<title>Research on non-uniform control rod for PWR</title>
<author>1,ChengLiu,2,FuyuZhao,3,DuLiu,4,BoYang,5,JiangboLi,6,XiuluZhang,7,BinYe,8,HuiyiLv</author>
<Affiliation>1,Southwest University of Science and Technology, China;2, Xi'an Jiaotong University, China;3,Mianyang Central Hospital, China</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2020.103527</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0149197020302754</URL>
Research on non-uniform control rod for PWR
ChengLiu,FuyuZhao,DuLiu,BoYang,JiangboLi,XiuluZhang,7,BinYe,HuiyiLv
Southwest University of Science and Technology, China
Xi'an Jiaotong University, China
Mianyang Central Hospital, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
The concept of non-uniform control rod is proposed.
The reactor core power level and deviation controls are completely decoupled using non-uniform control rod.
The driving device of non-uniform control rod is greatly reduced and the safety is improved.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The axial power distribution of the core has a great influence on the operation of PWR. The uneven distribution of the axial power even endangers the safety and economy of the whole nuclear reactor. Due to the coupling of neutron leakage, core power level control and axial power deviation control, it is difficult to obtain satisfactory control performance. In order to improve the axial power distribution in the core, a non-uniform control rod is defined based on the decoupling control idea. By taking advantage of the self-shielding effect and the staggered distribution of neutron and non-neutron absorbers, a single non-uniform control rod can achieve the function of power level and distribution control. A core model is built by MCNP5, and the uniform control rod is replaced by non-uniform control rod of N = 2 and 4 (N is the nonuniformity coefficient of non-uniform control), then the axial neutron flux density distributions at different rod positions are calculated and compared. The simulation results show the non-uniform control rod studied in this paper hardly affect the original axial power distribution when controlling the core power level. In other words, the power level and deviation controls are completely decoupled using non-uniform control rod. Although the reactivity introduced by non-uniform control rod is smaller than that of uniform control rod, it is more uniform. So the research of this paper can provide a direction for the new control rod.
Keywords:Axial power distribution control;PWR;Decoupling control;Non-uniform control rod;MCNP5
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
In core power control, core power distribution and level control are equally important. Uneven axial power distribution will affect the safety and economy of reactor operation. The core axial power distribution control is coupled with the core power level control and affected by neutron leakage, which is the fundamental reason why the good control performance of core axial power distribution is not easy to achieve. At present, there are three ways to improve the axial power distribution by neutron leakage compensation as follows: 1) Fuel rod axial partitioning. By changing the axial enrichment of the fuel rods, the neutron production capacity in the middle of the core is reduced to compensate for the neutron leakage(Cao et al., 2013; Amina et al., 2017). The variation of the lifetime leads to the non-uniform burnup in the axial direction (burnup can be regarded as the process of decreasing the enrichment of the fuel rod fission material), and finally changes the axial enrichment distribution of the fuel rod fission material in the initial design, and weakens the function of neutron leakage compensation. 2) The axial coating thickness of burnable poison rod variation. By changing the axial coating thickness of burnable poison rod, the neutron absorption capacity in the middle of the core is improved to compensate for the neutron leakage(Amin et al., 2016; Ortiz-Servin, 2010; CheukWah Lau et al., 2014; Lu et al., 2014; TayefiAliPazirandeh, 2014). In the same way, the axial burnup is not uniform due to the change of lifetime, which makes the ability of axial neutron generation change. However, the neutron absorption capacity of combustible poison rod can not track this change, which weakens the neutron leakage compensation function. 3) Axial reflector addition. In order to prevent the leakage of neutrons, neutron reflecting materials are used to replace fission materials at the upper and lower ends of fuel rods(Goto∗ et al., 2014; Tung et al., 2017). The gap between fuel rods weakens the effect of compensating neutron leakage.
Therefore, it is very limited to compensate for neutron leakage by means of axial partition of fuel rod, axial coating thickness change of combustible poison rod and addition of axial reflector, so it is difficult to obtain good control performance. For this reason, this paper tries to find another way to improve the axial power distribution by studying and using the new non-uniform control rod.
<Section>2. Non-uniform control rod</Section>
2.1. Model
2.1.1. Definition
In the existing PWR core power control system, the power control rod is composed of uniformly distributed neutron absorbers composed of Ag + In + Cd material, so it can be defined as uniform control rod. When the uniform control rod is inserted into the core to adjust the power level, except for the fully inserted state, an axial power distortion peak will inevitably be introduced, resulting in the change of axial power distribution. In turn, the use of uniform control rods for axial power distribution control also changes the power level. Therefore, it is difficult to obtain simultaneously good power level and axial power distribution control performance by using the current uniform control rod. In order to solve the above problems, a new type of non-uniform control rod is defined as follows(Cheng, 2016).
1
In the axial direction, it is composed of 2N + 1 (N is an integer greater than 0) equal height and staggered distribution neutron absorbers composed of Ag + In + Cd material and non-neutron absorbers made of stainless steel. The absorber length is h, and h = H/2N, where H is the reactor core height. The bottom 2N absorber is placed in the core. The cladding is made of stainless steel and the cavity is filled with inert gas.
2
In radial direction, there are two layer. The inner layer is a cylinder with a diameter of r. By connecting with the driving rod device, the cylinder can move up and down along the axis to realize the function of lifting and inserting rods. The range of rod position change is, and. The outer layer is a circular cylinder with an inner diameter of r and outer diameter of R. It remains stationary, when the cylinder moves up and down.
3
According to the number of neutron absorbers, it can be divided into type A and type B non-uniform control rods. Type A rod contains N+1 neutron absorber, and type B rod contains N neutron absorbers. In the non-uniform control rod system, Type A and type B rods are arranged in pairs as type AB rods.
4
The inner cylinder of all the non-uniform control rods is connected with the same drive rod device to realize the function of lifting and inserting rods synchronously.
2.1.2. Structure
According to the definition of non-uniform control rod, its axial section structure can be obtained as shown in Fig. 1. Fig. 1(a) shows the AB type rod in the full extraction position，and . Fig. 1(b) shows the AB type rod in the partial insertion position, and . Fig. 1(c) shows the AB type rod in the full insertion position, and .
Fig. 1. Axial section structure of N = 2 non-uniform control rod.
2.2. Function
2.2.1. Power level control
If (R-r)/2 and h/2 are greater than or equal to the average free path of the neutron in the absorber, then the neutron will be absorbed by the neutron absorber of the outer circular cylinder and cannot reach the neutron absorber of the inner cylinder. That is to say, the neutron absorber of the outer circular cylinder plays a "self shielding" effect on the neutron absorber of the inner cylinder. Fig. 2 (a), (b) and (c) show respectively the axial section structure of a pair of neutron absorber and non-neutron absorber when the non-uniform control rod are in the positions of full extraction, partial insertion and full insertion.
Fig. 2. Axial section structure of self-shielding effect of a pair of absorbers.
It can be seen from Fig. 2 that the size of the "self-shielding" area of the non-uniform control rod is proportional to the rod position. The larger the "self-shielding" region is, the weaker the neutron absorption capacity of the inner cylinder neutron absorber is. Vice versa. Therefore, by lifting and inserting the inner cylinder of non-uniform control rod, changing the rod position  to change the size of the "self-shielding" area, the core neutron flux density can be changed, and the function of power level control can be realized.
2.2.2. Axial power distribution control
Due to the difference of neutron absorption capacity, the difference of neutron flux density caused by a pair of neutron and non-neutron absorbers along the axis forms an axial neutron flux density peak. If this pair of neutron absorber and non-neutron absorber form a non-uniform control rod, and the overall length and outer diameter of the non-uniform control rod are the same as that of the current uniform control rod, Fig. 3 (a), (b) and (c) show respectively the axial power distortion peak caused by a pair of neutron and non-neutron absorbers when the non-uniform control rod are in the positions of full extraction, partial insertion and full insertion. Fig. 3 (a) shows that the non-uniform control rod is at full extraction position, which is equivalent to that when the uniform control rod is inserted into half of the core, so its axial power distribution is the same as that when the uniform control rod is inserted into the half of the core. Fig. 3 (b) shows that the non-uniform control rod is at the partial insertion position, which is similar to the position of the uniform control rod between half insertion and full insertion. Therefore, the axial power distribution is the same as when the uniform control rod position is between half and full core insertion. Fig. 3 (c) shows that the non-uniform control rod is at full insertion position, which is similar to that of the uniform control rod with lower control rod value inserted into half of the core, so its axial power distribution is the same as that when the uniform control rod with lower control rod value is inserted into the half core.
Fig. 3. Axial power distortion peak formed by a pair of neutron and non-neutron absorber.
According to the definition, the non-uniform control rod has N pairs of neutron and non-neutron absorber at the core height, so the non-uniform control rod decomposes a large axial power distortion peak introduced by uniform control rod into N small axial power distortion peaks. The smaller the "axial power distortion peaks" is, the more uniform the axial power distribution in the core is and vice versa. So The non-uniform control rod has better axial power distribution performance than the uniform control rod.
Because a pair of neutron and non-neutron absorber at the same height of type A and type B rods are inversely related to each other, the axial power distortion peaks are also inversely related to each other. The superposition of these two inverse power distortion peaks becomes the power distortion peak introduced by type AB non-uniform control rods at this position. The axial power distribution performance of type AB control rod is better than that of type A or type B control rod.
<Section>3. Modeling and simulation</Section>
3.1. Core model
China Qinshan 300 MW PWR is taken as the simulation object. The core height of the reactor is 307.6 cm. There are 121 fuel assemblies in total, and the fuel rods are arranged by 15 × 15.There are 204 fuel rods, 20 control rod guide tubes and 1 neutron flux density measuring tube in each fuel assembly. According to the different enrichment degree of 235U, the initial loading is divided into three areas, and the enrichment degrees are 2.4%, 2.67% and 3.0%. There are 5 power control rod assemblies in the core, one in the center of the core, and the other four are evenly and symmetrically distributed in the core. During power control, the original uniform rod is set to four rod positions: full extraction, 1/3 insertion, 2/3 insertion and full insertion.Its parameters and setting rod positions are shown in Table 1. A non-uniform control rod with N = 2 and r/R = 3/4 is used to replace the original uniform control rod (Of course, other non-uniform control rod can be chosen). The outer diameter, cladding, height and rod position of the non-uniform control rod are the same as those of the original uniform control rod. Its parameters and setting rod positions are shown in Table 2.
Table 1. Parameters and position of uniform control rod.
Table 2. Parameters and positions of no-nuniform control rod.
3.2. Axial neutron flux density
3.2.1. Physical calculation basis
The core power of the simulation object is 300 MW. It is assumed that the average energy released by each neutron fission is 200 MeV, and the average number of neutrons produced by each fission is 2.45. When F4 is selected to tally average neutron flux density of cell, the calculation of normalized source intensity constant of neutron is shown in formula (1) (Fan, 2018).
@(1)
The power density calculation of any pointin the core is shown in formula (2) (Yang, 2010).
@(2)
Where, the conversion constant.is the macroscopic fission cross section and  is the neutron flux density. In steady state, the macroscopic fission cross section is constant. According to formula (2), the core power density  is directly proportional to the average thermal neutron flux density .
3.2.2. Simulation model
Core power control rod system model of Qinshan nuclear power station is established with MCNP5. Fig. 4 shows the axial and radial sections of the core model. Fig. 5 shows the axial section of uniform control rod in four rod position models: full extraction, 1/3 insertion, 2/3 insertion and full insertion. The parts below the rod position are replaced by non-neutron absorber. Fig. 6 shows the axial section of non-uniform control rod in four rod positions: full extraction, 1/3 insertion, 2/3 insertion and full insertion. To show the whole structure of the control rod, the field of view scale in Fig. 4(2), Fig. 5, Fig. 6 is set to x:z = 1:17.
Fig. 4. MCNP5 model of fuel assembly with non-uniform control rods.
Fig. 5. MCNP5 model of uniform control rod.
Fig. 6. MCNP5 model of N = 2 non-uniform control rod.
3.3. Simulation results and analysis
Simulation calculation parameters are set as follows: In the critical source, the number of active and inactive cycles is 500 and 100, the initial source neutrons are 5000, and the initial keff estimate is 1.0. There are 27 source points in total, all of which are in the fission material. F4 is selected to tally average neutron flux density 31 cells of neutron measuring tube, and these cells are axial uniform distribution. When uniform control rod is used to control core power, the axial neutron flux density distribution is shown in Fig. 7 at the four rod positions of full extraction, 1/3 insertion, 2/3 insertion and full insertion. When non-uniform control rod is used to control core power, the axial neutron flux density distribution is shown in Fig. 8 at the four rod positions of full extraction, 1/3 insertion, 2/3 insertion and full insertion.
Fig. 7. Axial neutron flux distribution with uniform control rod.
Fig. 8. Axial neutron flux distribution with N = 2 non-uniform control rod.
For further comparison, the N value of non-uniform control rod is reset to 4, and other parameters remain unchanged. When N = 4 non-uniform control rod is used to control core power, the axial neutron flux density distribution is shown in Fig. 9 at the four rod positions of full extraction, 1/3 insertion, 2/3 insertion and full insertion.
Fig. 9. Axial neutron flux distribution with N = 4 non-uniform control rod.
It can be seen from Fig. 7 that the axial neutron flux density is symmetrically distributed at upper and lower half of core, when the uniform control rod position are at full extraction and full insertion. When the uniform control rod position are at 1/3 and 2/3 insertions, the axial neutron flux density distribution changes into an asymmetric distribution, and the axial neutron flux density in the upper part of the core is obviously smaller than that in the lower part to form a big distortion peak. Similarly, it can be seen from Fig. 8, Fig. 9 that the axial neutron flux density distribution is symmetrical when the non-uniform control rod positions are at full extraction, 1/3 insertion, 2/3 insertion and full insertion. Because the core power density distribution is the same as the neutron flux density distribution, therefore, when changing the position of the non-uniform control rod, there will be no large power distortion peak and almost no change of the original axial power distribution.
If the average value of the neutron flux density of 31 cells is approximately expressed as the axial average neutron flux density of the core, the axial average neutron flux density at different rod positions is shown in formula (3).
@(3)
Where:@represents the neutron flux density of the i-th cell at the j-th rod position.represents the average neutron flux density at the j-th rod position.
The variation of axial average neutron flux density caused by different rod positions is shown in formula (4).
@(4)
Where:@represents the change of neutron flux density at the j-th rod position relative to the first rod position (full extraction).
According to formula (3) and (4), the and at four positions of uniform control rod and non-uniform control rod can be obtained in Table 3, Table 4, Table 5.
Table 3. and at four positions of uniform control rod.
Table 4. and at four positions of N = 2 non-uniform control rod.
Table 5. and at four positions of N = 4 non-uniform control rod.
It can be seen from Table 3, Table 4, Table 5 that theandare different at four positions of uniform control rod and non-uniform control rod. According to formula (2), can be approximately expressed as the change of core power level, therefore, when changing the position of uniform control rod and non-uniform control rod, core power level will change. Theof non-uniform control rod is almost proportional to the rod position and is more uniform than that of uniform control rod. but of non-uniform control rod is less than that of uniform control rod. This is because the non-uniform control rod only relies on the inner neutron absorber to adjust the power level.
<Section>4. Conclusion</Section>
At present, when uniform control rods are used to control the core power level and power distribution, it is difficult to obtain good control performance due to coupling effect. Therefore, the non-uniform control rod studied in this paper give priority to the influence of changing rod positions on power level and deviation.
The simulation results show the non-uniform control rods studied in this paper hardly affect the original axial power distribution when controlling the core power level. In other words, the power level and deviation controls are completely decoupled using non-uniform control rod. Although the reactivity introduced by non-uniform control rod is smaller than that of uniform control rod, it is more uniform.
In this paper, Only the control performance of non-uniform control rod with N = 2 and 4 is studied. Actually, With the variation of N, the performance of non-uniform control rod will change, especially the deviation control performance. Therefore, the research content in the later work can focus on the influence of the variation of N on the performance of the core control rod.
<Section>Credit author statement</Section>
Cheng Liu: Conceptualization, Methodology. Du Liu: Conceptualization, Methodology. Fuyu Zhao: Software. Bo Yang: Writing – original draft preparation, Jiangbo Li: Writing – original draft preparation. Xiulu Zhang: Writing – original draft preparation. Bin Ye: Investigation, Writing-reviewing and editing. Huiyi Lv: Investigation, Writing-reviewing and editing.
<Section>Declaration of competing interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>References</Section>
Amin et al., 2016
E.A. Amin, I.I. Bashter, M. Nabil, et al.
Full core analysis of IRIS reactor by using MCNPX[I]
Appl. Radiat. Isot. (113) (2016), pp. 70-742
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Amina et al., 2017
E.A. Amina, I.I. Bashterb, M. Nabil, et al.
Fuel burnup analysis for IRIS reactor using MCNP5X and WIMS-D5 codes [J]
Radiat. Phys. Chem. (131) (2017), pp. 73-78
Google Scholar
Cao et al., 2013
Bo Cao, Yixue Chen, Xiaojing Li, et al.
Preliminary analysis of physical characteristics of typical fuel assembly of AP1000 [J]
Atomic Energy Sci. Technol., 12 (47) (2013), pp. 599-602
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Cheng, 2016
Liu Cheng
A Control Rod and Control Rod Assembly Capable of Flattening the Axial Power Distribution in the Nuclear Core[P]
(2016)
China, zl201410246885.3
Google Scholar
CheukWah Lau et al., 2014
A. Cheuk Wah Lau, Henrik Nyl_En, Christophe Demaziere, et al.
Reducing axial offset and improving stability in PWRs by using uraniumethorium fuel [J]
Prog. Nucl. Energy (76) (2014), pp. 137-147
Google Scholar
Fan, 2018
Ruichen Fan
Research on the Modeling Method of PWR Core Based on MCNP and Super MC[D]
East China University of Technology, Nanchang, China (2018)
Google Scholar
Goto∗ et al., 2014
Minoru Goto∗, Yasuyoshi Seki, Yuji Fukaya, et al.
Nuclear design study on a small-sized high temperature gas-cooled, et Al. Reactor with high burn-up fuel and axial fuel shuffling[J]
Nucl. Eng. Des., 271 (2014), pp. 515-522
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lu et al., 2014
Dong Lu, Yu Han, Lulin Yu, et al.
Axial 3D effect on modeling a heterogeneous core[J]
Ann. Nucl. Energy (66) (2014), pp. 85-93
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ortiz-Servin, 2010
J.J. Ortiz-Servin
A hybrid method for the coupled optimization of the axial and radial design of BWR fuel assemblies[J]
Prog. Nucl. Energy (52) (2010), pp. 249-256
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
TayefiAliPazirandeh, 2014
Shima Tayefi, AliPazirandeh
Using hopfield neural network to optimize fuel rod loading patterns in VVER/1000 reactor by applying axial variation of enrichment distribution[J]
Appl. Soft Comput. (21) (2014), pp. 501-508
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tung et al., 2017
Wu-Hsiung Tung, Tien-Tso Lee, Weng-Sheng Kuo, et al.
Optimization of axial enrichment distribution for BWR fuels using scoping libraries and block coordinate descent method [J]
Nucl. Eng. Des. (313) (2017), pp. 84-95
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yang, 2010
Jiayin Yang
Research on Neutron Distribution in Reactor and Design of Radiation Shielding[D]
Harbin Engineer University, Harbin, China (2010)
Google Scholar