<title>Bubble coalescence, growth, breakup and distribution in boiling water-cooled packed bed reactor</title>
<author>1,GuangzhanXu,2,ZhongningSun,3,XiantaoZhang</author>
<Affiliation>1,Wuhan Second Ship Design and Research Institute, Wuhan 430064, China;2,National Key Discipline Laboratory of Nuclear Safety and Simulation Technology, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin 150001, China;3,School of Power and Mechanical Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 430072, China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107905</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454920306022</URL>
Bubble coalescence, growth, breakup and distribution in boiling water-cooled packed bed reactor
GuangzhanXu,ZhongningSun,XiantaoZhang
Wuhan Second Ship Design and Research Institute, Wuhan 430064, China
National Key Discipline Laboratory of Nuclear Safety and Simulation Technology, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin 150001, China
School of Power and Mechanical Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 430072, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Discussed bubble coalescence, growth, breakup features in a volumetrically heated packed bed.
Discussed the bubble distribution in a volumetrically heated packed bed.
Provided the images of bubble behavior in a volumetrically heated packed bed.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The flow patterns in the heated packed bed are different to those without the heated packed bed. To gain a deeper understanding of these phenomena, the bubble coalescence, breakup, and distribution in a volumetrically heated packed bed are determined through experiments, and are very important for recognizing the flow pattern transition mechanisms in boiling water-cooled packed bed reactors. A high-speed camera was used for capturing images of these bubbles to analyze their behavior. The results revealed five types of bubble coalescence are observed in our experimental study. Bubble growth plays an important role in the flow pattern transition because it enlarges the contact area between the bubbles and the particles in the heated packed bed. The portion of small bubbles significantly increased with the decrease of the inlet fluid temperature and the increase of mass flux.
Keywords：Flow pattern transition;Bubble coalescence;Bubble breakup;Packed bed
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The water-cooled packed bed reactor has great development potential as an innovative conceptual nuclear reactor, owing to its advantages of long core lifetime, low manufacturing cost, high safety, and nonproliferation of nuclear materials. In many countries, conceptual designs for this type of reactor have already been completed or are in progress (Tsiklauri et al., 2005, Nagai and Shimazu, 2005, Geelhood et al., 2006, Alekseev et al., 2007, Tanihira and Shimazu, 2007, Şahin et al., 2011). However, to complete the preliminary reactor design, several flow and heat transfer phenomena must be elucidated. The results obtained by studies in the field of nuclear power and in the chemical industry are valuable for designing water-cooled packed bed reactors.
The single-phase convection heat transfer characteristics in the packed bed reactor have been investigated by Meng et al. (2012). A Single-phase convection heat transfer coefficient correlation considering the particle diameter, mass flux, and fluid temperature has been developed, and provides the theoretical basis for packed reactor design.
Benkrid et al. (2002) have investigated the mechanisms of bubble motion in gas–liquid flow through a quasi-two-dimensional porous medium. A high-speed video camera was used to visualize the flow, and the probability density function of the bubble centroid velocity and the equivalent bubble diameter were determined.
Wang et al., 2002, Wang et al., 2004 observed the pool boiling behavior in packed-bed structures using an experimental method. Their results revealed that the pore structure plays a very important role in the interfacial heat and mass transfer. The pore structure is divided into three areas, namely, the main cavity, narrow-gap corner zone, and bridge-channel. Nucleate boiling for the high superheat between a glass bead and the heated surface can very easily occur in the narrow-gap corner zone. However, the dry-out phenomenon in the narrow-gap corner zone is very difficult to occur, owing to the replenishment of the liquid. An analytical method for predicting the bubble shape was proposed and reasonably agrees with the experimental results. Finally, the bubble behaviors in the pool boiling in the packed bed were investigated.
Fang et al. (2004) conducted an experiment to observe the pool boiling behavior in packed-bed structures. Based on the critical bubble diameter, the bubbles were classified into small-bubbles that can move freely, and were slowed down mainly owing to collision with solid particles and large-bubbles moving down aided by bubble deformation. A model for predicting the flow pattern transition from non-continuous to continuous was proposed.
Jo and Revankar (2009) investigated the dominant bubble mechanisms in a two-dimensional packed bed using gas–water as the fluid, and identified three dominant mechanisms for bubble breakup, and two dominant mechanisms for bubble coalescence. In subsequent work, Jo and Revankar (2010) investigated the effect of bubble coalescence and bubble breakup on the bubble size under controlled-size bubble and uncontrolled-size bubble conditions.
Ito et al. (2018) investigated the local porosity and void fraction in the bed packed with the diameter of 2.7, 4.8, 6.7 and 9.8-mm plastic beads using air–water as the fluid. In this study, the local porosity and void fraction were measured by X-ray radiography method.
Bhardwaj et al. (2019) investigated the capillarity driven two-phase flow in a packed bed, the influence of different parameters (including pore surface wettability, porosity and pressure gradient) on the two-phase flow was explored.
Yeo and No (2019) studied two-phase drag models for the prediction of pressure drop and dryout heat in a packed bed. The result indicated that the pressure drop predicted by the model is good agreed with the measured pressure drop in a packed bed with uniform-size particles.
In previous work, we investigated flow patterns for the flow boiling of water in water-cooled packed bed reactors by conducting a visualized experiment (Xu et al., 2018). The results revealed that the flow patterns can be classified into bubble flow, slug flow, and annular flow based on the vapor–liquid morphology. Additionally, a model for predicting the flow pattern criteria was developed. These results are very different from the results obtained by Zhang et al. (2011), who found that the liquid-rich portion and gas-rich portion flow patterns change with the increase of the gas flow rate in the pulse flow. Hence, the pulse flow was subdivided into liquid-pulse flow, churn-pulse flow, and annular-pulse flow. Thus, we expected a more detailed observation of the flow pattern in the heated packed bed.
However, the bubble coalescence, breakup, and distribution in a heated packed bed have rarely been investigated. Identifying the bubble coalescence, breakup, and distribution governing the flow pattern transitions in a volumetrically heated packed bed is essential for understanding the boiling flow and heat transfer. To obtain additional information on the flow characteristics in boiling water-cooled packed bed reactors, we investigated the bubble coalescence, growth, breakup, and distribution associated with the bubble flow and slug flow in a volumetrically heated packed bed.
<Section>2. Experimental apparatus</Section>
2.1. Experimental apparatus
The schematic of the experimental apparatus is shown in Fig. 1. The water in the tank was heated until boiling to remove the dissolved gas, and was subsequently pumped from the tank through the heat exchanger, pressurizer, valve, flowmeter, and pre-heater. Then, the water flowed up into the test section, absorbed heat from the particles, and yielded vapor-water mixtures.
Fig. 1. Schematic of experimental loop.
A schematic of the test section is shown in Fig. 2. The test section was a glass tube wrapped by two induction coils. A window in the middle of the tube enabled the imaging of the flow pattern using a high-speed camera. Spherical oxidized carbon steel particles with uniform size were randomly packed in the tube. The steel particles were heated by an induction coil to simulate the heat release of a spherical fuel element. The influence of particle size on the flow pattern was assessed by comparing three test sections. There are three kinds of the test section which are packed by 13.82 kg 5-mm steel particles, 14.42 kg 8-mm steel particles and 12.55 kg 12-mm steel particles respectively. Bubble behaviors and flow pattern were observed for porosity mass flux varied from 31 kg·m−2·s−1 to 84.2 kg·m−2·s−1, local vapor quality varied from 0 to 0.16.
Fig. 2. Schematic of test section.
<Section>3. Results and discussion</Section>
3.1. Transition of flow patterns
Transition from bubble flow to slug flow: At low vapor quality, the bubble flow is characterized by tiny bubbles and a small number of bubbles, which leads to large inter-bubble distances and negligible bubble interaction. The bubbles can flow freely through the packed bed. When the heat flux increases, the number and size of the bubbles increase and, consequently, the inter-bubble distance decreases. The large bubbles are easily blocked by the particles, which results in bubble deceleration and, in turn, frequent bubble coalescence. However, the bubbles are smaller than the critical size and therefore, extremely stable and generally resistant to break up. The size of the bubbles continuously increases owing to the combined effect of bubble coalescence and the heating-induced growth of the bubbles. Bubble breakup begins when the volume of the bubbles reaches a critical size. However, the effects of bubble coalescence and growth are stronger than the breakup effects; thus, the bubble size continuously increases, which results in slug flow.
Transition from slug flow to annular flow: in slug flow, bubble/slug coalescence and breakup are both very violent and counteract each other. The large bubbles are blocked by particles, and thereby become elongated. Furthermore, the area between the bubble and the particles increases, and therefore the bubble absorbs an increased amount of energy from the particles, which results in local annular flow.
From the above discussions, it is understood that the flow pattern transition results from the combined effects of bubble growth, coalescence, and breakup. Bubble growth and coalescence have a positive effect on the flow pattern transition from bubble to annular flow, whereas bubble breakup has a negative effect and prevents pattern transition. Apparently, bubble coalescence, growth, and breakup are crucial for pattern transition, and the bubble distribution is important for understanding the flow pattern at the micro level, as will be discussed in subsequent sections.
3.2. Types of bubble coalescence
Five bubble coalescence types were observed in the experiment. The first type is shown in Fig. 3(a). When the bubble passed through the narrow channel, the bubble in the narrow channel was squeezed and the shape of bubble was distorted seriously, so that area is enlarged rapidly. The distance between enlarged bubble and surrounding bubbles getting closer and closer until to annex the surrounding bubbles.
Fig. 3. Bubble coalescence process.
The second bubble coalescence type is shown in Fig. 3(b). The downstream movement of the bubble was blocked by particles. However, the shape of the bubble changed owing to the effect of turbulence. Because of this turbulence, the surrounding fluid flow attracted and merged with the bubbles.
The third bubble coalescence is shown in Fig. 3(c). The large bubble moving downstream accelerated the fluid flow in the wake zone, and the small bubbles in this zone accelerated and merged with the large bubble.
The fourth bubble coalescence type is referred to as compression coalescence (Fig. 3(d)). This occurs when two bubbles simultaneously pass through the narrow channel, approach each other, and eventually merge into one bubble.
Although it has been experimentally observed in a previous study (Jo and Revankar, 2009), in our experiment, the appearance of the compression coalescence was scarce, and only had a secondary role in our study. This may have resulted from the fact that our test section structure was different to the section considered by Jo and Revankar (2009). In our experiment, the test section was a three-dimensional packed bed with a glass tube filled by particles. However, Jo and Revankar (2009) used a test section consisting of a two-dimensional packed bed with a rectangular channel filled by rubber discs. Therefore, in our experiment, the space close to the glass tube wall was larger owing to the sidewall effect, and few bubbles simultaneously passed through the narrow channel.
The fifth bubble coalescence, referred to as deceleration coalescence, is shown in Fig. 3(e). The leading bubble decelerated upon reaching the stagnation point, and the bubbles that followed first approached and eventually merged with this bubble. This coalescence has previously been observed in an experimental study (Jo and Revankar, 2009).
The main difference of bubble coalescence is shown in Table 1.
Table 1. The difference of bubble coalescence.
Bubble coalescence is very complex because the process depends on a combination of factors that are required to complete the merging process, particularly in slug flow.
3.3. Bubble growth
In the volumetrically heated packed bed, the bubble growth exerts a considerable effect on the flow pattern transition from bubble to annular flow. In the packed bed, the bubble against the particles leads to the easy enlargement of the contact area between the bubbles and the heated particles. Therefore, the bubble volume rapidly increases due to the evaporation at the interface. Therefore, the bubble volume rapidly increases to absorb more energy (Fig. 4).
Fig. 4. Bubble growth.
3.4. Bubble breakup
At the three dominant breakup mechanisms have been observed in the two-dimensional packed-bed with gas–water as the fluid, namely, the shear breakup, acceleration breakup, and impact breakup, as observed in previous experimental studies (Jo and Revankar, 2009).
The first breakup, namely, the shear breakup, is shown in Fig. 5. At the stagnation point, the bubble stretched in two directions along the surface of the particles, owing to the combined effects of particle resistance, fluid drag, and buoyancy. During stretching, the morphology of the bubble changed from crescent-shaped to dumbbell-shaped until the bubble broke up into two daughter bubbles. The shear breakup can be further classified into symmetrical shear and unsymmetrical shear, characterized by two daughter bubbles with approximately equal size and two daughter bubbles with significantly different size, respectively.
Fig. 5. Shear breakup.
The symmetricity of the two daughter bubbles was evaluated with consideration to parameter η, which can be calculated as follows:
where  and  denote the equivalent diameter of the large daughter bubble and small daughter bubble, respectively. The equivalent diameter D is defined as follows:
where @ is the surface area of the bubble in the figure.
Considering the effect of particle diameter on the probability density function η (Fig. 6), it can be seen that the diameter only has a slight influence on η. The magnitude of η varies from 1.25 to 5.5, with the max probability (>0.5) occurring at η = 1.25. This maximum value suggests that most bubbles break into two approximately equally-sized daughter bubbles.
Fig. 6. Probability density function η of large and small bubbles.
The second breakup, namely, the acceleration breakup, is shown in Fig. 7. The acceleration breakup occurred owing to the velocity difference of the head and trail of the bubble. The results indicate that the probability of the shear breakup is far greater than that of the acceleration breakup.
Fig. 7. Acceleration breakup.
In the experiment, it was observed that bubble breakup only occurred when the bubble diameter exceeded a certain critical diameter. To investigate the factors influencing the critical diameter, the breakup diameter (Db) associated with the particle diameters of 5 mm and 8 mm was plotted for the mass flux (G) values of 32.6–82.6 kg·m−2·s−1 (Fig. 8). The results indicate that bubble breakup occurred when the diameter was ~ 3 mm, and the breakup was barely affected by the particle diameters and mass flux. Tung and Dhir (1988) have reported that the bubble diameter depends on the surface tension and buoyancy, and can be calculated as follows:
Fig. 8. Breakup diameter distribution.
The above relationship yields a bubble diameter of ~ 3.3 mm, which is approximately equal to the critical diameter (~3 mm).
The third breakup is the impact breakup caused by the bubble–bubble collision at the narrow channel. However, this type of breakup did not occur in our experiment, possibly because the bubble impact breakup requires a strong collision force. However, the bubble volume increased along the packed bed, and the bubble velocity was lower in our experiment compared with the experiment by Jo and Revankar (2009). Therefore, the collision force was not sufficient for breaking up the bubbles.
3.5. Bubble size distribution
The bubble equivalent diameter D is defined as follows:
where @ is the surface area of the bubble in the image, and can be calculated as follows:
where @ is the number of pixels of a bubble in the image, and  is the area of a pixel which can be determined by the steel particle as a reference:
where @ is the diameter of the steel particle, and @ is the number of pixels of the projected area of the steel particle.
The cumulative distribution function cdf is introduced to analyze the influence of the thermal parameters on the bubble size distribution in the packed bed. This function is defined as the ratio between the number of bubbles with a diameter of less than a certain value to the total number of bubbles.
3.5.1. Effect of inlet temperature on bubble diameter probability density function
The effect of the inlet temperature on the bubble diameter cumulative distribution function is shown in Fig. 9. When the inlet temperature was low, the bubble diameter was less than that at a high inlet temperature. When the inlet temperature was equal to 94.6 ℃, the diameter of all bubbles was less than 2 mm. When the inlet temperature was 98.1 ℃, the range of the bubble diameter is more widely and from ~0 mm to 6.6 mm. The portion of small bubbles was significantly reduced and the portion of bubbles with a diameter of less than 2 mm was approximately 80%. The maximum diameter reached up to 6.6 mm. With the increase of the inlet temperature, the nucleation of bubble is more easily and fast-grow up. Owing to the decrease of the inlet temperature, the bubble could more easily condense and eventually decreased.
Fig. 9. Effect of inlet temperature on bubble diameter cumulative distribution function.
3.5.2. Effect of mass flux on bubble diameter cumulative distribution function
The effect of the mass flux on the bubble diameter cumulative distribution function is shown in Fig. 10. With the decrease of mass flux, the range of the bubble diameter is more widely. The maximal bubble diameter is from ~1 mm at 84.2 kg/m2·s to ~5 mm at 45.2 kg/m2·s. The portion of small bubbles significantly increased with the increase of the mass flux because of two reasons: First, the high mass velocity increased the heat transfer coefficient between the bubble and water, and the bubble easily condensed and decreased. The sizes of most of bubbles are small; secondly, the shear force of the bubble was enhanced, and the bubbles of large size are instable and could easily split and brake into smaller bubbles.
Fig. 10. Effect of mass flux on bubble diameter cumulative distribution function.
3.5.3. Effect of heat flux on bubble diameter cumulative distribution function
The effect of the heat flux on the bubble diameter cumulative distribution function is shown in Fig. 11. Due to the limit of experimental condition and the characteristics of experimental phenomena, the range of heat flux is narrow. The effect of heat flux on bubble diameter is no noticeable and some experimental data is overlap in Fig. 11. By comparing the results between the heat flux of 39.6 kW·m−2 and that of 43.5 kW·m−2, it can be seen that the portion of small bubbles slightly increased with the heat flux.
Fig. 11. Effect of heat flux on bubble diameter cumulative distribution function.
<Section>4. Conclusions</Section>
The bubble coalescence, growth, breakup, and distribution were evaluated for the flow boiling of water in a volumetrically heated packed bed consisting of particles with diameters ranging from 5 mm to 12 mm. The porosity mass flux varied from 31 kg·m−2·s−1 to 84.2 kg·m−2·s−1. The probability density function η and the breakup diameter distribution were determined. The effects of the inlet temperature, mass flux, and heat flux on the bubble diameter probability density function are discussed in this paper. The main conclusions drawn from this study are as follows:
(i)
Five bubble coalescence types were observed in the experiment; that is, three bubble coalescence types in addition to those observed by Jo and Revankar (2009) using a two-dimensional packed bed and gas–water as the fluid.
(ii)
Bubble growth plays an important role in the flow pattern transition because the contact area between the bubbles and the particles in the heated packed bed is enlarged. This is very different to the observations under the condition without a heated packed bed using gas–water as the fluid.
(iii)
The particle diameters and mass flux only had a slight impact on the critical diameter of bubble breakup, which occurred when the diameter was ~3 mm.
(iv)
The portion of small bubbles significantly increased with the decrease of the inlet fluid temperature and the increase of mass flux.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgments</Section>
The financial support of this work by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51906180) and the National Natural Science Foundation of Hubei Province (No. 2019CFB280) is gratefully appreciated.
<Section>References</Section>
Alekseev et al., 2007
P. Alekseev, E. Grishanin, A. Polismakov, et al.
Concept of boiling water reactor with the core on the base of pebble-bed of coated particles[C]
Proceeding of ICAPP (2007), pp. 13-18
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Benkrid et al., 2002
K. Benkrid, S. Rode, N.M. Pitiot, N. Midoux
Bubble flow mechanisms in trickling beds – an experimental study using image processing
Chem. Eng. Sci., 57 (2002), pp. 3347-3358
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bhardwaj et al., 2019
S. Bhardwaj, A. Dalal, P.P. Mukherjee
Mesoscale understanding of capillarity driven two-phase flow in a packed bed architecture[J]
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 136 (2019), pp. 116-127
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fang et al., 2004
C. Fang, X. Peng, Z. Yang
Vapor phase transport of liquid-vapor flow in porous media[J]
J. Eng. Thermophys., 25 (6) (2004), pp. 1007-1009
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Geelhood et al., 2006
K. Geelhood, C. Painter, D. Senor, et al.
Feasibility assessment of using triso fuel particles in AFPR[J]
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (2006)
Google Scholar
Ito et al., 2018
D. Ito, K. Ito, Y. Saito, M. Aoyagi, K. Matsuba, K. Kamiyama
Estimation of porosity and void fraction profiles in a packed bed of spheres using X-ray radiography[J]
Nucl. Eng. Des., 334 (2018), pp. 90-95
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jo and Revankar, 2009
D. Jo, S.T. Revankar
Bubble mechanisms and characteristics at pore scale in a packed-bed reactor[J]
Chem. Eng. Sci., 64 (2009), pp. 3179-3187
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jo and Revankar, 2010
D. Jo, S.T. Revankar
Effect of coalescences and breakup on bubble size distributions in a two-dimensional packed bed [J]
Chem. Eng. Sci., 65 (2010), pp. 4231-4238
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Meng et al., 2012
Meng Xianke, Sun Zhongning, Xu Guangzhan, 2012. Single-phase convection heat transfer characteristics of pebble-bed channels with internal heat generation[J]. Nucl. Eng. Design, 252, 121–127.
Google Scholar
Nagai and Shimazu, 2005
M. Nagai, Y. Shimazu
Small Pwrs using coated particle fuel for district heating, Pfpwr50[J]
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 47 (1) (2005), pp. 155-162
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Şahin et al., 2011
S. Şahin, H.M. Şahin, T.A. Al-kusayer, et al.
An innovative nuclear reactor for electricity and desalination[J]
Int. J. Energy Res., 35 (2) (2011), pp. 96-102
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tanihira and Shimazu, 2007
I. Tanihira, Y. Shimazu
Small Pwr using coated particle fuel of thorium and plutonium[J]
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 44 (8) (2007), pp. 1045-1051
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tsiklauri et al., 2005
G. Tsiklauri, T. Shea, A. Waltar, et al.
The Atoms for Peace Reactor (AFPR): a proliferation-resistant, long-life, 100 Mwe nuclear energy system[J]
Trans. Am. Nucl. Soc., 93 (2005), pp. 338-339
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tung and Dhir, 1988
V. Tung, V. Dhir
A hydrodynamic model for two-phase flow through porous media[J]
Int. J. Multiph. Flow, 14 (1) (1988), pp. 47-65
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2002
Wang, Z., Peng, X., Wang, B., Liu, T., 2002. Experimental investigation of nucleate boiling phenomena in bead-packed structures. J. Eng. Thermophys. 23 (6), 742–744.
Google Scholar
Wang et al., 2004
Z. Wang, X. Peng, J. Ochterbeck
Dynamic bubble behavior during boiling in bead-packed structures[J]
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 47 (22) (2004), pp. 4771-4783
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Xu et al., 2018
Guangzhan Xu, Zhang Xiaoning, Sun Zhongning, Ruan Jing
Flow patterns and transition criteria in boiling water-cooled packed bed[J]
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 108 (2018), pp. 214-221
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yeo and No, 2019
D.Y. Yeo, H.C. No
A zero-dimensional dryout heat flux model based on mechanistic interfacial friction models for two-phase flow regimes with channel flow in a packed bed[J]
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 141 (2019), pp. 554-568
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhang et al., 2011
Nan Zhang, Sun Zhongning, Zhao Zhongnan
Experimental investigation on flow patterns of gas-liquid two-phase upward flow through packedchannel with spheres [J]
Atom. Energy Sci. Technol., 45 (9) (2011), pp. 1040-1044
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar