<title>Coolant flow rate instability during extended station blackout accident in NuScale SMR: Two approaches for improving flow stability</title>
<author>1,A.Fakhraei,2,F.Faghihi,3,A.Rabiee,4,M.Safarinia</author>
<Affiliation>1, Department of Nuclear Engineering, School of Mechanical Eng., Shiraz University, Shiraz, 71936-16548, Iran;2,Radiation Research Center, Shiraz University, Shiraz, Iran;3,Ionizing and Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Science, Shiraz, Iran</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2020.103602</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0149197020303486</URL>
Coolant flow rate instability during extended station blackout accident in NuScale SMR: Two approaches for improving flow stability
A.Fakhraei,F.Faghihi,A.Rabiee,M.Safarinia
Department of Nuclear Engineering, School of Mechanical Eng., Shiraz University, Shiraz, 71936-16548, Iran
Radiation Research Center, Shiraz University, Shiraz, Iran
Ionizing and Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Science, Shiraz, Iran
<Section>Highlights</Section>
NuScale reactor performance during the station blackout accident is evaluated in this research.
Mass flow rate of the primary fluctuates in some stages and it may lead to potential structural damage to reactor components.
Two different approaches are proposed to mitigate flow instabilities in the primary loop.
It is observed that core decay heat can be removed smoothly in the long term with consideration of these systems in design.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Nowadays, small modular reactors have become an appropriate alternative option for replacement with most fossil fuel plants and also in some cases with reactors of past generations. Significant improvements take place in this technology in terms of safety, initial capital cost, compatibility with electricity demand, and usage for thermal processes. One approach to achieve a higher level of safety in these reactors has been the utilization of natural circulation in the primary system as the main mechanism for heat removal from the core in steady-state and accident conditions. Several SMRs such as NuScale, CAREM-25, ABV-6M, and IMR are designed to work with this method. Utilizing natural circulation in the primary system eliminates the risk of pump-related problems and causes significant simplification and improvements in design; however, under some circumstances, it becomes unstable. Exposure of the reactor components to these flow instabilities and flow-induced vibrations, in turn, is a potential source for further component failures. Especially tubes of steam generators and fuel rods are susceptible elements for damage in this situation. In this research, response of the NuScale SMR to station blackout (SBO) accident is calculated. It is observed that after approximately 6 hours from the beginning of the accident, flow begins to oscillate in the primary system. After analyzing SBO for the reference design, two new methods are suggested to make flow stable during the accident. These include utilizing a safety injection tank and using riser valves. The performance of the reactor is investigated in the long term, considering these systems. The strategies guarantee stable flow and decay heat removal during the coping time required by NRC regulations, even if the emergency core cooling system fails to actuate. The results of this research can be used for the design improvement of IPWRs with the natural circulation mechanism in the primary loop.
Keywords:Severe accident management;NuScale SMR;Extended station blackout;Flow instability;Passive safety systems;Safety injection tank
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
In the past decades, the prevalent mindset regarding the electric capacity of the nuclear plants was that “the bigger is better”. Although, at present, it is clear that deliberately small reactors (DSRs) could offer significant advantages that cannot be implemented in large reactors. A prime example of this is the utilization of natural circulation in the primary system of some SMR designs. NuScale, CAREM-25, ABV-6M, and IMR are such designs that are able to passively transfer core heat generation to the secondary system in all operational conditions (IAEA, 1985, 2013). The removal of the pump from the design of the primary system has its benefits and drawbacks. To clarify this point, for instance, it demands no active power for core heat removal, which can be useful for decay heat removal during the blackout accident, improves flow distribution in the core, reduces capital and maintenance costs, and simplifies the design. On the other hand, reactors that are working with this mechanism have special start-up procedures, lower power densities, lower CHF values, a smaller driving force in the primary, and more importantly is that they are susceptible to flow instabilities.
Because of the elimination of the pump from the primary system, in the reactors such as NuScale and CAREM-25, the main driving force of the primary circuit flow is supplied via natural circulation, which depends on core thermal power that can be affected by feedbacks. In turn, coolant flow can be a source of feedbacks and might lead to power changes. This complex relation between coolant flow and power can be a source of instability. In some transients temperature of the core inlet flow may experience a rise. In these cases, hotter inlet fluid to the core would lead to lower power and colder outlet fluid which returns to the core and causes power increase. If no intervention takes place, this oscillation of power and flow continues autocatalytically. This type of instability is referred to as density wave oscillation (DWO). The occurrence of this transient depends on the inherited design characteristics of the system. So far, several researches have been performed to analyze this type of instability for SMRs (Marcel et al., 2013b; Pilehvar et al., 2020; Zanocco and Delmastro, 2004; Zanocco et al., 2004).
On the other hand, BWRs are susceptible to several types of instabilities, including coupled neutronic thermal-hydraulic instability that also called reactivity instability, control system instability, and channel thermal-hydraulic instability. After the occurrence of first instability instances in BWRs, interest in this phenomenon and its roots were grown. In 1978 self-sustained oscillations in TVO-I power plant caused scram of the reactor. In this accident, the power of the one half the core decreased, whereas the other one increased. The oscillations had out of phase mode at which overall power left nearly constant. Also, in 1984, Caorso power plant experienced the same accident that described in the literature with detail. After LaSalle event in 1988, dynamics and stability issues of BWRs were getting focused by the scientists. The ringhals-1 reactor was the other case in which experienced out of phase oscillation of power during start-up in 1989 (Anglart, 2011; Lefvert, 1996; NRC Bulletin 88-07 Supplement 1, 1988; Valtonen, 1991).
Researches have been shown that thermal-hydraulics behavior of IPWRs with primary natural circulation loop and self-pressurization mechanism is not the same as natural circulation BWRs and even PWRs. CAREM-25 is an example of such a reactor (Marcel et al., 2013a). However, in NuScale SMR, a pressurizer with two heater bundles and spray nozzles are considered in the design to regulate the pressure of the primary system. As a result, the performance of this reactor is more close to PWRs. Despite this fact, the thermal-hydraulic loop of the NuScale is experienced significant changes that cause to perform in the accidents differently.
The idea of a primary system that encloses steam generators, pressurizer, and pumps was attractive for designers in the past decades. With this approach, they could eliminate reliance upon large-diameter external piping, pump casing, and other components such as part of the fission product barrier (Lewis, 1977). However, the first significant step toward this was the Multi-Application Small Light Water Reactor (MASLWR). (Modro et al., 2003) published the Final Report of the conceptual design that was based on utilizing 30 modules in one plant with an overall electric capacity of 1050 MWs. This conceptual design demonstrates major improvements compared to exciting commercial large plants in terms of safety and economics. The maximum usage of passive safety systems is implemented in this design, making CDF reach less than 10−7 per year. Simultaneously, this design utilized the proven technologies of its predecessor LWRs that make the licensing process and construction more convenient than other revolutionary designs.
Meanwhile, the OSU test facility was constructed at the Oregon state university to evaluate the system's performance under full pressure and temperature in the steady-state condition and transients (Fisher et al., 2001; Modro et al., 2003). From 2000 to 2005, the system's performance at start-up, steady-state operation, and shut down was assessed. Also, several flow stability tests were conducted, and the behavior of the system during several accidents was analyzed (Mascari et al., 2012; Reyes et al., 2007; Woods et al., 2005). In 2007 NuScale Power LLC and Oregon state university finalized the technology transfer agreement. Work on preliminary detailed design started in 2009 (NuScale Power LLC, 2017). In 2020 the design certification of the NuScale was approved by NRC.
Evaluation and Improvement of the thermal-hydraulic codes were other objectives of the OSU MASLWR test facility. (IAEA, 2013) carried out a study that normal operating conditions at different power levels and loss of feed-water transient with subsequent ADS operation in the test facility were simulated by eighteen participants from different countries. Results showed that nearly one-half of the participants in this research used RELAP5 to simulate the system. In these cases, the results of the code showed good agreement with experimental data.
(Arda and Holbert, 2015) developed a dynamic model of NuScale SMR for controller design purposes. Mathematical model of reactor components such as the steam generator, reactor core, hot leg riser, and downcomer has provided, and pressure losses of the primary loop were modelled. Steady-state values of the main parameters of the loop were obtained, and the response of the reactor to several transients was also calculated. Adra and Holbert have completed their mathematical model and considered pressurizer for their next work and predicted system dynamics related to several perturbations (Arda and Holbert, 2016).
(Sadegh-Noedoost et al., 2020) investigated a new loading pattern for the NuScale core first cycle. This loading pattern has excess reactivity for approximately five years. Cycle length, fuel depletion, and minimum departure from nucleate boiling (MDNBR) for this core were calculated. Also, other main parameters, such as power peaking factors, boric acid concentration during the operating cycle, and reactivity coefficients, are computed in this research. The core model of this research is implemented in the RELAP5 model for the present study.
So far, for NuScale SMR, the focus has been on the instabilities during normal operations, while the stability of the flow during accidents and decay heat removal has not been investigated. This can be a crucial point for passive systems. The reactor's performance during normal operation is assessed in our former research (Fakhraei et al., 2020). A RELAP5 model of a NuScale power module is developed in the study. Also, the reactor's response was investigated during the station blackout accident. It is observed that the circumstance of the accident would lead to primary mass flow rate oscillations. The fluctuation of the mass flow rate may lead to vibration of the reactor components. It can be considered as a potential risk for damage to the reactor components. In this research, two approaches for improving the stability of the flow during the accident are proposed. Then the performance of the system with considering the suggested equipment is analyzed.
<Section>2. Methods and materials</Section>
2.1. NuScale reactor overview
Each NuScale plant comprises 12 power modules that are housed in the reactor building. All modules are designed to place in a pool that acts as an ultimate heat sink in accident times. Fig. 1 shows the schematic of the NuScale reactor building. During the nominal operation, the rated thermal power of each NPM is 160 MW. The primary pumps are eliminated in this design, and NPMs rely on natural circulation for core heat removal. In this design, two helical coil steam generators are considered for an NPM, placed in the reactor pressure vessel. In the NuScale, despite the conventional PWRs, secondary fluid flows inside the tubes, and the primary fluid moves outside the tubes. The major characteristics of the reactor are given in Table 1. More detail about the reactor's design specifications is given in (NuScale Power LLC, 2018).
Fig. 1. NuScale reactor building and its associated facilities. The front-view shows six NuScale power modules which is kept in the water, and also there are other six series in the back-side. Other plant facilities are also highlighted.
Table 1. Specifications of the NuScale power module.
2.2. NuScale RELAP5 model
The thermal-hydraulic performance of the reactor is evaluated with the RELAP5 system analysis code. RELAP5 is a best-estimate code for calculation of the performance of nuclear and non-nuclear thermal-hydraulic systems. This code is based on a transient, two-phase, non-equilibrium, non-homogeneous model that solves six field equations for mass continuity, momentum, and energy of two phases. The analysis in this research is based on RELAP5/SCDAP Mod 3.4. This code can be utilized to provide the operator's guidelines for the accident times, estimate the accident consequences in nuclear plants, licensing, and evaluation of the design. Each part of the RELAP5 model of the NuScale is briefly discussed in the following sections.
2.2.1. Core
Due to different radially and axially power generation of the core and presence of the coolant bypass, five channels are considered to model the reactor core. Nodalization of the core is depicted in Fig. 2. Each core channel is axially divided into ten nodes in the active height part of the core. Channel 100 represents the average channel that is comprised of fuel rods of the 36 FAs. On the other hand, channel 110 corresponds to the hot channel. This channel is allocated to the FA with the highest radial PPF. Two heat structures are considered in this channel. Heat structure 1101 models the hot rod, which is the one fuel rod in the core with the highest PPFs in the core and heat structure number 1100, which represents the other 263 rods of the hot fuel assembly. Safety-related parameters such as clad and fuel temperatures would be evaluated based on the hot rod and hot channel values. The modelling in this research is based on conservative assumptions. For this reason, cross-flow between the hot channel and the average channel is neglected.
Fig. 2. Nodalization of the computational model.
There are three types of coolant flow in the NuScale core that do not pass on the surface of the fuel rods. These include the coolant that passes through guide tubes, reflector channels, and the coolant that moves in the gap between the reflector block and the core barrel. Average and hot channel guide tubes are modelled using 120 and 130, respectively. Also, passing coolant in the reflector is modelled using channel 140.
2.2.2. Thermal-hydraulic system
2.2.2.1. Steam generators
Each NuScale power module has two independent steam generators, and each of them is comprised of two trains with separated feedwater and steam heads. Every train contains a bundle of 345 helical tubes with an average length of 24.2 m (NuScale Power LLC, 2018). In spite of typical PWR designs, secondary fluid, flows through the tubes in this HCSG design. For the implementation of the steam generator in the model, every train of the steam generators is modelled using a set of pipes with equivalent helical angle, heat transfer, and fluid area. Nodalization of the steam generators is shown in Fig. 2.
The primary side of the SGs is modelled using annulus 300. Heat structures of all tubes are connected to this component. Based on sensitivity analysis, it is realized that 30 nodes for the helical part of the tubes are an optimal point in regards to the accuracy of the model and computational cost. Due to this fact, inner and outer parts of the tubes are divided into 30 axial nodes for the helical, and one node is considered for vertical ends of the tubes.
2.2.2.2. Pressurizer
In order to tune the primary pressure at the setpoint, NuScale has two bundles of heater with a nominal capacity of 400 kW per bundle and two spray nozzles. The PZR is located at the top of the RPV, where its fluid is separated from the circulating coolant of the loop by a baffle plate. This baffle plate has eight holes that connect the liquid in the pressurizer and the primary coolant. Heaters in the pressurizer provide the heat that is required for keeping system pressure at the 12.73 MPa. That is, the temperature of the water in the PZR is approximately 602 K. Reactor safety valves and RVVs are located at the top of PZR, where they can become open to the containment when they are demanded.
Nodalization of the PZR is shown in Fig. 2. This component is modelled using pipe 500. Sets of heat structures are considered in the model to simulate the performance of the haters and surrounding walls. Also, safety valves and RVVs are modelled according to the DCA of the reactor. The level of the PZR is considered at 60% in the steady-state condition.
2.2.3. Engineering safety features
Engineering safety features (ESF) of the NuScale include decay heat removal system (DHRS), emergency core cooling system (ECCS), and containment system (CNTS). The unique design of the NuScale SMR causes simplification of the safety systems. All of the ESFs of the reactor are designed based on passive function, and the only need for electricity is for the actuation of valves. For this purpose, a highly reliable DC power system (EDSS) is considered in the design.
Containment of the reactor is modelled using a series of components, including 600, 620, 630, and 640. Several cross-junctions between components of 600 and 620 are considered to take natural circulation in the CNTS area into account. As can be seen in Fig. 1, CNTS is located in the reactor pool. Heat structures between the reactor pool and the CNTS parts are modelled to consider the heat transfer between these components. Also, the reactor pool is divided into separated volumes with cross-junctions because of the consideration of natural circulation in the pool.
DHRS work is based on the function of the DHRHXs that are located in the reactor pool. These exchangers can be coupled with the SGs trough the actuation of its valves. With the actuation of the FVIWs and MSIVs, SGs become isolated, and with actuation of the DHR valves, outlet steam of the SGs moves toward the DHRHXs. Steam transfers heat with the reactor pool, and the colder output returns to the SGs. Nodalization of the system and its piping is shown in Fig. 2.
In the NuScale power module ECCS of the reactor is simplified to three RVVs and two RRVs. This design takes advantage of CNTS to transfer core decay heat to the reactor pool. With the function of the ECCS, produced steam in the core exit the RPV trough RVVs which are three valves with 12.7 cm in diameter located above the pressuizer. This released steam in the CNV exchange heat through the walls of the CNV and condensates returns to the downcomer using RRVs. Two RRVs are attached to the upper part of the core, which are approximately 5 cm in diameter.
Safety valves are considered in the model according to their specifications in the DCA. Two safety valves are considered in the design, with setpoints of 14.31 MPa and 14.47 MPa. These valves are attached to the RPV head and release to the CNV.
2.3. Steady-state results
The model used in this research is validated in (Fakhraei et al., 2020). Main Parameters of the reactor compared with design data. In all cases, it is observed that the offset of the parameters is within the range of acceptable errors that are determined for a RELAP5 model by NEA (OECD, 2004).
Fig. 3 represents the density profile along the flow direction. As shown in this figure, with absorbing heat, coolant density decreases in the core. Outlet coolant from the core mixes with bypass streams and become slightly denser at the core outlet. As fluid flow travels into the riser with approximately constant density, it encounters the baffle plate, which separates the pressurizer fluid inventory from the circulating flow in the primary system. With heat transfer of the coolant with steam generators, the fluid becomes denser and returns to the core.
Fig. 3. Coolant density profile along the NuScale primary circuit.
2.4. Station blackout accident
In this research, first, the sequence of the events and roots of the flow instability during the SBO accident is getting focused. SBO is among the beyond design basis accidents that is characterized by loss of off-site electric power system, simultaneous with a turbine trip, and emergency AC power spurious function. Nevertheless, according to SBO rule (10CFR50.63), this accident does not influence on station batteries provided for accident mitigation (Commission, 2007). In the NuScale power plant, one highly reliable DC power system (EDSS) is considered per each module (NuScale Power LLC, 2018). Actuation of the safety systems like ECCS, DHRS, and CIS depends on EDSS in the SBO accident.
The sequence of the events in the SBO scenario is brought in Table 2. Values that are obtained from the simulation are compared to DCA data (NuScale Power LLC, 2018).
Table 2. Station blackout without additional failure sequence of events.
According to the obtained results, SBO in the NuScale can be classified into five stages. These include initial transients, the formation of the new balance, water level reduction between baffle plate and riser, flow fluctuations in the primary system and, activation of the emergency core cooling system.
In the first stage, SBO begins with the loss of off-site power simultaneous with a turbine trip. As a result, secondary pumps stop working and feedwater halts to inject through the SGs. With the buildup of energy in the primary, the average temperature in the primary rises, and the PZR level increases, which leads to the primary pressure increase. After 9 s primary pressure reaches to the trip setpoint and after 2 s delay, shut down CRAs starts to move into the core and cause the power to decrease to the decay heat. The pressure of the primary rises with decreasing heat removal capacity of the system. After 13 s from the beginning of the accident, the pressure reaches the set point of the first safety valve, which is in 14.31 MPa, and at 17 s primary pressure reaches its maximum. However, with the actuation of the first safety valve variation trend of pressure become decreasing.
29.7 s after the RTS actuation, DHRS valves start opening, and after 0.3 s they are fully open. At the same time, MSIVs and FWIVs close, and it causes a pressure increase in the secondary. The actuation of these valves would form a new loop for passive heat removal. With the isolation of the secondary system, its pressure reaches a maximum. However, with the operation of DHRS, the pressure gets a decreasing trend with time.
In the second stage of the accident, a continuous flow, approximately 190 kg/s, is formed in the primary system, which decreases with decay heat. This heat removal from the primary by DHRS causes a decrease and increase in average fluid temperature and density, respectively. As density increases, the PZR level falls and causes a reduction in the primary pressure. In this stage of the accident, the primary flow rate is stable, and outlet and inlet fluid temperatures from the core steadily decreases with time. After nearly 4000 s, the liquid level in the PZR reaches to the baffle plate. The variation of the parameters in the first 1000 s of the accident is shown in Fig. 4.
Fig. 4. Variation of the main parameters during the early stage of the accident: (a) Reactor core power (b) primary system pressure (c) mass flow rate of the hot leg riser (d) core inlet and outlet temperatures (e) pressurizer collapsed level (f) maximum cladding temperature.
The third stage of the accident would begin approximately 4000 s, and it continues until about 23,500 s from the beginning of the accident. This stage is characterized by a reduction of mass flow rate in the primary system. As the average density of the primary loop increases and PZR become empty, the liquid water level reaches between the baffle plate and riser edge. The mass flow rate of the primary decreases dramatically as the liquid level reduces. At the beginning of this phase, there is 120 kg/s flow in the primary circuit, whereas it reaches 8 kg/s because of level reduction between the baffle plate and riser. In this phase, there is still continuous flow, while pressure decreases at a slower rate. It should be mentioned that pressure in this phase proportional to the saturation pressure of the outlet fluid from the core.
The fourth stage of the accident is characterized by intense fluctuations in the primary flow rate. This phase begins after approximately 6.5 h from the initiation of the accident and continues until the activation of ECCS. In this stage, the liquid level reaches the edge of the riser. This causes interruption of continuous flow between the riser and the downcomer. With the disturbance of the flow, a continuous trend of decrease in primary coolant temperature stops and, as shown in Fig. 5 (e), the temperature difference between outlet and inlet of the core rises. Accumulation of heat in the core causes the formation of a void in the core. Also, in this period of the accident, the pressure is reduced to roughly 0.7 MPa, and this makes flashing in the riser possible.
Fig. 5. Variation of the main parameters during the three days: (a) primary system pressure (b) RPV water level above the top the active fuel (c) pressurizer collapsed level (d) mass flow rate of the hot leg riser (e) core inlet and outlet temperatures (f) DHRS inlet flow.
As the amount of void in the core and riser passes a certain extent, it creates a flow surge that pure into the riser and replaces some of the fluid in the core. The liquid is almost stagnant in the loop until decay heat buildup and creates another surge. This process is the primary mechanism of heat removal from the core until activation of ECCS. Also, it affects the performance of the DHRS. Due to less velocity of the fluid on the primary side of the tubes heat transfer coefficient reduces. Moreover, fluctuation of the flow in the primary circuit affects the driving force in the DHRS and causes perturbation flow in this system.
The fifth stage of the accident is characterized by ECCS activation. After the loss of electric power, the 24-h timer of ECCS becomes active. After 3 s of delay, MPS sends the actuation signal to the RRVs and RVVs. With actuation of these valves coolant in the RPV discharge to the CNV. After a few seconds of transient pressure of the CNV and RPV reaches equilibrium. CNV is designed so that, with activation of ECCS, the reactor core remains flooded.
Released water in the CNV cools by means of heat transfer with reactor pool. On the other hand, decay heat causes the vaporization of the fluid in the core. This vapor leaves the RPV through RVVs and condenses after transferring heat with CNV walls. This fluid returns to the RPV through RRVs and reaches the reactor core. This mechanism stable the core condition for the remaining time.
Fig. 6 (a) shows the mass flow rate in the hot leg riser in the case that the fourth stage of the accident continues, and ECCS does not become active. Also, Fig. 6 (b) shows the inlet and outlet temperatures of the coolant from the core. Oscillations of the fluid flow can lead to failure of the SG tubes and also fuel elements. Furthermore, it exposes the primary components to alternate thermal shocks. In the case of SGTF, there is a potential risk for releasing radioactive material into the environment by means of bypassing the CNTS through DHRS. For this reason, in the following, two approaches are analyzed to enhance the flow rate in the system and mitigate its relevant consequences.
Fig. 6. Variation of the parameters during three days with consideration ECCS failure (a) mass flow rate of the hot leg riser (b) core inlet and outlet temperatures.
<Section>3. Safety measures for improving flow rate in the primary system</Section>
In order to design new equipment for improving the performance of the reactor during SBO, it is considered that it be compatible with the passive concept of the reactor. Two different approaches are suggested in which each of them lead to distinctive behaviours. The concept of both methods is to keep the continuous flow in the primary system. Pressure below roughly 5 MPa represents that the pressurizer level is reached to zero. Nearly 1 h after the initiation of the accident pressure of the primary reaches to 5 MPa. When it reaches 3 MPa, there is still approximately 0.4 m margin for the liquid level to reach the riser edge. In both scenarios, the setpoint of actuation is defined based on 3 MPa, which is where the point that the pressurizer is completely discharged.
The first method utilizes a passive safety injection tank (SIT) to provide sufficient coolant for the module to avoid interruption of flow during the accident. Specification of the SIT is provided in Table 3. The SIT does not have any moving parts. So it is not necessary to be checked frequently, and no operator action is needed. Nitrogen pressure above the fluid in the tank, supply the driving force for injection of flow to the system, and no pump is required.
Table 3. Specification of the safety injection tank.
The second approach utilizes four valves, which are located approximately in the middle height of the steam generator and attached to the hot leg riser. The riser connects to the downcomer using these valves when they are open. Electricity for actuation of these valves can be supplied using EDSS. The specification of the riser valves are provided in Table 4.
Table 4. Specification of the riser valves.
<Section>4. Results and discussions</Section>
4.1. Accident management with utilization of safety injection tank
According to NUREG-0800, passive systems must be able to perform safety-related functions for 72 h (Commission, 2007). To demonstrate the performance of the considered measures, it is considered that ECCS does not intervene in the scenarios. The operation of the reactor is investigated for three days for both scenarios.
The scenario begins with the loss of electricity and the turbine trip. The first two stages of the accident are the same as the preceding scenario for SBO. The third phase of the accident begins almost 4000 s after the initiation of the accident. As it is mentioned, with the discharge of the pressurizer, primary pressure decline with a sharp rate. Nearly at 4480 s pressure reaches to the 3 MPa, which is the actuation set point of the SIT. The collapsed liquid level at this point is reached to 0.1 m below the baffle plate.
With the actuation of the SIT valve, extra liquid releases trough the primary system, which causes to PZR liquid level to rise, as indicated in Fig. 7 (e). Release of the liquid in the system, sustain the circulation of the flow in the circuit during the rest of the scenario. Fig. 7 (a) illustrates the flow rate of the system for 72 h in the hot leg riser. The peak of flow is created due to injection from SIT at roughly 1.2 h. It can be seen that, in this case, the flow rate reduces smoothly with time as a function of decay heat and heat sink temperature. As it is described in the literature, the flow in the natural circulation loop is proportional to the third root of the power that is produced in the hot source. Thus, in the lower powers sensitivity of the flow to power is higher. As can be seen from the figure, about the onset of the accident flow rate is 180 kg/s while it reaches around 100 kg/s after 5 h.
Fig. 7. Variation of the main parameters with consideration of the passive accumulator in design: (a) mass flow rate of the hot leg riser (b) primary system pressure (c) DHRHX inlet flow (d) core inlet and outlet temperatures (e) pressurizer collapsed level (f) maximum cladding temperature.
Core inlet and outlet temperatures of the fluid decreases with time as fluid flows in the system. As can be seen from Fig. 7 (d), there is a significant temperature decrease in the first hours of the accident. For instance, approximately 175 K in the first 5 h of the accident. However, with elapsing time, temperature declines with a lower slope. This can mainly be justified by temperature difference that exists between cold source and hot source. As it is stated in the previous sections, this research is based on conservative assumptions. So, the reactor pool temperature is considered at its boiling point in the initial time. At the beginning of the accident, there is about 230 K temperature difference between clad temperature and reactor pool temperature, whereas, after 5 h, it becomes about 40 K. Consequently, as this temperature difference decreases, the driving force of the DHRS loops and primary reduces.
This temperature difference manifests itself in the heat removal capability of the DHR system. The Inlet mass flow rate of each of DHRHXs at the initial times of the accident is about 4 kg/s. This flow rate causes a significant temperature drop in primary and its corresponding pressure decrease. After injection of cold water from SIT, flow in the DHRS suppresses because of the existence of cold water in the shell side of steam generators and lack of deriving force between the hot and cold source in the DHR loops. However, as injected liquid mixes with primary circuit fluid, the temperature of the shell side of SGs rises, and it restores the DHR flow, as can be seen in Fig. 7 (c). After 10 h from the beginning of the accident temperature difference between the reactor pool and fuel cladding reaches to approximately 35 K. This low-temperature difference, causes a considerable decrease in the mass flow of DHRS. At this point, it can be stated that the condition of the rector is reached to equilibrium, and it continues for the remaining time.
The limiting parameter for the stable condition of the reactor primarily is the pool level and its temperature. Calculated parameters show that transferring decay heat to the pool causes evaporation and reduction of pool level in extent of around 1.2 m. It should be noted that any decrease in pool temperature causes an increase in heat removal capacity of DHRS and a reduction of primary temperatures. Fig. 7 shows that main parameters of the reactor remain in the safe margins. With the utilization of SIT in design, the variation of the primary mass flow rate is smooth, and no fluctuation of flow is observed.
4.2. Accident management using riser valves
Similar to the previous cases, this scenario begins with the loss of electric power and the turbine trip. The sequence of events for the first two stages of the accident is identical to the preceding ones. However, as pressure decreases to 3 MPa at 4480 s, riser valves become open. At this time, the mass flow rate of approximately 13.5 kg/s flows through each valve. Despite overall 55 kg/s flow through the valves, the largest part of circulating liquid passes from the upper part of the riser in this stage, with nearly 118 kg/s. As DHRS removes heat from the primary system and average density increases, the water level falls. With the level reduction, the flow rate that passes from above of riser reduces.
After elapsing 9500 s from the beginning of the accident, the liquid level falls below the riser edge, and the passing flow rate above of the riser drops to zero. After this time, all circulating flow in the primary passes through riser valves. As can be seen from Fig. 8 (a), there is about 50 kg/s flow rate at this time, whereas it reduces to approximately 32 kg/s after passing 72 h from the beginning of the accident. The reduction of the flow rate originates from the reasons described in the previous section. As can be seen from Fig. 8 (a) fluctuations of the flow improved significantly compared to the general case with the utilization of riser valves.
Fig. 8. Variation of the main parameters with consideration of riser valves in design: (a) mass flow rate of the hot leg riser (b) primary system pressure (c) DHRHX inlet flow (d) core inlet and outlet temperatures (e) RPV collapsed water level above TAF (f) maximum cladding temperature.
As DHRS works, temperatures of the inlet and outlet fluid from the core decreases. However, after approximately 10 h from the beginning of the accident, the driving force for DHRS is declined, and a further decrease in temperature continues at a slow rate. With decreasing temperature, the liquid level falls to 10.2 m Other parameters such as pressure and maximum cladding temperature remain in the steady condition until the end scenario. In this approach, the equilibrium of primary temperatures is slightly higher than the preceding scenario. Also, in some circumstances, slight oscillations may exist. However, the overall performance of the reactor shows dramatic improvement in the primary flow rate, and additional coolant is not needed in this method. Furthermore, the capital cost for utilizing this approach is lower.
<Section>5. Conclusion</Section>
Phenomenology involves the SBO for NuScale SMR is investigated in this research. It is observed that, when the pressurizer is discharged and the liquid level is reached to the riser edge, intense fluctuations in the primary flow rate appears. These fluctuations lead to temperature shocks and also vibrations. In the long term, these flow oscillations expose the reactor to the risk of damage to the integrity of the fuel elements. Furthermore, it might lead to SGTF and its relevant consequences that include the degradation of DHRS.
To alleviate the problem, two new approaches are suggested in this research. Both methods rely upon passive components, and they are compatible with the design of the reactor. The first approach is to equip the reactor with a passive safety injection tank. This system could provide sufficient coolant for the primary so that continuous flow between riser and downcomer to be guaranteed. Results show that, with the actuation of this system, the primary circuit is able to keep the continuous flow rate of approximately 80 kg/s in the system, which decreases with decay heat while the other parameters remain is safe margins.
The second method uses four valves that are located in the hot leg riser. As pressure reaches to the point that indicates pressurizer discharge, these valves are being actuated and connect the downcomer to the riser. These valves are located in the half-height of the steam generators. Results show that fluctuations could be damped using these valves and keep the continuous flow with a lower flow rate compared to the first method. This approach is realized to be more efficient for utilization in design regarding simplicity and its lower cost.
Adoption of the analyzed safety measures in design increases the safety of the system during SBO and decreases the risk of flow-induced vibrations that could be a potential source for SGTF and fuel element damage. Proposed safety systems provide long term continuous flow that obviates the need for ECCS during the first three days.
<Section>Declaration of competing interest</Section>
We wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome.
<Section>References</Section>
Anglart, 2011
H. Anglart
Nuclear Reactor Dynamics and Stability
KTH Royal Institute of Technology (2011)
Google Scholar
Arda and Holbert, 2015
S.E. Arda, K.E. Holbert
A dynamic model of a passively cooled small modular reactor for controller design purposes
Nucl. Eng. Des., 289 (2015), pp. 218-230
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Arda and Holbert, 2016
S.E. Arda, K.E. Holbert
Nonlinear dynamic modeling and simulation of a passively cooled small modular reactor
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 91 (2016), pp. 116-131
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Commission, 2007
U.N.R. Commission
NUREG-0800
Stand. Rev. Plan, 3 (2007)
Google Scholar
Fakhraei et al., 2020
A. Fakhraei, F. Faghihi, M. Amin-Mozafari, A. Sadegh-Noedoost
Safety analysis of an advanced passively-cooled small modular reactor during station blackout scenarios and normal operation with RELAP5/SCDAP
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 143 (2020), p. 107470
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fisher et al., 2001
J.E. Fisher, S.M. Modro, K.D. Weaver, J. Reyes, J. Groome, P. Babka
Performance and safety studies for multi-application, small, light water reactor (MASLWR)
Proceedings of RELAP5 International Users Seminar Was Held in Sun Valley, Idaho (2001)
Google Scholar
IAEA, 1985
IAEA
Small and Medium Power Reactors, Project Initiation Study, Phase 1
International Atomic Energy Agency (1985)
IAEA-TECDOC-347
Google Scholar
IAEA, 2013
IAEA
Evaluation of Advanced Thermohydraulic System Codes for Design and Safety Analysis of Integral Type Reactors
International Atomic Energy Agency (2013)
IAEA TECDOC 1733
Google Scholar
Lefvert, 1996
T. Lefvert
Ringhals 1 stability benchmark
NEA Nucl. Sci. Comm. Rep. EA/NSC/DOC, 96 (1996), p. 22
Google Scholar
Lewis, 1977
E.E. Lewis
Nuclear Power Reactor Safety
(1977)
Google Scholar
Marcel et al., 2013a
C. Marcel, H. Furci, D. Delmastro, V. Masson
Phenomenology involved in self-pressurized, natural circulation, low thermo-dynamic quality, nuclear reactors: the thermal–hydraulics of the CAREM-25 reactor
Nucl. Eng. Des., 254 (2013), pp. 218-227
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Marcel et al., 2013b
C.P. Marcel, F. Acuña, P. Zanocco, D.F. Delmastro
Stability of self-pressurized, natural circulation, low thermo-dynamic quality, nuclear reactors: the stability performance of the CAREM-25 reactor
Nucl. Eng. Des., 265 (2013), pp. 232-243
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Mascari et al., 2012
F. Mascari, G. Vella, B. Woods, F. D'Auria
Analyses of the osu-maslwr experimental test facility
Sci. Technol. Nucl. Instal. (2012), p. 2012
Google Scholar
Modro et al., 2003
S. Modro, J. Fisher, K. Weaver, J. Reyes, J. Groome, P. Babka, T. Carlson
Multi-application Small Light Water Reactor Final Report
Idaho National Engineering and Environmental Laboratory, Idaho Falls, ID (2003)
Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR; NEXANT, Inc., San Francisco, CA (US)
Google Scholar
NRC Bulletin 88-07 Supplement 1, 1988
NRC Bulletin 88-07 Supplement 1
Power Oscillations in Boiling Water Reactors
(1988)
Google Scholar
NuScale Power, 2017
L.L.C. NuScale Power
History of NuScale power technology
NuScale Power LLC (2017)
Google Scholar
NuScale Power, 2018
L.L.C. NuScale Power
NuScale standard plant design certification application
U.S. Nucl. Reg. Comm. (NRC) (2018)
Google Scholar
OECD, 2004
OECD
Neutronics/Thermal-hydraulics coupling in LWR technology
Nucl. Energy Agen., 3 (2004)
Google Scholar
Pilehvar et al., 2020
A. Pilehvar, M. Esteki, G. Ansarifar, A. Hedayat
Stability analysis and parametric study of natural circulation integrated self-pressurized water reactor
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 139 (2020), p. 107279
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Reyes et al., 2007
J.N. Reyes, J. Groome, B.G. Woods, E. Young, K. Abel, Y. Yao, Y.J. Yoo
Testing of the multi-application small light water reactor (MASLWR) passive safety systems
Nucl. Eng. Des., 237 (2007), pp. 1999-2005
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Sadegh-Noedoost et al., 2020
A. Sadegh-Noedoost, F. Faghihi, A. Fakhraei, M. Amin-Mozafari
Investigations of the fresh-core cycle-length and the average fuel depletion analysis of the NuScale core
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 136 (2020), p. 106995
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Valtonen, 1991
K. Valtonen
RAMONA-3B and TRAB Assessment Using Oscillation Data from TVO I
(1991)
Google Scholar
Woods et al., 2005
B.G. Woods, J.N. Reyes, Q. Wu
Flow stability testing under natural circulation conditions in integral type reactors
Presentation at IAEA Natural Circulation Research Coordination Meeting Corvallis, OR, USA Sept (2005)
Google Scholar
Zanocco and Delmastro, 2004
P. Zanocco, D. Delmastro
Linear and Nonlinear Stability Analysis of a Self-Pressurized, Natural Circulation, Integral Reactor, 12th International Conference on Nuclear Engineering
American Society of Mechanical Engineers Digital Collection (2004), pp. 763-772
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zanocco et al., 2004
P. Zanocco, M. Giménez, D. Delmastro
Modeling aspects in linear stability analysis of a self-pressurized, natural circulation integral reactor
Nucl. Eng. Des., 231 (2004), pp. 283-302
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar