<title>Transient thermal–hydraulic analysis of SCO2-cooled reactor system with modified RELAP5</title>
<author>1,YuandongZhang,2,MinjunPeng,3,GengleiXia,4,LianxinLv</author>
<Affiliation>1,Fundamental Science on Nuclear Safety and Simulation Technology Laboratory, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin 150001, China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107681</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454920303790</URL>
Transient thermal–hydraulic analysis of SCO2-cooled reactor system with modified RELAP5
YuandongZhang,MinjunPeng,GengleiXia,LianxinLv
Fundamental Science on Nuclear Safety and Simulation Technology Laboratory, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin 150001, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
The RELAP5 was modified for the use of SCO2 and benchmarked with typical design values.
The natural responses of reactor system in transient conditions were simulated without control systems.
The reactor power step reduction and loss of electrical load had great influence on turbomachinery.
The effect of small range increase of cooling water temperature on reactor system were acceptable.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The SCO2-Cooled Reactor System (SCRS) has good prospects in Gen-IV reactors. The SCO2 makes SCRS safe, compact and efficient. However, the variations of SCO2 thermophysical properties cause complex operation characteristics of SCRS. Transient simulation has great significance for SCRS safety analysis and its control system design. In this paper, the RELAP5 was modified and benchmarked by typical design. Transient conditions including reactor power step reduction, loss of electrical load and cooling water temperature disturbance were simulated without the intervention of control or auxiliary systems to study the natural responses of SCRS. The results demonstrated that the first two transients had great influence on turbomachinery. And control and auxiliary systems were necessary to respond quickly to ensure the normal operation of turbine. Moreover, the influences of cooling water temperature disturbance with temperature increase of 1 K on the change of main compressor operation condition and the weakening of circulation efficiency were acceptable.
Keywords：SCO2-cooled reactor system;Brayton cycle;Modified RELAP5;Transient analysis
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The SCO2-cooled reactor system (SCRS) is an advanced Generation IV reactors concept integrating several characteristics including supercritical fluid with strong heat transfer capability and compressibility, flexible reactor fuel form, various arrangements of Brayton energy conversion system and multilevel energy utilization. The typical schematic of SCRS coupled with recompression Brayton cycle is shown in Fig. 1. The advantages of this circulation system in simplicity, compactness, security and economy make it be one of the most potential candidates of the Generation IV reactors. Multiple conceptual designs of SCRSs, including the gas fast reactor (GFR) from Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) (Dostal et al., 2006, Pope et al., 2006), the integrated multi-module fast reactor (IMMFR) at Texas A&M University (Patel and Tsvetkov, 2013) and the small modular reactor (SMR) developed by Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST) (Kim et al., 2017, Kim Seong et al., 2017), have been proposed by worldwide institutions.
Fig. 1. SCO2-cooled reactor system (SCRS).
The advantages of SCRS are the result of the working fluid thermophysical properties. The thermophysical properties of SCO2 change sharply near the critical point in Fig. 2. The compression work and the volume-to-power ratio is reduced by utilizing the high density and low compressibility characteristics of SCO2 in the pseudocritical region compared with helium, which makes the turbomachinery miniaturization and a better plant thermal efficiency (Wang et al., 2019a, Wang et al., 2019b). However, the complex thermophysical properties will also bring risks to the normal operation of SCRS. The non-ideal variations of SCO2 thermophysical properties make the turbomachinery more complicated in design and operation. And more requirements are put forward to the control system for ensuring the quality of the working fluid. The effects of buoyancy and thermal-acceleration caused by the variable thermophysical properties make the SCO2 heat transfer more difficult to grasp, especially in the off-design operation process. Besides, due to the lack of SCO2 Brayton cycle experiment and operation experience, the characteristics of SCRS are difficult to be mastered in depth. Therefore, the analysis of SCRS operation characteristics is meaningful for guaranteeing the reactor safety and control system design.
Fig. 2. Normalized SCO2 thermophysical properties near the pseudocritical temperature at 8 MPa (Lemmon et al., 2010).
Few transient simulation tools and analysis results of SCRS exist. Idaho National Laboratory improves the calculation function of RELAP5-3D for next generation nuclear plant simulation and analysis (Donna et al., 2006, James and Cliff, 2005, Prashaanth et al., 2010). The reengineering of RELAP5-3D into structured code and the additions of necessary calculation models were performed during the code upgrade. Transient analysis was carried out for both the GFR proposed by MIT (Pope et al., 2006, Cliff et al., 2005) and the SCO2 power cycle for nuclear fusion reactor designed under TECNO_FUS (Batet et al., 2014) utilizing the RELAP5-3D. The thermal–hydraulic analysis with the commercial code of ANSYS CFX was carried out based on a CO2-Cooled Pebble Bed (CCPB) for the EU DEMO (Wang et al., 2019a, Wang et al., 2019b). The results showed that the CCPB satisfied the basic thermal hydraulic requirements and the CO2 was a realistic choice as primary coolant for gas-cooled fusion reactors. The preliminary designs of two systems were verified and transient responses in several accidents were analyzed during the simulation. In addition, the dynamic analysis of He-Xe gas Brayton cycle coupled to the space reactor proposed in Prometheus Project (McCann, 2007) was studied by RELAP-3D. The extended MARS code was applied to transient analysis and validation with experimental data of SCO2 integral experiment loop for developing a cycle operation strategy for SCO2 Brayton cycle (Park et al., 2018). The simulations provide notable insights into the responsiveness to varying scenarios such as system under valve control, power swing and heat sink reduction failure. Argonne National Laboratory (ANL) realized the coupling between the plant dynamics code for SCO2 cycle and SAS4A/SASSYS-1 calculating for the SFR reactor side (Moisseytsev and James, 2014). A control strategy for SCO2 Brayton cycle was developed and the capability to operate the reactor system at initial decay heat levels was demonstrated. It can be found that although some research has been carried out, it is far from enough to support the in-depth understanding of SCRS. Meanwhile, due to the tight coupling of closed Brayton cycle, the variations of any thermal parameters have profound impact on circulatory system. However, the existing research on control system and operation strategy for system and equipment is scarce. Consequently, more simulation works need to be developed for grasping the characteristics of SCRS, especially the SCO2 Brayton cycle in which the thermophysical properties of working fluid will change in a large range.
In view of the above, the function expansion of RELAP5 was performed for SCRS transient analysis. The models and methods used in code upgrading were benchmarked by typical design. Several typical transients were simulated to analyze the thermal–hydraulic characteristics and operation constraints of reactor system. It is worth mentioning that all transient conditions were simulated without any intervention of control or auxiliary systems, which was conducive to grasp the natural responses of the reactor system and determine the available time for control system to intervene.
<Section>2. RELAP5 modification and models</Section>
The RELAP5 code is the best-estimate system analysis code based on a two-fluid model for two-phase flows (INEL, 1998). In order to study the transient thermal–hydraulic characteristics of SCRS, a modified RELAP5 code was used to establish the calculation model. The modification of RELAP5 mainly includes the addition of SCO2 thermophysical properties, the development and update of Brayton components, and the change of thermal–hydraulic correlations.
2.1. SCO2 thermophysical properties
In RELAP5, the thermophysical properties of working fluids were calculated by look-up table method in interpolation subroutine. And in the modified RELAP5, the interface program was written to access the NIST Standard Reference Database (Lemmon et al., 2010). SCO2 thermophysical properties files were written according to the RELAP5 thermophysical property file format requirements, and the code for judging the type of working fluid and calling thermophysical property parameters was added.
Generally, the viscosity and thermal conductivity are only related to the temperature. And the temperature fitting function was used to calculate the viscosity and thermal conductivity of the traditional working fluids such as water in RELAP5. However, considering that the viscosity and thermal conductivity of SCO2 may change with pressure in pseudocritical region, the invocation of SCO2 dynamic viscosity and thermal conductivity was added to the original RELAP5 interpolation module. Meanwhile, the interpolation calculation of sound speed was also added due to the calculation needs of compressor. As a result, the thermophysical properties and transport characteristics of SCO2 including temperature, pressure, specific volume, internal energy, specific enthalpy, specific heat, specific entropy, coefficient of expansion at constant pressure, compressibility factor, dynamic viscosity, thermal conductivity and sound velocity were obtained by interpolation calculation, which has high calculation accuracy and can reduce the account step in pseudocritical region as needed.
2.2. Compressor model
Compressor and pump perform similar function on working fluids. Therefore, referring to the existing pump model, the compressor model was developed in RELAP5. The compressor model includes an inlet junction, a control volume and an optional outlet junction which can connect to not only an ordinary junction of RELAP5 but also the inlet junction of another compressor model. The following introduces the calculation models and implementation methods in modified RELAP5.
2.2.1. Calculation model
The torque applied to the compressor can be divided into two parts, one part changes the angular momentum of the working fluid, the other part produces reactive force in the journal and thrust bearings. And the total torque can be calculated by isentropic torque and an efficiency factor.
The compressor model calculation starts from the conservation of rotor angular momentum. The working fluid at radius r1 enters with initial azimuthal velocity vθ1 and exits at radius r2 with azimuthal velocity vθ2. The torque τ required for angular acceleration can be computed by (Boyce, 2011)
@(1)
The energy transfer rate can be calculated by the product of the torque τ and the angular velocity ω. And the steady state steady-flow energy equation of control volume can be written as
@(2)
where •Q•Qcv, •W•Wcv, h, z, g and gc is heat added in control volume, work done in control volume, specific enthalpy, elevation, gravitational acceleration and units conversion, respectively.
The total enthalpy is defined as
@(3)
The RELAP5 cannot realize the real-time call of NIST database to obtain the SCO2 thermophysical properties, which results that the torque cannot be calculated by assuming isentropic compression process. Hence, the torque should be computed from the work done on the working fluid based on some assumptions at State 2. The momentum equation of compressor is defined as (Vennard, 2011)
@(4)
where P, ρ and H is pressure, density and the head added to the fluid. Assuming that the average density is independent of pressure, the following formula can be obtained by integration.
@(5)
@(6)
which can be further derived in the forms of total pressure as follows.
@(7)
where Rp is the pressure ratio and given by the compressor performance map.
Hence, the pressure head added to the momentum equation is
@(8)
The total work done on the working fluid can be obtained by assuming that the heat entering the system is zero.
@(9)
where isentropic work •W•Ws is
@(10)
Combined with the above formulas, the isentropic torque τs is
@(11)
and the irreversible torque τd is defined as
@(12)
Therefore, the total torque τ which is added to the shaft rotational speed equation can be calculated by the sum of irreversible torque τd and isentropic torque τs:
@(13)
The compressor model is imposed on the volume-junction flow path. The pressure head provided by the compressor is added to the inlet junction, which connects the compressor model with the two-fluid hydrodynamic model. And as a result, the pressure head term appears in both the liquid and vapor phase terms of the mixture momentum equation.
2.2.2. Numerical form
As mentioned above, the pressure head term “ρgH”, added to the right side of mixture momentum equation, is implicitly coupled to the velocity by volumetric flow rate. The term of “ρgH” can be expressed by Taylor expansion as:
@(14)
Similar to that of turbine, the energy dissipation •Q•Q is defined as follows by ignoring the kinetic energy term and combining the Eq. (9).
@(15)
To ensure the equal temperature rise caused by dissipation in liquid and vapor phase terms of the mixture momentum equation, the energy dissipation term explicitly calculated is partitioned as:
@(16)
@(17)
where α is phasic volumetric fraction and cp is specific heat.
2.2.3. Input modification
The pressure ratio and efficiency of the compressor are calculated by performance map which is obtained based on the compressor preliminary design results. The surge line and choke line in performance map determine the normal operation range of the compressor. The data of the compressor normal operation area is written to RELAP5 in the form of table and read using linear interpolation method. Meanwhile, the parameters of transient conditions beyond the normal operation range are calculated by simple linear extrapolation. The shaft rotational speed and mass flow corrected by rated stagnation sound speed and density are used as the input parameters to call the performance tables for obtaining the compressor pressure ratio and efficiency under the corresponding working condition. The relative input parameters are calculated as follows.
For compressors whose working fluid is compressible, the pressure ratio and efficiency can be expressed by the following formula using the similarity principle.
@(18)
where C is sound speed, D represents the compressor geometric size, subscript 0 and in stand for stagnation and the inlet state, respectively.
For the same compressor, the compressor geometric size D can be omitted. And the dimensionless forms of the input parameters can be expressed as
@(19)
@(20)
Hence, the relative corrected input parameters can be calculated by
@(21)
@(22)
where subscript R refers to a rated condition.
2.3. Turbine model
The turbine model in the original RELAP5 code ignores the dissipated power, resulting in that the work done by the working fluid to the shaft is unequal to the reduced energy of the working fluid. Therefore, an appropriate heat source term is added to turbine energy equation to represent the dissipative power, which solve the problem of inconsistency between shaft and hydraulic powers.
For stable single-phase flow, the energy equation can be written as follows:
@(23)
where •Q•Q and U is the heat transferred from the structural material to control volume and specific energy, j and j + 1 represent two adjacent junctions.
Using the subscripts 1 and 2 to represent the inlet and outlet junctions respectively, and giving the same pressure at this two junctions, the Eq. (23) can be rewritten in the form of specific enthalpy:
@(24)
Therefore, by applying the same settings throughout the turbine and ignoring the heat transfer term, the total energy equation can be written as follows:
@(25)
where W is the work exerted by the fluid on the shaft and v is velocity.
Considering the transformation of sign and combining the Eqs. (24) with (25), the heat transferred from the structural material to control volume •Q•Q can be calculated by:
@(26)
Meanwhile, the power of turbine shaft is approximately:
@(27)
where the ratio of actual power to isentropic power η is defined as
@(28)
Therefore, the heat source term can finally be written as:
@(29)
In addition, based on the original RELAP5 turbine model, a new efficiency calculation method as a function of normalized shaft rotational speed and load is added, which increases the simulation ability and flexibility of the turbine model for SCRS. Besides, the turbine efficiency can also be obtained by linear interpolation in performance map similar to the above compressor efficiency.
2.4. Heat exchanger model
A promising candidate for recuperator with high-efficiency and compactness is the printed circuit heat exchanger (PCHE), which consists of several metal plates with semicircular microchannels manufactured by photo-chemically etching and diffusion bonding (Iverson et al., 2013, Li et al., 2011). Therefore, for the simplification and accuracy of modeling, all the heat exchangers of SCRS in this paper are designed as the straight channels PCHE where the alternating hot and cold streams are counter-flow arranged as shown in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3. Printed circuit heat exchanger (PCHE).
The heat transfer in PCHE includes the convection heat transfer between hot stream and metal plate, the heat conduction between metal plate, and the convection heat transfer between cold stream and metal plate. Because of the same structure size of each plates and channels in PCHE, the PCHE model can be simplified to use N heat exchange units to represent the whole heat exchanger. Therefore, the adjacent cold and hot channels are defined as one heat exchange unit. And the overall heat transfer capacity of PCHE can be obtained by multiplying the heat transfer capacity of a single heat exchange unit by N. Based on the PCHE geometry, the heat structure of the PCHE model is simplified to a plate type for filling in the RELAP5 input card. In addition, the semicircle channels of PCHE are transformed into rectangular channels which can be calculated in RELAP5 by a proper geometric mapping method described below.
In the process of geometric mapping, the length d, area A and pinch p of rectangular channel in Fig. 4 are equal to those of semicircle channel. Hence, the width of the rectangular channel dMapping is:
@(30)
Fig. 4. Geometric mapping of channels.
The thickness of the metal plate in the rectangular channel can be approximately calculated by the average value of the thickness limit of the semicircle channel:
@(31)
In addition, the specific heat of the heat structure needed to be corrected to match the heat capacity change caused by the volume change of the heat structure after the geometric mapping.
2.5. Heat transfer model
The original RELAP5 used the Dittus-Boelter correlation (Dittus and Boelter, 1985) for forced convection heat transfer calculation, which was considered not suitable for the simulation of gas working fluid circulatory system. Therefore, the Gnielinski correlation (Gnielinski, 1976) is added to calculate the heat transfer coefficient:
@(32)
@(33)
where Nu is Nusselt number, Re is Reynolds number, Pr is Prandtl number, ff is Fanning friction factor, deq is hydraulic diameter, l is entry region length, Tf is fluid temperature, and Tw is wall temperature.
<Section>3. Benchmark</Section>
The Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) has carried out extensive research on the design of gas cooled fast reactor (GFR) coupled with SCO2 direct Brayton cycle (Dostal et al., 2006, Pope et al., 2006, Cliff et al., 2005). In this paper, the modified RELAP5 model was benchmarked by the reactor system and its key devices proposed by MIT.
3.1. Compressor
The SCO2 compressor model was established, and the steady-state operation parameters simulated by the modified RELAP5 were compared with the design values to evaluate the calculation capacity of the compressor model.
The modified RELAP5 nodalization of compressor is shown in Fig. 5. The time-dependent volume 341 gives the boundary conditions of the compressor design inlet parameters. The purpose of volumes 345 and 346 is to ensure that the working medium at the compressor inlet reaches the stagnation conditions. The components 350 and 380 respectively represent the compressor and the related volume at its outlet. The time-dependent volume 382 is used to control the compressor outlet boundary conditions. Compressor outlet pressure in component 382 and shaft rotational speed are changed to study the compressor performance under off-design conditions. The thermal hydraulic boundary conditions used for the comparisons of compressor designed by MIT are listed in Table 1. In addition, the input parameters also include the compressor characteristic curves. The simulation results of the compressor pressure ratio and power consumption at three shaft rotational speeds, i.e. 50%, 80% and 100% of the rated speed, are consistent with the MIT design as shown in Fig. 6.
Fig. 5. The modified RELAP5 nodalization of compressor.
Table 1. The thermal hydraulic boundary conditions of compressor designed by MIT.
Fig. 6. Comparisons between compressor calculation results by modified RELAP5 and MIT design.
3.2. Turbine
In the process of turbine model building, the turbine efficiency was calculated by a cubic polynomial function of the normalized power. The form loss coefficient of the turbine inlet volume was adjusted for matching the rated power. Under the premise of constant turbine inlet parameters, the turbine outlet pressure was changed to obtain the device performance under different steady-state conditions. The thermal hydraulic boundary conditions of turbine designed by MIT are listed in Table 2. Similarly, the input parameters also include the turbine characteristic curves. Fig. 7 shows the comparisons of calculation results and MIT design, which proves that the modified model has good SCO2 turbine simulation ability.
Table 2. The thermal hydraulic boundary conditions of turbine designed by MIT.
Fig. 7. Comparisons between turbine calculation results by modified RELAP5 and MIT design.
3.3. Heat exchanger
The PCHE designed by MIT was modeled in the modified RELAP5 as shown in Fig. 8. The PCHE model consists of channels components (components 330 and 385), heat structure (red part in nodalization) and boundary control volumes (components 325, 335, 380 and 390). The two channels components respectively divided into 80 volumes simulate the semicircle channels which have been geometrically mapped into rectangular channels available in RELAP5. The time-dependent volumes provide the inlet temperature, mass flow and outlet pressure of cold and hot streams. The heat transfer and pressure drop in PCHE are calculated by the new thermal–hydraulic correlations described above. Additionally, the node number divided in channels components affects the calculation speed and accuracy. When the number of nodes is small, the cost of the increase of PCHE calculation speed is the decrease of calculation accuracy. Overly fine node division will slow down the computation speed, especially in system level simulation calculation. Therefore, it is necessary to conduct sensitivity analysis of the node division in PCHE channels components before systematic simulation.
Fig. 8. The modified RELAP5 nodalization of PCHE.
The thermal hydraulic boundary conditions of PCHE designed by MIT are listed in Tables 3 and the 4 showed comparisons between PCHE calculation results by modified RELAP5 and benchmark. It can be found that there was an error between the calculated value and the benchmark, which was caused by the divide of nodes number mentioned above and the error of pressure distribution. In the design process of PCHE benchmark, the pressure drops included the formal losses and friction losses, while only the friction losses were considered when modified RELAP5 calculation. But this error does not affect the accuracy of the whole system simulation results in Fig. 9. Hence, we thought the error (relative error less than 1%) was acceptable eventually.
Table 3. The thermal hydraulic boundary conditions of PCHE designed by MIT.
Table 4. Comparisons between PCHE calculation results by modified RELAP5 and MIT design.
Fig. 9. Comparisons of T-P chart between calculation results by modified RELAP5 and MIT design.
3.4. Gas cooled fast reactor system
The SCO2 fast reactor system designed by MIT was modeled by integrating the compressor, turbine and heat exchangers models mentioned above with the reactor model. The form loss coefficient of the turbine inlet and the cooling water flow rate of the precooler were appropriately adjusted to improve the agreement between steady-state simulation results and design. The electric energy of MIT-GFR is generated by SCO2 recompression Brayton cycle whose temperature–pressure charts calculated by the modified RELAP5 and designed by MIT are compared in Fig. 9. The figure shows that the simulation results of each position in the Bryton cycle are in good agreement with the benchmark results. The maximum deviations of working fluid temperature and pressure are within 15 ℃ and 0.1 MPa, and its relative errors are within 4% and 1% respectively.
<Section>4. System description and modeling</Section>
1MWe SCRS was designed using the method proposed by (Zhang et al., 2020) and the main parameters are given in Table 2. The detailed design results of the key equipment used to support the modified RELAP5 modeling, such as the performance curve of turbomachinery and the structural dimensions of each heat exchanger, can also be obtained in system design. In addition, the focus of this paper was the transient characteristics of the SCO2 Brayton cycle applied to the reactor system, so the design and modeling of the reactor was simplified. Meanwhile, the detailed three-dimensional core distribution was ignored and the point-reactor kinetics equations with six groups of delayed neutrons (INEL, 1998) were used to calculate the reactor power. The preliminary design of the reactor was carried out with reference to the core research of MIT-GFR (Dostal et al., 2006, Pope et al., 2006) and Prometheus Project (Ashcroft and Eshelman, 2007). The key reactor parameters input into RELAP5, such as the structure size, the number of fuel assemblies and the neutron feedback coefficient, are simply evaluated, which was not described in detail in this paper.
The nodalization of SCRS designed in this paper is shown in Fig. 10, which includes simplified reactor, Brayton cycle, pressure auxiliary system and cooling water circulation system. The SCO2 enters the reactor and flows down the downcomer (component 110). After the SCO2 reaches the inlet plenum (component 120), it flows upward through the core which is divided into 10 nodes axially to absorb the fission heat. The heated SCO2 enters the turbine (component 215) to generate power. The energy of exhaust gas is recovered via HTR (component 230) and LTR (component 240). The SCO2 then splits into two parts before entering the precooler (component 245). The main flow is compressed in main compressor (component 255) after cooled through the precooler. And the branch flow is compressed directly in recompressing compressor (recomp. compressor) (component 265) and merges with the main flow heated in LTR (component 270) at the recompressing compressor outlet (component 275). The combined flow is preheated in the HTR (component 280) and returns to the reactor. Moreover, the cold side of the precooler (component 310) is connected with the cooling water circulation system whose boundaries are defined by the time-dependent volumes 300, 320 and junction 305 J. All control systems are not considered during RELAP5 simulation in this paper. Hence, a time-dependent volume 400 representing the pressure auxiliary system is used as the pressure boundary in the steady-state calculation. The Brayton cycle is isolated from the pressure auxiliary system by disconnecting the time-dependent volume 400 mentioned above during transient calculation.
Fig. 10. Nodalization of SCRS.
Full power steady-state condition was calculated to obtain stable system initialization parameters, which were used as the basis for transient condition simulation. Meanwhile, the sensitivity analysis of the node division was done to reduce the uncertainty introduced by modeling. The Table 5 shows the comparisons between the SCRS design and the modified RELAP5 steady-state simulation results.
Table 5. Comparisons between SCRS design and the modified RELAP5 steady-state simulation.
<Section>5. Result and discussion</Section>
Based on the initial condition provided by the steady-state calculation results, three transient conditions, including reactor power step reduction, loss of electrical load, and cooling water temperature disturbance, were simulated to study the thermal-hydraulic characteristics of the SCRS. No control or auxiliary system was added in all transient processes. The simulation studies of transient conditions based on modified RELAP5 were conducive to understanding the coupling properties of S-CO2 recompression Brayton cycle to reactor system, and supporting its control system design.
5.1. Reactor power step reduction
In the case of no external disturbance, the system thermal parameters tended to be stable after 10,000 s calculations in modified RELAP5. The reactor power was adjusted to 80% of full power and the transient started at time 11000 s. The transient response of the SCRS after the heat source power step reduction was analyzed in Fig. 11, Fig. 12.
Fig. 11. Normalized parameters following the reactor power step reduction.
Fig. 12. Temperature response following the reactor power step reduction.
After the core power decreased, the reactor temperature dropped rapidly. And the temperature and pressure at the turbine inlet also decreased subsequently as shown in Fig. 11. However, because of the constant temperature at the cold side of precooler, the temperature change at the inlet of the main compressor was very small in Fig. 12(a). Meanwhile, the temperature change of each equipment was gentler and gentler along the flow direction of working fluid in recompression Brayton cycle consequently. And the time for the temperatures of these devices to reach steady state were gradually longer, resulting from the thermal inertia of components. In addition, in the early stage of the transient process, the circulation flow raised briefly resulting from the interactions of the rapid reduction of the turbine expansion ratio and the greater compressor pressure head than circuit resistance. With the development of transient process, the reduction of compressor inlet pressure resulting in the decrease of SCO2 density and compressor pressure head, which eventually led to the circulation flow and generator load reduction to 96.5% and 70% of design parameters respectively.
The results of the system parameters response following the reactor power step reduction indicated that this transient process had a great influence on the turbine. The operation parameters varying in large range may cause the turbine to deviate from the normal operating range and thus introduce system risks. Therefore, in order to ensure the normal operation of the turbine, the circulation flow control system is necessary to guarantee the quality of the working fluid at the reactor outlet. The impact of this transient on the heat exchangers was another concern. The temperature difference at the hot and cold ends of the heat exchangers was lower than the design value when the transient occurs as shown in Fig. 12(b). It can be found that the temperature difference at HTR cold end (LTR hot end) was even reduced to about 5K which was slightly higher than the temperature difference required for heat exchange in engineering design. Consequently, a larger value of minimum heat transfer temperature difference in system design was required to cope with the higher level of reactor power change transients.
5.2. Loss of electrical load
The turbomachineries in SCO2 recompression Brayton cycle of this paper are all coupled to a single shaft. Therefore, when losing the external load, the imbalanced shaft torque caused by the turbine torque greater than the compressors torque makes the shaft speed increase rapidly. The formulas of turbomachinery torque shown in Eqs. (36) and (37) indicate that the turbomachinery efficiency is reduced at high shaft speed, which is beneficial to reduce the torque difference between turbine and compressor to achieve shaft torque rebalancing and shaft speed rising to a new stable value.
@(34)
@(35)
The transient was initiated by an instantaneous loss of external load, which was assumed to occur at 11,000 s. The variations of system parameters with transient are shown in Fig. 13, Fig. 14.
Fig. 13. Parameters response following the loss of electrical load.
Fig. 14. Temperature response following the loss of electrical load.
The shaft speed increased sharply in transient initial stage, which caused the increase of compressor pressure head. The circulation flow increased with compressor pressure head and consequently reduced the reactor temperature. Meanwhile, the temperature rise at compressor outlet resulted in reducing the cooling effect on the working fluid flowing through the hot side of the regenerators. The high temperature SCO2 has a lower density, further resulting in a higher torque required to maintain compressor rotation, as evidenced in Eq. (37). Therefore, the shaft torque finally achieved balance when the shaft speed was more than twice its design value. In addition, the insertion of negative reactivity reduced the reactor power in Fig. 13(b). However, the decrease of reactor temperature and Doppler feedback led to a positive reactivity insertion, which eventually caused the re-increase of core power.
The main concern during this transient is the rapid increase in shaft speed and its impact on the safe operation of turbomachinery. The control and protective systems, such as bypassing flow system for reducing the turbine flow or an extra load resistor for replacing the failed generator load, are required hence to avoid excessive shaft speed.
5.3. Cooling water temperature disturbance
The temperature of the cooling water in the precooler is set as the ambient temperature, so it may fluctuate when system operates. If the cooling water temperature increases, the system circulation efficiency will decrease. And when the cooling water temperature decreases, the working fluid at the compressor inlet will change from supercritical state to liquid state, resulting in the system abnormal operation. Therefore, the transient of cooling water temperature disturbance was simulated in this paper. Therefore, the transient of cooling water temperature disturbance was simulated in this paper. The cooling water temperature step rise of 1 K was inserted into the Brayton cycle at time 11,000 s and the calculation result was shown in Fig. 15, Fig. 16.
Fig. 15. Compressor inlet parameters following the cooling water temperature disturbance.
Fig. 16. Normalized parameters following the cooling water temperature disturbance.
Because of the constant cooling water flow when its temperature raised, the cooling capacity of the precooler decreased, and the SCO2 temperature and pressure at the compressor inlet raised consequently demonstrated in Fig. 15. Meanwhile, the constant absolute shaft speed of the main compressor led to the reduction of relative shaft speed under the condition of the its inlet SCO2 temperature increased, which resulted in a sudden drop of the circulation flow in Fig. 16. Then, with the decrease of main compressor pressure ratio, the effect of pressure ratio change on circulation flow was greater than that of relative shaft speed, and subsequently the circulation flow continued to increase until the system reached a stable state. Compared with the design condition, the transient eventually resulted in temperature and pressure at the main compressor inlet rising to 313.11 K and 7.93 MPa respectively. In addition, the cooling water temperature disturbance also weakened the SCRS performance, in which the circulation flow increases by 0.4% and the generator load decreases by 0.2%.
The results of parameter response showed that the effects of cooling water temperature disturbance within the temperature rise range of this paper on recompression Brayton cycle was acceptable. The main concern of this transient was the change of main compressor operation condition and the slight decrease of cycle efficiency. However, the transient disturbance of cooling water temperature reduction which will lead to the increase of precooler cooling capacity and the deviation of working medium at the inlet of compressor from supercritical state is more serious. Therefore, it is necessary to carry out the simulation analysis and control system design for this accident condition to avoid compressor surge and ensure the quality of working fluid in the follow-up work.
<Section>6. Conclusion</Section>
In this paper, the RELAP5 was modified to support the gas cooled reactor research. A comprehensive simulation analysis on SCO2-cooled reactor system (SCRS), a promising energy conversion system candidate for Generation IV reactors, was performed based on the modified RELAP5. The system thermal-hydraulic characteristics in three severe accidents including reactor power step reduction, loss of electrical load, and cooling water temperature disturbance, without control or auxiliary system were studied. The natural responses of key operating parameters following the different transients were investigated aiding in guiding the design of control and auxiliary system. The main conclusions are listed in the following.
(1)
The modification of RELAP5 including the addition of SCO2 thermophysical properties, the development and update of Brayton components, and the change of thermal-hydraulic correlations was completed. And the modified RELAP5 was benchmarked by the gas cooled fast reactor (GFR) and its key devices proposed by MIT, in which the good agreements proved the simulation capability of the code modified in this paper.
(2)
Both reactor power step reduction and loss of electrical load had great influence on turbomachinery. The turbine inlet temperature and shaft speed raised sharply in these two transients respectively. Thus, the circulation flow system and the extra load resistor are necessary to respond quickly to ensure the normal operation of the turbine when the accidents occur.
(3)
Compared to the first two transients, the effects of cooling water temperature disturbance within the temperature rise range of this paper on SCRS was acceptable. The accident has a slight influence on the change of main compressor operation condition and the weakening of circulation efficiency. However, transients with the larger disturbance range of cooling water temperature need to be simulated in the subsequent research to guide the design of control system for main compressor and precooler.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Yuandong Zhang: Investigation, Visualization, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. Minjun Peng: Conceptualization, Supervision, Project administration. Genglei Xia: Validation, Writing - review & editing. Lianxin Lv: .
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>References</Section>
Ashcroft and Eshelman, 2007
J. Ashcroft, C. Eshelman
Summary of NR program Prometheus efforts. AIP Conference Proceedings
American Institute of Physics (2007)
Google Scholar
Batet et al., 2014
L. Batet, J.M. Alvarez-Fernandez, E.M.D.L. Valls, et al.
Modelling of a supercritical CO2 power cycle for nuclear fusion reactors using RELAP5–3D
Fusion Eng. Des., 89 (4) (2014), pp. 354-359
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Boyce, 2011
M.P. Boyce
Gas turbine engineering handbook
Elsevier (2011)
Google Scholar
Cliff et al., 2005
Cliff B D., Theron D M., K. D. Weaver, 2005. Modeling the GFR with RELAP5-3D. No. INL/CON-05-00528. Idaho National Laboratory (INL).
Google Scholar
Dittus and Boelter, 1985
F.W. Dittus, L.M.K. Boelter
Heat transfer in automobile radiator of the tubular type
Int. Commun. Heat Mass Transfer, 12 (1) (1985), pp. 3-22
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Donna et al., 2006
Donna P G., George L M., Joshua M H., 2006. Restructuring RELAP5-3D for Next Generation Nuclear Plant Analysis. No. INL/CON-06-01065. Idaho National Laboratory (INL).
Google Scholar
Dostal et al., 2006
V. Dostal, P. Hejzlar, M. Driscoll
High-performance supercritical carbon dioxide cycle for next-generation nuclear reactors
Nucl. Technol., 154 (3) (2006), pp. 265-282
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gnielinski, 1976
V. Gnielinski
New equations for heat and mass transfer in turbulent pipe and channel flow
Int. Chem. Eng., 16 (2) (1976), pp. 359-368
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
INEL, 1998
INEL
RELAP5/MOD3 Code
Manual., NUREG/CR-5535 (1998), p. USNRC
Google Scholar
Iverson et al., 2013
B.D. Iverson, T.M. Conboy, J.J. Pasch, et al.
Supercritical CO2 Brayton cycles for solar-thermal energy
Appl. Energy, 111 (4) (2013), pp. 957-970
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
James and Cliff, 2005
James E F., Cliff B D., 2005. RELAP5-3D compressor model. No. INL/CON-05-00042. Idaho National Laboratory (INL).
Google Scholar
Kim Seong et al., 2017
G.u. Kim Seong, Y.u. Hwanyeal, J. Moon, et al.
A concept design of supercritical CO2 cooled SMR operating at isolated microgrid region
Int. J. Energy Res., 41 (4) (2017), pp. 512-525
Google Scholar
Lemmon et al., 2010
E.W. Lemmon, M.L. Huber, M.O. Mclinden
NIST standard reference database 23: Reference fluid thermodynamic and transport properties-REFPROP
NSRDS, NIST (2010), p. 9.0.
Google Scholar
Li et al., 2011
Q. Li, G. Flamant, X. Yuan, et al.
Compact heat exchangers: A review and future applications for a new generation of high temperature solar receivers
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 15 (9) (2011), pp. 4855-4875
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
McCann, 2007
McCann L D., 2007. Use of RELAP5-3D for dynamic analysis of a closed-loop Brayton cycle coupled to a nuclear reactor. AIP Conference Proceedings. Vol. 880. No. 1. American Institute of Physics.
Google Scholar
Moisseytsev and James, 2014
Moisseytsev A., James J S., 2014. Recent developments in S-CO2 cycle dynamic modeling and analysis at ANL. The proceedings of Supercritical CO2 Power Cycle Symposium, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
Google Scholar
Park et al., 2018
J.H. Park, S.W. Bae, H.S. Park, et al.
Transient analysis and validation with experimental data of supercritical CO2 integral experiment loop by using MARS
Energy, 147 (2018), pp. 1030-1043
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Patel and Tsvetkov, 2013
V. Patel, P. Tsvetkov
Concept of a high temperature integrated multi-modular thermal reactor
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 55 (2013), pp. 312-321
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Pope et al., 2006
Pope M A., Driscoll M., Hejzlar P., 2006. Shutdown/emergency cooling system for a 2400 MWTH supercritical CO2-cooled direct-cycle GFR. Proceedings of the 2006 international congress on advances in nuclear power plants-ICAPP'06.
Google Scholar
Prashaanth et al., 2010
R. Prashaanth, S. Piyush, A.A. Nolan
Modeling a printed circuit heat exchanger with relap5-3D for the next generation nuclear plant. Office of Scientific and Technical
Information Technical Reports (2010)
Google Scholar
Vennard, 2011
J.K. Vennard
Elementary fluid mechanics
Read Books Ltd. (2011)
Google Scholar
Wang et al., 2019a
S. Wang, F.A. Hernández, H. Chen, et al.
Thermal-hydraulic analysis of the First Wall of a CO2 cooled pebble bed breeding blanket for the EU-DEMO
Fusion Eng. Des., 138 (2019), pp. 379-394
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2019b
S. Wang, F.A. Hernández, G. Zhou, et al.
First thermal-hydraulic analysis of a CO2 cooled pebble bed blanket for the EU DEMO
Fusion Eng. Des. (2019)
Google Scholar
Kim et al., 2017
Y. Kim, D. Hartanto, Y.u. Hwanyeal
Neutronics optimization and characterization of a long-life SCO2-cooled micro modular reactor
Int. J. Energy Res., 41 (7) (2017), pp. 976-984
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhang et al., 2020
Y. Zhang, et al.
Performance analysis of S-CO2 recompression Brayton cycle based on turbomachinery detailed design
Nucl. Eng. Technol., 2020 (2020), 10.1016/j.net.2020.02.016
Google Scholar