<title>Influence of the packing structure on the flow through packed beds with small cylinder diameter to particle diameter ratios</title>
<author>1,W.J.S.van der Merwe,2,C.G.du Toit,3,J.-H.Kruger</author>
<Affiliation>1,School for Mechanical Engineering, North-West University, South Africa</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nucengdes.2020.110700</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029549320301941</URL>
Influence of the packing structure on the flow through packed beds with small cylinder diameter to particle diameter ratios
W.J.S.van der Merwe,C.G.du Toit,J.-H.Kruger
School for Mechanical Engineering, North-West University, South Africa
<Section>Highlights</Section>
CFD can evaluate friction factor correlations for small aspect ratio packed beds.
Packed beds were built with DEM, with fillets in-between spheres to improve CFD.
Eisfeld & Schnitzlein correlation was validated successfully by CFD simulations.
New lower limit for KTA friction factor equation at small aspect ratios was developed.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The influence of different packing structures of packed bed particles on the fluid flow through packed beds was investigated. The flow through cylindrical packed beds consisting of mono-sized spherical particles was simulated using an explicit approach. These beds had cylinder to particle diameter ratios between 1.6 and 6.33. The results for the friction factor over a wide range of Reynolds numbers were compared with results from literature. It was found that the Eisfeld and Schnitzlein friction factor correlation was confirmed by the CFD results. The lower cylinder diameter to sphere diameter limit of the KTA friction factor correlation was also evaluated and adjusted. This adjustment was incorporated into a new formulation for the limiting line of the KTA equation, which is presented in this paper. It was further found that in the creeping flow regime the bed friction has an overwhelming effect on the pressure drop, whereas in the turbulent regime the inertial forces and the porous structure has the overwhelming influence.
Keywords:Packed bed;Structure;Pressure drop;Friction factor;Porosity;Small aspect ratio
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
A packed bed can be described as any fixed container which is packed with particles, where the particles can vary in shape and size. The basic principle of all packed beds is that a working fluid is passed through the bed, between the particles, resulting in flow-, thermal- and chemical effects. The flow through packed beds is applied in many processes in the engineering industry, with examples such as: filtration, ion exchange, drying, heterogeneous catalysis, thermal heat exchangers and nuclear packed bed reactors (Dolejs and Machac, 1995, Mueller, 2010). When considering the design of a fluid-system which incorporates a packed bed, the pressure drop (Δp) over the bed is one of the most important variables which has to be predicted accurately (Winterberg and Tsotsas, 2000), as it is related to the flow distribution, pumping power and operating costs (Hassan and Kang, 2012). For this basic design reason, the flow through packed beds has been the topic of interest for many authors.
Carman (1937) and Ergun (1952) derived correlations that included the viscous and turbulent regimes and Ergun (1952) was one of the first authors to summarise the factors which influence the pressure drop over packed beds as: (1) the rate of fluid flow, (2) viscosity and density of the fluid, (3) closeness and orientation of the packing, and (4) size, shape and surface roughness of the particles. Hence, the pressure drop is very sensitive to the geometrical properties of the bed, described in more detail in Section 2.
The Ergun equation (Ergun, 1952) was derived as a correlation for the friction factor as function of the modified Reynolds number, based on data collected from published studies, as well as data obtained by him and colleagues. These data points included pressure drop measurements for the flow through beds packed with particles of various shapes and sizes, such as various sized spheres, sand and pulverized coke. The Ergun equation, however, assumes the influence of the containing walls to be negligible and does not take the wall effect into account.
A 50-member German research group known as the Nuclear Safety Standard Commission, “Kerntechnischer Ausschuss” (KTA), made a considerable effort to develop a correlation which predicts the pressure drop through packed beds consisting of mono-sized spherical particles, over a large range of Reynolds numbers (KTA, 1988). The derivation of the correlation was based on the investigation of various correlations from literature and again assumed negligible wall effects. The KTA (1988) also provided the so-called KTA limiting line with their correlation, to indicate the range above which the wall effect is deemed negligible; however the theoretical basis for this line is not given.
Eisfeld and Schnitzlein (2001) investigated the influence of the cylinder wall on the pressure drop, with the goal of establishing which existing correlations are valid when the wall effects are not negligible. They made a comparison between the predictions of 24 published pressure drop correlations, including both Ergun- and Carman-type equations, with more than 2300 experimental data points. The ES correlation was developed to give the best fit to friction factors from the surveyed data and is claimed not to degrade for small aspect ratios of α⩽10.
In this paper, the focus is on packed beds consisting of spheres with a uniform size and with a small cylinder diameter to particle diameter ratio. Section 3 gives detail on the correlations used and in Section 4 and Section 5 the CFD methodology is developed and validated with which to investigate the influence of the packing structure on the flow through packed beds.
Subsequently, the contribution of the research is described in Section 6. The first objective was to confirm the validity of the Eisfeld & Schnitzlein correlation using numerical simulations. The second objective was to analyze the validity of the lower limit of the KTA Equation and to propose a new lower limit with a reduced error margin. In conclusion, the third objective was to explore the influence of the packing structure on the flow by considering viscous and inertial flow effects and their interaction with each other and with the packed bed geometry.
<Section>2. Packed bed structure</Section>
The structure of a packed bed can be described using a number of parameters. The most common of the parameters are the aspect ratio and porosity, whilst some other parameters are described in this section as well.
2.1. Aspect ratio
The aspect ratio, α, of a packed bed is the ratio of the cylinder diameter, D, to the diameter of the particles, d:
(1)α=Dd
This definition of the aspect ratio is only applicable to cylindrical packed beds, with mono-sized spherical particles. This ratio is arguably the most important general design parameter which characterises a randomly packed cylindrical bed, since the bed porosity and packing structure is directly related to it, which in turn influences the permeability of the bed.
2.2. Packing structure
Graton and Fraser (1935) showed that when systematically packing spherical particles, various layouts can occur in a single layer of spheres. The most basic being the square and simple rhombic layouts. From these two configurations in a layer, several different 3D structures can be obtained. Graton and Fraser (1935) noted that spheres packed in a cylinder are unable to start and retain any simple structural packing due to the interference of the cylinder wall. Thus, the structure in cylindrical packed beds of mono-sized spherical particles can typically be considered as random. Mueller (1992) also noted that the packing far from the cylinder wall display a randomised configuration.
Regarding the density of the packing structure of a packed bed, two different types can be obtained namely loose packings and dense packings (De Klerk, 2003). Loose packings are obtained when the particles are simply dropped into the container and left to settle only through gravity. Dense packings are obtained when the container is tapped or shaken after the particles were added, forcing the particles to shift and form a more tight packing. However, as pointed out by De Klerk (2003) and Leva and Grummer (1947), the difference in bed voidage between loose and dense packings starts to decrease as the aspect ratio is reduced below α<6. Therefore, it appears that at low aspect ratios, the packing technique becomes less important for randomly packed beds.
2.3. Porosity calculations
Porosity, ε, also known as the void fraction, is characterised as a volumetric structural property and has a value between 0 and 1. It is a basic packing parameter of fixed packed beds that gives an indication of the volume available for fluid flow, and the permeability of the bed (Mueller, 1997). Porosity is defined as the fraction of the volume of voids to the total volume. Thus,
(2)εb=VvVt=Vt-VsVt=1-VsVt
where εb is the bulk porosity, Vv the volume of the voids, Vs the solid volume and Vt the total volume, as defined by Mueller (2010).
Bai et al. (2009) gave an analytical expression to calculate the bulk porosity of beds consisting of mono-sized spherical particles, where N is the number of particles and L the axial length of the bed:
(3)εb=1-2Nd33LD2
Du Toit, 2008, Du Toit, 2019 developed comprehensive analytically-based numerical procedures to evaluate the variation in the porosity of a cylindrical packed bed consisting of spherical particles in the axial and radial directions, when the centre coordinates and diameters of the particles are known. The axial porosity ε(z) at a given level z is given as:
(4)ε(z)=1-∑Ai(z)Ac(z)
where Ac(z) is the cross-sectional area of the cylinder at level z, and Ai(z) the area of the intersection between the sphere i and the axial plane. The radial porosity ε(r) at a given radial position r is given as:
(5)ε(r)=1-∑Ai(r)Acyl(r)
where Acyl(r) is the area of the cylindrical plane at the radius r between axial heights z1 and z2, and Ai(r) the area of the intersection between the sphere i and the cylindrical plane. These procedures provide the area-based porosity at the selected positions as opposed to the volume-based porosity obtained by Mueller (1992).
Du Toit and Rosslee (2012) used Eq. (6) to calculate the bulk porosity of packed beds numerically, where zmin to zmax are the minimum and maximum axial coordinates respectively and z′ the number of planes from zmin to zmax.
(6)εb=∑k=1z′-112·(ε(zk)+ε(zk+1))·(zk+1-zk)(zmax-zmin)
2.4. Porosity variations
It has been well established in literature that the cylindrical wall of the bed, which is three-dimensional in nature, forces a two-dimensional ordered structure in the layer of particles adjacent to the wall (White and Tien, 1987). Also, the structure of the bed becomes less structured with increasing distance from the wall (Mariani et al., 2009). As a result, the porosity distribution in the radial direction has an oscillatory behaviour which dissipates with distance from the wall (Goodling et al., 1983). Radial porosity variations are particularly prominent at small aspect ratios (Mueller, 1997). These sharp porosity variations in the near wall region have profound effects on the fluid flow, since the velocity profile in this region can be severely distorted (Du Toit, 2008). This phenomenon in known as the wall effect. It has been established that the influence of the wall effect on the fluid flow is dependent on both the bed aspect ratio (Mehta and Hawley, 1969) and the flow Reynolds number (Eisfeld and Schnitzlein, 2001).
Radial porosity variations for cylindrical packed beds with mono-sized spheres have been investigated using various experimental and systematic methods. Most of these investigations assume axi-symmetry and average the porosity tangentially. However, Benenati and Brosilow (1962) and Zou and Yu (1995) were able to show that the presence of any distinct boundary or wall causes the above mentioned oscillatory porosity variations.
Zou and Yu (1995) described the influence on the porosity variations in the axial direction, due to the top/bottom walls, as the length effect. It is important that experimental and numerical domains are defined so as to eliminate the length effect as far as possible.
Dixon (1988) and Benyahia and O’Neill (2005) measured the bulk porosity of beds with various aspect ratios and developed correlations describing the strong relationship between the aspect ratio (α) and bulk porosity (εb). They confirmed that as α was increased above 20, the bulk porosity approached a general value of εb≈0.4, down from a high value of εb≈0.68 at α≈1.9.
<Section>3. Prediction of pressure drop</Section>
Predicting the pressure drop has been the topic of many theoretical and experimental studies, and general agreement has been achieved on how to describe the influence of the Reynolds number and the bulk porosity on the pressure drop through infinite beds. One of the most common methods used to describe the pressure drop through packed beds makes use of the hydraulic diameter concept proposed by Blake (1922), which is analogous to the flow through pipes. Blake (1922) proposed two dimensionless groups to characterise the pressure loss through packed beds:
(7)Ψ=ΔpρU2·dL·εb31-εb=ΔpρUi2·DHL
(8)Rem=Rep1-ε;Rep=ρUdμ
with Ui the interstitial velocity, U the superficial velocity, DH the hydraulic diameter, Rep the particle Reynolds number, ρ the fluid density and μ the fluid dynamic viscosity. The two groups, Ψ and Rem, are known as the modified friction factor and the modified Reynolds number respectively. However, the hydraulic diameter concept suggested by Blake (1922) was derived for infinite beds, and excluded the effect of the wall on the hydraulic diameter.
3.1. Types of equations
The most general form of the friction factor for fluid flow through packed beds, based on the hydraulic diameter concept, is given as:
(9)Ψ=ΔpρU2·dL·εb31-εb=a′Rem+b′(Rem)2-n
where a′ and b′ are determined empirically. Two main variations exist on this general form:
1.
Ergun-type equations are variations of Eq. (9) for which n=2, as originally proposed by Reynolds (1900). These equations are arguably the most widely used correlations to predict the pressure drop through packed beds.
2.
Carman-type equations are variations of Eq. (9) for which 1.9⩽n⩽1.95, as proposed by Carman (1937).
Known as the Ergun equation, Ergun (1952) originally obtained values for the constants as a′=150 and b′=1.75, by fitting Eq. (9) to 640 experimental data points, filtered to exclude any wall effects. The Ergun equation is thus suitable for large aspect ratio beds, valid for 1<Rep<2500 and 0.36⩽εb⩽0.4.
Carman (1937) originally obtained values for the constants as a′=180 and b′=2.871, which is known as the Carman equation. Even though a number of variations of Carman-type equations do exist, they are less known and have not received as much attention or credit as Ergun-type equations.
3.2. The KTA correlation
The KTA (1988) proposed a correlation that was obtained from a regression analysis of semi-empirical data obtained from various correlations in literature. The correlations used in the analysis had to adhere to the following criteria: (1) The wall effect had to be negligible, (2) the bulk porosity had to be known from the original documents, (3) all beds had to have length to particle diameter ratios of L/d>4, (4) correlations had to be developed using data obtained from randomly packed beds, and (5) experiments with d<1 mm were not considered.
In order to ensure that the wall effect was indeed negligible, KTA (1988) took experimental investigations from various authors and chose points for α and Rem where the influence of the containing walls was reported to be negligible. By plotting these values for α against Rem, they were able to estimate the KTA limiting line (Fig. 1), which indicates the range above which the wall effect is negligible. However, the theoretical basis for this line is not given.
Fig. 1. Lower limit of the KTA correlation: the KTA limiting line.
From the regression analysis of the semi-empirical data obtained from each correlation, KTA (1988) proposed a new correlation with values for the constants as a′=160,b′=3 and n=1.9:
(10)ΨKTA=160Rem+3(Rem)2-1.9
Eq. (10) is known as the KTA correlation, which is a Carman-type equation (KTA, 1981). The KTA correlation is valid for cylindrical packed beds containing mono-sized spheres, for 100<Rem<105,0.36<ε<0.42,L>5d, and aspect ratios above the limiting line in accordance with Fig. 1.
3.3. The Eisfeld and Schnitzlein correlation
Eisfeld and Schnitzlein (2001) investigated the influence of the cylinder wall on the pressure drop by examining more than 2300 experimental data points from literature. Assuming an Ergun-type equation to be valid, they found that the Reichelt (1972) approach of modifying Eq. (9) was the most promising. Eisfeld and Schnitzlein (2001) improved on the Reichelt (1972) equation, and determined values for the constants in the correlation, to obtain the best fit for the correlation to the friction factors based on the experimental data. They stated that their improved correlation does not degrade for small aspect ratios of α⩽10. Eqns. (11), (12) is the correlation proposed by Reichelt (1972), with the modifications by Eisfeld and Schnitzlein (2001), where E and E′ are functions which account for the wall effect. Eisfeld and Schnitzlein (2001) found the constants to be e=154,e′=1.15 and e″=0.87 for spherical particles.
(11)ΨES=e·E2Rep·(1-εb)+EE′
(12)E=1+23α(1-εb);E′=(e′α-2+e″)2
Eq. (11), the Eisfeld & Schnitzlein (ES) correlation, is an Ergun-type equation and is valid for 0.01<Rep<17,635,0.33<ε<0.882, and 1.624⩽α⩽250. Eisfeld and Schnitzlein (2001) also found that the Carman-type equations generally presented slightly better results for spherical particles. However, neither fitting the coefficients of the Carman-type equations nor combining them with the wall correction approach, Eq. (12), could improve the results.
3.4. Final remarks
Many authors have attempted to derive correlations based on dimensionless variables which can be used to predict the pressure drop over packed beds. However, the exact influence of the wall effect is still uncertain (Eisfeld and Schnitzlein, 2001). Also, many authors have compared the predictions of various correlations with measurements from numerous experiments. However, it is important to note that due to the nature of randomly packed beds, the porous structure of each packed bed will be unique. This introduces a source of error in the prediction of the pressure drop, regardless of the method (Hassan and Kang, 2012).
<Section>4. Methodology</Section>
Steps were taken during the numerical analyses of the flow through the packed beds, to ensure accurate solutions with a reasonable degree of confidence. Particular focus was given to aspects such as the packed bed creation, mesh density, treatment of the contact points between particles and different turbulence models. The influence of these factors on the pressure drop was investigated by simulating the flow through a reference bed. This ensured an optimized process with which to perform the CFD flow analyses for the various beds with different aspect ratios; as tested during the validation phase.
4.1. Creating the flow domain of packed beds
The general process was to pack the bed container numerically with spheres using the Discrete Element Modelling (DEM) solver of Star-CCM+ (CD-Adapco, 2012). The centre coordinates of the spheres were then used to create the flow domain in SolidWorks (Systemes, 2013). Finally the flow domain was meshed in Star-CCM+ and the necessary boundaries and flow parameters applied to perform CFD analyses.
4.1.1. Using DEM to pack the spheres
The methods developed by Reyneke (2009) for creating DEM generated packed beds were improved upon, and beds with aspect ratios of 1.6⩽α⩽25 were generated (containing only spheres – no flow domain meshing yet).
The packing quality of the DEM generated beds were then assessed by calculating each individual overlap, do, between adjacent particles, following the method of Du Toit and Rosslee, 2012. Ideally, the numerical spheres should be impenetrable, but due to the soft-sphere approach used by the Star-CCM+ DEM methodology, there will always inherently be a certain amount of overlap. The amount of overlap between adjacent particles was however found to be small, with do,max<0.08% for all particles in all the beds tested.
The bulk porosities were calculated with an analytical method as well as a numerical method. The differences in bulk porosity between the two methods were small, with Δ∊b<0.1% for all beds. These calculated values for the bulk porosities also corresponded well with the values predicted by correlations from literature, as well as experimental measurements. Thus, the DEM generated beds were of high quality, though it was found that the lengths of the beds, with Ld=10, were insufficient to fully eliminate the length effect.
4.1.2. Reference packed bed and chosen aspect ratios
In order to optimize the simulation methodology, a reference bed with an aspect ratio of α=2.01 was generated. This domain is shown in Fig. 2. Note that LI and LO are the axial lengths of the inlet and outlet regions respectively.
Fig. 2. Reference bed used for the development of the methodology, with α=2.01,D=100 mm, d=49.8 mm, LI=50 mm, LO=250 mm, and containing N=10 particles.
The remainder of Section 4 describes the optimization of aspects of the CFD simulation methodology. Due to restraints in the available resources and the high computational demand, only beds with aspect ratios of α=1.60, 2.01, 2.50, 3.00, 3.65, 4.00, 5.00 and 6.33 were further processed for flow simulation using this methodology. (These aspect ratios were chosen, based on the validation cases described in Section 5.)
4.2. Meshing and physics
4.2.1. Meshing models and cell types
Calis et al., 2001, Hassan, 2008, Bai et al. (2009) and Reddy and Joshi (2010) generated meshes consisting of tetrahedral cells, due to the complexity of the geometry, where the mesh density is characterised by the edge length of a tetrahedral element. Calis et al. (2001) also added a number of prism layer cells to solve viscous effects in the boundary layer. Eppinger et al. (2011) and Preller (2011) used polyhedral and thin volume meshes respectively. Both investigated the influence of the number of prism layers used, and found that 2 prism layers offer the highest quality cells, without an excessive cell count.
In the current investigation three meshing models were compared with regards to cell count, cell skewness angle and a cell quality metric. The three models were (1) a simple polyhedral mesh, (2) a thin mesh, and (3) a polyhedral mesh with 2 prism layers. The polyhedral mesh with 2 prism layers were used, as it offered the highest quality cells without an excessive cell count.
4.2.2. Mesh resolution
The influence of the mesh resolution on the simulation was analysed by simulating the flow through the reference bed, while decreasing the mesh base size, B, and consequently increasing the cell count and mesh density. Fig. 3 shows that the pressure drop over the bed was mesh independent above roughly 1.2×106 cells, since the pressure drop Δp(B=2) was within 1.0% of Δp(B=1.4). In order to have a mesh independent solution without an excessive cell count, a mesh resolution which corresponded to 1.7⩽B⩽2 mm was chosen for the reference bed. In order to scale the mesh base size to beds with different aspect ratios, B was calculated as a percentage of the particle diameter:
(13)Bd×100=4%
Fig. 3. Pressure drop over the reference bed as a function of the number of cells, at Rep=104.
4.2.3. y+ values
Star-CCM+ offers three different wall treatments, detailed in CD-Adapco (2012). Firstly, the high y+ wall treatment models the viscous effects near the wall boundaries using a rough mesh with 15<y+<500. However, this model is not suitable for highly turbulent applications where surface drag is of importance. Secondly, the low y+ wall treatment resolves the flow near the wall boundaries by calculating the wall shear stress as it would be in a Direct Numerical Simulation. However, this requires extremely fine meshes and is generally only suitable for low Reynolds numbers. Thirdly, the all y+ wall treatment blends the previous two models to estimate shear stress, and the results are similar to the low y+ wall treatment if the mesh is fine enough. CD-Adapco (2012) suggests that the all y+ wall treatment be used whenever STAR-CCM+ allows it to be used.
Calis et al. (2001) noted that it is difficult to meet the stringent y+ criteria everywhere on particle surfaces, because of the large deviations in velocity around particles. Thus, in the current investigation, the all y+ wall treatment was used in Star-CCM+ while keeping y+<3, which complies with the software vendor’s recommendation, for when calculating the drag is of importance.
4.3. Contact treatment
A crucial point for the mesh generation in packed beds is the cell quality near the contact points between particles, and between particles and the cylinder wall. Due to its geometric nature, the contact points force the flow area around it to be very small, thin and acute. The cells near the contact points are usually either highly skewed or highly refined. High numbers of skewed cells lead to convergence problems during the calculation, whereas highly refined regions increase the number of cells and as a direct consequence the computational time (Eppinger et al., 2011). Several methods to overcome this problem has been presented in literature.
Calis et al. (2001) and Reddy and Joshi (2010) eliminated contact points entirely by reducing their particle diameters by 1.0% without changing the particle positions, thus creating a gap between particles which improves the generated mesh. Bai et al. (2009) followed the same principle by reducing their particle diameter by 0.5%. Eppinger et al. (2011) introduced a method which flattens the particles locally at the contact points as soon as the minimum distance between two surfaces falls below an adequate and predefined value. This creates a gap between the particles which allows for a higher quality mesh. Reyneke (2009) approximated the contact between particles by connecting particles at the contact point with a small cylindrical shape, thus removing the region near the contact point from the fluid domain. His results showed that the macroscopic flow properties, such as pressure drop, were not influenced by the cylinders.
Dixon et al. (2013) did an in depth investigation of the influence of four different contact treatments on the flow through packed beds. They tested two global methods in which particles were either enlarged or shrunk uniformly, and two local methods in which particles were locally flattened, similar to Eppinger et al. (2011), and locally connected with bridges, similar to Reyneke (2009). Dixon et al. (2013) investigated the influence of the different methods on drag coefficients as well as heat transfer between particles. They found that global methods gave high errors in both drag coefficient and heat transfer rates between particles. For the local methods they found good results and recommended a local bridging method, since the local flattening method presented unrealistic results for heat transfer between particles.
Thus, in the current investigation a bridging method was employed, where the particles were connected to each other with a specific contact area with a diameter DC. This was achieved by creating a fillet, with a specified radius f, at all contact points between particle–particle and particle-cylinder surfaces, as shown in Fig. 4. The influence of the size of the contact area on the pressure drop was investigated, as shown in Fig. 5. It was found that a too large area, f>0.1 mm, increased the pressure drop as the permeability decreased, while a too small area, f<0.1 mm, still resulted in low cell quality in the contact region. A fillet radius of f=0.1 mm was chosen for the reference bed, as it ensured that the size of the contact area was large enough to improve cell quality, without influencing the pressure drop. However, in order to scale the fillet radius to beds with different aspect ratios, f was calculated as a percentage of the particle diameter:
(14)fd×100=0.2%
Fig. 4. Schematic illustration of a contact point between two particles with a filler radius f.
Fig. 5. Pressure drop over the reference bed as a function of the contact point fillet radius, at Rep=104.
4.4. Turbulence modelling
Many authors have investigated the influence of different turbulence models on the results of the simulation of the flow through packed beds. Most authors, including Bai et al., 2009, Calis et al., 2001 and Hassan and Kang (2012) found that more computationally intensive models such as Reynolds Stress Models (RSM) and Large Eddy Simulation (LES) offer little improvement in accuracy over less computationally intensive k-∊ models. In the current investigation the influence of the Realisable k-∊ model and LES on the flow through the bed was investigated.
The same mesh was used for LES and Realisable k-∊ simulations, with the maximum y+<3. (The available computational resources prohibited a mesh with y+⩽1, which is the recommended y+ for LES.) In implementing LES, some cues were taken from Hassan (2008) as well as Preller (2011) in order to optimize the comparison between the performance of the two turbulence models as much as possible, even though the LES model was used under non-ideal conditions. Nevertheless, the results of the study justified the choice that was made to balance practical performance against acceptable accuracy.
Fig. 6, Fig. 7 show the transient solutions for Δp, for Rep=103 and Rep=104 respectively. The Rep=103 case was simulated for 30 s, and the Rep=104 case for 3 s. In order to obtain representative average values of the pressure drop for the transient solutions, running averages were calculated by integrating Δp over a time interval using the trapezium rule. For the case with Rep=103 running averages with intervals of 5 and 10 s were calculated, and for Rep=104 the intervals were 0.5 and 1.0 s. The running averages were compared with the steady state solution for Δp of the Realisable k-∊ model.
Fig. 6. Comparison between the Realisable k-∊ model and LES, with running averages for LES, at Rep=103.
Fig. 7. Comparison between the Realisable k-∊ model and LES, with running averages for LES, at Rep=104.
Fig. 6, Fig. 7 show that the differences in Δp between the Realisable k-∊ model and LES were small. The difference in Δp between Realisable k-∊ and LES 30 s being 0.77% for Rep=103, and 1.01% between Realisable k-∊ and LES 3 s for Rep=104. These small differences did not justify the additional computational effort required by LES, thus it was decided to use the Realisable k-∊ model as the turbulence model in the current investigation.
4.5. Boundary definitions
4.5.1. Inlet boundaries
For the sake of simplicity, Bai et al. (2009), Reddy and Joshi (2010) and Calis et al. (2001) all specified uniform velocity profiles at the inlet boundary. A more realistic representation of the flow entering the packed bed would be fully developed viscous flow. A simple method to determine a velocity profile for fully developed flow is to calculate the velocity as a function of the cylinder radius, U(r), as derived from the shear stress in viscous flow. Eqns. (15), (16) provide UL(r) and UT(r) for laminar and turbulent flows respectively, where R is the cylinder radius and U‾ the average velocity (Munson et al., 2010).
(15)UL(r)=2U‾1-rR2
(16)UT(r)=U‾(n′+1)(2n′+1)2(n′)21-rR1n′
Another method to determine the velocity profile is explicitly solving for fully developed flow in a pipe using CFD, to generate a library of velocity values which can be introduced into the main computation at the inlet. This method is accurate due to its explicit nature, but requires additional computations to generate the velocity profiles (Tabor and Baba-Ahmadi, 2010). Thus, in this investigation Eqns. (15), (16) were used to calculate velocity profiles for fully developed flow, which were then specified at the inlet boundaries.
4.5.2. Inlet and outlet regions
To minimise the influence of the boundary conditions at the inlet and outlet, Calis et al., 2001, Bai et al., 2009 and Reddy and Joshi (2010) extended their volume meshes roughly one cylinder diameter in the axial direction at the inlet and outlet. Eppinger et al. (2011) extended the volume mesh at the inlet by 3 particle diameters and the outlet by 10 particle diameters. Thus, in the current investigation, the domains were created with the inlet region extending a length of LI=3d from the bed and the outlet region extending a length of LO=10d from the bed.
4.5.3. Pressure drop measurement
Bai et al. (2009) observed local variations in static pressure which correspond to the local velocity variations through the packing structure. To obtain a pressure drop over the bed which was not influenced by these variations, they calculated the difference in average pressures just before and after the bed. Reddy and Joshi (2010) and Eppinger et al. (2011) employed a similar method, but calculated the pressure drop as the difference in static pressure between the inlet and outlet boundaries.
In the current investigation the pressure drop over the bed was also calculated as the pressure difference between the inlet and outlet boundaries. This ensured that the pressure drop was not influenced by local pressure variations. Note that the influence of the wall boundaries in the inlet and outlet regions on the pressure drop were assumed to be negligible. The outlet boundary was specified as an atmospheric pressure of 101.325 kPa.
4.6. Working fluid
Considering the goal of the investigation, the particular fluid used was not of great importance. However, it was important to use the same fluid properties in the CFD simulations, as was used to calculate the pressure drops with the semi-empirical correlations used for validation purposes. Simulations with either compressible or incompressible flow would have been appropriate, since experiments reported in the literature commonly used air (compressible flow) and water (incompressible flow) and data for both types of flow was thus available.
In this study, it was therefore decided to use air as a compressible ideal gas for all CFD simulations, with the goal of developing an applicable methodology that can be used to simulate both compressible and incompressible flow in packed beds.
<Section>5. Validation</Section>
In order to validate the methodology discussed in Section 4, the flow through beds for which experimental measurements for the pressure drop were available in literature was simulated. The two experimental studies used for validation was that of Wentz and Thodos (1963) and Hassan and Kang (2012).
5.1. Wentz and Thodos
Wentz and Thodos (1963) did thorough experiments on the flow through structured packed beds consisting of mono-sized spherical particles. Their beds were made of plastic phenolic spheres, which were machined to fit into a cylindrical wind tunnel by removing excess portions of the external spheres to eliminate the wall effect. Each packing arrangement had five layers of particles in the axial direction and were arranged in cubic, body-centred cubic and face-centred cubic orientations.
Wentz and Thodos (1963) measured the pressure drop through the bed using static pressure taps mounted perpendicularly into the walls of the wind tunnel, roughly 5 particle diameters upstream and downstream of the bed. Pressure drop measurements were also taken for a single layer of particles in the middle of each bed, to eliminate any entrance and exit effects. From these measurements, Wentz and Thodos (1963) obtained the following correlation:
(17)ΨWentz=0.351Rem0.05-1.2
In this study, the packed beds with cubic and body-centred cubic structures were recreated as simulation models, and the flow through them was simulated using the methods developed as part of the present investigation. Fig. 8, Fig. 9 show the pressure drops predicted by the CFD simulations as well as the experimental measurements, for the ranges of Rem reported by Wentz and Thodos (1963). Note that the values of Rem differ slightly from the actual values given by Wentz and Thodos (1963) because the relevant values for the fluid density, dynamic viscosity and the ambient pressure were not reported and thus had to be assumed.
Fig. 8. Validation of CFD model results against measurements by Wentz and Thodos (1963) for a cubic structured bed.
Fig. 9. Validation of CFD model results against measurements by Wentz and Thodos (1963) for a body centred structured bed.
The Normalised Root Mean Square Deviation (NRMSD) for the pressure drop through the cubic- and body centered structures were 2.35% and 2.43% respectively. It can also be seen that the pressure drop predicted by the simulations followed the same trend as the experimental measurements. Thus, the pressure drops predicted by the CFD simulations corresponded well with the corresponding experimental measurements by Wentz and Thodos (1963).
5.2. Hassan and Kang
Hassan and Kang (2012) designed an experimental setup to measure pressure drops over randomly packed beds with aspect ratios of α = 19, 9.5, 6.33 and 3.65. Their cylindrical container, 12.065 cm in diameter and 152.4 cm in height, was constructed from Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) and was filled with PMMA beads. Both air and water was used as working fluids. For the experiments using air they monitored the pressure at various pressure tabs along the length of the bed, whilst for the experiments using water they used piezoelectric pressure transducers. For the current investigation, the beds with aspect ratios of α = 6.33 and 3.65 were recreated as CFD simulation models, and the flow through them was simulated using the methodology developed in this study.
Fig. 10, Fig. 11 show the pressure drops predicted by the CFD simulations as well as the experimental measurements by Hassan and Kang (2012). It can be seen that the simulated values for Δp/L were slightly lower than the measured values. This deviation could be attributed to the deviations in the bulk porosities between the beds. Hassan and Kang (2012) measured bulk porosities of εb=0.416 and 0.465 for the beds with α = 6.33 and 3.65 respectively, while the DEM generated beds had porosities of εb=0.452 and 0.504 respectively. These deviations in bulk porosity could be attributed to the nature of randomly packed beds, as well as the fact that the length effect of the DEM generated beds had an effect on the porosity. The DEM beds were generated with length ratios of L/d=10 to save on computational effort, while Hassan and Kang (2012) made beds long enough to ensure that the length effect had practically no influence on the porosity. By calculating the bulk porosities for the DEM beds for the part of each bed between one particle diameter from the bottom and one particle diameter from the top, the bulk porosities were εb=0.422 and 0.475 for the beds with α = 6.33 and 3.65 respectively. (Note that these values fall with the uncertainty ranges reported by Hassan and Kang (2012).) One particle diameter at the top and bottom of the beds were excluded from this calculation in an attempt to reduce the influence of the length effect on the calculated bulk porosity values. These values show the influence of the length effect, as they correspond better with the porosities measured by Hassan and Kang (2012).
Fig. 10. Validation of CFD model results against measurements by Hassan and Kang (2012) for a bed with α = 6.33 and air as working fluid.
Fig. 11. Validation of CFD model results against measurements by Hassan and Kang (2012) for a beds with α = 6.33 and 3.65 and water as working fluid.
The following NRMSD percentage differences were associated with the CFD simulations of the Hassan and Kang (2012) experiments: D/dp=6.33, air, NRMSD = 1.41%; D/dp=6.33, water, NRMSD = 1.40%; D/dp=3.65, water, NRMSD = 3.93%. Note that the differences almost fall within the uncertainties for the pressure measurements of ±1% (air) and ±3% (water), as reported by Hassan and Kang (2012).
Despite the small deviations, these results show that there are good agreement between the pressure drops predicted by the CFD simulations and the experimental measurements of Hassan and Kang (2012), where the pressure drop seems to be affected only slightly by the differences in the porosity.
Based on the agreement between the CFD results and the experimental results of Wentz and Thodos (1963) and the experimental results of Hassan and Kang (2012) it can be concluded that the methodology developed in this study is valid and can be applied to the modelling of the flow through packed beds.
<Section>6. Simulation setup and results</Section>
Having successfully validated the CFD methodology with the relevant published experimental measurements, the influence of the packing structure on the flow through packed beds could thus be investigated employing numerical simulations. The CFD methodology was applied to a selection of bed porosities and Reynolds numbers so that a good distribution of numerical data was obtained with which the empirical correlations in turn could be validated.
Three sets of numerical results are subsequently presented and discussed. The first set of data is used to confirm the validity of the Eisfeld & Schnitzlein correlation (Eq. (11)). The second set presents the findings of the analysis of the validity of the lower limit of the KTA Equation (Eq. (10)) and and proposes a new lower limit with a reduced error margin. In conclusion, the third set of results explores the influence of the packing structure on the flow by considering viscous and inertial flow effects and their interaction with each other and with the packed bed geometry.
6.1. Range of parameters covered
Table 1 shows the values of important parameters pertaining to the beds generated with DEM. Beds with aspect ratios 1.6⩽α⩽6.33 were generated, with L/d≃10.
Table 1. Parameters of DEM generated beds
For each of the eight bed porosity values listed, flow conditions were simulated at five modified Reynolds numbers. These were chosen in the range 100⩽Rem⩽104, namely Rem=100,101,102,103 and Rem=104.
This distribution of α and Rem values thus enabled numerical validation of the Eisfeld & Schnitzlein correlation (Eq. (11)) as it is applied with low aspect ratios, and falls within the correlation’s overall validity range of 0.01<Rep<17,635,0.33<ε<0.882, and 1.624⩽α⩽250 given by Eisfeld and Schnitzlein (2001).
6.2. Pressure drop
Fig. 12 shows the pressure drop per unit length, predicted from the CFD simulations for each bed as a function of the modified Reynolds number at different aspect ratios. It can be seen that the pressure drop over packed beds follows a distinct trend with respect to Rem. Also, the trend does not vary between beds with different aspect ratios, but differs only in magnitude.
Fig. 12. Pressure drop per unit length predicted by the CFD simulations as a function of Rem.
6.3. Friction factors
The CFD simulation results are presented in terms of an integral friction factor ΨCFD, calculated with Eq. (9), and compared with friction factors predicted by the empirical correlations. Fig. 13, Fig. 14, Fig. 15, Fig. 16, Fig. 17, Fig. 18, Fig. 19, Fig. 20 show the comparisons between friction factors obtained from the CFD simulations, ΨCFD, the Eisfeld & Schnitzlein (ES) correlation, ΨES, and the KTA correlation, ΨKTA, for the various cases that were considered.
Fig. 13. Comparison of friction factors between ES, KTA and CFD simulations as a function of Rem for α=1.60.
Fig. 14. Comparison of friction factors between ES, KTA and CFD simulations as a function of Rem for α=2.01.
Fig. 15. Comparison of friction factors between ES, KTA and CFD simulations as a function of Rem for α=2.50.
Fig. 16. Comparison of friction factors between ES, KTA and CFD simulations as a function of Rem for α=3.00.
Fig. 17. Comparison of friction factors between ES, KTA and CFD simulations as a function of Rem for α=3.65.
Fig. 18. Comparison of friction factors between ES, KTA and CFD simulations as a function of Rem for α=4.00.
Fig. 19. Comparison of friction factors between ES, KTA and CFD simulations as a function of Rem for α=5.00.
Fig. 20. Comparison of friction factors between ES, KTA and CFD simulations as a function of Rem for α=6.33.
It can be seen that ΨCFD compares well with ΨES for all instances. ΨCFD falls within the 18% NRMSD, with a confidence level of 95%, of the ES correlation. Since the ES correlation was developed from more than 2300 experimental data points, the correspondence between ΨCFD and ΨES is also a good indication of the validity of the CFD simulations.
However, ΨKTA does not correspond well with either ΨCFD or ΨES, particularly at low aspect ratios and low modified Reynolds numbers. Fig. 13, with α=1.60, shows a large discrepancy between ΨKTA and ΨCFD and ΨES. This indicates the influence of the wall effect since the ES correlation takes the wall effect into account, whereas the KTA correlation does not. As the aspect ratio increases to α=6.33 in Fig. 20, ΨKTA gradually moves closer to both ΨCFD and ΨES, which shows that the influence of the wall effect decreases with the increase in aspect ratio. Also, ΨKTA corresponded better with ΨCFD and ΨES at high modified Reynolds numbers than at low modified Reynolds numbers - giving further evidence of the fact that the wall effect is Reynolds number dependent. The friction factor increases in the creeping flow regime due to the effect of the wall friction and decreases in the turbulent regime as the effect of surface friction is being replaced by inertial effects.
Fig. 17, Fig. 20 also show that results similar to that of Hassan and Kang (2012) were found. Where ΨCFD corresponded better to ΨKTA for the bed with α=6.33 (Fig. 20) than for α=3.65 (Fig. 17). Thus, these results confirm the conclusion by Hassan and Kang (2012) that the KTA correlation cannot be expected to predict accurate pressure drop values for beds with aspect ratios of α⩽5 at high modified Reynolds numbers of 20000<Rem<30000.
6.4. Lower limit of the KTA correlation
As mentioned above, ΨCFD compared well with ΨES for all instances. Assuming then, that the ES correlation predicts accurate values for friction factors within its limits, ΨKTA was evaluated further in terms of ΨES by using Eq. (18) that compares the relative differences in values:
(18)ΔΨES-KTA=(ΨES-ΨKTA)×100ΨES
where ΔΨES-KTA is the percentage difference between ΨES and ΨKTA. To thoroughly characterise the distribution of ΔΨES-KTA, calculations were required over a range of aspect ratios with a more granular distribution than the aspect ratios used for the numerical validation cases. This was accomplished by defining a range of aspect ratio values and predicting the corresponding porosity for each of the aspect ratios in this range, by using Eq. (19) from Dixon (1988).
(19)εb=0.4+0.05dD+0.412(dD)2fordD⩽0.50.528+2.464(dD-0.5)for0.5⩽dD⩽0.5361-0.667dD32dD-1-0.5for0.536⩽dD
Fig. 21 shows the results of Eq. (18) in the form of a contour plot with ΔΨES-KTA as function of α and Rem. Keep in mind that the ES correlation has a NRMSD of 18%, thus by assuming the ES correlation is accurate within its limits values for ΔΨES-KTA<18% can be considered as acceptable. Fig. 21 also includes the original KTA limiting line.
Fig. 21. Contour plot of the percentage difference between ΨES and ΨKTA as functions of α and Rem.
Fig. 21 shows that for α<10, the KTA correlation under predicts the friction factor at low modified Reynolds numbers, reaching a maximum deviation of 70% at the smallest aspect ratios. This was to be expected as the same results were observed in Fig. 13, Fig. 14, Fig. 15, Fig. 16, Fig. 17, Fig. 18, Fig. 19, Fig. 20. At high modified Reynolds numbers of Rem>104 the KTA correlation also under predicts the friction factor. However, it should be noted that the ES correlation is only valid for Rem<3×104. This deviation at high Reynolds numbers can also be attributed to the fact that the ES correlation is based on the Ergun equation, which was developed from non-uniform packings, whereas the KTA correlation was developed using beds with mono-sized spherical particles. Thus, it was to be expected that the values predicted by ΨES would be higher than the values predicted by ΨKTA at high modified Reynolds numbers.
Fig. 21 is comparable with the Moody diagram (Munson et al., 2010), where at low Reynolds numbers the pressure drop is dominated by the viscous effects of the boundary layer. Whereas at large Reynolds numbers the pressure drop is dominated by inertial effects, that is, the effect of the bed particles on the momentum exchange between fluid particles. In other words, at high modified Reynolds numbers the bed structure and permeability have a larger influence on the pressure drop than the wall friction. This indicates that the large values of ΔΨES-KTA for Rem>104 may not have a significant influence on the actual pressure drop.
Fig. 21 also shows that the KTA limiting line is valid, but not exact. It also shows a suggested new KTA limiting line, which falls on the zero line of ΔΨES-KTA at low Reynolds numbers.
6.4.1. Formulating the new limiting line
Initial attempts using the KTA- and Ergun-type formulations to obtain a representative equation for the new limiting line were unsatisfactory.
Polynomials were fitted to the data using a least squares approach. It was found that the data could not be represented satisfactorily using a single polynomial, but thorough analysis suggested that when the data was split at Rem=800, the data could be represented accurately using two polynomials. (The choice of Rem=800 has no further specific physical origin or meaning.)
Subsequently, a two-part curve-fit analysis was thus used to obtain a polynomial formulation for the zero line of ΔΨES-KTA, with the split determined by the Reynolds number of Rem=800.
6.4.2. The formulation for 101⩽Rem<800
For the lower Rem-number section of the new limiting line, the formulation and applicable uncertainty values are:
(20)Dd=4.996470×10+1-3.640275×10+1log(Rem)+1.126928×10+1log(Rem)2-4.818649log(Rem)3+2.154367log(Rem)4-3.367786×10-1log(Rem)5for101⩽Rem<800
Within the following uncertainty parameters:
•
Maximum uncertainty in fit: Dd±0.94%
•
Minimum uncertainty in fit: Dd±0.07%
•
Average uncertainty in fit: Dd±0.49%
•
Confidence interval: 67.5%
6.4.3. The formulation for 800⩽Rem⩽105
For the higher Rem-number section of the new limiting line, the formulation and applicable uncertainty values are:
(21)Dd=5.661698-2.438250×10-1log(Rem)for800⩽Rem⩽105
Within the following uncertainty parameters:
•
Maximum uncertainty in fit: Dd±0.96%
•
Minimum uncertainty in fit: Dd±0.63%
•
Average uncertainty in fit: Dd±0.82%
•
Confidence interval: 67.5%
6.4.4. Assumptions for the new KTA limiting line
The following assumptions apply to the derivation of this new limiting line shown in Fig. 21:
1.
ΨCFD compared well with ΨES for all instances simulated at low aspect ratios. Hence, ΔΨES-KTA was calculated assuming that the ES correlation predicts accurate values for friction factors within its limits.
2.
ΔΨES-KTA was calculated using values for porosity as predicted by Eq. (19) as a function of the aspect ratio.
3.
The ES correlation is only valid for Rem<3×104 and has a NRMSD of 18% with a confidence level of 95%.
4.
The KTA correlation has an uncertainty range of 15% with a confidence level of 95%.
5.
The new limiting line follows the ΔΨES-KTA=0% line for low Reynolds numbers, keeping in mind that at high Reynolds numbers the inertial forces due to the packing structure has a larger influence on the friction factor than the frictional forces on the surfaces of the spheres and the wall.
6.5. Mechanisms which influence the flow
Fig. 22 shows the values of the friction factors predicted by the correlations relevant to this investigation, as well as some of the results from the CFD simulations. Values for ΨES and ΨCFD are shown for aspect ratios of α=1.60 and α=6.33, where it can be seen that the ΨES and ΨCFD friction factors deviate significantly from ΨKTA and ΨErgun at low aspect ratios.
Fig. 22. Friction factors from different investigations as function of Rem.
Note that neither ΨKTA nor ΨErgun are functions of α, and by design does not take the wall effect into account. Thus, the deviation of ΨES and ΨCFD from ΨKTA and ΨErgun is indicative of the effects of the flow chanelling and frictional forces due to the bed’s container walls. Thus, in the creeping regime, the additional frictional force due to the increased wall surface area impacts the flow resistance more than the increased permeability obtained with a more open packing structure (low α).
It can also be seen that there is good agreement between ΨKTA and ΨErgun at low Reynolds numbers, with the difference less than 10%. On the other hand, at large modified Reynolds numbers there is a larger discrepancy between ΨKTA and ΨErgun, with the difference reaching 45% at Rem=104. At Rem=105 (upper limit of graph) the difference is 84.3%.
The KTA correlation was developed using beds with mono-sized spherical particles, whereas the Ergun correlation was developed from packings consisting of non-uniform particles. Considering this difference, it can be concluded that the inertial forces become dominant for high Rem-number flow following the more torturous pathways through the non-uniform particle structure and thus have a larger influence on the flow in turbulent regimes.
Since the correlation by Wentz and Thodos (1963), Eq. (17), was derived from structured packings consisting of mono-sized spherical particles, the deviation of ΨWentz from ΨKTA and ΨErgun also reinforces this conclusion.
<Section>7. Conclusion</Section>
This investigation used the commercial CFD package Star-CCM+ (CD-Adapco, 2012) to explicitly analyse the flow through DEM generated packed beds, with small aspect ratios. STAR-CCM+ was used for both the generation of randomly packed beds using DEM, and the simulation of the flow through the beds using CFD.
Steps were taken to ensure that the DEM generated beds were of high quality and methods were also developed with regards to the CFD simulation of the flow through the DEM generated beds, to ensure simulations which presented realistic results. Particular attention was given to the mesh generation, turbulence modelling and boundary conditions. It was decided to use a polyhedral mesh with two prism layers. Particles were connected with a specific contact area to improve the mesh quality. The Realisable k-∊ turbulence model was used, and velocity profiles for fully developed laminar and turbulent flows were specified at the inlet boundary.
The methods developed were validated with experimental measurements from literature, for both structured and randomly packed beds. Good agreement was found between the predicted pressure drops from the CFD simulations and the pressure drop measurements of five different experiments. It could then be concluded that the CFD simulations, set up with the methods developed during this investigation, presented realistic results.
The values for the friction factors from the CFD simulations were calculated from the predicted pressure drops, and compared with the values predicted by the ES and KTA correlations. It was found that ΨCFD corresponded well with ΨES for all instances, as it fell within the 18% NRMSD of the ES correlation. However, ΨKTA did not correspond well with either ΨCFD or ΨES, particularly at low aspect ratios and low modified Reynolds numbers. This indicated the influence of the wall effect, since the ES correlation takes the wall effect into account, whereas the KTA correlation does not. The Reynolds number dependence of the wall effect could also be seen, where in the creeping flow regime the bed friction has an overwhelming effect on the pressure drop, whereas in turbulent regimes the structure and permeability of the bed has the overwhelming influence. It was also observed that the influence of the wall effect on the flow decreased as the aspect ratio increased.
Since a good correlation was found between ΨCFD and ΨES, and assuming that the ES correlation is valid within its limits, the percentage difference between ΨES and ΨKTA was calculated for a wide range of α and Rem. It was found that the KTA limiting line is valid, but not exact. A new limiting line for the KTA correlation was suggested, that offered an improvement for small aspect ratio beds with α<30 operating under low Reynolds number conditions, where Re<104.
In order to further improve the determination of the position of the KTA limiting line, criteria need to be established which determine how small the error in the predicted friction factor must be before the KTA correlation can be accepted as accurate. Further investigation is required to develop this criteria, as it must take into account the random nature of packed beds and the error margins of the ES and KTA correlations.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
W.J.S. van der Merwe: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, Software, Validation, Visualization, Writing - original draft. C.G. du Toit: Conceptualization, Data curation, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Resources, Software, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. J.-H. Kruger: Data curation, Methodology, Resources, Software, Supervision, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
This work is based upon research supported by the South African Research Chairs Initiative of the Department of Science and Technology and National Research Foundation (Grant No. 61059). Any opinion, finding and conclusion or recommendation expressed in this material is that of the author and the NRF does not accept any liability in this regard.
<Section>References</Section>
Bai et al., 2009
H. Bai, J. Theuerkauf, P.A. Gillis, P.M. Witt
A coupled DEM and CFD simulation of flow field and pressure drop in fixed bed reactor with randomly packed catalyst particles
Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Research, 48 (2009), pp. 4060-4074
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Benenati and Brosilow, 1962
R.F. Benenati, C.B. Brosilow
Void fraction distribution in beds of spheres
AIChE Journal, 8 (1962), pp. 359-361
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Benyahia and O’Neill, 2005
F. Benyahia, K.E. O’Neill
Enhanced voidage correlations for packed beds of various particle shapes and sizes
Particulate Science and Technology, 23 (2005), pp. 169-177
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Blake, 1922
F.C. Blake
The resistance of packing to fluid flow
Transactions of the Institution of Chemical Engineers, 14 (1922), pp. 415-421
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Calis et al., 2001
H.P.A. Calis, J. Nijenhuis, B.C. Paikert, F.M. Dautzenberg, C.M.V.d. Bleek
CFD modelling and experimental validation of pressure drop and flow profile in a novel structured catalytic reactor packing
Chemical Engineering Science, 56 (2001), pp. 1713-1720
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Carman, 1937
P.C. Carman
Fluid flow through granular beds
Transactions of the Institution of Chemical Engineers, 15 (1937), pp. 150-166
Google Scholar
CD-Adapco, 2012
CD-Adapco, 2012. STAR-CCM+ User guide. 7.06 ed.
Google Scholar
De Klerk, 2003
A. De Klerk
Voidage variation in packed beds at small column to particle diameter ratio
AIChE Journal, 49 (2003), pp. 2022-2029
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Dixon, 1988
A.G. Dixon
Correlations for wall and particle shape effects on fixed bed bulk voidage
Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering, 66 (1988), pp. 705-708
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Dixon et al., 2013
A.G. Dixon, M. Nijemeisland, E.H. Stitt
Systematic mesh development for 3d CFD simulation of fixed beds: contact points study
Computers & Chemical Engineering, 48 (2013), pp. 135-153
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Dolejs and Machac, 1995
V. Dolejs, I. Machac
Pressure drop during the flow of a Newtonian fluid through a fixed bed of particles
Chemical Engineering & Processing: Process Intensification, 34 (1995), pp. 1-8
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Du Toit, 2008
C.G. Du Toit
Radial variation in porosity in annular packed beds
Nuclear Engineering and Design, 238 (2008), pp. 3073-3079
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Du Toit, 2019
C.G. Du Toit
Analysing the porous structure of packed beds of spheres using a semi-analytical approach
Powder Technology, 342 (2019), pp. 475-485, 10.1016/j.powtec.2018.10.017
URL:http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S003259101830857X
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Du Toit and Rosslee, 2012
Du Toit, C.G., Rosslee, P.J., 2012. Analysis of the porous structure of packed beds of spheres using x-ray computed tomography. In: Eighth South African conference on computational and applied mechanics, SACAM, pp. 31–36.
Google Scholar
Eisfeld and Schnitzlein, 2001
B. Eisfeld, K. Schnitzlein
The influence of confining walls on the pressure drop in packed beds
Chemical Engineering Science, 56 (2001), pp. 4321-4329
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Eppinger et al., 2011
T. Eppinger, K. Seidler, M. Kraume
DEM-CFD simulations of fixed bed reactors with small tube to particle diameter ratios
Chemical Engineering Journal, 166 (2011), pp. 324-331
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ergun, 1952
S. Ergun
Fluid flow through packed columns
Chemical Engineering Progress, 48 (1952), pp. 89-94
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Goodling et al., 1983
J.S. Goodling, R.I. Vachon, W.S. Stelpflug, S.J. Ying, M.S. Khader
Radial porosity distribution in cylindrical beds packed with spheres
Powder Technology, 35 (1983), pp. 23-29
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Graton and Fraser, 1935
L.C. Graton, H.J. Fraser
Systematic packing of Spheres: with particular relation to porosity and permeability
The Journal of Geology, 43 (1935), pp. 785-909
CrossRefGoogle Scholar
Hassan, 2008
Y.A. Hassan
Large eddy simulation in pebble bed gas cooled core reactors
Nuclear Engineering and Design, 238 (2008), pp. 530-537
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hassan and Kang, 2012
Y.A. Hassan, C. Kang
Pressure drop in a pebble bed reactor under high Reynolds number
Nuclear Technology, 180 (2012), pp. 159-173
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
KTA, 1981
KTA
Reactor core design of high-temperature gas-cooled reactors. Part 3: Loss of pressure through friction in Pebble Bed Cores
Nuclear Safety Standards Commission, “Kerntechnischer Ausschuss”, 3102 (3) (1981), pp. 1-4
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
KTA, 1988
KTA
Safety standard by the Nuclear Safety Standards Commission
“Kerntechnischer Ausschuss”. “Bundesanzeiger”, 44 (1988), pp. D1-D36
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Leva and Grummer, 1947
M. Leva, M. Grummer
Pressure drop through packed tubes. Part III: Prediction of voids in packed tubes
Chemical Engineering Progress, 43 (1947), pp. 713-718
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Mariani et al., 2009
N.J. Mariani, W.I. Salvat, A. Campesi, G.F. Barreto, O.M. Martinez
Evaluation of structural properties of cylindrical packed beds using numerical simulations and tomographic experiments
International Journal of Chemical Reactor Engineering, 7 (2009), p. 1
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Mehta and Hawley, 1969
D. Mehta, M.C. Hawley
Wall effect in packed columns
Industrial and Engineering Chemistry Design and Development, 8 (1969), pp. 280-282
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Mueller, 1992
G.E. Mueller
Radial void fraction distributions in randomly packed fixed beds of uniformly sized spheres in cylindrical containers
Powder Technology, 72 (1992), pp. 269-275
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Mueller, 1997
G.E. Mueller
Angular porosity distributions in fixed packed beds of low diameter aspect ratio
Canadian Journal of Chemical Engineering, 75 (1997), pp. 677-683
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Mueller, 2010
G.E. Mueller
Radial porosity in packed beds of spheres
Powder Technology, 203 (2010), pp. 626-633
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Munson et al., 2010
B.R. Munson, D.F. Young, T.H. Okiishi, W.W. Huebsch
Fundamentals of Fluid Mechanics
sixth ed.
John Wiley and Sons Inc. (2010)
Google Scholar
Preller, 2011
A.C.N. Preller
Numerical modelling of flow through packed beds of uniform spheres
Master of Engineering in Nuclear Engineering, North-West University (2011)
Google Scholar
Reddy and Joshi, 2010
R.K. Reddy, J.B. Joshi
CFD modeling of pressure drop and drag coefficient in fixed beds: wall effects
Particuology, 8 (2010), pp. 37-43
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Reichelt, 1972
W. Reichelt
Calculation of Pressure Drop in Spherical and Cylindrical Packings for Single-Phase Flow (ZUR BERECHNUNG DES DRUCKVERLUSTES EINPHASIG DURCHSTROEMTER KUGEL- UND ZYLINDERSCHUETTUNGEN)
Chemie-Ingenieur-Technik, 44 (1972), pp. 1068-1071
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Reyneke, 2009
H.J. Reyneke
Investigation into the Velocity Distribution Through an Annular Packed Bed
Master of Engineering in Nuclear Engineering, North-West University (2009)
Google Scholar
Reynolds, 1900
O. Reynolds
Papers on Mechanical and Physical Subjects
Cambridge University Press, 14 (1900), pp. 81-85
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Systemes, 2013
Systemes, D., 2013. SolidWorks User Manual.
Google Scholar
Tabor and Baba-Ahmadi, 2010
G.R. Tabor, M.H. Baba-Ahmadi
Inlet conditions for large eddy simulation: a review
Computers and Fluids, 39 (2010), pp. 553-567
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wentz and Thodos, 1963
C.A. Wentz, G. Thodos
Pressure drops in the flow of gases through packed and distended beds of spherical particles
AIChE Journal, 9 (1963), pp. 81-84
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
White and Tien, 1987
S.M. White, C.L. Tien
Analysis of flow channeling near the wall in packed beds
Warme - und Stoffubertragung, 21 (1987), pp. 291-296
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Winterberg and Tsotsas, 2000
M. Winterberg, E. Tsotsas
Impact of tube-to-particle-diameter ratio on pressure drop in packed beds
AIChE Journal, 46 (2000), pp. 1084-1088
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zou and Yu, 1995
R.P. Zou, A.B. Yu
The packing of spheres in a cylindrical container: the thickness effect
Chemical Engineering Science, 50 (1995), pp. 1504-1507
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar