<title>A design of switching supervisory control based on fuzzy-PID controllers for VVER-1000 pressurizer system with RELAP5 and MATLAB coupling</title>
<author>1,MohammadLotfi,2,Mohammad BagherMenhaj,3,Seyed AliHosseini,4,Amir SaeedShirani</author>
<Affiliation>1,Department of Electrical Engineering, Amirkabir University of Technology (Tehran Polytechnic), Tehran, Iran;2,Faculty of Engineering, Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran, Iran</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107625</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454920303236</URL>
A design of switching supervisory control based on fuzzy-PID controllers for VVER-1000 pressurizer system with RELAP5 and MATLAB coupling
MohammadLotfi,Mohammad BagherMenhaj,Seyed AliHosseini,4,Amir SaeedShirani
Department of Electrical Engineering, Amirkabir University of Technology (Tehran Polytechnic), Tehran, Iran
Faculty of Engineering, Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran, Iran
<Section>Highlights</Section>
A new platform developed to apply the intelligent controller for the PRZ system.
A supervisory control with Fuzzy-PID controllers is presented for the PRZ system.
The advanced designed control system is applied to the VVER-1000 PRZ.
The PRZ designed control system can repel the worst disturbances during transients.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The safe operation of Pressurized Water Reactors (PWRs) is highly dependent on the Pressurizer (PRZ) system to stabilize the primary coolant pressure fluctuations during normal operation and maintain the pressure within specified boundaries. The behavior of the PRZ system is inherently non-linear and time-variant. Thus, it may not appropriate and precise enough to model it by the use of transfer functions or linear time-invariant state-space forms. As far as the authors know, the RELAP5 thermal-hydraulic code is one of the best platforms to represent a best-estimate (realistic) model for the PRZ system so far. Although the RELAP5 is capable of modeling the PRZ as a non-linear, time-variant, and dynamic system in an unknown model structure, it only uses classic controllers such as PID and Lead-Lag. According to the above issue, the RELAP5 code and MATLAB software are coupled together in this paper to use the capabilities of both the MATLAB software (the ability to implement advanced controllers) and the RELAP5 code (providing an accurate thermal-hydraulic model for the PRZ system). Conclusively, this coupling provides a new platform for designing and utilizing various intelligent and advanced controllers for the PRZ system. Moreover, this paper fully presents a switching supervisory control based on Fuzzy-PID controllers (as a model-free and intelligent controller) for the VVER-1000 PRZ system to adjust both its pressure and level outputs. In this work, the PRZ is modeled as a Multi-Input Multi-Output (MIMO) system with consideration of the interactions between outputs (pressure and level). Eventually, the designed control system is used for several case studies. The results show the high performance of the presented control system for the VVER-1000 PRZ system that can be applied for other PRZ systems.
Keywords:Pressurizer;Supervisory control system;Advanced and intelligent controllers;Fuzzy-PID controller;RELAP5 and MATLAB coupling;VVER-1000
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The pressurizer system (PRZ) plays a crucial role in the operation of pressurized water reactors (PWRs). This system is intended for adjusting the primary coolant pressure within specified boundaries during normal operations, and controlling the pressure during start-up and heat-up transients. In-surge and out-surge transients due to the variation of the mass flow rate in the primary circuit of the reactor lead to the changing in the PRZ pressure and level. Thus, it is needed to model the thermal-hydraulic behavior of the PRZ during transients. The PRZ behavior is entirely complex because this system is inherently nonlinear, the large inertia, time-variant, and it is a multi-interface system with unstable open-loop dynamic characteristics (Qian et al., 2019). Thus, it is difficult to obtain an accurate mathematical model for PRZ thermal-hydraulic behavior.
Furthermore, the various mathematical models with simplified assumptions are used for thermal-hydraulic simulation of the PRZ. For instance, Wang et al., 2019a, Wang et al., 2019b developed a nonequilibrium three-region model for the PRZ system based on the mass and energy conservation laws. Also, the two-region and four-region thermal-hydraulic models are presented by Moghanaki and Rahgoshay (2014); the four-region model has fewer assumptions in comparison with other models. The RELAP5 code is one of the best-estimated thermal-hydraulic codes that is widely used to analyze the commercial and research light water reactors. The results of the presented mathematical models by Moghanaki and Rahgoshay (2014) are verified with the RELAP5 code as the reference model. Zhong et al. (2019) introduced an improved non-equilibrium multi-region model for accurate prediction of the PRZ; the presented model consists of a three-layer, a liquid layer, a saturated layer, and a vapor layer; every layer divided into several control volumes (regions). Thus, this improved model seems to be the appropriate one among other mathematical models.
The RELAP5′s non-homogeneous and non-equilibrium thermal-hydraulic model solves eight field equations along with constitutive relations and correlations for eight primary dependent variables in a single control volume (single node). Also, the RELAP5 provides the predetermined control variables to evaluate simultaneous algebraic and ordinary differential equations. The existing control variables in the RELAP5 code only have the capacity to be used the classical controllers such as PID, Lead-Lag controllers, and it is not possible to utilize advanced and intelligent controllers.
For improving the performance of the pressure controlling during the safe operation of the PWR, several kinds of research apply the advanced controllers for the PRZ system modeling. De Oliveira and de Almeida (2013) develop a PRZ model based on Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs), and they don’t apply any mathematical model for PRZ modeling. On the other hand, the data from the reactor simulator are used in ANNs modeling for system identification. Also, the fuzzy controller is developed for the PRZ pressure controlling by De Oliveira and de Almeida (2013), and the results of the fuzzy controllers show that the fuzzy controllers have higher performance compared with conventional ones. Brown and Gabbar (2014) improved the inventory control performance by using the fuzzy controller for the level control system of the PRZ in the CANDU nuclear power plant. Hence in this work, the pressure control system is not investigated. The multi-objective optimization of the PID controller parameters is studied with the genetic algorithm for the PRZ pressure and level control systems (Wang et al., 2019a, Wang et al., 2019b). Also, Wang et al. (2020) present a fuzzy-logic-based method for adopting the pressure set points in the PRZ pressure control system. The PRZ pressure control system based on a new adaptive prediction algorithm is presented by Qian et al. (2019). It seems that the introduced model in this paper is sketchy, and it cannot demonstrate the realistic behavior of the PRZ actually because the PRZ transfer function, which is used in the article, is devoid of the PRZ's nonlinear response. Also, it seems the presented model is not verified by any acceptable models. In most of the articles related to the PRZ system and presented so far, the PRZ system is considered as a Single-Input Single-Output (SISO) system, and interactions between its outputs (pressure and levels) are not considered. In practice, these outputs affect each other, and changing one of them will change the other (swell and shrink phenomena). Therefore, it is essential to model the PRZ system as a Multi-Input Multi-Output (MIMO) system.
As it is mentioned before, the previous works mostly focused on modeling of the PRZ based on the simplified mathematical model. But in this study, a new platform (RELAP5 and MATLAB coupling) is provided to the implementation of the advanced controllers for the PRZ system. In this paper, the presented platform is verified in several benchmarked case studies. Besides, a novel switching supervisory control based on Fuzzy-PID controllers is presented for the pressure and level control of the PRZ with consideration of interactions between these outputs (MIMO PRZ system). The methods and research materials such as PRZ performance during nuclear power plant operation, the PRZ thermal-hydraulic modeling by RELAP5, the coupling of the RELAP5 and MATLAB along with the results of coupling, and theory of the switching supervisory control are presented in Section 2. The results of the newly designed controller are presented and discussed in Section 3. Also, a special performance of the designed control system in one of the worst cases (a transient such as an accident) is shown in Section 4.
<Section>2. Methods and research materials</Section>
2.1. Overview of the Bushehr nuclear power plant
Bushehr Nuclear Power Plant (BNPP) is a Russian VVER-1000 type Pressurized Water Reactor (PWR) that produces 1000 MW electrical power. The BNPP primary circuit consists of the reactor pressure vessel (RPV), the pressurizer system (PRZ), and four circulating loops that every loop associated with the main coolant pump (MCP), connected pipelines and steam generator (SG). SGs are located between the primary and secondary circuits and are intended to remove the heat from the primary loop to the secondary loop. The produced steam in the secondary side of SG passes through separators and flows to the reactor turbine.
Fig. 1 presents a schematic of BNPP's primary circuit components. The pressurizer system (PRZ) is the essential equipment in the primary circuit of PWRs. The PRZ is a vertical tank, with an equilibrium between vapor and liquid that is intended to pressurize the reactor's primary circuit during start-up, heat-up, and control of the reactor during operation in full power (Bushehr NPP final safety analysis report (BNPP FSAR), 2008). The PRZ position in VVER-1000 primary circuit like BNPP is shown in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. The layout of the VVER-1000 reactor primary circuit.
2.2. Pressurizer system
The PRZ has two principal functions during the operation of PWRs. The first function is the reactor primary circuit pressure-retaining within the allowed tolerances, and the second one is the primary circuit coolant volume controlling. The PRZ is connected to one of the hot-legs, and hence the coolant system transients and disturbances because of the load change and core power variations, are appeared by surge line in the PRZ. On the other hand, the reactor coolant system transients cause a pressure change in the primary circuit of the reactor. Thus, the PRZ utilizes two main strategies to control the primary loop pressure within the specified limits. The first strategy is to condensate the steam through the cold-water spray for decreasing the pressure, and the second one is heating the water by the PRZ electrical heaters for increasing the pressure. During an unbalanced situation from the PRZ operational set-point, spray and heaters are actuated by the direction of the error.
The schematic equipment of VVER-1000 PRZ is shown in Fig. 2. Also, the main characteristics of VVER-1000 PRZ are presented in Table 1. The second function of the PRZ is water level monitoring and controlling. The PRZ water level error signal actuates the chemical and volume control system (CVCS), and this system regulates charging and let-down flowrate to the primary circuit. The CVCS controlling system in BNPP consists of three pumps with a maximum mass flowrate capacity of 40 . Although the PRZ pressure and level control systems are two separate systems, these systems affect each other. For example, a little water level changing in the PRZ effects on primary circuit pressure. Thus, the PRZ control system is a Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO) system with three inputs and two outputs. The three inputs are spray mass flowrate, heaters power, and CVCS mass flowrate. Also, two outputs are the PRZ pressure and level.
Fig. 2. VVER-1000 PRZ's equipment (Fořtová and Ježek, 2018).
Table 1. Main characteristics of the BNPP's PRZ.
2.3. Pressurizer thermal-hydraulic modelling
2.3.1. RELAP5 thermal-hydraulic code
The RELAP5/Mod 3.3 code has been developed for best-estimate simulation of light water reactor (LWR) coolant system during postulated transients. The RELAP5/Mod 3.3 is a highly generic code that can be used for simulation of a wide variety of hydraulic and thermal transients in both nuclear and non-nuclear systems involving a mixture of steam, water, non-condensable and solute. Also, this code has been accepted throughout the world for analyzing LWR systems together with their related scaled systems (Fletcher and Schultz, 1999). Nowadays, the RELAP5 code is used widely for reactor circuits modeling and analyzing of the LWR abnormal conditions such as accidents (Akbari et al., 2017, Hosseini et al., 2020, Vahman et al., 2016). Therefore, with regard to the mentioned, the RELAP5/Mod 3.3 code is the best option for modeling of the PRZ system.
2.3.2. Pressurizer modeling description with RELAP5
In this section, RELAP5/Mod 3.3 code is used for modeling of the PRZ system transient behavior in reactor operation. Fig. 3 shows the nodalization of the PRZ system. In this nodalization, the PRZ vessel simulated equally with a vertical pipe that includes ten nodes. The PRZ electrical heaters placed in node #2. The surge line is modeled with one pipe that contains four nodes. One side of the surge line (node #4) is connected to the lower part of the PRZ with a single junction (Fig. 3). Also, both of the spray line and level controller sub-systems are modeled with a time-dependent volume and a time-dependent junction for control objectives. The PRZ physical characteristics and parameters at the initial condition are listed in Table 2.
Fig. 3. Nodalization of the VVER-1000 PRZ system with RELAP5/Mod3.3.
Table 2. Pressurizer physical characteristics and parameters at initial condition.
It is necessary to verify the PRZ nodalization to obtain reliable calculation. Thus, the steady-state results of the simulation without any surge line mass flow after 500 s are presented in Table 3. The comparison of the RELAP5 simulation results with design values shows that the PRZ modeling with RELAP5 is an acceptable model.
Table 3. The steady-state results of the PRZ modeling.
2.4. RELAP5 and MATLAB coupling
In this section, a new approach is used for the PRZ system modeling to provide a practical design and simulation of the control systems. Although the RELAP5 code is the best option for thermal-hydraulic modeling of PRZ, this code is only capable of modeling the classical controllers such as PID, Lead-Lag controllers. Thus, the coupling of RELAP5 and MATLAB is provided the implementation of new intelligent controllers such as Fuzzy controllers for the PRZ. The coupling of RELAP5 and MATLAB software is based on the Dynamic Data Exchange (DDE). In DDE, after initial database connections, the thermal-hydraulic parameters, e.g., pressure, temperature, velocity, etc., are exchanged between RELAP5 and MATLAB in a fixed time step. In other words, the RELAP5 output file is read by MATLAB at the end of the fixed time step, and then the parameter's values are saved in a specified file; after that, the new input file is built by MATLAB subroutine for next fixed time step. The time and time step are the main parameters during DDE. Thus, a correct synchronization between the RELAP5 and MATLAB during DDE is essential, because the MATLAB run time is faster than RELAP5 run during the simulation time step. The used method in this paper for the time synchronization between the RELAP5 and MATLAB is shown in Fig. 4. In Fig. 4  is the fixed data exchange time in the simulation, and its value is assumed one second during coupling ( = 1 s). The choosing reason for  = 1 s is that the thermal-hydraulic parameters (pressure and level) change in this value is pretty slow with considering control inputs (spray, heaters, and CVCS) within the PRZ system.  is the RELAP5 running time and  is the MATLAB running time for the first fixed simulation time step.  is the waiting time to finish the RELAP5 calculation time.  is given by:
Fig. 4. Time synchronization between RELAP5 and MATLAB.
The general equation for step n is given by:
Therefore, the MATLAB is synchronized with RELAP5 in every exchange time step by the presented method (Fig. 4). It is essential to qualify the RELAP5 and MATLAB coupling results to obtain reliable results; thus, the results of the RELAP5 and MATLAB coupling in comparison with RELAP5 alone results for three benchmark case studies are verified. In the first case study, a step mass flow rate as a surge line perturbation is investigated for the PRZ system (the illustrated mass flow rate in Fig. 5). The results of the PRZ pressure and level variations are shown in Fig 6. The results are demonstrated that the coupling has acceptable accuracy in this case study.
Fig. 5. The mass flow rate of the surge line in the first case study.
Fig. 6. The PRZ pressure and level comparison in the first case study.
Also, in the second case study, one of the worst surge line disturbances during 100% of full power (FP) to 25% FP load rejection transient in a studied PWR (Wang et al., 2019a, Wang et al., 2019b), is investigated for the assessment of coupling. The surge line flow rate of the second case study is shown in Fig. 7, the PRZ pressure and level results during this transient are shown in Fig. 8. The comparison of the RELAP5 and MATLAB coupling results with RELAP5 results illustrates that the coupling has appropriate performance similar to the first case study.
Fig. 7. The mass flow rate of the surge line in the second case.
Download : Download high-res image (158KB)Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 8. The PRZ pressure and level comparison in the second case study.
After the verification of the PRZ pressure and level for two previous surge lines, it is needed to make sure that the coupling is acceptable accuracy with considering control inputs (spray, heater, and CVCS). Thus, it is necessary to assess control inputs that can be implemented in single RELAP5 alone and the coupling of the RELAP5 and MATLAB. Therefore, in the third case study, arbitrarily the following values are selected for the control inputs:
-
Spray injection: 1
-
Heaters power: 500 W
-
CVCS let-down: −1
The verification results of the control inputs assessment are shown in Fig. 9; these results demonstrate the high-performance of the coupling for the controller's test.
Fig. 9. The PRZ pressure and level comparison in the third case study for controllers' test.
2.5. Supervisory control system
The main problem for the many control of complex systems is traditional control methodologies based on a single controller that does not provide satisfactory performance. Consequently, it might be more beneficial to employ supervisory and switching control strategies in which several controllers at low-level are included. In a supervisory and switching control scheme, as shown in Fig. 10, the controllers are divided into two levels, high and low. At the high-level, there is a controller (usually a switching control) that differs from the lower-level controllers of the system in that it appears occasionally and makes additional changes. In this type of controllers, there is a bank of candidate controllers at low-level, and the high-level controller (switching controller) controls the timing of switching between these low-level controllers based on measurement signals (input and output measurement signals of the system). The switching is orchestrated by a specially designed logic that uses the measurements to assess the performance of both the candidate controller currently in use and the potential performance of alternative controllers. Fig. 10 shows the underlying architecture employed by switching control, that u represents the control signal, w is an exogenous disturbance or noise,  is the switching signal, e is the error signal, and y and r also represent the output of the system and the reference signal, respectively.
Fig. 10. Switching supervisory control system.
The top element in Fig. 10 is the logic that controls the switch, or more precisely, it generates the switching signal. This logic is called the supervisor, and its purpose is to monitor the signals that can be measured (in this case u and y) and decide, at each instant of time, which candidate controller should be put in the feedback loop with the system. Between switching times, the system connects to one of the candidate controllers, and the dynamics of the supervisor play no role in the evolution of the resulting closed-loop system. This supervisor simplifies the analysis of the overall algorithm considerably. In this paper, the low-level controllers of the Fuzzy-PID type are fully described in the next sections.
2.5.1. Fuzzy-PID controller
The PID controller is widely used in engineering control and many industries. In general, this controller consists of three terms: proportional (P), integrator (I) and derivative (D), and it is structured as following:
@(1)
Or in transfer function form:
@(2)
In Eqs. (1), (2), @ is the error signal (the difference between desired and measured output (and  is the control signal. Also, @, @ and @ are proportional coefficient, integral coefficient, and derivative coefficient, respectively. The purpose of the design of the PID controller is to determine these coefficients. Each of these terms: proportional, integral, and derivative in the PID controller, plays an important role in determining the control signal value. For example, if the integral coefficient  is higher than the other two coefficients (,), it means that the values of past errors have a stronger influence on the determination of the control signal than the current error and error variations. As another example, if the proportional coefficient is higher than the other two coefficients, it means that the current error has more value in determining the control signal. In other words, each of these coefficients (,,) improves the different parts of the system response. For example, the coefficient, is used to improve the steady-state response (steady-state error) and the coefficient  is used to improve the transient response of the system.
There is another type of PID controller representation based on time constants, as given below.
@(3)
@ and @ are the time constants of the integral and derivative parts, respectively. By comparing this alternative representation with the classical description of the PID controller in (2), the two representations relate to each other using the following relationships:
@(4)
One of the disadvantages of the PID controller is that the control coefficients (@,@,@) are constant during the time. In other words, the magnitude of the impact of the current error, past errors, and error variations in the computation of the current control signal is constant throughout the control process. However, it may be necessary to change the values of these coefficients during the time to improve control performance; one of the methods used for this purpose is the fuzzy-PID controller. In this method, the PID controller coefficients change over time, depending on the circumstances, and different choices for these coefficients need to be considered. The fuzzy logic controller (FLC) adjusts the coefficients , (as fuzzy system outputs) according to the structure shown in Fig. 11, at any time, by using error and error derivative values (as fuzzy system inputs). Therefore, the system output follows the reference signal at an acceptable speed in Fuzzy-PID controllers (better than the conventional PID controller).
Fig. 11. Structure of Fuzzy-PID Controller.
The fuzzy system used in Fig. 11 to adjust the PID coefficients is Mamdani-type. Mamdani fuzzy systems can be used to formulate compensators based on the user's general sense of how to control a system. These types of controllers do not need any mathematical model of the system. The design of fuzzy controllers is mostly based on expert knowledge. A Mamdani-type Fuzzy controller, shown in Fig. 12, consists of four main components: fuzzifier, inference mechanism, knowledge-base, and defuzzifier. The operation of the fuzzifier is to convert the measured quantities from the process (pressure, voltage, velocity, temperature, etc.) to the fuzzy sets that are to be used by the inference mechanism (this set of rules specifies the relationship between the input and output of the designed FLC). The knowledge-base is a set of fuzzy “if-then” rules that show how an expert can control a given system. The inference mechanism, which is the brain and core of the fuzzy control system, can simulate expert decision making through an approximate inference, as long as the desired control policy is applied (Lilly, 2011).
Fig. 12. The main components of the Mamdani-type Fuzzy controller.
Generally, there are two basic tasks in the inference mechanism:
1.
Determine to what extent each fuzzy law (from the knowledge-base) corresponds to the current conditions introduced by the inputs. This step is called “matching.”
2.
Extraction of conclusions using the inputs and information in the knowledge-base (achieving appropriate control signal). This step is known as “inference.”
In the defuzzifier, which is the last step in the FLC design, the output of the inference mechanism (fuzzy output) converts to a control action (converts to a crisp number that can be applied to the dynamical system by the actuator). In other words, the task of the defuzzification step is to convert the fuzzy outputs generated by the inference mechanism to an appropriate crisp output. There are several ways to do this conversion that the most common ones are the center of gravity (COG) and center average (CA) defuzzification. In this paper, the COG method is used for defuzzification.
As shown in Fig. 11 shows the PID control system with a fuzzy gain scheduler; the approach taken here is to use fuzzy rules and reasoning to update the controller coefficients (Zhao et al., 1993). It is assumed that proportional gain () and derivative gain () are in prescribed ranges  and , respectively. The suitable ranges are determined experimentally. For convenience,  and  are normalized into the interval [0,1] by the following linear transformation:
@(5)
@(6)
And the integral time constant is determined according to the following relationship:
@(7)
And by using of relations (4), (7), the integral gain (@) is thus obtained by:
@(8)
The parameters@ , @ and  @are determined by FLC and a set of fuzzy rules of the form:
@(9)
In these rules,Ai,Bi , Ci,and Di are fuzzy sets on the corresponding supporting sets and @ are constant. The membership functions (MF) of these fuzzy sets for  and  (or  for = 1sec) are shown in Fig. 13. In this figure, N, P, ZO, S, M, B represent negative, positive, approximately zero, small, medium, big, respectively. Thus, NM stands for negative medium, PB for positive big, and so on.
Fig. 13. Membership Functions for  and  Fuzzy sets.
The fuzzy sets Ci  and Di  may be either big or small and are characterized by Gaussian membership functions shown in Fig. 14, where the degree of the membership functions m（x） has the following form:
@(10)
@(11)
Fig. 14. Membership Functions for @ and @ Fuzzy sets.
The fuzzy rules in (9) may be elicited from the operation’s expertise. The rules are derived experimentally based on the step response of the PRZ system modeled in RELAP5. The fuzzy rules for adjusting the proportional gain () are shown in Table 4. The tuning rules for  and  has given in Table 5, Table 6, respectively. In these tables, B stands for Big, and S for Small.
Table 4. Fuzzy rules for .
Table 5. Fuzzy rules for .
Table 6. Fuzzy rules for .
The fuzzy inference system output surface for @ , and @ are shown in Fig. 15, Fig. 16, respectively (in both top and side views).
Download : Download high-res image (485KB)Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 15. Fuzzy inference system output surface for @ (in both top and side views).
Download : Download high-res image (502KB)Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 16. Fuzzy inference system output surface for  @ (in both top and side views).
Note that @ may also be considered as a fuzzy number that has a singleton membership function, as shown in Fig. 17.
Fig. 17. Membership Functions for  (singleton membership function).
After the  kp,kd , and α coefficients are determined, the PID controller parameters are calculated from the following equations that are due to (5), (6), and (8):
@(12)
@(13)
@(14)
Based on an extensive simulation study on PRZ system modeled in RELAP5, the minimum and maximum range for  and  are as follows:
@(15)
In many Fuzzy and non-Fuzzy control systems, adjustable scaling gains @ and @ have been added for inputs  and , respectively, as shown in Fig. 18 (Lilly, 2011). Adjustable scaling gains ,  and  have been added for outputs ,  and , respectively, too. These gains are used to tune the compensator to achieve better performance. The values of these scaling gains for FLC used in spray flow, in heater power, and CVCS flow are shown in Table 7.
Fig. 18. Fuzzy logic controller with adjustable scaling gains in inputs and outputs.
Table 7. The values of scaling gains for FLC used in PRZ controllers.
As a result, the supervisory controller (with switching control in the upper level and Fuzzy-PID controllers in lower level) designed for the PRZ system is shown in Fig. 19. Since the supervisor (switching control) knows the reference and output pressure values ( and ) of the system at any time, by comparing these two signals, only one of the pressure controllers is activated (the spray flow controller or the heater power controller).
Fig. 19. The supervisory controller designed for the PRZ system.
In this structure, the switching signal () is equal to the error in the system pressure (). Therefore, we can have:
•
If , then the spray flow controller becomes on, and the heater power controller gets off (i.e., the heater power becomes zero).
•
If , then the heater power controller becomes on, and the spray flow controller gets off (i.e., spray flow = 0 kg/sec).
<Section>3. Results and discussion</Section>
In the previous section, it has been shown that the simulation platform by coupling of the RELAP5 and MATLAB can be trusted for the synthesis and analysis of the closed-loop control system. In this section, the performance of the designed supervisory control system for VVER-1000 PRZ is investigated by applying two disturbance inputs related to the previous section's first and second case studies. The results for the closed-loop system output response and their corresponding control signals for both of the first (Fig. 5) and second (Fig. 7) case studies are shown in Fig. 20, Fig. 21, Fig. 22, Fig. 23. It is assumed that the system is initially at the desired pressure (15.7 MPa), and the control objective is to maintain the operating pressure at the desired pressure (initial system pressure) during system operation despite the presence of disturbance in the PRZ system. Also, the same condition is existing for the PRZ level; the water level of PRZ is on the desired level (8.17 m), and the control objective is to keep the PRZ water level on the desired level (primary level of the PRZ) with the presence of disturbances. The results illustrate that the PRZ pressure and level have been appropriately controlled during disturbances (Fig. 20, Fig. 21, Fig. 22, Fig. 23). Also, the designed controllers have been able to repel the disturbance effect on the output signals of the PRZ system.
Fig. 20. The PRZ closed-loop outputs (pressure and level) for the first case study.
Fig. 21. The PRZ control signals for the first case study.
Fig. 22. The PRZ closed-loop outputs (pressure and level) in the second case study.
Fig. 23. Control signals and related PID controller parameters for the second case study.
Fig. 22 shows the PRZ pressure and level curves for the second case study (Fig. 7), the pressure and the level of the PRZ have been appropriately controlled for this case study, too. The associated control signals are shown in Fig. 23. The variations of the PID coefficients (,,) for spray, heater, and CVCS Fuzzy-PID controllers are shown in Fig. 23(b, d, f), respectively.
<Section>4. A special property of the designed control system</Section>
Note that the PRZ control systems are used during normal operation of the reactor (within the specified pressure limit, e.g., 15.5–16.5 MPa). For pressures above this limit, safety systems embedded in the PRZ (such as safety valves) will be activated, and the reactor shuts down. On the other hand, after the reactor shut-down in an accident situation, the reactor emergency safety systems are activated to place the reactor in a safe-stable state.
In this section, the ability of the designed control system is investigated for an abnormal condition such as accident disturbance, which causes the system pressure (in an uncontrolled state) to rise above the specified limit (15.5–16.5 MPa). For modeling an accident situation, a large disturbance with 10  amplitude applied as in-surge to the PRZ system. The simulation results for both the overall closed-loop pressure and level control systems and open-loop system are shown in Fig. 24, Fig. 25, respectively. According to Fig. 24, the pressure increases to near the 20 MPa for the open-loop case. At this pressure, all systems in the reactor, including the PRZ system, must be shut down due to the risk of failures. On the contrary, the results for the closed-loop system show that the pressure is appropriately controlled, and the pressure is within the tolerance range (15.5–16.5 MPa) during operation. These results better highlight the performance of the designed PRZ control system to repel the worst disturbance considered for the PRZ system.
Fig. 24. The PRZ pressure with and without control system in an abnormal situation.
Fig. 25. The PRZ level with and without control system in an abnormal situation.
<Section>5. Conclusion</Section>
In this paper, the coupling of RELAP5 thermal-hydraulic code and MATLAB software was developed as a new platform to apply the advanced controller for the PRZ system. Also, the switching supervisory control system based on Fuzzy-PID controllers was designed and applied for the VVER-1000 PRZ system. Moreover, the PRZ was modeled as a MIMO system with consideration of the interactions between outputs (pressure and level). The assessment of the designed control system for VVER-1000 PRZ during several case studies was demonstrated that the proposed controllers have the precise performance to repel the worst disturbances. The innovative presented procedure in the paper can be employed to design the PRZ control systems for future commercial nuclear power plants and other pressurized test loops where precise and rapid pressure control is required. Also, the presented procedure can be considered as a basic work in the progress of future studies about intelligent controls for the PRZ system.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Mohammad Lotfi: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. Mohammad Bagher Menhaj: Writing - review & editing, Supervision. Seyed Ali Hosseini: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Validation, Investigation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. Amir Saeed Shirani: Writing - review & editing, Supervision.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Appendix A. Supplementary data</Section>
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:
Supplementary data 1.
<Section>References</Section>
Akbari et al., 2017
R. Akbari, D. Rezaei, A. Gharib
Thermal-Hydraulics analysis of pressurized water reactor core by using single heated channel model
J. Appl. Comput. Mech., 3 (3) (2017), pp. 192-198
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Brown and Gabbar, 2014
C. Brown, H.A. Gabbar
Fuzzy logic control for improved pressurizer systems in nuclear power plants
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 72 (2014), pp. 461-466
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bushehr, 2008
Bushehr NPP final safety analysis report (BNPP FSAR), 2008. Atomic Energy Organization of Iran (AEOI).
Google Scholar
De Oliveira and de Almeida, 2013
M.V. De Oliveira, J.C.S. de Almeida
Application of artificial intelligence techniques in modeling and control of a nuclear power plant pressurizer system
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 63 (2013), pp. 71-85
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fletcher and Schultz, 1999
Fletcher, G.D., Schultz, R.R., 1999. RELAP5/MOD3.3 code manual, Idaho National Engineering Laboratory Idaho.
Google Scholar
Fořtová and Ježek, 2018
Fořtová, A. and Ježek, F., 2018, July. VVER 1000 Pressurizer System and Control Modelling in Dymola., 2018. 26th International Conference on Nuclear Engineering. American Society of Mechanical Engineers Digital Collection.
Google Scholar
Hosseini et al., 2020
S.A. Hosseini, A.S. Shirani, M. Zangian, A. Najafi
Re-assessment of accumulators performance to identify VVER-1000 vulnerabilities against various break sizes of SB-LOCA along with SBO
Progress in Nuclear Energy (2020), p. 103145
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Lilly, 2011
Lilly, J.H., 2011. Fuzzy control and identification. John Wiley & Sons.
Google Scholar
Moghanaki and Rahgoshay, 2014
S.K. Moghanaki, M. Rahgoshay
Simulation of two-region and four-region models for typical PWR pressurizer and benchmark obtained results using available results
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 63 (2014), pp. 302-308
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Qian et al., 2019
Qian, H., Yuan, Y., Wang, Y., Jiang, G. and Yang, T., 2019. Research on Pressurizer Pressure Control Based on Adaptive Prediction Algorithm. Complexity.
Google Scholar
Vahman et al., 2016
N. Vahman, R. Akbari-Jeyhouni, D.R. Ochbelagh, R. Amrollahi
An assessment of a VVER-1000 core during Turbo-Generator load reduction test using RELAP5/MOD3. 2 and WIMSD-5B/PARCSv2. 7
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 93 (2016), pp. 155-164
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2019a
P. Wang, J. He, X. Wei, F. Zhao
Mathematical modeling of a pressurizer in a pressurized water reactor for control design
Appl. Math. Model., 65 (2019), pp. 187-206
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2019b
P. Wang, X. Yan, F. Zhao
Multi-objective optimization of control parameters for a pressurized water reactor pressurizer using a genetic algorithm
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 124 (2019), pp. 9-20
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2020
P. Wang, J. Wan, S. Wu, F. Zhao
A fuzzy-logic-based pressure setpoint modification method for pressurized water reactor pressurizers
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 135 (2020), Article 106954
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Zhao et al., 1993
Zhao, Z.Y., Tomizuka, M. and Isaka, S., 1993. Fuzzy gain scheduling of PID controllers. IEEE transactions on systems, man, and cybernetics, 23(5), pp.1392-1398.
Google Scholar
Zhong et al., 2019
X. Zhong, X. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Saeed, Y. Li, Z. Chen, B. Tang, Y. Sun
Development of an improved non-equilibrium multi-region model for pressurized water reactor pressurizer
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 126 (2019), pp. 133-141
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
