<title>Structural subgrid scale model based on wavelet filter for large eddy simulation of particle-laden turbulence</title>
<author>1,YanXiong,2,RuwuCai,3,JingLi,4,FeiFei,5,ZhaohuiLiu,6,WeiLuo</author>
<Affiliation>1,State Key Laboratory of Coal Combustion, School of Energy and Power Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China;2,School of Aerospace Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China;3,China nuclear power operation technology corporation, Ltd, Wuhan 430071, P.R. China;4,Wuhan second ship design and research institute, Wuhan 430205, P.R. China</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>International Journal of Multiphase Flow</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.ijmultiphaseflow.2021.103730</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301932221001774</URL>
Structural subgrid scale model based on wavelet filter for large eddy simulation of particle-laden turbulence
YanXiong,RuwuCai,JingLi,FeiFei,ZhaohuiLiu,WeiLuo
State Key Laboratory of Coal Combustion, School of Energy and Power Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China
School of Aerospace Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China
China nuclear power operation technology corporation, Ltd, Wuhan 430071, P.R. China
Wuhan second ship design and research institute, Wuhan 430205, P.R. China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Differential filtered (DF) model combined with wavelet filter is proposed.
DF model can effectively reconstruct the SGS coherent vortex structure.
Subgrid langevin model is not suitable for predicting particle pair statistics.
DF model based on wavelet filter is a promising approach for two-phase LES.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Coherent vortex structures in subgrid scale (SGS) motions are important for preferential concentration and collision of particles with small and intermediate Stokes number (Xiong et al., 2019). In this study, a new large eddy simulation (LES) strategy that combines wavelet filtered large eddy simulation with a differential filter SGS model is proposed. First, a wavelet filtered direct numerical simulation (WFDNS) enables good preservation of SGS structures due to the high compressibility and local fidelity of the wavelet filter. Second, a differential filter (DF) model, containing only a parameter related to the nominal filter width, is used to dynamically reconstruct unresolved eddies. The SGS model presented here is verified using direct numerical simulation (DNS) data for particle-laden homogenous isotropic turbulence. Compared to the classical spectral-filtered DNS (FDNS) model, the new SGS model enables to achieve better agreement with DNS results related to the dispersed-phase statistics, such as particle acceleration, particle-seen fluid kinetic energy, particle-seen Lagrangian integral time etc. Furthermore, obtained results also exhibit the advantages of a proposed model over the stochastic Langevin model in the prediction of particle dynamics, especially collision-related statistics such as radial distribution function, radial relative velocities, and particle collision rates. Moreover, the model also demonstrates good performance in application to particle-pair related statistics at different Reynolds numbers and different filter depths. This is attributed to the ability of this model to multispectrally enhance coherent vortex structures in SGS, which is promising to apply for recovering SGS effects in the LES of turbulent particle-laden flows.
Keywords:Particle-laden flow;Subgrid scale;Coherent vortex extraction;Wavelet filter;Differential filter model
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Multiscale characteristics of turbulence strongly influence the characteristics of particle motions, which encompass a broad range of fundamental processes, such as particle preferential concentration (Andrew and Lance, 2014; Wood et al., 2005; Zaichik and Alipchenkov, 2005), particle-pair relative dispersion (Leonid and Vladimir, 2009; Zaichik and Alipchenkov, 2003), collision (Pan and Padoan, 2014), and agglomeration (Reeks, 2014). These processes depend not only on turbulent transport effects but also on interparticle collisions ((Voßkuhle et al., 2014); Wang et al., 2008, 2000; Zhou et al., 1998), these two strongly relying on particle inertia. Although Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS) has proven to be a reliable tool to analyze the behaviors of particle pairs, it has unaffordable computation limitations at high Reynolds numbers. The limitations of DNS motivate the development of a Large Eddy Simulation (LES) model of particle-laden flow. In the framework of this model, only large-scale motions are explicitly resolved, while a number of fundamental issues related to the absence of turbulent vortex structures in subgrid scale (SGS) motions on particle dispersion are still to be investigated (Bianco et al., 2012; Chibbaro et al., 2014).
LES without correction model was used for simulations of two-phase flow with good results obtained. LES without modeling was successfully applied for simulations of the two-phase channel flow (Milici et al., 2020) and the three-dimensional time-dependent flow (Marchioli et al., 2006). However, LES without modeling is not perfect in application to two-phase flows. Since numerical inaccuracies and interpolation errors affect estimation of forces acting on particles (Marchioli, 2017), the effect of filtered out SGS on the discrete phases is essential. At present, there are two main SGS particle model frameworks, namely stochastic models and structural models. The most frequently used SGS particle models are stochastic models derived from Langevin-type formulations (Minier et al., 2014), which reconstruct the particle-seen SGS velocity in the particle momentum equation. Such model shows excellent reproduction of the particle kinetic energy and the integral time seen by the particles (Berrouk et al., 2007; Fede et al., 2006; Shotorban and Mashayek, 2006). Extensions of this model, such as by replacing the SGS velocity with a corresponding value seen by the particles (Jin et al., 2010) or by considering the effect of space–time correlation (Jin and He, 2013) have been reported. However, these extensions did not enable still to predict the radial distribution function (RDF) and other particle-pair quantities because the Langevin-type model would inherently introduce additional numerical diffusion, which might destroy the microstructures in SGS motions (Pozorski and Apte, 2009).
Another family of SGS particle models, i.e., structural models, which are aimed to reproduce the important structural features in SGS, may be promising to address this issue. The approximate deconvolution method (ADM) (Shotorban and Mashayek, 2005) belongs to this family. This method enables to partially recover the subgrid scale kinetic energy in the vicinity of the cutoff wavenumber by deconvolution of the velocity field obtained in LES. Earlier studies (Marchioli et al., 2008; Shotorban et al., 2007) have shown its advantages over stochastic models in predicting particle-pair dynamics such as the RDF and the relative particle dispersion and collision. However, it could not be applied for a coarser grid LES or configurations with higher Reynolds numbers as it could not recover the associated SGS contributions below the filter size. The Kinematic Simulation (KS) for SGS motions proposed by (Ray and Collins, 2013) is a successful model for prediction of the RDF and particle relative velocities. KS is based on a pre-defined turbulent kinetic energy spectrum that represents the Eulerian statistics of the SGS field. At this, however, the intermittency effects related to the SGS vortex structures are ignored, which results in inaccurate RDFs at 0.2 ≤ St<6. Recently, extensions of the ADM have been reported by (Marchioli et al., 2008) and (Gobert and Manhart, 2011). For both extensions, reconstruction of the velocity field at the scales smaller than the filter size is expected. Most recently, a similar concept has been proposed that implements a differential filter (DF) (Bassenne et al., 2019; Park et al., 2017). More correct prediction of particle preferential concentration was obtained. DF model is flexible enough to be deployed because it contains the only parameter related to the nominal filter.
An appropriate SGS model for particles, especially the one used for predicting particle-pair dynamics such as the RDF and the particle collision rate, should recover the effects of coherent vortex structures (CVS) in the SGS. Traditional LES approach is based on the filters in the spectral (Balachandar and Maxey, 1989) or physical space (Rosales and Meneveau, 2005). The Fourier basis function is typically used as a global filter. However, it cannot preserve the structural information when the filter width is large. The wavelet-based vortex extraction technique proposed by (Farge et al., 2001) provides a good opportunity to retain SGS structures. (Bassenne et al., 2016) were the first who proposed a new wavelet-based method aimed to extract particle clusters using wavelet filters. This method demonstrated immense potential in capturing the effects of preferential concentration with significant reduction in computation cost. Recently, (Xiong et al., 2018) extracted the coherent vortex structures in turbulent particle-laden flows using an orthogonal wavelet decomposition algorithm introduced by (Farge and Schneider, 2001) and (Jacobitz et al., 2008) (Jacobitz et al., 2016). They investigated the effect of CVS in SGS motions on the particle statistics. It was found that wavelet-based structural filter can preserve the SGS coherent structures which are vital for the particle-pair statistics. Moreover, this filter should be particularly suitable for LES modeling of particle-laden flows.
The present research continues the work by (Xiong et al., 2018) by developing a structural SGS model for particle motions using wavelet filter. An orthogonal wavelet algorithm is used to extract the CVS, and DF model is implemented to dynamically reconstruct the unresolved eddies. A priori strategy is then followed to validate the structural SGS model using DNS data related to a particle-laden homogeneous isotropic turbulence. The paper is organized as follows: Numerical simulation methods and initial conditions for flow fields and particles are described in Section 2. Formulation of the SGS model is presented in Section 3. Results for carrier- and particle-phase obtained from spectral-filtered Direct Numerical Simulation (FDNS),wavelet filtered Direct Numerical Simulation (WFDNS) with and without SGS model as well as their comparison with respective DNS results are addresses in Section 4. Finally, the main conclusions are provided in Section 5.
<Section>2. Methodology</Section>
2.1. Fluid phase
The dimensionless governing equations for the fluid field shown below were solved on a cubical uniform mesh with 2563 grid points, the length of the cube side was L = 2π:
@(1)
@(2)
This DNS method for fluids is a pseudo-spectral solver (Eswaran and Pope, 1988) in which aliasing errors are almost completely removed by the 3/2-rule. In this method, the velocity field is driven and maintained by application of a random artificial force with non-zero values only at low wavenumbers @ in the Fourier space. The forcing scheme is analogous to that developed and tested by (Eswaran and Pope, 1988). The flow field evolves for about 10 eddy turnover times to reach a steady state.
A filtered DNS (FDNS) field can be obtained by applying a cutoff filter in the spectral space at various filter scales. This filter truncates the Fourier coefficients larger than the cutoff wavenumber (kc) in the turbulent energy spectra:
@(3)
In this study, the spectral filters with kc=16 were selected. The corresponding filter width in the physical space Δ was eight times the original grid size. The selected filter scales encompassed the range of the inertial subzone, which is always resolved in LES.
Classical Fourier transformation used in FDNS provides only spectral information below a chosen cutoff wavenumber kc. No information related to the physical space is given. Meanwhile, wavelet filtering can provide more extended information related to both physical and wavenumber scale space as a consequence of the properties of wavelets, which are the basis functions localized in both mentioned spaces. The velocity field u(x) can be represented in terms of the wavelet basis functions as follows:
@(4)
where @ and @ are the three-dimensional scale functions and wavelet coefficients of different families μ and levels of scale j, respectively.
The wavelet decomposition procedure comprised two steps. As the first step, we used an orthogonal three-dimensional multiresolution analysis of the field u(x) using wavelet transformation. In the following, wavelet filtering was performed using a wavelet coefficient threshold in the wavelet space.
The wavelet filter is defined as follows:
@(5)
where εT is the dimensionless threshold parameter and @ represents the wavelet threshold filtering norm denoted as the L2 norm in the simulation below, i.e. . (Farge and Schneider, 2001) and (Goldstein et al., 2005) suggested that the application of a wavelet filter with the specified threshold value @ to the homogeneous isotropic turbulence, where Z is the vorticity magnitude and N is the grid resolution, respectively, could result in the decomposition of the corresponding vorticity field @ into a coherent part wc and an incoherent part wi (nearly Gaussian white noise):
@(6)
The coherent vortex extraction (CVE) method will be addressed to as the WFDNS hereafter. This algorithm was applied to a 3D vector vorticity field . Next, the three components of @ were expanded on an orthonormal wavelet series, which ranged from the largest scale @ to the smallest scale . The velocity field could be reconstructed thereafter from the retained modes using a 3D inverse wavelet transformation and Biot–Savart's relation . Herein, the effective filter width in WFDNS is compared to the classical FDNS with Δ=8 (Xiong et al., 2018) for which the cutoff wavenumber is located in the inertia subzone.
2.2. Discrete particle motion
The dispersed phase was assumed to be dilute so that the assumption of a one-way momentum coupling was reasonable. Therefore, we could focus on the effects of turbulence on the statistics of dispersed phase. The density of particles was assumed to be significantly higher than that of the continuous carrier phase, ρp / ρf ≫ 1, and the particle diameter d was assumed to be a constant not exceeding the Kolmogorov spatial microscale η, d = 0.5η. In this case, the equation of particle motion can be written using the point-force approximation with only the drag force acting on the particles. As the fluid density is significantly smaller than the density of particles, the forces arising from unsteady or inhomogeneous motions, such as the forces due to the acceleration or deceleration of the fluid (the virtual mass effect) and the Basset force, which is attributed to the memory effect, can be neglected. Moreover, the main objective of this research is to study the effects of particle inertia on collision statistics. Therefore, action of external body forces is ignored. Under these assumptions, motion of a single heavy particle can be described by the following equations:
@(7)
@(8)
where xpi and upi are the instantaneous position and velocity of the particle, respectively, ugi,p is the instantaneous fluid velocity at the particle location, and τp is the characteristic time of the dynamic relaxation of particles:
@(9)
A correction to the Stokes coefficient (CD) and the particle Reynolds number (Rep) are expressed by
@(10)
@(11)
The particle Stokes number (Stk) is defined as follows:
@(12)
where τk is the Kolmogorov timescale.
When the velocity field reached steady state, particles were placed with a random distribution in the computation domain. All the simulations in the present study contained 1,200,000 particles in the flow. The initial velocity of particles was set equal to the fluid velocity at the same location. The fluid point velocity was computed using the accurate and well-tested partial Hermite interpolation scheme (Balachandar and Maxey, 1989). The particle motion and momentum equations were solved using the second-order Runge–Kutta method. The statistics were calculated after reaching a steady state condition, which was maintained for approximately six additional eddy turnover times.
2.3. Particle statistics
In this study, the particle statistics were divided into two categories, i.e. single-point particle statistics (Ayyalasomayajula et al., 2008) and particle-pair statistics (Salazar et al., 2012) which are discussed below. In addition, the algorithm of particle collision detection adopted in this study is an alternative to the cell index method, having optimized cell list and detection range (Sundaram and Collins, 1997). The total computation of collision detection per step is Np ( 27 Np / Ncell −1 ) / 2 as compared to Np ( Np @ −1) / 2 of the initial one. Subsequently, the collision kernel can be calculated as follows:
@(13)
where n=Np/V is the density number, NTDNS is the particle collision rate equal to the total number of detected collisions divided by the statistical time and computation domain. Furthermore, the estimated results can be obtained using the following expression:
@(14)
Here, g(R) is the radial distribution function (RDF), and 〈|wr|〉 is the averaged over the ensemble value of the modulus of particle-pair radial relative velocities (RRV). They can be expressed as follows:
@(15)
@(16)
where Vfield is the volume of the domain, Nt is the statistical time, VS = 4π[(R+δ/2)3-(R-δ/2)3] is the volume of the annulus used for detection, δ is the width of the detection circle of particle collisions, and @ is the number of particle pairs in the detection zone when the particles are uniformly distributed.
<Section>3. Flow field characteristics</Section>
3.1. Implementation of wavelet-based differential filtered SGS model
The SGS model with the particle-seen fluid velocity (or the particle SGS model for short), called the DF model herein, enables to obtain the velocities ui based on the filtered velocities @ (they can be the wavelet filtered velocities @ in WFDNSs) according to the following expression:
@(17)
Therefore, the corresponding particle-seen SGS velocities read
@(18)
Eq. (17) is the definition of an elliptic differential filter, where b is the only model parameter analogous to the filter width in LES.
For homogeneous isotropic turbulence, b is spatially uniform and the filtered velocity is
@(19)
where the filter kernel is
@(20)
which corresponds to Green's function of Eq. (17).
The parameter b can be computed dynamically. The dynamic procedure is based on the derivation of the equation for the SGS stress tensor, . Following the definition of DF, the components of the SGS stress tensor can be expressed as follows:
@(21)
Subsequently,
@(22)
which yields the transport equation for @ in the following form:
@(23)
@(24)
where Rij is an auxiliary tensor, and @ is the filtered velocity field obtained by wavelet filtering, respectively. Comparing Eq. (23) with the definition of DF by Eq. (17), one obtains
@(25)
where the bar in @ means the DF acting on it. Eq. (23) can be closed by constraining the modeled particle-seen SGS kinetic energy @ to be equal to that obtained from the LES model, . Under the assumption of @ Eq. (23) can be rewritten as follows:
@(26)
Because a wavelet filter instead of a spectral cutoff filter was used in these cases, the SGS kinetic energy should be redefined as follows:
@(27)
Subsequently, Eq. (26) is volume-averaged providing a spatially uniform distribution of b:
@(28)
where the coefficients α, β and γ are given by
@(29)
@(30)
@(31)
In this study, the trace of the SGS stress tensor @ was obtained by comparing the DNS and the filtered results. For frozen flow with periodicity in three dimensions, the volume-average of Eq. (30) can be simplified to . Eq. (28) yields only one positive root b2>0, and the full-scale instantaneous particle-seen fluid velocity field can be reconstructed using Eq. (17).
At present, the stochastic model (Apte et al., 2003) is widely used for modeling turbulent particle-laden flows. To comprehensively assess the DF model within WFDNS, the results obtained in the framework of the stochastic particle SGS model are presented for comparison. The equations of the stochastics model look as follows:
@(32)
@(33)
where the dispersion coefficients Ggp,ij and diffusion coefficient Bgp are defined as follows:
@(34)
@(35)
@(36)
Here, TLP,SGS is the Lagrangian integral timescale seen by the particles, kSGS,p is the particle-seen SGS kinetic energy of fluid, and εSGS the SGS dissipation, respectively. In this study, TLP,SGS and kSGS,p were determined from the prior test, where they could be obtained directly from the differences between the DNS and WFDNS results. For the homogeneous isotropic turbulence considered, we set C0 = 2.1 and Cε @ = 1.0 (Pozorski and Apte, 2009).
<Section>4. Results and discussion</Section>
This section focuses on the performance of the proposed model with respect to the particle-seen velocity field, single particle statistics and particle-pair statistics. We consider 15 different values of the Stokes numbers, namely, Stk=0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7, 0.9, 1.0, 1.2, 1.5, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0, 6.0, 8.0, 9.0. Moreover, we use 1,200,000 particles for each St value. The particle diameters are set equal to 0.5η.
4.1. Flow field statistics
The main parameters of the flow fields obtained by DNS, FDNS and WFDNS are summarized in Table 1. The parameters of the filtered velocity field were computed using standard definitions, with kmax replaced by kc. As can be seen from Table 1, the Reynolds number based on the Taylor microscale Reλ was equal to 103, the mesh resolution N was 256, and the CFL number was equal to 0.5.
Table 1. Characteristic parameters of a flow at the Reynolds number of 103 and the resolution of 256.
To test the scalability of the DF model at higher Reynolds numbers and higher resolutions, two more flow fields were added, namely the one with a resolution of 512 and a Taylor Reynolds number of 205, and the other one with a resolution of 1024 and a Taylor Reynolds number of 315, respectively. The simulation results obtained at these parameter values are presented in Tables 2 and 3.
Table 2. Characteristic parameters of a flow at the Reynolds number of 205 and the resolution of 512.
Table 3. Characteristic parameters of a flow at the Reynolds number of 315 and the resolution of 1024.
Combined application of the differential filter SGS model to calculate the particle-seen velocity field and WFDNSs for integrating the particle equation of motion is called the WFDNS+DF model hereafter.
First of all, it is instructive to analyze characteristic statistics of the velocity field, especially regarding the spectral content. Fig. 1 shows the energy and enstrophy spectra for the simulated cases. Subgrid scale motions in turbulent flows are primarily observed in the high wavenumber regions, where the turbulent energy and the enstrophy is small but essential. For comparison, the spectra obtained by FDNS with the filter width Δ = 8 is illustrated showing a sharp cutoff within the inertia subzone. In contrast to the classical spectral cutoff filter in the FDNS, WFDNS demonstrate the ability to cover the full range of resolved scales. It should be noticed that the wavenumber range for the modelled and the resolved velocities is the same. Therefore, reinforcement of the small-scale dynamics, which is always absent in LES combined with wavelet filters, is expected. The Fourier spectra of the kinetic energy and the enstrophy in the WFDNS+DF model were amplified with respect to those in the WFDNS and approach the curves obtained by the DNS. For small wavenumbers, the effects called by application of different models vanished. At the same time, at large wavenumbers, separation between the results obtained by the WFDNS and WFDNS+DF simulations increases significantly. This feature can be easily explained because the modeled velocity spectrum is 1 + b2k2 times the resolved one for a spatially uniform b, k being the wavenumber modulus.
Fig. 1. Ensemble-averaged spectra for (a) turbulent kinetic energy and (b) enstrophy as functions of wavenumber k, calculated in the DNS (2563 grid points, Reλ = 103), FDNS (Δ = 8), WFDNS (ε = 1/83), and WFDNS+DF model (the same grid points as in the WFDNS case). The constant b in the model was spatially uniform and was determined using the procedure described in Section 3.
As discussed above, WFDNS+DF model enabled to intensify the small-scale dynamics associated with localized structural information.
4.2. Single particle statistics
The enhanced local vortex structures at small scales shown in Fig. 2 (Reλ = 103) can yield better results of particle statistics driven by small-scale eddies. In Fig. 2, the magnitude of normalized particle acceleration vector |αp| = (αp,i αp,i)1/2 is presented as a function of particle Stokes number. Here αp,i = dup,i / dt, τk and uk = η/τk are the Kolmogorov time scale and the velocity, respectively. The effects of small-scale structures on particle acceleration are evident for small inertia particles with Stk ≤ 2.0 and middle inertia particles. The discrepancies between respective curves decrease to zero with the increase of Stk. It is interesting to note that the results obtained by both the WFDNS and FDNS show the same trend, which indicates that the absence of subgrid intermittency results in an under-prediction of |αp| especially at small Stk, at which particles can be driven by small eddies. In contrast, better preservation of coherent vortex structures by using wavelet filtering in the WFDNS offers some advantages over the classical spectral cutoff filter used in the FDNS. Therefore, subgrid scale structures are demanded.
Fig. 2. Normalized ensemble-averaged particle accelerations ap as functions of particle Stokes number calculated in the DNS (2563 grid points, Reλ= 103), WFDNS, and FDNS with and without different model combinations (a) and their relative errors (b).
Improvement becomes particularly evident at small Stokes numbers for both WFDNS and FDNS, as particles become subjected to the acceleration caused by small-scale eddies that are partially recovered with the DF model. Moreover, the results obtained by combination of the WFDNS and the DF model agree well with the ones obtained in the DNS, e.g. the maximum error at these conditions is below 5%. Improvement of the quality of results should be attributed to the fact that more coherent vortex structures at different scales and the kinetic energy cascades are enhanced when wavelet filtering is applied, as compared to those obtained only around the cutoff scale as in the FDNS case.
For particles suspended in turbulent motion, the characteristics of the particle-seen flow field are important in particle dispersion. Fig. 3 (Reλ = 103) shows the particle-seen fluid kinetic energy kpg as a function of particle Stokes number. It should be noticed that kpg mainly depends on the macroscopic energy-containing vortex structures, and the absence of SGS structures results in limited errors with a maximum value of ~10%, as shown by the curve obtained in the FDNS. As a validation, preservation of coherent vortex structures in the WFDNS helps to predict the values of kpg only for Stk > 3.0, as compared to the FDNS results, because large inertial particles tend to respond to the energy-containing vortex structures. Inclusion of the DF model can decrease the errors obtained in both WFDNS and FDNS, whereas WFDNS+DF exhibits no particular advantage over FDNS+DF. This means that the enhanced structural information in the subgrid scale affects the value of kpg, however, it might not be fundamental in determination of the kinetic energy-dominated variables.
Fig. 3. Particle-seen fluid kinetic energies as functions of particle Stokes number calculated in the DNS (2563 grid points, Reλ= 103), WFDNS, and FDNS with and without different model combinations (a) and their relative errors (b).
Improvement of the predictions of kpg leads to the agreement of the particle-seen fluid Lagrangian integral time TLp with respective value obtained in the DNS, as shown in Fig. 4 (Reλ =103). In addition to kpg, TLp controlled the dynamic equation of particle motions when the particle-seen fluid subgrid scale velocities @ were modeled as random time-dependent disturbances, as in the case of stochastic modeling. It should be noticed that TLp significantly increases at Stk > 1.0 because of for large inertial particles TLp is more likely to approach the Eulerian integral timescale of flow TE. For light particles (Stk → 0) the value of TLp is close to the Lagrangian integral timescale TL, as discussed in (Wang et al., 1993). As shown in Fig. 4(b), absence of SGS motions resulted in a slight increase in TLp, which is consistent with the work by (Boivin et al., 2000). The large-scale motions are more prominent in this case. As can be seen from the obtained results, the effects of the model demonstrate its ability to recover the variable TLp. However, it is difficult to make clear the advantages offered by application of the WFDNS+DF model over the FDNS+DF one in recovering the SGS structures. Similar to kpg, TLp is fundamental in the particle dispersion process, which is primarily driven by the energy-containing vortex structures in the turbulence, as discussed by (Wang and Squires, 1996). It can also benefit from the model as it is constructed based on the assumption that the kinetic energy balance in subgrid scale is maintained.
Fig. 4. Particle-seen Lagrangian integral time scales as functions of particle Stokes number calculated in the DNS (2563 grid points, Reλ= 103), WFDNS, and FDNS with and without different model combinations (a) and their relative errors (b).
In general, the DF model combined with both FDNS and WFDNS enables to obtain similar corrections for kpg and TLp. At the same time, it demonstrates much better ability to recover the values of particle acceleration |αp| for WFDNS. The former can be attributed to the fact that the single-particle diffusion statistics discussed above can be complimented with the classical stochastic model, as done by (Apte et al., 2003), because of these variables primarily reflect the information on particle kinetics and not on particle dynamic motions such as e. g. particle trajectory. Regarding the |αp|, a reliable prediction is more difficult to achieve because this quantity is directly related to the velocity and trajectory of every independent particle. It is clear that the combined WFDNS and DF model offers advantages in simulation of dynamical processes.
4.3. Particle-pair statistics
The results presented above weakly depend on the localized turbulent structures, so that the particle accelerations and particle-seen fluid kinetic energy are primarily determined by the particles sampled with large fluctuations. Therefore, the vortex structures in SGS motions affect these statistics randomly, in the same manner as the stochastic model. However, the stochastic model cannot predict the phenomena that depend on spatially localized turbulent structures, such as the preferential concentration effect.
In this subsection, the performance of the particle SGS model based on the particle-pair statistics is examined. Fig. 5 (Reλ = 103) shows the RDF as a function of particle inertia obtained in and without combination with the DF model. As shown in Fig. 5, the FDNSs without the SGS model under-predicts the RDF at Stk ≤ 1.2 and over-predicts it at Stk > 1.2. As illustrated in previous studies, such erroneous LES behavior may be attributed to the “shift” in the large inertia direction as a result of the absence of SGS motions in turbulence. Utilization of the DF model strengthens the spatial turbulent vortex structures through the modelled SGS velocities , which make the RDF increase for light particles and decrease at Stk > 1.2. As shown in Fig. 5(b), the relative errors of the RDF decrease non-monotonically with the particle inertia. Moreover, it is clear that the DF model is applicable in both the WFDNS and FDNS. The differences between the results obtained in them may be attributed to the contributions from the spectrally enriched fluid motions in subgrid scales. At the same time, the curve obtained in the framework of the Langevin model is far from the DNS curve obtained after adding the model, especially for intermediate particles with Stokes numbers around Stk ~ O(1). As reported by (Knorps and Pozorski, 2015), the stochastic model in the Langevin form cannot effectively compensate for the particle preferential concentration effects. This is validated in Fig. 5(a), as the diffusion term in the model would introduce an additional random noise that would consequently destroy the vortex structures, especially in subgrid scales. It is clear that the effects of the preferential concentration of light particles are primarily driven by the SGS vortex structures. Therefore, the stochastic model (such as the Langevin type one) cannot accurately predict the RDF.
Fig. 5. Radial distribution functions of particles g(r) as functions of Stk calculated in the DNS (2563 grid points, Reλ= 103), WFDNS (ε= 1/83) and FDNS with and without different model combinations (a) and their relative errors (b). Results obtained in the FDNS are displayed for comparison.
Moreover, Fig. 6 (Reλ = 103) shows the RDFs as the functions of the separation distances between the particle pairs at different particle Stokes numbers. The curves in Fig. 6 are special cases of the data presented in Fig. 5, when r = R. It is clear that implementation of the DF model improved the prediction of RDF at Stk ≤ 0.5 and Stk ≥ 6.0 for both WFDNS and FDNS, as reported by (Park et al., 2017) and (Bassenne et al., 2019). However, for intermediate particles, WFDNS+DF model was not effective, providing similar results to the FDNS +DF model as reported by (Park et al., 2017). It should be notices that precise capture of RDF for intermediate inertia particles is difficult. This is related to the fact that the DF model compensates for the information on the small-scale structure, which enhances the dissipation effect, resulting in a weakening effect on the local enrichment in the vicinity of the peak area. Furthermore, for all particle Stokes numbers considered, when the separation distance is large enough, the curves are close to respective DNS curves. It indicates that the DF model tends to reconstruct local coherent structures in the subgrid scale and that the effect of the DF model on RDF is insignificant at the large enough separation distances. For large-scale vortex structures such effects converge gradually, as expected. Obtained results also confirm that the effect of the preferential concentration of particles primarily depends on the small-scale vortex structures. Therefore, the model is feasible to improve the prediction ability of RDF for small inertial particles.
Fig. 6. Radial distribution functions of particles g(r) as functions of the separation distances calculated in the DNS (2563 grid points, Reλ= 103) and WFDNS (ε = 1/83) with and without particle SGS model for different values of Stk.
In addition, Fig. 7 shows the RDFs as functions of particle inertia at Reλ =205 and 315 and their relative errors in comparison with respective results obtained by the DNS with and without the particle SGS model. @ It can be seen from Figs. 7(a) and (b) that the curves obtained in the framework of the WFDNS+DF model are closer to the DNS results than the respective results obtained by the WFDNS at both filtering depths, and the difference is more significant at small Stokes numbers. This also demonstrates that the DF model is effective in extracting small-scale information, and the WFDNS+DF model is more accurate in predicting RDF at small Stokes numbers.
Fig. 7. Radial distribution functions of particles g(r) as functions of Stk calculated in the DNS (5123 grid points, Reλ= 205; 10243 grid points, Reλ= 315) and WFDNS (ε = 0.01 and 1/83) with and without particle SGS model and their relative errors.
With the increase of the Reynolds number the effect of subgrid scale enhances, which is evident from Fig. 7(c) and (d). Obviously, the error is larger at higher Reynolds number and the model enhancement is more visible.
The radial relative velocities (RRVs) of particle pairs and their relative errors obtained in the framework of the particle SGS model in different filtered flow fields are shown in Fig. 8 (Reλ = 103). As can be seen from this Figure, almost all the curves are significantly elevated in the entire range of inertial particles considered, especially at Stk<1.0, where subgrid scale motions dominate. For Stk ≥ 1.0, the large inertia particles are more susceptible to relative fluid motions between the particle pairs on macroscopic scales. This effect is known as the turbulent transport effect, which leads to a significant increase of the RRV. In this range, the effects of SGS motions gradually vanish with the increase of Stk. Moreover, it is clear from Fig. 8(b) that the relative errors obtained with different filters monotonously decrease after adding the model, which is valid in the considered range of particle inertia, and that the effect is more prominent in the WFDNS. It should be noticed as well that the RRV of the particles at Stk ≫ 1.0 is mainly affected by the nonlocal turbulent diffusion effect. However, loss of the SGS fluid vortex structures severely affects the particle-seen local vortex structure, which results in the limited errors to RRV caused by filtering. At the same time, as shown in Fig. 8, application of the particle SGS model can further reduce the errors, whether it is based on the FDNS or WFDNS flow field. Meanwhile, the stochastic model failed to accurately predict the RRV, which resulted in worse quality of the results obtained at all values of Stk, especially in the low inertia region with Stk ≤ 1.0. The unphysical behaviors in this range may be attributed to the inappropriate perturbations introduced by this model.
Fig. 8. Radial relative velocities of particles wr, as functions of Stk calculated in the DNS (2563 grid points, Reλ= 103), WFDNS (ε = 1/83) and FDNS with and without different model combination (a) and their relative errors (b).
Furthermore, Fig. 9 shows the RRVs as functions of particle inertia at Reλ = 205 and 315 and their relative errors as compared to respective DNS results with and without the particle SGS model. As shown in Fig. 9(a) and (b), the WFDNS+DF model outperforms the WFDNS model in the interval of the Stokes numbers of 0.1–10. This phenomenon is also consistent with the description above, namely that at Stk < 1.0 particles are more susceptible to small-scale motion. At the same time, when particle inertia increases, small-scale motion does not dominate, as demonstrated in Fig. 9(c) and (d). The relative error of WFDNS results becomes smaller as the Stokes number increases. With reference to Fig. 9, it can be seen that the WFDNS+DF model predicts RRV even better when the value of the Reynolds number increases. This can be explained by the fact that with the increase of the Reynolds number the inertial subintervals widen, the scales become separated and the small-scale information becomes more important.
Fig. 9. Radial relative velocities of particles wr, as functions of Stk calculated in the DNS (5123 grid points, Reλ= 205; 10243 grid points, Reλ= 315) and WFDNS (ε = 0.01 and 1/83) with and without particle SGS model and their relative errors.
Fig. 10 (Reλ = 103) shows the particle collision kernels βcol as functions of particle inertia and their relative errors in comparison with respective DNS results with and without the particle SGS model. The particle collision kernel function βcol is determined by the local enrichment and turbulent transport effects. As shown in Fig. 10(a), deviations between the functions presented are manly concentrated in the range of Stk ≤ 4.0, which means that absence of SGS fluid motions caused by filtration primarily affects the collision probability of small inertial particles, as further supported by the results shown in Fig. 10(b). This is consistent with the viewpoint that the inertial particles should be analyzed in the framework of the model comprising corresponding particle SGS model for Stk ≤ 3.0, as reported by (Jin and He, 2013). In addition, Fig. 10(b) shows that stochastic model cannot be used to predict the values of βcol at Stk ≤ 1.0 as expected, and that the DF model significantly improves the prediction ability of particle collision kernel βcol at Stk ≤ 4.0, especially for WFDNS, for which the maximum relative error does not exceed 20%.
Fig. 10. Particle collision kernels βcol as functions of Stk calculated in the DNS (2563 grid points, Reλ= 103), WFDNS and FDNS with and without different model combination (a) and their relative errors (b).
Fig. 11 shows the particle collision kernels βcol as functions of particle inertia at Reλ =205 and 315 and their relative errors in comparison with the respective DNS results with and without the particle SGS model. Particle collision kernel is closely related to the local enrichment of particles. The WFDNS+DF model curve is a better match to the respective DNS curve, indicating that the DF model can compensate for local enrichment with small inertia particles. At the filtering depth in the range of 0.01 to 1/83, the greater the weight of the dissipation rate is filtered out, the more small-scale information is lost, and therefore the larger is the relative error of the WFDNS results, as can be seen in Fig. 11(c) and (d).
Fig. 11. Particle collision kernels βcol as functions of Stk calculated in the DNS (5123 grid points, Reλ= 205; 10243 grid points, Reλ = 315) and WFDNS (ε = 0.01 and 1/83) with and without particle SGS model and their relative errors.
It was found that the WFDNS had a positive effect on the particle collision kernel for small values of Stk, which was derived from the precise capture of the particle preferential concentration effect and the accurate characterization of the relative motions between the particle pairs (Xiong et al., 2018). This implies that the model-enhanced structural information in the subgrid scales, such as the physical mechanism of particle collisions and clustering, is vital for the particle-pair dynamics of small inertia particles. Meanwhile, as compared to the spectrally enhanced information around the truncated wavenumbers in the FDNS, the DF model based on the WFDNS is aimed to enhance the multiscale vortex structural information in the SGS motions, which may be more suitable for describing the full chain of turbulent energy transfer, especially in subgrid scales. Combination of the WFDNS and the DF model extends the multiscale characteristics of turbulence in subgrid scale motions. This is important for further improvement of the model adaptability to the particle-pair statistics. This also overcomes the high-Re limitation of the original ADM-like structural models.
<Section>5. Conclusion</Section>
In this study, a structural SGS model of particle-laden turbulence for LES based on wavelet filtering is proposed. An orthogonal wavelet algorithm is used to extract the coherent vortex structures and DF model is implemented to dynamically reconstruct the unresolved eddies. A priori strategy is then followed to validate the structural SGS model using DNS data related to the particle-laden homogeneous isotropic turbulence. Obtained results indicate that the DF model based on the coherent vortex extraction technique is promising for predicting particle collision-related statistics. Additional details are as follows:
The DF model could effectively reconstruct the coherent vortex structure in the subgrid scale with multiscale reconstruction, being combined with the velocity field obtained by wavelet filtering, while the FDNS could only reconstruct the structural information in the vicinity of the truncated wave number. Therefore, the model enabled to improve predictability of particle-pair statistics (such as RDF, RRV and particle collision kernel), which were determined by vortex structures in small scales.
Additional random noise introduced by the Langevin model has a significant influence on the sub-scale coherent structures. However, the WFDNS can preserve more coherent vortex structures and, using the small-scale structure information extracted by the DF model, can improve the predictability of particle-pair related statistics, especially for small inertia particles, which is a great advantage. With the increase of Reynolds number or filtration depth, small-scale structural information becomes more important. It is evident that the WFDNS+DF model is more correct than the WFDNS in terms of particle-pair related statistics.
<Section>6. Author statement</Section>
We the undersigned declare that this manuscript entitled “Structural subgrid scale model based on wavelet filter for large eddy simulation of particle-laden turbulence” is original, has not been published before and is not currently being considered for publication elsewhere.
We would like to draw the attention of the Editor to the following publications of one or more of us that refer to aspects of the manuscript presently being submitted. Where relevant copies of such publications are attached.
We confirm that the manuscript has been read and approved by all named authors and that there are no other persons who satisfied the criteria for authorship but are not listed. We further confirm that the order of authors listed in the manuscript has been approved by all of us.
We understand that the Corresponding Author is the sole contact for the Editorial process. He/she is responsible for communicating with the other authors about progress, submissions of revisions and final approval of proofs.
Signed by all authors as follows: Yan Xiong & Ruwu Cai, Jing Li, Fei Fei, Zhaohui Liu, Wei Luo
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declared that they have no conflicts of interest to this work.
We declare that we do not have any commercial or associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in connection with the work submitted
<Section>Acknowledgments</Section>
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51876076 and 51876075), and the Foundation of the State Key Laboratory of Coal Combustion (FSKLCCB1702) and Young Talents Program of China National Nuclear Corporation (CNNC)https://doi.org/10.13039/501100012236
<Section>References</Section>
Andrew and Lance, 2014
D.B. Andrew, R.C. Lance
New insights from comparing statistical theories for inertial particles in turbulence: I. Spatial distribution of particles
New J. Phys., 16 (2014), Article 055013
Google Scholar
Apte et al., 2003
S.V. Apte, M. Gorokhovski, P. Moin
LES of atomizing spray with stochastic modeling of secondary breakup
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 29 (2003), pp. 1503-1522
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ayyalasomayajula et al., 2008
S. Ayyalasomayajula, Z. Warhaft, L.R. Collins
Modeling inertial particle acceleration statistics in isotropic turbulence
Phys. Fluids, 20 (2008), pp. 095104-095109
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Balachandar and Maxey, 1989
S. Balachandar, M.R. Maxey
Methods for evaluating fluid velocities in spectral simulations of turbulence
J. Comput. Phys., 83 (1989), pp. 96-125
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bassenne et al., 2019
M. Bassenne, M. Esmaily, D. Livescu, P. Moin, J. Urzay
A dynamic spectrally enriched subgrid-scale model for preferential concentration in particle-laden turbulence
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 116 (2019), pp. 270-280
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bassenne et al., 2016
M. Bassenne, J. Urzay, P. Moin
Extraction of Coherent Clusters in Particle-Laden Turbulent Flows Using Wavelet Filters
Center for Turbulence Research Annual Research Briefs. Center for Turbulence Research, Stanford University (2016), pp. 107-121
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Berrouk et al., 2007
A. Berrouk, D. Laurence, J. Riley, D. Stock
Stochastic modeling of fluid velocity seen by heavy particles for two-phase LES of non-homogeneous and anisotropic turbulent flows
B. Geurts, H. Clercx, W. Uijttewaal (Eds.), Particle-Laden Flow, Springer, Netherlands (2007), pp. 179-192
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bianco et al., 2012
F. Bianco, S. Chibbaro, C. Marchioli, M.V. Salvetti, A. Soldati
Intrinsic filtering errors of Lagrangian particle tracking in LES flow fields
Phys. Fluids, 24 (2012), Article 045103
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Boivin et al., 2000
M. Boivin, O. Simonin, K.D. Squires
On the prediction of gas–solid flows with two-way coupling using large eddy simulation
Phys. Fluids, 12 (2000), pp. 2080-2090
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chibbaro et al., 2014
S. Chibbaro, C. Marchioli, M.V. Salvetti, A. Soldati
Particle tracking in LES flow fields: conditional Lagrangian statistics of filtering error
J. Turbul., 15 (2014), pp. 22-33
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Eswaran and Pope, 1988
V. Eswaran, S.B. Pope
An examination of forcing in direct numerical simulations of turbulence
Comput. Fluids, 16 (1988), pp. 257-278
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Farge et al., 2001
M. Farge, G. Pellegrino, K. Schneider
Coherent Vortex Extraction in 3D Turbulent Flows Using Orthogonal Wavelets
Phys. Rev. Lett., 87 (2001), Article 054501
CrossRefGoogle Scholar
Farge and Schneider, 2001
M. Farge, K. Schneider
Coherent Vortex Simulation (CVS), A Semi-Deterministic Turbulence Model Using Wavelets
Flow Turbul. Combust., 66 (2001), pp. 393-426
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fede et al., 2006
P. Fede, O. Simonin, P. Villedieu, K.D. Squires
Stochastic modeling of the turbulent subgrid fluid velocity along inertial particle trajectories
Proceedings of the Summer Program (2006), pp. 247-258
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gobert and Manhart, 2011
C. Gobert, M. Manhart
Subgrid modelling for particle-LES by Spectrally Optimised Interpolation (SOI)
J. Comput. Phys., 230 (2011), pp. 7796-7820
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Goldstein et al., 2005
D.E. Goldstein, O.V. Vasilyev, N.K.R. Kevlahan
CVS and SCALES simulation of 3-D isotropic turbulence
J. Turbul., 6 (2005), p. N37
CrossRefGoogle Scholar
Jacobitz et al., 2008
F.G. Jacobitz, L. Liechtenstein, K. Schneider, M. Farge
On the structure and dynamics of sheared and rotating turbulence: direct numerical simulation and wavelet-based coherent vortex extraction
Phys. Fluids, 20 (2008), Article 045103
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jacobitz et al., 2016
F.G. Jacobitz, K. Schneider, W.J.T. Bos, M. Farge
Structure of sheared and rotating turbulence: multiscale statistics of Lagrangian and Eulerian accelerations and passive scalar dynamics
Phys. Rev. E, 93 (2016), Article 013113
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jin et al., 2010
G. Jin, G.-.W. He, L.-.P. Wang, J. Zhang
Subgrid scale fluid velocity timescales seen by inertial particles in large-eddy simulation of particle-laden turbulence
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 36 (2010), pp. 432-437
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jin and He, 2013
G.D. Jin, G.W. He
A nonlinear model for the subgrid timescale experienced by heavy particles in large eddy simulation of isotropic turbulence with a stochastic differential equation
New J. Phys., 15 (3) (2013), p. 035011
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Knorps and Pozorski, 2015
M. Knorps, J. Pozorski
An Inhomogeneous Stochastic Model for Subgrid-Scale Particle Dispersion in LES
Direct and Large-Eddy Simulation IX, Springer International Publishing (2015), pp. 671-678
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Leonid and Vladimir, 2009
I.Z. Leonid, Vladimir
Statistical models for predicting pair dispersion and particle clustering in isotropic turbulence and their applications
New J. Phys., 11 (2009), Article 103018
Google Scholar
Marchioli et al., 2006
C. Marchioli, V. Armenio, M.V. Salvetti, A. Soldati
Mechanisms for deposition and resuspension of heavy particles in turbulent flow over wavy interfaces
Phys. Fluids, 18 (2) (2006), p. 025102
2429-2117
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Marchioli et al., 2008
C. Marchioli, M.V. Salvetti, A. Soldati
Appraisal of energy recovering sub-grid scale models for large-eddy simulation of turbulent dispersed flows
Acta Mech., 201 (2008), pp. 277-296
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Marchioli, 2017
C. Marchioli
Large-eddy simulation of turbulent dispersed flows: a review of modelling approaches
Acta Mech., 228 (2017), pp. 741-771
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Milici et al., 2020
B. Milici, M. Marchis, E. Napoli
Large eddy simulation of inertial particles dispersion in a turbulent gas-particle channel flow bounded by rough walls
Acta Mech., 231 (2020), pp. 3925-3946
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Minier et al., 2014
J.-.P. Minier, S. Chibbaro, S.B. Pope
Guidelines for the formulation of Lagrangian stochastic models for particle simulations of single-phase and dispersed two-phase turbulent flows
Phys. Fluids, 26 (11) (2014), p. 113303
(1994-present) 26, -
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Pan and Padoan, 2014
L. Pan, P. Padoan
Turbulence-induced Relative Velocity of Dust Particles. IV. The Collision Kernel
Astrophys. J., 797 (2014), p. 101
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Park et al., 2017
G.I. Park, M. Bassenne, J. Urzay, P. Moin
A simple dynamic subgrid-scale model for LES of particle-laden turbulence
Phys. Rev. Fluids, 2 (2017), Article 044301
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Pozorski and Apte, 2009
J. Pozorski, S.V. Apte
Filtered particle tracking in isotropic turbulence and stochastic modeling of subgrid-scale dispersion
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 35 (2009), pp. 118-128
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ray and Collins, 2013
B. Ray, L.R. Collins
Investigation of sub-Kolmogorov inertial particle pair dynamics in turbulence using novel satellite particle simulations
J. Fluid Mech., 720 (2013), pp. 192-211
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Reeks, 2014
M. Reeks
Transport, Mixing and Agglomeration of Particles in Turbulent Flows
Flow Turbul. Combust., 92 (2014), pp. 3-25
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Rosales and Meneveau, 2005
C. Rosales, C. Meneveau
Linear forcing in numerical simulations of isotropic turbulence: physical space implementations and convergence properties
Phys. Fluids, 17 (2005), Article 095106
CrossRefGoogle Scholar
Salazar et al., 2012
J. Salazar, Collins P.L.C., R. L.
Inertial particle relative velocity statistics in homogeneous isotropic turbulence
J. Fluid Mech., 696 (2012), pp. 45-66
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Shotorban and Mashayek, 2005
B. Shotorban, F. Mashayek
Modeling subgrid-scale effects on particles by approximate deconvolution
Phys. Fluids, 17 (2005), p. 883
Google Scholar
Shotorban and Mashayek, 2006
B. Shotorban, F. Mashayek
A stochastic model for particle motion in large-eddy simulation
J. Turbul., 7 (2006), p. N18
CrossRefGoogle Scholar
Shotorban et al., 2007
B. Shotorban, K.K.Q. Zhang, F. Mashayek
Improvement of particle concentration prediction in large-eddy simulation by defiltering
Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 50 (2007), pp. 3728-3739
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Sundaram and Collins, 1997
S. Sundaram, L.R. Collins
Collision statistics in an isotropic particle-laden turbulent suspension. Part 1. Direct numerical simulations
J. Fluid Mech., 335 (1997), pp. 75-109
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang and Maxey, 1993
L.-P. Wang, M.R. Maxey
Settling velocity and concentration distribution of heavy particles in homogeneous isotropic turbulence
J. Fluid Mech., 256 (1993), pp. 27-68
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Voßkuhle et al., 2014
M. Voßkuhle, A. Pumir, E. Lévêque, M. Wilkinson
Prevalence of the sling effect for enhancing collision rates in turbulent suspensions.
J. Fluid Mech., 749 (2014), pp. 841-852
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2008
L.-.P. Wang, O. Ayala, B. Rosa, W.W. Grabowski
Turbulent collision efficiency of heavy particles relevant to cloud droplets
New J. Phys., 10 (2008), Article 075013
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2000
L.-.P. Wang, W.A. S., Z. Y.
Statistical mechanical description and modeling of turbulent collision of inertial particles
J. Fluid Mech., 415 (2000), p. 117
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang and Squires, 1996
Q. Wang, K.D. Squires
Large eddy simulation of particle laden turbulent channel flow
Phys. Fluids, 8 (1996), pp. 1207-1223
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wood et al., 2005
A.M. Wood, W. Hwang, J.K. Eaton
Preferential concentration of particles in homogeneous and isotropic turbulence
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 31 (2005), pp. 1220-1230
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Xiong et al., 2018
Y. Xiong, J. Li, F. Fei, Z. Liu, W. Luo
Influence of coherent vortex structures in subgrid scale motions on particle statistics in homogeneous isotropic turbulence
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 113 (2018), pp. 358-370
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zaichik and Alipchenkov, 2003
L.I. Zaichik, V.M. Alipchenkov
Pair dispersion and preferential concentration of particles in isotropic turbulence
Phys. Fluids, 15 (2003), pp. 1776-1787
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zaichik and Alipchenkov, 2005
L.I. Zaichik, V.M. Alipchenkov
Statistical models for predicting particle dispersion and preferential concentration in turbulent flows
Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow, 26 (2005), pp. 416-430
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhou et al., 1998
Y. Zhou, A.S. Wexler, L.P. Wang
On the collision rate of small particles in isotropic turbulence. II. Finite inertia case
Phys. Fluids, 10 (1998), pp. 1206-1216
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar