<title>Design and thermal-hydraulic evaluation of the finned-tube type sodium-to-air heat exchanger in sodium test facility</title>
<author>1,HyungmoKim,2,JungYoon,3,Hyeong-YeonLee,4,JaehyukEoh,5,Ji-YoungJeong,6,JewhanLee</author>
<Affiliation>1,Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute (KAERI), Daedeok-daero 989-111, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, Republic of Korea</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nucengdes.2020.110755</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029549320302491</URL>
Design and thermal-hydraulic evaluation of the finned-tube type sodium-to-air heat exchanger in sodium test facility
HyungmoKim,JungYoon,Hyeong-YeonLee,JaehyukEoh,Ji-YoungJeong,JewhanLee
Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute (KAERI), Daedeok-daero 989-111, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
<Section>Highlights</Section>
The finned-tube type sodium-to-air heat exchanger design and evaluation by comparison with the experiment result.
The CFD analysis back up for detailed evaluation.
The performance and behavior was checked by both CFD and experiment to conclude that it showed a reasonable agreement.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
A sodium-to-air heat exchanger having M-shape finned-tube banks was designed and evaluated to validate the design code for the Prototype Generation IV Sodium-cooled Fast Reactor Development (PGSFR) using a separate effect sodium test facility called SELFA (Sodium thermal–hydraulic Experiment Loop for Finned-tube Sodium-to-Air heat exchanger). A model heat exchanger was newly designed to represent the reference heat exchanger (i.e., Forced-draft sodium-to-air heat exchanger, FHX) of the PGSFR with a reduced power-scale. Several preliminary evaluations with the commercial CFD tool that considered the 3-D effect which cannot be observed by the design (1-D) code took place. The final design of the model FHX (M-FHX) was also analyzed by the CFD tool to check the performance and its behavior. The analysis results were compared with the experiment results, and they showed reasonable agreement in the view of similarities between two heat exchangers (FHX and M-FHX).
Keywords:Sodium-cooled fast reactor (SFR);A finned-tube type heat exchanger;Heat transfer;Staggered arrangement;Thermal-hydraulics;Computational fluid dynamics
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute (KAERI) has been developing a Prototype Generation IV Sodium-cooled Fast Reactor (PGSFR) which is a pool type reactor with a thermal power of 392.2 MWt that has inherent improved safety features of metallic fuels (Hahn et al., 2009, Hahn et al., 2007, Kim et al., 2019, Lee et al., 2019, Yoon et al., 2018). In a Sodium-cooled Fast Reactor system, a reliable decay heat removal system (DHRS), including a sodium-to-air heat exchanger as an ultimate heat sink, is essential to protect from severe accidents after a core scram (Planchon et al., 1987, Sofu, 2015, Bubelis et al., 2016, Caramello et al., 2017). PGSFR has two different types of DHRS. One is a passive decay heat removal system (PDHRS) that has both a straight shell and tube type sodium-to-sodium heat exchanger (DHX; Decay heat exchanger) as well as a helical tube type sodium-to-air heat exchanger (AHX; Natural-draft sodium-to-air heat exchanger), which works on the principle of natural circulation. The other is an active decay heat removal system (ADHRS) that has DHX and a finned-tube type sodium-to-air heat exchanger (FHX; Forced-draft sodium-to-air heat exchanger) with a blower (Yoo et al., 2016, Yoo et al., 2016, Lee et al., 2016).
A large-scale sodium thermal–hydraulic test program called STELLA (Sodium Test Loop for Safety Simulation and Assessment) is currently being progressed to support the PGSFR development project (Kim et al., 2016, Lee et al., 2018). The main purpose in the first phase of the STELLA program is separate effect tests for key sodium components such as described heat exchangers in DHRS. The performance tests of DHX and AHX were already conducted in experiments using the STELLA-1 facility (Hong et al., 2017, Lee et al., 2018), and FHX is the heat exchanger to be tested using another facility called SELFA (Sodium thermal–hydraulic Experiment Loop for Finned-tube Sodium-to-Air heat exchanger).
SELFA is a dedicated separate effect test facility for the verification and validation (V&V) of the safety analysis code (i.e., MARS-LMR) as well as the FHX design code (i.e., FHXSA). Because of this, the model FHX (M-FHX) in SELFA has to be carefully designed to represent the similar thermal–hydraulic behaviors of the reference FHX. In the present study, an appropriate design of M-FHX in the SELFA facility is proposed and its thermal–hydraulic characteristics including performance were also evaluated through both analysis using a 3-D commercial CFD tool and an experiment.
<Section>2. Design features of the model FHX</Section>
2.1. Overall design features of FHX and M-FHX
The PGSFR is a pool-type reactor in which reactor core is contianed in liquid sodium, and it consists of the primary heat transport system (PHTS), the intermediate heat transport system (IHTS), the steam generators (SGs) including balance of plant, and the DHRS as shown in Fig. 1. The PHTS is placed in the pool to make the coolant circulate to transfer heat generated in the reactor core to the IHTS through the shell-side of the intermediate heat exchanger (IHX). The IHTS loop is physically separated to the PHTS, but it is thermally coupled to the PHTS and the SGs. The IHTS transfers the heat from the IHX of the PHTS to the SGs. The SGs consist of two independent steam-generation loops and convert the subcooled water to a superheated steam for power conversion to electricity. And the DHRS is to reject the decay heat of the reactor core to the atmosphere as occasion demands including the failure of the normal heat transfer path through steam generators. The total heat removal capacity of the DHRS shall be 10 MWt which amounts to about 2.5% of the rated core thermal power. The DHRS shall be composed of four trains considering redundancy requirements. The PDHRS shall operate based on natural convection driving head alone, but the ADHRS shall be operated by active components (e.g., electro-magnetic pumps and blowers). The ADHRS employs DHX for heat transfer between the primary sodium to the nonradioactive sodium, and FHX as the final heat sink. In addition, it shall also be capable of operation in a passive mode during loss of power at a heat removal capacity of at least 50% of the design value (see the table inserted in Fig. 1).
Fig. 1. The schematic and key features of DHRS in PGSFR.
The reference design of M-FHX is the FHX in PGSFR, and the FHX in PGSFR, which has 2.5 MWt thermal duty per unit in a cross flow, transfers heat from the sodium to the environmental air. It consists of a total of 96 tubes with helical-fins for the extreme enhancement of the contact area with the air, and the finned tubes are connected to the horizontal cylindrical sodium chambers installed at the upper and lower sides as shown in Fig. 2(a). The tubes are a four-pass serpentine (or M-shape; i.e., there are three curved parts.) tubes that accommodate the thermal expansion and contraction of the tubes due to a high temperature variation of the sodium flow during the transient operation. The three tube rows constitute one bundle, and the middle tube is shifted horizontally by a half pitch respect to the others to have a staggered arrangement that enhances the heat transfer performance. Each tube is arranged to be orthogonal to the air flow direction with a slope of about seven degrees relative to the horizontal.
Fig. 2. Schematic drawings of (a) FHX and (b) M-FHX.
The sodium that has flowed through the hot-leg pipe of the loop is introduced into the upper sodium chamber of the FHX and then distributed to each individual finned tubes. This hot sodium introduced into each of the heat transfer tubes flows downward along the inside of the heat transfer tube and is cooled by the cross flow of air. Then the sodium enters the lower chamber, and flows back to the cold-leg pipe of the loop. The outside air blows through the air intake duct, and it flows through the shell-side of FHX. The air passes through the bundle of the heat transfer tubes, and the heat of the high temperature sodium inside the tubes transfers to the air. Finally, the heated air is released into the atmosphere through a chimney.
We employed a volume-scale scaling approach to make a scaled-down power design of the model FHX unit. That is, the M-FHX unit has the same length and height scale as the prototype FHX, but with a reduced power scale of 1 over 8 by reducing the number of tube columns for convenient constitution and space constraints as shown in Fig. 2(b) (i.e., a total of 12 tubes in 4 columns). Most of the physical parameters including temperature gradients along the flow streams of both sides (i.e., tube-side sodium and shell-side air), are available to be preserved, but there is inevitable distortion in the M-FHX. In particular, the reduced number of tube columns with conservation of tube dimensions distort the frontal sectional shapes in which the fluids flow. Therefore, we had to make efforts to minimize the expected discrepancies from the reduced number of tube columns. The geometry including dimensions of the designed M-FHX are shown in Fig. 2(b). The outer shell has a width of 3.553 m, a height of 3.002 m, and a depth of 1.2075 m, and the supporting frame has a beam of square cross section. The size of the air flow region where the heat transfer from sodium to air occurs is 2.043 m in width and 0.3825 m in depth. The 2-meter long finned tubes are employed in a 4-pass serpentine arrangement with an inclination of 7.2°, and the air heats up here as it passes through four tube banks. In addition, a thermal insulating material is installed in a surrounding region including the sodium chambers and the bended tubes. Table 1 represents the comparison between the reference FHX and M-FHX based on the design point. The overall scale ratio of the test heat exchanger was determined to be unity for the height (or length) and 1/8 for the power ratio (or volume). The material of the tube changed from Mod.9Cr-1Mo to STS304 for manufacturing convenience, but the discrepancy of the thermal behaviors is expected to be negligible since the thermal conduction is not dominant in the overall heat transfer mechanism in our heat exchanger. The fin tube’s diameter, height, thickness, and other geometrical features that determine the performance of the heat exchanger remained the same with the reference. The total number of fins per each sodium tube is preserved to 1,216, and the pitch is slightly reduced for the bare tube regions adjacent to the flow guide wall to permit the thermal expansion of the sodium tubes. The whole geometry was confirmed by the results of previously performed the integrity evaluations on M-FHX, including the frame structures according to ASME Section VIII Div.2 and ASME Subsection NH (ASME-NH) (Lee et al., 2017).
Table 1. Key design features of the reference FHX and M-FHX.
2.2. Design of the inlet structures
The computer code used for the FHX design is based on a one-dimensional approach, so it was assumed that both the intake fluid structures of sodium and air should be uniform. In particular, for M-FHX, a reduced number of tube columns compared to those of FHX in PGSFR inevitably led to a discrepancy of inlet flow structures on both sides (i.e., tube-side sodium and shell-side air). To minimize these differences and achieve the main purpose of design code validation, a baffle plate and a vane structure for flow distribution were adopted in the inlets of the tube-side and shell-side, respectively.
The perforated plate installed inside the upper sodium chamber made the liquid sodium have a flow rate distributed as uniformly as possible through each tube. To confirm the flow distribution inside the upper sodium chamber in M-FHX, three-dimensional, incompressible, and steady-state flow analyses for the tube-side sodium has been performed by using the commercial CFD code (ANSYS CFX v16.1) as shown in Fig. 3. The working fluid is sodium, and no-slip condition is applied at all walls. The fluid domain for the analysis is whole sodium region inside 2 chambers including connecting pipes and 12 sodium tubes including bending parts for connecting. More than 9,000,000 tetra meshes have been implemented, and the SST k-ω equation has been used as the turbulence model. The evaluations were conducted in the two different conditions of flow rates, which were the lowest (Case 1, when the mass flow rate of sodium is 0.99 kg/s) and the largest one (Case 2, when the mass flow rate of sodium is 4.38 kg/s) in our test matrix. The graphs in Fig. 3(a) and Fig. 3(b) show flow distribution behaviors for each tube with and without perforated plates, respectively. When there is no perforated plate, as shown in the velocity profile of Fig. 3(a), the distributed flow rate of tube no. 6 located almost in-line with the inlet pipe is relatively large. The flow rates of tube no. 5 and 7 also larger than those of the others, and the flow rate of tubes far from the inlet sodium pipe was low. To improve this unevenness of flow rates, the perforated plate installed inside the upper chamber was designed as shown in Fig. 3(b). It had three kinds of holes with 10, 20, and 30 mm diameters. The pitch of the holes was 50 mm, and the thickness was 2.5 mm, which was not deformed by the flow. Before adapting the perforated plate as shown in Fig. 3(a), the percentage of distributed flows on single tube were −11.7 ~ 33.8% and −16.3 ~ 49.3%, in Case 1 and Case 2, respectively. However, after adapting the designed perforated, the flow rates of each tube compared to the average flow rate were remarkably even with a difference of below 5% by the perforated plate as shown in Fig. 3(b).
Fig. 3. Adoption of a perforated plate for even flow distribution: (a) without and (b) with the perforated plate.
As explained earlier, M-FHX has a unit length scale, but 1/8 power scale by reducing the number of tube columns. This resulted in an increase in the frontal area aspect ratio for the air side which was nearly square shape. Moreover, it became more difficult to get a uniform flow profile (distribution). There are several ways to improve the uniformity of a flow profile:
(1)
Assure there is enough length before the flow reaches the tube banks from the inlet,
(2)
Using a vane structure to modify the velocity profile,
(3)
Adding flow resistance, such as perforated plate
Among these 3 solutions, (1), (2) were adopted as can be seen in Fig. 4. The length was extended, and a vane structure was designed and installed. (3) was not adopted due to the flow distortion and excessive pressure drop induced by the recirculation after the perforated plate. For accurate analysis of the shell-side air flow, all finned tube parts must be included, but this is not suitable for case studies for vane structure design because it requires extensive computing resources and very long calculation time. Therefore, in case studies for the design of the vane structure, the analysis was performed using air duct domain excluding the finned tubes. A numerical analysis was performed by STAR-CCM + v9.02.007, and it is three-dimensional, incompressible, steady-state flow analysis using 1/2 symmetric geometry. The total number of grids determined through the grid sensitivity test is about 280,000, and no-slip condition was applied to the wall. The working fluid was assumed to be 20 °C of air with the flow rate of 1.70 kg/s at the entrance. The realizable k-ε model was used as the turbulence model. Through several case studies, the design of the proper length of the vane plates and the entrance distance was conducted, and the length of vane region and the length before the flow reaches tube banks from the inlet were determined to be 425 mm and 1.0 m, respectively. By adopting this design, the standard deviation of the local velocity at 1 m position was improved to 0.24, and the pressure drop was increased by 8.9%. As a result, the additional flow resistance was minimized while achieving a reasonable inlet flow profile.
Fig. 4. CFD results of before/after adopting the air-side vane structure.
<Section>3. Evaluation results and discussions</Section>
3.1. 3-D CFD analysis
The previous analyses used the models that considered only a partial fluidic geometries without any heat transfer for a convenient case study at the design stage, while this time, three-dimensional thermal-fluidic analysis for the designed M-FHX was conducted using the commercial code (ANSYS CFX v16.2). The CFD analysis domain covers the entire M-FHX including the sodium chambers, finned tubes, and inlet/outlet pipes, and a total of 95,896,560 hybrid mesh elements (i.e., combination of hexagonal and tetra/prism meshes) were generated as shown in Fig. 5. Through the preliminary evaluations with controls of the number of mesh layers adjacent to the fins, the average y + value at the finned tube area was in an acceptable range. The liquid sodium and air are used as working fluids, and the structural parts in the analysis domain are made of STS316. Conjugate heat transfer between the fluid and solid was considered and the material properties (i.e., density, viscosity, specific heat, and thermal conductivity) based on the temperature function were implemented. No-slip conditions on all solid walls were assumed, and all exterior walls were assumed to be adiabatic. The SST k − ω turbulence model, which has an advantage in that it calculates the size of a vortex in the adverse pressure gradient well, was implemented, and conjugate heat transfer was considered in this analysis. The analysis was performed under the steady-state operating condition. The hot sodium flows from the upper chamber inlet with a mass flow rate of 2.19 kg/s and 335 °C to the lower chamber outlet, and the air flows upward through the guided flow section with a mass flow rate of 1.70 kg/s. The initial inlet temperature of air was set to 20 °C.
Fig. 5. Mesh generation results and flow directions on the M-FHX for the CFD analysis.
Fig. 6 shows the CFD analysis result of the velocity profile and the flow distribution in the shell-side and the tube-side. One of the main purpose of this CFD analysis was to confirm the acceptable air velocity profiles to avoid the distortion from the discrepancy between the FHX and M-FHX. Consequently, the air flow velocity was determined to be acceptable for conserving the similarity between the FHX and M-FHX, which shows the front and side vertical planes in Fig. 6(a). Although there is a slight uneven flow pattern at the inlet of the first tube bank (i.e., planes from 2 to 3 in the horizontal planes), it can be seen that the flow quickly resolves through the finned tube bank (i.e., planes from 4 to 7 in the horizontal planes). In the case of sodium, the mass flow rates distributed into the individual tubes on the upper chamber showed good uniformity within ±2.5% differences. Also, the sodium flow inside each tube at the bending parts partially accelerated in the outer edges due to the bending curvatures, as shown in Fig. 6(b).
Fig. 6. CFD analysis result of velocity profile and flow distribution in (a) shell-side and (b) tube-side.
Fig. 7 shows the air temperatures obtained from the CFD analysis. The flow zone of almost no-heat-transfer formed near the wall in the vertical planes view. The temperature of the air increases from 20 °C to 200 °C through the tube banks, and it is observed that quite uniform temperature distribution except the region near the wall by rapid thermal mixing despite the small number of tube rows due to the staggered arrangement.
Fig. 7. CFD analysis result of air temperature in the shell-side.
In the case of sodium, the hot sodium continued to lose heat energy and flow downward. Fig. 8 is the result of sodium temperature, and the overall sodium cooling behavior described in Fig. 8(a) is as expected in the design. Sodium temperature cooled down from 335 °C to 227 °C passed by the finned tube banks, and the amount of the temperature drop in the each zones between the tube bundles was more in the upper region where the temperature difference between sodium and air was relatively larger.
Fig. 8. CFD analysis result of sodium temperature in the tube-side.
Fig. 8(b) shows the temperature gradient inside the single sodium tube and the temperature for the each tube. The sodium temperature was very uniform inside every tube due to its high thermal conductivity. However, the temperature changes of sodium in the tube #8 were distinguishably different as shown in Fig. 8(b). In the previous description, it was mentioned that the M-FHX had as 1/8 power scale by reducing the number of rows from the original FHX. This means that the wall effect can be larger in the M-FHX unit and the influence appeared as a sharp drop in temperature of the sodium tube #8. This corresponds to the preliminary expectation that the M-FHX would have a larger heat transfer performance than the designed specifications.
3.2. Experimental result
The SELFA facility was constructed for the experimental studies of the M-FHX. The SELFA facility consisted of a main test loop, gas supply, and related auxiliary systems. The sodium-side’s (i.e., tube-side) main components included the M-FHX, an electro-magnetic pump, an electric loop heater, flow meters, an expansion tank, and a sodium storage tank. The air-side’s (i.e., shell-side) key components were a blower and dampers. The P&ID and constructed images of the SELFA facility are shown in Fig. 9. The designed maximum temperature of the facility was 500 °C, and the designed power capacity of the main heater was 650 kW. The pipe diameter of the facility was 2-inch(Sch20), and the expected nominal flow rates are from 0.99 kg/s to 4.38 kg/s in the tube-side and from 0.12 kg/s to 3.4 kg/s in the shell-side. The maximum available flow rates of the electro-magnetic pump and the blower were approximately 6 kg/s and 5 kg/s with some plus margins, respectively. The sodium storage tank (SST) contained about 1.6 tons of sodium.
Fig. 9. The P&ID and detailed figures of the SELFA facility.
There were also various instruments employed for measuring the flow rates, temperature, and pressure differences. Among them, the temperature information is the most important, especially in the M-FHX section. Every bending part of the tubes has a thermocouple installed in the thermos-well to measure the temperature of sodium inside and 20 multipoint-thermocouples with five different measurement points each (i.e., a total of 100 measurement points) were installed for the shell-side to measure air temperature. Fig. 10 shows the concept and installation pictures of the thermocouples for the sodium and the multipoint thermocouples for air.
Fig. 10. Thermocouple installations and GUI interface for the local temperature measurement.
After charging the sodium from SST to the main test loop, the sodium was circulated until the target temperature condition was reached. At the same time, the air flow rate was also adjusted appropriately. As a result, the sodium flow rate, sodium inlet temperature, and air flow rate were maintained with the target values for over 10 mins. Table 2 shows the experiment results of almost the same condition as the CFD analysis previously conducted. The transferred heat of sodium and air was calculated independently using the enthalpy difference between the entrance and exit regions. For the specific heat of air calculation, the humidity of air was also considered using Eq. (1) and Eq. (2). The results of the experiment showed a very small difference of about 1% between the heat gained by air and the heat lost by sodium, which was 335.29 kW and 338.84 kW, respectively.
@(1)
@(2)
Table 2. Experimental results of the M-FHX performance test in the design point.
3.3. Comparison of evaluation results
Table 3 shows the comparison results of the experiment and the analysis under the same boundary condition. The control parameters for the experiment were the inlet temperature and flowrate of sodium and air keeping the difference of 0.15% at a maximum. There was almost no difference between the heat transfer out of the sodium and into the air for both the experiment and the analysis. However, the comparison results between the experiment and CFD showed about 5% of difference based on the outlet temperature and 8.6% of difference at the maximum based on heat transfer. One of the main reasons for this difference may come from the actual physics of the experiment such as the heat loss to un-wanted areas. The experiment was not extensively modelled to cover the heat loss in the CFD analysis. For detailed verification, the local temperature profile was compared as shown in Fig. 11. The temperature of the sodium for each tube showed a similar trend in general, but in detail, the temperature of the sodium for the near-wall tube in the experiment was relatively lower than CFD as shown in Fig. 11(a). This is because the heat was transferred to the wall by thermal radiation. Also, in the case of air, the same effect can be observed. The temperature measurement result was divided into two regions, the near-wall region and the center region, where the near-wall temperature was notably lower, see Fig. 11(b). This was the result of a cold air zone where the heat transfer was low as seen in Fig. 7 in the previous section.
Table 3. Comparison between EXP and CFD.
Fig. 11. Comparison results of local fluid temperature between the experiment and CFD.
<Section>4. Conclusions</Section>
The FHX in PGSFR has an important role in removing the decay heat. This has been tested by the SELFA facility under the STELLA program. To verify the FHX in PGSFR, a separate effect test facility called SELFA was designed and constructed. The M-FHX was designed to represent the FHX in PGSFR, and the preliminary evaluations were carried out during the design process for the M-FHX, especially for the intake structures. The final M-FHX design adopted the consideration of the CFD evaluation results and it was installed in the SELFA. The M-FHX performance was analyzed by the commercial CFD tool as well as the experiment with the same boundary conditions. The comparison results between the analysis and experiment showed reasonable agreement to conclude that the heat exchanger design is good enough to verify the FHX in PGSFR.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Hyungmo Kim: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing - original draft, Investigation. Jung Yoon: Resources, Data curation. Hyeong-Yeon Lee: Methodology. Jaehyuk Eoh: Supervision. Ji-Young Jeong: Project administration. Jewhan Lee: Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgement</Section>
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korean government (MSIP - No. 2012M2A8A2025635 & MOE - No. 2018R1D1A1B07050341)
<Section>References</Section>
Bubelis et al., 2016
E. Bubelis, W. Jaeger, G. Bandini, A. Alemberti, M. Palmero
Assessment of the enhanced DHRS configuration for MYRRHA reactor
Nucl. Eng. Des., 307 (2016), pp. 181-187
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Caramello et al., 2017
M. Caramello, M. Gregorini, C. Bertani, M. De Salve, A. Alemberti, B. Panella, “Thermal hydraulic analysis of a passively controlled DHR system”, Prog. Nucl. Energy 99, 127-139 (2017).
Google Scholar
Hahn et al., 2007
D. Hahn, Y.-I. Kim, C.B. Lee, S.-O. Kim, J.-H. Lee, Y.-B. Lee, B.-H. Kim, H.-Y. Jeong
Conceptual design of the sodium cooled fast reactor KALIMER-600
Nucl. Eng. Technol., 39 (2007), pp. 193-206
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hahn et al., 2009
D. Hahn, J.-W. Chang, Y.I. Kim, Y.-B. Lee
Advanced SFR design concepts and R&D activities
Nucl. Eng. Technol., 41 (2009), pp. 427-446
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hong et al., 2017
J. Hong, S. Yeom, J.-H. Eoh, T.-H. Lee, J.-Y. Jeong
Heat transfer performance test of PDHRS heat exchangers of PGSFR using STELLA-1 facility
Nucl. Eng. Des., 313 (2017), pp. 73-83
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kim et al., 2016
J.-B. Kim, J.-Y. Jeong, T.-H. Lee, S. Kim, D.-J. Euh, H.-K. Joo
On the safety and Performance Demonstration Tests of Prototype Gen-IV Sodium-Cooled Fast Reactor and Validation and Verification of Computational Codes
Nucl. Eng. Technol., 48 (2016), pp. 1083-1095
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kim et al., 2019
H.-K. Kim, K.-H. Yoon, Y.-H. Lee, H.-S. Lee, J.-S. Cheon
Mechanical design of a sodium cooled fast reactor fuel assembly in Korea: Normal operation condition
Nucl. Eng. Des., 346 (2019), pp. 67-74
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lee et al., 2018
J. Lee, H. Kim, J. Eoh, Y. Jung, J.-W. Han, J.-Y. Jeong
Experimental study of sodium heat exchanger performance at high Pe number condition using STELLA-1 facility
Nucl. Eng. Des., 340 (2018), pp. 62-67
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lee et al., 2018
J. Lee, J. Eoh, H. Kim, J. Yoon, Y.-B. Lee, E.-K. Kim, J.-H. Jeong, K.L. Lee, J.-Y. Jeong
Design evaluation of large-scale sodium integral effect test facility (STELLA-2) using MARS-LMR
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 120 (2018), pp. 845-856
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lee et al., 2019
J. Lee, J. Eoh, J.-Y. Jeong, S.-J. Hong, Y.-H. Kim
Design of electric core simulator system (ECSS) for large-scale integral effect test facility
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 133 (2019), pp. 762-776
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lee et al., 2016
K.L. Lee, K.-S. Ha, J.-H. Jeong, C.-W. Choi, T. Jeong, S.J. Ahn, S.W. Lee, W.P. Chang, S.H. Kang, J. Yoo
A Preliminary Safety Analysis for the Prototype Gen IV Sodium-Cooled Fast Reactor
Nucl. Eng. Technol., 48 (2016), pp. 1071-1082
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lee et al., 2017
H.-Y. Lee, H. Kim, J.-B. Kim, J.-Y. Jeong
Design and Integrity Evaluation of a Finned-Tube Sodium-to-Air Heat Exchanger in a Sodium Test Facility
ASME J. Pressure Vessel Technol., 139 (2017), Article 031203
Google Scholar
Planchon et al., 1987
H.P. Planchon, J.I. Sackett, G.H. Golden, R.H. Sevy
Implications of the EBR-II inherent safety demonstration test
Nucl. Eng. Des., 101 (1987), pp. 75-90
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Sofu, 2015
T. Sofu
A review of inherent safety characteristics of metal alloy sodium-cooled fast reactor fuel against postulated accidents
Nucl. Eng. Technol., 47 (2015), pp. 227-239
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yoo et al., 2016
J. Yoo, J. Chang, H.-K. Joo
Overall reactor system description of prototype Gen-IV sodium cooled fast reactor
Trans. Am. Nucl. Soc., 114 (2016), p. 694
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yoo et al., 2016
J. Yoo, J. Chang, J.-Y. Lim, J.-S. Cheon, T.-H. Lee, S.K. Kim, K.L. Lee, H.-K. Joo
Overall System Description and Safety Characteristics of Prototype Gen IV Sodium Cooled Fast Reactor in Korea
Nucl. Eng. Technol., 48 (2016), pp. 1059-1070
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yoon et al., 2018
K.H. Yoon, H.-K. Kim, H.S. Lee, J.S. Cheon
Component design and accident analysis of fuel assembly for prototype GEN-IV sodium-cooled fast reactor
Nucl. Eng. Des., 340 (2018), pp. 133-145
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar