<title>Development and validation of an agglomeration model for CFD simulations of aerosol dispersion in the frame of Fukushima fuel debris retrieval</title>
<author>1,Thomas Gélain,2,Emmanuel Porcheron,3,Christophe Chagnot,4,Ioana Doyen,5,Christophe Journeau,6,Damien Roulet</author>
<Affiliation>1,Engineering Department, Shahid Beheshti University, P.O. Box: 1983969411, Tehran, Iran</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Sience and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2020.1862717</DOI>
<URL>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00223131.2020.1862717</URL>
Development and validation of an agglomeration model for CFD simulations of aerosol dispersion in the frame of Fukushima fuel debris retrieval
Thomas Gélain,Emmanuel Porcheron,Christophe Chagnot,Ioana Doyen,Christophe Journeau,Damien Roulet
Engineering Department, Shahid Beheshti University, P.O. Box: 1983969411, Tehran, Iran
<Section>Abstract</Section>
This article is devoted to demonstrate the feasibility of laser cutting technique for the fuel debris retrieval into the Fukushima Daiichi damaged reactors. IRSN is involved in a project led by ONET Technologies, in collaboration with CEA, to evaluate the risk occurred by the dispersion of aerosols emitted by the dismantling operations [4]. During the laser cutting operations of fuel debris in air condition, particles will be produced, inducing a potential risk of dispersion into the environment. Hence, evaluating the fate of these particles after their emission is one of the safety key issues for these dismantling operations. In this objective, IRSN performed CFD simulations of dispersion of particles representative of inactive fuel debris simulants (1)(2)(3)(4). The first numerical results (5) showed a quite good agreement but some improvements were needed to take into account complex particle size distributions (PSD). Consequently, this article proposes an alternative method to better initialize the agglomeration calculation, in order to take account for different kinds of particle size distribution in the CFD simulations and to better evaluate the fate of aerosols produced by the debris cutting in the damaged reactors of Fukushima-Daiichi pedestal.
KEYWORDS: Fukushima;fuel debris;aerosol;agglomeration;CFD simulations
<Section>1 Introduction</Section>
One of the important issues for the decommissioning of the damaged reactors of the Fukushima-Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant is the retrieval of the fuel debris, also called corium. The scenario of the severe accident that occurred in each reactor being unique, the status of each power plant unit is consequently different. The fuel debris is located inside and outside the reactor pressure vessel (RPV) and the molten core concrete interaction is more or less pronounced, depending on the elapsed time before water injection for each damaged unit. It follows that different corium retrieval configurations have to be studied before proposing the best strategies for dismantling. It is especially primordial to investigate the cutting conditions for air and underwater configurations (at different water levels for this latter). Concerning the cutting techniques, the laser one is well adapted to the cutting of expected material such as corium which is irregular shaped.
In addition, the laser cutting technique induces the lowest material mass removed and the lowest mass of re-suspended aerosol during the cutting, comparatively to other cutting techniques (grinder, plasma torch, arc air, arc saw, reciprocating saw) [1]. In addition to the study of the technical aspects regarding the capability of the cutting tool to be deployed in hostile conditions such as a radiating environment, the risk of the corium retrieval operations has to be evaluated to limit the radionuclide dissemination outside the containment vessel.
The strategy for this evaluation must be well defined in order to take account of most of the parameters that may influence the dispersion of aerosols produced by the cutting operations. For that, it must rely on an experimental component allowing to characterize the aerosols produced by the laser cutting and a numerical component allowing to evaluate the dispersion of aerosols into the reactor pedestal and further.
The experimental characterization of aerosols is one of the key issues [2,3], especially for human safety, knowing that only a specific fraction of particulate matter (PM) is able to penetrate in the human body by the respiratory tracts, in particular the so-called PM2.5 and PM10 (Particulate Matter with a nominal mean aerodynamic diameter lower than, respectively, 2.5 and 10 µm). The experimental characterization is also needed for providing input data for numerical simulations. Indeed, in the particular context of the decommissioning of the damaged reactors of the Fukushima-Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant, the numerical simulation is of interest to help to the development of the cutting device, to evaluate the dispersion and the fate of materials induced by the cutting operations and further to evaluate and optimize the hazardous material mitigation means. More precisely, when the laser cutting will produce aerosols, the latter will be characterized by their size distribution, shape, concentration, and probably temperature. These data are linked to the vicinity of the laser device, but most of the aerosols, due to their size and concentration, will evolve in the pedestal, thanks to the airflows involved by the cutting device, and will be able to deposit on the walls or agglomerate to create bigger aerosols. So, the fate of the aerosols on the pedestal after their emission and far from the cutting device is greatly important to evaluate the risk for humans and the environment but also to design relevant mitigation means.
This article interests in presenting a numerical study on the fate of the aerosols after their production by the laser-cutting device. This study relies on experimental data from a platform from the CEA called DELIA, into which the characterization of aerosols was carried out.
The numerical study has been performed with the CFD code ANSYS CFX, into which aerosol transport and deposition models have been implemented [4,5]. These models have then evolved to take into account-polydispersed aerosols and aerosol agglomeration phenomenon (due to the high aerosol concentration) and were applied to simulate the aerosol release and dispersion in the pedestal of the damaged reactors of the Fukushima-Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant. A preliminary study has been performed with the assumption of a predefined shape for the initial aerosol distribution (a lognormal distribution with one mode). Unfortunately, for more complex aerosol distributions such as corium aerosol ones, these lognormal distributions did not allow to reproduce of the aerosol behavior observed in the DELIA facility. That is why an alternative method to initialize the variable of the agglomeration calculations has been established and is detailed in this article in order to better evaluate the fate of these corium aerosols in the facility and later in the Fukushima Daiichi damaged reactor pedestal.
Let me remind you that this study is part of a project launched by the Japanese government to study and prepare operations of the corium retrieval. In this framework, a French consortium (ONET Technologies, CEA, and IRSN) has been selected among others to implement R&D related to the laser cutting of Fukushima 1 F fuel debris and related to dust collection technology [6].
<Section>2 Objective of the study</Section>
This study aims to evaluate the dispersion and the agglomeration of aerosols emitted during laser cutting of nonradioactive fuel debris simulants. It has been conducted in an experimental platform called DELIA from CEA [6] that contains a cylindrical vessel of around 3.7 m3 in which a laser cutting device is embedded [7]. Two corium simulants have been manufactured and tested that are complex oxides called ex-vessel (corresponding to fuel debris outside the reactor vessel) and in-vessel (corresponding to fuel debris inside the reactor vessel). Their manufacture and characterization are detailed in table 1 and in [8] and a lot of details about the platform DELIA and the experimental setup are available in [3]. During the simulants cutting operations, aerosols are emitted and dispersed before being extracted by a chimney connected to the DELIA vessel. However, during their dispersion and due to their high concentration, they will agglomerate modifying the particle size distribution (PSD) and consequently influencing their transport and deposition on the wall into the vessel. That is why, CFD simulations were conducted in order to evaluate the dispersion of the aerosols emitted during the laser-cutting operations in terms of transport, deposition, and especially agglomeration.
Table 1. Theoretical chemical compositions of corium simulants determined by CEA Cadarache (3)
Preliminary simulations have been undertaken with the commercial CFD code ANSYS CFX [4] [5], showing a good description of the fate of the emitted aerosols. However, some differences with experimental results were highlighted particularly for the particle diameter and the standard deviation time evolutions. An explanation was identified assuming that the aerosol input data were not relevant, especially the implementation of the particle size distribution. This article describes the improvement introduced in order to better represent any PSD such as bimodal one, representative of aerosol emission during fuel debris simulants cutting.
<Section>3 Model description</Section>
3.1 Aerosol transport model
Aerosols produced by laser cutting operations are strongly polydispersed. Hence, a population balance model was necessary to be implemented in ANSYS CFX. Different ones exist, such as the class or moment methods. The second one has been chosen to reduce calculation time and to ease the coupling with aerosol transport and deposition existing models. More precisely, the DQMOM (Direct Quadrature Method Of Moments) method was implemented in ANSYS CFX. It consists of the transport of the distribution weights and abscissae, which are calculated by the knowledge of the distribution moments. The more moments you calculate, the more precise the distribution are but the longer the calculations are.
The link between the density function of the distribution f(dp), the k order moment Mk ,and the weights wn (m−3) and abscissae ξn (m) is described below [9] in (equation 1):
Mk=∫0∞f(dp)dkpddp=∑Nqn=1wnξkn(1)
where dp is the particle diameter (m).
In general, to get a well-defined distribution with reasonable calculation times, six moments is a good compromise. Furthermore, the moments may reach quickly very low values which exceed the accuracy of most calculation machines. Hence, it is usual to normalize each moment Mk by an appropriate ratio defined by (M1M0)k. The normalized moment will be then written Mˆk.
The DQMOM method is set to carry the weights and abscissae of the distribution. Hence, transport equations for the weight wn and the weighted abscissa ζn=wnξn(m−2) [10] has been implemented in ANSYS CFX in place of an algebraic transport equation dedicated to the eulerian aerosol transport.
These transport equations have the following form (equation 2):
∂Yn∂t+∂∂xi((Ui+τp(ξn)(gi−(∂Ui\break∂t−Uj∂Ui∂xj)))Yn)=∂∂xi((DB+DT)∂Yn∂xi)+πn(2)
where Yn has to be replaced by wn and ζn, n = 1 … Nq (Nq is the quadrature point number), t is the time (s), Ui is the component i of the velocity vector (m.s−1), τp is the particle relaxation time (s), gi is the component i of the gravity vector (m.s−2), DB and DT are, respectively, the brownian and turbulent diffusion coefficient (m2.s−1).
As mentioned in (equation 2), source terms πn may be taken into account in the transport equations to evolve aerosols in time and space. In the present case, the source term necessary is an agglomeration source term πn,agg [10] allowing the agglomeration process to be considered.
3.2 Agglomeration model
The agglomeration phenomenon steps in the transport equations by the way of source terms [11], involving an agglomeration kernel β. This kernel takes into account classical agglomeration phenomena such as brownian agglomeration and turbulent collision.
The brownian agglomeration component, divided in molecular [12] and continuous [13] regimes are presented in (equation 3) and (equation 4):
βcol,B=6kBTρp−−−−√ (34π)λ(ξ02)2−6Df(1vi\break+1vj)(vi1/Df+vj1/Df)2(3)
where kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature (K), ρp is the particle density (kg.m−3), ξ0 is the monomer diameter (m), Df is the aggregate fractal dimension, vi and vj are the volumes of the particles i and j (m3) and λ is defined by λ=2Df−12.
βcol,∞=4πσDB,i+DB,j(4)
where σ is the collision radius defined by: σ=ξf,i+ξf,j2, ξf,i and ξf,j are the geometrical diameter of the aggregate i and j, which may be calculated with the following expression [14]: ξf=ξ0kfξξ03/Df with kf=0.414Df−0.211.
DB,i and DB,j are the diffusion coefficient of the particle i and j. It can be defined by: DB=kBT3πμfCcξ, with Cc the Cunningham factor [15] and μf the fluid dynamic viscosity (Pa.s).
The turbulent collision [16] is specified in equation (equation 5):
βcol,T=1.3σ3τK(5)
where τK is the Kolmogorov scale which may be calculated by: τK=νfε, with νf the kinematic viscosity (m2.s−1) and ε the dissipation rate (m2.s−3).
The global agglomeration kernel [14] is a coupling between the three previous equations by using Zaichik’s expression [17] detailed in (equation 6):
βξi,ξj=βcol,B2+βcol,T21+βcol,B2+βcol,T2βcol,∞1−χπ2+χtan−1χ(6)
with χ=0.15τKDB,i+DB,jσ.
It can be noticed that the fractal dimension Df can evolve in function of the time, so a variable formulation [18] was implemented to take it into account. The model is detailed below (equation 7):
Df=Df,min+Df,0−Df,min1/τs,ifτ≤1Df,max−Df,max−Df,0τs,ifτ>1(7)
where Df,min, Df,max and Df,0 are, respectively, the minimal, maximal, and mean fractal dimension, τ is a characteristic number defined by τ=tc/tf, tc is the characteristic time of the collision, tf is the characteristic time of turbulence, and s is an adjustment parameter of the slope of the Dffunction. For our case, s is considered equal to 1.
3.3 Aerosol deposition model
In order to take into account the aerosol deposition on the walls, a surface flux is added as a sink term to the walls for each transport equation. This term and the associated expressions was developed by Nerisson et al. [19] and implemented in ANSYS CFX [5]. They have then been adapted to the DQMOM model for this study. The surface flux J is detailed with the following equations:
J=vd+u∗CM(8)
vd+=maxg+.n1−eg+.nIp,−1Ip(9)
Ip=σtκlny++λScB,τp+(10)
λScB,τp+=τ p+2nωn+ScB−λ1λ0n−1/n(11)
where Ip is an integral along the boundary layer gathering diffusional and inertial effects, n=2, ω=1700, λ0=17.5, λ1=2/3 are empirical parameters of the model [20] [21], g+ is the nondimensional gravity vector, n is the wall-normal vector, σt is the turbulent Schmidt number, κ is the von Karman number, y+ is the nondimensional wall distance, ScB is the brownian Schmidt number and τp+ is the nondimensional relaxation time, which is defined below in (equation 12) and (equation 13):
ScB=μfρfDp(12)
τp+=ρfτpu∗2μf(13)
where ρf is the fluid density (kg.m−3), μf is the fluid dynamic viscosity (Pa.s), Dp is the particle diffusion coefficient (m2.s−1), and τp is the particle relaxation time defined by the following expression (equation 14):
τp=ρpdp2Cc18μf(14)
where ρp is the particle density (kg.m−3), dp is the particle diameter (m), and Cc is the slip correction factor [15]. Although the particle diameter and the relaxation time is very small, and the deposition is essentially diffusional, theauthors chose to present the complete model of Nerisson et al. [19] that is implemented in ANSYS CFX.
The surface flux is the product of three key parameters: the nondimensional deposition velocity vd+, the friction velocity u∗ ,and the particle mass concentration CM in the first mesh element which has to be sized in order to agree with a nondimensional wall distance y+ above 30 (corresponding to the beginning of the log layer). The friction velocity u∗ (m.s−1) is defined by: u∗=τw/ρ, with τw the wall shear stress (Pa.s) and ρ the carrier gas density (kg.m−3).
The nondimensional deposition velocity vd+ takes into account different contributions corresponding to different deposition regimes: the diffusion regime represented by the right-hand term of (equation 10), the diffusion-impaction regime represented by the left-hand term of (equation 10) and the inertial regime represented by the left-hand term of (equation 9).
It can be noticed that the final deposition velocity in (equation 8) is the maximal value between two terms: the left-hand one corresponds to that with the gravitational contribution and the right one is for the vertical walls without gravitational contribution.
The mass concentration CM is defined at the first point of the mesh element the closest to the wall and u∗ is the friction velocity (m.s−1) defined by: u∗=τw/ρ, with τw the wall shear stress (Pa.s) and ρ the carrier gas density (kg.m−3).
As mentioned in part 2 and shown in [4] [5], some differences have been highlighted with experimental results coming from unclassical aerosol distribution. These differences were explained by an inappropriate moment initialization considering all the distribution as lognormal with one mode, which is not corrected for aerosols produced by laser cutting of corium simulants.
The next chapter presents the impact of the improvement of the moment initialization on the comparison with the experimental results from the DELIA facility.
<Section>4 CFD simulations improvement</Section>
The improvement proposed for the CFD simulations consists of a better moment initialization and better representativeness of the emitted aerosol distribution. Indeed, for the first simulations, the initialization method consisted of fitting the real distribution determined experimentally by lognormal distribution and then calculating its associated initial moments. Hence, for a distribution far from a lognormal distribution, this method leads to a mistake in the moment calculation that will be not representative of the real PSD.
So, instead of using this initialization method, we tried to deduce the initial distribution moments from the real distribution using the definition of the moments given by (equation 1) (see table 3).
Then, these moments were used for calculating the weights and abscissae carried in the simulation domain.
4.1 CFD simulation setup
4.1.1 Computation domain definition
The geometry of the DELIA facility was performed with ANSYS Design Modeler and is presented in figure 1. DELIA facility is a cylindrical vessel with a diameter of 1.3 m and a length of 2.5 m. A cylindrical exhaust with a diameter of 0.3 m allows to extract the aerosols, with a flowrate of 120 m3.h−1 (Normal Temperature and Pressure conditions), corresponding to the sum of the airflows coming from the laser cutting device, for analyzing them [22]. It can be noticed the presence of an imposing structure in the center of the vessel allowing to maintain the laser cutting device at its wanted location. This structure was kept in the computational domain in order to take account of the clutter which may disturb the airflows and modify the transport and the deposition of airborne particles.
Figure 1. DELIA facility geometry
The calculation consisted of the following, in the closed vessel, the time evolution of the distribution moments after the aerosol injection and the gas flows was stopped. Indeed, the experimental scenario of cutting is presented in figure 2.
Figure 2. Scenario of laser cutting and example of time evolution of aerosol concentration. 220x149mm (150 x 150 DPI)
In figure 2, three phases are highlighted, and described: the first one is the laser cutting phase with aerosol production, the second one is the aerosol agglomeration phase after the laser cutting off and the last one is the aerosol purge phase. The phase of interest in the calculation is thus the second one.
Hence, the calculation was initialized with the initial moments for the aerosol phase, which is considered homogenised in the whole vessel. These moments were calculated from the PSD acquired experimentally at the end of phase 1. For the airflow initialization, a preliminary airflow calculation was performed in this facility. Then, the moments have evolved over time, only due to particle interactions depending on the aerosol concentration.
4.1.2 Dataset definition
This part aims to define the numerical parameters and models for the calculation. The latter are gathered in table 2.
Table 2. Calculation parameters
The turbulence model k-ω SST was chosen due to its robustness and its widely known use. A sensitivity study was also led with the k-ε model, which did not agree better with experimental data. The numerical scheme for spatial resolution is a hybrid one called ‘High-Resolution Scheme,’ which may automatically switch between first and second-order depending on the variables gradient. The calculation is transient, and a number of 3 to 10 internal iterations were chosen for each time step with a RMS (Root Mean Square) residual threshold of 10−4. The total time is 120 s according to the experimental time and the time step was defined as 0.05 s.
Finally, the domain initialization is needed for all variables (velocity, turbulence, and scalar). Velocity and turbulence initial values are obtained by a previous flow calculation without particles, whereas the scalar initialization (weight and weighted abscissae) is set by the moment information. The PSD moments are then used in the PD algorithm [9] to calculate the initial conditions for the weights and weighted abscissae. The next chapter proposes a better method for the moment calculation than that used in the previous study [4] [23].
4.1.3 Moment calculation for the calculation initialization
As mentioned previously, up to now, the moment calculation was led by considering all PSD as lognormal one with only one mode. Given that this calculation cannot be applied to unclassical PSD, since it induces notable differences with experimental results, a more universal method for the moment calculation is now proposed. For that, the real distribution for each studied corium simulant is considered at the end of phase 1 (figure 2). This distribution has to be fitted in order to calculate the integral of equation (1).
Figures 3, 4 present the distribution fits, respectively, for ex-vessel and in-vessel fuel debris simulants. The lognormal fit of the PSD is the one used in the previous simulations [5] and the exact fit is the one used for the present simulations. The exact fit is a cubic spline interpolation that matches exactly with all classes of the real distribution. Consequently, the correlation factor is equal to unity.
Figure 3. Exact and lognormal fits of the ex-vessel fuel debris simulant PSD. 220x144mm (150 x 150 DPI)
Figure 4. Exact and lognormal fits of the in-vessel fuel debris simulant PSD. 221x143mm (150 x 150 DPI)
These figures highlight that the simulant PSDs are not well represented by a lognormal fit, especially for ex-vessel that is represented by a bimodal distribution. The use of an exact fit allows taking into account the weight of each mode of the PSD whereas with the lognormal fit the second mode is smoothed. Thus, this fit method should be more relevant than the previous one. This observation can be also confirmed by table 3 that inventories the moment's values calculated for both fits and all fuel debris simulants.
Table 3. Moment values for both fits (all simulants)
Table 3 shows important differences for the moment values between exact and lognormal fits, especially again for ex-vessel simulant. These differences are more important as the moment order increases. Moreover, the PSD characteristics (mean geometric diameter and standard deviation) depend on the moment values as detailed in (equation 15) and (equation 16):
dg‾ =M1M01M0M2M12(15)
σg =elnM0M2M12(16)
where dg is the mean geometric diameter (m), σg is the geometric standard deviation, M0, M1 and M2 are the PSD moment, respectively, of the zeroth (0th), the first and the second order.
Consequently, the differences between lognormal and exact fit are also propagated to the calculation of these parameters. These differences are shown in table 4 for the mean geometric diameter and the geometric standard deviation.
Table 4. Distribution parameter calculation for both fits
As presented in table 4, the values of the mean geometric diameter and the geometric standard deviation are quite different according to the use of the exact or the lognormal fit. For ex-vessel fuel debris, a difference of around 10% is calculated for the mean geometric diameter and 15% for the standard deviation that may have a big impact on the results of dispersion, deposition, and further on the agglomeration. The differences are quite low for in-vessel simulant because low differences are also observed for the three first moments. However, the time evolution depends on the agglomeration source terms, which are calculated by the mean of all the moments of the PSD. So, if differences exist for the other moments, as shown in table 4, the time evolutions of PSD parameters may also be different, as shown in the next chapter.
4.2 CFD simulation results
4.2.1 Airflows analysis
Aerosol transport, deposition, and agglomeration are the couplings of different phenomena depending necessarily on surrounding airflows. Depending on their strength, these airflows may increase the deposition or the agglomeration. As specified previously, the scenario of interest begins when the laser cutting operations are stopped so, at this moment, the airflows induced by the laser are strong. But during phase 2, these airflows will change and become much less strong. Figure 5 presents the time evolution of the airflows inside the vessel during phase 2.
Figure 5. Time evolution of the airflows inside the vessel during the phase 2. 149x89mm (150 x 150 DPI)
As can be seen, the airflows are stronger and very turbulent at the beginning of the phase because the laser cutting was just stopped. Consequently, at this moment, aerosol agglomeration and deposition will be the highest. These strong airflow comforts also the choice of a homogeneous initial aerosol concentration forphase 2. Then, the airflows become less and less strong to reach very low velocities. The average velocity at the end of phase 1 (or beginning of phase 2) is around 3 m/s whereas at 8 s it has dropped to 0.7 m/s and finally at the end of phase 2, the average velocity is only of 0.1 m/s. So this quick evolution of the velocity will influence aerosol deposition and agglomeration because the involved phenomena will change with the velocity decrease.
For aerosol deposition, a key parameter is the friction velocity. It will evolve also with the airflows as is shown in figure 6.
Figure 6. Friction velocity-time evolution on the wall of the vessel during the phase 2. 219x164mm (150 x 150 DPI)
Figure 6 highlights the quick decrease of the friction velocity from 0.2 m/s to 0.01 m/s at the end of phase 2, with a mean velocity already of 0.05 m/s at 8 s. Consequently, as presented in figure 7, the deposition of ex-vessel particles (deposition of in-vessel particles is not presented here) decreases strongly and quickly in a few seconds to become negligible.
Figure 7. Time evolution of Ex-vessel aerosol deposition flux on the wall during the phase 2. 149x103mm (150 x 150 DPI)
4.2.2 Aerosol results
This part presents the CFD results for two corium simulants called ex-vessel and in-vessel, in terms of time evolutions of the volume average in the vessel of the particle number concentration, the mean geometric diameter, and the geometric standard deviation. The main objective is to evaluate how the exact fit consideration improves the comparison with the experimental results [24]. On each figure, from figure 8 to 13, are presented the numerical results with the lognormal fit (yellow color solid line), with the exact fit (blue color solid line), and the experimental data (red color dashed line). The black-hatched area represented on each figure corresponds to the area into which the agreement between experimental and numerical results may be considered satisfactory. This area agrees with the experimental overall error calculated from the combination of the systematic error of measuring instruments and experimental reproducibility error. This overall error was estimated by the experimental team to 20% and applied to all experimental results.
Figure 8. Time evolution of particle number concentration (ex-vessel). 252x168mm (150 x 150 DPI)
Figures 8-10 present the time evolution of particle number concentration, mean geometric diameter, and standard deviation for ex-vessel simulant.
This comparison concerning ex-vessel simulant is particularly important due to the bimodal initial size distribution which is not taken into account by considering a lognormal fit. The results are shown in Figures 8, 9, 10 highlights especially the relevance of taking into account an exact fit for the calculation initialization. Indeed, figure 8 related to the number concentration-time evolution shows a better agreement with experimental data for the exact fit compared to the lognormal fit. Moreover, figures 9, 10 shows also that CFD results with exact fit are not only closer to experimental ones but they have also better kinetics. That is particularly obvious in figure 10 for standard deviation. With lognormal fit, the standard deviation begins to increase at around 15 s before decreasing slowly, while with the exact fit, the standard deviation decreases quickly at the beginning of the calculation till around 40 s and becomes stable. The latter behavior is more representative of that experiment as shown in figure 10, even if a difference is still observed after a long time. As explained in the agglomeration model presentation, the fractal dimension may evolve during the calculation by the way of a model into which some constants have to be implemented. In particular, the parameter s may influence the slope of the agglomeration curve and Df,min and Df,max may influence the range between the fractal dimension may evolve. The default values were considered for these simulations but it could be envisaged to evaluate their influence on the agglomeration kinetic.
Similar comparisons were also carried out for in-vessel which presents less complex PSD with only one mode.
Figure 9. Time evolution of particle mean geometric diameter (ex-vessel). 258x168mm (150 x 150 DPI)
Figure 10. Time evolution of geometric standard deviation (ex-vessel). 258x170mm (150 x 150 DPI)
Figures 11, 12, 13 present the results for in-vessel fuel debris in terms of the time evolution of number concentration, mean particle diameter, and standard deviation.
Figure 11. Time evolution of particle number concentration (in-vessel). 251x172mm (150 x 150 DPI)
Figure 12. Time evolution of particle mean geometric diameter (in-vessel). 250x168mm (150 x 150 DPI)
Figure 13. Time evolution of geometric standard deviation (in-vessel). 258x168mm (150 x 150 DPI)
The results for in-vessel simulant with exact fit reveal also a better agreement with experimental data whatever the compared parameter. Indeed, even if the use of an exact fit has a lower impact on the moment calculation than for ex-vessel simulant, anyway the consequence on the results is sensitive and it allows to better approach the experimental results. Furthermore, as mentioned previously, even if the PSD parameters are quite close between both fits due to very close three first moments, the differences between the other moments have an impact on the time evolutions of the PSD parameters.
So, as a synthesis of this work, the improvement of the initialization of the agglomeration calculations allowed to obtain a better agreement with experimental results acquired in the DELIA facility. Indeed, the use of an exact fit of the PSD allows a better calculation of the particle parameters but also a better description of their time evolutions contrary to the results with the lognormal fit. Clearly, some differences still exist between experimental and numerical results with the exact fit, but numerical results are satisfactory and encouraging.
<Section>5 Conclusion</Section>
This article presents an improved way of the CFD calculations of agglomeration phenomena performed previously by taking into account, for the calculation initialization, an exact fit of the particle distribution instead of using a lognormal fit. This new method was applied for two simulants already used and the results obtained show a notable improvement for all simulants but especially for the ex-vessel simulant as proved in the present article. Overall, the results obtained with this initialization are in good agreement with the experimental ones even if some slight differences are still observed. Anyway, it allows the use of a bimodal size distribution as well as a mono-modal one, which was not the case with the lognormal fit. The improvement of the initialization method for agglomeration calculations allows a better prediction of the PSD parameters as well as of their time evolution during laser cutting operations. It is therefore an important key for the prediction of the aerosol dispersion and deposition in the real site, in order to develop countermeasures such as spray systems [25] or HEPA filtration.
<Section>Acknowledgments</Section>
This work has been carried out thanks to the subsidized project of Decommissioning, and Contaminated Water Management (Development of Fundamental Technologies for Retrieval of Fuel Debris and Internal Structures) funded by the Japanese Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI) and managed by the Mitsubishi Research Institute (MRI).
<Section>Disclosure statement</Section>
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
<Section>References</Section>
Pilot G, Fauvel S, Gosse X, et al. Measurement of secondary emissions during laser cutting of steel equipments. Nucl Eng Des. 2008;238(8):2124–2134. [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]
Dazon C, Porcheron E, Journeau C, et al. Characterization of chemical composition and particle size distribution of aerosols released during laser cutting of fuel debris simulants. J Environ Chem Eng [Internet]. 2020;8(4):103872. [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]
Porcheron E, Dazon C, Gelain T, et al. Fukushima-Daiichi fuel debris retrieval: results of aerosol characterization during non-radioactive simulants laser cutting. J Nucl Sci Technol. 2020;58(1):87–99. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]
Gelain T, Chagnot C, Porcheron E, et al. CFD simulations of aerosol dispersion and agglomeration during the laser cutting of Fukushima fuel debris simulants. In: Proceedings of the 2018 26th International Conference on Nuclear Engineering ICONE26. London (United Kingdom); 2018. [Crossref], [Google Scholar]
Gélain T, Porcheron E, Chagnot C, et al. Numerical evaluation of the fate of aerosols produced by the laser cutting of Fukushima fuel debris simulants. In: Aerosol Technology AT2018. Bilbao (Spain); 2018. [Google Scholar]
Georges C, Roulet D, Chagnot C, et al. Benefits from developments in the field of decommissioning for fukushima daiichi fuel debris retrieval: remote-controlled laser cutting process. In: WM2017 Conference. Phoenix (USA); 2017. [Google Scholar]
Chagnot C, Doyen I, Puma AL, et al. Deep gouging: development of deep blind kerf laser cutting technology for FUKUSHIMA fuel debris retrieval. In: DEM 2018 - dismantling challenges: industrial reality, prospects and feedback experience. Avignon (France); 2018. [Google Scholar]
Journeau C, Roulet D, Porcheron E, et al. Fukushima Daiichi fuel debris simulant materials for the development of cutting and collection technologies. J Nucl Sci Technol [Internet]. 2018;55(9):985–995. [Taylor & Francis Online], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]
McGraw R. Description of aerosol dynamics by the quadrature method of moments. Aerosol Sci Technol. 1997;27(2):255–265. [Taylor & Francis Online], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]
Silva LFLR, Damian RB, Lage PLC. Implementation and analysis of numerical solution of the population balance equation in CFD packages. Comput Chem Eng. Internet]. 2008 Dec 22 [cited 2018 Apr 5];32(12):2933–2945. Available from: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0098135408000525 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]
Marchisio DL, Fox RO. Solution of population balance equations using the direct quadrature method of moments. J Aerosol Sci. Internet]. 2005 Jan 1 [cited 2018 Apr 5];36(1):43–73. Available from: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021850204003052 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]
Friedlander SK. Smoke, Dust, and Haze Fundamentals of Aerosol Dynamics. 2nd editors. Oxford University Press; 2000. [Google Scholar]
Smoluchowski MV. Grundriß der Koagulationskinetik kolloider Lösungen. Kolloid-Zeitschrift. 1917;21(3):98–104. [Crossref], [Google Scholar]
Guichard R, Belut E. Simulation of airborne nanoparticles transport, deposition and aggregation: experimental validation of a CFD-QMOM approach. J Aerosol Sci. 2017;104(November2016):16–31. [Crossref], [Google Scholar]
Baron PA, Willeke K. Aerosol measurement: principles, techniques, and applications. Third. editors. John W, Pramo K, Baron PA, et al., 2011. [Google Scholar]
Saffman PG, Turner JS. On the collision of drops in turbulent clouds. J Fluid Mech. 1956;1(1):16–30. [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]
Zaichik LI, Solovev AL. Collision and coagulation nuclei under conditions of Brownian and turbulent motion of aerosol particles. High Temp. 2002;40(3):422–427. [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]
Artelt C, Schmid HJ, Peukert W. On the relevance of accounting for the evolution of the fractal dimension in aerosol process simulations. J Aerosol Sci [Internet]. 2003;34(5):511–534. [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]
Nerisson P, Simonin O, Ricciardi L, et al. CFD transport and boundary conditions models for low-inertia particles. Comput Fluids [Internet]. 2011 Jan cited 2019 Sep 23;40(1):79–91. Available from https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0045793010002069 [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]
Sippola MR, Nazaroff WW Particle deposition from turbulent flow: review of published research and its applicability to ventilation ducts in commercial buildings. Lawrence berkeley natl lab. 2002;(June). [Crossref], [Google Scholar]
Wood NB. A simple method for the calculation of turbulent deposition to smooth and rough surfaces. J Aerosol Sci. 1981;12(3):275–290. [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]
Porcheron E, Gelain T, Journeau C, et al. Analysis of aerosol emission and dispersion during the laser cutting of fukushima fuel debris simulants. In: 26th International Conference on Nuclear Engineering. London (United Kingdom); 2018. [Crossref], [Google Scholar]
Gelain T, Chagnot C, Porcheron E, et al. Development and validation of agglomeration model for CFD simulations of aerosol dispersion during Fukushima fuel debris retrieval. In: Proceedings of FDR2019 - International Topical Workshop on Fukushima Decommissioning Research. Naraha (Japan); 2019. [Google Scholar]
Porcheron E, Bourrous S, Peillon S, et al. Study of the influence of cutting tools on aerosol emission in the framework of Fukushima fuel debris retrieval. In: International Topical Workshop on Fukushima Decommissioning Research FDR2019. Naraha (Japan); 2019. [Google Scholar]
Porcheron E, Chagnot C, Leblois Y, et al. Study of spray scrubbing as mitigation means against aerosol dispersion during the Fukushima Dai-ichi fuel debris retrieval. 27th Int Conf Nucl Eng Proceedings, ICONE-27. Ibaraki (Japan); 2019. [Crossref], [Google Scholar]