<title>Modified turbulent Prandtl number model for helium–xenon gas mixture with low Prandtl number</title>
<author>1,BiaoZhou,2,YuJi,3,JunSun,4,YuliangSun</author>
<Affiliation>1,Institute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology, Key Laboratory of Advanced Reactor Engineering and Safety of Ministry of Education, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nucengdes.2020.110738</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029549320302326</URL>
Modified turbulent Prandtl number model for helium–xenon gas mixture with low Prandtl number
BiaoZhou,YuJi,JunSun,YuliangSun
Institute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology, Key Laboratory of Advanced Reactor Engineering and Safety of Ministry of Education, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
The code for calculating He–Xe thermal properties agrees well with literatures.
The existing Prt models are not able to predict the near wall distribution of Prt.
The modified Prt model is appropriate for flow and heat transfer of low Pr He–Xe.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Gas-cooled space nuclear-reactor systems generally adopt the helium–xenon mixture (He–Xe) as a working fluid and coolant, the Prandtl number (Pr) of which is low for recommended mixing ratios. Many studies have shown that the turbulent Pr (Prt) is not constant and that it is greater than 0.85 for low-Pr fluids. However, the Prt in the Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes model is generally set to 0.85 by default, which inevitably results in large prediction errors with respect to the flow and heat transfer of low-Pr He–Xe. In this paper, the Prt model of He–Xe is examined using theoretical analysis and numerical simulations. Based on the existing models applicable to liquid metals, the spatial distribution of the Prt model is modified. The Prt of turbulent core region is expressed as a function form, in which the local Reynolds number (Re) is introduced to characterize the trend of Prt in the near-wall region. With the undetermined coefficients obtained using numerical simulation, a new modified Prt model for low-Pr He–Xe is proposed. The results suggest that the new model can better reflect changes in Prt with Re, Pr, and the distance from the wall. The numerical predictions of Prt distribution at different radial positions are consistent with the analytical results, especially the distribution of the near-wall region. For the convective heat transfer simulation, the new Prt model has optimal numerical accuracy. In the future, the proposed Prt model can be used to further study the flow and heat transfer characteristics of He–Xe.
Keywords:Helium–xenon;Low Prandtl number;Turbulent Prandtl number;Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes (RANS) model;Near-wall region
<Section>Nomenclature</Section>
x
axial distance from inlet (m)
r
radial distance (m)
D
tube inner diameter (m)
u
axial velocity (m/s)
v
radial velocity (m/s)
p
operation pressure (Pa)
q
heat flux (W/m2)
T
temperature (K)
M
gas molar molecular mass (g/mol)
A
undetermined coefficient
B
undetermined coefficient
l1
length of unheated section (m)
l2
length of heated section (m)
Cp,m
molar heat capacity at constant pressure (J·mol−1·K−1)
Cp
specific heat capacity at constant pressure (J·kg−1·K−1)
G
average mass flux (kg/m2 · s)
εm
eddy diffusivity for momentum
εh
eddy diffusivity for heat
Non-dimensional quantities
Nu
Nusselt number, h·D/λ
Pr
Prandtl number, Cp · μ/λ
Re
Reynolds number, u·D/ν
Pe
Peclet number, Pr · Re
Prt
turbulent Prandtl number, μt /μ · Pr
y+
yplus, non-dimensional wall distance
Greek letters
α
thermal diffusion coefficient (m2·s−1)
ν
kinetic viscosity (m2/s)
μ
dynamic viscosity (Pa · s)
ρ
density (kg · m−3)
λ
thermal conductivity (W/m · K)
κ
turbulent kinetic energy (m2/s)
μt
turbulent dynamic viscosity (Pa · s)
λt
turbulent thermal conductivity (W/m · K)
Subscript
i
axial direction
j
radial direction
b
radial average
e
effective
t
turbulent
w
wall
∞
turbulent core region
in
inlet
out
outlet
Cal
calculation
Ref
reference data
local
local value
ave
average
mod
modified
—
time-averaged
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
To meet the ever-increasing demands of space exploration, projects on compact nuclear reactors that can provide energy for various space exploration missions have been undertaken (El-Genk and Schriener, 2011, National Research Council of the National Academies, 2012, NASA, 2015). In comparison with common space power sources, such as chemical fuel cells or solar photovoltaic arrays, space nuclear-reactor power is characterized by wide power coverage, long duration of operation, and by being environmentally friendly, which makes it possible to meet the needs of multi-scenario and multipurpose space-exploration missions. Among existing space nuclear-reactor technology roadmaps, the gas-cooled space nuclear-reactor system combined with a closed Brayton cycle is a promising scheme for achieving a desired conversion efficiency (up to 30%) and a small specific mass (Makarov and Naumkin, 2018, Schriener and El-Genk, 2018). The helium–xenon mixture (He–Xe) with a xenon molar concentration of approximately 8.6%–30.0% is a more effective coolant than pure gas or other gas mixtures owing to its low aerodynamic loading of turbomachinery and competitive heat transfer capability (El-Genk and Tournier, 2007, El-Genk and Tournier, 2008, Vitovsky et al., 2017). In this mixing-ratio range, the notable feature of He–Xe is its low Prandtl number (Pr), ~0.16–0.30, which is significantly lower than that of conventional water or air. Such low-Pr fluids have characteristics that are different from those of conventional fluids in terms of flow and heat transfer; one such characteristic is the turbulent Pr (Prt).
Prt is an important parameter in numerically simulating turbulent convective heat transfer. A good overview of the issues related to the status and perspectives of Prt can be found in the review papers of Reynolds (Reynolds, 1975), Kays (Kays, 1994), and Kirilov (Kirillov, 2017). The uniformity of this parameter being close to unity has been proven for the bulk flow region, which is remote from the heated/cooled wall, by numerous experimental and computational studies (Duponcheel et al., 2014, Kawamura et al., 1998). For conventional fluids, such as air or water, the value of Prt is essentially constant (0.85). However, for fluids with low Pr, such as He–Xe or liquid metals (Pr ≅ 0.01), Prt is greater than unity and there is a significant dependence on the molecular Pr, Reynolds number (Re), and yplus (y+). Because of this, many classical approaches derived from the similarity between the velocity and temperature fields may fail to accurately predict the flow and heat transfer of such fluids. To address this problem, it is vital to acquire a distribution of Prt.
Numerous experimental and numerical studies have been conducted in recent years on this topic. With respect to experimental studies, Sleicher et al. (Sleicher et al., 1973) examined the turbulent flow and heat transfer of liquid sodium–potassium alloys, solely acquiring the Prt at the fully developed region because the high thermal conductivity of liquid metal results in large uncertainties when measuring the local energy field for areas close to the wall. Indeed, it should be noted that the majority of experimental studies concerning Prt focus on conventional fluids. Although the flow and heat transfer characteristics of low-Pr fluids are different from those of conventional fluids, they can reflect general trends. Hollingsworth et al. (Hollingsworth et al., 1989) obtained a local value of Prt extended to y+ = 30 using constant free-stream experiments with water (Pr = 5.9); they suggested that although Prt was reasonably constant (0.85) in the core flow region, it took on much higher values in the sublayer. Blackwell et al. (Blackwell et al., 1972) concluded the same with an air (Pr = 0.75) experiment, further proving this point.
In addition, many numerical models have also been proposed to predict the distribution of Prt. According to the number of parameters introduced, the Prt models can be divided into three different types: constant model, double-parameters model (Re and Pr), and three-parameter model (Re, Pr, and y+). The Reynolds analogy and Prt = 0.85 model are just widely used constant models. However, the need for a better solution became evident when it was realized that Prt can increase to a considerably higher value than 0.85 for low-Pr fluids. The complex Prt function models were gradually proposed. For instance, Jenkins (Jenskins, 1951) first proposed the turbulent eddy model to calculate the Prt for low-Pr fluids. Following Jenkins, Aoki et al. (Aoki, 1963) proposed a model to describe Prt for liquid metals, the results of which are consistent with the measured Nusselt number (Nu) for liquid-metal flow. Considering the turbulence-modeled transport equations between turbulent energy, k, turbulent dissipation rate, ε, and turbulent heat flux, Jischa et al. (Jischa and Rieke, 1979) derived a semi-empirical Prt model for liquid metals in a circular tube. The Jischa and Aoki models are double-parameters models, both of which only consider changes in Prt according to the flow state and physical properties; in other words, they ignore the spatial distribution. Therefore, the three-parameter model was initially proposed. Kays et al. developed a three-parameter Prt model that reportedly had acceptable accuracy for all Pr fluids (Kays, 1994). Because the maximum predicted value of Prt for the Kays model was only 1.7, Weigand et al. (Weigand et al., 1997) further developed it by modifying the value of Prt to be far away from the wall. As liquid-metal heat transfer is dominated by molecular heat conduction, the near-wall distribution of Prt was not considered in this model. In conclusion, the majority of existing modified Prt models are derived using liquid-metal data; accordingly, it is doubtful whether these models are applicable to other low-Pr fluids. Therefore, for the subsequent thermohydraulic design of gas-cooled space nuclear-reactor systems, it is necessary to conduct further studies on the Prt model for low-Pr He–Xe.
In this paper, theoretical and numerical investigations of the Prt model for low-Pr He–Xe are conducted. First, the property-calculation code for He–Xe is developed and examined using data from existing literature. Thereafter, the properties of He–Xe are implemented in ANSYS Fluent using user defined functions (UDF) to test the applicability of different turbulence models. In addition, existing Prt models are introduced to modify the default turbulent models, analyzing the calculation results in the process. Finally, considering the difference in characteristics of flow and heat transfer between He–Xe and liquid metals, a modified variable Prt model for low-Pr He–Xe is proposed based on the theoretical analysis and numerical simulations.
<Section>2. Thermophysical and transport properties</Section>
He–Xe is recommended as a coolant and working fluid in the heat-exchange equipment of space gas-cooled nuclear-reactor systems, in which the typical operating pressure is 2 MPa and the temperature range is roughly 400–1300 K. Under these conditions, the theory of diluted gases based on the Chapman–Enskog approach does not apply (El-Genk and Tournier, 2008). Thus, a new and accurate calculation method for the thermodynamic and transport properties for such dense-gas mixtures is required. Currently, the majority of studies focus on pure helium or xenon, and relatively few have examined dense He–Xe. Tournier et al. (Tournier et al., 2006, Tournier and El-Genk, 2008) examined different noble-gas mixtures across the pressure range of 0.1–20 MPa and the temperature lower than 1400 K. Based on this study, the He–Xe semi-empirical property correlations are summarized to develop the property-calculation code, by which the properties of He–Xe under different mixture concentrations, pressures, and temperatures can be obtained. The comparisons between code calculations and reference data from existing literature (El-Genk and Tournier, 2008) are shown in Fig. 1, where the temperature is 400 K and pressure is 2 MPa. As the molar mass of He–Xe becomes larger, Cp,m increases, λ decreases, and μ first increases to the peak value, then decreases. The combined effects cause the Pr reaches the valley value at certain mixing ratio. The results are also consistent with corresponding data from the literature, therefore, the accuracy of the property-calculation code is validated and the property correlations are appropriate in numerical simulations of the next section.
Fig. 1. Comparison between calculations and reference data for He–Xe.
To further characterize the properties of He–Xe, the properties variation as a function of temperature are shown in Fig. 2 at several mixing ratios. In the temperature range of 300–1200 K, the variation of λ and μ is proportional to temperature, while Cp,m and ρ decrease as the temperature increases.
Fig. 2. The variation of properties with temperature at P = 2 MPa for He–Xe.
<Section>3. Numerical approach</Section>
3.1. Numerical calculation model
Based on the experiments of Taylor et al. (Taylor et al., 1988), a vertically upward flowing He–Xe in a uniformly heated tube was numerically investigated using ANSYS Fluent. Because of the axial symmetry of the tube without considering the influence of gravity, a two-dimensional calculation domain was adopted, as shown in Fig. 3. The internal diameter, D, of the tube was 5.87 mm and the wall thickness was 0.28 mm. The total length of this section was 680.92 mm, the first part of which was adiabatic, whereas the remaining parts were heated by a resistance wire to obtain a uniform heat flux.
Fig. 3. Schematic of the calculation domain.
With respect to simulating the boundary conditions, the inlet was set to ‘mass-flow-inlet’, the outlet was set to ‘pressure-out’, and the wall surface adopted a non-slip boundary. The thermal properties and transport characteristics of He–Xe were implemented through UDF. The other boundary conditions were set according to the specific experimental conditions of the simulation; the detailed operating parameters are given in Table 1. According to the research of Hiwett et al. (Hewitt et al., 1994), when Gr/Re2 ≪ 1, natural convection effects caused by gravity can be neglected. For instance, Run715 has the largest local value of Gr/Re2, of which the Gr number is 6024.5 and the maximum Gr/Re2 is 5.65E-06. Therefore, it is reasonable to neglect the gravitational effect. In terms of turbulence model selection, considering that the Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes (RANS) model is widely used in computational-fluid-dynamics software, five different RANS models, as well as the wall functions, were chosen to test their applicability, as given in Table 2.
Table 1. Parameters of Taylor’s experiments.
Table 2. Turbulence models and wall function.
Enhanced Wall Treatment
The solution methods, difference schemes, and grid independence verification have been studied in our previous work (Zhou et al., 2019); herein, the mesh grid number was 20 2000, which was sufficient to meet the requirements of numerical accuracy and computational efficiency. In this paper, the radial grid is further refined to capture more information in the near-wall region. The final mesh uses the grid number of 40 2000 and is partially enlarged in Fig. 4.
Fig. 4. The final selected mesh.
3.2. Significance of Prt models
For RANS modeling, the main issue in achieving accurate simulations is determining the eddy diffusivity for momentum, εm, and the eddy diffusivity for heat, εh. To ensure that the governing equations are closed, the mixing-length model and many other models have been proposed to predict εm based on the eddy viscosity assumption. However, to obtain εh, the concept of Prt must be introduced. Therefore, once a turbulent model is chosen, selecting a suitable Prt model is a primary consideration for subsequent numerical simulations.
The Prt is a dimensionless number and it is vital in RANS models. Indeed, the importance of Prt in turbulent heat transfer simulations is better understood by examining transport equations (Tang et al., 2016, Bae, 2016). The governing equations with variable properties in a two-dimension cylindrical coordinate can be described as follows:
@(1)
@(2)
@(3)
@(4)
Where μe denotes the effective dynamic viscosity, which can be written in Eq. (5), it represents the combined effect of molecular viscosity and turbulent mixing. By analyzing Eq. (4), we can also easily identify the terms that influence heat transfer from the expression of the effective thermal conductivity, as shown in Eq. (6). The first term is (1/Pr), which represents the contribution of molecular conduction, whereas the second term, (μt/μ/Prt), represents the turbulent-conduction contribution. From above equations and definitions, Prt significantly affects λt, and in turn, affects the turbulent heat transfer. Therefore, obtaining a Prt model appropriate for low-Pr He–Xe is the focus of this study.
@(5)
@(6)
<Section>4. Results of existing models</Section>
4.1. Comparison of turbulent models
Alongside the default Prt model (Prt = 0.85), the simulation results for He–Xe using different turbulence models are shown in Fig. 5. For a concise description, only three lines calculated by turbulence models were listed, including the maximum, the minimum, and the middle one among the wall temperature predictions. From Fig. 5, it is evident that five turbulent models have a similar tendency for the wall temperature, but all of them underestimated the experimental data. The results of the sstkw turbulence model are the most consistent with experimental data. Therefore, it was selected for the accuracy calculations.
Fig. 5. Wall temperature predictions of turbulent models.
To represent the numerical accuracy of the default sstkw model, the Nu under different working conditions was calculated, as shown in Fig. 6. The heated part of the straight tube can be divided into two sections: thermal entrance region and thermal fully developed region. This segmentation method is common in studying the flow and heat transfer of a tube. Schmidt (Worsoe-Schmidt, 1967) first proposed the concept of a thermal entry region in laminar flow for a heated tube. Taylor et al. (Taylor et al., 1988) also used this method to investigate the heat transfer relations for the variable physical properties of gases. For convenient analysis, in this paper, the initial heating section within Δx = 10D is defined as the thermal entry region. From Fig. 6, it is evident that the deviation is more than 30% in the thermal entry region with respect to the default model. Of course, the reason for the large numerical error in this part can be attributed to the greater uncertainty of experimental values. However, for the fully developed region, the numerical deviation remains as high as roughly 20%. Accordingly, it is necessary to modify the numerical method when investigating He–Xe.
Fig. 6. Calculation accuracy of the default sstkw turbulent model.
4.2. Applicability of existing Prt models
For fluids with Pr ≫ 1, Prt tends to unity; it is usually considered a constant in engineering practices, specially Prt = 0.85 for ANSYS Fluent. However, it has been shown that Prt is greater than unity for low-Pr fluids (Kawamura et al., 1998, Shams and Santis, 2019, Bricteux et al., 2012, Piller et al., 2002). Moreover, the smaller the Pr number is, the larger the value of Prt. Therefore, the default turbulent model fails to correctly predict the convective heat transfer of low-Pr He–Xe. In recent years, many Prt models have been proposed for liquid metals (Chen et al., 2013, Cheng and Tak, 2006). However, the Pr of He–Xe is an order of magnitude higher than that of liquid metals, and accordingly, the applicability of these models with respect to He–Xe is uncertain, and further study is required. In the present work, nine different Prt models were tested, as given in Table 3, five of which were selected for the displayed calculation results. The reason for this was to remove some models (Reynolds model and Aoki model) that were obviously not applicable and to show more concisely (Notter model and Reynolds analogy).
Table 3. Existing Prt models.
As shown in Fig. 7, the predictions of five Prt models under different conditions for He–Xe were investigated. The Nu calculated by the Dittus–Boelter correlation (Eq. (7)) was used to normalize the results, which is described in Eq. (8).
@(7)
@(8)
Fig. 7. Predictions of Prt models for He–Xe mixtures.
From Fig. 7, it is evident that the default model with Prt = 0.85 has maximum values and overpredicts the experimental data for all four cases. This means that the turbulent heat transfer was too strong. Generally, the results of the remaining Prt models were lower than the experimental values, which indicates that the heat transfer was restrained. Among these models, predictions using the Kays and Jischa models have better consistencies and are closer to the experimental data.
To further clarify the differences among those Prt models, wall temperatures along the tube are also predicted and compared, as shown in Fig. 8. The wall temperatures from most Prt models are higher than the experimental data, while Prt = 0.85, wall temperatures are lower.
Fig. 8. Wall temperature predictions of Prt models for He–Xe.
Yakhot et al. (Yakhot et al., 1987) used the renormalized group method and proposed an analytical expression of Prt in Eq. (9), which was validated by Kays et al. (Kays, 1994) with experimental data in the logarithmic region. Since it is implicit and not straightforward, the Yakhot equation of Eq. (9) is often used to evaluate new Prt models.
@(9)
where Pet denotes the turbulent Peclet number, which can be described as:
@(10)
Fig. 9 shows the radial distribution of Prt in the fully developed He–Xe flow region (Run713, x = 0.5 m) by various models. The Pickett, Jischa and the default Prt models neglect the spatial variation and are constants along the radial direction. The Kays and Weigand models overestimate Prt in the logarithmic region and fail in the viscous sublayer. Therefore, the Prt model needs to be improved to better predict the mixture of He–Xe flow and heat transfer.
Fig. 9. Distribution of Prt by various models.
<Section>5. Modified Prt model</Section>
5.1. Modified method
According to the study in Section 4.2, the existing Prt model still has some limitations with respect to calculating the flow and heat transfer of He–Xe. This can be attributed to two main factors.
The first factor concerns the difference in the characteristics of flow and heat transfer. Although liquid metals and He–Xe are both low-Pr fluids, the cause for the low-Pr and heat transfer modes are different. With respect to low Pr, the cause for this in liquid metals can be attributed to their high thermal conductivity, whereas for He–Xe, the cause is changes in the physical properties with the mixing ratio, as shown in Fig. 10. As for the heat transfer mode, liquid metals are dominated by molecular heat conduction, whereas He–Xe is dominated by convective heat transfer; this can be seen in Fig. 11, where the temperature profiles from air, He–Xe, and liquid mercury in a heated tube are presented (Azer and Chao, 1960). The liquid-metal temperature profile is flat, indicating that the thermal resistance is evenly distributed on the radial section. The slope of the air curve is the steepest near the wall surface, gradually flattening out in the turbulent core area. He–Xe is in between, but a steep-slope increase also occurs in the near-wall region, indicating that the thermal resistance is mainly concentrated in this area.
Fig. 10. The variation of ν and α with molar fraction of xenon for He–Xe.
Fig. 11. Temperature profiles of different fluids.
The second factor concerns the numerical predictions. As the Pr of liquid metals is smaller than that of He–Xe and the semi-empirical Prt models based on liquid-metal experiments and numerical results are not universal, the Prt predictions of these models are generally higher for He–Xe, causing turbulent heat transfer prediction more intense. Accordingly, this paper proposes a modified Prt model that is suitable for low-Pr He–Xe.
As given in Table 3, Kays model is a three-parameter Prt model, and compared with the default model, it offers drastic improvements in the numerical simulations. Kays model is essentially an asymptote, the limit of which can be described using Eq. (11).
<Section>(11)
At the near-wall region (when y+ is small), Pet approaches zero. As the distance from the wall increases, Pet gradually increases. Because Prt,∞ was taken as a constant (=0.85) in the Kays model, Prt approaches a constant value of 1.7 at the near-wall region. However, experimental data suggest that the Prt in the viscosity layer (roughly y+ <30) increases sharply for high-Re turbulent flow; thus, the Kays model fails to represent the behavior of Prt in the viscosity layer. Moreover, because the Pr of liquid metal is much lower than that of He–Xe and other common fluids, such as air and water, the Prt prediction by Kays may be higher in other turbulent regions. To illustrate the above viewpoints, the Kays model was used to simulate the flow and heat transfer of air due to the lack of Prt experimental data of He–Xe, as shown in Fig. 12. Therefore, based on the Kays model, a new modified variable Prt model for He–Xe is considered in this paper.
Fig. 12. Comparison between prediction by Kays model and experimental data.
The local Prt, (Prt,local) is proposed to replace the original Prt,∞ in the Kays model. Considering the optimal calculation accuracy and simple expression, Jischa mode was selected as the basic form of Prt,local, as shown in Eq. (12). In this way, Prt, local can fully represent the influence on the flow state and the physical properties of the fluid itself. To represent the rapid increase in Prt near the wall, the local Re (Relocal) was introduced in the Prt,local function, as shown in Eq. (13).
@12)
@(13)
where A and B are undetermined coefficients. In this study, the analytical solution by Yakhot et al. is adopted to determine the preliminary range of A and B. Thereafter, iterative calculations are repeated in this process to determine the final optimal coefficients of A and B. As shown in Fig. 13, a process of determining A is conducted using Run713 as an example. It is found that, when A and B are taken as 0.80 and 30, respectively, the results are consistent with the experimental data. Similarly, the calculation results of other cases are used to test the coefficients. Through above calculations, it is finally determined that A = 0.80 and B = 30.
Fig. 13. Effects of different A values on wall temperature predictions.
5.2. Model validation and analysis
The rationality of the new model was verified from two aspects, including the spatial distribution of Prt and the numerical simulations accuracy. Regarding the spatial distribution of Prt, Fig. 14 shows the radial distribution of Prt at the fully developed section (x = 0.5 m, Run713), from which it is evident that the new model better reflects the increase in Prt near the wall than Kays model. In the area with larger y +, the new model prediction was also more consistent with the analytical solution.
Fig. 14. Radial distribution of Prt at x = 0.5 m.
In terms of numerical prediction of flow and heat transfer for He–Xe, Fig. 15 shows the comparison between the calculated wall temperatures and experimental values, from which it is evident that the predictions of the new Prt model agree better with the experimental data. To further characterize the calculation accuracy of the new Prt model, Nu prediction errors were also calculated under different operating conditions, as shown in Fig. 16. It shows that the numerical accuracy of the new Prt model is improved at both sections compared with the default model; the deviation in the fully developed region was basically within 10%. With respect to the flow pressure-drop calculation, the average pressure drop value (ΔP = Ptap1  Ptap2) was also predicted, as shown in Fig. 17. Referred to Ref. Taylor et al. (1988), the Rew, mod, av is shown in Eq. (14), where Tb,av, Tw, av and μw, av are the average bulk temperature of He–Xe, the average wall temperature and the average viscosity calculated by Tw, av, respectively. These averaging values are calculated between the two pressure taps. It shows that the calculated numerical error of pressure-drop by the new Prt model is basically within 5%. The above calculation results suggest that the modified Prt model proposed in this study has good applicability to the numerical simulation of He–Xe with respect to flow and heat transfer.
@(14)
Fig. 15. Wall temperature predictions of the circular tube using the new Prt model.
Fig. 16. Calculation accuracy of the new Prt model.
Fig. 17. Numerical error of pressure drop calculation for new Prt model.
Previous research has shown that it is vital to accurately predict the heat transfer in the near wall region of y+ < 100 for He–Xe (McEligot and Taylor, 1996). From Eq. (6), it is evident that the total heat transfer is composed of molecular and turbulent heat conduction. The same position shown in Fig. 14 was selected and the ratio of the two terms was calculated, as shown in Fig. 18. When y+ < 15, the ratio is greater than 10, indicating the molecular heat conduction is dominant and the turbulent heat transport is weak. Combined with the definition of turbulent heat flux, the result can also be used to numerically explain the sharp increase in Prt in the near-wall region. When y+ greater than 100, the turbulent viscosity ratio, μt /μ, increases and turbulent heat conduction is dominant; however, the Prt is generally constant in this region. The two terms are basically equivalent at 15 < y+ < 100, where the turbulent kinetic energy reaches a maximum, as shown in Fig. 19, which suggests that the turbulent heat transport is intense. Because Prt directly determines the ratio of the two terms, the reasonable prediction of Prt is vital. Combined with Fig. 14, the new Prt model is consistent with the analytical solutions. Therefore, the prediction of flow and heat transfer based on the new Prt model for He–Xe is optimal.
Fig. 18. Ratio of molecular heat conduction and turbulent heat conduction of He–Xe.
Fig. 19. Radial turbulent kinetic energy of He–Xe.
<Section>6. Conclusion</Section>
From the above investigation, the conclusions outlined below can be drawn.
@(1)
The property calculation code for He–Xe was developed. The code calculations were consistent with the literature data, thereby verifying the accuracy of the code and laying the foundation for the subsequent numerical simulations of flow and heat transfer.
@(2)
Within the scope of this study, the predictions using default turbulence models underestimated the wall temperature. The calculation of the sstkw model was the closest to the experimental data, but its numerical error at the fully developed region exceeded 20%, indicating that the Prt = 0.85 model is not suitable for predicting the flow and heat transfer of low-Pr He–Xe.
@(3)
Different predictions were obtained when using existing Prt models to modify the default Prt model. Among these, the Tw calculations ​​from the Kays and Jischa models under different values of Pr, Re, and heat flux were similar to each other as well as being more consistent with the experimental data to the default Prt = 0.85 model.
@(4)
The Kays model is disadvantageous with respect to predicting the Prt spatial distribution for low-Pr He–Xe. The new modified Prt model is consistent with the analytical solutions, thereby optimally reflecting the He–Xe Prt distribution. In addition, the new Prt model is superior to the Kays model with respect to calculation accuracy for the flow and heat transfer of He–Xe.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Biao Zhou: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Writing - original draft. Yu Ji: Software, Validation. Jun Sun: Writing - review & editing, Project administration, Supervision. Yuliang Sun: Supervision.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
This work is supported by CNSA program (D010501) of China and Tsinghua University Initiative Scientific Research Program (20197050014) of China.
<Section>References</Section>
Aoki, 1963
S. Aoki
A consideration on the heat transfer in liquid metal
Bull. Tokyo Institute of Technology, 54 (1963), pp. 63-73
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Azer and Chao, 1960
N.Z. Azer, B.T. Chao
A mechanism of turbulent heat transfer in liquid metals
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 1 (2–3) (1960), pp. 121-138
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bae, 2016
Y.Y. Bae
A new formulation of variable turbulent Prandtl number for heat transfer to supercritical fluids
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 92 (2016), pp. 792-806
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Blackwell et al., 1972
Blackwell, B.F., Kays, W.M., Moffat, R.J., 1972. The turbulent boundary layer on a porous plate: An experimental study of the heat transfer behavior with adverse pressure gradients. NASA-CR-130291, SU-HMT-16. CA, United States: Stanford Univ., Thermosciences Div.
Google Scholar
Bricteux et al., 2012
L. Bricteux, M. Duponcheel, G. Winckelmans, et al.
Direct and large eddy simulation of turbulent heat transfer at very low Prandtl number: application to lead-bismuth flows
Nucl. Eng. Des., 246 (2012), pp. 91-97
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chen et al., 2013
F. Chen, X.L. Huai, J. Cai, et al.
Investigation on the applicability of turbulent-Prandtl-number models for liquid lead-bismuth eutectic
Nucl. Eng. Des., 257 (2013), pp. 128-133
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Cheng and Tak, 2006
X. Cheng, N. Tak
Investigation on turbulent heat transfer to lead-bismuth eutectic flows in circular tubes for nuclear applications
Nucl. Eng. Des., 236 (4) (2006), pp. 385-393
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Duponcheel et al., 2014
M. Duponcheel, L. Bricteux, M. Manconi, et al.
Assessment of RANS and improved near-wall modeling for forced convection at low Prandtl numbers based on LES up to Reτ =2000
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 75 (2014), pp. 470-482
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
El-Genk and Schriener, 2011
M.S. El-Genk, T.M. Schriener
Long operation life reactor for lunar surface power
Nucl. Eng. Des., 241 (6SI) (2011), pp. 2339-2352
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
El-Genk and Tournier, 2007
M.S. El-Genk, J. Tournier
Noble gas binary mixtures for closed-Brayton-cycle space reactor power systems
J. Propul. Power, 23 (4) (2007), pp. 863-873
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
El-Genk and Tournier, 2008
M.S. El-Genk, J. Tournier
Properties of helium, nitrogen and He-N2 binary gas mixtures
J. Thermophys Heat Transfer, 22 (3) (2008), pp. 442-456
Google Scholar
El-Genk and Tournier, 2008
M.S. El-Genk, J. Tournier
Noble gas binary mixtures for gas-cooled reactor power plants
Nucl. Eng. Des., 238 (6) (2008), pp. 1353-1372
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hewitt et al., 1994
G.F. Hewitt, T.R. Bott, G.L. Shires
Process heat transfer
Boca Raton: CRC Press, Belgell House, FL, USA (1994)
Google Scholar
Hollingsworth et al., 1989
D.K. Hollingsworth, W.M. Kays, R.J. Moffat
The measurement and prediction of heat transfer in a turbulent boundary layer in water. The 7th Symposium on Turbulent Shear Flows, Stanford University, CA, USA (1989)
Google Scholar
Jenskins, 1951
R. Jenskins
Variation of the eddy conductivity with Prandtl modulus and its use in prediction of turbulent heat transfer coefficients
Proceedings of the Heat Transfer and Fluid Mechanics, Institute, Stanford University Press, USA (1951)
Google Scholar
Jischa and Rieke, 1979
M. Jischa, H.B. Rieke
About the prediction of turbulent Prandtl and Schmidt numbers from modeled transport equations
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 22 (11) (1979), pp. 1547-1555
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kawamura et al., 1998
H. Kawamura, K. Ohsaka, H. Abe, et al.
DNS of turbulent heat transfer in channel flow with low to medium-high Prandtl number fluid
Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow, 19 (5) (1998), pp. 482-491
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kays, 1994
W.M. Kays
Turbulent Prandtl number-where are we?
J. Heat Transfer-Trans. ASME, 116 (2) (1994), pp. 284-295
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kirillov, 2017
P.L. Kirillov
Heat exchange in turbulent flow. Part 1. turbulent Prandtl number
At. Energ., 122 (3) (2017), pp. 156-171
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Makarov and Naumkin, 2018
M.S. Makarov, V.S. Naumkin
Heat transfer in helium-xenon mixture flowing in straight and twisted tubes with square cross-section
J. Phys. Conf. Ser., 1128 (2018), pp. 12020-12027
Google Scholar
McEligot and Taylor, 1996
D.M. McEligot, M.F. Taylor
The turbulent Prandtl number in the near-wall region for low-Prandtl-number gas mixtures
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 39 (6) (1996), pp. 1287-1295
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
NASA, 2015
NASA
NASA technology roadmaps TA3: space power and energy storage, NASA, USA (2015)
Google Scholar
National Research Council of the National Academies, 2012
National Research Council of the National Academies
NASA Space Technology Roadmaps and Priorities: Restoring NASA’s Technological Edge and Paving the Way for a New Era in Space, The National Academies Press, USA (2012)
Google Scholar
Piller et al., 2002
M. Piller, E. Nobile, T.J. Hanratty
DNS study of turbulent transport at low Prandtl numbers in a channel flow
J. Fluid Mech., 458 (2002), pp. 419-441
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Reynolds, 1975
A.J. Reynolds
The prediction of turbulent Prandtl and Schmidt numbers
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 18 (9) (1975), pp. 1055-1069
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Schriener and El-Genk, 2018
T.M. Schriener, M.S. El-Genk
Effects of decreasing fuel enrichment on the design of the Pellet Bed Reactor (PeBR) for lunar outposts
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 104 (2018), pp. 288-297
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Shams and Santis, 2019
A. Shams, A.D. Santis
Towards the accurate prediction of the turbulent flow and heat transfer in low-Prandtl fluids
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 130 (2019), pp. 290-303
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Sleicher et al., 1973
C.A. Sleicher, A.S. Awad, R.H. Notter
Temperature and eddy diffusivity profiles in NaK
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 16 (8) (1973), pp. 1565-1575
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tang et al., 2016
G.L. Tang, H. Shi, Y.X. Wu, et al.
A variable turbulent Prandtl number model for simulating supercritical pressure CO2 heat transfer
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 102 (2016), pp. 1082-1092
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Taylor et al., 1988
M.F. Taylor, K.E. Bauer, D.M. McEligot
Internal forced convection to low-Prandtl-number gas mixtures
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 31 (1) (1988), pp. 13-25
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tournier and El-Genk, 2008
J. Tournier, M.S. El-Genk
Properties of noble gases and binary mixtures for closed Brayton Cycle applications
Energy Convers. Manage., 49 (3) (2008), pp. 469-492
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tournier et al., 2006
Tournier, J., El-Genk, M.S., Gallo, B., 2006. Best estimates of binary gas mixtures properties for closed Brayton cycle space applications. 4th International Energy Conversion Engineering Conference and Exhibit (IECEC), San Diego, California, USA.
Google Scholar
Vitovsky et al., 2017
O.V. Vitovsky, M.S. Makarov, V.E. Nakoryakov, et al.
Heat transfer in a small diameter tube at high Reynolds numbers
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 109 (2017), pp. 997-1003
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Weigand et al., 1997
B. Weigand, J.R. Ferguson, M.E. Crawford
An extended Kays and Crawford turbulent Prandtl number model
Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 40 (17) (1997), pp. 4191-4196
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Worsoe-Schmidt, 1967
P.M. Worsoe-Schmidt
Heat transfer in the thermal entrance region of circular tubes and annular passages with fully developed laminar flow
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 4 (10) (1967), pp. 541-551
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yakhot et al., 1987
V. Yakhot, S.A. Orszag, A. Yakhot
Heat transfer in turbulent fluid-I. Pipe flows
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 30 (1) (1987), pp. 15-22
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhou et al., 2019
Zhou, B., Sun, J., Sun, Y.L., et al., 2019. CFD simulation of the helium-xenon mixture flow and heat transfer. 27th International Conference on Nuclear Engineering (ICONE2019), Ibaraki, Japan.
Google Scholar