<title>PIRT and V&V associated to an uncertainty quantification methodology for fluid thermal mixing</title>
<author>1,SolèneGouénard,2,Jean-PhilippeHéliot,3,MickaëlBiçakli,4,EricRoyer</author>
<Affiliation>1,Commissariat à l’Energie Atomique et aux Energies Alternatives (CEA), 15 avenue des Sablières, 33116 Le Barp cedex, France,2,Commissariat à l’Energie Atomique et aux Energies Alternatives (CEA), 25 rue Leblanc, 75015 Paris, France</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nucengdes.2020.110736</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029549320302302</URL>
PIRT and V&V associated to an uncertainty quantification methodology for fluid thermal mixing
SolèneGouénard,Jean-PhilippeHéliot,MickaëlBiçakli,EricRoyer
Commissariat à l’Energie Atomique et aux Energies Alternatives (CEA), 15 avenue des Sablières, 33116 Le Barp cedex, France
Commissariat à l’Energie Atomique et aux Energies Alternatives (CEA), 25 rue Leblanc, 75015 Paris, France
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The operating conditions of nuclear reactor vessels do not allow an easy access to thermal-hydraulics parameters. Thus, only macroscopic parameters can give information on the thermal hydraulic state of the vessel. Developments and validations of Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) tools become crucial to have a local view of the flow corresponding to the measured macroscopic parameters. In order to ensure accurate simulations of such flows, a well-known step-by-step procedure has been applied to a fluid thermal mixing case. A first step, called the Phenomena Identification and Ranking Table (PIRT) approach, consists of identifying all the potential physical phenomena that contribute to the target flow. These phenomena are then ordered according to two main criteria: their contribution level and their degree of maturity in terms of modelling. Based on this step, verification test cases are identified for each selected physical phenomenon. They are simulated with the Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) tool ANSYS Fluent. Mesh convergence are systematically done on these test cases. A specific effort is made on phenomena that have been considered with a high contribution and a low maturity level in the PIRT step. Then, the objective of the Validation step is the improvement of the modelling and meshing choices by considering single and multiple phenomena effects in the same flow. For this step, experimental studies are conducted by researchers from the University of Poitiers* (France). An experimental facility has been designed with an increasing level of flow complexity. Hydraulic and concentrations of passive tracer measurements are planned. Finally, uncertainty quantifications methods are explored to quantify the discretization errors and the sensibility of the simulations on some parameters (geometry, boundary conditions, etc.).
This paper gives an overview of the step-by-step methodology applied to a specific fluid thermal mixing problem with illustrated examples at each step.
Keywords：CFD;Thermal-hydraulics;PIRT;Verification;Validation;Uncertainty quantification
<Section>1. Context</Section>
Fluid thermal mixing in complex geometries occurs in many industrial applications especially in nuclear reactors in both operational conditions and multiple severe accidents. Due to the high level of temperatures and pressures in operating nuclear reactor vessels, few measurements can be extracted. However, these measurements are the only information available to drive the nuclear reaction and power and to have an idea of its thermal–hydraulic state. Therefore, Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) gives us the opportunity to have a better view of the flow behavior related to measured macroscopic parameters. Nevertheless, the complexity of the flow in terms of geometry, involved physical phenomena and characteristics sizes require robust, efficient and accurate CFD tools. To reach this high level of accuracy and obtain the best estimate of a target complex flow associated to uncertainty quantification, Best Practice Guidelines have been established and applied in many research programs especially for safety demonstrations after the 2011 Fukushima Daiichi (Wilson and Boyack, 1998, Sakai et al., 2014, Baschuk, 2017). However, all these studies have been applied for global transient analyses. In this paper, we use this methodology well described in Oberkampf and Roy (2010) and the OECD/CSNI report NEA/CSNI/R(2016)4 (2016) to analyze locally a complex flow occurring in a nuclear reactor vessel and involving fluid thermal mixing. The objective is to be able to understand the local flow behavior related to the measured global temperature and pressure. In nuclear reactor vessels, local and global phenomena are strongly linked. Studying local quantities is really interesting for safety considerations since many severe accidents can occur due to a local phenomenon. One of the multiple examples is the boiling crisis caused by a local creation of steam bubbles at the surface of the fuel rod. Moreover, specific care has to be given to the uncertainty evaluations for both global and local quantities. This analysis, which is also presented in this paper for the target flow, is highly relevant to define available margins in safety studies where many phenomena are associated to critical thresholds.
After shortly detailing the target flow, the different steps involved in the methodology are described. The paper is then structured following these steps. Each step is described and then illustrated. The CFD tool used for the simulation is Ansys Fluent version 18.2 (Ansys Fluent Solver Theory Guide, 2017).
1.1. Geometry
The geometry considered here is a classical nuclear reactor vessel consisting in a tank which contains obstacles of variable sizes and geometries. The thermal–hydraulic state of the vessel corresponds to operating conditions. The fluid is injected in the vessel with different mass flow rates and temperatures through a multi-hole grid such that fluid thermal mixing occurs. Fig. 1 illustrates a fluid thermal mixing that can be observed in the target flow between two holes of the grid. The temperature difference between the two created jets is reproduced using two different inks (Grenis, 2015). The grid consists in relatively large holes such that the flow is split into only dozens of parts. Moreover, the obstacles in the tank induce partial obstructions of it which also contribute to mixing and variation of fluid velocity and direction. This mixing is conducted by forced or mixed convection (according to the pumps power applied). The tank walls are all insulated. Thus, no thermal boundary layers are considered (i.e. no heat flux on walls).
Fig. 1. Streams of tempera paint into water create mixing turbulent jets at  (Grenis, 2015).
1.2. Methodology
To ensure an accurate simulation of this flow, a step-by-step methodology is explored. Fig. 2 proposes a schematic view of the process. This methodology has been well described in the OECD/CSNI report NEA/CSNI/R(2016)4 (2016) and applied for different analyses in the nuclear power plant community. The first step called Phenomena Identification and Ranking Table (PIRT) process consists of defining the physical phenomena that explain the flow behavior. The phenomena are then ranked according to their level of influence in the flow and the state of knowledge associated. This step can be based on expert opinions, experiment analyses or sensitivity studies. Based on the expected physical phenomena, verification and validation test cases are identified. The objective of the verification test cases consists of assessing that the equations in the CFD tool are properly implemented. These test cases are based on analytical solutions. Validation simulations aim at verifying that the correct equations are solved for specifics physical phenomena. They can be splitted into two main categories which lead to an accurate simulation of the target complex flow: separated effects and combined effects test cases. Finally, uncertainties associated to the final complex simulation are quantified. The objective is to detail a methodology to quantify the discretization errors on both local and global quantities of interest.
Fig. 2. Step-by-step methodology applied to a fluid thermal mixing case.
During the whole process, the results are discussed with an expert group based on a literature review. Concerning validation of combined effects, experiments have been planned in 2019 and 2020 in collaboration with researchers from the University of Poitiers (France). An experimental model has been produced for this purpose. Finally, the implementation of uncertainty quantification methodologies has been done in collaboration with Inria Saclay (France) to complete the analysis.
Thus, in this paper, this methodology is applied in order to simulate with a controlled accuracy level the flow evolving in a nuclear reactor vessel in operating conditions. Each section describes one step of the methodology. To illustrate the different steps, test cases have been simulated. The objective here is to show cases with increasing flow complexity and to give an idea of the diversity of cases considered during the process.
<Section>2. Phenomena Identification and Ranking Table (PIRT)</Section>
The PIRT is the first step to understand the target flow and being able to simulate it accurately. In this section, the methodology is briefly described. Then, the PIRT of the target fluid thermal mixing case is detailed.
2.1. Methodology
The PIRT is obtained by analyzing the characteristics of the target geometry (Oberkampf and Roy, 2010). The expert group, composed by different French researchers from four independent companies and laboratories, identifies the expected physical phenomena. Then, they are classified according to their contribution levels and the computational models maturity. As suggested by Zuber (2010), the ranking procedure is based on the analysis of characteristics dimensionless numbers of the target flow. Preliminary simulations have also been performed and discussed with the expert group. Finally, the Verification and Validation process already done by the developers on the CFD tool have been studied to rank the physical phenomena. The physical models with a high contribution and a low model maturity will require specific efforts in the Verification and Validation (V&V) process.
2.2. Application to the fluid thermal mixing case
In the target case, the PIRT has been obtained following the methodology detailed in the previous section. Fig. 3 presents the result of this step. Some of the physical phenomena identified in the target flow have already been studied in a previous work from Héliot et al. (2017). Thus, fully developed turbulence, pressure loss and turbulent boundary conditions can be considered mature as well as detachment flow. However, the phenomena related to the fluid thermal mixing and the transversal and longitudinal flows along cylinders require specific care. Due to the geometrical constraints, these identified phenomena are considered with a high contribution level in different regions in the vessel. The modeling efforts during the verification and validation steps are then focused on these phenomena.
Fig. 3. PIRT of the fluid thermal mixing test case.
<Section>3. Verification and validation of separated effects</Section>
Based on the previous step, verification and validation of separated effects test cases have been identified for each physical phenomenon with a specific care for those with a limited level of maturity but a high contribution. After explaining the methodology, the selected test cases for the target flow are detailed. It has to be noted that the V&V process relies also on the code verification performed by the Ansys Fluent developers’ team, which is not detailed in this paper.
3.1. Methodology
The first step consists of analyzing the characteristic dimensionless numbers of the flow (mainly Reynolds numbers and cylinders aspect ratios) in order to select the most suitable test cases. Then, a literature review has been done to choose the cases. Finally, the list has been validated by the expert group. The test cases have been simulated with the retained CFD tool. Convergence studies have been performed. In the case where different models were available, they have been compared.
3.2. Identified test cases
Table 1 displays the selected verification test cases for each physical phenomenon. The first five test cases in the table: the channel flow, (Hussain and Reynolds, 1975), the turbulent jet flow (Idel’cik, 1999), a separated flow over plates (Ota et al., 1981), the IRPHEE experiment (Idel’cik, 1999, Meunier and Schouveiler, 2016) and the step flow (Driver and Seegmiller, 1985) have already been studied (Héliot et al., 2017) with Fluent. For the thermal flow behavior, two approaches have been explored: transport of a passive scalar and resolution of the energy equation. Indeed, in the validation step of combined effects, it has been decided to transport tracers (see Section 4). Thus, test cases of passive scalar transport are also simulated as a preliminary work for the future validation step. Concerning the second approach, the simulations results and analyses can be found in the following papers: Smith et al., 2011, Westin, 2007.
Table 1. Verification and validation of separated effects test cases selected for each physical phenomenon.
Only one test case is detailed in the following subsection. The same methodology is applied to the others, which includes convergence studies and modeling comparisons based on either analytical solutions and/or experimental and other simulations results (following the Best Practice Guidelines, Oberkampf and Roy, 2010).
3.3. Turbulent flow around 3 × 3 rods with an obstacle (Krull et al., 2012)
In this test case, an isothermal longitudinal flow of p-cymene ( and ) is evolving around 3 × 3 rods organized in a square lattice. The computational domain is represented in Fig. 4(a). The distance between two rods is equal to 13 mm. The main pipe is 978 mm high and has a diameter equal to 54 mm. A spacer grid, displayed in Fig. 4(c), which supports the rods is placed in the first third of the computational domain and constitutes an obstacle for the flow. Fig. 4(a) presents the location of the grid and Fig. 4(b) its geometry. The fluid is injected horizontally in a complex inlet zone which induces turbulence. Fig. 4(c) displays the geometry of this region. The colored lines give an idea of the flow path. The Reynolds number at the inlet is equal to , corresponding to an inlet mass flow rate equal to . Experimental velocity profiles and distributions from the Helmholtz Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf (HZDR-Germany) are available to validate the Fluent simulations. Simulation results obtained with Ansys CFX 14.0 (Krull et al., 2012) allow a code-to-code comparison as part of the code verification process (Oberkampf and Roy, 2010).
Fig. 4. Geometry of the turbulent flow around 3 × 3 rods test case, (a) computational domain, (b) spacer grid and (c) inlet geometry geometry (Krull et al., 2012).
Four different grids have been considered. Their properties are summarized in Table 2. The maximum value of  in the first cell at walls is only given for the Fluent simulations. It decreases when the mesh is refined whereas the aspect ratio remains approximately constant. Mesh 4b is obtained by decreasing a bit more the  value, which induces a slight increase of the maximum aspect ratio compared to Mesh 3b.
Table 2. Properties of the grids considered for the turbulent flow around 3 × 3 rods test case.
Unsteady Reynolds Averaged Navier Stokes (URANS) simulations are performed. The Shear Stress Transport (SST) model (Menter, 1994) and the BaSeLine (BSL) Reynolds Stress Model (RSM) (Menter, 1994) have been chosen for the CFX simulations, whereas the Fluent simulations are performed with the k- SST model (Ansys Fluent Solver Theory Guide, 2017). This choice is based on previous studies of turbulent flows (Héliot et al., 2017). The time steps are equal to 5 ms for the CFX simulations with Mesh 1b and 2b, 1 ms for Mesh 1b with Fluent and 0.01 ms for Mesh 3b and 4b. The difference between the two codes in terms of time step can be explained by the turbulence model and the criteria to consider that convergence has been reached at each time step. The results are compared with the CFX and experimental data at four different heights H1b, H2, H2b and H3 respectively located at 198 mm, 258 mm, 408 mm and 508 mm above the top of the inlet vessel. Fig. 5(a) displays the location of these heights to have a better idea of their relative positions to the spacer grid. The profiles are extracted on two planes, whose locations are illustrated in Fig. 5(b).
Fig. 5. Position of the post-processing planes and elevations (Krull et al., 2012), the spacer grid appears in black.
The velocity profiles for plane 2 and 4 at height H2 and H3 are presented in Fig. 6. The experimental data plotted in these figures correspond to the measurements with an error of . One can note that a scaling factor of 0.924 has been applied to the CFX velocity profiles (Krull et al., 2012), assuming a bias on the mass flow boundary conditions, which is not applied in the Fluent results. Comparisons of the velocity profiles obtained with Mesh 1b and 2b with CFX highlighted a negligible effect of the grid refinement (Krull et al., 2012). Thus, only the results on Mesh 1b are displayed in Fig. 6. Fluent velocity profiles are improved by the grid refinement especially on plane 2. The shift towards larger x values observed for the first optimum and all the CFX results disappears with Fluent when the mesh is refined. For this plane, the simulated results are close to the experimental data with a tendency to overestimate the velocity contrary to the CFX results (calibrated by a 0.924 factor). For plane 4, simulations predict larger variations of the velocity especially for the positive x values, which is not the case with the CFX velocity profiles. The experimental results measured in planes 2 and 4 are not symmetrical. Nevertheless, Fluent simulations do not reproduce this asymmetrical behavior.
Fig. 6. Fluent mean y velocity profile obtained on (a) plane 2 H2, (b) plane 2 H3, (c) plane 4 H2, (d) plane 4 H3.
To have a quantitative comparison of the results, the mean velocity, the maximum, minimum and amplitude values are extracted from the profiles for x position between −22 mm and 22 mm. Table 3 presents the results for plane 2 H2, Table 4 for plane 2 H3, Table 5 plane 4 H2 and Table 6 plane 4 H3. These quantities of interest transcript quite well the behavior of the different velocity profiles. Thus, for each position, the mean value prediction is improved by the mesh refinement with Fluent. On this parameter, the results are very similar between the two CFD tools. The amplitude value confirms the observation of an overestimation of the velocity variations with Fluent which is better predicted by CFX. This trend is also visible on the minimum and maximum values. Mesh 3b allows reaching a reasonable accuracy for all the quantities (mean, maximum, minimum and amplitude values) compared to mesh 4b. Thus, the meshing effort has to be concentrated on limiting the aspect ratio more than decreasing the  value in the first cell to obtain better results with the k- SST model.
Table 3. Quantitative comparisons of simulated results with experimental data extracted from the velocity profile of plane 2 H2, all the quantities are evaluated for an x position between −0.022 m and 0.022 m.
Table 4. Quantitative comparisons of simulated results with experimental data extracted from the velocity profile of plane 2 H3, all the quantities are evaluated for an x position between −0.022 m and 0.022 m.
Table 5. Quantitative comparisons of simulated results with experimental data extracted from the velocity profile of plane 4 H2, all the quantities are evaluated for an x position between −0.022 m and 0.022 m.
Table 6. Quantitative comparisons of simulated results with experimental data extracted from the velocity profile of plane 4 H3, all the quantities are evaluated for an x position between −0.022 m and 0.022 m.
These simulations highlight the ability of the modeling to reproduce velocity variations and amplitudes. Grids with limited aspect ratios and wall  seem to be appropriate for such types of flows with the k- SST model. Some discrepancies have been observed with the two CFD tools especially on plane 4 with the experimental profiles. The authors of the reference paper (Krull et al., 2012) could explain them by the difficulty to reproduce properly the experimental inlet boundary condition especially the pre-history of the flow before entering the test section.
<Section>4. Validation of combined effects</Section>
After the verification and validation of separated effects step, multiple phenomena test cases are considered to enlarge the CFD modeling. For this part, experiments are planned for 2019 and 2020.
4.1. Methodology
For this step, an experimental facility has been designed. Thus, characteristic dimensions and dimensionless numbers have been first extracted from the target flow occurring in the reactor vessel. Choices have then been made to adapt the expectations with the available experimental facility in order to well control the experimental measurements and to be able to compare them with simulations.
4.2. Experimental facility
The experiments are performed at the University of Poitiers (France), which has several hydraulic circuits. The experimental model, presented in Fig. 7, which adapts on one of these circuits, is composed by a multiple injection. Water enters the tank, which is in a horizontal position, through a multi-hole grid. The experimental model is designed in order to increase the flow complexity. In the first configuration, water flows in the tank which is empty. Then, obstacles of different sizes and shapes will be added. Water flows out through another multi-hole grid. To have a similar Reynolds number in the experimental model, water is heated up at . The mass flow rate at the inlet is fixed at  and is divided into twelve injections.
Fig. 7. Volume of fluid of the experimental model designed for the validation on combined effect step, the blue arrow indicates the flow direction. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
4.3. Expected experimental data
For the hydraulic behavior, PIV are performed on different planes XY, YZ and XZ along the tank (Baramili et al., 2017). Mean and RMS velocity values are expected with uncertainty evaluation based on the Guide to the expression of Uncertainty in Measurement (JCGM100:2008). To reproduce fluid thermal mixing, passive tracers will be injected.
4.4. Preliminary results on the first configuration
The first flow configuration studied in this section corresponds to the empty tank. Only velocity measurements are compared. For this study, two different turbulence models have been considered in the simulation: the k- SST model (Ansys Fluent Solver Theory Guide, 2017) previously studied in Section 3.3 and the k- realizable model combined with a wall law “enhanced wall function” (Ansys Fluent Solver Theory Guide, 2017). The main advantage of the second turbulence model is that the  value in the first cell at the wall can be much larger ([50; 100]) than with the k- SST model (<1). Thus, with this model, it is easier to limit the total number of cells and the aspect ratios of cells close to walls in the target geometry. For each turbulence model, three URANS simulations have been performed with two different grids. Table 7 gives the properties of the simulations in terms of grid, time step and turbulence model. The two multi-hole grids are meshed with tetrahedrons whereas hexahedrons are considered everywhere else. Wall refinement is applied in the whole computational domain. The maximum aspect ratio of the grid used for the simulation Epsilon3 is higher than in the grid used in Epsilon1 and Epsilon2 even if the grid is more refined. This is due to the fact that the cell with the maximum aspect ratio is not located at a wall where the mesh is refined. Integration time to obtain converged average quantities is fixed at 5 s.
Table 7. Properties of the simulations performed in the first configuration of the experimental facility designed for the validation step (Section 4.3).
Different mean and RMS velocity profiles have been compared to the experimental results in Fig. 8, Fig. 9, Fig. 10. The axis position is given in Fig. 7. For the X and Y axes, the zero position is located in the middle of each XY plane. For the Z axis, the zero position corresponds to the right wall of the tank (see Fig. 7) where water flows in the tank. The experimental data are given with error bars evaluated using the Guide to the expression of Uncertainty in Measurement (JCGM100:2008). In Fig. 8, the flow at z = 10 mm (close to the entrance of the tank) is compared. The k- SST model predicts better velocities in the middle of the flow for x = 80 mm and y = 0 mm. For both turbulence models, simulation results remain within the experimental error bars. The effect of the time step and mesh refinement is quite limited. Thus, the simulations can be considered converged in space and time. Fig. 9 presents two other profiles at z = 96 mm. A slightly better prediction is obtained with the k- SST model for the profile along the y = 31.05 mm line especially close to the tank walls. For this model and in this region, the decrease of the time step improves the results. In this configuration, the k- realizable model combined with a wall law “enhanced wall function” is not able to reproduce the flow behavior close to walls and predicts lager velocity variations. However, along the y = x line, this model predicts better the mean velocity especially for positive x positions. The effect of the time step and mesh refinement is negligible contrary to the k- SST model. Finally, in Fig. 10, the RMS of the z component of the velocity is compared. The k- realizable model combined with a wall law “enhanced wall function” underestimates this quantity especially with the coarser grid. With the k- SST model, a better prediction is obtained. However, the mesh refinement does not improve the results.
Fig. 8. Mean velocity profiles () at different coordinates for the XY plane z = 10 mm, (a) and (b): y = 0 mm; (c) and (d): x  = 0 mm; (e) and (f): y = 31.05 mm.
Fig. 9. Mean velocity profiles () at different coordinates for the XY plane z = 96 mm, (a) and (b): y = x; (c) and (d): y = 31.05 mm.
Fig. 10. RMS velocity profiles () for the XY plane z = 96 mm and y = 31.05 mm.
These preliminary results highlight that the two turbulence models predict quite well the flow even with coarser grids. Extra comparisons are still expected on more challenging flow configurations with this experimental facility to enrich this study.
<Section>5. Uncertainty quantification</Section>
To complete the V&V process, uncertainty quantification is studied. This step is particularly relevant in safety studies to define margins to a certain threshold. To take the example of the boiling crisis, the heat exchange between the fuel rod and the fluid is sufficient to stay under the critical heat flux. Therefore, in this situation, it is interesting to have an accurate view of thermal-hydraulics state of the nuclear reactor vessel correlated to the global figures of merit that can be measured. For these parameters, the ability of evaluating the uncertainties associated to the simulation allows reducing margins to stay within the critical safety threshold. Different approaches and methodologies are available in the literature to estimate the different uncertainty sources. In this section, we focus on the estimation of the discretization error. Since we are dealing with discretization error, this step could be seen as a verification step in the terminology of Oberkampf and Roy (2010). However, the objective here is to quantify the global discretization error obtained on the target complex flow for which we do not have an analytical solution and to compare it to other uncertainty sources. In this section, the methodology is described. Some results obtained on a verification and a validation test cases are presented considering global and local quantities of interest to validate it. The ability of the methodology to evaluate discretization errors on both local and global quantities is a major advantage. Indeed, for system safety, the critical parameters can be either global for example a total mass flow rate or local such as a wall temperature at a specific position. These cases are relevant for the fluid thermal mixing target flow. They have been chosen among the cases identified in the PIRT step. They allow validating the methodology with an increasing complexity of the flow. Experimental error bars are provided for the validation test case.
5.1. Estimation of the discretization errors
The method proposed by Eça and Hoekstra (2014) has been implemented to evaluate the discretization errors. The estimation is based on the Richardson’s extrapolation (Richardson, 1927) extended to meshes which do not belong to the asymptotic range. The different steps can be summarized as followed:
1.
Selection of the best fit of the simulation among 4 definitions:
@(1)
@(2)
@(3)
@(4)
With ∊the estimated discretization error, @ the quantity of interest obtained with the simulation i, @ the estimated exact solution (i.e. solution at convergence),@ , @ and @ coefficients, @ an observed order and  the typical cell size.
2.
Evaluation of a reliability factor . It is based on the standard deviation and the simulated data range.
3.
Estimation of the error bar:
If the estimation is considered reliable,
@(5)
If not,
@(6)
These steps are applied to each quantity of interest. This means that for a velocity profile, this methodology is applied to each point of the profile. For each point, the error model can be different from its neighbor. In practice, it is rarely the case. However, no constrains are applied to ensure a continuity in the selected error model. One can note that the error bar expression includes both the discretization error estimation and its reliability.
To be applied, this method requires several assumptions:
1.
Discretization errors are dominant against round-off errors and iterative errors.
2.
At least four simulations with four different grids are available.
3.
The results converge monotonically towards an asymptotic solution.
For more details about the methodology, the reader should refer to the original paper (Eça and Hoekstra, 2014).
It has to be noted that with this methodology the quantity of interest can be global or local (both are presented in what follows). In the selected test cases, pressure drop and local velocities are chosen as examples. The application to local or global temperatures is straightforward. Results are not shown with this quantity of interests in this paper due to the lack of experimental data available in the target flow configuration. However, future works on the experimental facilities should allow this analysis.
5.2. Application to a verification test case
This methodology has been applied to a turbulent jet through a hole (Idel’cik, 1999). The geometry of the computational domain is presented in Fig. 11. The diameter and the length of the computation domain are respectively  and . The hole diameter is equal to  and its length to . Water with a density of  and viscosity of  is flowing at a Reynolds number in the hole equal to . The RANS simulations are performed with the k-ω SST model. The meshes are composed with tetrahedral cells and are refined close to walls to follow accurately the turbulent boundary layer.
Download : Download high-res image (73KB)Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 11. Computational domain of the turbulent jet through a hole, the blue arrow indicates the flow direction. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
5.2.1. Global quantity of interest: Pressure loss coefficient
The methodology is first applied to the total pressure loss coefficient . To compare the results with a reference (Idel’cik, 1999), walls are defined everywhere except at the inlet and outlet. The expected pressure loss coefficient is equal to 7.11 (see Eq. (8) for the pressure drop model described in (Idel’cik, 1999)):
@(7)
With dP the pressure loss and v0 the inlet velocity.
@(8)
With λ and t two values given in (Idel’cik, 1999).
Four simulations are performed. The mesh properties are described in Table 8. A constant refinement with a characteristic cell size of 2 mm is applied in the grey region (see Fig. 11). In the two other regions, a variable refinement is applied according to the cell size given in Table 8. The results are plotted with the error bars in Fig. 12. The estimation is obtained with the error model at a first order (see Equation (2)) and is considered reliable. Fig. 12 shows that the error bars decrease when the grid is refined. As expected also, the reference value (Idel’cik, 1999) is included in the bars. The predicted asymptotic value is equal to 7.15, which is close to the Idel’cik empirical estimation (Idel’cik, 1999).
Table 8. Properties of the grids for the discretization error estimation of the pressure loss coefficient in the test case of the turbulent jet through a hole.
Fig. 12. Pressure loss coefficient with the error bars estimated using the methodology proposed by Eça and Hoekstra (2014).
It has to be noted that this analysis is relevant in nuclear reactor safety where pressure drop is an important parameter in multiple severe accidents. Let us consider that for safety reasons, the pressure loss coefficient had to remain above 6.5. We will then analyze the results of Fig. 12 with this constrain. First of all, we see that all the grids predict pressure loss coefficient above 6.5. However, if we consider the error bars related to the discretization error for the grids 4, 3 and 2, the threshold value can be reached. Indeed, is smaller than 6.5. However,  the estimated exact solution is above 6.5. The methodology evaluates that with a converged grid, the pressure loss coefficient should be above the critical threshold. Thus, if we had only these 3 results, it will be a good option to simulate the case with a more refined grid to obtain results above the 6.5 limit. In terms on safety margins, the results show that the direct simulation results without considering uncertainties is not sufficient since with the error bars critical pressure loss coefficient in terms of safety considerations are reached.
However, specific care has to be done for safety analyses using this methodology. First, only discretization errors are considered. The error bars should be completed with other uncertainties sources. Moreover, the methodology can be used with not fully converged grids. Thus, the reliability of the estimated exact solution has to be criticized regarding the considered grids. According to these results, the authors recommend to simulate the case with the more refined grid available with the computing budget and then to coarse the grid, to obtain the three other simulations.
5.2.2. Local quantity of interest: velocity profile
Then, the methodology is applied to the axial component of the velocity at the revolution axis. For this purpose, five other simulations are performed. In this case, wall boundary conditions are imposed only at the hole. Symmetry boundary conditions are applied everywhere else except at the inlet and outlet. This analysis is used as a preliminary study for the multi-grid validation test case (see Section 5.2.3). The mesh properties are described in Table 9. The variable cell size is imposed in the whole domain contrary to the previous section.
Table 9. Properties of the grids for the discretization error estimation of the velocity profile in the test case of the turbulent jet through a hole.
The results are presented in Fig. 13(a). Only the error bars of Mesh 1 are displayed. The error bars are larger through the hole and remain large until the jet fades. Fig. 13(b) shows that for some points, the error estimation is considered not reliable (). This has two main causes:
1.
In some regions, the velocity has approximately the same value for all the grids (low signal over noise ratio). This occurs before the hole and when the jet has faded.
2.
For some points also, there is no monotonic convergence of the velocity. Thus, no error model is able to reproduce this behavior.
Fig. 13. (a) Profile of the x component of the velocity at the revolution axis, the error bars of Mesh 1 are evaluated using the methodology proposed by Eça and Hoekstra (2014); (b) reliability factor at each point of the velocity profile, : reliable estimation, otherwise ; (c) selected error model: 0 value refers to the error model described in Eq. (1), 1 value to Eq. (2) and 2 to Eq. (3); (d) error model order.
For this second point, one solution is to refine more the mesh to reach the asymptotic range. However, as presented in Section 5.1, the methodology is supposed to be able to deal with grids out of the asymptotic region. Thus, these results show the behavior of the methodology. The  factor highlights points with no monotonic convergence which is interesting since it will probably happen in the target simulation.
Moreover, the methodology is applied for each quantity of interest. Thus, for a profile, the methodology is applied to each point of the profile. Fig. 13(c) illustrates the selected error model for each point. The Y axis is constructed as followed: 0 value refers to the error model described in Eq. (1), 1 value to Eq. (2) and 2 to Eq. (3). The error model is quite consistent for a specific flow region. Before the hole and when the jet has vanished, the error model (1) is chosen, whereas definition (2) is selected in the vicinity of the jet. If we look at the model order, this effect is more visible since the error model (1) predicts order close to 2. These results illustrate the fact that the selected error model follows the evolution of the flow characteristics without imposing any constrains between neighboring points.
5.2.3. Application to a validation test case
Finally, the methodology has been applied to a multi-hole grid turbulent flow (Héliot et al., 2017). Experimental studies have been performed by researchers from University of Poitiers (France). The geometry is presented in Fig. 14. Water is injected at 293.15 K and ~6.10−2 m3.s−1. URANS simulations are performed with the k- SST model (Ansys Fluent Solver Theory Guide, 2017).
Fig. 14. Computational domain of the validation test case, the blue arrow indicates the flow direction.
The grids are composed by tetrahedral cells in the regions Z1 and Z2. The Z1 region appears in blue in Fig. 14. It begins downstream the multi-hole grid and ends upstream with the divergent Z2. The cell size is fixed in Z2. Table 10 gives the cell size in Z1 for the four grids with the total cells number.
Table 10. Properties of the grids for the discretization error estimation of the velocity profile in the validation test case.
The discretization error estimation is performed on different velocity profiles. The result on the axial velocity along the revolution axis is presented in Fig. 15 with the experimental and numerical error bars. In this figure, the error bars expression has been modified to take only into account the contribution of the discretization error. Thus, if the estimation is considered reliable, the error bar is equal to . Otherwise, it is equal to . The error bars intensity allows identifying regions still sensible to the grid refinement (larger errors bars). On the contrary, regions where the error bars are small but do not meet the experimental data highlight that other uncertainty sources (geometry, boundary conditions, models, etc.) should be investigated to explain the discrepancies. The same behavior as in the turbulent jet through a hole (Section 5.1) is observed. The error bars are larger behind the grid and decrease when the jets vanish. To finish, in Fig. 16, two different profiles are represented in the XZ and YZ planes at two different positions behind the grid with both the numerical and experimental error bars. The two profiles are extracted at Z ~ −120 mm, which is located 10 mm behind the grid and Z ~ −100 mm (30 mm behind the grid). We observe the velocity decrease on both experimental and numerical data. The experimental error bars are smaller on the XZ plane due to a better precision of the camera. The simulation predicts quite well the flow. The numerical error bars allow explaining the small differences observed between the simulated and experimental data. However, on the two lateral jets in the XZ plane and the recirculated flow between two jets in the YZ plane, discrepancies are observed that are not covered by the error bars. For these two areas, other uncertainty sources should be explored.
Fig. 15. Profile of the mean z velocity at the revolution axis, the error bars (in green) of Mesh 1 are evaluated using the methodology proposed by Eça and Hoekstra (2014), the experimental error bars appear in blue. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 16. Profile of the mean z velocity in the XY plane (top) and the YZ plane (bottom) at Z ~ −120 mm (left) and Z ~ −100 mm (right), the error bars (in green) of Mesh 1 are evaluated using the methodology proposed by Eça and Hoekstra (2014), the experimental error bars appear in blue. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
5.3. Perspectives on uncertainty quantifications
Different perspectives of this work are studied. The first step will be to consider the temperature as a quantity of interest. As explained in Section 5.1, the methodology can be applied to any quantity as soon as we are able to define properly the typical cell size of the different grids.
Moreover, as mentioned in the introduction of this section, only discretization errors have been considered here. Studies are also performed on other crucial parameters of the simulations, among them the injection mass flow rate, holes positions, dimensions and shapes. The objective is to display error bars on simulated results containing all the possible uncertainty sources.
<Section>6. Conclusions</Section>
The objective of this work is to ensure an accurate simulation of a complex fluid thermal mixing case. To achieve this simulation, a PIRT and a V&V process associated to uncertainty quantification have been used. This whole process has been applied to simulate with a controlled accuracy a flow involving fluid thermal mixing. One of the originality of this paper is that it focuses on a local thermal–hydraulic analysis where many studies previously performed for safety demonstrations concerned global accident phenomena (Wilson and Boyack, 1998, Sakai et al., 2014, Baschuk, 2017). Moreover, this work includes an uncertainty quantification process for both local and global quantities. The methodology has been applied to pressure drop, which is an important figure of merit in safety demonstrations.
In the analysis of the target flow, several physical phenomena have been identified and considered at a first priority (strong influence on the result but limited maturity of modeling). Thus, verification and validation of separated effects test cases are currently simulated to optimize the modeling and meshes. Then, for the validation step of combined effects, dedicated experiments have been performed in 2019 and are planned in 2020 to improve the understanding of the flow behavior. Preliminary comparisons have already been performed. Finally, uncertainty quantifications are still explored to enlarge the analysis and to finally provide confidence levels on the computations.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>References</Section>
ANSYS Fluent-Solver Theory Guide, 2017
ANSYS Fluent-Solver Theory Guide, release 18.2, 2017.
Google Scholar
ANSYS Meshing User’s Guide, release 18.2, 2017
ANSYS Meshing User’s Guide, release 18.2, 2017.
Google Scholar
Baramili et al., 2017
A. Baramili, L. Chatellier, L. David, L. Ancian
Elbow flow multi-section characterization using planar and Stereo-PI
Proceedings of the 12th International Symposium on Particle Image Velocimetry (2017)
Google Scholar
Baschuk, 2017
Baschuk, J.J., 2017, Phenomena identification and ranking table for a severe accident in a CANDU irradiated fuel bay, Report 153-1268000-REPT-002, Rev. 0, Canadian Nuclear Laboratories, Chalk River, ON, Canada.
Google Scholar
Braza et al., 2006
M. Braza, R. Perrin, Y. Hoarau
Turbulence properties in the cylinder wake at high Reynolds numbers
J. Fluids Struct., 22 (6-7) (2006), pp. 757-771, 10.1016/j.jfluidstructs.2006.04.021
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Clayton et al., 1968
C.G. Clayton, A.M. Ball, R. Spackman
Dispersion and mixing during turbulent flow water in a circular pipe, AERE-R 5569
Isotope Division, Wantage Research Laboratory, Wantage, Berkshire, UK (1968)
Google Scholar
Driver and Seegmiller, 1985
D.M. Driver, H.L. Seegmiller
Features of a Reattaching Turbulent Shear Layer in Divergent Channel Flow
AIAA J., 23 (2) (1985), pp. 163-171
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Eça and Hoekstra, 2014
L. Eça, M. Hoekstra
A procedure for the estimation of the numerical uncertainty of CFD calculations based on grid refinement studies
J. Comput. Phys., 262 (2014), pp. 104-130
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Evans, 1967
G.V. Evans
A study of diffusion in turbulent pipe flow
J. Basic Eng. ASME, Paper (1967), p. 66-FE-A
Google Scholar
Grenis, 2015
Q. Grenis
Flow Visualization
Technical Report (2015)
Google Scholar
Héliot et al., 2017
J.P. Héliot, S. Pécault, L. Chatelier, C. Caplier
V&V for computational fluid dynamics of multiple parallel Jets using an hybrid RANS-LES method in fluent
Proceedings of the ASME V&V Conference, Las Vegas (2017)
Google Scholar
Hussain and Reynolds, 1975
A.K.M.F. Hussain, W.C. Reynolds
Measurements in fully developed turbulent channel flow
J. Fluids Eng., 97 (4) (1975), pp. 568-578
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Idel’cik, 1999
Idel’cik, I.E., 1999. Memento des pertes de charge, Eyrolles, Paris France.
Google Scholar
JCGM100:, 2008
JCGM100:2008 (F), 2008. Evaluation of measurement data – Guide to the expression of uncertainty in measurement.
Google Scholar
Krull et al., 2012
B. Krull, C. Lifante, T. Frank, R. Franz, U. Hampel
3 × 3 Rod Bundle Investigations, CFD Single Numerical Simulations
Proceedings of the CFD for Nuclear Reactor Safety Applications (CFD4NRS-4) congress, Daejeon (2012)
Google Scholar
Menter, 1994
F.R. Menter
Two-equations eddy-viscosity turbulence models for engineering applications
AIAA J., 32 (8) (1994), pp. 1598-1605
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Meunier and Schouveiler, 2016
Meunier, P., Schouveiler, L., 2016. Campagne d’essais hydrauliques DPN. Technical Report, Irphé Institut de Recherche sur les Phénomènes Hors Equilibre.
Google Scholar
Oberkampf and Roy, 2010
W. Oberkampf, C. Roy
Verification and Validation in Scientific Computing
Cambridge University Press (2010)
Google Scholar
OECD, CSNI, 2016
OECD/CSNI, 2016. Review of Uncertainty Methods for Computational Fluid Dynamics Application to Nuclear Reactor Thermal Hydraulics OECD/CSNI Report NEA/CSNI/R(2016).
Google Scholar
Ota et al., 1981
T. Ota, Y. Asano, J. Okawa
Reattachment length and transition of the separated flow over blunt flat plates
Bull. JSME, 24 (192) (1981), pp. 941-947
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Richardson, 1927
L.F. Richardson
The approximate arithmetical solution by finite differences of physical problems involving differential equations, with an application to the stresses in a masonry dam
Philo. Trans. Royal Soc. London, Ser. A, 226 (1927), pp. 299-349
Google Scholar
Roshko, 1960
Roshko, A. 1960. Experiments on the flow past a circular cylinder at very high Reynolds number, pp. 345–356.
Google Scholar
Sakai et al., 2014
N. Sakai, H. Horie, H. Yanagisawa, T. Fujii, S. Mizokami, K. Okamoto
Validation of MAAP model enhancement for Fukushima Daiichi accident analysis with Phenomena Identification and Ranking Table (PIRT)
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 51 (7–8) (2014), pp. 951-963
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Smith et al., 2011
Smith, B.L., Mahaffy, J.H. Angele, K., Westin, J., 2011. Report of the OECD/NEA – Vattenfall T-junction Benchmark exercise NEA/CSNI/R(2011)5.
Google Scholar
Sparrow and Loeffler, 1959
E.M. Sparrow, A.L. Loeffler
Longitudinal laminar flow between cylinders arranged in regular array
A.I.Ch.E J., 5 (3) (1959), pp. 325-330
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tadrist et al., 1990
H. Tadrist, R. Martin, L. Tadrist, P. Seguin
Experimental investigation of fluctuating forces exerted on a cylindrical tube (Reynolds numbers from 3000 to 30 000)
Fluid Dyn. Phys. Fluid. A, 2 (1990)
Google Scholar
Westin, 2007
Westin, J., 2007. Thermal Mixing in a T-Junction. Model Tests at Vattenfall research and Development AB, Boundary Conditions and List of Available Data for CFD Validation, Report Memo U 07-26, Vattenfall R&D AB Älvkarleby, Sweden.
Google Scholar
Wilson and Boyack, 1998
G.E. Wilson, B.E. Boyack
The role of the PIRT process in experiments, code development and code applications associated with reactor safety analysis
Nucl. Eng. Des., 186 (1998), pp. 23-37
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zuber, 2010
N. Zuber
Scaling: From quanta to nuclear reactors
Nucl. Eng. Des., 240 (8) (2010), pp. 1986-1996
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
