<title>Experimental studies on metallic fuel relocation in a pin bundle core structure of a sodium-cooled fast reactorIntegral molten salt reactor neutron physics study using Monte Carlo N-particle code</title>
<author>1,TaeilKim,2,DzmitryHarbaruk,3,DariusLisowski,4,NathanBremer,5,MitchellFarmer,6,ChristopherGrandy,7,Yoon IlChang</author>
<Affiliation>1,Argonne National Laboratory, 9700 S Cass Ave, B206, Argonne, IL 60439, United States</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nucengdes.2020.110719</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029549320302132</URL>
Experimental studies on metallic fuel relocation in a pin bundle core structure of a sodium-cooled fast reactor
TaeilKim,DzmitryHarbaruk,DariusLisowski,NathanBremer,MitchellFarmer,ChristopherGrandy,Yoon IlChang
Argonne National Laboratory, 9700 S Cass Ave, B206, Argonne, IL 60439, United States
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Experiments dropping uranium into sodium filled pin bundle geometry were conducted.
Post-test radiographic images were used to confirm how the uranium was relocated.
Pressure drop was measured to evaluate the blockage of the sodium coolant channel.
The more formation of the eutectics could lead to more dispersion and less blockage.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Understanding the relocation behavior of metallic fuel in severe accident scenarios is one of the most important factors in the safety assessment of sodium-cooled fast reactors (SFRs). In the present study, the relocation behavior of uranium metallic fuel was investigated by conducting metallic fuel relocation experiments using 19-pin bundle test sections in the Argonne’s Metallic Uranium Safety Experiment (MUSE) facility. Post-test radiographic images were taken to characterize the uranium fuel relocation within the pin bundle test section. In addition, the pressure drop in the test sections was measured after the relocation experiments to evaluate the blockage of the sodium coolant channel. The pressure drop in the pin bundle test sections was also analytically calculated by varying the porosity and the pore size of the relocated fuel. The porosity and pore size of the relocated fuel in the pin bundle test sections were estimated by comparing those calculated pressure drop values with the measured pressure drop values from the pressure drop tests. The experimental results showed that the more formation of the eutectics could lead to more fuel dispersion and less blockage due to the lower freezing point of the eutectics.
Keywords:SFR;Metallic fuel;Relocation;Eutectic formation
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Passive shutdown and heat removal experiments performed in the Experimental Breeder Reactor-II (EBR-II) demonstrated the inherent safety of metallic fuel pool type sodium-cooled fast reactors (SFRs) (Planchon et al., 1986, Chang, 2007). However, it is still necessary to assess the consequences of severe accidents that may arise from conservative assumptions. For the severe accident scenarios in SFRs, removal of fuel from the active core region along coolant channels due to pin plenum pressure or coolant flow is an important negative reactive feedback factor that reduces the reactor power level and eventually eliminates the possibility of the recriticality energetics. Therefore, understanding the relocation behavior of fuel in the severe accident scenarios of SFRs is one of the most important factors in a safety assessment.
Research to understand the relocation behavior of metallic fuel continues to build off previous studies (Nishimura et al., 2002, Nishimura et al., 2005, Nishimura et al., 2007, Zhang et al., 2009, Zhang and Sugiyama, 2010, Gabor et al., 1987, Gabor et al., 1989, Bauer et al., 1990, Kamiyama et al., 2013, Heo et al., 2016, Kim et al., 2017, Kim et al., 2018). Many researchers have studied the fragmentation behavior of the molten metallic fuels in an open sodium pool (Nishimura et al., 2002, Nishimura et al., 2005, Nishimura et al., 2007, Zhang et al., 2009, Zhang and Sugiyama, 2010, Gabor et al., 1987, Gabor et al., 1989). Recently, studies on the discharge behavior of the metallic fuels in the sodium coolant channels have been conducted (Bauer et al., 1990, Kamiyama et al., 2013, Heo et al., 2016, Kim et al., 2017, Kim et al., 2018). Kim et al. studied the relocation behavior of the metallic fuel in single pin core structures using the Argonne's Metallic Uranium Safety Experiment (MUSE) facility (Kim et al., 2017, Kim et al., 2018). The authors investigated the relocation behavior of the metallic uranium in a narrow annular sodium channel. Post-test radiographic images were taken to confirm how the uranium was relocated within the test section. The temperature profile as a function of time in the eutectic formation area of the test section was numerically calculated and compared with the experimental data to evaluate the moment of cladding rupture and sodium boiling. The extent of the eutectic formation between the uranium and the cladding was investigated using scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM/EDS). This relocation experiment using a single pin test section contributed to a better understanding of the relocation behavior of the fuel in the narrow sodium channel. However, since the relocation behavior of the fuel occurs in the fuel bundle structure rather than the single pin structure, there is a limitation in the understanding the relocation phenomenon by the single pin relocation experiments.
In the present study, the relocation behavior of the metallic fuel in a realistic core assembly was investigated by conducting the metallic fuel relocation experiments using 19-pin bundle test sections instead of single pin test sections in the MUSE facility. The 19 pins were in a three–row hexagonal array, showing the dispersion behavior of fuel from one pin to others. The pin bundle test sections were fabricated as a mock-up of the fuel assembly of the prototype generation-IV sodium cooled fast reactor (PGSFR) developed by Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute (KAERI). The uranium metal was selected as the fuel material and the HT-9M was selected as the cladding material to investigate the extent of eutectic formation between them in the core region. Post-test radiographic images were taken to confirm how the uranium fuel was relocated. In addition, the pressure drop in the test section was measured after the relocation experiments to evaluate the blockage of the sodium coolant channel after the fuel relocation.
<Section>2. Experiments</Section>
2.1. Metallic uranium safety experiment (MUSE) facility
The MUSE facility consisted of a melt assembly, a test section with a vertical split tube furnace, a sodium transfer system, and a containment box as shown in Fig. 1(a). The melt assembly consisted of a graphite crucible, a plug and a rod, a pneumatic cylinder, an induction heater with a motor generator, an injection line, a diaphragm, and a melt vessel, as shown in Fig. 1(b). The crucible and plug were coated by yttrium oxide which is known as the most stable material available for the reactive molten uranium. The metallic uranium fuel was inductively heated in the graphite crucible until reaching its target temperature. The plug was then pneumatically removed from the crucible to allow downward injection of the fuel melt. The inner diameter of the injection line was 47.4 mm, which was 3.5 times larger than the 13.5-mm bottom hole of the graphite crucible, so the molten fuel did not come into contact with the injection line during the drop. The diaphragm was used to separate the melt vessel and the test section until it was broken by the fuel. It was made of 316 stainless steel and its thickness was 0.0254 mm. The test section, which reflects a mock-up of the core structures of the PGSFR, was heated by the vertical split tube furnace to prototypic temperatures. The bottom of test section was connected to the sodium transfer tube for transferring sodium. The sodium transfer system consisted of a sodium supply tank, sodium transfer tubes, pneumatic valves, a sodium dump tank, and a vapor trap.
Fig. 1. (a) Schematic of Metallic Uranium Safety Experiment (MUSE) facility (b) melt assembly.
2.2. Pin bundle test section
The pin bundle test section consisted of a hex can, 19 cladding tubes, thermocouples, sodium level indicators, and a venting tube. A schematic diagram of the pin bundle test section is shown in Fig. 2. The fuel cladding was fabricated from a HT-9M tube with 7.4-mm outer diameter and 0.5-mm thickness and it was filled by the aluminum oxide fillers with 57.15-mm space left at the top for preventing the sodium flowing into the cladding in case it is disrupted by the eutectic formation with the molten uranium. The fuel cladding was arranged in a hexagonal shape with a pitch of 8.436 mm. The fuel cladding tubes were welded with wire wrap spacer then they were assembled in the hex can with a 38.86-mm inner face-to-face distance. The venting tube was welded on the side of the top flange. The test section thermocouple 1 (TC1) was a type C thermocouple that was inserted into the path of the molten uranium in order to measure the uranium temperature before entering the fuel claddings. The test section thermocouple 2 to 11 (TC2 – TC11) were type K thermocouples that were located between the hex can and the outermost layer claddings. TC2 was located at the height of top of the claddings and TC3 – TC11 were installed at a distance of 50.8 mm. The sodium was filled to 25.4 mm below the TC2 where the upper indicator was located.
Fig. 2. Schematic diagrams of pin bundle test section.
Three different designs of the pin bundle test sections were fabricated in order to study the impact of way of the fuel ejection and the impact of eutectic formation on the relocation behavior of the fuel (Fig. 3). Test sections #2 and #3 used a ceramic guide funnel to direct the molten metal fuel into the inside of the central seven claddings, while test section #1 did not use the guide funnel but simply dropped the molten uranium on top of the claddings. In the test section #1, some molten uranium fell into the sodium coolant channel and some fell into the claddings, which could create conditions similar to the state in which the core disruption progressed to some extent in the postulated severe accidents. In the test section #2 and #3, the molten uranium could be ejected into the sodium channel via the eutectic formation. This allowed only horizontal ejection of uranium into the coolant channel, which could create conditions similar to the initial cladding rupture in SFR's postulated severe accidents. In the test section #3, the yttria coating was used on the inner surfaces of the upper section of the claddings to prevent excessive eutectic formation. In addition, weak spots with 3.175-mm diameter and 0.0254-mm thickness were fabricated at the same height of TC2 in the center three claddings to allow for the molten uranium to be released into the sodium channel as soon as it entered inside the claddings. This allowed more localized fuel ejection into the coolant channel than in the test section #2.
Fig. 3. Pin bundle test section designs and fuel path.
2.3. Experimental procedure and conditions
The metallic fuel relocation experiment procedure with the pin bundle test section was as follows: The melt assembly, the test section, and the sodium transfer system were evacuated by using a vacuum pump and purged by argon gas to remove air and moisture. Afterwards, the test section and the sodium transfer system were heated to 200 °C to avoid the solidification of the sodium during the transfer from the sodium supply tank to the test section. The sodium was transferred to the test section by pressurizing the sodium supply tank. Following the sodium transfer, the valve on the sodium supply tank was closed and the test section was heated up to its desired temperature by the vertical split tube furnace. After the sodium filling process in the test section, the uranium fuel was heated inductively past it’s melting temperature in the graphite crucible. The molten uranium metal was then dropped through the injection line to the diaphragm using the pneumatic cylinder. After the diaphragm was broken instantly, the molten fuel was dropped by gravity into the test section. The estimated velocity of the molten uranium at the top of the fuel claddings was 1.58 m/s. Since the diaphragm appeared to be completely burned out instantly, it was expected that uranium would be injected in the form of a jet column. Post-test radiographic images were taken without draining of the sodium to investigate the relocation of metal fuel in the test section.
Two principal mechanisms have been identified as causing the fuel cladding damage in the metallic fuels; one is pin plenum overpressure by fission gas/bond sodium vapor, the other is clad thinning by the eutectic formation (Bauer et al., 1990). When the fuel cladding fails, overpressure will result in a high ejection velocity of molten fuel which is advantageous for fragmentation and dispersion of the molten fuel. However, for a low initial fuel burnup condition, the pin plenum pressure is expected to be low and therefore the ejection velocity is expected to be low. The eutectic penetration becomes the most important cladding breach mechanism in this low burn up condition. In the present study, the characteristics of relocation behavior of the metal fuel in a hexagonal pin bundle channel was investigated with a condition of low ejection velocity less than 2 m/s and a low Weber number less than 10, which was consistent with a low burnup condition. The Weber number was calculated by using following equation (Zhang et al., 2009):
@(1)
where @ is a thermal conductivity, @ is a density, @ is a specific heat capacity, @ is an injection velocity, @ is a hydraulic diameter, @ is a surface tension, a subscript a subscript  means uranium. The estimated weber number of present study was relatively small compared to those of previous studies (Nishimura et al., 2002, Nishimura et al., 2005, Nishimura et al., 2007, Zhang et al., 2009, Zhang and Sugiyama, 2010, Gabor et al., 1987, Gabor et al., 1989) due to the small hydraulic diameter.
Iron-uranium eutectic formation occurs above 700 °C, and the threshold value where eutectic formation becomes very rapid is approximately 1080 °C (Walter and Kelman, 1966). The penetration rate at this temperature is about 500 µm/sec. Since the thickness of the cladding is 0.5 mm, it would take a second for the fuel to breach the cladding. Tentner et al. conducted the analysis of severe accidents of the PGSFR by using the SAS4A/SASSYS-1 code for thermal, hydraulic, and safety analysis of transients in SFRs (Tentner et al., 2017). The peak fuel temperature was reported above 1400 °C for loss-of-flow and transient overpower without scram (LOF-TOPWS). In the experiment, the uranium fuel was super-heated sufficiently in the graphite crucible so that the temperature when uranium was injected into the cladding could be set above the eutectic penetration threshold value and set near 1400 °C. As in the single pin relocation experiments (Kim et al., 2017, Kim et al., 2018), uranium metal was selected as a fuel material and HT-9 M was selected as a cladding material to investigate the extent of eutectic formation between them in the core region.
Sodium coolant temperature was calculated by MARS-LMR code, which is developed by KAERI to analyze transients in a pool-type SFR, for design basis accidents and design extended conditions of the PGSFR (Lee et al., 2016). The peak coolant temperature was reported as 670 °C for transient overpower without scram (TOPWS), 620 °C for loss-of-heat sink without scram (LOHSWS), and 880 °C for loss-of-flow without scram (LOFWS). In the experiments, the sodium temperature was set at about 650 °C to meet the conditions for various accident scenarios without scram. The parameters for the metallic fuel relocation experiments are set up based on these findings and they are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1. Parameters of metal fuel relocation experiments.
<Section>3. Results and discussion</Section>
3.1. Pin bundle metallic fuel relocation experiment #1 (PBR-1)
In PBR-1 experiment, the molten uranium was dropped directly on top of the pin bundle structure without any guide structure. Some of the molten uranium fell to the sodium coolant channel and some fell to the claddings. Subsequently, when the cladding breach occurred due to the eutectic formation, the fuel dropped into the claddings was ejected into the sodium coolant channel. This was a condition for investigating the relocation behavior of the fuel in a state where the core disruption was progressed to some extent.
The response of the test section thermocouples are shown in Fig. 4. TC1 and TC2 experienced a sharp temperature peak. After the temperature peak, the temperature of TC1 and TC2 decreased quickly and this indicated the uranium fuel passed through these TCs. Unlike from TC1 and TC2, TC3 did not experience a very sharp temperature peak but experienced a sudden temperature increase. After the sudden temperature increase, it gradually increased to its maximum temperature then gradually decreased. This indicated that the dropped uranium was frozen around TC3 and this was confirmed by the post-test radiographic images. Meanwhile, TC4 – TC11 did not experience any temperature peaks or sudden increases but experienced a relatively small and slow increase of the temperature. This different temperature behavior among TC1 – TC2, TC3, and TC4 – TC11 implied that the molten uranium flowed only to the height of TC3 and TC4, a distance of approximately 10 cm from the top of the cladding.
Fig. 4. Temperature measurements of PBR-1.
The post-test radiographic image following PBR-1 experiment were taken without draining the sodium to keep the frozen uranium in its original position, as shown in Fig. 5. Most of the uranium appeared to be frozen near the region of TC3. It has been confirmed that some uranium flowed to the depth of TC4 (101.6 mm from the top of the cladding) through the coolant channel among the claddings. Based on the dispersion dimension of uranium shown in the post-test radiographic image, the porosity of relocated uranium was estimated to be 0.30. Plenty of uranium fragments were found on the top of the claddings after disassembly. These fragments were likely formed by the boiling of the coolant sodium, which occurs at temperatures exceeding 880 °C. The shape of the top portion of the central claddings was not clear, likely due to the destruction of cladding by the eutectic formation. White voids of round shape were also found in the upper cladding region above the frozen uranium, which further confirms that localized sodium temperatures likely reached boiling temperatures
Fig. 5. Radiographic images of PBR-1 test section (a) pre-test (b) post-test.
3.2. Pin bundle metallic fuel relocation experiment #2 (PBR-2)
In PBR-2 experiment, a guide funnel was used to direct the molten uranium into the seven central cladding pins so that the molten uranium could be ejected into the sodium channel only via the eutectic formation. This allowed only horizontal ejection of uranium into the coolant channel, which simulates the initial cladding rupture in the severe accident scenarios of LOFWS or LOF-TOPWS. In addition, the guide funnel enabled us to see the flow path of the molten uranium toward adjacent claddings and sodium channel by narrowing the ejection area down to the seven central pins.
The response of the thermocouples are shown in Fig. 6. TC1 – TC3 experienced a sharp temperature peak. After the temperature peak, the temperature of TC1 – TC3 decreased quickly and this indicated the uranium fuel passed through these TCs. Unlike from TC1 – TC3, TC4 did not experience a very sharp temperature peak but experienced a sudden temperature increase. TC4 was in a position where uranium can only reach after the cladding breach. From this, it can be inferred that the uranium was ejected into the sodium channel through the cladding breach. After the sudden temperature increase, it gradually increased to its maximum temperature then gradually decreased. From the temperature behavior of TC4, it could be concluded that the some of the ejected uranium was frozen around TC4. TC5 did not show any temperature peak or a sudden temperature increase but gradually increased to its maximum value at ~30 s. TC6 also gradually increased to its maximum value. The temperature behavior of TC5 and TC6 also indicated that some of uranium froze near TC5 and TC6. Meanwhile, TC7 – TC11, 25 cm down from the uranium entrance height, did not experience any notable temperature peaks or temperature increase. This means no uranium reached to TC7 – TC11. This was confirmed by the post-test radiographic images.
Fig. 6. Temperature measurements of PBR-2.
The post-test radiographic image from PBR-2 experiment was shown in Fig. 7. Unlike PBR-1 experiment, the molten uranium flowed deep into the sodium channel and froze between TC3 and TC7 (254 mm from the top of the cladding). In PBR-2 experiment, uranium could be ejected into the sodium channel only through the cladding breach via the eutectic formation. Therefore, it can be inferred that the ejected uranium would have been a uranium-iron eutectic, not pure uranium, and that the eutectic could have flowed far deeper than PBR-1 experiment due to its low freezing point (725 °C) and thus more superheat. It was confirmed that the uranium injected into the central seven claddings through the guide funnel was injected into the sodium channel, spread to the adjacent sodium channel, and frozen over most of the sodium channels. This is another reason why uranium could flow to TC7. This showed more practical relocation behavior than in the single pin experiment. This deep flowed and spread uranium did not reveal small debris or white voids, probably because the temperature of the flowing eutectic was not high enough to cause the sodium boiling. Based on the dispersion dimension of uranium shown in the post-test radiographic image, the porosity of relocated uranium was estimated to be 0.53, which is 77% higher than 0.30 of the test section #1. The more formation of the eutectics could lead to more fuel dispersion and less blockage. As in PBR-1 experiment, a number of white voids were found in the area above the aluminum oxide fillers. This was probably due to the boiling of the sodium heated by the ejected uranium when the claddings were breached. It was also found that some uranium froze above the top of the claddings and outside the guide funnel. It was presumed that some uranium was levitated by the pressure generated by the sodium boiling. This showed a possibility of removal of fuel from the core region even without pressure injection. Further studies of metal fuel relocation with pressure injection is necessary to find the effect of pressure on fuel fragmentation, removal of fuel from the core region.
Fig. 7. Radiographic images of PBR-2 test section (a) pre-test (b) post-test.
3.3. Pin bundle metallic fuel relocation experiment #3 (PBR-3)
In PBR-3 experiment, a guide funnel was used to direct the molten uranium into the center 7 cladding pins. In addition, center 3 claddings had a weak spot to allow for the molten uranium to be readily released into the sodium channel as soon as it entered inside the claddings. The inner surface of top 25.4-mm section of all claddings was coated with yttria to prevent the excessive eutectic formation between the fuel and the cladding. In PBR-3 experiment, uranium could be ejected into the sodium channel through the weak spots or the cladding breach via the eutectic formation. PBR-3 experiment simulated molten fuel ejection through a relatively localized area with less eutectic formation compared to PBR-2 experiment.
The response of the thermocouples is shown in Fig. 8. TC1 – TC3 experienced a sharp temperature peak. After the temperature peak, the temperature of TC1 – TC3 decreased quickly and this indicated the uranium fuel passed through these TCs. Unlike from TC1 – TC3, TC4 did not experience a very sharp temperature peak but experienced a sudden temperature increase. As in PBR-2, TC4 was in a position where uranium could reach only after the cladding breach. From this, it can be inferred that the uranium was ejected into the sodium channel via the eutectic formation. After the sudden temperature increase, it gradually increased to its maximum temperature. From the temperature behavior of TC4, it can be concluded that the some of the ejected uranium was frozen around TC4. TC5 did not show any temperature peak or a sudden temperature increase but gradually increased to its maximum value. TC6 showed similar pattern to TC4. It did not experience a very sharp temperature peak but experienced a sudden temperature increase. TC7 increased slowly to its maximum value. The temperature behavior of TC4 – TC7 indicated that some of uranium was frozen near TC4 – TC7. On the other hand, TC8 – TC11 did not experience any significant temperature peaks or temperature increase. This means that uranium did not reached to TC8 – TC11. The different temperature behaviors among TC1 – TC3, TC4 – TC7, and TC8 – TC11 implied that the molten uranium froze past TC1 – TC3, at TC4 – TC7, and did not reach TC8 – TC11. This was confirmed by the post-test radiographic images.
Fig. 8. Temperature measurements of PBR-3.
The post-test radiographic image from PBR-3 experiment was shown in Fig. 9. Unlike PBR-1 experiment and very similar to PBR-2 experiment, the molten uranium flowed deep into the sodium channel and froze between TC3 and TC7 (254 mm from the top of the cladding). Also it was found that the uranium was frozen in most sodium channels. Based on the dispersion dimension of uranium shown in the post-test radiographic image, the porosity of relocated uranium was estimated to be 0.42, which is 40% higher than 0.30 of the test section #1 and 20% lower than 0.53 of the test section #2. The yttrium oxide coating on the top 25.4-mm section reduced the total amount of the eutectic formation, thereby reducing the dispersion of the fuel. This confirmed again that the more formation of the eutectics could lead to more fuel dispersion and less blockage. It could be concluded that the superheat of the fuel ejected into the sodium channel plays a very important role in the dispersion behavior of the fuel in the sodium channel. In addition to that, the total amount of the eutectic and the ratio of the eutectic to the pure uranium could be important factors to determine the dispersion behavior of the fuel in the sodium channel. A number of white voids were also found in the region above the alumina filler. This was likely due to the boiling of the sodium.
Fig. 9. Radiographic images of PBR-3 test section (a) pre-test (b) post-test.
3.4. Pressure drop test
After PBR experiments, it was found that the fuel was frozen in the sodium coolant channel through the radiographic images. In order to quantitatively assess the degree of blockage in the sodium coolant channels, the pressure drop in the pin bundle test sections was measured. Prior to the pressure drop tests, the pin bundle test sections were cleaned with ethanol and de-ionized water to remove the residual sodium remaining inside the test sections. A schematic diagram of the pressure drop test loop is depicted in Fig. 10, which consisted of a water storage tank, a centrifugal pump, a flow meter, test section, valves, and piping. Water was used as a working fluid of the test loop and all experiments were conducted under a single-phase flow condition. The flow rates ranged from 0.05 LPM to 1.74 LPM for PBR-1 test section, which corresponds to 0.35% to 12.16% of the normal operating condition of the PGSFR. The flow rate range of PBR-2 test section was from 0.72 LPM to 5.30 LPM, which corresponds to 5.03% to 37.05% of the normal operating condition of the PGSFR. The flow rate range of PBR-3 test section was from 0.32 LPM to 4.32 LPM, which corresponds to 2.24% to 30.20% of the normal operating condition of the PGSFR.
Fig. 10. Schematic diagram of pressure drop test loop.
Fig. 11 shows the measured pressure drops as a function of flow rates. The pressure drop test indirectly evaluated the degree of blockage of the sodium channel in the test section. The degree of blockage of PBR-1 test section was higher that of PBR-2 test section and PBR-3 test section based on the pressure drop measurements. In PBR-1 experiment, some of the uranium fell directly into the sodium channel and froze before the uranium that fell into the inside cladding was ejected via the eutectic formation into the sodium channel. As a result of that, it can be concluded that most of the uranium was frozen at the top of the cladding and that the degree of blockage was high. On the other hand, in PBR-2 experiment, all uranium was injected into the inside cladding through the guide funnel, and the uranium was ejected into the sodium channel only via the eutectic formation with the HT-9M cladding. The fuel ejected into the sodium channel can be spread much wider area and the degree of blockage was much lower compared to PBR-1 since the freezing point of the uranium-cladding eutectic was significantly lower than that of the uranium. Unlike PBR-1 experiment and similar to PBR-2 experiment, in PBR-3 experiment, the molten uranium flowed deep into the sodium channel and froze between TC3 and TC7. The pressure drop test confirmed that the superheat of fuel ejected into the sodium coolant channel is an important factor for its relocation behavior.
Fig. 11. Pressure drop vs flow rate.
The pressure drop values of PBR test sections were also evaluated using Ergun's equation (Egun, 1952). Ergun developed an empirical correlation for calculating pressure drop through a porous medium based on the porosity and the characteristic length scale of the internal structure of the porous medium:
@(2)
where A = 150 and B = 1.75 are empirical constants, @ is the porosity of the porous medium, @ is the characteristic length of the internal structure of the porous medium (i.e. pore size), @ is the length of the porous medium, @ is the dynamic viscosity of the working fluid, @ is the density of the working fluid, and @ is the working fluid velocity defined as the total system flow rate divided by the cross-sectional area of the vessel containing the porous medium.
The pressure drop of PBR test sections was calculated by varying the porosity (P) and the pore size (D) of the relocated fuel. The porosity and pore size of the relocated fuel in PBR test sections can be estimated by comparing these calculated values of the pressure drop with the measured values of the pressure drop from the pressure drop tests. Fig. 12 compares the analytically calculated pressure drop values using Ergun's equation with the pressure drop measurements of PBR-1 test section. It suggested that the porosity of the relocated fuel in PBR-1 test section was likely between 0.2 and 0.3. This value was close to the estimated porosity of 0.30 based on the dispersion dimension. Fig. 13 compares analytically calculated pressure drop values using the Ergun's equation with the pressure drop measurements in PBR-2 test section. The porosity of the relocated fuel in PBR-2 test section can be estimated to be between 0.5 and 0.6, which is close to the estimated porosity of 0.53 based on the dispersion dimension. This was higher than the estimated porosity of the relocated fuel in PBR-1 test section. Fig. 14 compares analytically calculated pressure drop values with the pressure drop measurements in the PBR-3 test section. The porosity of the relocated fuel in the PBR-3 test section can be estimated to be between 0.4 and 0.5, which is close to the estimated porosity of 0.42 based on the dispersion dimension. This was higher than the estimated porosity of the relocated fuel in the PBR-1 test section and lower than the estimated porosity of the relocated fuel in the PBR-2 test section. The porosities calculated by Ergun's equation were close to the estimated porosities based on the dispersion dimension, which suggested that the equation could reasonably estimate the porosity of the relocated fuel.
Fig. 12. Pressure drop of experimental data and analytical calculations for PBR-1.
Fig. 13. Pressure drop of experimental data and analytical calculations for PBR-2.
Fig. 14. Pressure drop of experimental data and analytical calculations for PBR-3.
Through the pressure drop tests, it could be concluded that the porosity of the relocated uranium increases as the amount of the eutectic formation increases. The porosity of relocated fuel is an important factor that determines whether the relocated fuel is coolable or not. The pressure drop experiment confirmed that the sodium channel was not completely blocked, so there is a possibility of the coolable geometry formation of the relocated fuel in a severe accident.
<Section>4. Conclusions</Section>
In the present study, the relocation behavior of the metallic fuel was investigated by conducting metallic fuel relocation experiments using the 19-pin bundle test sections in the MUSE facility. In PBR-1 experiment, most of the uranium appeared to be frozen above TC4 (101.6 mm from the top of the cladding). Plenty of the uranium fragments were found on the top of the claddings. These fragments were likely formed by the boiling of the coolant sodium. In PBR-2 experiment, the molten uranium flowed deep into the sodium channel to TC7 (254 mm from the top of the cladding). The uranium could be ejected into the sodium channel only through the cladding breach via the eutectic formation. Therefore, it can be inferred that the ejected uranium would have been the uranium-iron eutectic, and that the eutectic could have flowed far deeper than PBR-1 experiment due to its low freezing point and higher superheat. It was confirmed that the uranium was injected into the sodium channel, spread to the adjacent sodium channel, and frozen over most of the sodium channels. This was another reason why uranium could flow to TC7. This showed more practical relocation behavior than in the single pin experiment. In PBR-3 experiment, unlike the PBR-1 experiment and very similar to the PBR-2 experiment, the molten uranium flowed deep into the sodium channel to TC7 (254 mm from the top of the cladding). Due to the yttrium oxide coating inside the top section of the fuel claddings, the total amount of uranium cladding eutectic was less than that of the PBR-2 experiment and unreacted cladding pieces were found. From these results, it was concluded that due to the lower freezing point of the eutectics, the more formation of the eutectics could lead to more fuel dispersion and less blockage. It could be concluded that the superheat of the fuel ejected into the sodium coolant channel plays a very important role in the dispersion behavior of the fuel in the sodium coolant channel. In addition to that, the total amount of the eutectic and the ratio of the eutectic to the pure uranium could be important factors to determine the dispersion behavior of the fuel in the sodium channel.
The pressure drop test indirectly evaluated the degree of blockage of the sodium channel in the test section. The blockage of the PBR-1 test section, the PBR-2 test section, and the PBR-3 test section showed clear differences. The degree of blockage of the PBR-1 test section was much higher compared to that of the PBR-2 test section and PBR-3 test section. The extent of blockage of the PBR-3 test section was between the PBR-1 and PBR-2. The porosity and pore size of the relocated fuel in the PBR experiments were estimated by comparing the analytically calculated pressure drop values with the measured values from the pressure drop tests. The porosity of the relocated fuel of the PBR-1 test section was estimated between 0.2 ~ 0.3, while the porosity of the relocated fuel of the PBR-2 test section was estimated between 0.5 ~ 0.6 and the porosity of the relocated fuel of the PBR-3 test section was estimated between 0.4 ~ 0.5. The porosities calculated by Ergun's equation were close to the estimated porosities based on the dispersion dimension, which suggested that the equation could reasonably estimate the porosity of the relocated fuel. Through the pressure drop tests, it could be concluded that the porosity of the relocated uranium increases as the amount of the eutectic formation increases. The porosity of relocated fuel is an important factor that determines whether the relocated fuel is coolable or not. The pressure drop experiment confirmed that the sodium channel was not completely blocked, so there is a possibility of the coolable geometry formation of the relocated fuel in a severe accident.
It should be noted that in the event of a postulated severe accident in a SFR, the molten fuel is expected to be ejected into the coolant channel at higher velocities than tested in the present experiments. A backpressure would be applied to the fuel that increases with burnup due to the fission gas and presence of the bond sodium vapor. The higher injection velocities would be expected to promote fragmentation and dispersion of the molten fuel in the coolant channel, which ultimately leads a negative reactivity feedback by removing fuels from the core region. Further studies of metal fuel relocation with pressure injection is necessary to find the effect of pressure on fuel fragmentation, relocation behavior in the core region.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Taeil Kim: Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. Dzmitry Harbaruk: Investigation, Methodology, Writing - review & editing. Darius Lisowski: Formal analysis, Writing - review & editing. Nathan Bremer: Methodology, Writing - review & editing. Mitchell Farmer: Conceptualization, Methodology, Resources. Christopher Grandy: Supervision, Resources. Yoon Il Chang: Supervision, Resources, Funding acquisition.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgments</Section>
The authors are grateful for the MUSE facility design support from Stanley Wiedmeyer, Dennis Kilsdonk, and Arthur E. Wright at Argonne National Laboratory. They would like to acknowledge the helpful guidance and discussion on SFR accident analysis of Adrian M. Tentner and Aydin Karahan at Argonne National Laboratory, and Seok Hun Kang at Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute. This work was performed under the Cooperative Research and Development Agreement (CRADA) No. 1501601 supported by the Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute.
<Section>References</Section>
Bauer et al., 1990
T.H. Bauer, A.E. Wright, W.R. Robinson, J.W. Holland, E.A. Rhodes
Behavior of modern metallic fuel in treat transient overpower tests
Nucl. Technol., 92 (3) (1990), pp. 325-352
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chang, 2007
Y.I. Chang
Technical rationale for metal fuel in fast reactors
Nucl. Eng. Technol., 39 (3) (2007), pp. 161-170
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Egun, 1952
S. Egun
Fluid flow through packed columns
Chem. Eng. Prog., 48 (2) (1952), pp. 89-94
Google Scholar
Gabor et al., 1987
Gabor, J.D., Purviance, R.T., Aeschliman, R.W., Spencer, B.W., Characterization of IFR metal fuel fragmentation, Trans. Am. Nucl. Soc.; (United States), 54(CONF-870601-). (1987).
Google Scholar
Gabor et al., 1989
Gabor, J.D., Purviance, R.T., Aeschliman, R.W., Spencer, B.W., Dispersion and Thermal Interactions of Molten Metal Fuel Settling on A Horizontal Steel Plate through A Sodium Pool, DE89 017679 (1989).
Google Scholar
Heo et al., 2016
H. Heo, S.D. Park, D.W. Jeong, I.C. Bang
Visual study of ex-pin phenomena for SFR with metal fuel under initial phase of severe accidents by using simulants
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 53 (9) (2016), pp. 1409-1416
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kamiyama et al., 2013
K. Kamiyama, M. Saito, K.I. Matsuba, M. Isozaki, I. Sato, K. Konishi, V.A. Zuyev, A.A. Kolodeshnikov, Y.S. Vassiliev
Experimental study on fuel-discharge behavior through in-core coolant channels
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 50 (6) (2013), pp. 629-644
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kim et al., 2017
T. Kim, D. Harbaruk, C. Gerardi, M. Farmer, Y.I. Chang
Experimental studies on metallic fuel relocation in a single-pin core structure of a sodium-cooled fast reactor
Nucl. Eng. Des., 322 (2017), pp. 204-214
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kim et al., 2018
T. Kim, D. Harbaruk, C. Gerardi, M. Farmer, Y.I. Chang
Experimental studies on eutectic formation between metallic fuel and HT-9M cladding in a single-pin core structure of a sodium-cooled fast reactor
J. Nucl. Mater., 505 (2018), pp. 204-214
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lee et al., 2016
K.L. Lee, K.S. Ha, J.H. Jeong, C.W. Choi, T. Jeong, S.J. Ahn, S.W. Lee, W.P. Chang, S.H. Kang, J. Yoo
A preliminary safety analysis for the prototype Gen IV sodium-cooled fast reactor
Nucl. Eng. Technol., 48 (5) (2016), pp. 1071-1082
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Nishimura et al., 2002
S. Nishimura, I. Kinoshita, K.I. Sugiyama, N. Ueda
Thermal fragmentation of a molten metal jet dropped into a sodium pool at interface temperatures below its freezing point
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 39 (7) (2002), pp. 752-758
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Nishimura et al., 2005
S. Nishimura, I. Kinoshita, K.I. Sugiyama, N. Ueda
Thermal interaction between molten metal jet and sodium pool: effect of principal factors governing fragmentation of the jet
Nucl. Technol., 149 (2) (2005), pp. 189-199
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Nishimura et al., 2007
S. Nishimura, Z.G. Zhang, K.I. Sugiyama, I. Kinoshita
Transformation and fragmentation behavior of molten metal drop in sodium pool
Nucl. Eng. Des., 237 (23) (2007), pp. 2201-2209
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Planchon et al., 1986
H.P. Planchon, R.M. Singer, D. Mohr, E.E. Feldman, L.K. Chang, P.R. Betten
The experimental breeder reactor II inherent shutdown and heat removal tests—results and analysis
Nucl. Eng. Des., 91 (3) (1986), pp. 287-296
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tentner et al., 2017
Tentner, A., Kang, S., Karahan, A., Advances in the Development of the SAS4A Code Metallic Fuel Models for the Analysis of Prototype Gen-IV Sodium-cooled Fast Reactor Postulated Severe Accidents, International Conference on Fast Reactors and Related Fuel Cycles FR17, Yekaterinburg, Russian Federation, (2017).
Google Scholar
Walter and Kelman, 1966
C.M. Walter, L.R. Kelman
The interaction of iron with molten uranium
J. Nucl. Mater., 20 (3) (1966), pp. 314-322
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhang and Sugiyama, 2010
Z.G. Zhang, K.I. Sugiyama
Fragmentation of a single molten metal droplet penetrating sodium pool II stainless steel and the relationship with copper droplet
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 47 (2) (2010), pp. 169-175
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhang et al., 2009
Z.G. Zhang, K.I. Sugiyama, W. Itagaki, S. Nishimura, I. Kinosita, T. Narabayashi
Fragmentation of a single molten metal droplet penetrating sodium pool I Copper droplet and the relationship with copper jet
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 46 (5) (2009), pp. 453-459
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar