<title>SCALE capabilities for high temperature gas-cooled reactor analysis</title>
<author>1,FriederikeBostelmann,2,CihangirCelik,3,Mark L.Williams,4,Ronald J.Ellis,5,GerminaIlas,6,William A.Wieselquist</author>
<Affiliation>1,Oak Ridge National Laboratory, P.O. Box 2008, Bldg. 5700, Oak Ridge, TN 37831-6170, USA</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107673</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454920303716</URL>
SCALE capabilities for high temperature gas-cooled reactor analysis
FriederikeBostelmann,CihangirCelik,Mark L.Williams,Ronald J.Ellis,GerminaIlas,William A.Wieselquist
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, P.O. Box 2008, Bldg. 5700, Oak Ridge, TN 37831-6170, USA
<Section>Highlights</Section>
SCALE’s capabilities for double heterogeneous fuel components are described.
Verification/validation of multigroup and continuous-energy methods are performed.
Excellent results in code-to-code comparisons and with experiments are obtained.
The choice of ENDF/B library is critical for the agreement calculation/experiments.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The SCALE code system’s ability to address stochastic distributions of fuel particles within a graphite matrix has been revisited in both multigroup (MG) features and continuous-energy (CE) Monte Carlo methods. This paper describes current and emergent SCALE capabilities within the CSAS sequence to address double-heterogeneous systems and presents verification and validation studies of these methods and data. Good agreement was obtained for a high temperature gas-cooled reactor (HTGR) fuel pebble model between CSAS MG eigenvalue calculations and corresponding CE reference solutions. Code-to-code comparisons for this HTGR pebble model showed good agreement of CSAS-KENO and CSAS-Shift CE calculations and the Serpent and MCNP codes in terms of eigenvalues and reaction rate ratios. Validation studies based on two HTGR experiments resulted in good agreement between MG and CE results, as well as between experiment and calculation, although the level of agreement was significantly influenced by the applied ENDF/B nuclear data library.
Keywords：SCALE；Double-heterogeneity；HTR-10HTTR；Validation；Pebble-bed reactor
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The SCALE code system (Rearden and Jessee, 2017) provides a comprehensive, integrated package of codes and nuclear data for a wide range of applications in criticality safety, shielding, isotopic transmutation, sensitivity/uncertainty, and reactor physics analysis. SCALE 6.2.3, released in 2018, includes features of an ongoing development program to (1) redesign the fundamental SCALE computational architecture for improved execution, (2) refactor many computational routines for improved quality assurance, maintenance, and efficiency, and (3) provide new simulation capabilities (Rearden et al., 2014). New capabilities will be included in the next major release, SCALE 6.3.
Recently, there has been renewed interest in advanced reactor designs using tristructural-isotropic (TRISO) fuel particles such as pebble-bed and prismatic high temperature gas-cooled reactors (HTGRs), as well as fluoride-salt cooled high temperature reactors (FHRs). A TRISO fuel particle is roughly 1 mm in diameter and consists of a micro fuel kernel composed of uranium in oxide, carbide, or nitride form. The particle is enclosed by four concentric coatings: a porous graphite buffer, an inner pyrolytic carbon (PyC) layer, a ceramic silicon carbide (SiC) layer, and an outer pyrolytic carbon layer (Fig. 1). Many thousands of these TRISO particles are distributed randomly in a graphite matrix to form a fuel component such as a pebble or a cylindrical compact.
Fig. 1. TRISO particle model.
Earlier releases of SCALE included the capability to perform calculations for TRISO fuel compacts using multigroup (MG) methods that were specifically developed for doubly heterogeneous (double-het) systems (Goluoglu and Williams, 2005, Williams, 2011). The recent development work has provided enhanced MG features, as well as new continuous-energy (CE) Monte Carlo methods to address randomly distributed fuel particles. In addition, new MG and CE cross section libraries processed from ENDF/B-VII.1 (Chadwick, 2011) and ENDF/B-VIII.0 (Brown et al., 2018) nuclear data provide significant improvements in nuclear data for graphite and uranium nuclides. SCALE 6.2.3 includes ENDF/B-VII.1 libraries, while the ENDF/B-VIII.0 libraries will be available in the future release SCALE 6.3.
This paper describes current (6.2.3) and emergent (6.3) SCALE capabilities to address TRISO systems and provides results of verification and validation studies of these methods and data. Section 2 discusses CE methods and verification for TRISO fuel compacts. Section 3 describes the MG methods available in SCALE for TRISO system calculations, including techniques for treating resonance self-shielding effects in double-het systems. Section 4 summarizes recent improvements in nuclear data and demonstrates the impact on selected test cases. Section 5 provides validation results of the SCALE methods and data based on comparisons between calculations and experimental data for the HTR-10 (International Handbook of Reactor Physics Experiments, 2007) and HTTR (International Handbook of Reactor Physics Experiments, 2010) benchmarks. Section 6 summarizes the conclusions of this work. An overview of the calculations is given in Table 1.
Table 1. Overview of studies performed.
<Section>2. Continuous-energy Monte Carlo methods</Section>
2.1. Particle distribution models
The most common approach for modeling a double-het system with CE methods is to model the TRISO particles explicitly. This study investigates the following approaches for modeling the placement of TRISO particles in a fuel pebble:
1.
Array: a uniform array of particles
2.
Random-mesh: the fuel area within the pebble is divided into several mesh regions, each containing a random distribution of particles
3.
Random: a random distribution of particles throughout the entire domain
The array model can enable relatively fast particle tracking during simulations because of the small number of neighboring surfaces to be considered for the next neutron interaction; the calculations can be completed in a fraction of the time required for random models (depending on the code). However, such a configuration approximates the actual particle distribution within the pebble. Biases might be induced in the results, for example, because long neutron streaming paths are created, and local particle packing fractions are increased compared to the specifications when particle clipping is not permitted, leading to significant local deviations of the moderator-to-fuel ratio. The random-mesh approach is a middle step in between the array model and the random model. During the sampling of the coordinates of particles within the fuel pebble, the particles which are intersecting with the mesh boundary are resampled. This approach enables particle tracking that is faster than tracking with the random model because the number of surfaces to consider for the next interaction within a mesh voxel is a fraction of the number of surfaces that needs to be considered for the random model. While the random-mesh approach is slower than the array model, it provides better accounting for self-shielding factors. For the random-mesh and random approaches, the user input definition is complex and likely prone to user error. The modeling and simulation times for these two approaches can be significantly longer than that needed for the array modeling approach. In all three mentioned approaches, the particles are not clipped by the edge of the fuel region (Fig. 2).
Fig. 2. Pebble models to investigate stochastic effects: array model (left), random-mesh model (middle), and random model (right).
2.2. Code-to-code comparisons
For code-to-code comparisons within this study, the CSAS sequence of SCALE was applied with the underlying Monte Carlo transport kernels KENO1 and Shift. KENO is available with the current version of SCALE 6.2.3 (Rearden and Jessee, 2017). Shift (Pandya et al., 2016) is a new Monte Carlo transport kernel that will be available with the SCALE 6.3 release. Shift allows a concise, user-friendly input deck for representing TRISO particles in a fuel pebble, as well as pebbles in a core fuel region. A geometry with randomly distributed particles in a specified region can be automatically generated for different random distributions. A beta version of SCALE 6.3 was used for the application of CSAS/Shift in this study. Additionally, the Monte Carlo codes Serpent 2.1.30 (Leppänen et al., 2015) and MCNP 6.2 (Werner et al., 2017) were used. All codes allow a parallel execution on multiple processors; for KENO, this capability was introduced with SCALE 6.2.
Random distributions of the fuel particles were used in the Shift, Serpent and MCNP simulations. Because KENO calculations with random distributions resulted in extremely long runtimes, the random modeling of the particles in this case was performed using the random-mesh modeling approach. In MCNP and KENO, the particles were explicitly placed in a random distribution within the geometry input. A program was written to randomly place the particles in the fuel region and discard particles that would be clipped by the outer surface or a mesh boundary in the geometry model used with each of these two codes. In Serpent, the particle random locations were determined using Serpent’s disperse function that creates a separate file that includes the coordinates of the particles for use in the main Serpent input file (Rintala et al., 2015). All four Monte Carlo codes were used for the analysis of the array model (Fig. 2), allowing a code-to-code comparison and analysis of the impact of the particle modeling. A program was written to determine the particle lattice pitch and to decide which array positions are filled by a particle to avoid clipping. The Monte Carlo calculations with random or random-mesh models were performed for 10 realizations, each with different particle distributions, to reduce the bias resulting from individual particle distributions. All calculations discussed in this section used ENDF/B-VII.1 data.
The code-to-code comparisons for the CE Monte Carlo calculations were performed for a single fuel pebble model. The characteristics of this pebble were taken from the initial critical configuration of the 10 MWth HTR-10 reactor as specified in the International Handbook of Reactor Physics Experiments (IRPhEP) (International Handbook of Reactor Physics Experiments, 2007). The fuel pebble has a 2.5 cm radius inner fuel zone with TRISO particles distributed within a graphite matrix. The inner fuel zone is surrounded by a 0.5 cm thick graphite layer (Table 2). The fuel pebbles are placed in a cube with an edge length of 3 cm that is filled with saturated air. An infinite lattice of these cubes is realized by applying reflective boundary conditions to the cube. Models used here are based on models from earlier studies (Ilas et al., 2012, Ellis et al., 2011).
Table 2. HTR-10 pebble model specifications (International Handbook of Reactor Physics Experiments, 2007).
The eigenvalues (k∞) for the HTR-10 fuel pebble model obtained with the four codes and different particle distributions are compared in Table 3, with the KENO CE eigenvalue considered as a reference. As shown in the table, all four codes show consistent results when considering the statistical uncertainties σ. The random models show a perfect eigenvalue agreement, within 1σ, and they agree within 2σ with the KENO random-mesh model; all eigenvalue differences are smaller than 60 pcm. The bias of the random-mesh model compared to a random model was also found negligible in an assessment study using Serpent (mean values of 10 realizations: Δk = 9 ± 5 pcm). The agreement between the four codes is also very good for the array models. The bias due to the modeling of the particle distribution (array vs. random model) for a given code is between 145 and 250 pcm.
Table 3. HTR-10 pebble model: CE eigenvalue results using ENDF/B-VII.1 data.
The ratio between the fission reaction rate in 235U and the capture reaction rate in 238U show differences less than 0.4% between the four codes (Table 4) for a given modeling approach. The differences between the array and random models for a given code range up to 1%.
Table 4. HTR-10 pebble model: CE 235U fission/238U capture using ENDF/B-VII.1 data.
While the Serpent random and array calculations had similar run times, the MCNP and Shift random calculations were ~12 and ~25 times longer, respectively, than their corresponding array calculations. The KENO random-mesh calculation was ~126 times longer than the array calculation.
<Section>3. Multigroup methods for TRISO fuel components</Section>
The generic MG cross section libraries distributed with SCALE assume infinitely dilute conditions, so they must be corrected for self-shielding effects in a given application. Self-shielding of MG cross sections for fuel components (pebbles, rods, or plates) that include randomly dispersed TRISO particles is especially challenging. The particles are closely packed in a graphite medium, which requires resonance self-shielding for a distribution of spherical fuel particles. The fuel components themselves are placed into the reactor lattice, which also impacts the resonance escape probability; thus, double-het self-shielding effects occur.
3.1. SCALE double-het methodology
SCALE has a unique approach to computing problem-dependent MG cross sections for double-het fuel elements with its material and cross section processing module XSPROC (Williams, 2011). It uses two CE deterministic transport calculations that are performed by the CENTRM module to treat the two levels of heterogeneity at the fuel particle and component levels. Fig. 3 illustrates the overall procedure to generate self-shielded MG cross sections for a double-het fuel pebble.
Fig. 3. Double-het computational procedure for pebble fuel component.
The first transport calculation, which accounts for the fuel particle heterogeneity in the graphite matrix, is performed for an “average” spherical unit cell containing the fuel kernel and surrounding coatings embedded in a graphite matrix. The unit cell’s diameter is equal to the average distance between fuel particles, and a white boundary condition is applied on the outer surface: on average, there is equal probability for a neutron to enter a cell from all directions. This white boundary condition is adequate for an infinite medium of random particles, but it is an approximation for those particles located near the boundary of a finite volume fuel compact. The first transport calculation provides a detailed CE flux distribution throughout the fuel kernel, coatings, and graphite matrix in the spherical unit cell. Energy-dependent CE disadvantage factors  are calculated as the ratio of the CE flux in the corresponding zone Z, , and the unit cell–averaged CE flux, :
These factors are then used to compute cell-weighted CE cross sections for the homogenized fuel compact in the fuel component. For example, Fig. 4 shows the CE disadvantage factor for the fuel particle in the unit cell. The disadvantage factor has pronounced minima at resonance energies (mainly of 238U) and is close to unity at energies higher than the resonances. Thus, the cell-weighted CE cross sections are significantly reduced at resonance energies, and they are reduced to a lesser extent in the thermal energy range as a result of applying the disadvantage factors.
Fig. 4. Energy-dependent disadvantage factor for fuel particle.
A second transport calculation is performed for a Wigner-Seitz unit cell representing the fuel component in the reactor lattice. In this calculation, the fuel particles and their matrix are homogenized, and the spatially averaged CE cross sections obtained from the first transport calculation are used in the fuel region. Finally, the CE flux from the second transport calculation is used in the SCALE module PMC to process the cell-homogenized pointwise cross sections into MG data.
Compared to previous versions, SCALE 6.2 can treat additional types of “regular” and “annular” unit cell geometries for self-shielding calculations of double-het fuel components (Fig. 5). Regular cells include fuel in the central region, while the central region in annular cells corresponds to an internal moderator or absorber region that is surrounded by fuel. The following double-het cell types are available in SCALE 6.2: (1) sphere (pebble), (2) annular sphere, (3) cylinder (fuel rod), (4) annular cylinder, (5) symmetric slab (plate fuel), (6) asymmetric slab, and (7) two-dimensional (2D) rectangular cell with cylindrical fuel rod. For all but the last geometry type, transport calculations are performed using one-dimensional discrete ordinates transport theory. The pointwise transport calculations for 2D rectangular lattice cells are performed using the method of characteristics that was shown to generate more accurate self-shielded cross sections than the previous one dimensional discrete ordinate solver used with CENTRM (Kim and Williams, 2012).
Fig. 5. Unit cell geometries in SCALE 6.2 for double-het fuel components (Rearden and Jessee, 2017).
3.2. Verification of MG double-het methodology
3.2.1. HTR-10 pebble criticality model
The SCALE double-het methodology was first verified by comparing results of MG calculations with corresponding CE reference solutions using the CSAS sequence of SCALE that automatically performs the required cross section processing steps prior to the neutron transport calculation. CSAS of SCALE 6.2.3 was used in combination with the Monte Carlo code KENO, and a beta version of SCALE 6.3 was applied to run CSAS in combination with the new Monte Carlo code Shift. The results based on ENDF/B-VII.1 data are presented in Table 5 for the HTR-10 pebble model.
Table 5. HTR-10 pebble model: Comparison of MG and CE eigenvalues and 235U fission/238U capture ratios using ENDF/B-VII.1 and ENDF/B-VIII.0 data.
The reference CE results for KENO correspond to the random-mesh particle distribution model, whereas the reference Shift CE results are obtained using a random particle distribution model. MG calculations were also performed with both codes using 252-group and 1597-group cross section libraries. The 1597-group library is a new, recently developed, very fine group (VFG) library, as further discussed in this paper.
The MG eigenvalues obtained with KENO underestimate the CE reference values by up to 280 pcm when using ENDF/B-VII.1 data (Table 5). When using ENDF/B-VIII.0 data, the difference of the KENO 252-group result compared to the reference is slightly increased to 380 pcm. Since the use of additional energy groups in the MG library (1597 vs. 252) did not lead to an improvement in eigenvalue in case of the ENDF/B-VII.1 calculations, it can be concluded that the MG bias is largely due to the double-het approach and less to the refinement of the MG energy structure. In the first step of the double-het approach (see illustration in Fig. 3), the fuel particle model that uses a white boundary condition is practically equivalent to an infinite array of particles; the data for this particle model is based on the specified number of particles in the pebble or the particle packing fraction. Therefore, the boundary effects of the finite fuel region in the pebble are not explicitly considered, but they are accounted for through the two-step resonance self-shielding approach, as described in Section 3.1. The eigenvalues of the MG calculations and the CE array calculations are in good agreement (differences of ~30 ± 13 pcm and ~100 ± 16 pcm for KENO and Shift, respectively).
The reaction rate ratios differ by less than 0.9% compared to their corresponding reference when MG ENDF/B-VII.1 data are used, and by less than 1.5% in the ENDF/B-VIII.0 data case. In case of the eigenvalue, the MG result shows a better agreement with the CE array model: the relative difference is ~0.15 ± 0.04% for the KENO ENDF/B-VII.1 calculations.
The KENO runtime for the MG calculation is ~6 times smaller than the corresponding CE array calculation. For Shift, the MG runtime differs from its MG runtime by a factor of 16.
3.2.2. HTGR pebble depletion model
For the second part of the verification study, a depletion calculation of an HTGR pebble as specified in the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development/Nuclear Energy Agency (OECD/NEA) HTGR Fuel Element Depletion benchmark (DeHart and Ulses, 2009) was performed. The TRISO particle and pebble dimensions were identical to the HTR-10 pebble (Table 6). However, compared to the HTR-10 pebble, in this benchmark the fuel enrichment was lower (8.2 wt%) and the number of fuel particles in the pebble was larger (15,000).
Table 6. HTGR pebble model for depletion: Specifications (Ellis et al., 2011) of TRISO particles and fuel pebble.
The pebble was modeled in an infinite array of cubes for which the length matched the pebble’s diameter, consistent with the benchmark specifications. The space between the pebble and the outer boundary of the cube was filled with helium. The depletion was performed at a constant power of 62 MW/tHM. Both the fuel and the graphite matrix (the boron impurities in graphite) were depleted. The eigenvalue, a set of spectral indices with fast/thermal boundary at 0.625 eV (Table 7), and nuclide concentrations of actinides and fission products, were calculated.
Table 7. Spectral indices as defined in Ref. (DeHart and Ulses, 2009).
The depletion calculations were performed using the TRITON sequence in SCALE that automatically performs the cross section processing, neutron transport, and depletion/decay by calling the adequate modules as applicable. In addition to the MG Monte Carlo depletion capability available in previous SCALE versions, CE Monte Carlo depletion capabilities have been added in SCALE 6.2. The performance of the MG double-het methodology was verified by comparing the MG and CE depletion results. In both MG and CE calculations, KENO was used as transport kernel. For the CE calculations, TRITON was used with an array model. Additional comparisons of the SCALE CE results were performed against Serpent CE calculations that used an array model.
The eigenvalue trajectory as a function of burnup is presented in Fig. 6. An excellent eigenvalue agreement with a difference of less than 200 pcm was observed between MG and CE TRITON over the burnup range. The results obtained for the isotopes specified in the OECD/NEA HTGR depletion benchmark and a few other relevant isotopes are presented in Fig. 7, Fig. 8. The results in Fig. 7 show a good agreement overall between the MG and CE predictions for all considered actinides. The comparisons for the Pu nuclides show differences of less than 2% for all Pu isotopes, with less than 1% difference for the major actinide 239Pu, at all burnups. The difference for 235U was less than 1% for up to ~80 GWd/tHM burnup and increased to ~2.8% at 120 GWd/tHM. This type of behavior was not unexpected given the approximations used in MG depletion. Moreover, it should be noted that at 120 GWd/tHM, there was a small quantity of 235U present in the fuel, with approximately 95% of the initial 235U being depleted. There was a good agreement between the MG and CE calculations for the considered fission products, with relative differences of less than 1.3% over the 0–120 GWd/tHM burnup range. The variation of spectral indices (defined in Table 7) over burnup, which occurred due to the change of the flux spectrum and the depletion of 235U, are presented in Fig. 9, showing an excellent agreement between MG and CE TRITON for ρ238, δ235 and c/f235. The relative differences for these three spectral indices were less than 1.8% throughout the burnup range. The index δ238 (238U fission/235U fission) showed slightly larger differences between 2 and 2.5% for burnups of 0–85 GWd/tHM, and up to 4.4% between 85 and 120 GWd/tHM. Overall, the MG double-het results showed excellent good agreement with the CE results, while enabling a considerable reduction in model definition and a reduction of computation time by a factor of 19.
Fig. 6. HTGR pebble depletion: Eigenvalue as a function of burnup.
Fig. 7. HTGR pebble depletion. Left: CE TRITON nuclide density of actinides as a function of burnup (the differences between MG and CE are so small that the curves lie on top of each other). Right: Relative difference between MG and CE TRITON.
Fig. 8. HTGR pebble depletion. Left: CE TRITON nuclide density of fission products as a function of burnup (the differences between MG and CE are so small that the curves lie on top of each other). Right: Relative difference between MG and CE TRITON .
Fig. 9. HTGR pebble depletion: Spectral indices as defined in Table 7 compared between MG and CE TRITON.
The eigenvalue comparison between the Serpent and CE TRITON array model calculations (Fig. 6) showed eigenvalue differences of less than 400 pcm for burnups up to 80 GWd/tHM; these differences increased significantly to more than 1000 pcm in the 80–120 GWd/tHM burnup range when the eigenvalue dropped below 1.0. The actual sources of these specific differences have not been quantified, because this is beyond the main goal of the current paper. They are likely the aggregate result of various differences in code methodologies and associated nuclear data such as energy release from fission and capture, power normalization, depletion algorithms, and applied data processing. In contrast to the eigenvalue, the nuclide densities at 120 GWd/tHM burnup showed good agreement in general between Serpent and CE TRITON array model calculations (Table 8). At 120 GWd/tHM burnup, these differences were less than 1.4% for all Pu isotopes and for 235U. The excellent agreement for the widely used burnup indicator fission products 148Nd (within 0.1%) and 137Cs (0.3% difference) indicate that the integral number of fissions agree between CE TRITON and Serpent. Moreover, strong absorber fission products such as 135Xe, 149Sm, and 151Sm are in good agreement, with less than 1.5% difference between CE TRITON and Serpent. A slightly larger difference of ~5.6% was observed for 242mAm because of differences in the branching ratios for 241Am between Serpent and SCALE. While Serpent uses constant branching ratios based on the JEFF-3.1 activation library, SCALE uses spectrum dependent branching ratios based on the JEFF-3.0 activation library—with the exception of 242mAm for which ENDF/B-VII.0 branching ratios are used.
Table 8. Relative differences between the nuclide densities of the CE TRITON and Serpent array model calculations at 120 GWd/tHM burnup.
<Section>4. Improved nuclear data libraries</Section>
The SCALE code system includes nuclear data libraries processed from ENDF/B using the AMPX code system (Wiarda et al., 2015). SCALE 6.2 and the future release SCALE 6.3 have several improvements in the MG and CE nuclear data libraries which are relevant for HTGR analysis. Both types of libraries benefit from improvements in the fundamental evaluated nuclear data in ENDF/B. In addition, the CE Monte Carlo codes in SCALE 6.2 have an improved method for interpolating cross sections and thermal scattering kernels on the CE libraries. MG calculations of HTGRs were impacted by the library group structure and self-shielding techniques used in analysis. The following sections discuss the SCALE libraries as they impact HTGRs and show relevant verification results.
4.1. Improvements in graphite data
HTGRs contain a significant amount of carbon, not only in the fuel particles, graphite matrix and moderator, but also in the graphite reflector material. Thus, the calculated results are sensitive to the carbon thermal capture cross section and the thermal scattering data for graphite. Until recent years, the carbon/graphite data in ENDF/B was based on very old evaluations dating back to the 1960s. In 2010, reactivity analysis of the HTTR benchmark experiment performed by Shimakawa et al. (Shimakawa et al., 2010) suggested that the thermal capture cross section of carbon in ENDF/B and other evaluated data files at the time was too low. Measurements by Firestone (Firestone et al., 2007) also indicated that the carbon thermal cross section should be increased. The release of ENDF/B-VII.1 in 2011 increased the value of this cross section from 3.368 mb in version VII.0 to 3.861 mb. This removed a reactivity discrepancy that had been observed in calculations such as the Very High Temperature Reactor Critical Assembly (VHTRC) experiment (Bostelmann et al., 2016). ENDF/B-VIII.0, which was released in 2018, includes new evaluations for the inelastic thermal scattering kernels of graphite and other materials. These kernels are based on model calculations using Ab initio molecular dynamic codes, which are believed to have a more accurate approach than earlier procedures for evaluating scattering kernels (Wormald and Hawari, 2017). ENDF/B-VIII.0 also includes the first evaluations for reactor-grade graphite, in addition to the ideal graphite scattering law conventionally included in ENDF/B. Reactor-grade graphite is more porous than ideal graphite, causing changes in the phonon distribution. The new evaluations in ENDF/B-VIII.0 have been shown to improve the agreement between calculations and measurements for porous graphite (Hawari and Gillete, 2014). The next SCALE 6.3 data release will include cross sections for graphite with 10 and 30% porosities, in addition to the conventional graphite. Generally, the graphite porosity is not known; for example, the benchmark specifications of the HTR-10 and HTTR discussed in Section 5 do not provide such information. Furthermore, the graphite porosity changes as a function of neutron spectrum with time, i.e. as a function of operation time (Campbell et al., 2016), and the graphite impurities can potentially have a significant impact on an HTGR’s reactivity.
The current SCALE 6.2 version includes MG and CE libraries based on ENDF/B-VII.1 and VII.0, while the next release, SCALE 6.3, will include libraries based on ENDF/B-VII.1 and ENDF/B-VIII.0.
4.2. MG energy group structures in SCALE
The latest fine-group library in SCALE 6.2 has 252 energy groups and has been shown to improve results for light water reactor analysis compared to the 238-group library used in earlier versions of SCALE. Validation of SCALE for HTGR analysis in 2012 (Ilas et al., 2012) was performed using the 238-group library. In this work, new HTGR validation results are computed with the 252-group structure. The upcoming release SCALE 6.3 will also include a VFG structure consisting of 1597 groups. The VFG library provides generic MG data that can be collapsed using a problem-specific spectrum to provide a coarser MG library tailored for any reactor type. Fig. 10 shows a plot of the MG capture cross section of 238U in the 252-group and VFG libraries for the HTR-10 fuel pebble model and the neutron flux of an HTGR fuel pebble based on a calculation with ENDF/B-VII.1 data. The 252-group and the VFG libraries are verified here by comparison with corresponding CE KENO Monte Carlo calculations.
Fig. 10. Neutron flux and 238U capture cross section in 252 and 1597 energy groups in an HTGR fuel pebble.
4.3. Comparison of MG and CE library results
To investigate the impact of the improved nuclear data libraries, criticality calculations were performed with KENO for (1) an HTR-10 fuel pebble in an infinite lattice (fresh fuel) as used in Section II with TRISO particles modeled in an array and (2) the HTR-10 full core model that is discussed further in this paper.
Because of the significant amount of carbon in the HTR-10′s fuel pebble and reflector materials, the results are sensitive to the carbon thermal capture cross section and the thermal scattering data for graphite. The eigenvalue for the HTR-10 full core model changed by more than 1% (i.e. more than 1,000 pcm) when moving from ENDF/B-VII.0 to ENDF/B-VII.1 data because of an increase of the carbon capture cross section in the latter library. The eigenvalue obtained with ENDF/B-VII.1 data was consistent with the experiment, within the reported 1σ experimental uncertainty of 370 pcm (International Handbook of Reactor Physics Experiments, 2007). However, the eigenvalue obtained with ENDF/B-VII.0 clearly overestimated the experiment by more than 1%.
The eigenvalue difference between ENDF/B-VII.1 and VIII.0 for the HTR-10 fuel pebble model was ~440 pcm. To identify the source of the difference and the nuclide cross sections, cross section data of 235U, 238U and graphite in the ENDF/B-VII.1 calculation were individually replaced with ENDF/B-VIII.0 data (Table 9). No impact of the updated graphite data in ENDF/B-VIII.0 was observed for the eigenvalue. However, the impact of the 235U and 238U cross sections was found to be significant. The eigenvalue decreased by ~700 pcm when changing only 235U data to ENDF/B-VIII.0, and it increased by ~240 pcm when only 238U data were replaced. Although this side study was a rather simple approach to estimate the impact of library changes, it nevertheless indicated that significant changes to important cross sections have been implemented in the latest ENDF/B release and that the observed differences are the result of the compensation of various changes. The impact of these changes should be investigated in more detail.
Table 9. HTR-10 pebble model (array): CE KENO eigenvalue results using ENDF/B-VII.1 and ENDF/B-VIII.0 data.
To demonstrate the impact of the new evaluations in ENDF/B-VIII.0 for reactor-grade graphite, calculations were performed for the HTR-10 full-core model with 10% and 30% porosity graphite cross section data in all graphite materials present in the model, while keeping the nominal nuclide densities. Through this change, the eigenvalue was increased by ~350 and 680 pcm, respectively. This indicates that the choice of the graphite porosity can significantly influence the eigenvalue in a system containing large amounts of graphite and should therefore be chosen carefully based on realistic specifications or assumptions.
To investigate the performance of the new VFG library, MG calculations with both the 252-group and VFG libraries were compared with corresponding CE reference results (Table 5). With both MG libraries, the eigenvalue of the HTR-10 pebble model was underestimated by up to 280 pcm when using ENDF/B-VII.1 data, and the reaction rate ratio of 238U capture to 235U fission was underestimated by less than 1%. When using ENDF/B-VIII.0 data, the eigenvalue difference for the 252-group result compared to the reference was slightly increased to 380 pcm; whereas the reaction rate ratio was consistent with the CE reference.
The use of additional energy groups within the VFG library did not lead to a significant improvement of the eigenvalue or the reaction rate ratio. This result confirms the good performance of the 252-group library for HTGR systems. The studied cases were apparently not sensitive to the energy resolution of the cross sections beyond the coarse structure in the 252-group library. However, the VFG library is expected to improve the results of other models, especially those with different fuel compositions or for nonthermal systems. In any case, the availability of the VFG library offers the possibility to quickly check the applicability of the 252-group library for any configuration of interest to the user.
<Section>5. Validation results</Section>
Validation of the presented MG and CE methods was performed using two experiments from the IRPhEP handbook: the initial criticality of the 10 MWth HTR-10 pebble-bed reactor (International Handbook of Reactor Physics Experiments, 2007) and the first critical state of the HTTR prismatic design reactor (International Handbook of Reactor Physics Experiments, 2010).
5.1. HTR-10
The HTR-10 (International Handbook of Reactor Physics Experiments, 2007) was a small 10 MWth prototype pebble-bed reactor operated at Tsinghua University in China. With a core diameter of 1.8 m and a mean height of 1.97 m, it contains almost 10,000 fuel pebbles surrounded by graphite reflector structures. This reactor was designed to help in the development of pebble-bed technology in China and to test fuel, safety features, operational behavior, and other factors. Construction began in 1995, first criticality was achieved in December 2000, and the reactor operated at full power condition through January 2003.
5.1.1. Model
The initial critical configuration of HTR-10 was modeled based on the high-fidelity specifications provided in the IRPhEP handbook (International Handbook of Reactor Physics Experiments, 2007). For this configuration, the conus and discharge tube were filled with pure graphite “dummy” pebbles. The cylindrical core consisted of a mixture of 9,627 fuel pebbles and 7,263 dummy pebbles at a packing fraction of 61%. Criticality was achieved at room temperature while all control rods were withdrawn, and void spaces were filled with ambient air (Fig. 11, Fig. 12). KENO models prepared for earlier studies (Sunny and Ilas, 2010, Ilas, 2010) were used for the present work. The particles were modeled in arrays without particle clipping, as discussed previously for the single fuel pebble model. This modeling choice avoids the long runtimes of models with randomly dispersed particles and is considered adequate for eigenvalue calculations at full-core level as long as the amount of fissile is correctly modeled.
Fig. 11. HTR-10: horizontal cross-sectional view of SCALE model.
Fig. 12. HTR-10: vertical view of SCALE model.
5.1.2. Results
Given the significant amount of carbon contained in the fuel pebbles and reflector materials of HTR-10, the eigenvalue results were sensitive to the carbon thermal capture cross section and the thermal scattering data for graphite in different ENDF/B evaluations, as seen in Table 10. The eigenvalue changed by more than 1% when moving from ENDF/B-VII.0 to ENDF/B-VII.1 data because of the increase of the carbon capture cross section in the latter library. The results obtained with CE ENDF/B-VII.1 data were consistent with the experimental value (the reported 1σ experimental error is 370 pcm), whereas the ENDF/B-VII.0 CE result clearly overestimated the experiment. When using the latest ENDF/B-VIII.0 CE data, a difference of ~580 pcm from the experiment was obtained. The MG and CE results were consistent among all ENDF/B-VII.1 data sets used; whereas differences of up to 130 pcm were seen for the for ENDF/B–VIII.0 data.
Table 10. HTR-10 eigenvalues determined with KENO.
In addition to the criticality calculations, the impact of uncertainties in nuclear data on the eigenvalue was determined by the application of the random sampling approach implemented in Sampler (Williams et al., 2013) and by application of perturbation theory as implemented in TSUNAMI (Broadhead et al., 2004). The Sampler sequence in SCALE can perturb the MG cross sections used in transport calculations and determine the average and standard deviation (uncertainty) of any output quantity of interest. Here, KENO was the transport kernel, with the eigenvalue as the output of interest. A sample size of 350 was used with Sampler (350 KENO runs). TSUNAMI uses linear perturbation theory to estimate the change in the eigenvalue due to changes in the energy-dependent cross section data via sensitivity coefficients. The data-induced uncertainty in the system’s eigenvalue is estimated by multiplying the sensitivity coefficients with corresponding covariance matrices. The recently implemented CE TSUNAMI code, in particular the Iterated Fission Probability method, that uses CE KENO as transport kernel was used herein. For both approaches, ENDF/B-VII.1 cross section data and SCALE 6.2 covariance data—which are mainly based on ENDF/B-VII.1 covariance data—were used in this study.
The eigenvalue uncertainty due to nuclear data uncertainties determined with both methods was 0.68% or 680 pcm. TSUNAMI provides a ranking of the contributions of individual nuclide reactions to this uncertainty. As is typical in thermal systems (Rochman et al., 2017), it was determined that the neutron multiplicity of 235U was the top contributor to the eigenvalue uncertainty, followed by elastic scattering on graphite, fission spectrum of 235U, and neutron capture in graphite and 235U.
5.2. HTTR
The HTTR is a graphite-moderated helium-cooled 30 MWth prismatic reactor built by the Japan Atomic Energy Agency to establish and upgrade the technological basis for advanced HTGRs and to conduct various irradiation tests for HTGR-related research (International Handbook of Reactor Physics Experiments, 2010). First criticality was achieved in 1998.
The core of the HTTR consists of hexagonal graphite blocks 58 cm in height and with 36 cm flat width (Fig. 13). Five of these fuel blocks, control rod guide blocks, replaceable reflector blocks, or irradiation blocks are stacked vertically into columns. The fuel blocks contain fuel rods consisting of a stack of annular fuel compacts. The fuel compacts are composed of TRISO fuel particles dispersed in a graphite matrix with a volumetric packing fraction of 30%. The TRISO particles contain a fuel kernel consisting of uranium dioxide with enrichments ranging between 3.4 and 9.9 wt% (Table 11).
Fig. 13. Fully loaded HTTR core configuration.
Table 11. HTTR: Specifications (International Handbook of Reactor Physics Experiments, 2010) of TRISO particles, fuel pin and fuel block.
5.2.1. Model
The benchmark specifications (International Handbook of Reactor Physics Experiments, 2010) contain descriptions of several critical and subcritical configurations with different loads. The fully loaded 30-fuel-column core was considered for this study, as illustrated in Fig. 13. Models generated for an earlier SCALE HTTR validation study (Rintala et al., 2015) were updated and used for this study. Since the self-shielding treatment in SCALE 6.1 as used in previous models did not allow for annular double-het fuel pins, the HTTR fuel pins were combined at the time with the inner helium zone by mixing the helium into the graphite matrix composition and defining only an outer fuel radius. In addition to this previous model, a more realistic double-het MG model was developed that uses the new annular double-het pin capability available in SCALE 6.2. For this new model, the graphite matrix composition was updated, and the inner helium zone was defined explicitly in the self-shielding and in the transport model. KENO was used in both MG and CE modes to study the eigenvalue and the flux distribution in the instrumentation columns (yellow rods in Fig. 13).
5.2.2. Results
The results obtained with KENO using ENDF/B-VII.0, ENDF/B-VII.1 and ENDF/B-VIII.0 MG and CE libraries are presented in Table 12. The previously published SCALE 6.1 results (Ilas et al., 2012) obtained with ENDF/B-VII.0 are also added to the eigenvalue comparison in Table 12. The eigenvalues determined with ENDF/B-VII.1 and ENDF/B-VIII.0 data agree with the experimental evaluated value, when considering the large uncertainty reported for the experiment [−0.0060, +0.0071]. The ENDF/B-VII.0 results overestimates the eigenvalue by more than 1,200 pcm due to the difference in the carbon capture cross section.
Table 12. CSAS-KENO eigenvalue comparisons of the fully loaded HTTR core.
The difference between the SCALE 6.1 MG and CE calculations was 337 pcm. The difference between the SCALE 6.2 MG and CE calculations for the same configuration and the same ENDF/B data was reduced in SCALE 6.2 due to various improvements of the double-het MG methodology (Williams, 2011, Williams, 2015). As also observed for the HTR-10 validation model, theENDF/B-VII.1 calculations showed slightly greater differences between MG and CE than were obtained with ENDF/B-VII.1. The flux distribution in the instrumentation columns of the HTTR model, as illustrated in Fig. 14, was consistent between KENO MG and CE (using ENDF/B-VII.1 data). When considering the experimental error, both results showed good agreement with the measurements.
Fig. 14. Axial neutron flux in the instrumentation columns of the HTTR compared between MG and CE CSAS-KENO using ENDF/B-VII.1 data. All values are accompanied by their 2σ standard deviation.
<Section>6. Summary</Section>
Due to the renewed interest in advanced reactor concepts that use randomly distributed TRISO fuel particles, SCALE’s ability to model such conceptual designs with MG and CE Monte Carlo methods have recently been enhanced. This paper describes the MG and CE methods available in SCALE for application to various double-het systems. Verification of the MG and CE capabilities was performed through comparison of various relevant metrics for a series of HTGR simple or complex configurations. Validation was addressed by investigating the initial criticality experiments for the HTR-10 pebble-bed test reactor and the prismatic HTTR reactor.
New modeling capabilities of TRISO particles in spherical or cylindrical fuel compacts are available for CE calculations with SCALE, adding to those already existing in previous SCALE versions. The beta version of the new Monte Carlo kernel Shift in the CSAS sequence allows modeling of randomly dispersed particles via a user-friendly, simple input block that defines the number of particles or packing fraction in a chosen cell. The KENO Monte Carlo kernel can be used to model randomly distributed TRISO particles via user input that includes an explicit random placement of particles in a coarse mesh overlaid on the geometry. Both Shift and KENO codes allow the simplified modeling of particle distribution via arrays of particles. Eigenvalues and reaction rate ratios comparisons for an HTGR fuel pebble model that used different approaches for modeling the TRISO particles distribution showed very good agreement between Shift and KENO, most within 2 statistical uncertainties. Additional comparisons with the Monte Carlo codes MCNP and Serpent, which also allow random particle modeling, showed similar agreement for the eigenvalue and reaction rate ratios for the fuel pebble model.
The treatment of the self-shielding effects in MG calculations for double-het systems is a unique SCALE capability that was available since the SCALE 5.1 release. Significant improvements to this capability have been implemented in the latest SCALE version, which allows the generation of problem-dependent MG cross sections for double-het symmetric or asymmetric fuel pebbles, fuel rods, and fuel plates. MG calculations for the HTGR fuel pebble model resulted in eigenvalues that underestimate the corresponding CE reference solutions by less than 300 pcm. For the HTR-10 and HTTR full core models, consistent eigenvalues were obtained between the MG and CE calculations. The advantage of having reliable MG libraries is even more relevant for depletion of double-heterogeneous systems, for which CE analysis can be quite time-consuming. For the considered HTGR fuel pebble depletion calculation, the runtime for the MG compared to the CE calculation was reduced by a factor of 19.
In addition to the existing 252-group cross section library in SCALE 6.2.3, a new very-fine group library with 1597 groups was developed. Although the use of this library does not provide a significant improvement for the investigated set of HTGR models, this library offers the possibility to verify the use of the 252-group library, and enables improvements in SCALE MG calculations for nonthermal systems, for which the 252-group library may not be appropriate.
Validation of the SCALE MG and CE methods for HTGR analysis was performed by comparing calculated and experimental eigenvalues for the HTR-10 and HTTR benchmarks. Simulations for these full-core configurations were carried out with different sets of ENDF/B data. The choice of the ENDF library was found to significantly impact the agreement between experiment and code prediction. While the HTR-10 model with ENDF/B-VII.0 data overestimated the benchmark eigenvalue by more than 1%, the corresponding ENDF/B-VII.1 result was consistent with the measurement, within the reported benchmark uncertainty. This improvement in the ENDF/B-VII.1 was due to a reduction of the carbon capture cross section, as previously reported in the literature. When moving from ENDF/B-VII.1 to ENDF/B-VIII.0 data, the eigenvalue increased by 0.3%, mainly due to updates of uranium cross sections in ENDF/B-VIII.0. However, this difference is still within the 2σ experimental error. In the case of the ENDF/B-VII.1 calculation for the HTTR full-core model, the calculated eigenvalue and axial flux distribution was found consistent with the experimental data.
The new ENDF/B-VIII.0 libraries allow the choice of graphite with different porosities, which can have an impact of several hundred pcm on the eigenvalue. Further studies with this library, in particular with respect to the mentioned different graphite options, are necessary to evaluate the ramifications of this impact.
Current and future development efforts for SCALE 6.3 relevant to HTGR analysis involve the MG cross section processing including resonance self-shielding within the unresolved resonance range, on-the-fly adjustments to the thermal scattering matrix, and normalization of the pointwise neutron flux (Kim et al., 2020). The new Monte Carlo code Shift is currently being improved with respect to accelerated geometry tracking and CE nuclide lookup for its release with SCALE 6.3. Future validation studies based on the latest developments will include the HTGR models used in this study, as well as other reactors types with double-het fuel systems, such as fluoride salt-cooled high temperature reactors.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Friederike Bostelmann: Formal analysis, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing, Visualization. Cihangir Celik: Formal analysis, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. Mark L. Williams: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing - original draft. Ronald J. Ellis: Formal analysis, Writing - original draft. Germina Ilas: Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing, Project administration, Funding acquisition. William A. Wieselquist: Writing - review & editing, Project administration, Funding acquisition.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
This work was funded by the US Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC). The authors would like to thank Richard Lee and Don Algama of the NRC, as well as to Brad Rearden and Steve Bowman, former SCALE managers, for their support over the years of the development of HTGR analysis capabilities in SCALE.
<Section>References</Section>
Bostelmann et al., 2016
F. Bostelmann, et al.
Criticality calculations of the Very High Temperature Reactor Critical Assembly Benchmark with Serpent and SCALE/KENO-VI
Annals of Nuclear Energy, 90 (2016), pp. 343-352
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Broadhead et al., 2004
B.L. Broadhead, et al.
Sensitivity- and uncertainty-based criticality safety validation techniques
Nuclear Science and Engineering, 146 (2004), pp. 266-340
Google Scholar
Brown et al., 2018
D. Brown, et al.
ENDF/B-VIII.0: The 8th major release of the nuclear reaction data library with CIELO-project cross sections, new standards and thermal scattering data
Nuclear Data Sheets, 148 (2018), pp. 1-142
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Campbell et al., 2016
A.A. Campbell, et al.
Property changes of G347A graphite due to neutron irradiation
Carbon, 109 (2016), pp. 860-873
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chadwick, 2011
M.B. Chadwick, et al.
ENDF/B-VII.1 nuclear data for science and technology: cross sections, covariances, fission product yields and decay data
Nuclear Data Sheets, 112 (2011), pp. 2887-2996
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
DeHart and Ulses, 2009
Mark D. DeHart, A.P. Ulses
https://www.nrc.gov/docs/ML0904/ML090440163.pdf
Ellis et al., 2011
Ellis, R.J., et al., 2011. Generation of a Broad-group HTGR Library for Use with SCALE. NUREG/CR-7106. https://www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/doc-collections/nuregs/contract/cr7106/.
Google Scholar
Firestone et al., 2007
Firestone, R.B., et al., 2007. New methods for determination of total radiative thermal neutron capture cross sections. In: Proc. 2007 Int. Workshop on Compound-Nucleus Reactions and Related Topics, Yosemite 2007, p. 26.
Google Scholar
Goluoglu and Williams, 2005
S. Goluoglu, M.L. Williams
Modeling doubly heterogeneous systems in SCALE
Transactions of the American Nuclear Society, 93 (2005), pp. 963-965
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hawari and Gillete, 2014
A.I. Hawari, V.H. Gillete
Inelastic thermal neutron scattering cross sections for reactor-grade graphite
Nuclear Data Sheets, 118 (2014), pp. 176-178
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ilas et al., 2012
Ilas, G., et al., 2012. Validation of SCALE for high temperature gas-cooled reactor analysis. NUREG/CR-7107, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/doc-collections/nuregs/contract/cr7107/.
Google Scholar
Ilas, 2010
Ilas, G., 2010. On SCALE validation for PBR analysis. In: CD Proc. PHYSOR 2010 International Conference on Reactor Physics, Pittsburgh, PA.
Google Scholar
International Handbook of Reactor Physics Experiments, 2007
International Handbook of Reactor Physics Experiments, 2007. Evaluation of the Initial Critical Configuration of the HTR-10 Pebble-Bed Reactor,” HTR10-GCR-RESR-001, NEA/NSC/DOC(2006)1, Rev. 0.
Google Scholar
International Handbook of Reactor Physics Experiments, 2010
International Handbook of Reactor Physics Experiments, 2010. “Evaluation of the Start-up Core Physics Tests at Japan’s High Temperature Engineering Test Reactor (Fully-Loaded Core),” HTTR-GCR-RESR-001, NEA/NSC/DOC(2006)1, Rev. 1.
Google Scholar
Kim and Williams, 2012
Kim, K.S., Williams, M., 2012. The method of characteristics for 2-D multigroup and pointwise transport calculations in SCALE/CENTRM. In: Proc. PHYSOR 2012, Knoxville, TN, April 15–20.
Google Scholar
Kim et al., 2020
Kim, K.S., et al., 2020. Improvement of SCALE-XSPROC multigroup cross section processing based on the CENTRM pointwise slowing down calculation. In: Proc. PHYSOR2020, Cambridge, United Kingdom, March 29-April 2.
Google Scholar
Leppänen et al., 2015
J. Leppänen, et al.
The Serpent Monte Carlo code: Status, development and applications in 2013
Annals of Nuclear Energy, 82 (2015), pp. 142-150
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Pandya et al., 2016
T.M. Pandya, et al.
Implementation, capabilities, and benchmarking of shift, a massively parallel Monte Carlo radiation transport code
Journal of Computational Physics, 308 (2016), pp. 239-272
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Rearden and Jessee, 2017
Rearden, B.T., Jessee, M.A. (Eds.), SCALE Code System. ORNL/TM-2005/39, Version 6.2.2, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, 2017. Available from the Radiation Safety Information Computational Center as CCC-834. https://www.ornl.gov/sites/default/files/SCALE_6.2.3.pdf.
Google Scholar
Rearden et al., 2014
Rearden, B.T., et al., 2014. Modernization Enhancements in SCALE 6.2. CD Proc. PHYSOR 2014, Kyoto, Japan.
Google Scholar
Rintala et al., 2015
V. Rintala, et al.
Modeling of realistic pebble bed reactor geometries using the Serpent Monte Carlo code
Annals of Nuclear Energy, 77 (2015), pp. 223-230
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Rochman e t al., 2017
D. Rochman, et al.
Nuclear data uncertainties for typical LWR fuel assemblies and a simple reactor core
Nuclear Data Sheets, 139 (2017), pp. 1-76
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Shimakawa et al., 2010
Shimakawa, S., et al., 2010. Impact of Capture Cross Section of Carbon on Nuclear Designs for HTGRs. In: Proc. HTR10 Conference, Prague, Oct 18–20.
Google Scholar
Sunny and Ilas, 2010
Sunny, E.E., Ilas, G., 2010. SCALE 6 analysis of HTR-10 pebble-bed reactor for initial critical configuration. In: CD Proc. PHYSOR 2010 International Conference on Reactor Physics, Pittsburgh, PA.
Google Scholar
Werner et al., 2017
Werner, C.J., et al., 2017. MCNP User’s Manual, Code Version 6.2. LANL Report, LA-UR-17-29981.
Google Scholar
Wiarda et al., 2015
Wiarda, D., et al., 2015. AMPX: A Modern Cross Section Processing System for Generating Nuclear Data Libraries. CD Proc. of International Conference on Nuclear Criticality Safety ICNC, Charlotte, NC (2015). https://www.osti.gov/biblio/1286858-ampx-modern-cross-section-processing-system-generating-nuclear-data-libraries.
Google Scholar
Williams, 2011
M.L. Williams
Resonance self-shielding methodologies in SCALE
Nuclear Technology, 174 (2011), pp. 149-168
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Williams et al., 2013
M. Williams, et al.
A statistical sampling method for uncertainty analysis with SCALE and XSUSA
Nuclear Technology, 183 (3) (2013), pp. 515-526
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Williams, 2015
M. Williams, et al.
A new equivalence theory method for treating doubly heterogeneous fuel–I: Theory
Nuclear Science and Engineering, 180 (2015), pp. 30-40, 10.13182/NSE14-68
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wormald and Hawari, 2017
J.L. Wormald, A.I. Hawari
Generation of phonon density of states and thermal scattering law using ab initio molecular dynamics
Progress in Nuclear Energy, 101 (Part C) (2017), p. 461-46
Google Scholar