<title>Flow visualization on SFR wire-wrapped 19-pin bundle geometry using MIR-PIV-PLIF and comparisons with RANS-based CFD analysis</title>
<author>1,Min SeopSong,2,Jae-HoJeong,3,Eung SooKim</author>
<Affiliation>1,32-207, Seoul National University, 1 Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul, South Korea;2,Department of Mechanical Engineering, Gachon University, 1342, Seongnam-daero, Sujeong-gu, Seongnam-si, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107653</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454920303534</URL>
Flow visualization on SFR wire-wrapped 19-pin bundle geometry using MIR-PIV-PLIF and comparisons with RANS-based CFD analysis
Min SeopSong,Jae-HoJeong,Eung SooKim
32-207, Seoul National University, 1 Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul, South Korea
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Gachon University, 1342, Seongnam-daero, Sujeong-gu, Seongnam-si, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Flow in 19-pin SFR wire-wrapped bundle geometry is visualized using PIV-PLIF.
Optical distortions of visualization are minimized by refractive index matching.
High-fidelity velocity field data are obtained for various locations.
RANS-based CFD simulations are conducted and compared with the experimental data.
Overall, RANS-based CFD predicts the local velocity fields very well.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
In this study, measurement of turbulence intensity, pressure drop and local velocity field in the sodium fast reactor (SFR) wire-wrapped 19-pin bundle have been conducted to compare with the Reynolds averaged Navier–Stokes equations (RANS)-based computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations. The refractive indices between test section and working fluid, anise oil, were matched for the flow visualization. The turbulence intensity measurement showed that the transition of flow regime occurs at around Re = 13,800 at the test section. Pressure drop results revealed that the low-Re model showed the superior agreement with the experimental results. The particle image velocimetry (PIV) measurement was performed at the Reynolds numbers from 15,000 to 17,000. The velocity fields measured in the edge and interior subchannels. From the comparisons, it was found that the CFD simulation showed good agreement with the PIV measurement on specific flow characteristics such as vortex structure, swirl flow, and velocity direction change.
Keywords：Sodium-cooled fast reactor；Wire-wrapped fuel bundle；Benchmark study；Pressure drop；Computational fluid dynamics；Particle image velocimetry
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The Sodium-cooled fast reactor (SFR) is a fourth-generation reactor that uses liquid sodium as a coolant. The reactor utilizes heat generated by fission reactions by fast neutrons. The high thermal conductivity of sodium makes the fuel bundle possible to be arranged in a compact triangular array by minimizing moderation of fast neutrons from nuclear fission. In addition, a wire-wrapped fuel design is used to prevent collisions between the fuel rods and maintain the gap between the rods. This wire generates transverse flow, which contributes to the mitigation of heat from the core center to the surrounding area.
The transverse flow induced by the wire around the pin enhances flow mixing between subchannels. Therefore, the SFR fuel assembly shows efficient heat transport from its center to its peripheral region. However, the wire also leads to a very complex flow field. Since it obstructs part of the flow, it generates a transverse flow to the wire axis and vortex structures inside of the subchannels (Song et al., 2019), which is yet to be well understood. Therefore, it is perceived that comprehensive understanding of the flow characteristics in the wire-wrapped pin bundle is important for design and safety of SFRs.
In recent years, the computational fluid dynamics (CFD) has been widely used for design of system components, including reactor cores, heat exchangers, and safety devices. In addition, the CFD technique would be one of the good alternatives to understand and predict local and multi-dimensional phenomena and heat transfer characteristics around the complicated geometries in a core. Especially, adopting CFD analysis with appropriate turbulence model or advanced CFD methodologies have a possibility to increase accuracy of the calculation of the pressure drop or heat transfer. Even though many empirical correlations have been developed by experiments for some specific designs, local information on the flow inside the SFR reactor core is not fully understood because of immature experimental techniques.
Of last years, the matching index of refraction (MIR) technique has been proposed to overcome experimental difficulties in local flow measurement in this area. The technique involves matching the refractive indices of the working fluid and test section to minimize the optical distortion. The local velocity field can be accurately obtained by employing this technique along with particle image velocimetry (PIV) or laser Doppler velocimetry (LDV). Accordingly, recent studies on benchmark tests for the flow field in wire-wrapped pin bundles have focused on applying an appropriate MIR technique in experiments. Previously, several experimental researches have been conducted for the wire-wrapped fuel bundle using the MIR and PIV combinations. JAEA constructed a 7-pin tests section, and measured the internal flow field to compare them with the analysis code (Sato et al., 2009). They used water and FEP tube, which have same refractive index, as working fluid and fuel rod material, respectively. Texas A  M conducted pressure drop and local velocity measurements using stereo particle image velocimetry system for the 61-pin geometries which is the largest wire-wrapped pin bundle for flow visualization (Goth et al., 2018). The UNIST conducted 19-Pin flow visualization experiment to observe the change of the velocity field for their unique core design (Jeong et al., 2020). They also utilized FEP tube and water to match the refractive indices.
The objective of this research was to perform a benchmark study on a Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes equations (RANS)-based CFD simulation of hydraulic characteristics such as pressure drop and velocity field of a wire-wrapped pin bundle. CFD results for hydraulic characteristics can be validated in two ways. One is by comparing global parameters such as pressure drop from CFD studies and experimental data. The CFD results can alternatively be compared with the empirical correlations made for bundle friction factors (Novendstern, 1972, Chen et al., 2018, Rehme, 1973). The other method is to compare the local parameters at various locations in the pin bundle.
Toward this end, global and local parameters were obtained for the wire-wrapped fuel bundle and the numerical analysis were performed for various turbulence models. The measured parameters included the turbulence intensity pressure drop, and local velocity field. The RANS-based CFD analysis was performed with different turbulence models by using a novel grid scheme to accurately describe the flow field. The local velocity fields were measured in the present study, where a detailed benchmark test on the velocity field was performed using a combination of MIR, PIV and PLIF.
<Section>2. Experimental method</Section>
2.1. Experimental facility and main idea
An experimental facility was designed and constructed to conduct hydraulic experiments for the measurement of pressure drop, turbulence intensity, and local velocity field. Fig. 1 shows the overall configuration of the facility. In the closed-loop-type facility, the working fluid was circulated using a centrifugal pump. The facility also contained a tank, a turbine flowmeter, a differential pressure transmitter, a filter, and a test section. The flow rate, pressure, and temperature were monitored in real time using a data acquisition system (DAS). Every part of the facility was made chemically resistant to prevent reaction from the working fluid. In the test section, a wire-wrapped 19-pin bundle was placed. The number of pins was selected to be 19, which is known to be the minimum number of pins required to reproduce the similar flow behavior with the prototype SFRs (Gajapathy et al., 2009). Pins were arranged in a hexagonal pattern in the duct, as shown in Fig. 2. Table 1 summarizes the geometrical parameters of the test section along with those of the previous studies (Goth et al., 2018, Chang et al., 2016, Jeong et al., 2015). The pin and wire diameters were designed to be larger than those of the prototype SFRs to improve the spatial resolution for the PIV measurement. Since the channel of the fuel bundles in the prototype reactor was too narrow to visualize the details, increasing diameters helped to obtain larger number of velocity data.
Fig. 1. 19 wire-wrapped pin bundle flow visualization facility (a) Front View (b) Side View.
Fig. 2. Geometry Parameter in Cross Sectional View of the Test Section (a) cross-sectional view, (b) two rod configuration.
Table 1. Geometry Parameters of Flow Visualization Experimental Facilities (Sato et al., 2009, Goth et al., 2018, Jeong et al., 2020, Chang et al., 2016).
Fig. 3. Physical Properties of Anise Oil (a) Dynamic Viscosity (b) Density.
For successful flow visualization using PIV, the laser sheet should reach the flow area without being refracted or reflected. The matching-index-of-refraction (MIR) technique was applied to minimize optical distortion of the laser sheet and particle images. MIR refers to the matching of the refractive indices of the working fluid and a solid model (Budwig, 1994). Among the various MIR techniques, the one applicable for rapid prototyping (RP) such as 3-D printing and vacuum casting was adopted by considering the applicability to the complex wire-wrapped pin geometry (Song et al., 2015). A mixture of anise oil and mineral oil was selected as a working fluid, which has a refractive index in the range 1.455–1.555. Based on that, a solid model material was selected to be epoxy or urethane, both of which have a refractive index exceeding 1.45, which is a good match with the refractive index of the working fluid. The advantage of using 3D printing and vacuum casting is its flexibility in shape of manufacturing.
2.2. Working fluid
Anise oil extracted from anise star seeds, was used as the working fluid as mentioned above. Its refractive index is 1.555 at 25 °C, which is comparable to the refractive indices of epoxy (1.55) and urethane (1.52) resin (Song et al., 2015). Changes in the physical properties such as dynamic viscosity and density of anise oil with temperature were investigated. The dynamic viscosity was measured with an SV-10, a viscometer (A&D Ltd.) in the temperature range from 20 °C to 40 °C. The measurement was performed in a glass test tank with a constant-temperature water bath. The dynamic viscosity exponentially decreased with an increase in the temperature as shown in Fig. 3.
@(1)
The density of anise oil from the literature was as follows (Bosart, 1936).
@(2)
The rate of decrease of the density with temperature was lower than that of the dynamic viscosity. Therefore, the Reynolds number can be increased by increasing temperature of the working fluid. For this reason, the experiments were performed in the temperature range from 32°C to 36°C. The temperature of the test section was kept constant during each experimental case.
2.3. Test section
The test section comprised 19 wire-wrapped pins and a duct. Each pin was fabricated by connecting two pins, as shown in Fig. 1. One pin was made of stainless steel and was 3H long and another transparent one of length 1H was made of epoxy resin through vacuum casting. Vacuum casting is a method to replicate a master model by filling the master cast with resin. Fig. 4 shows the procedure of vacuum casting. Epoxy and urethane are commonly used as the resin to fabricate a transparent model. To test the feasibility of the MIR for epoxy and urethane, the refractive index was measured with a refractometer. Fig. 5 shows the refractive indices of epoxy and urethane with quartz, and acrylic (Song et al., 2015). As shown in this figure, the refractive indices decrease exponentially with wavelength. Among the materials tested, epoxy showed the highest refractive index. At the wavelength of 532 nm, which is the wavelength of the Nd:Yag laser used in PIV, the refractive index of epoxy is 1.5547. The difference between the refractive indices of anise oil and epoxy is 0.0003, which is just 0.19. Therefore, this study selected pure anise oil and epoxy as working fluid and test-section material.
Fig. 4. Vacuum Casting Procedure.
Fig. 5. Refractive Indices of Transparent Models (revised from [Song et al., 2015]).
To demonstrate that the MIR was well achieved, a simple test was performed for a single wire-wrapped pin model made of epoxy. Fig. 6 shows the checkerboard images behind the model in the tank for fluid of various refractive indices. When the refractive index difference was large (plot (a)), the checkerboard image was severely distorted. However, when the refractive indices were well matched with the model, distortion was rarely observed, as shown in plot (d).
Fig. 6. Image Distortion due to a Difference of Refractive Indices. The RI indicates refractive index of working fluid.
2.4. Experimental setups
2.4.1. Turbulence intensity measurement
In this study, the turbulence intensity (TI) was measured for figuring out the flow regime in the wire-wrapped bundle. The TI can be calculated from temporal velocity distribution data by using Eq. (3) (Basse, 2019).
@(3)
The temporal distribution of the axial velocity at the center of the edge subchannel was measured using miniLDV of MSE, Inc. [Fig. 7]. The miniLDV was used to measure the flow speed from the particle speed. Whenever the particle passed the fringe region at the intersection of the two laser beams, the reflected light re-entered the probe and the signal was converted to speed. The accuracy of LDV was 99.7. The measurements were conducted for one minute for each case, with Re ranging up to 19,425. A fluorescent particle with a diameter of 15  was used as the tracer as well as the PIV tracer particle. To reduce noise in the LDV data, the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) limit was set to 5.0.
Fig. 7. LDV Measurement Setup (a) Measurement Location (x=-0.012 m, y=-0.047 m, z = 1.155 m) (b) Image of LDV Measurement.
Fig. 8. PLIF Images (a) PLIF Strategy (b) PLIF Particle Light (c) PIV Image with Hollow Glass Particle (d) PIV Image with PLIF Particle.
2.4.2. Pressure drop measurement
Pressure drop measurements were conducted for analysis of the friction factor at the wire-wrapped bundle. The pressure drops were obtained in the upper part of the test section, where the flow was expected to be fully developed (Chen et al., 1974). Pressure ports were installed at the surface of the duct, as depicted in Fig. 8. The ports were connected to a differential pressure transmitter (SITRANS P DS III, Siemens, Germany) that had a measurement range up to 100 mbar and an accuracy of  0.075. The Reynolds number of the experiment ranged from 10,000 to 37,000.
Fig. 9. Location of Pressure Ports.
2.4.3. PIV measurement
The local velocity field in the test section was measured using a PIV system. The test section had an oil jacket that facilitated the penetration of the laser sheet into the test section without refraction (Fig. 1, Fig. 11). The oil jacket was made of PVC and filled with anise oil. The particles coated by rhodamine B were used as seed particle for PIV imaging. The rhodamine B emits orange light (580nm) when it absorbs green light (532 nm) from the Nd:Yag laser as shown in Fig. 9. The difference of the wavelength between the laser and fluorescent light enables filtering of the laser sheet to the camera. figure (b) to (d) in Fig. 9 demonstrate that the quality of the image was enhanced with the filter.
The traceability of the PIV particle in the anise oil was analyzed using a Stokes number. The Stokes number, which was defined as Eq. (4), indicated the ratio of the response time of the particle to that of the fluid. A smaller Stokes number indicated better traceability, with a shorter response time of the particle.
@(4)
The parameter  is the response time of the particle calculated from the particle density and diameter and the viscosity of the working fluid. It was estimated as 18e-6s from the equation , where the particle density was 1100kg.m−3. The parameter  was calculated from the velocity scale and length scale of the bulk fluid. Therefore, the Stokes number for the bulk flow was estimated as 0.00212, which was sufficiently low for the particle to trace the flow.
The PIV experiment was performed with a PIV system manufactured by ILA in Germany. The system comprised a CCD camera, a Nd:Yag laser, and a synchronizer that controlled the timing of camera exposure and laser emissions. The CCD camera (PCO-1600) captured particle images at 30 Hz with a resolution of 1600  1200 pixels. A high-pass filter was installed in front of the camera to filter out green light emitted by the double-pulsed Nd:Yag laser with a maximum strength of 145 mJ. The laser thickness was controlled to be smaller than 1 mm at the measurement location.
The measurement of the local velocity field was performed at the interior and edge subchannels, as shown in Fig. 10, Fig. 11. The position of the plane laser in the test section was accurately controlled using the structure image captured by camera. Based on the MIR state in the test section, the inserted laser sheet pass through the interior and edge subchannel with minimized refraction. From the camera image, the position of the laser sheet was controlled within the pixel level. In the edge subchannel, a large vortex structure and swirl flow were known to be formed. The interior subchannel was in contact with the wire wound around the rods surrounding the subchannel (Song et al., 2019). As the flow pattern in the interior subchannels is similar regardless of the subchannel location according to the literature, the interior subchannel located in the outermost ring of the test section was selected as the measurement location (Gajapathy et al., 2009). Three measurement planes at different heights were chosen. Table 2 summarizes the coordinates of each measurement plane and the name of the plane. The experiments were conducted under steady-state flow conditions at Re = around 17,000, where the flow assumed to be in turbulent flow (Chen et al., 2018). The flow conditions of the experiments are listed in Table 3. The experiments were conducted under steady-state flow conditions.
Fig. 10. PIV Experiment Image.
Fig. 11. PIV Measurement Location (a) cross sectional view, (b) axial configuration of measurement planes.
Table 2. Location of the PIV Measurement Planes.
Table 3. PIV Experimental Conditions.
<Section>3. Numerical method</Section>
3.1. Model geometry and grid model
A RANS-based CFD simulation was performed using a commercial CFD code, ANSYS CFX-17.0 (ANSYS, 2013). The geometry of the CFD simulation was constructed to be the same shape as the experiment. As flow developed in the test section within 3H, the inlet and outlet plenums were excluded in the model (Chen et al., 1974). The grid system of the test section was constructed using a grid scheme developed by Jeong et al. for wire-wrapped pin bundles (Jeong et al., 2015). This scheme divides the flow region into a wire-containing region and the independent region, as depicted in Fig. 12. By isolating the wire-containing region, the grids in this region can be easily constructed as structure meshes. The unmatched grid interface between two regions, wire-containing region and the other region, can be connected using the general grid interface method (ANSYS, 2013). The remaining region can also be constructed as structural meshes easily. The contour of orthogonality angle described in Fig. 12 (b) and (c) shows that the grid quality is maintained high in most areas. A total of 11.3 million grids with y+ under 2 at the surface were constructed. The reliability of this grid scheme has been demonstrated by numerous sensitivity and validation studies on the bundle friction factor (Jeong et al., 2017, Jeong et al., 2017). The optimized parameters for grid structure that gives best estimation of friction factor were y plus value of 1, streamwise axial grid normalized with rod diameter of 1.81, and 23 radial points at the independent region. The same grid parameter was applied in this study. Furthermore, previous studies have suggested that in general, using the shear stress transport (SST) turbulence model with this grid scheme shows the best predictions among RANS-based turbulence models in terms of the bundle pressure drop in the wire-wrapped pin bundles.
Fig. 12. Grid System of the Test Section (a) cross sectional grid view, (b) division of the grid region with contour of mesh orthogonality, (c) detailed description of grid at the contact point.
3.2. Boundary conditions and turbulence models
In the simulation, a velocity–pressure boundary condition was applied. At the inlet, the velocity was assigned as constant (Table 4). An average static pressure condition and a relative pressure of zero were set at the outlet. The no-slip condition was applied to the surfaces of the rods, wires, and duct. The density and dynamic viscosity of the working fluid (anise oil) were set as 982kg m−3 and 0.82 Pas, respectively.
Table 4. CFD Inlet Flow Condition.
Simulation cases with low-Re turbulence models such as the k- model, SST model, and baseline Reynolds stress model (BSLRSM) calculate the velocity field near the surface without using a wall function (ANSYS, 2013). Therefore, the wall shear stress derived from the near-wall velocity field can be expected to be more accurate in this geometry. In addition, simulation with BSLRSM model can generate more robust velocity field as it also resolves the near wall velocity field and calculate the swirl flow more precisely by solving additional Reynolds stress terms. Using the Reynolds stress model could induce diversion of the simulation, but it was successfully carried out owing to structure grid with high quality. The k-
∊ model with scalable wall function was also used. The introduction of the wall function can reduce the computational costs, but it could inaccurately capture the vortex structures made by flow separation. For the inlet flow condition at Re of 10,000, the SST model with gamma-theta model was used to simulate transition flow. The advection scheme and turbulence numeric were set to have high resolution. During the calculation, the root mean square of residuals converged below 0.0001 within 200 iteration steps.
<Section>4. Results and discussions</Section>
4.1. Turbulence Intensity (TI)  flow regime determination
Fig. 13 shows an example of an LDV measurement for the experiment at Re = 19,425. The histogram shows a Gaussian-like distribution. The temporal distribution of the velocity data for 20–20.5 s shows that the SNR is in the range of 5 to 35. The axial velocity data fluctuated because of the random nature of turbulence motion, and the measurement uncertainty originated from the incident angle of the particle in the fringe region.
Fig. 13. LDV Measurement Example at 420LPM (a) Histogram (b) Temporal Distribution of the LDV Data with SNR Value.
The axial velocity data were reduced to TI using Eq. (3). Even though the TI is not a direct indicator of the flow regime, the transition of TI with Reynolds number could be an indicator of the flow regime. Basse (Basse, 2019) found that in smooth and rough pipe flows, the TI scales with the friction factor. A change in the flow regime is determined from a change in the trend of the friction factor in a plot of the friction factor vs. Re (Cheng and Todreas, 1986). Therefore, changes in the flow regime can be inferred from changes in the TI.
Fig. 14 shows the trend of the TI. The slope of the TI apparently changes in the Re range from 12,000 to 14,000, and therefore, it seems that the flow characteristic changes from one to another at this point. The flow regime criteria for the upgraded version of the detailed Cheng and Todreas (UCTD) model (Cheng and Todreas, 1986) also support the change of the flow regime in this range. The criteria for the UCTD model were determined using the geometric parameter Pi/D in Eq. (5) (Cheng and Todreas, 1986).
@(5)
Fig. 14. Turbulence Intensity Plot.
For a Pi/D value of 1.2, an Re value of 13,800 was obtained, which was within the Re range where the TI slope changes. Therefore, the experimentally observed flow for Re 13,800 in this study was considered to be in the fully turbulent flow regime.
4.2. Friction factor comparisons between experiment, CFD, and empirical correlations
The pressure drop measurement was performed at the test section at heights between 3H and 5H, where the flow was expected to be fully developed. To confirm fully developed flow, the change of the flow profile along the height was analyzed using the CFD analysis based on the BSLRSM model. Fig. 15 shows changes in the flow field at the edge and interior subchannels for the transverse and axial velocity components. It can be observed that the velocity profiles located at  = 110.52 and 159.73 are converged, indicating the flow development.
Fig. 15. Development of the Flow in the Test Section (a) u velocity (b) w velocity; circle: interior subchannel, star: edge subchannel.
The pressure drop was converted into the bundle friction factor data by Eq. (6).
@(6)
In this study, the hydraulic diameter of the bundle was 10.45 mm, and the sensitivity of the measurement location to the friction factor was known to be negligible (Chang et al., 2016). The uncertainty of the friction factor was calculated using the uncertainty propagation method considering the systematic and statistical uncertainties in the pressure drop and bulk velocity. In the numerical simulation, the pressure drop was calculated at the locations of the pressure ports in the actual facility. The friction factors calculated with different turbulence models are shown together with the experimental data in Fig. 16. The friction factor was also compared with friction factors obtained from existing empirical correlations of Rehme (Rehme, 1973), Novendstern (Novendstern, 1972), and the UCTD model (Chen et al., 2018). The turbulent regime criteria at 13,800 verified in Fig. 14 is also marked in Fig. 16. From the criteria, it was confirmed that most CFD simulations were conducted in the turbulent flow regime. The experimental data were also in the turbulent flow regime, except for the first data point.
Fig. 16. Friction Factor Plot of 19 Wire-wrapped Pin Bundle.
A comparison of experimental data with the existing correlations showed that the experimental data agreed with the Novendstern model for Re  30,000 and with the UCTD model for higher Re. Furthermore, data obtained in the simulation agreed with the low-Re models. The k-
model yielded the values close to the Rehme model, but underpredicted the friction factor. The agreement also can be assessed from the curve fitted using the expression  to the friction factor. Table 5 lists the coefficients of the expression along with the root mean square error. The table shows that the experimental data shad a trend similar to that of the low-Re models. The trend of the k-
model resembles that of the UCTD model, in which the coefficient b is based on the pipe flow model (Chen et al., 2018). For the other correlations, the trend was somewhat different. From the fitting results, it was found that the BSLRSM model predicted the friction factor the most accurately. As BSLRSM model calculate Reynolds stress terms in every direction, this model can be assumed to predict swirl flows and vortex flows in the wire-wrapped pin bundle properly. In addition, the k- and SST models can calculate the swirl flows more accurately since they do not use the wall function.
Table 5. Friction Factor Fitting with f ~@.
To analyze the different friction factor behavior between k-∊
model and other models, the contour of axial velocity was investigated. Fig. 17 represents the axial velocity distribution at a plane. Common characteristic of velocity field is reduced axial velocity where the interior vortex to be made (Song et al., 2019). However, the reduced velocity region in k-∊
model case is more closely attached to the rod surface. In addition, more flattened velocity field is observed in the k-∊
model case due to the usage of wall function. This altered axial velocity field would have affected the pressure drop.
Fig. 17. Contour of Axial velocity according to the Turbulence Model (a) k-∊
(b) BLSRSM (c) k- (d) SST.
The effect of flattened velocity field to the pressure drop can be analyzed based on the loss of energy in detail. The representative loss of energy results from the friction loss and form loss as described in Eq. (7).
@(7)
Here, @ is the wall shear stress at the surface of the duct, wire, and rods. The loss of energy is caused by the friction loss at the wall and the form loss, associated with the flow structure such as vortex. In the CFD simulation, the total loss and friction loss could be easily calculated. Therefore, the form loss can be calculated from the difference between those two terms. Fig. 18 shows the estimated loss of energy for different turbulence models. For the BLSRSM, SST model, and k- model, the total wall shear and form loss are close together. However, the friction loss and form loss in the k-∊
model are lower than those in the other models. Compared to the difference of form loss to total wall shear loss, the following conclusion can be drawn that loss from wall shear stress is more dominant than the form loss. And the less wall shear loss will be because of flattened velocity field.
Fig. 18. Analysis of the Comprehensive Loss in the Test Section.
In conclusion, the RANS-based CFD simulation with a high-quality grid structure could successfully predict the friction factor for turbulent flow when a low-Re turbulence model was used.
4.3. CFD analysis on local flow structures
The flow characteristics and structures in the edge and interior subchannels were analyzed using CFD to understand the complex flow field in the SFR wire-wrapped fuel bundle prior to comparisons with the PIV data. Investigation of the local velocity field is important because flow phenomena such as small vortex or swirl flow are related to the flow mixing in the test section. With understanding the occurrence of those flow structures, accuracy of subchannel code would be increased from better calculation of the flow mixing. According to the literature, the flow structure in the wire-wrapped pin bundle did not show strong dependence on geometric parameters such as Pi/D or H/D when the pin number exceeded 19 (Gajapathy et al., 2009, Jeong et al., 2015). One of the noticeable flow patterns observed in the CFD analysis was swirl flow in the peripheral region, induced by wires (Song et al., 2019). The wires at the edge subchannel drove the flow in the direction of the wire rotation. In addition, vortex structures were formed at locations where the wire passed a subchannel. In Fig. 19, the existence of the vortex structure at the edge subchannel and the development of swirl flow are described. In plot (b), the occurrence of a vortex is identified with streamlines, and the contour of the invariant-Q is used to detect the core of the vortex structure. Fig. 20 reveals that the direction of the transverse flow changes in relation to the wire in the interior subchannel. A high invariant-Q region was also located in the interior subchannel through which the wire passed. As the wire passed the interior subchannel frequently, the vortex structure was continually formed.
Fig. 19. Convergence Test Result (a) Plane 1, velocity u (b) Plane 1, Axial Velocity, velocity v (c) Plane 2, velocity u (d) Plane 2, Axial Velocity, velocity v.
Fig. 20. CFD Analysis on the Flow Field in Edge Subchannel (a) contour of velocity u, (b) contour of invariant Q, (c) contour of velocity w.
4.4. PIV measurement on local velocity field
4.4.1. Convergence of PIV data
The PIV requires a sufficient number of particle images so that stable results are to be obtained. The convergence of the PIV results according to the number of images was analyzed here. Owing to the fluctuating nature of turbulent flow, the convergence of the data can be delayed. In order to check the convergence, velocities obtained at two points, each in PL1HE1 and PL2HE2, were converted to normalize relative errors to the total average velocity. Fig. 21 shows the relative errors in the u and v components along with the number of samples. For the u component in (a) and (c), the parameter varies around zero after 1400 of . On the other hand, in v-component plots, the normalized relative error decreases to zero more rapidly after 700 of .
Fig. 21. CFD Analysis on the Flow Field in Interior Subchannel (a) contour of velocity u, (b) contour of invariant Q, (c) contour of velocity w.
4.4.2. Uncertainty analysis
The uncertainty in the PIV data originated from the systematic uncertainty in the PIV system and the statistical uncertainty of the fluctuating characteristics of the flow (ITTC, 2008). Therefore, the total uncertainty of the PIV result could be decomposed as Eq. (8).
@(8)
The systematic uncertainty of the PIV was determined on the basis of the guidelines suggested by International Towing Tank Conference (ITTC) (ITTC, 2008). The guidelines provided an uncertainty assessment method related to calibration, acquisition, data reduction, and experiments of PIV. Table 6 shows the systematic PIV uncertainty analysis results. The total systematic uncertainty for the axial and transverse velocity components was estimated as 11.648 mm/s. Furthermore, the statistical uncertainty of the velocity data in each interrogation area was estimated from the standard deviation to be 3.
@(9)
Table 6. PIV Systematic Uncertainty based on ITTC Guideline (ITTC, 2008).
4.5. PIV results and comparison with CFD
The local velocity fields at the edge subchannel and interior subchannel were measured using PIV and compared with the CFD results at some specific locations. The CFD results for different turbulence models, including the k-∊
model, k- w model, shear stress transport model, and baseline Reynolds stress, were taken into considerations. All velocity data were normalized with the bulk velocity of 1.18 m/s. First, the velocity components were compared along with streamlines as shown in Fig. 22. The edge subchannel was characterized by the formation of the edge vortex and the generation of swirl flow, as observed in Fig. 19. In PL1HE1, the contours of u show a negative transverse flow region, demonstrating that a vortex structure was developed in both cases. As the measurement plane passed through vortex structures, positive and negative flow regions were repeatedly formed. In PL1HE2 and PL1HE3, the vortex structure decay and swirl flow start to appear. Therefore, only a positive flow region is observed, and the flow increases in strength as the swirl flow develops. The direction of the flow was inclined relative to the direction of transverse flow. The development of swirl flow led to a flat distribution of the axial flow in PL1HE2 and PL1HE3. Fig. 23 shows a comparison of velocity components at the interior subchannel. As discussed in Fig. 20, the direction of transverse flow switched after the wire passed the interior subchannel. The contours in (a) and (b) demonstrate that the flow change in the interior subchannel was accurately calculated in the CFD simulations. In addition, an abrupt change in the flow direction because of the vortex formation was observed in PL2HE2. The distribution of the axial flow was more complex than the transverse flow, especially in the edge subchannel.
Fig. 22. Contour of u and w in Edge Subchannel (a) u, CFD result (b) u, PIV result (c) w, CFD result (d) w, PIV result.
Fig. 23. Contour of u and w in Interior Subchannel (a) u, CFD result (b) u, PIV result (c) w, CFD result (d) w, PIV result.
To compare the magnitude of the normalized velocity in the different planes in detail, the velocity profile at the center line of each measurement plane was extracted. For the investigation of the sensitivity of the turbulence model to the velocity profile, the result for each turbulence model was obtained. In the benchmark graphs, contours of the velocity component with streamlines were added to understand the flow profile in relation to flow structures.
Error bars are attached to the velocity data from PIV. The uncertainty in the PIV data was calculated from the systematic uncertainty and statistical uncertainty of the PIV data by using the root sum square method. For the CFD data, two shaded regions representing the uncertainty because of the shift in and rotation of the laser sheet were described. As the PIV data had an uncertainty that affected the accurate determination of the laser position, the measurement location could be different from the data location of CFD. Therefore, a change in the velocity profile was represented as a shaded region by considering the rotation of or shift in the laser sheet.
The direct comparison of the velocity profile between experiment and CFD for the edge subchannel is made in Fig. 24. From plots (a)-(c), the change in transverse flow at the peripheral region can be examined. In plot (a), where the vortex was formed because of the passage of the wire to the interior subchannel, negative transverse flow was observed near x = 0.01 m. As the flow progressed, the vortex structure disappeared and the swirl flow became stronger. The u velocity of the swirl flow showed a sinusoidal distribution. The CFD results under-predicted the swirl flow at x = −0.02 m, where transverse flow entered from the other side of the duct. However, flows showed similar trend in other regions. The k-∊
model under-predicted the velocity profile.
Fig. 24. Benchmark Test - Velocity Profile Comparison at the Edge Subchannel (a) P1H1, u, (b) P1H2, u, (c) P1H3, u (d) P1H1, w, (e) P1H2, w, (f) P1H3, w.
In the axial flows shown in (d)-(f), the flow becomes flat as it travels. In (d) where the vortex exists, the axial velocity increases around the vortex, indicating that the flow is directed in the axial direction because of the vortex. As the swirl flow becomes stronger, the flow becomes inclined relative to the direction of transverse flow, as shown in Fig. 22. For the CFD simulations, it can be observed that the uncertainty resulting from a shift in or the rotation of the measurement plane is large. However, the flow is still flat around the bulk velocity. Among the CFD results, the result obtained using the BSLRSM model shows a more flattened velocity distribution than those obtained from the other models.
The direct comparison of the velocity field in the measurement plane in the interior subchannel was performed. The measurement of the velocity field in the inner space is difficult because the rods are so closely arranged that the flow path can be distorted. However, owing to the close matching of the refractive indices of the transparent model and working fluid, the velocity field in the interior subchannel could be obtained.
Fig. 25 shows the benchmark result for the center lines at interior subchannel. For the transverse flow, the change in the flow direction is remarkable in plots (a)-(c). Before the wire passed the interior subchannel, positive transverse flow was dominant, as shown in (a). As the upper interior subchannels contained a vortex structure, zero transverse flow was observed at x values of -0.024, 0, and 0.024 m. When the wire passed the subchannel as shown in (b), a vortex was formed in the lower interior subchannel. Therefore, a continuous change in the flow direction is observed in the velocity contour. The same tendency was observed in the PIV result around x = 0.024 m. The discrepancy in the  region is because the laser sheet was tilted relative to the upper rod after it passed the second wire around x = 0. After the wire passed interior subchannel in (c), negative transverse flow became dominant at the lower interior subchannel. For the transverse flow, the CFD uncertainty resulting from rotation or a shift in the measurement plane was negligible. The axial flow in plot (d) shows a more complex distribution than the transverse flow. For CFD results, the velocity magnitude is related to the distance to the rod surface. However, in the PIV results, flow distribution in  and x0 is not similar. It appears that the PIV results indicate that the average axial flow is higher at the interior subchannel located in the x  0 region.
Fig. 25. Benchmark Test - Velocity Profile Comparison at the Interior Subchannel (a) P2H1, u, (b) P2H2, u, (c) P2H3, u (d) P2H1, w, (e) P2H2, w, (f) P2H3, w.
In plot (e) the axial flow is reduced for both CFD and PIV results. The reduction in the axial flow around x = 0 is because the flow behind the wire is blocked. It has been numerically found that the axial flow on the lee side of the wire is always has a weak axial flow (Song et al., 2019). In addition, around x = 0.015, where the vortex formed in the lower interior subchannel meets the rod surface, the velocity decreased. Similar to the case of transverse flow, the CFD results show better agreement at x  0. At P2H3 in plot (f), reduced axial velocity behind the wire is observed. The vortex formed at the upper interior subchannel did not reach the lower rod surface. The CFD result agreed well with PIV data in the entire region.
From the comparison results, it was concluded that the CFD result faithfully shows the flow structures in edge and interior subchannel. The effect of the vortex structure that dominantly changes local velocity profiles was well described in both results. The result from the low-Re models shows more strengthened velocity filed in all regions compared to the result from the k-∊
model. The result from k-∊
model have more flattened velocity distribution.
<Section>5. Conclusions</Section>
In this study, the benchmark study was conducted for the pressure drop and velocity field inside of wire-wrapped 19-pin bundle. An experimental facility was constructed to perform the pressure drop measurement and flow visualization experiment by using LDV and PIV. The test section was specially built by using the RP-MIR method to fabricate a transparent wire-wrapped pin model with a refractive index identical to that of the working fluid. The MIR test demonstrated that the test section had a homogeneous refractive index space with relative difference of 0.0003 between working fluid and test section. The RANS-based CFD study for steady-state flow field was performed with the novel grid scheme that describe accurately the geometry with the contact of wire and pin using various turbulence models. From the trend of the results of the TI measurement experiment, it was found that the flow regime changed to the turbulent regime between 12,000 and 14,000 where the criteria suggested by the UCTD model is placed. The validation study on the friction factor, based on experimental data, CFD results, and existing correlations, showed that the CFD results obtained with low-Re models accurately predicted the variation of the friction factor with the Reynolds number, in terms of both absolute values and trend. The different friction factor predicted by the k-∊
model was found to be because of weakened wall shear and form loss resulting from the use of a wall function. Therefore, it is recommended that a low-Re model be used to predict the pressure drop in 19 wire-wrapped pin bundles.
The velocity field measured at the edge and interior subchannels was used to validate the feasibility of the RANS-based CFD simulation results obtained with different turbulence models. From the CFD results, common flow features, including large swirl flow and a vortex structure at the points where the wire passed through the subchannels, observed in the wire-wrapped pin bundle were analyzed. PIV measurement results at the edge and interior subchannels revealed flow structures predicted by RANS-based CFD studies. A comparison of contour and velocity profiles for the same location showed that the flow structures were present in an average flow field and that the use of RANS-based CFD simulation was the proper way to analyze the flow structures.
In a future study, on the basis of the CFD analysis result validated in this study, representative velocity field characteristics on the subchannel scale will be modeled for different numbers of pins.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgement</Section>
This research was supported by National R&D Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning(No. 2016M2B2A9911846)
<Section>References</Section>
ANSYS, 2013
ANSYS, C. 2013. Ansys cfx solver modeling guide, release 15.0.
Google Scholar
Basse, 2019
N.T. Basse
Turbulence intensity scaling: a fugue
Fluids, 4 (2019), p. 180
CrossRefGoogle Scholar
Bosart, 1936
L.W. Bosart
Change in specific gravity of essential oils and perfumes with temperature
Ind. Eng. Chem., 28 (1936), pp. 867-870
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Budwig, 1994
R. Budwig
Refractive index matching methods for liquid flow investigations
Exp. Fluids, 17 (1994), pp. 350-355
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chang et al., 2016
S.-K. Chang, D.-J. Euh, H.S. Choi, H. Kim, S.R. Choi, H.-Y. Lee
Flow distribution and pressure loss in subchannels of a wire-wrapped 37-pin rod bundle for a sodium-cooled fast reactor
Nucl. Eng. Technol., 48 (2016), pp. 376-385
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chen et al., 1974
Chen, Y., Ip, K., Todreas, N. 1974. Velocity measurements in edge subchannels of wire wrapped LMFBR fuel assemblies, Technical Report, Massachusetts Inst. of Tech., Cambridge (USA). Dept. of Nuclear Engineering.
Google Scholar
Chen et al., 2018
S. Chen, Y. Chen, N. Todreas
The upgraded cheng and todreas correlation for pressure drop in hexagonal wire-wrapped rod bundles
Nucl. Eng. Des., 335 (2018), pp. 356-373
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Cheng and Todreas, 1986
S.-K. Cheng, N.E. Todreas
Hydrodynamic models and correlations for bare and wire-wrapped hexagonal rod bundles–bundle friction factors, subchannel friction factors and mixing parameters
Nucl. Eng. Design, 92 (1986), pp. 227-251
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gajapathy et al., 2009
R. Gajapathy, K. Velusamy, P. Selvaraj, P. Chellapandi, S. Chetal
A comparative cfd investigation of helical wire-wrapped 7, 19 and 37 fuel pin bundles and its extendibility to 217 pin bundle
Nucl. Eng. Des., 239 (2009), pp. 2279-2292
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Goth et al., 2018
N. Goth, P. Jones, T.D. Nguyen, R. Vaghetto, Y. Hassan, N. Salpeter, E. Merzari
Ptv/piv measurements of turbulent flows in interior subchannels of a 61-pin wire-wrapped hexagonal fuel bundle
Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow, 71 (2018), pp. 295-304
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jeong et al., 2015
J.-H. Jeong, J. Yoo, K.-L. Lee, K.-S. Ha
Three-dimensional flow phenomena in a wire-wrapped 37-pin fuel bundle for sfr
Nucl. Eng. Technol., 47 (2015), pp. 523-533
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jeong et al., 2017
J.-H. Jeong, M.-S. Song, K.-L. Lee
Cfd investigation of three-dimensional flow phenomena in a jaea 127-pin wire-wrapped fuel assembly
Nucl. Eng. Des., 323 (2017), pp. 166-184
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jeong et al., 2017
J.-H. Jeong, M.-S. Song, K.-L. Lee
Rans based cfd methodology for a real scale 217-pin wire-wrapped fuel assembly of kaeri pgsfr
Nucl. Eng. Des., 313 (2017), pp. 470-485
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jeong et al., 2020
Y.S. Jeong, J.Y. Kim, I.C. Bang
Enhanced heat transfer and reduced pressure loss with u-pattern of helical wire spacer arrangement for liquid metal cooled-fast reactor fuel assembly
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 135 (2020), Article 106971
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Novendstern, 1972
E. Novendstern
Turbulent flow pressure drop model for fuel rod assemblies utilizing a helical wire-wrap spacer system
Nucl. Eng. Des., 22 (1972), pp. 28-42
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Rehme, 1973
K. Rehme
Pressure drop correlations for fuel element spacers
Nucl. Technol., 17 (1973), pp. 15-23
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
ITTC, 2008
ITTC, 2008, Procedures, Guidelines, uncertainty analysis: Particle imaging velocimetry, in: 25th International Towing Tank Conference.
Google Scholar
Sato et al., 2009
Sato, H., Kobayashi, J., Miyakoshi, H., Kamide, H., 2009. Study on velocity field in a wire wrapped fuel pin bundle of sodium cooled reactor–detailed velocity distribution in a subchannel.
Google Scholar
Song et al., 2015
M.S. Song, H.Y. Choi, J.H. Seong, E.S. Kim
Matching-index-of-refraction of transparent 3d printing models for flow visualization
Nucl. Eng. Design, 284 (2015), pp. 185-191
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Song et al., 2019
M.S. Song, J.H. Jeong, E.S. Kim
Numerical investigation on vortex behavior in wire-wrapped fuel assembly for a sodium fast reactor
Nucl. Eng. Technol., 51 (2019), pp. 665-675
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar