<title>Thermal-hydraulic characteristics of purge gas in a rectangular packed pebble bed of a fusion reactor using DEM-CFD and porous medium analyses</title>
<author>1,AkhaleshSharma,2,AbhishekThakur,2,Sandip K.Saha,3,AtulSharma,4,DeepakSharma,5,ParitoshChaudhuri</author>
<Affiliation>1, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, 400076, India;2,Institute for Plasma Research, Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India;3,Homi Bhabha National Institute (HBNI), Anushaktinagar, Mumbai, 400094, India</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Fusion Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.fusengdes.2020.111848</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0920379620303963</URL>
Thermal-hydraulic characteristics of purge gas in a rectangular packed pebble bed of a fusion reactor using DEM-CFD and porous medium analyses
AkhaleshSharma,AbhishekThakur,Sandip K.Saha,AtulSharma,DeepakSharma,ParitoshChaudhuri
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, 400076, India
Institute for Plasma Research, Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India
Homi Bhabha National Institute (HBNI), Anushaktinagar, Mumbai, 400094, India
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Studied transport behaviour of helium in spherical packed rectangular pebble bed reactor.
Adopted DEM-CFD and porous medium approaches considering radiation heat transfer.
Heat transfer characteristics obtained by both the approaches is almost same.
Evaluated the effect of location of inlet and outlet on the flow uniformity in canister.
Pebble bed with diagonally opposite inlet and outlet has higher tritium sweeping efficiency.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The thermal-hydraulic characteristics of helium as a purge gas for the removal of the tritium from a spherical packed rectangular pebble bed reactor are studied in this paper using the DEM-CFDand porous medium approaches. Numerical models are developed for the two approaches considering radiation heat transfer, which are validated with the published experimental results. Further, a comparison is made between the porous medium and the DEM-CFD approaches for predicting the thermal and hydraulic characteristics of the helium. The heat transfer behaviour predicted by both the approaches is approximately the same. The DEM-CFD approach can capture the detailed and localized flow behaviour in the presence of pebble, whereas the porous medium approach can predict the average flow characteristics. Further, the effect of the location of the inlet and outlet on the uniformity of the fluid flow in the canister is studied by considering different combinations of inlet and outlet.It is found that the pebble bed with diagonally opposite inlet and outlet configuration has a higher tritium sweeping efficiency as compared to the existing design of the canister with inlet and outlet at the same face.
Keywords:DEM;Porous medium;CFD;Pebble bed;Radiation;Purge gas
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Fusion nuclear power is a clean source of electricity, which can meet the ever-increasing demand for energy with almost no effect on the surroundings. Nuclear fusion is an attractive preference as its hydrogen isotope fuels are abundant. One of the essential isotopes, tritium, can be bred from a lithium ceramic-based tritium breeder in a blanket of the fusion reactor. The breeder blanket has several important functions such as to produce tritium, extract heat and radiation shielding to outer components of the reactor [1]. Hence, the tritium breeder ensures both smooth operations with better efficiency and safety of a fusion reactor. The lead–lithium cooled ceramic breeder (LLCB) concept consists of lead–lithium (Pb–Li) eutectic, which acts as a tritium breeder, multiplier of neutrons and also acts as a coolant. Lithium Titanate (Li2TiO3) is used as the ceramic breeder material in the form of packed pebble beds [2]. Lead–lithium flows separately around the pebble bed reactor to extract heat from it. Helium acts as a coolant, as well as, extracts tritium from the bed, which has a separate auxiliary system for tritium extraction. The flow parameter, geometrical model and its configuration of purge gas affect the partial pressure and temperature distribution. Therefore, the study of transport phenomena of purge gas is essential for the design of the tritium extraction systems for efficient extraction of tritium.
Two broadly adopted approaches, namely (i) discrete element method (DEM) and (ii) porous medium model, are employed to analyze the fluid flow in the packed bed filled with lithium titanate (Li2TiO3) pebbles. The discrete element methodology (DEM) is a numerical approach for modelling the dynamics of solid particles which interact with each other at discrete contact points. This method offers detailed insight into the local fluid flow and heat transfer in an actual pebble bed at the expense of higher computational cost. As it was first proposed by Cundall and Strack [3] for analyzing the mechanical behaviour of rocks at the microscopic scale, DEM has various applications in rock/soil mechanics, chemical engineering and pharmacy. Eppinger et al. [4] developed a meshing technique for fixed-bed consisting of monodisperse spherical particles. In order to avoid the poor cell qualities, computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations were performed for a tube diameter ratio of  in the laminar, transitional and turbulent regimes and the predictions were compared with results from the literature for porosity and pressure drop. The DEM method is used to fill the confined geometry. Zhang et al. [5] solved the flow parameters of the purge gas in a randomly packed bed of a fusion reactor using discrete element method (DEM)- computational fluid dynamics (CFD) model. Nijemeisland and Dixon [6] suggested that for obtaining good quality cells at the contact points, the size of the pebbles in the fixed bed reactors should be reduced to 98 % of the original size. Chen et al. [7] characterized the purge gas flow in the pebble bed reactor in the laminar flow regime using CFD-DEM methodology. The pressure drop was simulated and compared with the Ergun equation, which was used for estimating the pressure drop in a pebble bed reactor assuming pebbles as the porous medium. Bai et al. [8] numerically analyzed the flow pattern in different packing arrangements of pebbles in a pebble bed reactor. Higher heat transfer and lower surface temperature of pebbles were found in the most compact arrangements. Zhang et al. [9] performed a CFD analysis of gas flow in a pebble bed reactor with realistic packing obtained using the DEM. It was reported that the complex flow in the pebble bed reactor plays a significant role in heat transfer enhancement. Zhao et al. [10] analyzed the fluid flow and heat transfer simulations in a pebble bed reactor using DEM-CFD approach using different turbulence models to capture the details of the flows. Authors found that the large-eddy simulations (LES) resolve the fluid flow structures in the gap between pebbles better compared to the Reynold averaged stress model (RANS). Lew et al. [11] used the combined DEM-CFD approach with numerical implementations of pebble fragmentations to study the combined effects of granular crushing, ensemble restructuring granular fragment size and initial packing for different breeder volume configurations. Authors considered two configurations; namely (i) when the heat is removed from at walls parallel to the gravity vector and (ii) heat is removed from at walls whose orientation is perpendicular. Both these configurations were found to have advantageous features that manifest at different stages of pebble crushing. The initial packing fraction significantly affects the increase in bed temperatures.
The porous medium model assumes continuous and pseudo homogeneous medium and predicts the fluid flow and heat transfer characteristics using the volume-averaged techniques. However, the transport phenomena near the wall of the pebble bed are difficult to predict. Zavattoni et al. [12] discussed the various reasons for the porosity variation along the transverse direction in a cylindrical bed due to the wall effects and along the longitudinal direction of the packed bed. In the region of varying porosity at the wall, the porosity is almost unity and decreases to 0.2 at a distance of  due to the wall effects. Wu et al. [13] compared the porous medium approach with the CFD-DEM approach for the analysis of pebble bed reactor. In the modelling of the porous medium, authors considered averaged volume porosity. The thermal characteristics of the flow predicted by both the approaches were found to be approximately the same. The CFD-DEM approach can reasonably predict the anisotropic hydraulic characteristics of pebble bed reactors, including the flow separation, vortices and flow features accurately; whereas, the porous medium approach can predict the average flow properties reasonably well.
In heat transfer modelling of the porous medium approach, an extensive study was carried out on the validity of the thermal equilibrium assumption and the temperature difference between both the phases in the presence of different volumetric heat transfer coefficients, conductivity ratios, different gas phases and different heat generations [14]. Many authors [14,15] studied non-equilibrium heat transfer in a porous medium using various correlations available in the literature. However, the implementation of effective thermal conductivity model is very complex, as it depends on several factors, such as material properties of solid and gas phase, flow rate and flow regime, pebble to bed ratio, porosity variation and temperature. Qian et al. [16] studied the effective radiative conductivity in packed beds for low temperature, as well as, high temperature and high bed to pebble diameter ratio using the porous medium approach. Their work concluded that in packed beds, heat transfer is significantly enhanced when the particles are radiating heat at higher temperatures resulting in the increase in overall effective conductivity of the bed.
It can be noted from the preceding literature review that few studies reported the comparison of CFD-DEM and CFD-porous medium approaches; however, such comparison considering the radiation heat transfer in the packed bed are very few in the published literature. Furthermore, the fluid flow and temperature characteristics in the packed bed containing lithium titanate pebbles for the different inlets and outlets arrangements are not studied. Hence, in the present work, the CFD-DEM and CFD-porous medium approaches are adopted for analyzing the heat transfer and fluid flow behaviours in a representative pebble bed reactor considering radiation heat transfer. Helium is considered as the purged gas. Numerical models are developed for these two approaches and validated with the experimental results in the published literature. In the surface to surface radiation heat transfer model in CFD-DEM approach, an optically thin layer of gas in the gap between neighbouring spheres is assumed. Further, the effect of several inlet and outlet arrangements on the hydraulic-thermal performance of the packed bed is investigated.
<Section>2. Description of the physical model<Section>
Fig. 1 shows the schematic of the existing design of a representative pebble bed with the inlet and outlet located on the same face. The pebble bed reactor, which is a rectangular canister of dimensions 73.5 (height) × 19 (width) × 2.5 (thickness) mm, is filled with spherical pebbles having each diameter of 1 mm. The inlet and outlet are located on the same face, and both are having diameters of 0.45 mm. The walls of the canister are 5 mm thick and are made of IN-RAFMS (Indian Reduced Activation Ferritic Martensitic Steel). Spherical pebbles are made of Lithium meta titanate (Li2TiO3). Molten Lead Lithium flows around the canister walls and is having an average temperature of 340 °C. Helium flows through the gap between the pebbles to purge the tritium from the canister. The temperature-dependent thermophysical properties of IN-RAFMS, Li2TiO3 pebble bed and helium, are shown in reference [17,18]. The emissivity of the pebbles is considered as 0.3, while the emissivity of the internal walls of the canister is 0.35. The pebbles are being given a uniform heat generation rate of 5.6 × 105 W/m3, and the walls of the canister are subjected to convection heat transfer, and a free surface temperature of 613 K.The convective heat transfer coefficient is obtained through the standard convection heat transfer correlations.
Fig. 1
Fig. 1. Schematic of the existing design of the representative canister (all dimensions are in mm).
In order to study the effect of inlet and outlet configurations on the thermal-hydraulic characteristics of helium in the canister, several arrangements are considered, as shown in Fig. 2. The considered canister has inlets and outlets having a diameter of 0.45 mm each. Further, different locations of inlet and outlet configurations are considered, viz. (a) canister with three inlets and three outlets, (b) canister with inline inlets and outlets located on opposite faces and (c) canister with diametrically opposite inlet and outlet. In the configuration of the canister with three inlets and three outlets, the three inlets and outlets are located at an equal distance from one another. Fig. 2(b) shows the canister with diametrically opposite inlet and outlet located at a distance of 1 mm from the left and right wall and a distance of 0.625 mm from the front and back walls. Fig. 2(c) displays the canister with inline inlet and outlet located on the opposite face. Both inlet and outlet have a diameter of 0.45 mm in the two considered cases while the simulation conditions for both the cases are the same as the case of existing canister design shown in Fig. 1.
Fig. 2
Fig. 2. Schematics of canisters with (a) three inlets and three outlets, (b) inline inlets and outlets located on opposite faces and (c) diametrically opposite inlet and outlet.
<Section>3. Mathematical model</Section>
3.1. Discrete element method (DEM)
Fig. 3 illustrates the flowchart of the DEM calculations. The simulation initiates by detecting the points of contact between particles. The points of contact between the particles and the particle overlapping distance are then used to determine the interaction forces between the particles through the force-displacement relations. The resulting contact forces are applied at the centre of each particle, which causes the particles to move according to Newton’s second law of motion. The acceleration, velocity and displacement of the particle are updated at the end of each numerical iteration step. The iteration continues until the specified number of iterations are reached.
Fig. 3
Fig. 3. Calculation cycle in DEM.
3.1.1. Particle motion
According to Newton’s second law of motion, the equation which governs the translation motion of a single particle is expressed as,
@(1)
where @ is the mass of a particle , @ is the position of the centroid, g is the acceleration due to gravity, @ and @ are the normal and tangential inter-particle contact forces exerted by the neighbouring particles; summing all these forces at all the contact forces of overall the contacts (Nc); @ is the interaction between the fluid and the particles.
3.1.2. Transport equations in DEM
A three-dimensional computational domain is considered for evaluating hydraulic and thermal characteristics of a pebble bed reactor. Few assumptions made in developing the mathematical model are, (i) the fluid flow is steady, incompressible Newtonian fluid, (ii) the influence of gravity and buoyancy is negligible, (iii) the effect of viscous dissipation is neglected, (iv) no phase transition in the fluid, (v) radiation effect is neglected. According to the Reynolds number criterion , the linear-laminar flow regime in the canister is considered. The governing equations based on the above assumptions can be written as,
Conservation of mass:
@(2)
Conservation of momentum:
@(3)
where @ is the pressure,  @is the stress tensor, and  @ is the gravitational body force.
Conservation of energy:
@(4)
where @ is the thermal conductivity of the fluid, @ is the specific heat of the fluid at constant pressure, @ is the density of the fluid, @ includes the volumetric heat sources. It can be noted that the wall with a thickness of 5 mm is not considered in the numerical domain.
3.1.3. Surface to surface radiation heat transfer model
The energy flux, which is leaving a given surface consists of directly emitted energy and the portion of energy, which is reflected. The reflected energy flux depends on the energy flux, which is incident on the surface from the surroundings, which can be further expressed in terms of energy fluxes which are leaving from all other surfaces. The energy that is reflected from surface k is given as,
@(5)
where @ is the energy flux which is leaving from surface k, @ is the emissivity of surface k, σ is Boltzmann constant, @ is the energy flux which is being incident on the surface k from the surroundings and  is the reflectivity of the surface k. Using the surface to surface view factor, Fjk and the view factor reciprocity relationship, one can finally obtain,
@(6)
which can be written as,
@(7)
where Jk represents the energy that is leaving the surface (or radiosity) of surface k, and Ek represents the emissive power of surface k.
3.1.4. Porous medium modelling
The pebbles in the canister can be modelled as a porous medium. A three-dimensional computational domain is considered for evaluating thermal-hydraulics characteristics of helium in the canister. The flow is assumed steady, laminar and Newtonian, and the viscous dissipation effect is neglected. The two energy equations non-equilibrium heat transfer model for pebbles and helium with radiation effect using the radiative effective conductivity method is employed. The general governing equations are as follows,
Conservation of mass:
@(8)
Conservation of momentum:
@(9)
where @ represents the density at the reference temperature, @. @ is the source term which includes the porosity effects.
Conservation of energy for gas:
@(10)
Conservation of energy for solid:
@(11)
where Ssh is a source term in solid due to volumetric heat generation.
The laminar fluid flow with superficial velocity formulation and the effect of the porous medium on the mean flow is included using a source term, which represents the resistance to the fluid flow in the momentum equation. The source which represents the resistance to the fluid flow is composed of two terms, (i) viscous resistance and (ii) inertial resistance. For the case of the homogeneous porous medium, the momentum source term in ith direction can be expressed as,
@(12)
where α is the permeability, and  is the inertial resistance. The expression of α (viscous resistance) and  (inertial resistance) in each direction can be obtained from the Ergun equation as,
@(13)
@(14)
A comparison of several interfacial heat transfer coefficient correlations available in the literature is made with experimental results reported by Yagi and Wakao [19]. The study shows that the correlation of Wakao et al. [15] gives a minimum error. The interfacial heat transfer coefficient given by Wakao et al. [15] is,
@(15)
The interfacial specific area can be determined as,
@(16)
Qian et al. [16] extensively studied the effective radiative conductivity for low temperature, as well as high temperature applications. At low temperature, the ZBS (Zehner-Bauer-Schlünder) model [20] shows the closest results with minimum error and wider usability. The correlation of effective solid and gas conductivity of the ZBS thermal conductivity model is given as,
@(17)
@(18)
where ω = 0.00726 [21,22],@ , @ is the gas thermal conductivity and @ is the solid thermal conductivity. The parameter, γ is given as,
@(19)
where
@(20)
For modelling the radiation heat transfer, the above-defined ZBS model is combined with B-B (Breitbach and Barthels) effective radiative conductivity model. At high temperature, the overall conductivity of packed bed is the effective thermal conductivity including both thermal, as well as, radiative conductivity as expressed in Eq. (21).
@(21)
where @ is the effective radiative conductivity and  is the effective thermal conductivity. The radiative heat flux incorporated with the effective radiative conductivity can be written in the form of Fourier law as,
(22)
where @ is the radiation heat flux, Ts is the temperature of solid. The general form for radiative effective conductivity for a packed bed is [23].
@(23)
where FE is the radiation exchange factor. The B-B correlation for FE is given as [23],
@(24)
and @ is the emissivity of pebbles and  is the pebble diameter.
3.2. Boundary conditions
In the present study, the following boundary conditions are imposed to solve the governing equations,
(i)
At the inlet, @.
(ii)
At the outlet,@ .
(iii)
No-slip condition assigned to all the walls and pebble surfaces, @.
(iv)
At the walls, the overall heat transfer coefficient of h = 1538 W/m2K and free stream temperature  are used. The overall heat transfer coefficient is determined from the thermal conductivity, the thickness of the wall and the convective heat transfer coefficient.
The heat generation in the pebbles is considered as, @.
3.3. Numerical methodology
Fig. 4 shows the procedures adopted in the CFD-DEM methodology. A pebble bed is created by writing a script in LIGGGHTS (based on Discrete Element Methodology), which helps to simulate the pebbles falling under the action of gravity in the canister. The dimensions of the canister, pebble size and material properties are used as inputs to the developed LIGGGHTS script. The script is run for a sufficient time so that the entire canister can be filled with the pebbles. Finally, the pebbles are allowed to settle and thus, a pebble bed is created. The velocity, angular velocity, pebble centre positions (x, y, z) data are extracted through Paraview software. A macro is written in Solidworks software which creates the pebbles from the information of the centre positions of the pebbles (x, y, z). Then the canister is created in Ansys modeler neglecting the wall thickness to reduce the computational cost. In order to mesh the geometry properly, the pebble diameter is considered 98 % of its original diameter. Then the model is simulated in Ansys Fluent V16 [24] with suitable boundary conditions. The number of pebbles included in the current simulation is 3304, which accounts for an average porosity of 0.5. It can be noted that the tritium breeding ratio (TBR) > 1 may not be possible with the average porosity of 0.5; however, the present analysis aims at analyzing the flow and thermal characteristics of helium for the variation of porosity distribution in a packed bed. The SIMPLE algorithm is used to the velocity-pressure coupling, and the coefficients of discretized momentum and energy equations are obtained using the power-law scheme in the CFD-DEM and porous medium methodologies. Temperature-dependent properties of Li2TiO3 and helium and porosity variations are written in User Defined Functions (UDF) in Ansys Fluent. The convergence criteria in both the approaches are set as 10−3 for the continuity and momentum equations and 10-6 for the energy equation (Fig. 4).
Fig. 4
Fig. 4. Simulation procedure in CFD-DEM approach.
3.4. Porosity distribution
The cross-sectional porosity is defined as the ratio of flow area to the total area of a cross-section. For determining the porosity distribution along the width and the thickness, cross-sectional porosity is determined at several cross-sections along the width and thickness, and thus the porosity distribution is plotted in Fig. 5 along the non-dimensional width and thickness. The porosity distribution along the direction of length is assumed constant. The porosity distribution along the width and thickness is found to be symmetric. Porosity is maximum close to the walls along both the width and thickness. The non-dimensional width (W*) and thickness (H*) are defined as,
@(25)
Fig. 5
Fig. 5. Non-dimensional porosity variation from the centre of the bed along (a) the width and (b) the thickness.
3.5. Grid independence study
In order to ascertain the numerical results are independent of grid sizes, the grid independence study is performed in the CFD-DEM and porous medium approaches. In the porous medium approach, a fine sizing control is assigned at the inlet and the outlet to capture high temperature and velocity gradients. Four different numbers of elements, viz. 724125, 1,264,382, 2,055,390 and 3,016,486 with hexahedral elements are chosen to mesh the existing canister design, as shown in Fig. 1. Mesh generated for the grid size of 2,055,390 is shown in Fig. 6. The fluid temperature at the outlet and the pressure drop are calculated for these grid sizes and are tabulated in Table 1. The deviations  in the outlet temperature and the pressure drop are found to be 6.9 % and 0.96 %, respectively between the number of elements of 1,264,382 and 2,055,390, whereas the corresponding values are 0.208 % and 0.0306 % between the number of elements of 2,055,390 and 3,016,486. Therefore, the total hexahedral elements of 2,055,390 are chosen as the preferred number of meshes for further study in the porous medium model. Similarly, in the DEM-CFD model, the grid independence study is conducted with the particle size reduced to 98 % of the original value. It is found that the number of tetrahedral elements of 17,289,112 produces grid independent solutions with a reasonable computational time.
Fig. 6
Fig. 6. Meshing of the existing canister with inlet and outlet.
Table 1. Grid independence study in the porous medium approach.
<Section>4. Results and discussion</Section>
4.1. Validation of CFD-DEM approach
4.1.1. Pressure drop
In order to ensure that the present model predicts the pressure drop results correctly, it is being validated with the previously published experimental results, as well as with the Ergun equation for pressure drop in a pebble bed reactor. In the experiments by Hassan and Kang [25], the experimental setup consists of a cylinder having a diameter of 0.1205 m and a length of 1.534 m. The cylinder was packed with glass spheres of diameter 0.1905 cm and was having a porosity of 0.41. Experiments were performed with two fluids, air and water and the pressure at different sections was recorded. In the validation study, the pressure drop is simulated for both laminar and turbulent regimes. The pebble size was considered to be 98 % of the original size to ensure a good quality mesh. The computational domain was considered a quarter of the physical domain with symmetric boundary conditions. In order to evaluate the effect of pebble diameter contraction on the pressure drop, a comparison of pressure drops is made, which are obtained by considering the pebble diameter as 98 % of the original size and the Ergun equation using the original parameters of void fraction and diameter, as well as, using the reduced parameters. Fig. 7 shows the comparison of simulated results for pressure drop with the results obtained from the Ergun equation. It can be observed that with the increase in effective Reynolds number, the difference between the simulated pressure drop and pressure drop from the Ergun equation increases. Simulated pressure drop values were lesser than the values obtained from the Ergun equation, as the inlet velocity values were calculated from the effective Reynolds number whose parameters are considered with contraction, thereby resulting in less velocity and hence, less pressure drop. Simulated results for pressure drop were also compared with the results obtained from the Ergun equation when its parameters porosity and diameter are considered with contraction.
Fig. 7
Fig. 7. Comparison of the present numerical model with the Ergun equation.
4.1.2. Heat transfer
Further, the present model is validated with the experimental results reported by Yagi and Wakao [19] for heat transfer in a pebble bed reactor. A steam jacketed brass tube with a diameter of 36 mm and the wall thickness of 1 mm and a length of 200 mm was used. The tube was packed with solid glass spherical particles of 6 mm diameter. Steam flew through outside the tube with a constant temperature of 100 °C. Air flowed through the tube with an inlet temperature of 16.9 °C with a mass flow rate of 2740 kg/m2.hr. The effective Reynolds number based on the pebble diameter is found to be more than 300, which is in the turbulent regime. The packing of solid spheres in the tube is obtained by the LIGGGHTS script. A porosity of 0.43 is obtained as compared to the porosity of 0.4 reported by Yagi and Wakao [19]. The particle diameter was considered 96 % of the original diameter to ensure moderately skewed mesh elements. The  turbulence model is used for the fluid flow simulation [26]. Fig. 8 shows the comparison of centerline temperature values measured experimentally and predicted numerically. The simulated results are in close agreement with the experimentally measured values. However, there are some differences in the temperature, because of reducing the solid sphere diameter size to 96 % of the original diameter, the porosity value is increased from 0.43 to 0.5 which is the main reason behind these differences. However, the maximum error percentage in the results is not more than 4.5 %, which is acceptable.
Fig. 8
Fig. 8. Comparison of simulated values with experimental results [19] for heat transfer validation.
4.2. Validation of porous medium approach
The radiation heat transfer model used in the porous medium approach is adopted from Qian et al. [16]. The experimental apparatus was composed of an electrical furnace (heated wall), a test cell and a data acquisition system. The cylindrical test cell was used in the experiment, which has a diameter and height of 200 mm and was made up of stainless steel. The cylindrical test cell was completely filled with silica particles having a mean diameter of 1 mm. A constant temperature of 1173 K is set for the heated sidewall of the test cell, and all other walls are set as adiabatic. The interfacial heat transfer coefficient is calculated according to the correlations of Wakao et al. [15]. The radiative effective conductivity is modelled using the formulation of the B-B model given in Eqs. (23 and 24). The thermal conductivity of solid is used to include radiative effective conductivity. Fig. 9 shows the comparison of experimental and numerical temperatures of the centre point of the bed. This validation study proves that the effective radiative conductivity formulation reported by Qian et al. [16] agrees well with the experimental results with an average error of 5.69 %. The deviation at time ∼5411 s is due to the constant interfacial heat transfer coefficient chosen at an average temperature of 773 K; whereas, the interfacial heat transfer coefficient depends on the conductivity, which again depends on temperature and increases with temperature .
Fig. 9
Fig. 9. Temporal variation in temperature of the centre point.
4.3. Thermal hydraulic characteristics of helium in the existing canister design
Fig. 10 shows the variation of velocity across the width at different cross-sections at z = 20, 40 and 60 mm using CFD-DEM approach with the particle diameter reduced by 2 % of its original value. The velocity can be observed as zero at the locations of pebbles, where no-slip velocity condition exists. The figure indicates that the velocity magnitude has significant values close to the inlet, whereas the velocity magnitude drops close to zero at the region located far away from the inlet as can be observed from the velocity profiles at z = 40 and 60 mm. The pressure drop of the existing design is found to be 77.03 Pa. Fig. 11 shows the velocity contour plots at different cross-sections of the canister at z = 5, 15 and 40 mm from the top surface (z = 0 mm as shown in Fig. 1) of the existing design of the representative canister. The velocity field at each cross-section of the canister is observed to be non-uniform due to the random packing of pebbles in the canister, resulting in a non-uniform temperature field, which is discussed later. The magnitude of velocity decreases at the locations where the pebbles are closely placed; however, to maintain the mass conservation at a cross-section, the fluid flows through the least resistance path, where a higher velocity magnitude can be observed in the figure.
Fig. 10
Fig. 10. Comparison of velocity across the width at different cross-sections at z = 20, 40, 60 mm.
Fig. 11
Fig. 11. Resultant velocity (m/s) contour at cross-sections located at (a) z = 5, (b) z = 15 and (c) z = 40 mm.
Fig. 12 shows the temperature contour at the centre plane (y = 0) of the canister, which shows that the temperature distribution is nearly constant with maximum temperature occurring at the centre. The helium temperature increases from 573 K (inlet temperature of the helium) to a value of 612.93 K at the outlet. Helium experiences a ∼40 K rise in temperature as it flows through the canister.
Fig. 12
Fig. 12. Temperature (K) contour at the centre plane (y = 0) of the existing canister design.
4.4. Comparison of DEM-CFD approach with the porous medium approach
A comparison of the thermal-hydraulic characteristics is made between the DEM and the porous medium approaches to ascertain the validity of both the approaches for the existing canister design. For the CFD-DEM approach, the packing of the canister is numerically obtained using LIGGGHTS, and the variation in porosity is determined both along the width and thickness, which is used in the porous medium approach to mimic the exact porosity distribution as obtained from LIGGGHTS. In the porous medium approach, the inertial, as well as, the viscous coefficients vary according to the porosity distribution along the thickness and width, while the porosity along the length direction is assumed to be constant. The property variations with respect to temperature as well as the boundary conditions, were taken the same for both the approaches. Radiation heat transfer is included in both the DEM-CFD as well as in the porous medium approach. For the DEM-CFD approach, the radiation heat transfer is modelled by S2S radiation model with heat transfer occurring between the pebble-pebble and between pebble-canister walls while the helium is considered to be optically thin so that it does not affect the radiation heat transfer by means of scattering, absorption, while in the porous medium approach the radiation heat transfer is modelled by combining the ZBS model with the B-B effective radiation conductivity model.
The temperature distribution in the canister is compared for both the DEM and the porous medium approaches. Fig. 13 shows the comparison of the variation of temperature across the width at different cross-sections, i.e. z = 72.50 (Fig. 13(a)) and 60 mm (Fig. 13(b)). It can be observed that the temperature field obtained by the DEM approach is not uniform along the width of the canister, as the velocity distribution at a cross-section is not uniform due to the random packing of the pebbles, as discussed earlier. The porous medium, as well as, the DEM approaches capture nearly similar variations of temperature. However, there are some differences, which are due to the fact that in the DEM approach, the pebble diameter is reduced, which results in the increase in the porosity. Therefore, the heat generation is decreased slightly in the DEM approach, which consequently shows less temperature as compared to the porous medium approach. This shows that both the porous medium, as well as the DEM approaches, give almost the same thermal characteristics in the pebble bed reactor. The average outlet temperature predicted by the DEM approach is 613.19 K as compared to 613.2 K determined by the porous medium approach. Thus, for determining the thermal characteristics of the pebble bed reactor, both the porous medium, as well as, the DEM approaches can be used.
Fig. 13
Fig. 13. Comparison of temperature (K) distributions predicted from the DEM and porous medium approaches at z = (a) 60 and (b) 72.50 mm.
The velocity distributions at two planes obtained from DEM and the porous medium approaches are compared. Fig. 14 shows the comparison of the variation of velocity across the width at a cross-section, i.e. z = 60 mm, which indicates that the DEM approach produces the localized accelerations in the flow due to fluid flowing through the least resistance path which is the high porosity region. In the porous medium approach, the velocity profile is almost constant except at the solid boundaries, as this approach does not directly model the flow passage; however, this approach adopts the porosity concept to account for the flow reduction in this region. If there is a slight acceleration in this approach, it is due to the fact that the gas density is lowered at higher temperatures. Therefore, the DEM approach can reasonably predict the anisotropic hydraulic characteristics of pebble bed reactors including the flow separation, vortices and flow features accurately; whereas, the porous medium approach can predict the average flow properties reasonably well.
Fig. 14
Fig. 14. Comparison of velocity distributions predicted from the DEM and Porous medium approaches at z = 60 mm.
4.5. Fluid flow and heat transfer characteristics in modified canister designs
In order to determine the effect of inlet and outlet locations of the canister on the tritium sweeping capacity, several arrangements are numerically simulated. For the three inlets and outlets, as shown in Fig. 2(a), the velocity is found to be maximum at the inlet and outlet with a value of 19.95 m/s. Fig. 15(a) shows the variation of velocity across the width at different cross-sections of z = 20, 40 and 60 mm. The velocity can be observed as zero at the locations of pebbles. On comparing the magnitudes of velocity at z = 20, 40 and 60 mm with the velocity magnitudes at the same location in the existing canister design (Fig. 9(a)), it can be seen that the magnitude of velocity is more in the present configuration, which is an indicator of the fact that with the modified configuration of inlet-outlet, helium flows more uniformly in the canister due to the increased number of inlets. Thus, the present three inlets-outlets configuration can have better tritium removal as compared to the existing canister design. The pressure drop in this modified configuration with three inlets and outlets is obtained as 80.59 Pa. Fig. 15(b) shows the temperature contour at the centre plane (y = 0) of the canister, which shows that the temperature distribution is nearly constant. The helium temperature increases from 573 K, which is the inlet temperature of helium, to a value of 613.01 K at the outlet. Therefore, helium experiences a temperature rise of ∼40 K as it flows through the canister. Thus, from the above analysis, it is evident that better removal of tritium is possible with this canister design (3 inlets and 3 outlets) based on the fluid flow characteristics.
Fig. 15
Fig. 15. (a) Variation of velocity (m/s) across the width at different cross sections and (b) temperature (K) contour at the centre plane (y = 0) of the canister with three inlets and outlets.
4.6. Fluid flow and heat transfer in the canister with diametrically opposite inlet and outlet and inline inlet and outlet located on the opposite faces
Fig. 16(a, b) shows the comparison of velocities for the two considered configurations (Fig. 2(b) and (c)) at z = 50 and 60 mm. Both figures indicate that the velocity profile is nearly the same for both the considered cases at z = 50 and 60 mm. Thus, from the point of view of tritium sweeping from the canister, both the considered cases have nearly the same extraction efficiency based on the fluid flow characteristics. The pressure drops of 144.94 and 133.05 Pa are predicted for the diagonally opposite and inline inlet and outlet configurations. Fig. 17(a, b) shows the temperature contour at the centre plane (y = 0) of the canister for both the cases. The helium temperature increases from 573 K (inlet temperature of the helium) to a value of 612.78 K at the outlet for the canister with diametrically opposite inlet and outlet, while in the case of the canister with inline opposite inlet and outlet, it increases to ∼613.08 K.
Fig. 16
Fig. 16. Comparison of velocity distributions at different sections at z = (a) 50 and (b) 60 mm.
Fig. 17
Fig. 17. Temperature (K) contour at the midplane for a canister with (a) diametrically opposite inlet and outlet, and (b) inline inlets and outlets located on opposite faces.
4.7. Flow uniformity for purging tritium
The purging process of tritium in the lithium titanate pebble bed depends on the flow distribution of helium in the canister. A uniform flow of helium across the pebble bed ensures uniform sweeping of the tritium from the canister. Hence, in order to identify the flow uniformity of helium, the area-weighted average velocity is plotted at different cross-sections along the height. The area-weighted average velocity is defined as,
@(26)
where @ is the velocity of helium at the ith node, @ is the tritium formation rate at the ith node, @ is the area of the ith node, N is the number of nodes. Fig. 18 shows the area-weighted average velocity at different cross-sections along the height for all the considered designs. It can be observed that the velocity magnitude along the height of the canister reduces close to zero at a distance of 30 mm from the inlet of the existing canister design. Thus, with the present inlet and outlet configurations, as seen in Fig. 1, helium is not being able to penetrate deep inside the canister and is circulating at the top. The volume-weighted average velocity of this configuration is calculated as 0.063 m/s. Therefore, the existing configuration is not suited for the efficient tritium removal from the canister as most of the flow is circulated at the top, and the flow is not being able to penetrate deep inside the canister. In the case of three inlets and outlets located equidistantly on the sidewalls, the helium flows at different cross-sections, and the flow uniformity in the canister improves slightly. The flow uniformity in the canister improves considerably for the configurations of inlet and outlet located diagonally opposite and inline opposite as can be observed from the figure. The volume-weighted average velocities of the three modified configurations of inlet and outlet located diagonally opposite and inline opposite and three inlets and three outlets are found to be 0.228, 0.222 and 0.071 m/s, respectively. Hence, the canister with diagonally opposite inlet and outlet has more efficient tritium removal as compared to the other modified designs and the existing design of canister.
Fig. 18
Fig. 18. Area weighted average velocity of helium at different cross-sections along the height of the considered canister designs.
<Section>5. Conclusions</Section>
In the present work, the DEM-CFD approach is used to study the thermal and flow characteristics of helium in a representative pebble bed reactor filled with Lithium meta titanate pebbles. Further, the pebble bed is modelled using the porous medium approach using the porosity variation obtained through the DEM approach. The DEM-CFD and porous medium approaches are validated with the published experimental results and are found to be in good agreement. Surface to surface radiation heat transfer model is also included in the DEM-CFD model with helium considered as an optically thin medium. The radiation heat transfer is incorporated in the porous medium model using an effective thermal conductivity adopting the ZBS-BB models. The DEM-CFD approach is compared with the porous medium approach, and it is found that both methods can predict the nearly same heat transfer behaviour of helium in the canister. However, The DEM-CFD approach can predict the detailed localized and globalized characteristics of the flow, whereas the porous medium approach reasonably captures the average flow behaviour with a less computational cost. The locations of inlet and outlet of the canister are altered to ensure better flow distribution for tritium removal from the pebble bed over the existing canister design. The diagonally opposite inlet and outlet of the canister results in more uniform flow with the higher volume-weighted average velocity compared to other locations of inlet and outlet.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Akhalesh Sharma: Software, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing - original draft. Abhishek Thakur: Software, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing - original draft. Sandip K. Saha: Formal analysis, Writing - review & editing, Supervision, Conceptualization, Methodology, Funding acquisition, Project administration. Atul Sharma: Writing - review & editing, Conceptualization, Methodology, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Project administration. Deepak Sharma: Writing - review & editing, Project administration. Paritosh Chaudhuri: Writing - review & editing, Funding acquisition, Project administration.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
On behalf of all co-authors, I declare that there is no conflict of interest. We have acknowledged the funding agency along with the grant number in the manuscript, who has supported this work.
<Section>Acknowledgement</Section>
Authors acknowledge the support provided by the Department of Atomic Energy, Government of India through grant number 39/14/12/2018-BRNS/39012.
<Section>Appendix A. Supplementary data</Section>
The following is Supplementary data to this article:
<Section>References</Section>
[1]
M. Abdou, N. B.Morley, S. Smolentsev, A. Ying, S. Malang, A. Rowcliffe, M. Ulricson
Blanket/first wall challenges and required R&D on the pathway to DEMO
Fusion Eng. Des., 100 (2015), pp. 2-43
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[2]
P. Chaudhuri, S. Ranjithkumar, D. Sharma, C. Danani, H.L. Swami, R. Bhattacharya, A. Patel, E.R. Kumar, K.N. Vyas
Progress in engineering design of Indian LLCB TBM set for testing in ITER
Fusion Eng. Des., 89 (7–8) (2014), pp. 1362-1369
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[3]
P.A. Cundall, O.D.L. Strack
A discrete numerical model for granular assemblies
Gotechniqu, 29 (1) (1979), pp. 47-65
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[4]
T. Eppinger, K. Seidler, M. Kraume
DEM-CFD simulations of fixed bed reactor with small tube to particle diameter ratios
Chem. Eng. J., 166 (2010), pp. 324-331
Google Scholar
[5]
H. Zhang, Z. Li, H. Guo, M. Ye, H. Huang
DEM-CFD simulation of purge gas flow in a solid breeder pebble bed
Fusion Eng. Des., 113 (2016), pp. 288-292
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[6]
M. Nijemeisland, A.G. Dixon
CFD study of fluid flow and wall heat transfer in a fixed bed of spheres
Aiche J., 50 (5) (2004), pp. 906-921
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[7]
Y. Chen, L. Chen, S. Liu, G. Luo
Flow characteristics analysis of purge gas in unitary pebble beds by CFD simulation coupled with DEM geometry model for fusion blanket
Fusion Eng. Des., 114 (2017), pp. 84-90
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[8]
Y. Bai, N. Gui, X. Yang, J. Tu, S. Jiang
Computational fluid dynamics investigation of thermal-hydraulic characteristics in a simplified pebble bed modular reactor using different arrangements of fuel elements
J. Comput. Multiph. Flows, 10 (3) (2017), pp. 119-127
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[9]
S. Zhang, X. Zho, Z. Yang
Flow simulations in a pebble bed reactor by a combined DEM-CFD approach
Nucl. Sci. Eng., 189 (2) (2017), pp. 135-151
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[10]
X. Zhao, T. Montgomery, S. Zhang
Combined CFD and DEM simulations of fluid flow and heat transfer in a pebble bed reactor
Proceedings of the ASME 2011 Small Modular Reactors Symposium, Washington, DC, USA, September 28-30 (2011)
Google Scholar
[11]
J.T. Van Lew, A. Ying, M. Abdou
Numerical study on influences of bed resettling, breeding zone orientation, and purge gas on temperatures in solid breeders
Fusion Eng. Des., 109 (2016), pp. 539-544
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[12]
S.A. Zavattoni, M.C. Barbato, A. Pedretti, G. Zanganeh
CFD simulations of a pebble bed thermal energy storage system accounting for porosity variations effects
AIP Conference Proceedings, 2033 (2018), 10.1063/1.5067121
090027-1–090027-090028
Google Scholar
[13]
C.Y. Wu, Y.M. Fereng, C.C. Chieng, C.C. Liu
Investigating the advantages and disadvantages of realistic approach and porous approach for closely packed pebbles in CFD simulation
Nucl. Eng. Des., 240 (2010), pp. 1151-1159
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[14]
A.C. Baytas
Thermal non-equilibrium natural convection in a square enclosure filled with a heat-generating solid phase, non-Darcy porous medium
Int. J. Energy Res., 27 (2003), pp. 975-988
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[15]
N. Wakao, S. Kaguei, T. Funazkri
Effect of fluid dispersion coefficients on particle-to-fluid heat transfer coefficients in packed beds: correlation of Nusselt numbers
Chem. Eng. Sci., 34 (3) (1979), pp. 325-336
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[16]
Y. Qian, Z. Han, J.H. Zhan, X. Liu, G. Xu
Comparative evaluation of heat conduction and radiation models for CFD simulation of heat transfer of packed beds
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 127 (2018), pp. 573-584
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[17]
A.N. Mistry, C.S. Sasmal, S. Sam, N. Singh, A. Prajapati, J.P. Chauhan, H.M. Tailor, S.K. Albert, K. Laha, S. Saibaba, A.K. Bhaduri, E.R. Kumar
Status of India-specific reduced activation Ferritic-Martensitic steeland fabrication technologies development for LLCB TBM
Fusion Eng. Des., 125 (2017), pp. 263-268
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[18]
https://webbook.nist.gov/chemistry/fluid/ (last accessed on July 20, 2019).
Google Scholar
[19]
S. Yagi, N. Wakao
Heat and mass transfer from wall to fluid in packed bed
Aiche J., 4 (1) (1959), pp. 79-85
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[20]
R. Bauer, E.U. Schlünder
Part I: effective radial thermal conductivity of packings in gas flow. Part II: thermal conductivity of the packing fraction without gas flow
Int. Chem. Eng., 18 (1978), pp. 189-204
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[21]
R. Yusuf, B. Halvorsen, M.C. Melaaen
An experimental and computational study of wall to bed heat transfer in a bubbling gas–solid fluidized bed
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 42 (2012), pp. 9-23
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[22]
D.J. Patil, J. Smit, M. van Sint Annaland, J.A.M. Kuipers
Wall-to-bed heat transfer in gas–solid bubbling fluidized beds
Aiche J., 52 (2006), pp. 58-74
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[23]
G. Breitbach, H. Barthels
The radiant heat transfer in the high temperature reactor core after failure of the afterheat removal systems
Nucl. Technol., 49 (1980), pp. 392-399
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[24]
ANSYS FLUENT 12.0 User’s Guide. (last accessed on July 20, 2019). https://www.afs.enea.it/project/neptunius/docs/fluent/html/ug/node1.htm.
Google Scholar
[25]
Y.A. Hassan, C. Kang
Pressure drop in a pebble bed reactor under high Reynolds number
Nucl. Technol., 180 (2) (2012), pp. 159-173
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[26]
B.E. Launder, D.B. Spalding
Lectures in Mathematical Models of Turbulence
Academic Press, London, England (1972)
Google Scholar