<title>CATHARE simulation results of the natural circulation characterisation test of the PKL test facility</title>
<author>1,AnisBousbia Salah</author>
<Affiliation>1,Bel V (Subsidiary of the Belgian Federal Agency for Nuclear Control), Walcourtstraat 148, 1070, Brussels, Belgium</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2020.11.016</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1738573320309311</URL>
CATHARE simulation results of the natural circulation characterisation test of the PKL test facility
AnisBousbia Salah
Bel V (Subsidiary of the Belgian Federal Agency for Nuclear Control), Walcourtstraat 148, 1070, Brussels, Belgium
<Section>Abstract</Section>
In the past, several experimental investigations aiming at characterizing the natural circulation (NC) behavior in test facilities were carried out. They showed a variety of flow patterns characterized by an inverted U-shape of the NC flow curve versus primary mass inventory. On the other hand, attempts to reproduce such curves using thermal-hydraulic system codes, showed 10–30% differences between the measured and calculated NC mass flow rate. Actually, the used computer codes are generally based upon nodalization using single U-tube representation. Such model may not allow getting accurate simulation of most of the NC phenomena occurring during such tests (like flow redistribution and flow reversal in some SG U-tubes). Simulations based on multi-U-tubes model, showed better agreement with the overall behavior, but remain unable to predict NC phenomena taking place in the steam generator (SG) during the experiment.
In the current study, the CATHARE code is considered in order to assess a NC characterization test performed in the four loops PKL facility. For this purpose, four different SG nodalizations including, single and multi-U-tubes, 1D and 3D SG inlet/outlet zones are considered. In general, it is shown that the 1D and 3D models exhibit similar prediction results up to a certain point of the rising part of the inverted U-shape of the NC flow curve. After that, the results bifurcate with, on the one hand, a tendency of the 1D models to over-predict the measured NC mass flow rate and on the other hand, a tendency of the 3D models to under-predict the NC flow rate.
Keywords:Thermal-hydraulic system codes;Natural circulation characterization test;3D;1D approaches;CATHARE;Flow reversal
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Natural circulation (NC) cooling process constitutes a key parameter of several PWR safety studies. The latter rely on computer thermal-hydraulic system codes based generally on nodalization using lumped modelling features to represent interactions of complex systems behaviors under steady and transient conditions. These simplifications are generally acceptable for many scenarios, especially under forced circulation regimes. However, under NC regimes, phenomena like flow mixing, temperature stratification, flow recirculation and instabilities, could take place and may affect the global behavior of the system and more particularly the code prediction accuracy of the target safety criterion. This leads, in general, to the need to introduce additional conservatism in the safety assessment studies in order to take into account the impact of such issue.
In the past, several experimental investigations of phenomena occurring during NC flows were carried out in LSTF, PKL, BETHSY, and SEMISCALE [[1], [2], [3]]. They showed a variety of flow patterns characterized by the inverted U-shape of the NC flow versus primary mass inventory. In some tests, the presence of recirculation flow between the inlet and outlet plena of the steam generators (SG) was emphasized. On the other hand, early attempts to simulate the NC primary loop mass flow rate using thermal-hydraulic system codes like RELAP5 and TRAC, using nodalizations based upon single U-tube representation, showed large differences between the calculation results and the measured data. For instance, simulations results using RELAP5/Mod2 [1] of the NC characterization test in the LSTF test facility show that at full mass inventory, the calculated loop flow rate is over-estimated by about 10%. At 90%–80% of the primary mass inventory, the NC loop mass flow rate could be overestimated by 50%. The authors concluded that single U-tube model is unable to simulate the transient properly and suggested to consider a sufficiently detailed model of the SG. Later, simulations based on multi-U-tubes model by TRAC-PF1, RELAP5/Mod2 and RELAP5/Mod3 [[2], [3], [4]], showed better agreement with the overall behavior. However, the maximum loop flow rate was still over-predicted by 20–30%. These deviations could be due to several source of uncertainties like the two-phase pressure loss models, the heat transfer correlations between the primary and secondary side, and the RPV swell water level. On the other hand, the presence of NC phenomena that could not be adequately simulated by the used models could also be a source of discrepancies. Indeed, 3D phenomena that take place in the SG inlet/outlet plena may activate the interactions between numerous parallel SG U-tubes, and lead to flow redistribution and reversal in some of them. In these conditions, the fluid temperature difference between the inlet and the outlet chamber of the SG decreases and consequently affect the NC mass flow rate.
In order to assess the aforementioned aspects, a NC characterization test, carried out in the PKL facility [5], is simulated using the advanced thermal-hydraulic system code CATHARE 2/V2.5_3/mod4.1 developed by CEA, EDF, AREVA and IRSN [6]. In the current framework, the CATHARE model for PKL was modified to take account four SG nodalization models including 1D, 3D, single U-tube and multi U-tubes model are used. Each model corresponds to one of the SG of the PKL cooling loops. This allows the assessment of the prediction capabilities of each nodalization and a better characterization and validation of the code models in predicting phenomena occurring during natural circulation based transients.
<Section>2. PKL facility description</Section>
The PKL facility [5] has been built in order to perform experimental investigations related to different integral behaviors of a typical 4-loop 1300-MW Siemens pressurized water reactor (PWR) plant under normal and accident conditions. The layout of the PKL facility (Fig. 1) shows the primary side and the most significant components of the secondary side. The scaling ratios of the facility are 1:1 elevation ratio, and 1:145 for the power, volumes and the cross section areas. However, the maximum operating primary pressure is 45 bar.
Fig. 1. Layout of the PKL test facility [8].
The primary side is represented by four quasi-identical loops arranged around the reactor pressure vessel. For each loop, a secondary side is associated, as well as all the significant interfaces and auxiliary systems. Each SG contain 28 U-tubes distributed over seven elevations as shown in Table 1. The U-tube repartition in the SG inlet and outlet zone sections are shown in Fig. 2.
Table-1. Main components of the PKL Steam Generator U-tubes.
Fig. 2. Transversal section of the SG U-tubes repartition.
<Section>3. CATHARE model for PKL test facility</Section>
3.1. PKL pressure vessel
The PKL vessel model is fully based on 1D components (see Fig. 3). The downcomer consists of an upper downcomer ring where the flows coming from the different cooling loops are mixed up. The descending part of the downcomer consists of two pipes connecting the downcomer ring to the core lower plenum. The rod bundle consists of 314 uniformly disposed heated rods. The latter were lumped into one equivalent heating channel with a uniform axially distributed power. The CATHARE nodalization was chosen to fit the spacer’s position. The geometry of the upper plenum includes the connections to the four hot legs and the lower part of the upper head. The upper head is connected to the core upper plenum through nine holes that simulate the guided tubes zone, and to the upper part of the downcomer through four upper head bypass pipes. In addition, four bypass pipes connecting each hot-leg to the RPV downcomer are also modelled.
Fig. 3. CATHARE modelling of the PKL reactor vessel components.
3.2. Cooling loops and steam generators (primary side)
PKL is a 4-loop test facility simulating the thermal-hydraulic behavior of KONVOI –type PWR nuclear reactors. The loops are almost identical with small geometry differences and the fact related to the control volume system that extracts the letdown flow from Loop-3 only, but the charge flow is injected to all loops. All the four cooling loops are modelled individually; each loop has its corresponding SG and cooling pump. The pressurizer is connected to the cooling loop number 2.
In the CATHARE model, each SG is simulated individually. Actually, 4 different nodalizations, including 1D, 3D, single U-tube and multi U-tubes model, are considered. The objective is to assess the prediction capabilities of each model in reproducing the phenomena occurring during a variety of NC flow regimes;
-
The first model corresponds to the SG in loop1 (SG-1). It considers a 1D inlet and outlet zone with single U-tube model. The SG-1 inlet and outlet zones are represented by a VOLUME component whereas 28 U-tubes are lumped into one representative U-tube having an elevation of 18.7 m (see Fig. 4a).
Fig. 4. a. 1D Single U-tube model for SG1 in loop1. Fig. 4b–1D multi-U-tube model for SG3 in loop3. Fig. 4c–3D inlet zone and multi-U-tube model for SG2 in loop2. Fig. 4d–3D inlet and outlet zones and multi-U-tube model for SG4 in loop4.
-
The second model corresponds to the SG in loop3 (SG-3). It considers a 1D inlet and outlet SG-3 zones with multi-U-tubes representation model (see Fig. 4b). The inlet and outlet SG-3 zones are represented by a VOLUME component whereas the U-tubes having the same elevation are lumped together in a representative group. In total, 7 groups, as described in Table 1, are considered.
-
The third model corresponds to the SG in loop2 (SG-2). It considers a 3D inlet and a 1D outlet zones for SG-2. Together with the multi -U-tubes model representation. In this approach, the inlet zone of SG-2 is represented by a 3D (THREED) component while the outlet zone is represented by a VOLUME component. The adopted THREED component has two nodes along the z direction, 3 node along the y direction and 9 nodes along the x direction and (see Fig. 4c). Each U-tube group is connected to a separate 3D node.
-
The fourth model corresponds to the SG in loop4 (SG-4). It considers a 3D inlet and 3D outlet SG representation with multi-U-tubes model. In this approach, the inlet and outlet zones of SG-4 are represented by a 3D (THREED) component. This allows the assessment of 3D phenomena that may occur at the outlet chamber and that could affect the NC flow rate. The representative THREED component has two nodes along the z direction, 3 node along the y direction and 9 nodes along the x direction and (see Fig. 4d). Each U-tube group is connected to a separate 3D node.
3.3. Nodalization assessment
The CATHARE model of the PKL facility was already assessed and validated in previous work [7] for transients under NC flow regimes. This includes the pressure drop across the primary side, the heat losses, the volumes and elevations of the components [8]. The difference with respect to the previous model is mainly related to the 3D nodalization of the SG inlet/outlet zones. In this context, steady state calculations using former (1D mulit-U-tube model) and current nodalization (mulit-U-tube model and 3D SG inlet/outlet zones) show no deviation in estimating the NC mass flow rate.
<Section>4. NC-flowmap test description</Section>
The PKL-IIIi NC-Flowmap test was carried out at the initial conditions outlined in Table 2. The test consists in carrying out a stepwise blowdown of the RPV by mass inventory reduction via lower plenum drain line following a prescribed procedure as shown in Fig. 5 (see also Table 3). After each drain, the secondary pressure is increased as shown in Fig. 6 in a stepwise manner in order to keep the primary pressure around 30 bar. The natural circulation flow rate evolution during the test time span is recorded in all the 4 loops using the lower range measurement channels [0.2–4.8 kg/s]. On the other side, U-tubes inlet and outlet temperatures are measured; 8 inlet U-tubes temperatures are measured in SG-1, 3 in SG-2, 7 in SG-3, and 28 in SG-4 (see Table 4). One can notice that all the U-tubes of SG-4 are instrumented, therefore in the following sections figures related to the temperature measurement in SG-4 are preferably considered. These temperature measurements are important in this context since they allow getting information about the flow direction in the considered U-tube. Actually, the presence of reverse flow in a U-tube is clearly emphasized when the measured inlet temperature is close to the measured outlet temperature.
Table-2. Initial and boundary conditions of the PKLIIIi NC-flowmap test.
Fig. 5. RPV Discharged mass during the NC-Flowmap test.
Table-3. Main events during the PKLIIIi NC-flowmap test.
Fig. 6. Secondary side pressure during the test.
Table-4. PKL Temperature instrumented U-tubes.
<Section>5. Calculation vs. experimental results</Section>
The simulation of the PKLIIIi NC characterization flowmap test [5] is carried out using four SG models. Each model corresponds to one of the four SGs of the PKL cooling loops. The 1D SG single U-tube representation corresponds to SG-1, the 1D SG with multi-U-tube nodalization correspond to SG-3, the 3D SG inlet zone with the multi-U-tube representation correspond to SG-2, and the 3D SG inlet and outlet zones with multi-U-tube model correspond to SG-4. The assessment of the prediction capabilities of the each modelling approach in evaluating the measured NC mass flow rate in the cooling loops covering single phase to reflux condensing regimes is carried out.
In Fig. 7, the calculated pressurizer level is compared with the experimental measurement. The predicted level agrees well with the measured one within the period covered by the beginning of the primary discharge phase up to the time of the isolation of the pressurizer (between 2000 and 2350 s). The apparent discrepancy after that period is not significant for the course of the transient since the total amount of displaced mass from the pressurizer to the primary inventory is well simulated. On the other hand, Fig. 8 shows the predicted primary side pressure evolution in comparison with the measured value. The calculation results match well the experimental trend throughout the duration time of the test.
Fig. 7. Measured and calculated Pressurizer level.
Fig. 8. Measured and calculated primary pressure.
Concerning the NC mass flow rate prediction, Fig. 9 shows the CATHARE code results for each loop in comparison with their corresponding experimental measurements. Discrepancies between the calculated and measured data as well as between the four SG models predictions are observed. In the following, these differences are assessed and discussed by considering 3 different periods of the test time span:
Fig. 9. PKL4 NC test - Experimental and calculated mass flow rates in all loops.
5.1. First period (from 0 to 12500 s)
At the beginning of the transient, one can observe in Fig. 10 that the measured SG inlet temperature is over-predicted by 2 °C by the calculations. This result could be due to the presence of steady state NC flow reversal in some U-tubes. Indeed, Fig. 11, shows a clear indication that flow reversal in two short U-tubes of SG-4 (U-tubes R1 and R8) is taking place. This phenomenon is not predicted by the code calculations.
Fig. 10. PKL4 NC test - Experimental and calculated inlet/outlet temperatures in SG4.
Fig. 11. PKL4 NC test - Measured inlet U-tube temperature in SG4.
This situation changes with the first action of the primary system mass inventory decrease when flow returns to forward direction in U-tube R8, and reverses in R11. At the same time, flow reversal in U-tube group G2 is predicted by the 3D SG2 inlet model (in Loop2 connected to the PRZ), and lasts for 3 h and reverse again with the third decrease action of the primary inventory (see Fig. 12a). With the continuous stepwise decrease of the primary inventory, the NC mass flow rate begins to rise due to the increased density difference between the RPV downcomer and the core.
Fig. 12. a. CATHARE prediction of the 3D SG inlet multi-U-tubes mass flow rates in SG2. b – CATHARE prediction of the 1D multi-U-tubes mass flow rates in SG3. c – CATHARE prediction of the 3D SG inlet/outlet multi-U-tubes mass flow rates in SG4.
During this first period, the 4 SG models exhibit similar predictions of the NC mass flow (see Fig. 9) notwithstanding the fact that 3D SG based models exhibit flow reversal in the short size U-tube group G2 and G3 , while the 1D multi-tube model do not exhibit any flow redistribution or reversal within this first period.
It should be noted that measurement show flow reverse, stalling and return flows in the U-tube independently from their corresponding sizes (long, medium or short) and may take place at different periods of the test time span.
5.2. Second period (from 12500 to 22500 s)
At the beginning of the second phase, corresponding to the fifth stepwise primary mass inventory depletion, the 3D and 1D SG models bifurcate and exhibit differences in predicting the NC mass flow rate. On the one hand, 1D SG model over-predict the NC mass flow rate with a rising evolution trend (similar to the measured evolution). Flow redistribution between the U-tubes followed by flow reversal is predicted by the 1D multi-U-tube model in the longest U-tube groups G6 and G7 only (see Fig. 12b). It should be noted that the 1D model of SG-1 clearly over-estimates the measured NC flow due to the absence of flow reversal phenomenon. Actually,lower temperature difference between the inlet and the outlet chamber of the SG leads to lower NC mass flow rate. This tendency to overestimate the NC mass flow using 1D modelling agrees with former studies that reached the same statement [[1], [2], [3]].
On the other hand, the 3D SG models exhibit a NC mass flow rate that do not increase anymore with continuous stepwise decrease of the primary inventory. Indeed, a second flow reversal in the short U-tube groups G2 and G3 is predicted. This is followed by additional flow reversal in the longest U-tube groups G5 and G6 (see Fig. 12a and c, respectively). In these conditions, the driving forces in the SG become weaker and consequently lower NC mass flow rate, with respect to the 1D model, is predicted. These flow reversals could be triggered by the presence of asymmetric flow and temperature mixing at the SG inlet zone as shown in Fig. 13. Similar phenomena were also assessed in details by Ref. [9].
Figs. 13. 2D CATHARE temperature and mass flowrate distribution in the SG3 inlet zone.
During the second period, the 3D models show a tendency to under-predict the NC mass flow rate. However, one should take into account the fact that two-phase flow measurement have larger uncertainties with respect to single phase regime. Thus, the 3D SG model predictions remain acceptable.
5.3. Third period (from 22000 s to end of the test)
At 22000 s, reflux condensation regime is predicted by the 1D and 3D SG models. This corresponds also to the experimental trend. After that moment, all the models predict similar results (see Figs. 9). It should be noted that the 3D SG models predict earlier reflux condensation period; around 16000 s in SG-4 and 18000 s in SG-2.
<Section>6. Conclusion</Section>
In the current study, four modelling approaches of the SG primary side are considered for the simulation of the PKLIIIi NC characterization flowmap test. The prediction capabilities of the considered models in evaluating the measured NC mass flow rate ranging from single phase to reflux condensing phases are assessed.
In general, it is shown that the models based on 1D (single and multi-U-tubes) approach, exhibit similar prediction of the NC mass flow rate throughout the transient time span. However, larger over-prediction results are obtained by the 1D single U-tube model due to its intrinsic inability to predict flow redistribution and reversal phenomena that were observed in the experiment.
On the other hand, similar results between the 3D inlet SG and 3D inlet and outlet SG models are obtained. This shows that the impact of the 3D modelling of the outlet zone of the SG is almost negligible. Indeed, 3D phenomena are mainly occurring at the inlet chamber since the fluid temperature in the outlet chamber of the SG is generally uniform.
SG model based on 3D representation of the inlet/outlet zones allow getting flow reversal phenomenon in short, medium and long U-tube groups. This agree with the experimental observation. Actually, the 1D multi-U-tube model flow reversal occurs only in the longest U-tube groups.
3D and 1D SG models exhibit similar results up to a certain range before reaching the peak point of the NC flow rate. Beyond that, predictions between 1D and 3D models bifurcate and deviations become larger with a tendency of the 1D SG models to over-predict the measured NC mass flow rate while the opposite trend is predicted by the 3D SG models.
Overall, according to the classification outlined in Table 5, it could be concluded that the 1D multi-U-tubes provides better results with respect to the other models. However, using the 3D inlet/outlet SG models, better prediction of the phenomena involved during the test are obtained. Thus, additional efforts should be considered in order to enhance the accuracy of the 3D modelling and get a more representative simulation of the phenomena under focus.
Table-5. Main simulation hypothesis and results of the PKLIIIi NC-flowmap test.
<Section>Declaration of competing interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgement</Section>
This paper contains findings that were produced within the NEA/OECD-PKL-4 Project. The author is grateful to the PKL operating agent and to the Management Board of the Project for their consent for this publication. Special thanks to M. Adorni for her careful review of the paper.
<Section>Appendix A. Supplementary data</Section>
The following is the Supplementary data to this article:
Multimedia component 1.
<Section>Research data for this article</Section>
Data not available / The authors do not have permission to share data
<Section>References</Section>
[1]
R.R. Schultz, J.C. Chapman, Y. Kukita, F.E. Motley, H. Stumpf, Y.S. Chen, L. Tasaka
Single and two-phase natural circulation in westinghouse PWR simulators: phenomena, analysis and scaling
ASME International Symposium on Natural Circulation, Boston, USA (17 Dec 1987)
Google Scholar
[2]
P.R. McHugh, R.D. Hentzen
‘Natural Circulation Cooling in US PWRs’, NUREG/CR-5769
(1991)
Google Scholar
[3]
Y. Kukita, H. Nakamura, K. Tasaka
Nonuniform steam generator U-tube flow distribution during natural circulation tests in ROSA-IV large scale test facility
Nucl. Sci. Eng., 99 (1988), pp. 289-298
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[4]
C. Chauliac, Y. Kukita, M. Kawaji, H. Nakamura, K. Tasaka
Post-test Analysis with RELAP5/Mod2 of ROSA-IV/LSTF Natural Circulation Test ST-NC-02
(October 1988)
JAERI-M-88-215
Google Scholar
[5]
Equipe CATHARE
DRN/DTP/SMTH/LMDS, “CATHARE-2 V2.5_1/mod8.1 Dictionary”
(2008)
SMTH/LMDS/EM/2002_067
Google Scholar
[6]
S.P. Schollenberger, K. Umminger
PKL IIIi NC-Flowmap Test
(2017)
Google Scholar
[7]
A. Bousbia Salah, J. Vlassenbroeck, H. Austregesilo
Experimental and analytical assessment of natural circulation interruption phenomenon in the LSTF and PKL test facilities
ANS Nucl. Tech., 192 (2015), pp. 1-10
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[8]
S.P. Schollenberger, K. Umminger
Determination of Pressure Losses in the PKL III Test Facility for Mass Flows of 0.8 to 25.0 Kg/s Per Loop
(2006)
NTT1-G/2006/en/0066
Google Scholar
[9]
C.F. Boyd, D.M. Helton, K. Hardesty
CFD Analysis of Full-Scale Steam Generator Inlet Plenum Mixing during a PWR Severe Accident
(2004)
NUREG-1788
Google Scholar