<title>STH/CFD coupled calculations of postulated transients from mixed to natural circulation conditions in the NACIE-UP facility</title>
<author>1,A.Pucciarelli,2,F.Galleni,3,M.Moscardini,4,D.Martelli,5,N.Forgione</author>
<Affiliation>1,Dipartimento di Ingegneria Civile e Industriale, Università di Pisa, L.go Lucio Lazzarino n. 2, Pisa, Italy;2,Experimental Engineering Division, Fusion and Technology for Nuclear Safety and Security Department, ENEA Brasimone Research Centre, 40032 Camugnano (BO), Italy</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nucengdes.2020.110913</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029549320304076</URL>
STH/CFD coupled calculations of postulated transients from mixed to natural circulation conditions in the NACIE-UP facility
A.Pucciarelli,F.Galleni,M.Moscardini,D.Martelli,N.Forgione
Dipartimento di Ingegneria Civile e Industriale, Università di Pisa, L.go Lucio Lazzarino n. 2, Pisa, Italy
Experimental Engineering Division, Fusion and Technology for Nuclear Safety and Security Department, ENEA Brasimone Research Centre, 40032 Camugnano (BO), Italy
<Section>Highlights</Section>
STH/CFD coupled simulation of two postulated PLOFA scenarios is performed.
Coupled STH/CFD and STH stand-alone results are quantitatively and qualitatively compared.
Advantages and drawbacks of the adopted techniques are here discussed.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
In the present paper, coupled STH/CFD calculations are performed addressing two operating conditions in the frame of the NACIE-UP experimental campaign. In order to simulate mixed and natural circulation phenomena related to liquid metals thermal hydraulics, the RELAP5/Mod3.3 STH code and the CFD code ANSYS Fluent are adopted in an integrated manner. The combined use of STH and CFD codes aims to help the user overcoming the limits of the individual techniques and thus achieving a better predicting capability with respect to each stand-alone application.
Measured values and calculated results are compared. In particular, the coupled application provides the best results in terms of predicted mass flow rate and comprehensiveness of information giving the possibility to analyse the local and cross-sectional distributions. Furthermore, as an additional beneficial aspect, CFD results can be used as a tuning tool for some of the STH code parameters. The aim of the present work is highlighting the advantages and drawbacks of the adopted techniques, also reporting the margins of error that may presently be expected from these applications. Though perfectly matching results were not obtained, coupled STH/CFD application report promising modelling capabilities and may be consequently considered as a sound candidate for addressing liquid metal thermal hydraulics in complex geometries and large systems.
Keywords:STH/CFD coupling;Thermal hydraulics;Liquid metals;NACIE-UP
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The use of coupled STH/CFD (System Thermal Hydraulics / Computational Fluid Dynamics) calculations is becoming a sound approach for the simulation of complex thermal hydraulics analyses due to its capability in addressing phenomena which may involve very different spatial and time scales, straddling from the small scales of turbulence to the ones influencing the system as a whole (Roelefs, 2019). During the last decades, System Thermal Hydraulics (STH) codes proved the capability to suitably reproduce phenomena occurring in complex systems, both for single and two-phase flows, becoming one of the most relevant tools in the licensing process of Nuclear Power Plants (NPPs). In this sense, the STH code RELAP5 was successfully used to address several operating and postulated accidental conditions which may occur in Pressurized Water Reactors (PWRs) and Boiling Water Reactors (BWRs) (see e.g. D’Auria et al., 2006).
Nevertheless, the 1D STH codes modelling approach is not able to accurately reproduce the intrinsically 3-Dimensional phenomena which may occur in large environments and complex geometries as, for instance, pool type reactors and fuel assemblies adopting wrapped wires rod bundles. Such geometrical configurations, which are absent in most of the previous Generations of NPPs, are instead a key feature of the upcoming Generation IV, specifically for the Liquid Metals Fast Breeder Reactors (LMFBRs). On the other hand, simulating 3-Dimensional complex geometries is instead one of the key features of CFD approaches. CFD simulations, however, are well known to be computationally expensive and, furthermore, lack in accuracy when considering two-phase flow conditions and phase transition. As a consequence, CFD became a sound candidate for integrating the capabilities of STH codes and to achieve a suitable accuracy level in the prediction and simulation of liquid metals thermal hydraulics.
During the last years the University of Pisa (UniPi), in the frame of EU H2020 project SESAME, started a program for the qualification and validation of coupling techniques to be used for liquid metals thermal-hydraulics applications (see e.g. Martelli et al., 2017, Galleni et al., 2020, Pucciarelli et al., 2020b). In particular, UniPi developed a coupled STH/CFD tool adopting the code RELAP5/Mod3.3 and the commercial software ANSYS Fluent for the STH and CFD side respectively. Similar processes were also carried out by other institutions, see e.g. the works by Toti and co-authors at SCK•CEN (Toti et al., 2018a, Toti et al., 2018b) and the ones by Zwijsen et al. 2019 at NRG.
In this framework, UniPi mainly focused on the simulation of two experimental facilities set at the Research Center ENEA Brasimone: the CIRCE pool (Pesetti et al., 2018) and the NACIE-UP loop (Di Piazza et al., 2016). Concerning the NACIE-UP facility, previous analyses both concerned the analysis of single components (Marinari et al., 2019) and of the whole facility, both with STH stand-alone calculations (Forgione et al, 2019) and coupled STH/CFD 2D applications. More recently, CFD analyses were also performed to obtain better information about the addressed facilities and thus impose improved boundary conditions and parameters for the STH applications (see e.g. Buzzi et al., 2020a, Buzzi et al., 2020b, Pucciarelli et al., 2020a). Specifically, in the work Pucciarelli et al., 2020a, CFD was adopted in order to obtain a better estimation of the distributed pressure drops in the NACIE-UP Fuel Pin Simulator (FPS) component.
In this framework, this work aims at performing STH/CFD calculations of the whole facility by considering a well refined nodalization and a 3-Dimensional environment for the CFD domain. The considered experimental conditions aim at reproducing a potential Protected Loss of Flow Accident (PLOFA) in a LMFBR, trying to verify the capabilities of the considered geometry in providing room for passive cooling of the reactor core. Measured values are compared with the calculated results showing the improved capabilities of coupled tools. The beneficial influence of CFD as a tuning tool for some of the relevant parameters of STH codes is also highlighted, suggesting that an integrated STH/CFD approach could be a valid tool for the resolution of wide and complex thermal hydraulics systems.
The aim of this paper is not claiming success in reproducing the addressed conditions either trying to define qualification or validation processes or suggesting any safety procedure. Coupled STH/CFD applications are still under development and the main objective of the present work is showing the limits and potentialities of the addressed modelling technique, trying to draw lessons to be used in further works and studies. The present paper can be consequently considered as the first part of a proper validation procedure of the adopted nodalization, which requires several steps (see e.g. Bonucelli et al.1993). In particular, the outcomes of the present work were considered for the development of Best Practice Guidelines for STH/CFD applications (Pucciarelli et al., 2021, currently under review) trying to propose a possible qualification procedure of the adopted techniques.
<Section>2. NACIE-UP facility description and discretization</Section>
2.1. Facility description
In the present paper, the NACIE-UP facility (NAtural CIrculation Experiment – UPgraded, Di Piazza et al., 2016), set in Brasimone Research Center is considered. It is designed in order to provide experimental data for the validation and benchmarking of numerical codes (i.e. STH, coarse mesh CFD and refined mesh CFD) on heavy liquid metal pools in support of the development of LMFBRs. Its main aim is the investigation of forced, mixed and natural circulation phenomena connected with the use of liquid metals, specifically LBE (Lead Bismuth Eutectic). At the present stage, the investigation does not aim at supporting or validating a possible plant geometry or safety procedure but it rather tries to evaluate postulated operating conditions, providing material for a further understanding of the involved phenomena and benchmarking of modelling techniques to be adopted for future design phases. The facility consists of a rectangular loop equipped with a FPS and a Heat Exchanger; a sketch of the facility is reported in Fig. 1. Fig. 2 shows instead a magnification of the FPS region: the heated section of the FPS is highlighted, the location of the thermocouples measuring the FPS inlet and outlet temperatures is also reported. The FPS represents the hot sink of the system whilst the heat exchanger, where cooling water flows on the secondary side, represents the cold one. In order to promote natural circulation phenomena, the two devices are allocated at a significantly different height. Furthermore, circulation is also enhanced through the injection of Argon at the base of the Riser; the inert gas is then collected in the Expansion Vessel. The variation of the Argon mass flow rate allows imposing a defined flow regime and simulating both normal operation and accidental conditions. Besides, Argon also works as cover gas in the expansion vessel reducing the occurrence of LBE oxidation. The facility is also equipped with a thermal flow meter in the lowest branch of the circuit sampling the LBE mass flow rate during the postulated experimental scenarios.
Fig. 1. Schematic layout of the NACIE-UP facility, Di Piazza et al., 2016.
Fig. 2. Magnification of the FPS region also reporting the positioning of the thermocouples measuring the FPS inlet and outlet temperatures. .
Adapted from Di Piazza et al., 2016
The FPS, located at the bottom of the hot leg, consists of 19 electrically heated pins arranged in a hexagonal lattice; the duct has an hexagonal shape too (Fig. 3a). The selected arrangement is sufficient to analyse the different sub-channels types of a fuel assembly providing a good benchmark for code comparison and validation of different modelling techniques. In addition, as reported in literature, see e.g. Gayapathy et al. 2009, in the case of hexagonal wire-wrapped bundles, only the two external ranks are affected by the external wall; as a consequence, the channels S1-S6, the ones around the inner Pin 1, are sufficiently representative of the internal sub-channels of a reactor core, thus providing additional investigation capabilities to the addressed experimental facility. The FPS is 1.3 m long, nevertheless, only 600 mm are actually heated (Fig. 3b). Upstream the heated section, a 615 mm long unheated entrance region is located assuring fully developed flow condition in the heated section itself; downstream, a 115 mm discharge unheated region is also located. The correct positioning of the pins is maintained using wires wrapped around each pin (represented by black circles in Fig. 3a) and by two grids, one upstream and the other downstream the FPS. Pins and wires define 54 subchannels, some of which are instrumented. The facility is equipped with more than 90 thermocouples (see e.g. Angelucci et al., 2018), nevertheless, for the sake of simplicity the most representative thermocouples were selected for the comparison. In particular, in the present paper, the experimental temperature measurements on the wall of Pin 3 (see the red dot in Fig. 3a) and for subchannel S5 (Fig. 3a) are considered for comparison with the calculated results. These locations were selected since they lay in the hottest region of the FPS and provide temperature sampling for several axial locations: they thus report on the highest measured temperatures and their axial trend. In particular, the values collected at Sections A, B and C (beginning, half and final part of the FPS) are here considered for comparison with the calculated values since they provide a good perspective of the temperature distribution inside the component. Comparison between measured and calculated values is performed also for the mass flow rate (measured by a thermal mass flow meter) and for the temperature values measured upstream and downstream the FPS.
Fig. 3. Sketch of the cross section of the FPS, Di Piazza et al. 2016 (a) and its axial subdivision (b); the heated length is depicted in red. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
2.2. Facility discretization
The procedure adopted to discretize the simulated facility for the coupled STH/CFD application consists of two main phases: the former is the nodalization to be adopted by the stand alone STH code RELAP5/Mod3.3, the latter is the introduction of the CFD domain generated for the FPS in the existing STH nodalization. RELAP5/Mod3.3 (RELAP5 Code Manual, 2001) is a modified version of the RELAP5 code which allows the analysis of thermal hydraulic phenomena involving liquid metals. The thermodynamic properties of LBE were implemented according to the work by Sobolev's (Sobolev,2011), heat transfer correlations for liquid metals (see e.g. Ushakov et al., 1977, Seban and Shimazaki, 1951) were implemented as well. Concerning the physics and correlations for transported incondensable gases, it is assumed that, lacking specific correlations for liquid metals, the tables and flow regime maps developed for water and already implemented in the code could be a good first approximation. The presently obtained results strongly suggest that this assumption is a valid first step for the analysis of the addressed operating conditions; the code and its approach was also qualified in the frame of previous works performed at UniPi involving both STH stand-alone (Forgione et al., 2019) and coupled STH/CFD calculations (Martelli et al., 2017).
2.3. RELAP5 nodalization
For the first phase, an updated version of the nodalization designed at UniPi (Forgione et al., 2019) was implemented: this nodalization was validated against the same experimental test matrix considered in the present paper reporting good predicting capabilities both for the steady-state and transient conditions. A sketch of the considered nodalization is depicted in Fig. 4. It consists of a series of pipes and branches subdivided into two circuits: the primary and secondary loop, where LBE and water flow, respectively. The secondary loop represents the shell side of the heat exchanger.
Fig. 4. Adopted RELAP5/Mod3.3 stand-alone nodalization.
Heat transfer between the two loops is assured by the thermal structures connecting Pipe 190 to Pipe 590. A heat structure simulating the heating rods is also located in correspondence of Pipe 110, which corresponds to the heated part of the FPS. The Time Dependent Volume (TDV) 410 and the Time Dependent Junction (TDJ) 405 represent the Argon Injection System: Argon is supplied downstream the FPS and later separated in correspondence of the Branch 150 and collected at TDV 320, which represents the cover gas region and allows imposing the pressure boundary condition. The presently adopted nodalization updates some of the pressure drop coefficients used by Forgione et al., 2019 in their work; specifically, it adopts distributed pressure drop coefficients for the FPS region derived by CFD calculations performed by Pucciarelli et al., 2020a. Indeed, owing to the presence of rod bundles and wrapped wires, a single pressure drop coefficient may not be suitable for a good representation of the involved phenomena. As a consequence, CFD calculations were performed for a sufficiently wide range of operating conditions, straddling from laminar to fully turbulent flows; pressure drops along the FPS region were calculated and discussed on the basis of the corresponding Reynolds number. The obtained results reported a good matching with the Cheng and Todreas (Chen et al., 2018) correlation which was consequently implemented in the code and adopted for Pipes 100, 110 and 120
2.4. CFD nodalization
The second phase is based on the work carried out by Pucciarelli et al. 2020a, which focused on the CFD analysis of thermo-fluid-dynamic phenomena occurring in the FPS of the NACIE-UP facility. The work also concerned the prediction and comparison of the calculated temperature distribution with the experimental measurements, reporting a good matching. The considered geometry is reported in Fig. 5; the same strategies and parameters adopted by Pucciarelli et al., 2020a, Pucciarelli et al., 2020b for the mesh generation and validation were adopted here and are reported in Table 1. The commercial code ANSYS Fluent (ANSYS, Inc., 2018) was used for the present simulations, too.
Fig. 5. Considered Geometry.
Table 1. Parameters adopted for the creation of the CFD nodalization in ANSYS Fluent.
The obtained mesh, of which a detail is reported in Fig. 6, is highly refined nearby the walls, especially in the region of the wrapped wires. This allows the use of low Reynolds turbulence models, providing a y+ value lower than unity for the first cells close to the wall. The selected turbulence model is the SST k-ω (Menter, 1994) which proved good capabilities in predicting heat transfer phenomena in previous works (see e.g. Roelefs, 2019, Pucciarelli et al., 2020a). As it can be observed from Fig. 6, in order to reduce the computational cost, the heating rods were modelled reproducing only the external layer; thermal power is consequently supplied imposing heat flux on the internal surface of the rods. This assumption was considered following the previous work Pucciarelli et al., 2020a in which steady-state analyses of the presently addressed facility were performed. Nevertheless, thermal inertia is a relevant feature to be reproduced to obtain suitable predictions in transient applications; as a consequence, the density of the solid material was slightly increased with the aim to match the simulated and actual heat capacity of the rods.
Fig. 6. Detail of the obtained CFD nodalization.
2.5. Coupled nodalization
At the present phase, no pre-defined procedures to qualify the nodalization for coupled STH/CFD application exist. The individual STH and CFD nodalization were subsequently integrated to obtain the one implemented for the coupled STH/CFD calculation. The non-overlapping approach was selected in the present work; as a consequence, each code solves its domain without any geometrical superimposition. In particular, CFD solves the 3-dimensional environment of the FPS, while RELAP5/Mod3.3 deals with all the other components of the experimental loop the RELAP5 nodalization was consequently modified to be suitable for the coupling with the CFD domain. Fig. 7 shows a magnification of the region surrounded by a dashed red line in Fig. 4, the red zone in contact with the component 110 represents the heating rods of the FPS region in the STH stand-alone nodalization. Fig. 8 reports instead the updated nodalization for the coupled STH/CFD application with the variables to be exchanged at the code interfaces. It can be observed that the components from Pipe 100–3 to Pipe 120–1, which refer to the hexagonal duct, were removed and substituted by the CFD domain. On the other hand, two Time Dependent Volumes, TDV 112 and TDV 108, and a Time Dependent Junction, TDJ 115, were introduced in order to provide suitable boundary conditions to the STH portion of the nodalization. Specifically, TDV 112 is used for imposing the Temperature calculated at the outlet of the CFD domain, TDV 108 for the Pressure at the basis of the FPS and TDJ 115 for mass flow rate at the outlet end of the FPS.
Fig. 7. Adopted RELAP5/Mod3.3 stand-alone nodalization, particular of the FPS region.
Fig. 8. Adopted coupled calculation nodalization, particular of the FPS region and data transfer scheme.
In the CFD domain, the mass flow rate is imposed at the inlet section in accordance with the one calculated at the Single Junction SNGJ-105, while the Inlet Temperature is set in accordance to value obtained at Pipe 100–2; at the outlet section a constant pressure is imposed instead. Mainteining a constant reference pressure value at the outlet section, and thus inside the CFD domain, variations of the pressure field are limited in each iteration and computational cost is reduced. CFD is consequently used for calculating the pressure drops and the pressure head across the FPS component; these data are combined with the pressure calculated by the STH code in Pipe 116 and then are fed back to TDV 108, which impose the pressure value on the STH nodalization.
The absence of a continuous domain in the STH code may be a potential source of errors, mainly related to the continuous exchange of information occurring at the interfaces between the STH and the CFD codes. The relevance of this inconvenient may be reduced by introducing strict convergence requirements for the exchanged information and by checking the relevant balance equations at each time step. As a consequence, a semi-implicit scheme is adopted for the time advancement of the coupled calculation; synchronization is instead assured at defined time levels. CFD moves between the time levels considering a single time-step, the STH code instead subdivides the same interval into several time-steps, depending on its requirements for the fulfilment of the Courant limit. Nevertheless, the considered CFD time intervals are sufficiently small in order to always fulfil the Courant number limit for the STH code; a single time step would be thus sufficient for RELAP5 in order to solve each time level, too. In order to provide the STH part with some level of flexibility and to further refine the temporal discretiziation, the maximum time step for the STH application was imposed to be 1/10 of the macro time-step adopted by the CFD calculation. At each macro time-step, CFD first performs its calculation based on the information of the previous time-step; the updated results are provided to the STH code which consequently performs its calculation. CFD and STH results are then compared; if the convergence criteria imposed by the user are fulfilled, the calculation moves to the following time step; if not, the same time level is repeated with updated boundary conditions until convergence is achieved. Under-relaxation for time-step internal iterations is also considered in order to improve the robustness and convergence capability of the coupled application.
<Section>3. Results</Section>
The obtained results are discussed in the present section. Table 2 resumes the considered operating conditions: FT1 (Fundamental Test 1) takes into account an argon mass flow transition, while FT3 reproduces a postulated PLOFA with both Argon and secondary water transition and a decrease of the supplied power at the FPS (Di Piazza et al., 2017). These cases were selected because they involve the maximum supplied power conditions (FT3) and allow observing the capabilities of the selected modelling techniques in simulating different flow conditions, specifically: gas-aided circulation (FT1 and FT3 initial conditions), mixed (FT1 final condition) and natural circulation phenomena (FT3 final condition). Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 eventually report the measured trend of the power supplied at the FPS and of the injected Argon volumetric flow rate: it is worth observing that, for sake of the facility safety, in FT3 the supplied power was reduced about 15 s earlier of the dramatic decrease of the injected Argon volumetric flow rate, thus avoiding excessive temperature peaks.
Table 2. Considered Operating Conditions.
Fig. 9. FT1 – Trend of the measured supplied power and injected Argon volumetric flow rate at the beginning of the transient.
Fig. 10. FT3 – Trend of the measured supplied power and injected Argon volumetric flow rate at the beginning of the transient.
Fig. 11 reports the comparison of the calculated and measured LBE mass flow rate trends for the first 250 s of transient FT1; the abrupt decrease experienced at the beginning is directly connected with the sudden reduction of the Argon supplied by the injection system. At the beginning of the transient, the circulation is strongly aided by the injection of Argon at the basis of the riser section; nevertheless, the contribution related to natural circulation cannot be neglected at all. In fact, analyses of the considered loop in isothermal conditions pointed out that the gas injection contribution to the mass flow rate is about 3 kg/s of the total of 4 kg/s observed in the considered heated case. Gas injection still plays a relevant role also at the end of the transient where it contributes instead for about 2 kg/s of the total of 3 kg/s; mixed circulation conditions are thus experienced during this phase. As it can be observed, the coupled calculation performs better in comparison to the STH stand-alone application; in particular, after 50 s, the predicted trend lays inside the experimental uncertainty range. A steeper reduction of the predicted mass flow rate with respect to the measured one is observed. This could be due to approximations introduced by correlations of the adopted models resulting unsuitable to perfectly reproduce two-phase flows characterized by relevant amounts of transported incondensable gases (Issa and Galleni, 2015). The development of new reliable correlations being capable to model the transport of incondensable gases in liquid metals is thus of capital importance in order to improve the present understating of the involved physical phenomena providing better numerical predictions of the addressed experimental conditions. After the initial phase of the transient, a new steady state is achieved and the adopted physical model seems able to predict sufficiently well the involved phenomena; in fact the obtained results lay inside the experimental uncertainty range reproducing the transient experimental mass flow trend. Besides, the slight improvement of the present RELAP5 stand-alone prediction with respect to the results obtained in the previous work Forgione et al., 2019 must be observed as well. The two RELAP5 stand-alone calculations differ only in the selection of pressure drop coefficients of the FPS region: the coefficients adopted in the present simulation were calculated on the basis of CFD calculations performed in the frame of a previous work (Pucciarelli et al., 2020a). Even if the best prediction is the one provided by the coupled STH/CFD application, the updated STH stand-alone prediction slightly improved the results obtained in the past work Forgione et al., 2019: this is another hint of the mutual advantages that may be provided by the combined use of STH and CFD codes.
Fig. 11. FT1 – numerical and experimental mass flow rate.
Fig. 12 reports the predicted and measured temperature trends at the inlet section of the FPS; as it can be noted the observed phenomenon has been qualitatively reproduced; nevertheless, the predicted temperatures underestimate the measured temperature trend of about 2–3 °C. This discrepancy, which is below 1.5% in terms of relative error with respect to the measured inlet temperature, was already observed at the beginning of the simulated transient, suggesting that it could be related to differences between the predicted and measured mass flow rate and heat transfer coefficients in the initial steady state conditions. Fig. 13 reports instead the correspondent temperature trends at the outlet of the FPS component. As it can be observed, the predicted temperature trends overestimate the measured one, especially at the very beginning of the considered experimental transient. This is coherent with the predicted LBE mass flow rate, which shows a steeper decrease from the initial steady state conditions with respect to the experimental measurements. Once the predicted mass flow rate gets closer to the experimental one, the predicted temperature coherently approaches the measured values, too. Again, it is worth highlighting the better prediction provided by the coupled calculation, which also manages to reproduce the small temperature decrease observed at the very beginning of the experimental transient.
Fig. 12. FT1 – numerical and experimental bulk temperature at the inlet of the FPS.
Fig. 13. FT1 – numerical and experimental bulk temperature at the outlet of the FPS.
Fig. 14 shows the comparison between the calculated and measured mass flow rates for case FT3. In this case, mixed circulation conditions are experienced at the beginning of the transient. During the transient the injected gas is progressively decreased and, when no gas is injected at all, the system switches to pure natural circulation conditions. Results provided by the Coupled calculation and the presently performed RELAP5 Stand-Alone application are almost superimposed and, after 50 s from the beginning of the transient, very close to the measured values. The performance is superior with respect to the previous results by Forgione et al., 2019 which slightly underestimated the measured values for a longer time interval. It is again stressed that the better trends provided by the presently performed RELAP5 Stand-Alone calculation are related to the improved pressure drop coefficients obtained via the CFD analyses of the FPS performed by Pucciarelli et al. 2020a. Concerning the abrupt decrease experienced at the beginning, it is again remarked that the different behaviour with respect to the experimental measurements is likely to be due to the intrinsic uncertainties of the regime maps adopted by RELAP5 which may not be completely suitable for the LBE-Argon two-phase flow.
Fig. 14. FT3 – numerical and experimental mass flow rate.
Fig. 15 and Fig. 16 show the comparison between the measured and calculated results for the temperature trends at the inlet and outlet section of the FPS, respectively. The inlet temperature trends are qualitatively predicted; as for the previous FT1 case, they differ from the measured values by just 2–3 °C reporting a relative error which is below 1.5%. Concerning the outlet temperature, the underestimation is larger, reaching a maximum discrepancy of about 50 °C after about 25 s from the beginning of the transient. The trends become instead closer once a new steady state is reached, coherently with the mass flow rate trends reported in Fig. 14. Comparing the observed trends with the imposed operating conditions reported in Fig. 10, the authors speculate that the measurements of the thermocouple sampling the outlet temperature may be affected by a certain time delay, e.g. due to recirculation phenomena occurring during the first phases of the transient. This would not allow the experimental facility noticing the outlet temperature decrease observed in the numerical simulation. This hypothesis is supported by the following observation: while the predicted LBE mass flow rate is smaller than the measured value, a lower FPS temperature increase is obtained in the simulationscompared to the experiments, resulting into a physical inconsistence. Fig. 17 and Fig. 18 show instead the comparison between the measured and calculated temperature trends for some selected thermocouples located inside the FPS, where, ideally, there should be no time-delay in the collected measured values. The selected thermocouples are positioned at different axial sections (A, B and C, see Fig. 3b for context): the ones in Fig. 17 in the bulk region of channel S5, the ones in Fig. 18 are instead located on the wall of Pin 3 (see Fig. 3a for reference). The obtained results match very well the measured values for all the considered sections suggesting that the assumptions regarding the thermal inertia of the pins were sufficiently correct, thus supporting the hypothesis of some level of inaccuracy in the outlet temperature measurement. On average, the discrepancy between measured and calculated values is well below 3 °C, thus in the same range of the error observed for the inlet temperature conditions. Instead, larger discrepancies, also in the range of 50 °C, are noted for the first parts of the transient; nevertheless, it must be stressed that they are mainly related to the observed differences occurring between the measured and calculated mass flow trends in the correspondent time interval. Once the calculated mass flow gets closer to the measured one after about 50 s, the discrepancy in the observed temperature trends decreases, too.
Fig. 15. FT3 – numerical and experimental bulk temperature at the inlet of the FPS.
Fig. 16. FT3 – numerical and experimental bulk temperature at the outlet of the FPS.
Fig. 17. FT3 – numerical and experimental bulk temperature for S5 at three selected sections.
Fig. 18. FT3 – numerical and experimental wall temperature for Pin 3 at three selected sections.
It is here remarked that the comparisons reported in Fig. 17 and Fig. 18 may be obtained only performing coupled calculations; indeed, STH codes stand-alone applications cannot provide such information because of the intrinsic limits of their modelling approach. This is a very relevant feature of the adopted approach since it provides the user with important information about the local temperature distribution on the FPS rods which could not be obtained with a STH stand-alone application. This becomes even more significant in case of safety analyses since it could help in identifying the risk of potential material failures that could not be spotted by STH codes which provide instead the user with average information for each component. Another result that could not be obtained by STH stand-alone calculations is the cross-sectional distributions reported in Fig. 19 and Fig. 20 at two selected time levels. Thanks to the CFD contribution, the coupled application may provide detailed representations of the instantaneous distribution of relevant quantities in the corresponding domain. In the cited figures, temperature distributions are shown, reporting the presence of two temperature regions: a hotter region in the very internal rank and a colder region outside the outer rank pins. Together with the temperature trends reported in Fig. 17 and Fig. 18, this information may clearly help to identify the region that may undergo the most severe conditions. Analyses concerning the velocity and turbulence distributions may be performed as well, providing the user with information about stagnation points and cross-flow between the FPS subchannels.
Fig. 19. Temperature distribution at Section C of the FPS at the beginning of the analysed FT3 transient (t = 0 s).
Download : Download high-res image (158KB)Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 20. Temperature distribution at Section C of the FPS after 260 s from the beginning of the analysed FT3 transient.
Coupled STH/CFD application may thus provide the user with improved investigation capabilities and information about the addressed operating conditions. On the other hand, the major drawbacks of this approach are instead related to the dramatic increase of the computational cost of the calculations with respect to STH stand-alone applications. Though the improvements in terms of predicted mass flows and bulk average temperatures may sometimes be limited, they may become more relevant when approaching large 3D environments in which the STH approach is no more reliably appliable (see e.g. Pucciarelli et al. 2020b). In addition, the information obtained for important components, such as the local wall temperature on the FPS rods may be crucial for the prediction of relevant phenomena and potential material failure in the frame of safety analyses thus rewarding the user for the increase in the required computational effort.
<Section>4. Conclusions</Section>
In the present paper, two experimental conditions addressed in the NACIE-UP facility were considered and reproduced performing STH/CFD coupled calculations. The experimental facility was firstly simulated via STH stand-alone calculations in which some of the parameters were tuned taking into account CFD calculations performed in the frame of previous works. Coupled calculations were later performed with the introduction of the CFD domain adopting a non-overlapping approach and a semi-implicit time-advancing scheme.
Numerical and experimental results were compared showing the good predicting capabilities of the adopted techniques. With respect to the considered STH attempts, the coupled calculation provided better results, in particular for case FT1, in which the predicted mass flow rate lays inside the experimental uncertainty range. Improvements were also observed for the presently performed “CFD-tuned” STH calculation, which managed to reproduce results very close to the ones provided by the coupled calculation. This suggests that the integration of STH and CFD techniques may be very advantageous and, even without performing coupled calculations, the CFD may provide relevant information allowing for a sound improvement of the results obtained by STH codes.
Furthermore, the use of CFD should not be completely avoided for conditions involving intrinsically 3D environments such as pools or wire-wrapped rod bundles in which the lumped parameter approach of STH could not be the most suitable for the achievement of reliable predictions. The use of coupled calculations, even if more computationally expensive, may also provide the user with plenty of information about temperature and properties distributions inside the CFD domain. As reported in the paper, indeed, CFD allowed the calculation of temperature trends for both bulk and wall regions resulting in a good, yet not perfect, matching with the experimental data. Though sometimes only limited improvements may be achieved with respect to STH stand-alone applications, the real advantage of coupled STH/CFD calculations lays in the dramatic increase of the provided information. In fact, in addition to the section averaged trends provided by STH codes, CFD may also provide local temporal trends and detailed cross-sectional distributions allowing for a better comparison of the involved global phenomena. This may in addition result in crucial information to be considered for safety analyses: an improved prediction of temperature distributions on the heating rods may in fact provide the user with the capability to spot potential material failure risks that could not be predicted with the component averaged information provided by STH codes. This may be useful also in the Nuclear Power Plant design phase; by analysing the obtained temperature trends and flow paths, designers may avoid potentially dangerous conditions and thus select more suitable geometries for the reactor core and other relevant plant components.
As a final comment, coupled calculations may really improve the present understanding and predicting capabilities of thermal–hydraulic phenomena. Indeed, when addressing systems and phenomena with different spatial and temporal time scales, the use of STH stand-alone codes may provide only limited results; CFD, instead, could help in introducing more appropriate spatial and temporal discretizations for regions and phenomena for which the 1D approach is not reliable at all. As highlighted in the present paper, the coupled STH/CFD calculation techniques seem sufficiently mature for addressing even complicated geometries and conditions, becoming a sound candidate for the simulation of the thermal–hydraulic phenomena that may be involved in innovative nuclear power plants reactors.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
A. Pucciarelli: Investigation, Writing - review & editing. F. Galleni: Writing - review & editing. M. Moscardini: Writing - review & editing. D. Martelli: Writing - review & editing. N. Forgione: Supervision, Writing - review & editing.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
This work was performed in the framework of the H2020 SESAME project. This project has received funding from the Euratom research and training program 2014.2018 under grant agreement No 654935.
<Section>References</Section>
ANSYS, Inc., 2018
ANSYS, Inc., “ANSYS Fluent User’s Guide, Release 19.2”, August 2018.
Google Scholar
Angelucci et al., 2018
M. Angelucci, I. Di Piazza, D. Martelli
Experimental campaign on the HLM loop NACIE-UP with instrumented wire-spaced fuel pin simulator
Nucl. Eng. Des., 332 (2018) (2018), pp. 137-146
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bonucelli et al., 1993
M. Bonucelli, F. D’Auria, N. Debrecin, G. Galassi
A methodology for the qualification of thermalhydraulic codes nodalizations
6th NURETH Conference (1993)
Google Scholar
Buzzi et al., 2020a
F. Buzzi, A. Pucciarelli, F. Galleni, M. Tarantino, N. Forgione
2020, “Analysis of thermal stratification phenomena in the CIRCE-HERO facility”
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 131 (June 2020), Article 107320
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Buzzi et al., 2020b
F. Buzzi, A. Pucciarelli, F. Galleni, M. Tarantino, N. Forgione
2020, “Analysis of the temperature distribution in the pin bundle of the CIRCE facility”
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 147 (November 2020), Article 107717
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Chen et al., 2018
S.K. Chen, Y.M. Chen, N.E. Todreas
The upgraded Cheng andTodreas correlation for pressure drop in hexagonal wire-wrapped rod bundles
Nucl. Eng. Des., 335 (2018), pp. 356-373
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
D’Auria et al., 2006
F. D’Auria, A.B. Salah, A. Petruzzi, A. Del Nevo
State of the art in using best estimate calculation tools in nuclear technology
Nucl. Eng. Technol., 38 (2006), pp. 11-32
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Di Piazza et al., 2016
I. Di Piazza, M. Angelucci, R. Marinari, M. Tarantino, N. Forgione
Heat transfer on HLM cooled wire-spaced fuel pin bundle simulator in the NACIE-UP facility
Nucl. Eng. Des., 300 (2016), pp. 256-267
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Di Piazza et al., 2017
Di Piazza, I., Angelucci, M., Polazzi, G., Sermenghi, V., 2017, “D4.10 – NACIE-UP data for PLOFA experiment”. Deliverable SESAME – 654935 – D4.10 – version 0 issued on 01/09/2017.
Google Scholar
Forgione et al., 2019
N. Forgione, D. Martelli, G. Barone, F. Giannetti, P. Lorusso, T. Hollands, A. Papukchuev, M. Polidori, A. Cervone, I. Di Piazza
2019, “Post-test simulations for the NACIE-UP benchmark by STH codes”
Nucl. Eng. Des., 353 (2019), Article 110279
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Galleni et al., 2020
F. Galleni, G. Barone, D. Martelli, A. Pucciarelli, P. Lorusso, M. Tarantino, N. Forgione
2020, “Simulation of operational conditions of HX-HERO in the CIRCE facility with CFD/STH coupled codes”
Nucl. Eng. Des., 361 (2020), Article 110552, 10.1016/j.nucengdes.2020.110552
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Gayapathy et al., 2009
R. Gayapathy, K. Velusamy, P. Selvaraj, P. Chellapandi, S.C. Chetal
A comparative CFD investigation of helical wire-wrapped 7,19 and 37 fuel pin bundles and its extendibility to 217 pin bundle
Nucl. Eng. Des., 239 (2009), pp. 2279-2292
Google Scholar
Issa and Galleni, 2015
R. Issa, F. Galleni
2015, “Mechanistic simulation of slug flow in vertical pipes using the one-dimensional two-fluid model”
Multiphase Science and Technology, 27 (2–4) (2015), pp. 229-245
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Marinari et al., 2019
R. Marinari, I. Di Piazza, M. Tarantino, M. Angelucci, D. Martelli
Experimental tests and post-tests analusis on non-uniformly heated 19-pins fuel bundle cooled by Heavy Liquid Metal
Nucl. Eng. Des., 343 (2019) (2019), pp. 166-177
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Martelli et al., 2017
D. Martelli, N. Forgione, G. Barone, I. Di Piazza
Coupled simulations of the NACIE facility using RELAP5 and ANSYS FLUENT codes
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 101 (2017) (2017), pp. 408-418
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Menter, 1994
F.R. Menter
Two-equation eddy-viscosity turbulence modelling for engineering applications
AIAA J., 32 (8) (1994), pp. 1598-1605
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Pesetti et al., 2018
Pesetti, A., Forgione, N., Narcisi, V., Lorusso, P., Giannetti, F., Tarantino, M., 2018, “ENEA CIRCE-HERO test facility: geometry and instrumentation description”, ENEA report for Project H2020 SESAME WP5.2, Ref CI-I-R-343.
Google Scholar
Pucciarelli et al., 2020a
A. Pucciarelli, G. Barone, N. Forgione, F. Galleni, D. Martelli
2020, “NACIE-UP post test simulations by CFD codes”
Nucl. Eng. Des., 356 (2020), Article 110392
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Pucciarelli et al., 2020b
A. Pucciarelli, F. Galleni, M. Moscardini, D. Martelli, N. Forgione
“STH/CFD Coupled simulation of the Protected Loss of Flow Accident in the CIRCE-HERO Facility
Appl Sci., 10 (2020), p. 7032, 10.3390/app10207032
Google Scholar
Pucciarelli et al., 2021
Pucciarelli, A., Toti, A., Castelliti, D., Belloni, F., Van Tichelen K., Moscardini, M., Galleni, F., Forgione, N., 2021. “Coupled Stystem Thermal Hydraulics/CFD models: general guidelines and applications to heavy liquid metals”. Currently under review for Annals of Nuclear Energy.
Google Scholar
RELAP5 Code Manual, 2001
RELAP5 Code Manual, 2001, “RELAP5/Mod3.3 code manual Volume I: Code structure, System models and solution methods”. Nuclear Safety Analysis Division; Information System Laboratories, Inc., Rockville, Maryland Idaho Falls, 2001.
Google Scholar
Roelefs, 2019
Roelefs, F., “Thermal Hydraulics Aspects of Liquid Metal Cooled Reactors”, Woodheat Publishing, ISBN: 978-0-08-101981-8 (online), 2019.
Google Scholar
Seban and Shimazaki, 1951
R.A. Seban, T.T. Shimazaki
Heat Transfer to a Fluid Flowing Turbulently in a Smooth Pipe with Walls at Constant Temperature
Transactions of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 73 (1951), pp. 803-809
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Sobolev, 2011
Sobolev, V. (2011), Database of Thermophysical Properties of Liquid Metal Coolants for GEN-IV, SCK•CEN report BLG-1069, Mol, Belgium, December 2010 (rev. December 2011).
Google Scholar
Toti et al., 2018a
A. Toti, J. Vierendeels, F. Belloni
Extension and application on a pool-type test facility of a system thermal-hydraulic/CFD coupling method for transient flow analyses
Nucl. Eng. Des, 331 (2018) (2018), pp. 83-96
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Toti et al., 2018b
A. Toti, J. Vierendeels, F. Belloni
Coupled system thermal-hydraulic/CFD analysis of a protected loss of flow transient in the MYRRHA reactor
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 118 (2018) (2018), pp. 199-211
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ushakov et al., 1977
Ushakov, P.A., Zhukov, A.V., Matyukkhin, N.M., 1977. “Heat transfer to liquid metals in regular arrays of fuel elements. High Temperature 15, 868-873, translated from Teplofizika Vysokikh Temperatur, Vol. 15, No 5, pp. 1027-1033.
Google Scholar
Zwijsen et al., 2019
Zwijsen, K., Martelli, D., Breijder, P.A., Forgione., N., Roelofs, F., 2019, “Multi-scale modelling of the CIRCE-HERO facility”. Nucl. Eng. Des. 335, 15 December 2019, 110344.
Google Scholar