<title>Application of virtual reality technology in nuclear device design and research</title>
<author>1,ShijunQin,2,QingfengWang,3,XianfengChen</author>
<Affiliation>1, Institute of Plasma Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, 230031, China;2,University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, 230022, China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Fusion Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.fusengdes.2020.111906</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0920379620304543</URL>
Application of virtual reality technology in nuclear device design and research
ShijunQin,QingfengWang,XianfengChen
Institute of Plasma Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, 230031, China
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, 230022, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Virtual reality technology was used to intuitively check the calculation results of the CFETR device.
A CFETR virtual reality system was established, including diagrams of its software and hardware structures.
Virtual reality technology was designed and built for the ITER and the CEA.
The development and design of the virtual reality technology in the nuclear fission device were introduced in detail.
The virtual reality technology and its characteristics were introduced in detail.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The design, fabrication, assembly, operation, and decommissioning of nuclear devices are very complex processes, and virtual reality (VR) technology can be used at all stages to save time and reduce costs. This study introduces VR technology and its characteristics in detail. The China Fusion Engineering Test Reactor (CFETR) is in its engineering design phase and considerable analysis still needs to be conducted to ensure that it is safe. This includes investigating plasma geometry, stability, the scrape-off layer, and the discharge process and conducting an engineering analysis of its electromagnetic, thermodynamic, and structural characteristics. At the same time, many software applications are used, which generate a large amount of data; therefore, a system capable of managing such large quantities of data is required. VR technology certainly meets this requirement. In this paper, the design and development of a VR technology in a nuclear fission device is described, including the display interface of the melting pit and containment parameters, virtual roaming of the nuclear plant, and the operational flow of the main loop of the nuclear power plant, all in three dimensions. The CFETR VR platform setup is investigated (in terms of both hardware and software), and the future development of this platform is discussed.
Keywords:CFETR;Virtual reality;Nuclear plant;Computer
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
In spite of the tension between our energy needs and protection of the environment, nuclear energy has been developed in many countries as an economically viable, safe, and reliable clean energy source [1]. Nuclear energy research comprises involves two main categories: nuclear fusion and nuclear fission. Nuclear fusion remains in the experimental and research stage, as it is impossible to realize large-scale and low-cost power for the time being. Nuclear fission, on the other hand, has been commercially developed for the benefit of humankind. However, whether it is in its commercial form or experimental form, the process still encompasses design, analysis, R&D, optimization, mock-up manufacturing, assembly, and operational stages.
As nuclear fission devices have characteristics of high temperature, high pressure, and high radioactivity [2], all loop systems are inaccessible during the operational stages. Complex power plant entities are difficult to decompose and display, which makes it difficult for students, engineers, and experts to fully understand the device structure. At the same time, the construction costs of a physical experimental platform would be too high. The most important aspect of this, is that the review and evaluation of the design, operation, maintenance, decommissioning, and other stages, would be time consuming and costly. Consequently, VR technology has been studied and used to solve the above problems.
<Section>2. Virtual reality technology and its characteristics</Section>
Users can use their own intuition to investigate and operate objects in a virtual world through a variety of sensing devices. At the same time, users participate in events and are "immersed" in the simulated environment. VR technology provides real-time perceptions of our visual, auditory, and tactile senses [3].
VR technology includes the simulation environment, perception, natural skills, and sensing equipment. The simulation environment is a three-dimensional life-like image that is dynamically generated in real time by a computer. In addition to the visual perceptions generated by the computer, there are hearing, tactile, force, movement, and even multi-perception attributes of smell and taste. Natural skills refer to head rotation, eye movement, gestures, and other human actions, the data of which are processed by computer, to create a real-time response to the users’ input, while simultaneously providing feedback of the users’ facial features respectively. Sensing equipment refers to three-dimensional interactive equipment, including stereo helmets, data gloves, 3D mouse, data clothes, and other devices worn by the user, as well as equipment set in real environmental sensors, such as cameras, floor pressure sensors, etc.
The "triangle of virtual reality technology" proposed by Burdea explains the basic characteristics of VR technology. That is, the three "I"s, which are Immersion, Interaction, and Imagination, as shown in Fig. 1 [4].
•
Immersion: a virtual world, generated by a computer, gives people an immersive feeling.
•
Interaction: people are able to interact or communicate with objects in the virtual world in a natural way, which are emphasized by body movements (mainly through helmets, data gloves, and data clothes), natural language, and other natural means of communication.
•
Imagination: virtual environments immerse users, allowing them to acquire new knowledge, enhance their perceptual and rational understanding, strengthen their concepts, and develop new ideas. Therefore, it can be said that VR technology inspires creative thinking.
Fig. 1
Fig. 1. Basic features of virtual reality technology.
Key VR technologies include modeling technology in a dynamic environment, real-time 3D graphics generation technology, stereoscopic display and sensor technology, development tools in application systems, and system integration technology.
The United States is the birthplace of VR technology. At present, VR research in the United States focuses mainly on four aspects: perception, user interface, software, and hardware. Its applications are focused primarily in the military, aerospace, medicine, training, entertainment, and nuclear energy sectors. The development and design of VR technology applicable to the fields of nuclear fusion and fission will be explained in detail, in the next section.
<Section>3. Development and design of virtual reality technology in nuclear fusion devices</Section>
The currently under-construction International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) is set to be the largest nuclear fusion experiment reactor in the world. The China Fusion Engineering Test Reactor (CFETR) began its engineering design as recently as 2018. When conceptually designing the CFETR (2010–2017), a combination of conceptual design and VR technology was investigated. Although some parameters may have changed during engineering design, the overall VR architecture has not changed much compared to the conceptual design stage. The design and construction of a nuclear fusion reactor is costly, time consuming, and complex. By using VR technology, all of the processes can be integrated into a computer simulation system. The fusion project is integrated into a computer workstation database, benefiting the conceptual design, engineering design, interface, assembly studies, etc. VR technology can simplify research and development, reducing project costs and facilitating improved communication. The emergence of VR technology for nuclear fusion projects has broad application prospects. The ITER, which is at the assembly stage, has set up a VR laboratory. The ITER interface interference can be visited and reviewed, and design rationality checks can also be completed through the laboratory, as shown in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2
Fig. 2. The ITER virtual reality laboratory.
The French Atomic Energy Commission (CEA) also has set up a VR laboratory, which includes the use of a force-feedback system [5] as shown in Fig. 3. Haption Virtuose 6D35−45 devices were used for virtual assembly/disassembly applications, as shown in Fig. 4. The force-feedback system gives a more realistic experience than conventional viewing systems in simulating assembly/disassembly processes, making it possible to improve our analysis of complex systems.
Fig. 3
Fig. 3. The CEA virtual reality laboratory.
Fig. 4
Fig. 4. The force-feedback system used in the CEA virtual reality laboratory.
The LIST, which is based near Paris at Saclay and Fontenay-aux-Roses, is a key software system and technology research center. A LIST goal is to develop a virtual system for visualizing the assembly/disassembly processes of a tokamak device and, with the help of a 6D force-feedback arm, test its feasibility, ergonomics, and relative complexity.
The CFETR is in its engineering design phase and much analysis still needs to be performed to ensure its safety, such as the calculation of its plasma geometry, stability, scrape-off layer, discharge process for physical design, and engineering analysis of its electromagnetic, thermodynamic, and structural characteristics, etc. This requires the use of many software applications, producing much data, which ultimately needs a system capable of managing such large volumes of data. VR meets this requirement: it needs to be visual for displaying analysis results, convenient for ease of understanding, and efficient for continual improvement. All of these benefits can be highlighted in the following three points: Intuition: visually displaying analysis using stereo images; Unification: displaying results of each analysis in this system; Flexibility: realizing the effective integration of analysis and design.
The CFETR engineering calculation results were integrated into the VR system as follows: The thermodynamic, electromagnetic force, earthquake, nuclear radiation, and other physical load calculation results are displayed through a two-dimensional screen, but not in stereo projection. We found the post-processing software EnSight to be simple to use and cost-effective, as it runs on all mainstream computer platforms. Most mainstream CAE program interfaces, data formats, and VR 3D display protocols are supported, enabling 3D display results to be seen. The physical and Ansys results were run through the EnSight application and post-processed. Then, EnSight was connected to the VR system, enabling any physical load changes of the device to be felt in the scene. For example, through the VR system, people could enter the vacuum vessel and feel the vibration, stress, and strain in three dimensions under the action of electromagnetic forces and thermal loads, as shown in Fig. 5.
Fig. 5
Fig. 5. The CFETR device engineering calculation results were intuitively checked through virtual reality technology.
The CFETR VR platform was set up successfully based on the CFETR requirements and the investigations into the VR system, both in China and aboard. The platform comprised both hardware and software.
The hardware of the CFETR VR platform included a human interface device, force-feedback controller, and stereo vision projection system. A diagram of the hardware structure is shown in Fig. 6.
Fig. 6
Fig. 6. A diagram of the hardware structure of the CFETR VR system.
The software of the CFETR VR platform comprises the engineering design, assembly simulation, numerical analysis software applications, as well as an immersive interaction system. A diagram of the software structure is shown in Fig. 7 [6].
Fig. 7
Fig. 7. A diagram of the software structure of the CFETR VR system.
The interactive display of the CFETR device was complete after all the hardware and software components had been built. Consequently, an audience can now experience and review the design of the CFETR and analyze its progress directly, including the assembly interference [6].
The engineering design of the CFETR is a huge and complex multi-disciplinary project, and this VR platform aids every aspect of the design process, from conceptual design to digital mock-up. Subsequently, the further development of the CFETR VR platform is focused on four key points.
•
Design review: transferring the design data from design software to the VR system, reviewing the design through the VR system with interactive roaming, checking the interface, and making comments. The numerical analysis results are displayed.
•
Assembly simulation: verifying the clash and collision by using Haption devices and the force-feedback system, programing assembly paths for all components before the manufacturing process.
•
Technical communication: interface, design, analysis, assembly, technology, etc. in VR.
•
Training: training and certification of all operators before the construction of the CFETR.
<Section>4. Development and design of virtual reality technology in a nuclear fission device</Section>
The application of VR to nuclear fission has been as follows: A distributed and multi-participant virtual system used for job training in nuclear power plants was jointly developed by several scholars from the Sandia National Laboratories and University of New Mexico in 1995. The most successful application connecting VR technology with the design of a nuclear power plant was that of Reed and Tunley, (British Nuclear Fuels Engineering, Group, Risley, Warrington) [7]. A virtual central control room (CCR) was constructed to optimize its structure and layout, and the human factor was fully considered in the process of the design and construction of the Sellsfield Mox Plant CCR. The French power company, EDF, installed a VR system to investigate the design and testing of a nuclear power plant’s operating procedures. EDF has successfully modeled the virtual environment inside the reactor building. Workers can enter the virtual reactor building (wearing a helmet and controlling their movements using a 3D mouse). Engineers too, can move around the virtual building based on the paths suggested by maintenance procedures.
VR technology was also applied to a nuclear power station by Shanghai Jiao Tong University [[8], [9], [10]], and a virtual simulation system for the nuclear power station’s main control room was set up. In the main control room, the actual nuclear power plant can be experienced and roamed using a computer, and the dynamic conditions and failure conditions can be felt. A three-dimensional model of the Daya Bay Nuclear Power Station was created by Qinzheng (North China Electric Power University). The Institute of Nuclear Energy Safety Technology of the Chinese Academy of Sciences worked with Manheng Digital to engage in advanced reactor design, nuclear power software development, and nuclear safety simulation research—Manheng Digital is a leader in the VR industry in China.
On the enterprise side, the "Virtual reality Engineering Application Laboratory" was set up at the China Nuclear Power Engineering Co., Ltd., making use of VR solutions such as ART motion capture equipment (Manheng) and Haption force-feedback equipment. VR solutions have been applied to the Hualong One civil construction project and several breakthroughs have been achieved. The virtual system of the China Nuclear Power Corporation (CNPC) digital reactor platform has also been officially launched. The system comprises simulation software and hardware—the software resources contain abundant cranes, tooling, common tools, and human body models.
In a study on the simulation platform considering serious accidents of a nuclear fission power plant (based on the 3Keymaster simulation platform), the core analysis program was MELCOR 2.1 [11]—MELCOR code was used as the core analysis program in the 3Keymaster simulation platform, through a number of interfaces. The serious accident simulation results and the parameters of the MELCOR code could be displayed through the 3Keymaster simulation platform, permitting workers to intuitively feel the accident situation and parameters. Fig. 8 shows the display interface of the reactor melting pit and Fig. 9 shows the display interface of the containment parameters. Through this platform, all types of serious accident sequences can be simulated, and the design and verification of serious accident scenarios can be realized.
Fig. 8
Fig. 8. The display interface of the melting pit.
Fig. 9
Fig. 9. The display interface of the containment parameters.
Entering the nuclear power field is strictly controlled due to the meticulous requirements of the nuclear power sector. A three-dimensional VR system of the CPR1000 nuclear power plant was built using VR technology, which required building the actual nuclear power plant on the computer. Workers can experience the nuclear power plant’s internal structure and processes by virtue of virtual roaming, from both first person and third person perspectives. Fig. 10 shows workers roaming the virtual nuclear power plant, learning about the layout of its buildings and installations, all while staying safely at home.
Fig. 10
Fig. 10. Workers roaming the diagrammatic sketch in the nuclear power plant.
At the same time, nuclear power plant main loop operational flow can be demonstrated in three dimensions using VR, and the nuclear power plant accident process changes can be dynamically demonstrated [12,13], as shown in Fig. 11. Complex physical phenomena or physical processes that are difficult to describe can be displayed more vividly using three-dimensional VR methods. VR is a convenient way to improve the effect and quality of each design review phase.
Fig. 11
Fig. 11. The three dimensional flow display of the nuclear power plant’s main loop.
<Section>5. Conclusion</Section>
The design, fabrication, assembly, operation, and decommissioning of nuclear fusion and nuclear fission devices are complex phases, but the application of VR technology can be used during all of these phases to save time and reduce costs. VR technology and its characteristics have been discussed in detail. VR is a new virtual world created using computers and other technologies. In this new virtual world, users participate in events and are "immersed" in the simulated environment. VR technology comprises a compelling mix of the three "I"s, namely Immersion, Interaction, and Imagination. At the same time, the development and design of VR technology for nuclear fusion devices has been studied in detail. The ITER and CEA have built VR laboratories, the CEA using the force-feedback system in its laboratory. The CFETR VR platform was successfully set up, both the hardware and software components. Finally, the development and design of VR technology in nuclear fission device has been covered in detail. The future development of the CFETR VR platform has also been discussed. The fusion and fission nuclear fields require significant development of VR technology, in order speed up and improves development of the nuclear industry.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Shijun Qin: Conceptualization, Methodology, Virtual reality technology used in the nuclear fusion device, Writing - original draft manuscript. Qingfeng Wang: Resources. Xianfeng Chen: Writing - review & editing.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
We declare that we have no financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that can inappropriately influence our work, there is no professional or other personal interest of any nature or kind in any product, service and/or company that could be construed as influencing the position presented in, or the review of, the manuscript entitled, “Application of Virtual Reality Technology in Nuclear Device Design and Research”.
<Section>Acknowledgments</Section>
This work has been supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 11975268) and National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2017YFE0300503).
<Section>References</Section>
[1]
China Government Network, Strategic Action Plan for Energy Development (2014—2020) [EB/OL］. http:// energy. People. Com. cn / n /2014 / 1119 / c71661-26055076. html.
Google Scholar
[2]
Xinian Zang
Nuclear Power Plant Systems and Equipment [M]
Beijing: tsinghua university press (2010)
Google Scholar
[3]
Ying Wu
Summary of virtual reality technology [J]
Computer and digital engineering, 30 (3) (2002), pp. 41-44
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[4]
Chengwei Wang, Wen Gao, Xingren Wang
Theory, Realization and Application of Spiritual Environment (virtual Reality Technology) [M]
Beijing: tsinghua university press (1996), pp. 5-6
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[5]
Arnaud Pilia, Cyril Brun, Louis Doceul, et al.
Application of virtual reality tools for assembly of WEST components: comparison between simulations and physical mockups [J]
Fusion Eng. Des. (98) (2015), pp. 1589-1592
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[6]
L.I. Jiangang, Yuntao Song, L.I.U. Yong, W.an. Yuanxi
Fusion Engineering Test Reactor Main Machine Design [D]
Beijing, Science Press (2015)
Google Scholar
[7]
J. Reed, C. Tunley
The application of advanced techniques in control room design and operator training [nuclear power plants]
Human Factors and Power Plants, 1997.Global Perspectives of Human Factors in Power Generation, Proceedings of the 1997 IEEE Sixth Conference on (1997)
age (s):3/13-3/18.
Google Scholar
[8]
Xiaobo Liu
Application of Virtual Reality in Nuclear Power Plant -- Real-time Roaming and Interaction of Virtual Scene [D]
Shanghai: Shanghai Jiao Tong University (2003)
Google Scholar
[9]
Yongmu Yang
Application of Virtual Reality in Simulation Design of Main Control Room of Nuclear Power Plant [D]
Shanghai: Shanghai Jiao Tong University (2008)
Google Scholar
[10]
L.iu Pengfei, Y.ang Yanghua, Y.ang Yongmu, et al.
Application of virtual reality technology in nuclear power plant simulation [J]
Atomic Energy Science and Technology, 42 (Suppl) (2008), pp. 169-175
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[11]
R.M. Summers
MELCOR Computer Code Manuals [R]
(1995)
Google Scholar
[12]
Szabo Tobias
Obtaining a more realistic hydrogen distribution in the containment by coupling MELCOR with GASFLOW [J]
Nucl. Eng. Des. (2014)
269: 330-339
Google Scholar
[13]
Pan Wu, Jianqiang Shan, Bo Zhang
Application of virtual simulation experiment in teaching of major of nuclear engineering and technology [J]
Research and Exploration in Laboratory, 37 (4) (2018), pp. 102-106
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar