<title>Numerical study on the heat transfer deterioration and its mitigations for supercritical CO2 flowing in a horizontal miniature tube</title>
<author>1,ChikaEze,2,Shahid AliKhan,3,KwunTing Lau,4,ShakeelAhmad,5,LinChen,6,WangWei,7,JiyunZhao</author>
<Affiliation>1,Department of Mechanical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China;2,Institute of Engineering Themophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China;3,School of Aeronautics and Astronautics, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107982</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454920306782</URL>
Numerical study on the heat transfer deterioration and its mitigations for supercritical CO2 flowing in a horizontal miniature tube
ChikaEze,Shahid AliKhan,KwunTing Lau,ShakeelAhmad,LinChen,WangWei,JiyunZhao
Department of Mechanical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
Institute of Engineering Themophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
School of Aeronautics and Astronautics, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
HTD mitigation of turbulent sCO2 in a horizontal mini tube with baffles is investigated.
The performances of various baffle arrangements on HTD mitigation are demonstrated.
Mechanisms of buoyancy influence on HTD with and without baffles are discussed.
The effects of baffles on HTD mitigation when the tube is further miniaturized are analysed.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Responding to the rapid growth of size reduction in engineering systems, it is crucial to explore the safety performance of supercritical fluid systems in miniature tubes. In this paper, numerical studies are conducted to explore the performance of baffles on heat transfer deterioration (HTD) mitigations for supercritical CO2 (sCO2) flowing in a horizontal mini tube using RNG k-e turbulence model with enhanced wall treatment (EWT). Three kinds of baffle arrangements: in-lined, staggered and centred, with the same blockage ratio (BR = 0.25) are selected to explore their performance on HTD mitigation. The thermo-hydraulic performances of the baffled tubes are examined using the dimensionless parameters based on normalized Nusselt numbers and Fanning friction factors, Nu/Nu0, f/f0 and PEC = (Nu/Nu0)/(f/f0)1/3. The results reveal that unlike the in-lined and staggered baffles, the centred baffles induce jet impingements directly onto the tube walls and generate significant amounts of transverse fluid velocity near the tube wall (which exceeds that in the core region), making it the most influential baffle arrangement on the HTD mitigations. The effects of baffles on buoyancy flow under a wide range of heat and mass fluxes are explored based on Jackson’s criterion (Gr/Re2<103). It is observed that the Gr/Re2 increases at a relatively lower rate in baffled tube than in the smooth tube under increased heat flux variation whereas it decreases at a higher rate than the smooth tube under increased mass flux variation, thus revealing the buoyancy weakening effects of baffles. Finally, the baffle’s performance on HTD mitigation when the tube is further miniaturized is explored and the results unveil that miniaturization weakens buoyancy, and there exists a certain mini size (D = 0.5 mm) at which buoyancy influence completely vanishes, and the effect of baffles on HTD mitigation becomes insignificant.
Keywords：Supercritical CO2;Horizontal miniature tube;Heat transfer deterioration;Mitigation
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Convective heat transfer of supercritical carbon dioxide (sCO2) has attracted much attention as a working fluid in many large, moderate, and compact heat exchanger systems due to its highly efficient energy utilization benefits, relatively simple critical parameters, and environmental friendliness. For example, several energy conversion and transport systems such as innovative refrigeration systems, high-temperature solar power system, electronic cooling systems, and advanced nuclear reactor systems have been proposed to utilize sCO2 instead of supercritical water as the working fluid (Guo et al., 2019, Lu, 2018, Sarkar, 2015, Lorentzen and Pettersen, 1993, Zhang et al., 2006, Feher, 1968, Oh and Moore, 2005).
Under supercritical pressure, the fluid’s thermohydraulic behaviour is somewhat similar to the conventional single-phase flow in that liquid–vapor phase transition does not occur. However, unlike fluids in the subcritical pressure regimes, supercritical fluids experience sharp variations of its thermophysical properties due to small variation in pressure and temperature near the pseudo-critical point (example, see Fig. 1). Pseudocritical point can simply be defined as a point at a pressure and temperature above their critical values which corresponds to the peak value of the specific heat. This peak value becomes narrower and sharper as the operating supercritical pressure nears the critical pressure. As it is known that CO2 and water have their critical pressures and temperatures at P = 7.38 MPa and T = 31 °C, and P = 22.1 MPa and T = 374 °C respectively, CO2 is a more advantageous fluid compared with water, due to its low critical parameters and lower value of specific volume. Fig. 1 shows the thermal physical properties of CO2 and water at different temperature and pressure above their critical values with their corresponding pseudocritical points.
Fig. 1. Physical properties of water and CO2 at different supercritical pressures (NIST Standard Reference Database 23, version 9.1).
This variation causes non-uniform density distribution in the radial and axial directions, leading to the acceleration and buoyancy effects which, thus, cause an undesirable heat transfer behaviour called heat transfer deterioration (HTD), which usually manifests in form of sharp and broadened wall temperature peaks (Cheng et al., 2017).
Several research studies have been conducted for the last six decades focusing on the convective heat transfer to supercritical fluids flowing in normal and large straight channels, as well as porous and looped channels (Shitsman, 1963, Petukhov, 1970, Hall and Jackson, 1971, Jackson, 1979, Kurganov and Kaptilnyi, 1993, Jiang et al., 2008, Liu et al., 2014, Sharabi et al., 2008, Xiong et al., 2012, Ambrosini, 2011, Debrah et al., 2013). These studies provide knowledge and understanding of the various phenomena and mechanisms of supercritical fluids heat transfer as well as some useful correlations. In addition, the occurrence of HTD, an undesirable phenomenon in supercritical fluids systems and its mitigations have been investigated for the normal channel sizes by a few researchers recently. Eze et al. (2019) conducted a computational study of effects of vortex generators (VGs) on HTD of supercritical water upward flow, and demonstrated that that VG’s size position and number have suppression and delay effects on HTD downstream of the VG, and there exists an optimum size beyond which HTD starts to aggravate. Yang et al. (2020) explored numerically, the effects of longitudinal vortex generators (LVG) on the heat transfer deterioration of supercritical CO2 in vertical tubes. The results show an increase in thermal efficiency of the tube with single-row LVG by 15.2% and a suppression of wall temperature peaks by 8.7 K. The results also conclude that the mitigation of wall temperature peak is a consequence of the reduction of the boundary layer thickness and enhancement of flow mixing in the downstream of the LVG. Luo et al. (2020) studied the effect of lattice structures on heat transfer deterioration of supercritical CO2 in rectangle channels. The results show that all the Body-Centred Cubic (BCC) lattice, Kagome lattice and Pin-fin structures can generate arch-shaped vortices near the wall, which increases the wall shear stress and the fluid turbulence intensity, thus promotes the full mixing of the bulk and the near-wall fluids, and therefore mitigates HTD. Xiao et al. (2020) investigated numerically, effects of spacer on HTD of supercritical R-134a flow in an annulus and reveals the occurrence of spacer induced HTD when spacers are placed in the heat transfer recovery region of the boundary layers. In general, most of the existing research on HTD mitigations only focused on heat transfer of supercritical fluids flowing upward in relatively large diameter channels which are called the macro channels, with a diameter of 3 mm used as the threshold to distinct between macro- and mini/micro-channels (Cheng et al., 2008). However, studies on HTD mitigation for supercritical fluids flowing in horizontal miniature tubes, are relatively unexplored.
Driven by the need for size reduction in engineering systems for example, in compact boilers, internal heat exchangers, super-conductor coolers etc, there have been increasing interests in heat transfer of fluids at supercritical pressures in small size tubes (Lei and Chen, 2020, Jajja et al., 2020, Chen et al., 2015, Bae et al., 2011). Liao and Zhao (2002) conducted an experimental investigation of convection heat transfer to sCO2 in horizontal and vertical miniature tubes under heating. The results reveal a heat transfer enhancement (HTE) for both horizontal and upward flow, whereas for downward flow, a significant HTD was observed near the pseudocritical point. Jiang et al., 2004, Jiang et al., 2008, Jiang et al., 2013 carried out experimental and numerical studies on the conductive heat transfer of sCO2 in mini tubes of various sizes, orientations and configurations including porous media. The results reveal that thermophysical property variations and flow buoyancy significantly influence the heat transfer behaviour of the channels with inner diameter of 2.0 mm. Whereas for the channel with 0.27 mm inner diameter, the local wall temperature varies non-linearly for both flow directions at high heat fluxes (113 kW/m2) for inlet Reynolds number less than 2900. Also, the results reveal a low effect of buoyancy and a strong effects of flow acceleration. He et al. (2005) conducted numerical investigations of the turbulent convection heat transfer of sCO2 flowing in a vertical tube of diameter 0.948 mm using low-Reynolds number eddy viscosity turbulence models. The result reveals that the buoyancy effect is insignificant in this size of tubes, however, at relatively strong heat flux, HTD caused by flow acceleration is observed. And more recently, Guo et al. (2020) conducted an experimental studies of heat transfer to sCO2 with inner diameter of 2.0 mm under high heat flux (=200 kW/m2). The results reveal the special occurrence of HTD in the entire heated channel.
Based on the afore-mentioned studies, it can be concluded that the heat transfer characteristics of sCO2 in straight mini channels has been substantially studied. Nonetheless, the mitigations of HTD for supercritical fluids at this scale are relatively unexplored and to the best of the authors’ knowledge, no previous study has investigated the effect of baffles on HTD for supercritical fluids in a miniature tube. Following the experimental work of Guo et al. (2020), this work presents a numerical study on the occurrence of HTD in sCO2 horizontal mini channel, and its mitigations using baffles as flow obstacles. The objectives of this work are to compare the effects of different baffle arrangements and blockage ratios on HTD mitigations, and to choose the most reliable ones. The effect of baffles on wall temperature suppression for a further miniaturized tube when the buoyancy profile crosses below its significant threshold is also explored. Overall, this work provides a better understanding of heat transfer to supercritical CO2 flowing in horizontal mini tubes, and the results presented here are of great importance in the design of safe and reliable supercritical fluid’s miniature systems such as SCWR, compact boilers, internal heat exchangers, super-conductor coolers etc.
<Section>2. Numerical approach</Section>
2.1. Geometry configurations
The geometry employed in this study follows from the experimental work of Guo et al. (2020). The diameter of the tube is 2 mm, the adiabatic entrance section is 50 mm and the heated length is 100 mm. Different from the fluid flows in vertical circular tubes, due to the combined effect of gravity and buoyancy, the flow fields in horizontal circular tubes are asymmetric and cannot be simplified by 2D axi-symmetry (Wang et al., 2018). Hence, a three-dimensional (3D) model is employed in this study. However, since the overall flow field still maintains symmetry against the central plane (xy plane), only half of the tube is modelled to minimize the computational load. This strategy has been utilized by Wang et al., 2018, Wang et al., 2018. A typical schematic of 3D half horizontal smooth tube is illustrated in Fig. 2 (a). Baffle arrangements consist of ten baffles each placed an in-lined, staggered and centred arrays on the tube walls as shown in Fig. 2 (b), (c) and (d)., respectively. The dimensions of a cross-section of the baffle configurations are shown in Fig. 2(e) and specified with the same blockage ratio (BR = b/d) to compare their performance separately. The spacing between adjacent baffle in the tubes is denoted as w and the length and height of each baffle are denoted as “a” and “b” respectively. In summary, it must be noted that:
(i)
In all cases, 3D half horizontal smooth tube models are adopted to simplify the full 3d models in order to reduce the computation cost greatly.
(ii)
The staggered arrangement of baffles is mimicked by combining both in-lined and centred baffles in a single equal arrangement as shown in Fig. 2(c).
(iii)
For practical applications, spacers grids or wire wrap spacers may be required to precisely position and support the baffles at the centre of the channel, just as they hold fuel pins and rod bundles in nuclear reactor systems (Xiao et al., 2018, Bae et al., 2011, Gu et al., 2016). Although these spacers could also influence the thermal and hydrodynamic behaviours of the flow channel by disrupting the fluid flow and further contributing to fluid mixing within the channels (Xiong et al., 2012). Nevertheless, to ensure a fair comparison of the various baffle arrangements considered, these spacers are completely ignored.
Fig. 2. Problem geometries.
2.2. Boundary and operating conditions
It is well known that there are two kinds of HTD phenomena that occur in supercritical fluid systems for a given heated tube: HTD at low mass flux which is mainly due to buoyancy influence and HTD at high mass flux caused by flow acceleration effect. Based on the experimental study of Guo et al. (2020) HTD phenomena are investigated at low mass flux, G = 400 kg/m2 s and q = 200 kW/m2 in supercritical pressure CO2 flowing through a horizontal miniature tube, which is a typical low mass flux and high heat flux conditions. The operating pressure is 7.6 MPa and the SCO2 temperature at the inlet of the computational domain is 25 °C. In addition, a wide range of heat fluxes (100–300) kW/m2, mass fluxes (100–800) kg/m2 s and bulk inlet temperatures (5–30) °C are also examined both for the smooth, and baffle tubes. For both tubes, the inlet and the outlet boundary conditions are mass flow inlet and pressure outlet, respectively. No slip is adopted at the tube walls and at the baffles. The turbulent intensity level of 5% are set at inlet, and uniform heat fluxes are applied at the computational walls.
2.3. Solution methods
All thermo-properties, including density, specific heat, thermal conductivity and viscosity, are retrieved from NIST Standard Reference Database 23, version 9.0 software (Lemmon et al., 2010) and are temperature-dependent in the calculation. The SIMPLE scheme algorithm is used to couple the pressure and velocity in the momentum equation. Whereas the continuity, momentum and energy equations are performed by the second-order upwind scheme. The convergence criteria for the normalized residual of individual governing equations was set to be less than 1.0 × 10−6 to minimize the linearization error.
2.4. Governing equations
The generic form of the fundamental governing equations of continuity, the Navier–Stokes and the energy equations for a steady state incompressible fluid flow are given as follows:
Continuity equation:
(1)@
where ρ is the fluid density, ui is the velocity component in the x, y and z coordinates.
Momentum equation:
(2)@
where @ is the effective viscosity defined by,@, and @ is the fluid viscosity while @ is the turbulent viscosity
Energy equation:
(3)@
where @ is the thermal conductivity, ρ is the density, u is the flow velocity, cp is the specific heat capacity and H is the bulk fluid enthalpy. The constant @ = 0.85 is used for the turbulent prandtl number, and the gravity term is included directly in the momentum equation rather than being modelled by the Boussinesq approximation.
2.4.1. The equations of RNG@ turbulence model adopted in this study is given as:
The turbulent kinetic energy, k is obtained by solving the following equations:
(4)@
Whereas the turbulent dissipation rate, @ is obtained by solving equation below:
(5)@
(6)@
where @, @, @, @, @= 1.42, @ = 1.68, @ = 0.0845, @ is the effective viscosity, @ and @ are inverse effective Prandtl numbers computed by the RNG theory, whereas @ and @ represent the dilatation dissipation and user-defined source terms respectively. And @ and @denote the production of turbulence kinetic energy due to shear stress and buoyancy respectively.
Literally, wall serves as a boundary to a confined flow problem and therefore affects turbulent flows. So, even though walls are the main source of turbulence, the near-wall modelling influences the accuracy of numerical solutions. The choice of a suitable wall function is not arbitrary, it is completely dependent on the turbulence model used and on the physics of the problem (in this case, the heat transfer at the wall/wall temperature). If the near-wall mesh is fine enough to be able to resolve the viscous sublayer (typically with the first near-wall node placed at@), then the enhanced wall treatment (EWT) effect will be achieved. Therefore, the accurate prediction of wall-bounded turbulent flows is dependent upon successful modelling of the flow in the near-wall region and EWT approach is an a appropriate method for resolving flow structure near the wall compared with the standard wall function (which doesn't require near wall mesh resolution), but the higher computational time associated with EWT is a major drawback to contend with.
2.5. Calculated parameters
The Reynolds number Re is defined as follows:
(7)@
where ρ is the density of fluid, u is flow velocity, d is the inner diameter of the tube, and μ is the viscosity of fluid.
The heat transfer coefficient h:
(8)@
where @ is the heat flux, @ is the local wall temperature (i.e the average value of the top and bottom wall temperatures at each cross section of the horizontal tube) , @ is the local bulk-fluid temperature, evaluated according to bulk pressure and enthalpy using the NIST REFPROP.
The Nusselt number is defined as:
(9)@
where d is the tube diameter, k is the thermal conductivity of CO2, and h is the heat transfer coefficient.
The Fanning friction factor, f given below is used to characterize the pressure drop:
(10)@
where @ is the total pressure drop along the tube, @ is the density in the tube, u is the average velocity between the tube’s inlet and outlet, and L is the length of the tube. Hence, the thermal hydraulic performance evaluation criteria is given as:
(11)@
where the subscript ‘0’ denotes the baseline/smooth channel case.
2.6. Model verification
Mesh quality has a significant effect on numerical results. An accurate numerical simulation for turbulent flows requires considerations for mesh independent grid in order to ensure a reliable numerical result. In this study, the commercial software ANSYS Fluent 17.0 is used for the CFD simulations whereas the computational domain is discretized by a structured mesh using the commercial software ICEM CFD. A grid independence test is conducted using the k-e model with EWT in smooth tube. It is important to clarify the logic of the grid independence study. First of all, in order to ensure that the dimensional wall distance, Y+ is less than one as recommended by several researchers (Cheng et al., 2007, Yang et al., 2007, Du et al., 2010), the height of the first grid near the wall is set to 0.001 mm and the height ratio is 1.08. Then, a gradually increased mesh sizes are employed based on different mesh sizes and comparison results of wall temperature distribution are presented in Fig. 3. By gradually increasing the number of grids in all directions from a coarse grid1 (180,708) nodes through fairly fine grid2 (361416) nodes and grid3 (722832) nodes, up to a very fine grid4 (1.45@) nodes, it is found that the difference in wall temperature and the trend of the profiles become insignificant between grid3 and grid4. Hence, grid3 is chosen as the verified results.
Fig. 3. Comparisons of the wall temperature profiles with different grids.
2.7. Model validations
To validate the accuracy of the numerical simulation, comparison with the experimental data is necessary. It is known that the effects of turbulence models play an important role in numerical analysis, and there exists no single universal turbulence model that can be adopted in the prediction of heat transfer to supercritical fluids (Zhu et al., 2014). For this reason, a series of available turbulence models such as standard k − ε, Realizable k-e, RNG k − ε, RNG k − ε with Enhanced Wall Treatment (EWT), standard k − ω, and SST k − ω models are carefully tested against Guo’s experimental data (Guo et al., 2020) for smooth channels. The results show that the family of k − ε appear to capture the experimental data more closely than the family of k − ω models. Particularly, the RNG k − ε with Enhanced Wall Treatment (EWT) gives the best results in terms of both the trend and magnitude of wall temperature distribution, with the experimental wall temperature captured within less than 15% error as shown in Fig. 4(a).
Fig. 4. Comparison of the wall temperature profile between numerical and experimental results.
Also, several researchers (Lei et al., 2012, Yang, 2016, Gao and Bai, 2017, Li et al., 2019, Kim et al., 2003) have concluded that RNG @ turbulence model with enhanced wall treatment (EWT) performs well in predicting heat transfer of supercritical fluids for horizontal flows. The simulation results of wall temperature distribution along the axial direction are therefore conducted using RNG@ turbulence model with EWT, and the results are summarily compared to the results of Guo’s experiment (Guo et al., 2020) for smooth horizontal mini tube as shown in Fig. 4(b), with a magnified partial view of the Tw variation showing that the wall temperature is not constant in the heated tube for results of both experiment (where it varies from 161 °C to 178 °C) and simulation (where it varies from 150 °C to 187 °C. The numerical wall temperature results captured appropriately both the trends and magnitudes of the experimental results. In addition, the excessively high wall temperature results observed in the entire heated tube compared with the bulk fluid temperature reveals that HTD has been observed as shown in Fig. 4(b). Based on the analysis, it can be concluded that the current model is accurate enough to explore heat transfer behaviours in smooth tubes. For the baffle tubes on the other hand, since there are no existing experimental data for the effect of flow obstacle on heat transfer of fluids at miniature scale, experimental data obtained by Eter et al. (2017) at the Super-Critical University of Ottawa’s Loop (SCUOL) are utilized to validate the numerical results of CO2 with baffles as shown in Fig. 4(b). The length of the enhanced heated tube is 2000 mm and the diameter is 8 mm. Two flow obstacles (with 25% blockage ratio) were placed at the start of the heated section and at the length of 500 mm from the heated section. The heat flux, mass flux, inlet temperature and operating pressure are q = 15.9 kW/m2, G = 308 kg/ (m2s), Tin = 25 °C and P = 7.75 MPa. The results indicate that although the numerical simulation does not coincide well with the experimental result, it captures the trend of the experimental wall temperature results. Also, at the location of the obstacle, the wall temperature decreases significantly showing that the obstacle effect has been observed. Hence it is considered that the current model is capable to simulate the baffle effects on flow and heat transfer to sCO2 in mini tube.
<Section>3. Results and discussion</Section>
3.1 . Effects of different baffle arrangement on HTD
In this section, the flow and heat transfer behaviour of tubes with three kinds of baffle arrangements having the same blockade ratio (BR = 0.25) are selected: in-lined, staggered and centred baffles, and their effects on mitigation of HTD of sCO2 in mini-tubes are explored. The wall temperature Tw is the average value of the top and bottom wall temperatures at each cross section. Fig. 5 (A) show that all baffle arrangements have positive influence on HTD mitigation with wall temperature distributions that are below that of the smooth tube. It can be seen also, from the velocity and TKE contours and streamlines in Fig. 4(E-G) that the staggered baffles induce strong oscillatory motion of the bulk fluid which enhances fluid mixing between the wall and the core region of the tube, leading to enhanced wall temperature suppression, but the accompanying pressure loss (Fig. 5(B)) is excessively higher than those of the other arrangements. Comparatively, the centred baffles generate significant amounts of the streamwise vortex flows and transverse velocity which induce jet impingements directly onto the tube walls leading to the most significant decrease in HTD, minimal pressure loss, and maximum PEC. Also, as it is seen from the contours in Fig. 5(E), the central baffle is the only baffle arrangement that causes a higher fluid velocity to flow near the wall than in the core region, which is beneficial to the heat transfer at the wall and therefore causes an increase in TKE in the near wall region thus weakening the HTD. Fig. 5(F) shows that the vortex dynamics are very complex in 3D half tube and thus cannot be distinguished for all different arrangements investigated. However, for this reasons, 2D plots of the streamlines which capture the different vortex behaviours in all different channels are included to explain the vortex dynamics. Hence it can be concluded that even though the staggered baffles outperform the in-lined ones, the centred baffles are found to be the most influential baffle arrangement on HTD mitigations. Therefore, centred baffle arrangement was selected to examine wall temperatures at various baffle sizes along the tube.
Fig. 5. Comparison of the effect of baffle arrangement on HTD.
3.2. Effects of baffle blockage ratio
The effect of baffle’s blockage ratio (BR) is presented in Fig. 6. For each tube in this case, there are a combination of 10 baffles with BR = 0.25, 0.50, and 0.75 corresponding to the baffle of height (0.5 mm, 1.0 mm and 1.5 mm) respectively, each placed 10 mm apart and uniformly spread through the entire tube. Blockage ratios generally have great influence on fluids heat transfer and pressure drop (Yang et al., 2017, Sarper et al., 2018, Eze, Chika, 2020). When BR is small, mainly longitudinal vortices are generated, with relatively weak jet impingements and swirl flows as seen in Fig. 6(F). By increasing the BR, the streamlines start to show stronger deflections and disturbance which results in the generation of counteracting larger swirls downstream of each baffle. The streamline also shows strongly waved pattern of the same as staggered baffled tubes (Fig. 5(F)), but the wave cycle of the streamline in this case are much nearer the wall than those generated by the staggered baffle. Fig. 6(C) presents the axial variation of normalized Nusselt number for the miniature wall with baffles of various BR. In the figure, it is worth noting that all baffle tubes show fluctuating values of Nu/Nu0 profile in the entire walls of the baffled tube. Analysis shows that when the fluid enters the tube, Nu/Nu0 profile starts to increase until it gets to a peak value when it encounters the first baffle, and then drops abruptly. When the fluid flows past the first baffle, Nu/Nu0 profile increases and reaches a maximum level at the trailing edge behind the baffle, and downstream of the baffle, Nu/Nu0 profile starts to decrease and gets to the minimum level before the second baffle. In the region where the second baffle is mounted, Nu/Nu0 increases and reaches another peak at the trailing edge. This phenomenon is repeated until the fluid flows past the last baffle. The peak value of Nu/Nu0 from using the baffles is found to be about 15–900 times over the smooth tube, depending on the baffle’s BR with the use of baffle of BR = 0.75 showing best distribution over all other cases at all axial locations. This reveals a heat transfer advantage of employing the baffle over the smooth tube. Also, correspondingly, the use of blockages in heat transfer is concerned with penalty in terms of increased pressure drop. Fig. 6(B) shows the normalized friction factor f/f0 along the wall of the horizontal miniature tubes for the cases of different BR. In the figure, f/f0 profiles is found to fluctuate across the entire tube and the values are found to increase as BR increases. Overall, the tube with baffles of BR = 0.75 is found to have the largest PEC among all the other cases studied as shown in Fig. 6(D).
Fig. 6. Comparison of the effect of baffle height on HTD.
3.3. Effect of baffles on buoyancy flow
The buoyancy effect is due to the large density gradient resulting from the temperature difference of fluid in the radial direction of the tube. Based on theoretical analysis, a dimensional buoyancy effect parameter Gr/Re2 was proposed by Jackson (Jackson, 2013). In this study, the Jackson’s buoyancy criterion which states that buoyancy effect can be neglected when Gr/Re2@ is employed to compare our results. The definitions of Gr and Re are given in Eqs. (12) and (13) respectively below:
(12)@
(13)@
In what follows, Fig. 7 presents the variations in wall temperature and buoyancy criteria Gr/Re2, for both smooth and baffle tubes (BR = 0.75) under a wide range of heat flux and mass flux. As is shown, the wall temperature varies significantly under increasing heat flux for both tubes. When the amount of heat flux are increased by equal amounts, the wall temperature profile for the smooth tube (Fig. 7(a)) rises at about twice larger values than those of the baffle tube (Fig. 7(b)). In contrast, Gr/Re2 varies very weakly under increasing heat flux and the profiles are substantially stabilized the closer the bulk fluid temperature is to the pseudocritical point, Tpc. The Gr/Re2 profiles also fully overlap at Tb = Tpc which is due to the sudden and drastic decrease in the bulk fluid density at Tpc. Also, the buoyancy effect, for both tubes slightly decreases with increasing (Tb/Tpc) because the near-wall fluid density remains low even under different heat fluxes (Guo et al., 2020). It is worth noting that, for the baffle tube (Fig. 7(f)) the buoyancy increases at a relatively lower rate than that of the smooth tube (Fig. 7(e)) under increased heat flux variation, revealing the baffles performance in buoyancy weakening. Additionally, increasing the mass flux significantly decreases Gr/Re2 for both tubes which is due to the direct proportionality between Reynold’s number (Re) and mass flux (G). However, it must be observed that for the baffle tube, buoyancy decreases at a relatively higher rate than the smooth tube, thus revealing the buoyancy weakening effects of baffles which is obvious from the suppressed wall temperature variations in Fig. 7(c) and (d). Overall, the values of Gr/Re2 in all cases is greatly larger than @ which indicates that the buoyancy effect is significant.
Fig. 7. Comparison of the effect of baffle buoyancy flow.
3.4. Effect of further miniaturization on HTD mitigation performance of baffles.
In this section, the simulated wall temperature distributions in the axial direction of the horizontal mini tubes with different reduced diameters under the same operating conditions are shown in Fig. 8 (a). Although the wall temperature Tw is the average value of the top and bottom wall temperatures at each cross section. However, due to the influence of buoyancy, in horizontal flows, it is common to observe the differences in wall temperatures of the top and bottom surfaces. It is observed in Fig. 8(b) that the top wall temperatures are greater than those at bottom surface for each diameter, signifying a worse heat transfer at top surface than that at bottom surface which is caused by the vapour-like fluids at the top wall compared with the liquid-like fluids at the bottom. Also, lower-density vapour-like fluid flows from the bottom to the top surface under the buoyancy effect, leading to a further augmentation of the local heat transfer resistance at top surface (Guo et al., 2020). In addition, further miniaturization of the tubes reveals a gradually overlapping effect between the top and bottom wall temperatures, such that at D = 0.5 mm, both temperature profiles are indistinguishable. The results further unveil that further miniaturization of the heated tube weakens buoyancy (Fig. 8(d)) such that at d = 0.5 mm, buoyancy influence vanishes when the criterion goes below its HTD induced threshold (Gr/Re2@), and in contrast to the larger tube, the effect of baffles on HTD mitigation becomes insignificant (see Fig. 8(c))
Fig. 8. Comparison of the effect of further miniaturization on buoyancy and baffle performance.
<Section>4. Mechanism analysis</Section>
To explain this phenomenon, six points are arbitrarily selected at different axial locations and distributed along the tube in steps of 20 mm, x  = 50, 70, 90, 110, 130, 150 mm and plotted to compare the radial distribution of velocity and TKE of the baffle (BR = 0.75) and the smooth tubes as well as their normalized profiles in order to reveal the baffle’s effect. In both tubes, the diameter is 2 mm and the same operating conditions of mass flux G = 400 kg/m2 s, heat flux q = 200 kW/m2, pressure p = 7.6 MPa and inlet temperature T = 25 °C are considered. Fig. 9 (a) shows M-shaped flattening of the velocity profile of the smooth tube, which reduces the TKE as seen in Fig. 9(d). This eventual reduction of TKE impairs the turbulent diffusion and thus causes HTD. However, the baffle tube increases significantly the near wall velocities (Fig. 9(b)) of both the top and bottom sections, such that due to the higher buoyancy influence at the top wall, the velocity near the wall (Fig. 9(c) peaked at 131 times that of the smooth tube whereas it peaked at 112 times that of the smooth tube at the bottom section, thereby promoting heat transfer and mitigating HTD. The TKE for the baffle tube on the other hand also increased enormously near the wall as shown in Fig. 9(e), with the values at the top and bottom sections of the tube peaking at 4.8@ and 4.5@ times those of the smooth tubes respectively as shown in Fig. 9(f). These TKE peak indicates that the TKE at these locations was destructed by the baffles effect resulting in the wall temperature suppression.
Fig. 9. Radial velocity and TKE distributions at different axial positions.
<Section>5. Conclusions</Section>
In this paper, the effects of baffles on heat transfer deterioration is numerically studied for supercritical CO2 flowing in horizontal miniature tube using RNG @ turbulence model with EWT. The effects of baffle’s arrangements (in-lined, staggered and centred) and blockage ratios (BR) on wall temperature are investigated, and based on their thermo-hydraulic performances, the following conclusions are summarized:
All baffle arrangements have positive influence on HTD mitigation with wall temperature distributions that are below that of the smooth tube.
The staggered baffles induce strong oscillatory motion of the bulk fluid which enhances fluid mixing between the wall and the core region of the tube, leading to enhanced wall temperature suppression, but the accompanying pressure loss is excessively higher than those of the other arrangements.
The centred baffles induce jet impingements directly onto the tube walls and generate significant amounts of transverse fluid velocity near the tube wall (which exceeds that in the core region), with minimal pressure loss, making it the most influential baffle arrangement on the HTD mitigations.
Increasing the baffle’s BR has a significant effect on wall temperature suppression.
Additionally, the baffles influence on buoyancy flow under a wide range of heat and mass fluxes are explored. It is observed that buoyancy increases at a relatively lower rate in baffled tube than in the smooth tube under increased heat flux variation whereas it decreases at a higher rate than the smooth tube under increased mass flux variation, thus revealing in details the buoyancy weakening effects of baffles which is obvious from the suppressed wall temperatures in baffled tubes compared with smooth tubes.
Finally, the baffle’s performance on HTD mitigation when the tube is further miniaturized is explored. The results unveil that miniaturization weakens buoyancy, and there exists a certain mini size (D = 0.5 mm) at which buoyancy influence completely vanishes, and the effect of baffles on HTD mitigation becomes insignificant.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Chika Eze: Conceptualization, Methodology, Supervision. Shahid Ali: Supervision. Kwun Ting Lau: Supervision. Shakeel Ahmad: Supervision. Lin Chen: Supervision. Wang Wei: Supervision. Jiyun Zhao: Supervision.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgments</Section>
This work is partially supported by The Science Technology and Innovation Committee of Shenzhen Municipality through project number: JCYJ20150601102053068. We would also like to express our very great appreciation to Prof. Tim Fisher (University of California, Los Angeles) for his valuable and constructive advice during the planning and development of this research work. His willingness to give his time so generously is very much appreciated.
<Section>Appendix A. Supplementary data</Section>
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:
Download : Download XML file (302B)
Supplementary data 1.
<Section>Research data for this article</Section>
Data not available / Data will be made available on request
About research data
<Section>References</Section>
Guo et al., 2019
J.-Q. Guo, M.-J. Li, X.u. Jin-Liang, J.-J. Yan, K. Wang
Thermodynamic performance analysis of different supercritical Brayton cycles using CO2-based binary mixtures in the molten salt solar power tower systems
Energy, 173 (2019), pp. 785-798
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lu, 2018
S.-M. Lu
A global review of enhanced geothermal system (EGS)
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 81 (2018), pp. 2902-2921
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Sarkar, 2015
J. Sarkar
Review and future trends of supercritical CO2 Rankine cycle for low-grade heat conversion
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 48 (2015), pp. 434-451
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lorentzen and Pettersen, 1993
G. Lorentzen, J. Pettersen
A new, efficient and environmentally benign system for car air-conditioning
Int. J. Refrig, 16 (1) (1993), pp. 4-12
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhang et al., 2006
X.-R. Zhang, H. Yamaguchi, D. Uneno, K. Fujima, M. Enomoto, N. Sawada
Analysis of a novel solar energy-powered Rankine cycle for combined power and heat generation using supercritical carbon dioxide
Renewable Energy, 31 (12) (2006), pp. 1839-1854
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Feher, 1968
E.G. Feher
The supercritical thermodynamic power cycle
Energy Convers., 8 (2) (1968), pp. 85-90
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Oh and Moore, 2005
C.H. Oh, R.L. Moore
Brayton cycle for high-temperature gas-cooled reactors
Nucl. Technol., 149 (3) (2005), pp. 324-336
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Cheng et al., 2017
H. Cheng, J. Zhao, M.K. Rowinski
Study on two wall temperature peaks of supercritical fluid mixed convective heat transfer in circular tubes
Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 113 (2017), pp. 257-267
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Shitsman, 1963
M.E. Shitsman
Impairment of the heat transmission at supercritical pressures (Heat transfer process examined during forced motion of water at supercritical pressures)
High Temp., 1 (1963), pp. 237-244
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Petukhov, 1970
B.S. Petukhov
Heat transfer and friction in turbulent pipe flow with variable physical properties
Adv. Heat Transfer, 6 (503) (1970), Article i565
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hall and Jackson, 1971
W.B. Hall, J.D. Jackson
Heat transfer near the critical point
Adv. Heat Transfer, 7 (1) (1971), p. 86
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jackson, 1979
Jackson, J.D., Jackson J.D., Hall, W.B., 1979. Influences of buoyancy on heat transfer to fluids flowing in vertical tubes under turbulent conditions.
Google Scholar
Kurganov and Kaptilnyi, 1993
V.A. Kurganov, A.G. Kaptilnyi
Flow structure and turbulent transport of a supercritical pressure fluid in a vertical heated tube under the conditions of mixed convection. Experimental data
Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 36 (13) (1993), pp. 3383-3392
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jiang et al., 2008
P.-X. Jiang, Y.u. Zhang, X.u. Yi-Jun, R.-F. Shi
Experimental and numerical investigation of convection heat transfer of CO2 at supercritical pressures in a vertical tube at low Reynolds numbers
Int. J. Therm. Sci., 47 (8) (2008), pp. 998-1011
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Liu et al., 2014
Z.-B. Liu, Y.-L. He, Y.-F. Yang, J.-Y. Fei
Experimental study on heat transfer and pressure drop of supercritical CO2 cooled in a large tube
Appl. Therm. Eng., 70 (1) (2014), pp. 307-315
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Sharabi et al., 2008
M.B. Sharabi, W. Ambrosini, S. He
Prediction of unstable behaviour in a heated channel with water at supercritical pressure by CFD models
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 35 (5) (2008), pp. 767-782
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Xiong et al., 2012
T. Xiong, X. Yan, Z. Xiao, Y. Li, Y. Huang, Y.u. Junchong
Experimental study on flow instability in parallel channels with supercritical water
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 48 (2012), pp. 60-67
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ambrosini, 2011
W. Ambrosini
Assessment of flow stability boundaries in a heated channel with different fluids at supercritical pressure
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 38 (2–3) (2011), pp. 615-627
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Debrah et al., 2013
S.K. Debrah, W. Ambrosini, Y. Chen
Discussion on the stability of natural circulation loops with supercritical pressure fluids
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 54 (2013), pp. 47-57
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Eze et al., 2019
Eze, Chika, Kin Wing Wong, Tobias Gschnaidtne, Cai, J., Jiyun Zhao, 2019. Numerical study of effects of vortex generators on heat transfer deterioration of supercritical water upward flow. Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer 137, 489–505.
Google Scholar
Yang et al., 2020
Zenan Yang, Xiaobo Luo, Wei Chen, Minking K. Chyu
Effects of longitudinal vortex generators on the heat transfer deterioration of supercritical CO2 in vertical tubes
Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 152 (2020), Article 119478
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Luo et al., 2020
Xiaobo Luo, Zenan Yang, Wei Chen, Minking K. Chyu
Effect of lattice structures on heat transfer deterioration of supercritical CO2 in rectangle channels
Numer. Heat Transfer, Part A: Appl. (2020), pp. 1-20
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Xiao et al., 2020
Yao Xiao, Junlong Li, Jian Deng, Xinli Gao, Gu. Hanyang, Jinsong Pan
Study of spacer effects on deteriorated heat transfer of supercritical fluid flow in an annulus
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 123 (2020), Article 103306
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Cheng et al., 2008
Lixin Cheng, Gherhardt Ribatski, John R. Thome
Analysis of supercritical CO2 cooling in macro-and micro-channels
Int. J. Refrig., 31 (8) (2008), pp. 1301-1316
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lei and Chen, 2020
Yuchuan Lei, Zhenqian Chen
Cooling heat transfer and pressure drop of supercritical CO2 in wavy microchannels with consistent and opposite crests and troughs
Int. J. Refrig., 109 (2020), pp. 64-81
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jajja et al., 2020
Sa.ad.A. Jajja, Jessa M. Sequeira, Brian M. Fronk
Geometry and orientation effects in non-uniformly heated microchannel heat exchangers using supercritical carbon dioxide
Exp. Therm Fluid Sci., 112 (2020), Article 109979
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Chen et al., 2015
Lin Chen, Yi-Min Chen, Meng-He Sun, Xin-Rong Zhang
Investigation of trans-critical CO2 horizontal mini-channel flow with multi-peak heat transfer behaviors
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 75 (2015), pp. 559-569
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Liao and Zhao, 2002
S.M. Liao, T.S. Zhao
An experimental investigation of convection heat transfer to supercritical carbon dioxide in miniature tubes
Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 45 (25) (2002), pp. 5025-5034
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jiang et al., 2004
Pei-Xue Jiang, Xu. Yi-Jun, Jing Lv, Run-Fu Shi, Shuisheng He, J.D. Jackson
Experimental investigation of convection heat transfer of CO2 at super-critical pressures in vertical mini-tubes and in porous media
Appl. Therm. Eng., 24 (8–9) (2004), pp. 1255-1270
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jiang et al., 2008
Pei-Xue Jiang, Yu. Zhang, Chen-Ru Zhao, Run-Fu Shi
Convection heat transfer of CO2 at supercritical pressures in a vertical mini tube at relatively low Reynolds numbers
Exp. Therm Fluid Sci., 32 (8) (2008), pp. 1628-1637
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jiang et al., 2013
Pei-Xue Jiang, Bo Liu, Chen-Ru Zhao, Feng Luo
Convection heat transfer of supercritical pressure carbon dioxide in a vertical micro tube from transition to turbulent flow regime
Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 56 (1–2) (2013), pp. 741-749
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
He et al., 2005
He, Shuisheng, Pei-Xue Jiang, Yi-Jun Xu, Run-Fu Shi, Kim, W.S., Jackson, J.D., 2005. A computational study of convection heat transfer to CO2 at supercritical pressures in a vertical mini tube. Int. J. Therm. Sci. 44(6), 521–530.
Google Scholar
Guo et al., 2020
Pengcheng Guo, Shouchun Liu, Jianguo Yan, Junhui Wang, Qiaoling Zhang
Experimental study on heat transfer of supercritical CO2 flowing in a mini tube under heating conditions
Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 153 (2020), Article 119623
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2018
Jianyong Wang, Zhiqiang Guan, Hal Gurgenci, Kamel Hooman, Anand Veeraragavan, Xin Kang
Computational investigations of heat transfer to supercritical CO2 in a large horizontal tube
Energy Convers. Manage., 157 (2018), pp. 536-548
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2018
Jianyong Wang, Zhiqiang Guan, Hal Gurgenci, Ananthanarayanan Veeraragavan, Xin Kang, Yubiao Sun, Kamel Hooman
Numerical study on cooling heat transfer of turbulent supercritical CO2 in large horizontal tubes
Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 126 (2018), pp. 1002-1019
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Xiao et al., 2018
Yao Xiao, Jinsong Pan, Gu. Hanyang
Numerical investigation of spacer effects on heat transfer of supercritical fluid flow in an annular channel
Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 121 (2018), pp. 343-353
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bae et al., 2011
Yoon-Yeong Bae, Hwan-Yeol Kim, Tae Ho Yoo
International journal of heat and fluid flow (2011), pp. 340-351
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gu et al., 2016
Han-Yang Gu, Hu. Zhen-Xiao, Da. Liu, Hong-Bo Li, Meng Zhao, Xu. Cheng
Experimental study on heat transfer to supercritical water in 2× 2 rod bundle with wire wraps
Exp. Therm Fluid Sci., 70 (2016), pp. 17-28
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lemmon et al., 2010
Lemmon, E.W., Huber, M.L., McLinden, M.O., 2010. NIST Standard Reference Database 23, Reference Fluid Thermodynamic and Transport Properties (REFPROP), version 9.0, National Institute of Standards and Technology. R1234yf. fld file dated December 22, 2010.
Google Scholar
Cheng et al., 2007
X. Cheng, B. Kuang, Y.H. Yang
Numerical analysis of heat transfer in supercritical water-cooled flow channels
Nucl. Eng. Des., 237 (3) (2007), pp. 240-252
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yang et al., 2007
Jue Yang, Yoshiaki Oka, Yuki Ishiwatari, Jie Liu, Jaewoon Yoo
Numerical investigation of heat transfer in upward flows of supercritical water in circular tubes and tight fuel rod bundles
Nucl. Eng. Des., 237 (4) (2007), pp. 420-430
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Du et al., 2010
Zhongxuan Du, Wensheng Lin, Gu. Anzhong
Numerical investigation of cooling heat transfer to supercritical CO2 in a horizontal circular tube
J. Supercrit. Fluids, 55 (1) (2010), pp. 116-121
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhu et al., 2014
Xiaojing Zhu, Shinichi Morooka, Yoshiaki Oka
Numerical investigation of grid spacer effect on heat transfer of supercritical water flows in a tight rod bundle
Int. J. Therm. Sci., 76 (2014), pp. 245-257
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lei et al., 2012
Xianliang Lei, Huixiong Li, Yu. Shuiqing, Tingkuan Chen
Numerical investigation on the mixed convection and heat transfer of supercritical water in horizontal tubes in the large specific heat region
Comput. Fluids, 64 (2012), pp. 127-140
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yang, 2016
Mei Yang
Numerical study of the heat transfer to carbon dioxide in horizontal helically coiled tubes under supercritical pressure
Appl. Therm. Eng., 109 (2016), pp. 685-696
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gao and Bai, 2017
Zhigang Gao, Junhua Bai
Numerical analysis on nonuniform heat transfer of supercritical pressure water in horizontal circular tube
Appl. Therm. Eng., 120 (2017), pp. 10-18
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Li et al., 2019
Zhouhang Li, Yecheng Yao, Qinggong Wang, Jingyong Cai, Wu. Yuxin, Hu.a. Wang
Effect of internal helical-rib roughness on mixed convection flow and heat transfer in heated horizontal pipe flow of supercritical water
Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 130 (2019), pp. 1272-1287
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kim et al., 2003
Kim, Seong Hoon, Yong In Kim, Joe, B.H., Yoon Yeong Bae, 2003. Numerical sumulation of the vertical upward flow of water in a heated tube at the supercritical pressure.
Google Scholar
Eter et al., 2017
Ahmad Eter, Dé Groeneveld, Stavros Tavoularis
Convective heat transfer in supercritical flows of CO2 in tubes with and without flow obstacles
Nucl. Eng. Des., 313 (2017), pp. 162-176
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yang et al., 2017
Weihua Yang, Shulin Xue, Yihong He, Wei Li
Experimental study on the heat transfer characteristics of high blockage ribs channel
Exp. Therm Fluid Sci., 83 (2017), pp. 248-259
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Sarper et al., 2018
Bugra Sarper, Mehmet Saglam, Orhan Aydin
Experimental and numerical investigation of natural convection in a discretely heated vertical channel: Effect of the blockage ratio of the heat sources
Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 126 (2018), pp. 894-910
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Eze, Chika, 2020
Eze, Chika, Kwun Ting Lau, Shakeel Ahmad, Nnaemeka Nnamani, Thomas Ferrand, Tobias Gschnaidtner, Christoph Wieland, Jiyun Zhao, 2020. Mitigation of heat transfer deterioration in a circular tube with supercritical CO2 using a novel small-scale multiple vortex generator. Int. J. Therm. Sci. 156, 106481.
Google Scholar
Jackson, 2013
J.D. Jackson
Fluid flow and convective heat transfer to fluids at supercritical pressure
Nucl. Eng. Des., 264 (2013), pp. 24-40
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar