<title>Optimal design of a VVER-1000 nuclear reactor core with dual cooled annular fuel based on the reactivity temperature coefficients using Thermal hydraulic and neutronic analysis by implementing the genetic algorithms </title>
<author>1, R.Kianpour; 2,G.R.Ansarifar, 3, M.Fathi</author>
<Affiliation>Department of Nuclear Engineering, Faculty of Physics, University of Isfahan, Postal Code: 81746-73441, Isfahan, Iran</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107682</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454920303807</URL>
Optimal design of a VVER-1000 nuclear reactor core with dual cooled annular fuel based on the reactivity temperature coefficients using Thermal hydraulic and neutronic analysis by implementing the genetic algorithms
Author links open overlay panelR.KianpourG.R.AnsarifarM.Fathi
Department of Nuclear Engineering, Faculty of Physics, University of Isfahan, Postal Code: 81746-73441, Isfahan, Iran
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Optimal design of a Nuclear Reactor with Annular Fuel is presented.
Reactivity temperature coefficients are calculated with changes of internal radius.
Effects of the fuel inner radius on the reactivity coefficients are investigated.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
One of the approaches which can help the enhancement of a reactor power is changing its fuel geometry. For this purpose, as well as decreasing the maximum fuel temperature in PWR reactors, the technology of annular fuels with ability of internal and external cooling shows its importance and has been considered widely. Such fuels are investigated in western PWR and VVER-1000 reactors. Hence, in this study, this fuel in VVER-1000 reactors are considered and studied thoroughly. In this paper, fuel and coolant reactivity temperature coefficients are calculated for a VVER-1000 Nuclear Reactor with Dual Cooled Annular Fuel with changes of internal radius and different power levels and effects of the fuel internal radius on the reactivity temperature coefficients are investigated. By analyzing the fuel internal radius changes in a specific range in the neutronic code, the effects of effective multiplication factor are investigated.
For purpose of data fitting, an artificial neural network is trained using the observed data. The input consists of different internal and external radiuses, outputs consist of pitch, fuel and coolant reactivity temperature coefficients. Finally, the optimal geometry of fuel is determined using the neural network by implementing the genetic algorithms based on these dynamic-coefficients. In the optimization process, it has been shown that having an internal radius 2.67 mm and external radius 6.95 mm provides an optimal geometry. Also, validation of the designed artificial neural network and genetic algorithm has been done using neutronic and Thermal hydraulic calculations.
Previous articleNext article
Keywords：VVER-1000 nuclear reactorDual cooled annular fuelReactivity temperature coefficientsThermal hydraulic and neutronic analysisGenetic algorithmsOptimal geometry
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Nowadays, most of the nuclear plants use solid fuel rods; one of the major problems during the performance of this type of reactor with this kind of fuel rods is the possibility of melting fuel rods in the central part due to the accumulation of heat. One way to overcome this problem and improve the thermal efficiency of nuclear plants is to use internally and externally cooled annular fuel. So far internally and externally cooled annular fuel has only been investigated in the square assemblies (Kazimi, 2006).
Recently, MIT proposed an internally and externally cooled annular fuel for an advanced PWR (pressurized water reactor), which can endure a substantial power uprating (Kazimi, 2007). The dual-cooled annular fuel has several benefits; the first is that the peak temperature in a fuel pellet can be decreased by the decrease in fuel thickness. Due to an increase in the heated area, the heat flux on the heated surface is decreased, and therefore the MDNBR (Minimum Departure from Nucleate Boiling Ratio) margin can be increased. The heat split ratio between the internal and external surface is significantly affected by the internal and external gap conductance between fuel pellet and cladding (Shin et al., 2012).
Recently, annular fuel rods are proposed for both PWRs and BWRs to achieve more average power density and therefore many neutronic as well as thermal-hydraulics calculations have been made to find more performance in the future reactors. Also, some safety margins are studied for the proposed uranium-nitride (and/or other fissile materials) annular pins. Two important safety coefficient of the annular fuel core are studied. These are “prompt reactivity” and “power coefficients” (Faghihi, 2011). For the first time, fuel and coolant temperature reactivity coefficients are calculated in a VVER-1000 Nuclear Reactor with nanofluid as a coolant, by using different volumetric percentages and sizes of Al2O3 (Alumina) nanoparticle, (Kianpour and Ansarifar, 2019). The calculations showed that annular fuel rods have a sufficient margin available on MDNBR in both internal and outer surfaces relative to solid fuel (Amin Mozafari, 2013). Decrease in the Doppler coefficient (in the next generation annular pins) is a good feature to avoid resonance neutrons absorbing in the U-238 and causes more fission density and also less soluble boron for core controlling (at the BOC) comparing to the current VVER-1000 solid pins (Erfani Nia et al., 2012).
In the nuclear reactor core, some parts of the changes in the reactivity are due to the energy generation that is called reactivity feedback, and is an essential dynamical parameter. Calculation of reactivity temperature coefficients in a nonhomogeneous reactor’s core which consists of fuel (Doppler coefficient) and coolant reactivity temperature coefficients is a very important part of dynamical and safety analysis of a nuclear reactor specially in regards to the designing the control system of the reactor’s core. However, for development of reactors with regard to the safety and economic aspects, the use of dual cooled annular fuels seems to be effective. Indeed, since maximum of the fuel temperature decreases, the safety of the reactor increases (Hetrick, 1965). It is evident that the lower fuel temperature in design of PWR reactors with annular fuel is mainly due to the increase of heat transfer surface exposure to the coolant as well as decreasing the thickness of the heat flow path in annular fuels. The lower fuel temperature also decreases the amount of stored thermal energy in the annular fuel models. In failure cases of the cooling system (such as e.g., LOCA), there are fewer amounts of energy to cool-down the core (Kazimi, 2002).
The amount of the released free gases by diffusion in annular fuel models is smaller than the PWR fuels. In normal cases, the average fuel temperature for regular fuels is 900 K while this number for annular fuels with powers 100% and 150% is 600 K and 800 K respectively. In terms of peak temperature comparison, in regular fuels is 1800 K whereas this number in annular fuels with power of 100% is 900 K (Kazimi et al., 2004).
In this paper, for the first time, Optimal Design of a VVER-1000 Nuclear Reactor Core with Dual Cooled Annular Fuel based on the Reactivity Temperature Coefficients is presented using Thermal hydraulic and Neutronic Analysis.
Indeed, we have used another approach for determining the reactivity feedbacks of the VVER-1000 including dually-cooled fuel rods.
At the first, the effective pitch length for intended fuel rod internal radiuses in VVER-1000 reactors with Dual Cooled Annular Fuel, in cold and clean core condition, is designed using the neutronic calculation codes of WIMS & CITATION. Neutronic calculations showed that effective multiplication factor (keff) of the conventional VVER-1000 reactor in the stated conditions was equal to 1.2706. Suitable internally and externally cooled annular fuel rod is considered and, by regarding the safety measures of negative coolant reactivity temperature coefficients for various pitch lengths and using core and cell neutronic calculation codes, the variation of effective multiplication factor based on the pitch length of this fuel rod is obtained.
By analyzing the fuel internal radius changes in a specific range in the neutronic code, the effects of effective multiplication factor are investigated. The Thermal hydraulic calculations are done by simulation of different internal radiuses of the fuel rod in different power levels via AnsysFluent and AnsysWorkbench. Using results of Thermal hydraulic simulation, the temperature of all parts, including coolant, fuel, clad, and helium (gap) is inserted in the WIMS code and by using the generated cross sections of the WIMS code within the CITATION code, the effective multiplication factor of that specific power is determined and reactivity temperature coefficients have been calculated versus variation of fuel internal radius.
For purpose of data fitting, an artificial neural network is trained in MATLAB using the observed data. The input consists of different internal and external radiuses, and output consist of pitch and fuel and coolant reactivity temperature coefficients.
Finally, the optimal geometry of fuel is determined using the neural network by implementing the genetic algorithms. In the optimization process, it has been shown that having an internal radius 2.67 mm and external radius 6.95 mm provides an optimal geometry. Also, validation of the designed artificial neural network and genetic algorithm has been done using neutronic and Thermal hydraulic calculations.
<Section>2. Materials and methods</Section>
Both neutronic and Thermal hydraulic analysis is needed in order to properly investigate the network pitch and the desired radius for reactivity temperature coefficients in an annular fuel assembly with external and internal cooling ability.
It is considerable that the reference solid fuel rod has a hole in the fuel center in order to satisfy the safety-criteria. Specifications of the Reference Reactor with solid fuel rods are presented in Table1 as follows:
Table 1. Reference Reactor specifications.
Indeed, in order to have equivalent nuclear power of conventional VVER-1000 reactor for the presented VVER-1000 reactor with Dual Cooled Annular Fuel as a designing criterion, we considered the arrangement-8 and changed the internal and external radius in such a way that the reactor was in the under moderated and distance between clad to clad for two adjacent fuel (rod to rod gap) was sufficient to pass the flow and was practical. By keeping the gap thickness (0.008 cm) and clad thickness (0.0685 cm) constant, the internal and external radius changes the fuel surface area is obtained (Ansarifar and Ebrahimian, 2016). And also rod to rod gap can obtain according to pitch, as presented in Table 2.
Table 2. The desired pitches and rod to rod gap proportional to the different internal radiuses.
2.1. Neutronic analysis
A proper criterion is needed for design purposes of an annular fuel assembly. For this matter, we are aiming to design appropriate pitches for the new fuel which satisfies the negative reactivity temperature coefficients (the left hand side of the effective multiplication factor diagram in terms of pitch) and critical status of the VVER-1000 reactor core. It is needed to model the core of VVER-1000 reactor of Conventional VVER-1000 reactor in cold and clean condition and calculate the effective multiplication factor for different internal radius. It should be noted that under cold and clean condition, the temperature of all components of the reactor is 300 K while cooling system is empty of boric acid, and assemblies are without burning poisons.
After determining the appropriate criteria for the design, cell and core calculations are performed several times for different internal radius in different pitches and the effective multiplication factor is plotted in terms of pitch length for each of them. The pitch length that satisfies the uniformity condition the effective multiplication factor (annular fuel designed reactor) with the Bushehr nuclear reactor as well as the negative reactivity temperature coefficient is considered as an appropriate pitch length (Hetrick, 1965).
For performing neutron calculation in the reactor core, reactor simulation is necessary. For this purpose, first step is cell calculation that simulates fuel assemblies in reactor core. The cell calculation is performed in fuel assemblies with different enrichments using the WIMS code.
The first simulation for the Bushehr fuel assemblies was done by the WIMS code and precision purposes the cluster fuel model is used, in a way that the code transmits the neutron transformation equation for the six types of fuel assembly used in the first working cycle. There are 60 radial meshes and it is solved by the DSN method.
2.1.1. WIMS computing code
This code is a deterministic computational tool that is used to calculate neutron flux distribution, infinite and effective multiplication factor, and solves the neutron transport equation in the desired region. The calculated neutron flux is used to obtain the macroscopic cross sections of homogeneous cells in a given energy group structure. Then, macroscopic cross sections are used as group constants of material in the input file of different types of cardiac code.
The calculations of WIMS are according to Fig. 1(Donnelly, 1986). The fuel assembly in the WIMS code is simulated such as shown in Fig. 2. Indeed, Fig. 2 shows a one types of FA-8 (8 fuel rod in each side of fuel assembly) modeled by WIMS code as a sample. Indeed, there are six types of FAs as shown in Fig. 3, which all of these six types of FAs have been modeled in the WIMS code and macroscopic cross-sections for all parts of core, such as fuel assemblies, reflectors, etc., calculated and used in the next step, core calculation, which performs the calculation of neutronic parameters. FA 16 and 24 contains the control rods (CRs), but the other FAs do not. Instead, in FAs 24B20, 24B36 and 36B36; there are 18 BARs (Burnable Absorber Rods). So, WIMS has been used in this paper to create average group- constants for six types of fuel assemblies used for the first operation cycle.
Fig. 1. Simplified flowchart of WIMS calculation.
Fig. 2. The simulated annular fuel assembly-8 using WIMS code.
Fig. 3. A view of the simulated reactor core using CITATION.
2.2. CITATION computing code
The CITATION computational code solves the multi-group neutron diffusion equation by finite difference method. The capabilities of this code include the calculation of neutron flux distribution (power distribution) at the reactor core and the infinite and effective multiplication factor, fuel management calculations, fuel depletion calculations, and disturbance calculations.
The CITATION code solves the multi-group neutron diffusion equation by finite difference method and by using the Successive Over Relaxation (SOR) iterative method (Fowler and Vondy, 1969). A view of the simulated reactor core by the CITATION code is shown in Fig. 3.
Because of the hexagonal shape of the core and the fuel assemblies of the selected reactor in this investigation, the meshing for applying in the diffusion code can be performed using hexagonal or triangular grids. For this type of meshing, the cross section of each fuel assembly is divided into identical divisions, where the number of divisions is related to the calculation accuracy. In our calculations, we have taken of hexagonal mesh grid arrangement. In hexagonal meshing, the considered geometry which is applied in CITATION, input file is same with actual geometry and fits with it, completely. So that, hexagonal fuel assembly was divided into seven hexagonal meshes in the considered model as shown in bellow, in which the area of these seven virtual hexagons is equal to the area of the one real FA.
2.3. Thermal hydraulic analysis
The aim of this portion of this paper is to provide a Thermal hydraulic analysis of hot fuel assembly designed by annular fuel. For this purpose, firstly the equivalent cell is designed and calculated for different internal radius, and then the equivalent cells obtained by computing fluid dynamics simulation (CFD) are analyzed by AnsysFluent and AnsysWorkbench software.
2.3.1. Equivalent cell
For the hexagonal assemblies with the appropriate pitch lengths designed, according to Eq. (2), an equivalent cell was obtained and shown in Fig. 4.
Fig. 4. Equivalent cell in a hexagonal network.
Therefore, for CFD modeling, FA simplified by formulating an equivalent annulus in which the area of the material bounding the cell’s central cylinder is replaced by an annulus that the approximation is an accurate representation of the temperature fields. An equivalent cell of a fuel assembly is a cell that contains a fuel rod and a portion of the total fluid passing through the core, which is the fuel rod’s share (Fig. 4). Triangle sub-channel is considered as hot channel for modelling. The hot channel (Triangle sub-channel) comprises one-sixth of the three fuels. So, it contains half the fuel.
This model has already been used for CFD modeling of dual-cooled annular fuel in the VVER-1000 (Zaidabadi et al., 2017, Ebrahimian and Ansarifar, 2016).
The equivalent cell is dependent on the geometry of the fuel assembly in which the fuel rod is located. Since the geometric shape of the reactor fuel assembly is hexagonal, the following equation is used to calculate the radius of the equivalent cell (Zaidabadi et al., 2017, Ebrahimian and Ansarifar, 2016).
@(1)
In this equation, P is the pitch length and Rcell is the equivalent radius of the cell. Eq. (1) is derived based on that the twice of the area of equilateral triangle in the sub-channel is considered equivalent to the area of the equivalent cell. Because, as mentioned above, hot channel (triangle sub-channel) contains half of a fuel rod.
The differential equations governing the flow, turbulence and heat transfer under the assumptions of steady, incompressible flow are given as follows (White, 1999):
2.3.1.1. Conservation of mass
@(2)
2.3.1.2. Conservation of momentum
@(3)
The stress tensor is given by
@(4)
Where the second term on the right-hand side is the effect of volume dilation. For incompressible flow, [] becomes zero.
2.3.1.3. Conservation of energy
@(5)
Where is the effective conductivity, =, is the turbulent thermal conductivity, defined according to the turbulence model being used. The first three terms on the right-hand side of Eq. (5) represent energy transfer due to conduction, species diffusion, and viscous dissipation respectively.
2.3.1.4. TKE equation
@(6)
2.3.1.5. SDR equation
@(7)
Where, @, @(Sreenivasulu and Prasad, 2009).
2.3.2. The drawing and meshing of the equivalent cell in AnsysWorkbench
AnsysWorkbench is a software platform that combines all the abilities and capabilities of the core solver with product management tools for better project management. Using AnsysWorkbench, you can manage all the processes of the simulation project from start to finish. This bundle includes two powerful software which are DesignModeller and AnsysMeshing that is a geometric modeling tool for constructing assembly models. Considering the equivalent cell and the overall symmetry, only one quarter of the designed equivalent cell is simulated to increase the speed and precision of the problem. Fig. 5 shows the constructed geometry and Fig. 6 shows the meshing in the AnsysWorkbench.
Fig. 5. The constructed geometry in the AnsysWorkbench.
Fig. 6. The meshing in AnsysWorkbench.
The convergence criterion is fixed such that the residual values are acceptable as presented in Fig. 7. The number of grids which satisfies the convergence criterion, was obtained equal to 4106. For this purpose, several numbers of meshes has been investigated and, at 4106, the convergence criterion was satisfied very well, as shown in Fig. 7.
Fig. 7. Residual values with 4106 meshes.
2.3.3. Fluent
Fluent is one of the renowned industrial software companies that has many capabilities in regards to fluid analysis. This software has the ability to model two and three-dimensional streams. In order to use this software, the flow geometry and meshing are determined by other software. Fluent uses mesh output of other software. This software has the ability to perform calculations with regular accuracy or double precision, and which enables the user to select any of them. This software is based on a finite volume method, which is a very powerful method for computational fluid dynamics. Practical experiments and theoretical calculations are two main methods for predicting the amount of heat transfer and how fluid flows in various industrial and research applications.
2.3.3.1. The solving process of this research in Fluent
After constructing and meshing the geometry, the first step in problem analyzing in Fluent is to apply the boundary conditions as well as their initial values after the implementation of the generated geometry in AnsysWorkbench. The boundary conditions used in this research for hot channel are as follows:
1. Input boundary condition: Mass-Flow-inlet
2. Output boundary condition: Pressure-Outlet
3. Surrounding boundaries: Symmetric
Each of the boundary conditions require an initial value for solving the problem. These values are given below (Report, 2003):
Input inflow:
̇
System pressure: 15.73 MPa
Thermal flux: For ten different voltages, ten cosine thermal fluxes are required for generation of cosine thermal flux in Fluent; a UDF (User Defined Function) file should be created by C++.
<Section>3. Results</Section>
3.1. The obtained results of neutronic analysis
One of the objectives of the neutronic analysis is to obtain the pitches of the new fuel rods in a VVER-1000 reactor fuel assembly. In order to achieve this goal, the effective multiplication factor of the Bushehr nuclear reactor is considered in cold and clean core condition (without boric acid, burnable absorber and T = 300 K) as an appropriate criterion. The obtained result for the effective multiplication factor for the Bushehr’s core is 1.2706 (Report, 2003). This effective multiplication factor is considered as the main annular fuel design criterion. Since the VVER-1000 reactor is identical in terms of fuel mass, thermal flux, flow rate, operating pressure and operating temperature with that of Bushehr nuclear reactor, its effective multiplication factor is considered identical with the Bushehr nuclear reactor. In order to obtain the appropriate pitch length for the desired internal radius, necessary changes should apply to the cards in the WIMS code, including ANNULUS, ARRAY and RODSUB cards to obtain their cross section by solving the Transport Equation for CITATION code. By performing the neutron calculations using the CITATION code, by getting the cross section from the WIMS code and solving the diffusion equation, the effective multiplication factor is obtained for each of the internal radius. The effective multiplication factor is plotted in terms of the desired pitch length for the internal radius 0.30 cm as sample (Fig. 8). For the effective multiplication factor 1.2706 in the Cold and Clean condition (the temperature of all components of the reactor is 300 K while cooling system is empty of boric acid, and assemblies are without burning poisons), which is the design criterion, two different values of the pitch length are obtained, but as stated, the design should be in the left region of the diagram (under-moderated), which ensures the negative temperature reactivity coefficient.
Fig. 8. Variation of the core effective multiplication relative to the pitch length of fuel rods for internal radius 0.30 cm.
Indeed, Neutronic calculations showed that effective multiplication factor (Keff) of the conventional VVER-1000 reactor in the Cold and Clean conditions was equal to 1.2706. Suitable internally and externally cooled annular fuel rod whose specifications are given in Table 1 was considered and, by regarding the safety measures of negative temperature feedback of the moderator reactivity for various pitch lengths and using core and cell neutronic calculation codes, the variation of effective multiplication coefficient based on the pitch length of this fuel rod was obtained, as shown in Fig. 8.
For each of the studied internal radius, the related pitches for each of them have been calculated same as above procedure which are presented in Table 2.
The dimensions of internally and externally cooled annular fuel rods whose specifications are given in Table 2 were considered with the assumption, in order to have equivalent nuclear power of conventional VVER-1000 reactor for the presented VVER-1000 reactor with Dual Cooled Annular Fuel as a designing criterion, we considered the arrangement-8 and changed the internal and external radius in such a way that the reactor was in the under moderated and distance between clad to clad for two adjacent fuel (rod to rod gap) was sufficient to pass the flow and was practical.
According to Table 2, it is concluded that with increasing the annular fuel internal radius, the length of the pitches also increases. This statement is evident in Fig. 9.
Fig. 9. Pitch changes with increase of annular fuel internal radius.
Also, the infinite multiplication factor in the Clean and Cold conditions versus the internal radius and pitch has been calculated and shown as a 3D diagram in the above figure Fig. 10, Fig. 11, Fig. 12, Fig. 13, Fig. 14.
Fig. 10. Infinite multiplication factor versus pitch-length and internal radius.
Fig. 11. Logarithmic variation of the effective multiplication factor in terms of fuel temperature, R = 0.30 cm.
Fig. 12. Variation of the Reactivity in terms of fuel temperature, R = 0.30 cm.
Fig. 13. Logarithmic variation of the effective multiplication factor in terms of coolant temperature, R = 0.30 cm.
Fig. 14. Variation of the reactivity in terms of coolant temperature, R = 0.30 cm.
Besides, according to the Table 2, it is concluded that with increasing the annular fuel internal radius, the length of the pitches also increases. Therefore, non-leakage Probability increases and since, Keff in Clean and Cold conditions is constant as design criterion, Infinite multiplication factor (Kinf) decreases with increasing the annular fuel internal radius.
3.2. The obtained results of Thermal hydraulic analysis
The main aim of the Thermal hydraulic analysis in this study is obtain the distribution of fuel temperature as well as the coolant. In this section, the geometries that were used in the previous section in regards to the neutronic analysis should be investigated in terms of thermal hydraulic aspect. For this purpose, geometries were simulated using AnsysFluent and AnsysWorkbench. However, since our objective in this research is to study fuel and coolant reactivity temperature coefficients, only these two results are reported in this section. Although, in the WIMS code, the temperature of all parts, including coolant, fuel, clad, and helium (gap) is inserted, and by using the generated cross sections of the WIMS code within the CITATION code, the effective multiplication factor of that specific power is determined.
3.2.1. Fuel and coolant reactivity temperature coefficients
In order to obtain these coefficients, we must obtain the fuel and coolant temperature for every geometry in different powers. Fuel is the first part that senses the change in power (temperature) and this temperature change is instantaneous. But other components (coolant, clad, and gap) are delayed by this temperature change. Then, the fuel temperature increases with increasing power and the temperature of the other components is maintained at a temperature proportional to 10% power and so, proportional multiplication factors are obtained in Table 3. Then keep the fuel temperature at a temperature proportional to 10% and increase the temperature of the other components. So, proportional multiplication factors are obtained in Table 4. Hence, for all geometries, the fuel and coolant temperatures for every power of simulation are obtained and by placing these temperatures values in the WIMS, and subsequently using the given output by WIMS in the CITATION code, the effective multiplication factor is determined. By obtaining the fuel and coolant temperature of every power of every internal radius, it is possible to plot a logarithmic variation of the effective multiplication factor (Eqs. (8), (9)) or variation of reactivity (Eqs. (10), (11)) in terms of average fuel and coolant temperature. The slope of these equations are fuel and coolant reactivity temperature coefficients. These two values lead to same parameter and finally can compare these two values as follows:
@(8)
@(9)
Table 3. The effective multiplication factor obtained by CITATION at Tc = 565.38 K and different fuel temperature for internal radius of 0.30 cm.
or
@(10)
@(11)
ρ is total core reactivity and equal to  @.
The numerical results obtained by the simulations are presented in Table 3, Table 4, for internal radius of 0.30 cm interest as sample.
The logarithmic variations of the effective multiplication factor of the reactor core in terms of fuel and coolant temperature are presented in below.
For internal radius of 0.30 cm, the fuel reactivity temperature coefficients are calculated as follows:
y = -1.19081E-06x + 0.0882
@
The other method for calculate the fuel reactivity temperature coefficient is:
y = -1.0913E-06x + 0.0844
@
The absolute error of these two methods is equal= |-1.19081E-06 - |-1.0913E-06|
= 9.9519E-08
For internal radius of 0.30 cm, the coolant temperature reactivity coefficients are calculated as follows:
y = -9.856E-05x + 0.1377
@
The other method for calculate the coolant reactivity temperature coefficient is:
y = -7.46128E-05E-05x + 0.1298
@
The absolute error of these two methods is equal= |-9.856E-05| - |-7.46128E-05| =
= 2.39472E-05
Table 5 presents all of the fuel and coolant reactivity temperature coefficients for designed geometries.
Table 5. Fuel and coolant reactivity temperature coefficients in terms of internal radius of the annular fuel.
In below Figures, the fuel and coolant reactivity temperature coefficients with two methods are shown, respectively, in terms of the internal radius of the annular fuel.
The fuel reactivity temperature coefficient (Doppler coefficient) depends on two main elements fuel temperature and moderating power which both of them depend on the fuel geometry. Its behaviour is presented in Fig. 15, Fig. 16 which show that, with increasing of the internal radius, at the first, fuel reactivity temperature coefficient becomes more negative because, amount of heat removal from the fuel increases, so, the fuel temperature decreases. Therefore, the fuel reactivity temperature coefficient becomes more negative since the fuel temperature coefficient is inversely related to the fuel temperature (Hetrick, 1965). Then, by increasing the internal radius by more than 0.25 (cm), fuel reactivity temperature coefficient decreases due to increase the moderating power and resonance escape probability factor.
Fig. 15. Fuel reactivity temperature coefficients (∂Lnk/∂TF) in term of internal radius.
Fig. 16. Fuel reactivity temperature coefficients /ρ∂)∂TF) in term of internal radius.
Also, it is found that by more increasing the internal radius, fuel reactivity temperature coefficient becomes more negative, which is due to the more increasing of the pitch-lattice relative to the mean free-path and reduction of the fission rate in the core which leads to reduction of the fuel temperature. However, in the case of annular fuel, the effect of geometry has a more effect on the Doppler coefficient in comparison to the solid fuel. Therefore, with variations in the internal radius, an irregular behaviour in the fuel reactivity temperature coefficient occurs.
According to the Fig. 17, Fig. 18, coolant reactivity temperature coefficient, at the first, increases with increasing internal radius. Indeed, coolant reactivity temperature coefficient depends on the coolant temperature and moderating power which both of them depend on the fuel geometry. At the first, with increasing internal radius amount of heat removal from the fuel increases, so, the coolant temperature increases. Therefore, the coolant reactivity temperature coefficient becomes more negative since moderating reduces. Then, by increasing the internal radius, coolant reactivity temperature coefficient decreases. Because, the heterogeneity effects of the core strengthened by increasing the internal radius and consequently, by increasing the heterogeneity, the resonance escape probability factor also increases which leads to increase of the moderating power. Therefore, slowing the neutrons is done easier by increasing the internal radius. As a result, magnitude of the coolant reactivity temperature coefficient decreases. In some cases increasing the internal radius, increases the amount of heat removal from the fuel and coolant temperature, so, the coolant reactivity temperature coefficient becomes more negative. Therefore, with variations in the internal radius, an irregular behaviour in the coolant reactivity temperature coefficient occurs.
Fig. 17. Coolant reactivity temperature coefficients (∂Lnk/∂Tc) in term of internal radius.
Fig. 18. Coolant reactivity temperature coefficients /ρ∂)∂Tc) in term of internal radius.
3.3. Artificial neural network
Using a written neural network program in the MATLAB software, a neural network was created with a transfer function tan-sigmoid with 2 neurons in the hidden layer and a linear transfer function with 2 neurons in the layer output. Different transfer functions can be used for fitting, but sigmoid transfer functions have a certain reputation. Fig. 19 shows the designated neural network for training.
Fig. 19. Neural network designated for training.
The input consists of different internal and external radiuses and output consists of pitch, fuel and coolant reactivity temperature coefficients.
The network is used by default using the Levenberg – Marquardt Algorithm as the learning function. The algorithm is intelligently designed to reduce the neural network error and converge the output of the network to the target set for it.
Additionally, input vectors are randomly divided into three sets:
•70 percent of the data in the training set.
•15 percent of the data in the evaluation set to prevent overfitting the network.
•15 percent of the data in the test set to check the network's final performance.
The neural network uses training data from training data from evaluation data and after training uses test data to regulate neurons.
3.3.1. Network performance
Regarding the settings applied to the program, the training routine stops if the evaluation set error increases in 18 consecutive increments. In Fig. 20 network performance diagram for educational errors, evaluation, and tests indicate that the stop has occurred in step 18. Checking the diagram shows:
Fig. 20. Network Performance Diagram.
3.3.2. Network regression
For statistical analysis of the network, the regression between target and output data is investigated. Fig. 21 shows the regression diagram for educational, evaluation, testing, and ultimately the total data.
Fig. 21. Network Regression.
3.3.3. Genetic algorithm
Every optimization problem follows a specific goal. In other words, solving an optimization problem involves finding solutions that maximize the profit variables while minimizing the loss variables, which is called the cost function. Therefore, an appropriate criterion should be considered in order to find the optimal response. At the beginning of solving any optimization problem, by determining the cost function appropriate to that problem, the suitability of each population is also determined. The next steps of solving, including the selection of parents will continue.
Indeed, Genetic Algorithm (GA) flowchart is demonstrated in Fig. 22 (Simon, 2013, Yang, 2014).
Fig. 22. GA flowchart.
The different termination criteria are as follows:
i)
When there has been no improvement in the population for X iterations.
ii)
When we reach an absolute number of generations.
iii)
When the objective function value has reached a certain pre-defined value
The chromosomes representation in the GA in this work is used in the real numbers field with certain modifications, namely real-coded GA.
The goal of optimization process is to minimize or maximize an objective function. For this purpose, the objective function is called with the cost/error and fitness/profit functions, on problems related to minimization and maximization respectively.
Parent selection methods are as follows:
i)
Roulette Wheel Selection
ii)
Stochastic Universal Sampling
iii)
Tournament selection
iv)
Rank selection
v)
Random selection
In a roulette wheel selection, the circular wheel is divided as described before. A fixed point is chosen on the wheel circumference and the wheel is rotated. The region of the wheel, which comes in front of the fixed point, is chosen as the parent. For the second parent, the same process is repeated.
Stochastic Universal Sampling is quite similar to Roulette wheel selection; however, instead of having just one fixed point, we have multiple fixed points. Therefore, all the parents are chosen in just one spin of the wheel. Also, such a setup encourages the highly fit individuals to be chosen at least once.
In K-Way tournament selection, we select K individuals from the population at random and select the best out of these to become a parent. The same process is repeated for selecting the next parent. Tournament Selection is also extremely popular in literature as it can even work with negative fitness values.
Rank Selection also works with negative fitness values and is mostly used when the individuals in the population have very close fitness values. This leads to each individual having an almost equal share of the pie (like in case of fitness proportionate selection) and hence each individual no matter how fit relative to each other has an approximately same probability of getting selected as a parent. This in turn leads to a loss in the selection pressure towards fitter individuals, making the GA to make poor parent selections in such situations. Every individual in the population is ranked according to their fitness. The selection of the parents depends on the rank of each individual and not the fitness. The higher ranked individuals are preferred more than the lower ranked ones.
In the random number strategy, parents are selected randomly from the existing population. There is no selection pressure towards fitter individuals and therefore this strategy is usually avoided.
In this work, Roulette Wheel Selection (RWS) method is used based on cost. In this method parent selection is done regarding to the uniform probability density function (Pi) of individuals (Do and Nguyen, 2007, Montes et al., 2004).
Assume  is a sample random variable related to selected parents, and npop is the number of initial population. One of the following equations can be used as a probability density function (Pi):
@(12)
@(13)
@(14)
Where, C: cost of individuals; β: selection pressure (positive number); : arbitrary small number. If β = 0, the probability of individual selection is equal; and if β→∞, just the best individual is chosen. In this work, the value of β is selected as an adaptive parameter in each iteration. The steps of RWS method are as follows:
i)@
ii)@
iii)@
The arithmetic crossover procedure is implemented on crossover of real numbers. Generation rate of mutated number is according to the normal (Gaussian) or the Cauchy distributions (Chellapilla, 1998, Rudolph, 1997).
In this paper, the sum of the two reactivity temperature coefficients squares is used as cost function (objective function) as follows:
@（15)
In this paper, regarding to the parameters used in the cost function (objective function), GA takes the values of system inputs (internal and external radius) and outputs (pitch, fuel and coolant reactivity temperature coefficients). Then, the best value of the internal radius based on maximization the cost function (Eq. (15)) is selected in each iteration. This procedure is repeated, until the cost (objective) function is converged or termination criteria are achieved.
In order to analyze the performance of the genetic algorithm, a parameter called the Number of Function Evaluation (NFE) is considered. Using this parameter, we can examine the performance of the algorithm in reaching the optimal answer. Fig. 23 shows that with increasing the number of calls to this function, the value of the expense function is increasing, which expresses the efficiency and accuracy of the function of the written genetic algorithm.
Fig. 23. Changes in the cost function in terms of the number of function evaluation.
For this cost function, the fuel and coolant reactivity temperature coefficients are generated in Table 6.
Table 6. Optimal internal radius and reactivity temperature coefficients derived from the genetic algorithm (GA).
In this section, using the results obtained from the GA in the previous section, a new annular fuel with an optimal internal and external radius has been designed. The effective multiplication factor graph in terms of pitch for optimal internal radius 0.267 cm and external radius 0.695 cm is shown in Fig. 24.
Fig. 24. The effective multiplication factor graph of optimal internal and external radius in terms of pitch.
Indeed, cell and core calculations are performed for optimal internal radius in different pitches and the effective multiplication factor is plotted in terms of pitch length. After determining the appropriate criteria for the design, appropriate pitch for the optimal internal radius is obtained as Table 7.
Table 7. The appropriate pitch for the optimal internal radius.
3.4.1. Validation
After optimal design of the annular fuel assembly, in order to validate the designed artificial neural network and genetic algorithm, fuel and coolant reactivity temperature coefficients are calculated in optimal geometry using neutronic and Thermal hydraulic simulations, as described in sec. 3.2.1 Fig. 25, Fig. 26, Fig. 27, Fig. 28.
Fig. 25. Logarithmic variation of the effective multiplication factor in terms of the average fuel temperature.
Fig. 26. Variation of the reactivity in terms of the average fuel temperature in optimal internal radius.
Fig. 27. Logarithmic variation of the effective multiplication factor in terms of average coolant temperature.
Fig. 28. Variation of the reactivity in terms of average coolant temperature in optimal internal radius.
The results of changes in the core multiplication factor in terms of average fuel and coolant temperature for optimal internal radius (2.67 mm) are presented in Table 8, Table 9.
Table 8. The effective multiplication factor obtained by CITATION at TC = 565.72 K and different coolant temperature for optimal internal radius of 0.267 cm.
Table 9. The effective multiplication factor obtained by CITATION at TF = 584.3752 K and different coolant temperature for optimal internal radius of 0.267 cm.
For optimal internal radius of 0.267 cm, the fuel reactivity temperature coefficients are calculated as follows:
y = -4.06802E-06 ×  + 0.0579
@
The other method for calculating the fuel reactivity temperature coefficient is:
y = -2.1874E-05x + 0.0562
@
For optimal internal radius of 0.267 cm, the coolant temperature reactivity coefficient is calculated as follows:
y = -2.25839E-04x + 0.0933
@
The other method for calculate the coolant reactivity temperature coefficient is:
y = -2.36377E-04x + 0.1242
@
The relative errors of reactivity temperature coefficients in optimal geometry derived from the genetic algorithm (GA) is reported in the following table:
Comparing Table 6 with Table 10 confirms that reactivity temperature coefficients in optimal geometry derived from using neutronic and Thermal hydraulic simulations are agreeing with these dynamical coefficients obtained from GA very well. This indicates validity of the designed artificial neural network and genetic algorithm Table 11.
Table 10. Fuel and coolant reactivity temperature coefficients in optimal geometry derived from neutronic calculations.
Table 11. Relative error magnitude resulting from the optimization validation.
<Section>4. Conclusion</Section>
Considering the benefits of the dual-cooled annular fuel, in this paper, fuel and coolant reactivity temperature coefficients in a VVER-1000 Nuclear Reactor with Dual Cooled Annular Fuel were calculated with changes of internal radius and different power levels. Indeed, for the first time, optimal design of a VVER-1000 Nuclear Reactor Core with Dual Cooled Annular Fuel based on the Reactivity Temperature Coefficients was presented in this paper using Thermal hydraulic and Neutronic Analysis. At the first, the pitch length for intended fuel rod internal radiuses in VVER-1000 reactors with Dual Cooled Annular Fuel, in cold and clean core condition, was designed using the neutronic calculation codes (WIMS and CITATION). Then, Thermal hydraulic calculations were done and average fuel and coolant temperatures were obtained. By obtaining the fuel and coolant temperature of every power of every radius, logarithmic variations of the effective multiplication factor in terms of average temperature of fuel and coolant were presented and Reactivity Feedback Temperature Coefficients have been calculated versus variation of fuel internal radius.
Results indicated that, in the case of annular fuel, the effect of geometry has a more effect on the fuel (Doppler) and coolant temperature coefficients in comparison to the solid fuel. Therefore, with variations in the internal radius, an irregular behaviour in the fuel and coolant reactivity temperature coefficients occurs.
Finally, the optimal geometry of fuel was determined using the neural network by implementing the genetic algorithms. In the optimization process, it has been shown that having an internal radius 2.67 mm and external radius 6.95 mm provides an optimal geometry based on the Reactivity Temperature Coefficients. Also, validation of the designed artificial neural network and genetic algorithm has been done using neutronic and Thermal hydraulic calculations which show that there is an acceptable convergence between the results of the genetic algorithm and the neutronic calculations which indicates the authenticity of the neural network and the calculation of the genetic algorithm.
There are many other neutronics as well as thermal-hydraulics constraints for core designing of the dually-cooled fuel rods. But, in the current article, a few of those are verified.
<Section>5. Contributions:</Section>
•For the first time, optimal design of a VVER-1000 Nuclear Reactor Core with Dual Cooled Annular Fuel based on the Reactivity Temperature Coefficients is presented
•Fuel and coolant reactivity temperature coefficients are calculated for a VVER-1000 Nuclear Reactor with Dual Cooled Annular Fuel with changes of internal radius and different power levels
•Effects of the fuel inner radius on the reactivity temperature coefficients are investigated.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Appendix A. Supplementary data</Section>
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:
<Section>References</Section>
Kazimi, 2006
M.S. Kazimi, et al.
“High Performance Fuel Design for Next Generation PWRs: Final Report, MIT-NFC-PR-082”, Center for
Advanced Nuclear Energy Systems (CANES) (2006)
Google Scholar
Kazimi, 2007
M.S. Kazimi
Introduction to the annular fuel special issue
Nucl. Technol., 160 (1) (2007), pp. 2-15
Google Scholar
Shin et al., 2012
Chang-Hwan Shin, Tae-Hyun Chun, Dong-Seok Oh, Wang- Kee In,“ Thermal hydraulic performance assessment of dual-cooled annular nuclear fuel for OPR-1000”, Nuclear Engineering and Design, 243, 291– 300, (2012)
Google Scholar
Faghihi and M. , 2011
F. Faghihi, M. Saidi nezhad
Two safety coefficients for a typical 13*13 annular fuel assembly
Prog Nuclear Energy, 53 (2011), pp. 250-254
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kianpour and Ansarifar, 2019
R. Kianpour, G.R. Ansarifar
Assessment of the nano-fluid effects on the thermal reactivity feedback coefficients in the VVER-1000 nuclear reactor with nano-fluid as a coolant using thermal hydraulic and neutronics analysis
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 133 (2019), pp. 623-636
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Amin Mozafari and F. , 2013
M. Amin Mozafari, F.
Faghihi, “ Design of annular fuel for a typical VVER-1000 core: Neutronic investigation, pitch optimization and MDNBR calculation”
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 60 (2013), pp. 226-234
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Erfani Nia et al., 2012
A. Erfani Nia, F. Faghihi, K. Hadad
Prompt and power reactivity coefficients for the next generation VVER-1000 reactor including hexagonal assemblies and annular fuels
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 61 (2012), pp. 41-47
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hetrick, 1965
David Hetrick
“Dynamic of nuclear reactor”, The
University of Chicago press (1965)
Google Scholar
Kazimi, 2002
M.S. Kazimi
High Performance Fuel Design for Next Generation PWRs Annul Report
MIT Nuclear Energy Department (2002)
Google Scholar
Kazimi et al., 2004
M.S. Kazimi., D, Feng., Y, Yuan., P, Hejzlar., H, Feinroth., B, Hao., E. J., Lahoda., H, Hamilton., “The Design and Manufacturing of Annular Fuel for High Power Density and Improved Safety in PWRs“, Florida: International Meeting on LWR Fuel Performance, September 19-22, 2004.
Google Scholar
Ansarifar and Ebrahimian, 2016
G.R. Ansarifar, M. Ebrahimian
Design and neutronic investigation of the Nano fluids application to VVER-1000 nuclear reactor with dual cooled annular fuel
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 87 (2016), pp. 39-47
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Donnelly , 1986
J. Donnelly, “WIMS-CRNL: A user's manual for the Chalk River version of WIMS”, 1986.
Google Scholar
Fowler and Vondy, 1969
T. Fowler, D. Vondy, “NUCLEAR REACTOR CORE ANALYSIS CODE: CITATION”, Oak Ridge National Lab, Tenn.1969.
Google Scholar
Zaidabadi et al., 2017
M. Zaidabadi, G.R. Ansarifar, M.H. Esteki
Thermal hydraulic analysis of VVER-1000 nuclear reactor with dual-cooled annular fuel using K–ω SST Turbulence model
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 101 (2017), pp. 118-127
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ebrahimian and Ansarifar, 2016
M. Ebrahimian, G.R. Ansarifar
Investigation of the Nano fluid effects on heat transfer characteristics in Nuclear Reactors with dual cooled annular fuel using CFD (Computational Fluid Dynamics) Modeling
Energy, 98 (2016), pp. 1-14
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
White, 1999
F.M. White
Fluid Mechanics, fourth edition
McGraw-Hill, New York (1999)
Google Scholar
Sreenivasulu and Prasad, 2009
T. Sreenivasulu, B.V.S.S.S. Prasad
Flow and heat transfer characteristics in an annulus wrapped with a helical wire
Int. J. Therm. Sci., 48 (2009), pp. 1377-1391
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Report, 2003
Final Safety Analysis Report of Conventional VVER-1000 reactor , Chapter 4, Reactor, 2003.
Google Scholar
Simon, 2013
D. Simon
Evolutionary optimization algorithms
John Wiley & Sons (2013)
Google Scholar
Yang, 2014
X.-S. Yang
Nature-inspired optimization algorithms
Elsevier (2014)
Google Scholar
Do and Nguyen, 2007
B.Q. Do, L.P. Nguyen
Application of a genetic algorithm to the fuel reload optimization for a research reactor
Appl. Math. Comput., 187 (2) (2007), pp. 977-988
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Montes et al., 2004
J.L. Montes, J.J. Ortiz, I. Requena, R.
Perusquía”, Searching for full power control rod patterns in a boiling water reactor using genetic algorithms”
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 31 (16) (2004), pp. 1939-1954
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chellapilla, 1998
K. Chellapilla
Combining mutation operators in evolutionary programming
IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., 2 (3) (1998), pp. 91-96
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Rudolph, 1997
G. Rudolph
Local convergence rates of simple evolutionary algorithms with Cauchy mutations
IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., 1 (4) (1997), pp. 249-258
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar