<title>Theoretical study of steady-state characteristics of natural circulation system</title>
<author>1,GongleSong,2,DiWu,3,RuleiSun,4,YuLiang,5,DalinZhang,6,JianDeng,7,GuanghuiSu,8,WenxiTian,9,SuizhengQiu</author>
<Affiliation>1,School of Nuclear Science and Technology, Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Advanced Nuclear Energy and Technology, State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, China;2,Science and Technology on Reactor System Design Technology Laboratory, Nuclear Power Institute of China, Chengdu 610041, China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107663</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454920303613</URL>
Theoretical study of steady-state characteristics of natural circulation system
GongleSong,DiWu,RuleiSun,YuLiang,DalinZhang,JianDeng,GuanghuiSu,WenxiTian,SuizhengQiu
School of Nuclear Science and Technology, Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Advanced Nuclear Energy and Technology, State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, China
Science and Technology on Reactor System Design Technology Laboratory, Nuclear Power Institute of China, Chengdu 610041, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
The conservation equations are established for the natural circulation system.
A set of constitutive models are obtained to solve thermal hydraulic parameters.
The modular modeling is universal for systems with different structures.
Mass flow increases with heat flux increasing and inlet subcooling decreasing.
The influence of phase change depends on the structural characteristics.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
In this paper, the conservation equations of mass, momentum and energy are established for the natural circulation system. A complete set of constitutive models for solving the steady-state thermal hydraulic parameters are obtained including heat conduction, condenser, pipe, pressurizer, system flow and other auxiliary modules. For calculating natural circulation systems with different structures conveniently, the modular modeling method is adopted. By comparing with the data of different experiments, it proves that modular modeling is universal for systems with different structures, and the correctness of the process of model establishment and model solution is also proved. It is found that the mass flow would increase with the increase of heat flux and the decrease of inlet subcooling of test section. The influence of phase change on the mass flow depended on the structural characteristics of the system. The appearance of two-phase not only increases the driving force of natural circulation system, but also increases the flow resistance. When the increase of driving force is dominant, the appearance of two-phase will further increase the mass flow. Otherwise, the two-phase flow will hinder the increase of mass flow and may even cause its decrease. For the structural design of natural circulation system, the introduction of large form resistance should be avoided as far as possible so as to avoid the establishment of natural circulation process hindered by two-phase flow. The steady-state model of natural circulation system established in this paper has laid a good foundation for the following transient studies and is of great significance.
Keywords:Natural circulation;Steady-state characteristics;Homogeneous flow;Theoretical study;Modular modeling
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Natural circulation system is mainly composed of heat source and cold source. Working fluid in a closed loop absorbs heat from the heat source, and the temperature of the working fluid decreases when heat is transferred to the cold source. Because the temperatures of the working fluid at the heat source and the cold source are different, the density will also change correspondingly. When there is a height difference between the heat source and the cold source, the buoyancy and gravity drive the flow of the working fluid, and then the natural circulation is established.
As the simple structure, natural circulation has been widely used in nuclear reactors, transformers, steam turbines, internal combustion engines, solar energy applications and other cooling related fields (Japikse, 1973, Zvirin, 1982, Greif, 1988).
In the field of nuclear energy, especially in the field of nuclear reactor accident analysis, natural cycle has been widely concerned by researchers (Yuanyuan et al., 2012, Liu et al., 2016, Gnanadhas et al., 2011, Oh et al., 2012).
After power failure or scram due to main pump jamming, natural circulation will be established rapidly in nuclear power plant. In this condition, core residual heat removal has always been the most important safety issue for large-scale reactors.
The Fukushima nuclear accident in Japan has raised the importance of this issue to an unprecedented level. The continuous development of nuclear power technology has put forward higher requirements on the two contradictory aspects of safety and economy. How to ensure the natural circulation of the core has sufficient cooling capacity for the cladding and fuel under the conditions of high power density and compact core structure depends on the deep understanding of the natural circulation characteristics of the core by the researchers.
On the research of natural circulation system, some researchers focus on the flow stability of the system (Shitzer et al., 1979, Wissler et al., 1956, Bau and Torrance, 1981, Creveling et al., 1975, Mertol et al., 1981, Zvirin and Greif, 1979, Jain et al., 1966), and some researchers focus on the flow and heat transfer characteristics under motion conditions (Kim and Park, 2001, Murata et al., 1999, Murata et al., 2002, Ishida et al., 1990, Ishida and Yoritsune, 2002, Kim and Park, 1996), and have achieved fruitful results. The research methods of natural circulation system include theoretical research and experimental research. The theoretical study of natural circulation systems generally adopts the one-dimensional method, following the classic theory of buoyancy-driven flow (Rayleigh, 1916, Gebhart, 1973, Ostrach, 2005).
Our team has conducted a lot of research on natural circulation during nuclear reactor accident (Feng et al., 2019, Wang et al., 2013, Wang et al., 2012) and has accumulated profound theoretical experiences. Based on these theoretical experiences and the theory of buoyancy-driven flow, the modular modeling has been used in this paper to separately model different components of the natural circulation system. By freely combining different components, the natural circulation systems with different structures can be simulated and calculated.
<Section>2. Theoretical model</Section>
The model of the natural circulation system established in this paper (as shown in Fig. 1), includes test section, condenser, preheater, pressurizer, control valve, pipes and measuring instruments. For natural circulation systems with different structures, corresponding components could be selected according to actual needs, which made the natural circulation system model established in this paper have a strong applicability.
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of natural circulation system.
In order to simplify the modeling and its solving process, the following reasonable assumptions were made.
@(1)
Both the test section and the preheater were uniformly electrically heated.
@(2)
The condenser was a coaxial cylindrical heat exchanger, which was composed of a heat transfer tube and a shell-side sleeve. In the natural circulation system, the fluid heated by the test section entered the condenser, and heat was reversely exchanged with the secondary side fluid through the tube wall. After being cooled, the fluid flowed back to the test section through the descending section.
@(3)
All pipes were covered with insulation material, so the natural convective heat transfer between the pipe parts and the outside air could be ignored.
@(4)
The nitrogen pressurizer was divided into a nitrogen zone and a water zone, and the mass exchange between the two zones was ignored.
@(5)
The total volume of the pressurizer was unchanged.
@(6)
The pressure in the nitrogen and water zones was the same.
@(7)
The physical properties of the nitrogen and water zones didn’t change with space position.
2.1. Field equations
The thermal hydraulic state of the fluid could be characterized by parameters such as enthalpy (temperature), pressure, flow rate, and density. These parameters followed the basic laws of conservation of mass, momentum, and energy. And a one-dimensional fluid thermal hydraulic model was used in this paper to solve the parameters of the fluid.
Both single-phase and two-phase operating conditions might occur in the natural circulation system. In order to comprehensively consider the single-phase and two-phase, a homogeneous flow model was used in the two-phase region, so the field equations in single-phase region and two-phase region had the same form, which could be solved by the same method.
The field equations of the single-phase region could be expressed as follows (Su and Qiu, 2013).
Mass conservation equation:
@(2-1)
Momentum conservation equation:
@(2-2)
Energy conservation equation:
@(2-3)
The field equations of the two-phase region was the same as that of the single-phase region, but the following parameters in equations to (2–3) needed to be changed
@(2-4)
@(2-5)
@(2-6)
And the friction term in equation was @
2.2. Tube wall heat conduction
According to assumption (1) and ignoring the radial differences of the tube wall, the heat transfer equations of the test section and the preheater could be obtained from the energy conservation using the lumped parameter method.
@(2-7)
2.3. Condenser
According to assumption (2), the tube wall of the condenser was not only the pressure boundary of the natural circulation system and the secondary side, but also the heat transfer medium between the primary fluid and the secondary fluid of the condenser. Since the heat transfer tube wall of the condenser was very thin, the change of the wall temperature in the radial direction could be ignored, so the lumped parameter method was used to derive from the Fourier heat conduction equation
@(2-8)
For the primary fluid of the condenser
@(2-9)
For the secondary fluid of the condenser
@(2-10)
2.4. Pipes
Under the premise of assumption (3), the pipes referred to the components in the natural circulation system that were used to connect the various components of the system without heat exchange. The natural circulation system consisted of a large number of pipes, including rising hot pipe sections, horizontal hot pipe sections, descending cold pipe sections and horizontal cold pipe sections.
The energy conservation equation of the fluid in the pipes could be written as
@(2-11)
To improve the calculation accuracy, a plurality of control volumes could be divided in the axial direction of the pipes to obtain a more accurate axial temperature distribution.
2.5. Pressurizer
In order to make the model in this paper applicable to natural circulation systems under different pressure conditions, a pressurizer model was set up to control the system pressure. A nitrogen pressurizer model was introduced, and it was composed of a nitrogen pressurizer body, a nitrogen tank and a wave tube. Based on assumptions (4)-(7), the mass and energy conservation equations were established for the nitrogen and water regions, respectively.
2.5.1. Water zone
The specific volume of the fluid in the system could be expressed as a function of pressure and enthalpy
@(2-12)
According to the conservation of mass, the fluctuating water flow of the pressurizer was the sum of the flow fluctuations of the control volumes in the circuit
@(2-13)
According to the conservation of energy
@(2-14)
In the above formula, the enthalpy of the fluctuating water depended on whether it was positive or negative. For positive fluctuations, it was the enthalpy value of the outlet of the test section. And for negative fluctuations, it was the enthalpy value of the water zone of the pressurizer.
In the PWR nuclear power system, the water level of the regulator was a very important parameter. Many control and regulation systems of the primary loop system were related to the water level of the pressurizer (Mengmeng, 2018). The water level of the pressurizer could be expressed as
@(2-15)
Then the water level equation of the pressurizer was
@(2-16)
2.5.2. Nitrogen zone
Since the nitrogen region was a closed system, its mass conservation equation was
@(2-17)
According to conservation of energy
@(2-18)
The pressure of nitrogen could be expressed as a function of temperature and specific volume
@(2-19)
Then the pressure equation in the nitrogen zone was
@(2-20)
To solve the thermodynamic parameters of the nitrogen zone, the temperature or volume equation of the nitrogen zone needed to be obtained. According to assumption (5), the volume change in the nitrogen zone was opposite to the volume change in the water zone
@(2-21)
Equations (2–14) (2–17) (2–20) could be summarized as follows
@(2-22)
@(2-23)
@(2-24)
@(2-25)
@(2-26)
@(2-27)
2.6. System flow
The natural circulation system was different from the forced circulation system driven by the pump. It relied on the density difference between the hot and cold sections of the system to provide the driving head. The flow rate of the entire system was determined by the resistance and the driving head of the natural circulation circuit. According to the different physical and thermal conditions of the pipes in the loop, the entire loop could be divided into N segments and integrated separately. Assuming that M points needed to consider the local pressure drop, the momentum conservation equation was integrated along the entire loop to obtain
@(2-28)
For a closed natural circulation system, the acceleration pressure drop was zero, namely
@(2-29)
So the formula could be transformed into
(2-30)
2.7. Flow resistance
The pressure loss of fluid flow mainly included lifting pressure drop, acceleration pressure drop, friction pressure drop, and local form resistant pressure drop. Among them, the calculation of lifting pressure drop and acceleration pressure drop was relatively simple. The key to calculating the local pressure drop was to select and calculate the local resistance coefficient, which depended on the structure of the natural circulation system. The calculation of frictional resistance, especially the frictional resistance in two-phase flow, was relatively complicated, which was the focus of modeling in this paper.
2.7.1. Single-phase friction resistance
The Darcy correlation was generally used during the calculation of friction pressure drop in single-phase flow
@(2-31)
The frictional resistance coefficient was associated with the flow property (laminar/turbulent flow), flow state (fully developed flow or not), heating condition (isothermal or non-isothermal), channel geometry, roughness of surface and so on. Therefore, the key to calculating single-phase friction resistance was to choose a reasonable resistance coefficient expression according to the specific working conditions. According to the Reynolds number, single-phase fluid flow was divided into laminar flow, transition flow and turbulent flow.
The friction resistance coefficient in the laminar region (Re≦2000) was
@(2-32)
For the selection of the friction resistance coefficient in the turbulent region (Re≧2500), the following relations were used for different working conditions.
The Blausius correlation
@(2-33)
The McAdams correlation
@(2-34)
The Nicolas correlation
@(2-35)
The Cole-Brook correlation
@(2-36)
For the transition region (2000 < Re < 2500), linear interpolation of the laminar and turbulent regions was used for calculation.
All friction coefficients mentioned above were isothermal flow friction resistance coefficients. For non-isothermal flows, the formula suggested by Sieder-Tate was used
@(2-37)
2.7.2. Two-phase friction resistance
The calculation of the two-phase flow friction pressure drop was much more complicated than that of the single-phase, and it was difficult to calculate directly. Generally, the pressure drop gradient of the whole liquid phase was first calculated, and then the pressure drop of the two phases was calculated.
@(2-38)
The key to the calculation of the two-phase pressure drop was the calculation of the two-phase friction multiplication factor. An empirical formula was generally used to calculate the two-phase friction multiplication factor. In this study, the Lockhart-Martinelli relationship (Todreas and Kazimi, 2015) was used.
@(2-39)
@(2-40)
@(2-41)
2.7.3. Local resistance
The movement of a fluid through a local area was very complicated. Only in very rare cases, such as the sudden expansion of the fluid section, the theoretical calculations could be performed. Because the processes in local areas were generally short, and in the local loss, the friction along the path appeared to be quite small compared to the vortex. At this time, the loss was mainly in the vortex region, so the fluid's lifting pressure drop and friction pressure drop along the path could be ignored. The formula for calculating local pressure drop was as follows
@(2-42)
The local resistance coefficient could be calculated according to the experimental relationship, and some could be inferred from the pressure drop measured in the experiment. The standard local resistance coefficient could be obtained by referring to the manual of friction resistance. In order to make the model in this paper suitable for natural circulation systems with different structures, the local resistance coefficient in equation was used as the input parameter of the model.
2.8. Heat transfer coefficient
In this paper, a complete set of heat transfer coefficient models were established for the analysis and calculation of steady-state thermal hydraulic characteristics of natural circulation systems. These models took into account all possible heat transfer conditions, such as single-phase water, subcooled boiling, saturated boiling, and condensation.
2.8.1. Single phase convective heat transfer
Collier correlation was selected for the calculation of single-phase laminar heat transfer (L/D > 50, Re < 2000).
@(2-43)
Where
@(2-44)
When the mass flow was very small, the influence of buoyancy should be considered. The heat transfer model was
@(2-45)
Where
@(2-46)
Nu2 was the result of equation.
For the single-phase turbulent heat transfer, four commonly used formulas were provided, which could be selected according to specific conditions.
Sider-Tate correlation (Re > 2500)
@(2-47)
Petukhov correlation (Re > 2500)
@(2-48)
where
@(2-49)
@(2-50)
Dittus-Boelter correlation (L/D > 50, Re > 10000)
(2-51)
Where when the fluid was heated, and when the fluid was cooled.
Mikheiv correlation (L/D > 50, 10000 < Re < 5000000)
@(2-52)
For single-phase region, correlations suitable for laminar and turbulent flow respectively could make the heat transfer model more detailed, but because there was no transition formula between the two regions, the heat transfer coefficient would jump at the transition region. In order to eliminate this effect, the linear interpolation of laminar and turbulent flow region was used to calculate the transition region to ensure the continuity of single-phase liquid heat transfer coefficient.
2.8.2. Subcooled boiling heat transfer
In engineering, the initial point of subcooled boiling (ONB) was usually regarded as the boundary between single-phase flow and two-phase flow, so it was very important to study the initial point of subcooled boiling to determine the flow form and state. From the point of view of heat transfer, the start point of subcooled boiling (ONB) was the turning point from single-phase convective heat transfer to boiling two-phase heat transfer, so this point met both the single-phase convective heat transfer equation and the subcooled nucleate boiling heat transfer equation. The single-phase convection heat transfer equation was in the form of
@(2-53)
The heat transfer mechanism of subcooled boiling has been studied a lot. In this paper, Jens-lottes formula, one of the most commonly used in the reactor thermal design, was selected. The formula was simple in form and widely used (11 < G < 10500 kg/m2s).
@(2-54)
For a certain fluid temperature, and  could be obtained by combining equations and .
2.8.3. Saturated boiling heat transfer
Chen's formula was considered to be the best one to calculate the heat transfer in the saturated boiling region. The specific expression of Chen's formula was as follows:
@(2-55)
Among them, F was the Reynolds number factor, which was only related to the Lockhart Martinelli parameter.
@(2-56)
@(2-57)
And S was the nucleate boiling inhibitor
@(2-58)
@(2-59)
2.8.4. Condensation heat transfer
Meng (Meng et al., 2014, Meng et al., 2014, Meng et al., 2015) carried out some experimental and theoretical research related to condensation heat transfer. But due to the application background of AP1000, the scope of application was relatively limited, so the Shah model was used in this paper. Shah (Shah, 1979) put forward a comprehensive calculation formula for condensation heat transfer in horizontal tube, vertical tube and inclined tube. and were used to represent the quality at the inlet and outlet of the pipe respectively,  was the ratio of saturation pressure to critical pressure.
When x1=1 and x2=0, the inlet of the pipe was full of steam, and the steam was condensed completely at the outlet
@(2-60)
When x1<1 or x2>0 , the inlet and outlet of the pipe were both full of two-phase mixture
@(2-61)
@(2-62)
Where hf0 was the heat transfer coefficient calculated by Dittus-Boelter formula when the mass flow was the same and the pipe was full of liquid.
2.9. Void fraction and physical properties
Void fraction was an important parameter in the solution of pressure drop and heat transfer of two-phase flow. The correct solution of void fraction was directly related to the calculation accuracy of natural circulation driving head. The Chexal-Lellouche correlation (Chexal et al., 1992) was used in this paper.
@(2-63)
The international IAPWS-IF97 standard was used to calculate the physical properties of water and steam, which was widely used in the calculation of water physical properties.
The physical properties of the materials used in the calculation included the density, specific heat capacity and thermal conductivity of the wall materials of the test section, condenser heat transfer tube and preheater. The physical properties of the materials used in the calculation were given in the form of temperature function.
In the established nitrogen pressurizer model, nitrogen could be considered as an ideal gas or an actual gas.
<Section>3. Model verification</Section>
3.1. Model solution
Based on the model described in the second part, different structural parameters could be input to perform steady-state calculations on the natural circulation system with a specific structure.
The system parameter data was initialized firstly according to the input structural parameters and initial thermal parameters. By presetting the power, flow rate and inlet temperature of the test section and the preheater, various modules in the natural circulation system could be calculated according to the flow direction of the working fluid to obtain the new test section inlet temperature.
If the test section inlet temperature does not converge, a new inlet temperature would be reset. After the convergent test section inlet temperature was obtained, the driving head and resistance pressure drop of the circuit were calculated separately. If the two do not match, the mass flow would reset and a new iterative calculation was started. The solution process of the model was shown in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2. Model solving flowchart.
To verify the correctness of the model established in this paper, the experimental data of the natural circulation system were compared with the calculation results of the model. Input parameters included pressure, power in the test section, secondary inlet temperature, secondary flow and secondary pressure of the condenser. The temperature difference between the inlet and outlet of the test section and the natural circulation flow were the objectives which needed to be compared with the experimental data.
3.2. Single-phase experiment verification
Genoa University had set up a simple natural circulation loop (LOOP #1). The test section was a tube with an inner diameter of 40 mm. The heat exchange of the loop included two parts, the heating section at the bottom and the cooling section at the top. The heating section and the cooling section were connected by pipes. The loop was also provided with an expansion tank to accommodate the change of fluid in the loop. The experimental structure is shown in Fig. 3. The parameters of the experiment are shown in Table 1.
Fig. 3. LOOP#1 structure (Petruzzi et al., 2002).
Table 1. LOOP#1 structure parameters (Petruzzi et al., 2002).
On the experimental bench shown in Fig. 3, Petruzzi (Petruzzi et al., 2002) conducted a single-phase natural circulation experiment, measuring the temperature difference between the inlet and outlet of the heating section and the system mass flow by changing the heat flux. This article selected some experimental results and compared with the calculation results of the model in this paper. Table 2 shows the selected experimental conditions.
Table 2. Single-phase natural circulation experiment conditions (Petruzzi et al., 2002).
Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 show the comparison of temperature difference between inlet and outlet of heating section and mass flow, respectively. As can be seen from these two figures, the predicted value of the model in this paper is in good agreement with the experimental value. With the increase of power, the predicted value and the experimental value show the same growth trend. The overall error of temperature difference and mass flow is<5%, which fully demonstrates the correctness of this model in the prediction of single-phase region of natural circulation system.
Fig. 4. Comparison of the temperature difference between inlet and outlet of heating section.
Fig. 5. Comparison of the mass flow.
3.3. Two-phase experiment verification
CHEN (Chen et al., 1991) conducted an experimental study on the two-phase steady-state behavior of natural circulation using water-steam as the working fluid. The total length of the experimental loop was 7.8 m. The heat source was located at the bottom of the right side of the loop, with an inner diameter of 30 mm and a length of 0.8 m. The cold source was located at the top of the left side of the loop. It was a double-pipe heat exchanger with an inner diameter of 30 mm and an outer diameter of 60 mm and a length of 0.68 m. The cold source and the heat source were connected by pipes with inner diameter of 2.8 mm. The experiment was equipped with 17 temperature measurement points and 9 pressure measurement points for measuring the temperature and pressure changes along the loop. The structure and parameters of the loop, and the arrangement of temperature and pressure measurement points are shown in Fig. 6.
Fig. 6. Two-phase natural circulation experiment system (Chen et al., 1991).
CHEN conducted 9 groups of two-phase natural circulation steady-state experiments with heating powers of 350 W, 450 W, and 550 W, and the liquid phase volume ratios in the loop were 36.7%, 51.4%, and 66.0%, respectively. The temperature distribution and pressure distribution were obtained with the liquid phase volume ratio of 51.5% (Shah, 1979). In this paper, when the liquid phase volume ratio was 51.4%, three different heating power conditions were calculated and compared with the experimental values.
The comparison of loop temperature distribution is shown in Fig. 7. In Fig. 7, the abscissa represents the position of the loop, and the starting point is the outlet of the condenser. The solid line represents the experimental data, and the dashed line represents the predicted value of the model in this paper. The black curve represents the 350 W operating condition, the blue curve represents the 450 W operating condition, and the red curve represents the 550 W operating condition. As can be seen from Fig. 7, according to the calculated value of the model in this paper, the error is<5% compared with the experimental value, which proves the accuracy of the model for the steady-state calculation of the two-phase natural circulation.
Fig. 7. Comparison of loop temperature distribution.
It is worth noting that, in Fig. 7, in the steam region with the abscissa ranging from 3.92 to 7.12 m, the three sets of experimental values all show a downward trend, while the model calculation does not. This is because there is heat loss during the experiment, and the higher the temperature is, the more obvious the heat loss is. In the steam region, even if there is no cold source to cool the working fluid, the temperature still presents a gradual downward trend due to heat dissipation.
However, the heat loss of the steam region is not considered in the calculation process of the model, so the calculated value shows a stable trend in this part. From the first point of the steam region (L = 3.92 m), the predicted value of the model is in good agreement with the experimental value. Since then, even if the error increases gradually due to heat loss, it can be shown that this model has a very good prediction ability for the steady-state behavior of two-phase natural circulation system.
The comparison of pressure distribution is shown in Fig. 8. Compared with the temperature results, although the prediction error of pressure distribution is slightly larger (overall within 10%), it is still in good agreement with experimental results, and the trend of the predicted value is consistent with the experimental value.
Fig. 8. Comparison of loop pressure distribution.
The correctness of the model in this paper is verified through the calculation of single-phase and two-phase operation conditions of the natural circulation system. On the one hand, the single-phase and two-phase experiments selected from the literature belong to natural circulation systems with different structures, which can demonstrate the correctness of the modular modeling, and can establish reasonable and effective models and calculations for different experimental systems. On the other hand, by comparing with the experimental results, including parameters such as temperature, mass flow, pressure, etc., it is found that the prediction error of the model in this paper is small, indicating the correctness of the model calculation process.
Therefore, the applicability of the modular model established in this paper to different structures of natural circulation system and the correctness of the calculation process have been effectively verified.
<Section>4. Steady state characteristic analysis</Section>
Some interesting phenomena are found in the calculation of LOOP#1 by using the model proposed in this paper.
Wang (Wang et al., 2008) simulates the natural circulation steady-state characteristics of HRTL-5 using the numerical simulation method. Fig. 9 is the variation curve of natural circulation mass flow with the inlet subcooling obtained by Wang. Fig. 10 is the variation curve of mass flow with the inlet subcooling when the heat flux is 200 kW/m2. It can be seen from the comparison that the trend of the two is the same, and as the inlet subcooling increases, the mass flow gradually decreases. This is because, under the same heat flux conditions, with the increase of the inlet subcooling of the experimental section, the temperature of the fluid at the exit of the experimental section is lower, the density is higher, and the driving force of natural circulation is smaller, which leads to the decrease of the system mass flow.
Fig. 9. Variation of mass flow with inlet subcooling by Wang (Wang et al., 2008).
Fig. 10. Variation of mass flow with inlet subcooling in this paper.
Fig. 10 shows that with the same heat flux, the natural circulation system mass flow gradually decreases with the increase of inlet subcooling, and the rate of decrease gradually slows down. This is because when the input heat power is the same, the void fraction of the experimental section decreases with the increase of the inlet subcooling. When the inlet subcooling increases to about 20 K, the influence of single-phase region on the system mass flow is gradually dominant. After the fluid in the experimental section retreats from two-phase to single-phase, the mass flow of the system decreases greatly, and then the mass flow changes approximately linearly with the inlet subcooling.
However, in the study of the variation trend of the system mass flow with the heat flux, there are different phenomena.
Fig. 11 is the variation curve of natural circulation mass flow with heat flux obtained by Wang. Fig. 12 is the variation curve of natural circulation mass flow with heat flux when the pressure is 1.5 MPa and inlet subcooling is 30 K, 40 K and 50 K respectively (without considering loop resistance).
Fig. 11. Variation of mass flow with heat flux by Wang (Wang et al., 2008).
Fig. 12. Variation of mass flow with heat flux in this paper.
It is easy to find that the overall trend of Fig. 11 and Fig. 12 is similar, that is, with the increase of heat flux, the mass flow of natural circulation system increases. This is because with the increase of heat flux, the outlet fluid temperature of the experimental section increases gradually, the fluid density decreases, and the driving force of natural circulation increases, resulting in the increase of mass flow.
From Fig. 12, it can be seen that when the inlet subcooling of the experimental section is 30 K, the heat flux of 300 kW/m2 becomes an turning point of flow change, which indicates that at this time, the outlet of the experimental section has developed into two-phase flow, and the density of the fluid is significantly reduced, so that the natural circulation driving force is significantly increased to form the turning point shown in Fig. 12. When the inlet subcooling increases, the occurrence of two-phase is delayed, and the turning point is also delayed.
Therefore, according to the calculation results in this paper (Fig. 12), two-phase flow can significantly increase the system mass flow compared to single-phase flow, but according to Wang's calculation results (Fig. 11), the two-phase flow will not significantly increase the system flow, or even reduce the flow. It shows that the influence of phase state on the flow shows the opposite trend.
This is because after entering the two-phase region, on the one hand, due to the increase of the void fraction, the overall density of the fluid is significantly reduced, which is beneficial to increase the driving force of the natural circulation system. On the other hand, the increase of the void fraction also means that the two-phase resistance increases, which is a resistant force to the flow of the natural circulation system. For the research object of this paper, the effect of the driving force in the two-phase region is greater than the resistant force, but for the research object of Wang, it is the opposite.
In order to study the influence of resistance, a local resistance coefficient is added to the calculation object in this paper. Fig. 13 shows the effect of loop resistance on the system mass flow. In Fig. 13, the black curve represents 30 K inlet subcooling, the blue curve represents 40 K and the red curve represents 50 K. The solid line represents the loop local resistance coefficient of 0, and the dashed line represents the total loop local resistance coefficient of 5.
Fig. 13. Influence of resistance on mass flow.
As can be seen from Fig. 13, under the same inlet subcooling and heat flux conditions, when there is no local resistance, the mass flow is always large. This is because the existence of flow resistance consumes part of the driving force of natural circulation, resulting in the decrease of system flow.
In the single-phase region, with the increase of heat flux, the growth rate of dashed line is higher than that of solid line. This is because when there is resistance, the mass flow of the system is lower and the driving force consumption is less. Increasing the same heat flux has more obvious effect on the flow growth.
But in the two-phase region, when there is no resistance, the two-phase driving force effect of the loop is greater than the resistance effect, so the flow increases faster, and the turning point appears. When there is resistance, the driving force effect of the two-phase decreases and the resistance effect increases. For 30 K inlet subcooling, the effect of the two-phase region is greater, so there is a result of a decrease in the flow growth rate (black dashed line), while for 40 K and 50 K inlet subcooling, the effect of the two-phase region is smaller, so there is no significant change in the rate of increase of the flow (blue and red dashed line).
It can be found that structure characteristics have a great influence on the natural circulation ability. If the structure of natural circulation system is complex (such as HRTL-5 studied by Wang), the flow resistance along the loop is large, especially after entering the two-phase area, because of the introduction of two-phase friction multiplication factor, the pressure drop effect will further increase, and the driving force provided by gravity and buoyancy force is not enough to overcome the pressure drop in the loop, then the resistance effect in the two-phase region will be large than the driving force effect (as shown in Fig. 11). If the natural circulation system has a simple structure (such as LOOP#1 studied in this paper), the form resistance pressure drop of the fluid flowing along the loop is small, and the driving force introduced by the density reduction after entering the two-phase region is enough to overcome the pressure drop in the loop, finally, the result that the driving force effect of the two-phase region is greater than the resistance is shown (as shown in Fig. 12). By introducing resistance to LOOP#1, the calculation results can also prove that the resistance characteristics of the system have a significant impact on the natural circulation capacity (as shown in Fig. 13).
In general, through the comparative analysis of the modeling calculation in this paper and the calculation results in the existing literature, it can be seen that the following conclusions are the same for the natural circulation system, no matter how its structure changes:
@(1)
At the same inlet subcooling, with the increase of heat flux, the natural circulation system flow increases.
@(2)
At the same heat flux, the natural circulation system flow increases with the decrease of inlet subcooling.
However, the influence of the change of phase state on the flow change of natural circulation system is related to the specific structure of natural circulation system. Generally speaking, the increase of the natural circulation system flow with the heat flux increasing is beneficial to the specific engineering problems. If the structure of the system is complex and the resistance in the loop is large, the increase of flow in the natural circulation system will decrease or even reduce the system flow after entering the two-phase region, which is not conducive to heat removal. But if the structure of the system is simple and the resistance in the loop is small, the amplitude of the increasing system flow will increase after entering the two-phase region, which is more beneficial to heat removal.
<Section>5. Conclusion</Section>
In this paper, the conservation equations of mass, momentum and energy were established for the natural circulation system. A homogeneous flow model was adopted in the two-phase region, so that the two-phase region and the single-phase region had unified field equations. Combined with the tube wall heat conduction module, condenser module, pipe module, pressurizer module, system flow module, flow resistance module, heat transfer coefficient module, void fraction module and physical property calculation module, A set of solving models for the steady-state thermal hydraulic characteristics of natural circulation systems were obtained. The model adopted a modular modeling method. Through the combination of various modules, it could be used to calculate the natural circulation system with different structures.
Compared with the experimental data, the correctness of the model in this paper is proved. On the one hand, it is proved that the modular modeling method in this paper can be applied to natural circulation systems with different structures, so the model has strong universality. On the other hand, the single-phase region and the two-phase region are verified separately, which proves the correctness of the model solving process.
During the steady-state calculation of LOOP#1 using the model of this article, some interesting results were found.
(1) Increasing heat flux will increase the flow of the natural circulation system. The increase of heat flux will directly lead to the increase of the fluid temperature at the exit of the test section, and the decrease of the density. The driving force for natural circulation increases, so the flow will increase.
(2) Decreasing the inlet subcooling will also increase the natural circulation system flow. When the heat flux is the same, and the inlet subcooling is reduced, the fluid temperature at the outlet of the test section is higher, and the density is lower. The driving force for natural circulation is greater, and the flow will increase.
The above two conclusions are universal for natural circulation systems.
(3) The effect of phase change on natural circulation system flow depends on system structural characteristics. The appearance of two-phase region not only increases the driving force of natural circulation system, but also increases the resistance of two-phase flow. When the system structure determines that the increase in driving force is dominant, the appearance of the two-phase region will further increase the system flow. On the contrary, the two-phase region will hinder the increase of the flow and may even cause the flow to decrease.
Therefore, for the structural design of natural circulation system, the introduction of large resistance should be avoided as much as possible, so as to avoid two-phase flow hindering the establishment of natural circulation process, or destroying the established natural circulation process.
In practical engineering application, natural circulation system is always in transient process. However, it is necessary to obtain accurate steady-state results in order to obtain the changes of thermal hydraulic parameters in the transient process. The modular steady-state model of the natural circulation system established in this paper has been effectively verified for the applicability of the natural circulation system with different structures and for the correctness of the calculation results, which lays a good foundation for the follow-up transient research and has a very important engineering application significance.
Since the focus of this article is on the establishment and verification of the model, due to space limitations, there is no detailed analysis of the effects of different parameters (such as pressure, heat flux, inlet subcooling, geometric parameters, etc.). After the model of this paper is added to the transient calculation module, the above research will be carried out in conjunction with the specific transient conditions, which is also the follow-up research goal of the authors.
<Section>Declaration of interest statement</Section>
The authors declare that we do not have any commercial or associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in connection with the work submitted.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Gongle Song: Methodology, Software, Writing - original draft. Di Wu: Writing - review & editing. Rulei Sun: Software. Yu Liang: Investigation, Validation. Dalin Zhang: Conceptualization. Jian Deng: Resources. Guanghui Su: Data curation. Wenxi Tian: Visualization. Suizheng Qiu: Supervision.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
The authors gratefully acknowledge the supports from Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 11675127) and K. C. Wong Education Foundation.
<Section>Appendix A. Supplementary data</Section>
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:
Supplementary data 1.
<Section>References</Section>
Japikse, 1973
D. Japikse
Advances in Thermosyphon Technology
Adv. Heat Trans., 9 (1973), pp. 1-111
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zvirin, 1982
Y. Zvirin
A review of natural circulation loops in pressurized water reactors and other systems
Nucl. Eng. Des., 67 (2) (1982), pp. 203-225
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Greif, 1988
R. Greif
Natural circulation loops
J. Heat Transfer, 110 (4b) (1988), pp. 1243-1258
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yuanyuan et al., 2012
Yuanyuan, W.U., Liu, T., Sun, W. Analysis of SBO Accident and Natural Circulation of 49-2 Swimming Pool Reactor. 2012, 117(8):4024-4031.
Google Scholar
Liu et al., 2016
Liu, Y.S., Chao, X., Li, C.X., et al. Scaling Analysis of Fluid Properties for Natural Circulation Phenomena Under Station Blackout Accident. 2016.
Google Scholar
Gnanadhas et al., 2011
L. Gnanadhas, A.K. Sharma, B. Malarvizhi, et al.
PATH – An experimental facility for natural circulation heat transfer studies related to Post Accident Thermal Hydraulics
Nucl. Eng. Des., 241 (9) (2011), pp. 3839-3850
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Oh et al., 2012
C.H. Oh, E.S. Kim, H.S. Kang
Natural circulation patterns in the VHTR air-ingress accident and related issues
Nucl. Eng. Des., 249 (2012), pp. 228-236
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Shitzer et al., 1979
A. Shitzer, D. Kalmanoviz, Y. Zvirin, et al.
Experiments with a flat plate solar water heating system in thermosyphonic flow
Sol. Energy, 22 (1) (1979), pp. 27-35
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wissler et al., 1956
E.H. Wissler, H.S. Isbin, N.R. Amundson
Oscillatory behavior of a two-phase natural-circulation loop
AIChE J., 2 (2) (1956), pp. 157-162
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bau and Torrance, 1981
H.H. Bau, K.E. Torrance
Transient and steady behavior of an open, symmetrically-heated, free convection loop
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 24 (4) (1981), pp. 597-609
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Creveling et al., 1975
H.F. Creveling, J.F.D. Paz, J.Y. Baladi, et al.
Stability characteristics of a single-phase free convection loop
J. Fluid Mech., 67 (1) (1975), pp. 65-84
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Mertol et al., 1981
A. Mertol, R. Greif, Y. Zvirin
The transient, steady state and stability behavior of a thermosyphon with throughflow
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 24 (4) (1981), pp. 621-633
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zvirin and Greif, 1979
Y. Zvirin, R. Greif
Transient behavior of natural circulation loops: Two vertical branches with point heat source and sink
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 22 (4) (1979), pp. 499-504
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jain et al., 1966
K.C. Jain, M. Petrick, D. Miller, et al.
Self-sustained hydrodynamic oscillations in a natural-circulation boiling water loop
Nucl. Eng. Des., 4 (3) (1966), pp. 233-252
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kim and Park, 2001
T.W. Kim, G.C. Park
Numerical Study on the Natural Circulation Characteristics in an integral type marine reactor for inclined conditions
J. Korean Nucl. Soc., 33 (4) (2001), pp. 397-408
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Murata et al., 1999
H. Murata, K. Sawada, M. Kobayashi
Experimental Investigation of Natural Convection in a Core of a Marine Reactor in Rolling Motion
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 37 (6) (1999), pp. 509-517
Google Scholar
Murata et al., 2002
H. Murata, K. Sawada, M. Kobayashi
Natural circulation characteristics of a marine reactor in rolling motion and heat transfer in the core
Nucl. Eng. Des., 215 (1) (2002), pp. 69-85
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ishida et al., 1990
I. Ishida, T. Kusunoki, H. Murata, et al.
Thermal-hydraulic behavior of a marine reactor during oscillations
Nucl. Eng. Des., 120 (2) (1990), pp. 213-225
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ishida and Yoritsune, 2002
T. Ishida, T. Yoritsune
Effects of ship motions on natural circulation of deep sea research reactor DRX
Nucl. Eng. Des., 215 (1) (2002), pp. 51-67
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kim and Park, 1996
J.H. Kim, G.C. Park
Development of RETRAN-03/MOV code for thermal-hydraulic analysis of nuclear reactor under moving conditions
J. Korean Nucl. Soc., 28 (6) (1996), pp. 542-550
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Rayleigh, 1916
Rayleigh, Lord. LIX. On convection currents in a horizontal layer of fluid, when the higher temperature is on the under side. Philosophical Magazine Series 1, 1916, 32(192):529-546.
Google Scholar
Gebhart, 1973
B. Gebhart
Natural convection flows and stability
Adv. Heat Trans., 9 (1973), pp. 273-348
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ostrach, 2005
S. Ostrach
Natural convection in enclosures
Adv. Heat Trans., 8 (4b) (2005), pp. 161-227
Google Scholar
Feng et al., 2019
Tangtao Feng, Mingjun Wang, Ping Song, Luguo Liu, G.H.Su. Wenxi Tian
Suizheng Qiu, Numerical research on thermal mixing characteristics in a 45-degree T-junction for two-phase stratified flow during the emergency core cooling safety injection
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 114 (2019), pp. 91-104
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2013
Mingjun Wang, Suizheng Qiu, Wenxi Tian, Su. Guanghui, Yapei Zhang
The comparison of designed water-cooled and air-cooled passive residual heat removal system for 300 MWe nuclear power plant during the feed-water line break scenario
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 57 (2013), pp. 164-172
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2012
Mingjun Wang, Hao Zhao, Yapei Zhang, Su. Guanghui, Wenxi Tian, Suizheng Qiu
Research on the Designed Emergency Passive Residual Heat Removal System During the Station Blackout Scenario for CPR1000
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 45 (2012), pp. 86-93
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Su and Qiu, 2013
Su, G.H., Suizheng Qiu, Wenxi Tian. Thermal hydraulic calculation method of nuclear power system [M]. Tsinghua University Press, 2013 (in Chinese).
Google Scholar
Mengmeng, 2018
Xi Mengmeng
Study on natural circulation system and critical heat flux under ocean conditions
Xi’an Jiaotong university (2018)
Google Scholar
Todreas and Kazimi, 2015
N.E. Todreas, M.S. Kazimi
Nuclear Systems I-Second edition
Taylor & Francis Group, New York (2015)
Google Scholar
Meng et al., 2014
Z. Meng, X. Fu, L. Ding, et al.
Experimental and theoretical investigation of liquid entrainment through small-scaled ADS-4 in AP1000
Exp. Therm Fluid Sci., 57 (2014), pp. 177-187
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Meng et al., 2014
Z. Meng, B. Dong, L. Wang, et al.
Experimental research of liquid entrainment through ADS-4 in AP1000
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 72 (2014), pp. 428-437
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Meng et al., 2015
Z. Meng, L.F. Liu, L. Ding, et al.
Comparative study on effect of two working mediums on liquid entrainment through ADS-4 in AP1000
Exp. Therm Fluid Sci., 69 (2015), pp. 149-157
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Shah, 1979
M.M. Shah
A general correlation for heat transfer during film condensation inside pipes
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 22 (4) (1979), pp. 547-556
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chexal et al., 1992
B. Chexal, G. Lellouche, J. Horowitz, et al.
A void fraction correlation for generalized applications
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 27 (4) (1992), pp. 255-295
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Petruzzi et al., 2002
Petruzzi, A., Francesco D’Auria, Misale M. Single-phase natural circulation in a rectangular loop in micro-gravity condition. AIP Conference Proceedings. American Institute of Physics, 2002.
Google Scholar
Chen et al., 1991
K.S. Chen, Y.Y. Chen, S.W. Shiao, et al.
An experimental study of steady-state behavior of a two-phase natural circulation loop
Energy Convers. Manage., 31 (6) (1991), pp. 553-559
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2008
Jianjun Wang, Xingtuan Yang, Shengyao Jiang
Steady-State Behaviors of Natural Circulation in HRTL-5
Atomic Energy Sci. Technol., 42 (5) (2008), pp. 434-437
(in Chinese)
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar