<title>Evaluation of hot channel factor for sodium-cooled fast reactors with multi-physics toolkit</title>
<author>1,YiqiYu,2,Emily R.Shemon,3,Taek K.Kim,4,EliaMerzari</author>
<Affiliation>1,Nuclear Engineering Division, Argonne National Labortary, Lemont, IL 60439, USA</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nucengdes.2020.110704</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029549320301989</URL>
Evaluation of hot channel factor for sodium-cooled fast reactors with multi-physics toolkit
YiqiYu,Emily R.Shemon,Taek K.Kim,EliaMerzari
Nuclear Engineering Division, Argonne National Labortary, Lemont, IL 60439, USA
<Section>Highlights</Section>
First-of-a-kind HCF estimation for SFR with high fidelity codes was demonstrated.
The results indicate the reduction of the HCF due to less modeling uncertainties.
The tool can be applied to different reactor design.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The evaluation of hot channel factor (HCF) is of great significance to the quantification of safety margins for reactor designs. In this paper, HCFs for a sodium-cooled fast reactor (SFR) are evaluated with the Simulation-based High-efficiency Advanced Reactor Prototyping (SHARP) toolkit, which is developed under the Nuclear Energy Advanced Modeling and Simulation (NEAMS) Campaign of DOE for multi-physics reactor performance and safety simulations. The high-fidelity neutronics and thermal hydraulics solvers PROTEUS and Nek5000 in the SHARP toolkit are coupled to perform the multi-physics simulations for HCF evaluation. The HCFs induced by cladding manufacturing tolerance, fissile content mal-distribution, wire orientation and uncertainties on the cladding, coolant, and fuel properties are evaluated for a reference core SFR design (AFR-100). The HCFs calculated with the SHARP toolkit are compared to legacy HCFs for similar reactor types. The comparison demonstrates the reduction or elimination of modeling uncertainties in the calculation of HCFs using high fidelity advanced modeling and simulation tools without the need of expensive experiments. Moreover, the reduction of the uncertainties on HCFs evaluation allows an increase in nominal parameters and safety margin, which in turn improves the economic competitiveness of the SFR.
Keywords:Hot channel factor;SHARP;Multi-physics;SFR
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Hot channel factor analysis has been an important part of nuclear reactor design since the early days of nuclear power development. The HCF is used to account for the impact on peak temperatures of various uncertainties such as physical parameter uncertainty, manufacturing tolerance, or modeling approximation, and to assure that the specified maximum fuel temperature in the core does not exceed the fuel design limit at any time and at any location under the normal operation condition. The hot channel factors are dimensionless numbers greater than unity such that the decimal part (i.e., HCF minus one) represents uncertainties. For instance, the maximum fuel temperature can be evaluated by the following equation with HCFs:
@
i= 1: coolant temperature rise
i= 2: film temperature rise
i= 3: cladding temperature rise
i= 4: gap temperature rise
i= 5: fuel temperature rise
@ is the maximum fuel temperature, @ is the coolant inlet temperature, @ is the nominal temperature rise for component , and @ is the overall hot channel factor for component i. To determine the overall hot channel factors for each component , sub-factors are determined individually according to the uncertainty.
Sets of HCFs were developed under SFR programs in the United States from 1976 to 1995 for the Fast Flux Test Facility (FFTF), Clinch River Breeder Reactor (CRBR) and EBR-II reactor. Limited computing power and numerous approximations in modeling and simulation methods during the 1970s and 1980s resulted in the prediction of neutronics and thermal-hydraulic parameters with relatively large uncertainties, where some uncertainties could only be quantified by expensive experiments. For instance, the existing neutronics codes (XSRES-W1DX, DOT(XY), W-2DB, etc.) solved few group, low-dimension diffusion equations in a homogeneous medium (Hardie and Little, 1969, Mynatt, 1973, Little and Hardie, 1969), and in order to compensate for the simplifications and approximations, the resulting neutron fluxes and integral parameters were adjusted by mockups performed in zero power critical experiment reactors (ZPR, ZPPR). Similarly, early thermal-hydraulics codes (COBRA, ENERGY) solved single or multi-channel equations with approximated wire-wrap models, and the results were calibrated using experiments (Yang, 2005). As more design and operating experience was gained along with the refinement of theoretical analyses, the values of various hot channel factors decreased dramatically and new approaches to the philosophy and treatment of the hot channel factors were pursued. For instance, the set of HCFs for the CRBR was developed in 1980, while the set for the EBR-II was developed in 1995. The HCFs of the CRBR (Mario, 1980) and EBR-II (Ku et al., 1994) are compared in Table 1. During the 15-year time lag, the number of HCFs was significantly reduced and the magnitudes of several HCFs were changed. This trend indicates that several uncertainties were eliminated or changed in the later design even though those uncertainties were involved in the earlier designs. The same trend is also observed when comparing two sets of HCFs for FFTF developed in 1976 and 1990.
Table 1. Comparison of HCFs between CRBR and EBR-II.
However, it was still not uncommon to see hot channel factors of 2 (which is equivalent to a 100% uncertainty) or greater for these early days nuclear reactor design. Moreover, no additional efforts were made to develop HCFs since 1995 due to the cancellation of the Integral Fast Reactor (IFR) program, which saw the shutdown of EBR-II. Nevertheless, during the last few decades, there was significant progress in computing power and computational code systems, which enabled much more advanced and adequate modeling and simulation. For instance, the Mira BlueGene/Q supercomputer, one of the world’s leading supercomputers, can do in one day what would take more than 1000 years using the 1970′s era IBM360 computer. Looking back at the earlier efforts for the HCF analysis, the limited computing power led to numerous approximations in modeling and simulation methods that resulted in large uncertainties on the prediction of neutronics and thermal-hydraulic parameters.
In 2016, the Reactor Product Line of the Nuclear Energy Advanced Modeling and Simulation (NEAMS) Campaign of the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) officially released the Simulation-based High-efficiency Advanced Reactor Prototyping (SHARP) toolkit (Mahadevan et al., 2014, Merzari et al., 2015). The SHARP toolkit is a high-fidelity reactor simulation tool comprised of the neutronics module PROTEUS (Shemon et al., 2014), thermal hydraulics module Nek5000 (Fischer et al., 2008), and structural mechanics module Diablo (Parsons et al., 2007). The SHARP toolkit is developed to enable virtual design and engineering of nuclear plant behavior that would be impractical from a traditional experimental approach. The individual physics solvers within SHARP are state-of-the-art, highly scalable (up to millions of processors in the case of Nek5000) tools. By using the SHARP toolkit, HCFs can be obtained with fewer modeling approximations. Thus, the uncertainties associated with HCFs in the early SFR designs can be reduced or eliminated with high performance calculations. The calculation of HCFs without mockups or experimental supports can save huge sums of money and time during the reactor design phase. Moreover, the reduction of HCFs would allow an increase in power rate, which yields extra earnings of hundreds of millions per year from a 1000 MW fast reactor (based on current electricity cost of 12 cents per kWh). A better quantitative evaluation of HCFs can enhance the safety margins and improve the economic competitiveness of a SFR.
In this paper, a set of hot channel sub-factors for SFRs were identified through literature review as potential candidates for reduction or elimination through high-fidelity simulations. The advanced neutronics and thermal hydraulics modeling and simulations tools are adopted. The semi-statistical method, which consists of direct and statistical hot channel factors analytical procedure, is used to calculate the selected hot channel sub-factors in an SFR design. At last, the new HCFs are compared to the legacy HCFs.
<Section>2. Model description</Section>
The 100 MWe Advanced Sodium-cooled Fast Reactor (AFR-100) (Grandy, et al., 2013), a small transportable reactor targeting a small electrical grid and operable for a long time without frequent refueling, is modeled in this work for HCF evaluation. Several innovative fast reactor technologies such as a compact core concept with a fission gas vented fuel and advanced shielding material have been integrated in the AFR-100 concept to improve the overall core performance. These unique design features make AFR-100 a desired demonstration for HCF assessment with SHARP toolkit since it shows that the proposed toolkit and methodology can be applied to advanced sodium fast reactor designs.
2.1. Neutronics parameters
The AFR-100 core design depicted in Fig. 1 consists of 150 driver assemblies, and 13 control assemblies. The driver assemblies are surrounded by 48 reflector assemblies and 54 shield assemblies. The AFR-100 core adopts an onion-type enrichment-zoning concept that was developed for a long refueling scheme and flat radial power distribution. The active core is divided into three different enrichment zones radially, and each zone has multiple zones axially. The average uranium enrichment is 11.97% for the inner core, 13.12% for the middle core, and 14.97% for the outer core. The core can maintain criticality for 30 years by employing the unique enrichment zoning strategy with low reactivity swing during the reactor lifetime. The AFR-100 inner core fuel assembly with vented design was chosen for calculation of HCFs in this work. The inner core fuel assembly is comprised of 91 U-10Zr fuel pins distributed in six concentric rings with sodium coolant, an assembly duct and an inter-assembly sodium gap.
Fig. 1. AFR-100 Core Radial Layout and Uranium Enrichment.
2.2. Thermal hydraulic parameters
The fuel assembly contains 91 fuel pins with 1.49 cm diameter arranged in a triangular pitch array. The fuel pin is helically wrapped with wire to maintain the pin spacing so that the coolant can flow freely through the pin bundle. It is noted that the application of grid space was not allowed because of the small space between each pin. The small P/D (1.072) makes the assembly a tight lattice. The tight lattice configuration will bring in the long-term, large-scale coherent structure that leads to significant mixing in the gap region in thermal hydraulic aspect (Yu et al., 2011, Merzari et al., 2008). The key thermal hydraulic parameters of AFR-100 are listed in Table 2.
Table 2. Key Thermal Hydraulic Design Parameters of AFR-100.
<Section>3. Toolset and methododogy</Section>
As a multi-physics toolkit, SHARP allows analysts to make use of neutronic, CFD and structural mechanics module simultaneously while it also provide the flexibility to use a combination of tools among these three modules. Either users can perform standalone calculation with each module or two-physics coupled calculation. For instance, PROTEUS-Nek5000 driver and Nek5000-Diablo driver are integrated in the SHARP toolkit for applications that require two-physics coupled. In this work, neutronic and CFD modules are used for the coupled simulation although in a specialized coupling scheme as described below.
3.1. Thermal Hydraulics: Nek5000
Nek5000 is a high-order open-source CFD code based on spectral-element method. It can achieve extremely rapid (exponential) convergence at low cost. In addition to its high-order foundation, Nek5000 has several other features that make it ideally suited for large-scale parallel simulations. Temporal discretization is based on a high-order splitting that is third order accurate in time and reduces the coupled velocity–pressure Stokes problem to independent three Helmholtz and one elliptic solver per time step, i.e. for each velocity component and pressure, respectively. The velocity problems are diagonally dominant and thus easily solved by using Jacobi preconditioned conjugate gradient iteration. The pressure sub-step requires a Poisson solve at each step, which is performed through multigrid-preconditioned GMRES iteration coupled with temporal projection to find an optimal initial guess. Particularly important components of Nek5000 are its scalable coarse-grid solvers that are central to parallel multigrid. The code uses pure MPI parallelism to scale beyond 1 M MPI ranks on ALCF’s BG/Q architecture.
Nek5000 calculations are computationally expensive due to the inclusion of high-fidelity features. In order to save computational resources and ensure the reliability of the calculations, systematic sensitivity studies (Table 3) were conducted with both Nek5000 and commercial CFD code STAR-CCM+ (Shemon et al., 0000). The sensitivity studies include the test of mesh configuration, turbulence model, numerical scheme, boundary conditions, size of the domain and performance comparison between bare rod bundle and rod bundle with wire-wrap. Moreover, in order to capture the flow oscillation in the gap region due to the tight lattice configuration of AFR-100 fuel assembly, unsteady simulations are very necessary even for the prediction of averaged statistics. Since the Reynolds number in the AFR-100 assembly can reach 25,000, it is very expensive to perform the calculation with Large Eddy Simulation (LES) methodology. Some literatures(Yu et al., 2011, Merzari et al., 2008) point out that Unsteady Reynolds-Averaged Naiver–Stokes (URANS) simulation perform equally well, and solve for the transient solution at a fraction of the computational cost of large eddy simulation (LES). Based on the sensitivity studies, URANS with k-Omega turbulence model are adopted in CFD simulation with Nek5000.
Table 3. List of Sensitivity Studies for Thermal Hydraulic Simulation.
3.2. Neutronics: PROTEUS-MOCEX
PROTEUS-MOCEX, one of the 3D neutron transport solvers within the PROTEUS toolset, solves the method of characteristics equations in the 2D plane for an unstructured mesh and the exact equations in the axial plane using the discontinuous Galerkin finite element method. The method is also known as “extruded MOC” as it relies on an extruded 2D mesh in the axial plane for geometry description. The method is more accurate than other well-known extruded 2D/1D synthesis MOC methods, which suffer from convergence and accuracy issues in certain core geometries. The stability issues of other well-known synthesis methods (2D/1D method) were investigated in (Kelley, 2015, Kelly and Larsen, 2015, Collins, 2016, Choi and Joo, 0000), and is caused by the synthesis of 2D radial and 1D axial solutions in the iterative solution process. The PROTEUS-MOCEX formulation does not involve any synthesis of 2D radial and 1D axial solutions. Instead, the 3D transport equation is directly solved using plane-by-plane 2D sweepings. Thus, the instability is eliminated in the numerical formulation of PROTEUS-MOCEX, while stabilization techniques are needed in synthesis 2D/1D methods in the iterative solution scheme. PROTEUS-MOCEX uses pure MPI distributed memory parallelism to distribute work over space and angle and is scalable on both intermediate clusters as well as leadership class machines (ALCF BG/Q), depending on the problem size. PROTEUS-MOCEX is ideal for smaller, highly heterogeneous geometries such as the AFR-100 heterogeneous configurations needed for HCF modeling.
The heterogeneous neutronics model built for the AFR-100 fuel assembly contains the lower structure, lower shield, lower reflector, three fuel regions of varying enrichments, a fission gas plenum, and upper structure with the hot configuration (assuming 0.615% SS316 and 0.731% HT9 thermal expansion factors, 8% fuel axial swelling). Reflected boundary conditions are applied radially. A series of neutronics sensitivity studies (Table 4) including the test on mesh, transport solvers, angle, energy group, initial temperature condition are performed to identify optimal discretization parameters to ensure accuracy and efficiency (Shemon et al., 0000). Some approximations were made in the neutronics model including replacement of fission gas in plenum with helium, geometrical homogenization of helium into cladding, and smearing the wire wrap into the cladding. These approximations are not impactful on the neutronics calculations. Legendre-Tchebyshev (LT) product cubature is used for the angular discretization and leads to a series of equispaced points on each latitude ring on the unit sphere, where the number of rings and number of points on each ring can be varied independently (polar resolution given by Legendre order, azimuthal resolution given by Tchebyshev order). The primary advantage of LT cubature is the ability to exactly integrate a set of spherical harmonics functions. The convergence studies indicated that a minimum of 33 energy groups, L3T5 cubature (48 angles), 78 axial planes, and 3061 radial mesh elements are required for convergence based on assessment of k-eff changes (measured in pcm).
Table 4. List of Sensitivity Studies for Neutronics Simulation.
3.3. Multi-physics coupling approach
The computational requirements of PROTEUS-MOCEX and Nek5000 are vastly different in terms of number of compute cores and time to solution required. Therefore, an offline multi-physics coupling scheme was chosen in this work to permit each physics solver to use its own parallelization scheme and compute resources, improving computational efficiency. Use of the offline-coupling scheme also allowed the quick coupling of these two solvers without significant code development. Offline coupling (as opposed to online coupling) has some drawbacks in that coarser-grained finite element block-based data was transferred as oppose to finite element-based data, and manual interventions are required between code iterations that preclude efficient two-way coupling. However, it was determined that one-way coupling is sufficient as the temperature gradient does not significantly impact the core power distribution (Shemon et al., 0000). An initial temperature condition (either flat temperature or temperature gradient based on analytic solution or scoping CFD runs) is first assumed in PROTEUS-MOCEX to yield temperature-dependent cross section data, and the resulting pin power distribution is passed to the Nek5000 solver to compute the temperature distribution for several configurations.
3.4. Computing platform
This work was performed on a combination of small clusters, medium-scale high performance clusters (Argonne National Laboratory Computing Resource Center) and large-scale supercomputing machines (Argonne Leadership Computing Facility (ALCF)) as suited to the problem size and physics solver. The computing resources on ALCF are significantly more powerful than systems typically used for scientific research. More than 80 simulations concerning both neutronic and thermal hydraulic are performed in this work. For one simulation, the case is calculated in parallel with 1024 nodes (32 cores per node). In order to reach the convergence, it usually takes more than 5 h. In all, more than 20 million core hour was spent on ALCF for these high performance calculations.
<Section>4. Hcf assessment</Section>
Several hot channel factors for SFRs were identified through literature review as potential candidates (Table 5) for reduction or elimination through high-fidelity simulations. The HCFs of the peak temperatures at cladding outer surface, cladding inner wall surface, and fuel centerline induced by cladding manufacturing tolerance and uncertainties on the material thermo-physical properties will be evaluated.
Table 5. Proposed SFR hot channel factor candidates for high-fidelity simulations with SHARP toolkit.
a) C or E indicates that the HCF can be calculated (C) or eliminated (E) using SHARP toolkit.
The flow behavior can be quite different in the bare rod bundle as compared to the rod bundle with wire-wrap. The investigations are carried out to study the effect of wire wrap on the HCF calculations.
Due to the geometric complexity and the strict hexahedral mesh requirement of Nek5000, the Nek5000 calculation for wire wrapped rod bundle is performed without conjugate heat transfer (CHT). Therefore, in wire-wrapped rod bundle calculations, the maximum cladding and fuel temperature can only be derived through theoretical analysis (Fourier’s law) from the maximum coolant temperature obtained in CFD calculation, while in the bare rod bundle simulation, the temperature of fuel and cladding can be modeled explicitly with conjugate heat transfer.
The temperature distribution in 1/6th of the 91-pin assembly is examined. The comparison of the maximum outer cladding temperature between bare rod bundle and wire wrap rod bundle is shown in Fig. 2. In the wire wrapped rod bundle, the maximum outer cladding temperature in different rods deviates more than that in the bare rod bundle. However, the difference in the predicted maximum outer cladding temperature between bare rod bundle and wire wrap rod bundles is only about 2 °C. In addition, the maximum outer cladding temperature appears on Rod 3 and Rod 5 in the wire wrapped rod bundle, which is also well captured by the bare rod bundle model. In order to estimate the effect of neglecting conjugate heat transfer in the wire wrapped rod bundle case, the simulations are performed with and without CHT using the commercial code STAR-CCM + . The results (Shemon et al., 0000) show that no obvious deviation of the maximum cladding temperature is observed between the CHT calculation and the theoretical derivation based on Fourier’s law. However, the maximum fuel temperature is overestimated by Fourier’s law due to its one dimensional heat conduction assumption. No circumferential heat conduction is taken into account by the theoretical derivation. From the temperature contour of cladding and fuel shown in Fig. 3, the isolines in both cladding and fuel are not perfect concentric circles, which indicates the presence of circumferential heat conduction. The CHT further homogenize the circumferential temperature distribution. Consequently, the maximum fuel temperature is 4.12 °C overestimated by the theoretical analysis with Fourier’s Law when CHT is neglected. Therefore, the simulation on wire wrapped rod bundle with Nek5000 introduces some error in maximum fuel temperature prediction due to the absence of CHT. Moreover, the CFD calculation for the wire wrapped rod bundle can be 30 times more expensive than that for the bare rod bundle. To sum up, the bare rod bundle model is a more practical and efficient model for HCF calculations. Thus, bare rod bundle with CHT are used for all the solid temperature related hot channel factor calculations. The wire wrapped rod bundle is still used for calculating the HCFs of the peak temperatures at cladding outer surface due to the uncertainties from coolant properties, which is relatively independent of CHT.
Fig. 2. Maximum outer cladding temperature between 91-pin bare rod bundle and 91-pin wire wrap rod bundle.
Fig. 3. Contour of temperature in cladding and fuel.
To assess the HCF due to uncertainties in material properties, the procedure adopted was to modify the parameter (coolant density, fuel or cladding thermal conductivity etc.) directly in the code performing the calculations; by doing so, the effects of uncertainties are simultaneously and properly taken into account. The HCFs from some other uncertainties such as cladding thickness, fissile fuel maldistribution and wire-wrap orientation are calculated based on the simulation constructed correspondingly, which are described in detailed in the following section.
4.1. HCF associated with uncertainties in cladding thickness
The uncertainty in sub-channel flow area due to manufacturing tolerance of cladding thickness can have a non-negligible neutronics effect, so neutronics simulations were performed for perturbed cladding thickness. The manufacturing tolerance on the cladding thickness was obtained from the EBR-II MARK-V fuel fabrication, which is ± 3% (Chang et al., 1995). The cladding thickness of only the center pin (Fig. 2:rod1) was changed. Modifying the center pin cladding thickness has a negligible effect on the power profile and a small effect on eigenvalue (Table 6). In conclusion, the effect of the cladding thickness perturbation in neutronics is negligible. Using the unchanged power profiles in Nek5000 for the cladding perturbation hot channel factor calculation is therefore justified. In Nek5000 simulation, the cladding thickness perturbation can impact the flow area and CHT as well. In conventional HCF calculation, the HCFs are considered as independent while the high-fidelity calculation can take into account the coupled effect simultaneously.
Table 6. Neutronics Results for Cladding Perturbation.
4.2. HCF associated with uncertainties in fuel Pellet fissile content
Due to manufacturing uncertainty, the U-235 fissile content in a pin can vary up to +/- 6% from the target enrichment. This variability in enrichment causes changes in local pin power and temperature. A stochastic (random sampling) technique was used to assess the impact of manufacturing fissile content uncertainty. To obtain meaningful stochastic distributions, thirty independent neutronics inputs for the 91-pin configuration were randomly selected as follows:
•
The fissile content in each pin is sampled individually and not affected by neighboring pins.
•
The bottom and top enrichment zones of a pin are assumed to have identical enrichments.
•
A normal distribution is used to sample each enrichment perturbation.
•
The sampled enrichment perturbations are rounded to the nearest integer in the discrete set {±6, ±5, ±4, ±3, ±2, ±1, 0}%.
The eigenvalue and peak pin power distribution from each of the thirty simulations was identified in an attempt to characterize the corresponding distributions as shown in Fig. 4. The eigenvalue resembles a normal distribution. However, the distribution of peak pin powers does not follow a defined distribution, most likely due to the low number of samples. The peak pin power should follow a more predictable distribution when provided with more samples. Due to the relatively small number of samples (30), the simulation with the maximum peak pin power was conservatively chosen to transfer power to Nek5000. A normal distribution would be more likely to occur with more random sampling and the simulation with a peak pin power lying in the 95% confidence interval (2-sigma) could be selected as in Fig. 5.
Fig. 4. Eigenvalue and peak pin power distribution based on 30 random samples.
Fig. 5. Hypothetical distribution of peak pin power based on random sampling with a very large number of samples.
4.3. HCF associated with uncertainties in wire orientation
To calculate the hot channel factor due to reversed wire orientation in a wire wrapped pin, the explicit modeling of wire wrap is necessary. However, the generation of a pure hexahedral mesh for a wire wrapped rod bundle with different wire orientations is challenging. When constructing a simulation for flow through a wire-wrapped fuel rod bundle, scientists often utilize a smaller bundle than designed in order to minimize material or computational costs. In light of this, a miniature 7-pin configuration of the same fuel type was modeled in order to assess whether a smaller lattice can accurately capture the majority of relevant physics needed for HCF calculations. The results (Shemon et al., 0000) show that the HCFs are not sensitive to the number of pins. Given the complexity of the geometric feature, the HCF calculation for wire orientation was performed in only the 7-pin wire wrapped rod bundle. An innovative tet-to-hex meshing strategy(Yuan et al., 2020) is applied in this study. Fig. 6 shows the work flow of this strategy, which begins with a tetrahedral mesh. Since the tetrahedral elements can best represent the complex geometry, the automated mesh generation capability in ICEM CFD 18.2 was employed to build the pure tetrahedral mesh for the wire wrap rod bundle with the center pin wire wrap oriented in the opposite direction. Then, the tetrahedral mesh is converted to hexahedral mesh to adapt the mesh to Nek5000. Finally, mesh extrusion is applied to build boundary layers for better simulation of the flow near the wall.
Fig. 6. Workflow of tet-to-hex meshing strategy.
Code–to-code verification between STARCCM + and Nek5000 was performed to ensure the reliability of the results (Shemon et al., 0000). Good agreement between two codes are observed. Both velocity and temperature for wire wrap rod bundle with same (nominal) and different (perturbed) wire orientation is shown in Fig. 7. Reversal of the wire orientation in the center pin disturbs the flow pattern near the center pin and thus the temperature distribution. As seen from the figures, it changes the location of the hot spot rather than the temperature value of the hot spot. The effects incurred by reversed wire wrap in a pin are well captured by the SHARP model. This hot channel factor could not be well estimated by other tools previously.
Fig. 7. Comparison of velocity and temperature distribution with same and different wire orientation.
4.4. Estimation of hot channel factors
Based on the results of neutronics and thermal-hydraulics calculations using the SHARP toolkit, the obtained HCFs are listed in Table 7. The uncertainties or manufacturing tolerances and HCFs for EBR-II were obtained from Ref. (Chang et al., 1995), which was developed for Mark-V fuels. Compared to the HCFs for EBR-II Mark-V fuel, the newly estimated HCFs using the SHARP toolkit are smaller generally due to the reductions of uncertainties in modeling and simulations. For instance, in the EBR-II, the uncertainty of fuel thermal conductivity was considered as the HCF of fuel centerline temperature by assuming that the fuel centerline temperature is proportional to the fuel thermal conductivity. However, the calculated variation of the peak fuel centerline temperature was slightly smaller than the uncertainty of fuel thermal conductivity because there is non-linear correlation between them when the circumferential heat conduction is properly taken into account. Overall, the results obtained with PROTEUS and Nek5000 show consistently improved results over legacy techniques. This procedure of computing HCF using high fidelity models shows promise for being repeated for any arbitrary reactor of choice, since these tools are targeted to solve different reactor types and geometries.
Table 7. Evaluation of hot channel factors for selected uncertainties.
<Section>5. Conclusions</Section>
Several hot channel factors for SFRs were identified through literature review as potential candidates for reduction or elimination through high-fidelity simulations. The HCFs of the peak temperatures at cladding outer surface, cladding inner wall surface, and fuel centerline induced by manufacturing tolerances and uncertainties on the material thermo-physical properties were evaluated in this paper by using high-fidelity multi-physics SHARP toolkit. Systematic sensitivity studies are performed from both neutronic and thermal hydraulic perspectives to ensure the accuracy and efficiency of the model. Given the complexity and the extremely high computational cost for wire wrapped rod bundle modeling, bare rod bundle with CHT is the optimized model for the HCF calculation for fuel and cladding. The newly produced HCFs are compared to previous hot channel factors from historical efforts in order to quantify the advantages resulting from using advanced simulation methods and ensuring a high level of confidence in the new factors. As expected, the resulting HCFs obtained from the high-fidelity SHARP calculations are generally smaller than those developed for the earlier SFRs because most uncertainties involved in the modeling and simulations were reduced or eliminated. Some HCFs such as cladding circumferential temperature variation and wire orientation, which cannot be accessed in previous study, have also been computed adequately.
Moreover, many benefits are made possible by using high-fidelity multi-physics simulation for HCF calculation:
•
The hot channel factors are not independent of each other, it is convenient and conservative to consider them as independent in conventional HCF study. The high-fidelity calculation can take into account the coupled effect simultaneously and properly.
•
The results demonstrate the reduction or elimination of modeling uncertainties in the calculation of HCFs using high fidelity advanced modeling and simulation tools without the need of expensive experiments, which can save significant money on experiment deployment during design phase.
•
In addition to the improvement on HCF evaluation, high fidelity tools generate data to help the designer better understand the mechanism of the impact from these uncertainties.
•
The reduction of the uncertainties on HCF evaluation allows an increase of safety margin, which in turn improves the economic competitiveness of the reactor.
•
The multi-physics simulation can be applied to different reactor design. Currently, a HCF calculation is underway for Lead-cooled Fast Reactor (LFR) under the NEAMS program.
In conclusion, the use of high-fidelity multi-physics tools will play an increasingly more important role in advanced nuclear reactor design as benefits are demonstrated such as those shown in this work.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Yiqi Yu: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. Emily R. Shemon: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. Taek K. Kim: Supervision, Project administration. Elia Merzari: Writing - review & editing, Supervision.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgments</Section>
This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Nuclear Energy, Nuclear Energy Advanced Modeling and Simulation under contract DE-AC02-06CH11357. This research used resources of the Argonne Leadership Computing Facility, which is a DOE Office of Science User Facility. The authors also gratefully acknowledge the computing resources provided on Blues and Bebop, high-performance computing clusters operated by the Laboratory Computing Resource Center at Argonne National Laboratory.
<Section>References</Section>
Chang et al., 1995
L.K. Chang, L.K. Chang, D.J. Hill, “Safety Analysis and Technical Basis for Establishing an Interim Burnup Limit for Mark-V & Mark-VA Fueled Subassemblies in EBR-II,” ANL-IFR-246, (1995).
Google Scholar
Choi and Joo, 0000
N. Choi and H.G. Joo, Stability enhancement of planar solution based whole-core calculation employing augmented axial method of characteristics, Annals of Nuclear Energy, 143, 107440.
Google Scholar
Collins, 2016
B. Collins, et al.
Stability and accuracy of 3D neutron transport simulations using the 2D/1D methods in MPACT
J. Comput. Phys., 325 (2016), pp. 612-628
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fischer et al., 2008
P. F. Fischer, J. W. Lottes, and Stefan G. Kerkemier, Nek5000 Web Page, http://nek5000.mcs.anl.gov, 2008.
Google Scholar
Grandy, et al., 2013
C. Grandy, T.K. Kim, et al, “Advanced Fast Reactor - 100 – Design Overview,” Proceedings of FR-13: Fast Reactor and Related Fuel Cycles, Paris, France, March 4-7, 2013.
Google Scholar
Hardie and Little, 1969
R.W. Hardie and W.W. Little, Jr. , “1DX: A One-Dimensional Diffusion Code for Generating Effective Nuclear Cross Sections”, BNWL-954, Battelle Northwest Laboratory (1969).
Google Scholar
Kelley, 2015
B.W. Kelley, An Investigation of 2D/1D approximations to the 3D Boltzmann transport equation, Ph.D Thesis, University of Michigan, 2015.
Google Scholar
Kelly and Larsen, 2015
B.W. Kelly, E.W. Larsen
A consistent 2D/1D approximation to the 3D transport equation
Nucl. Eng. Design, 295 (2015), pp. 598-614
Google Scholar
Ku et al., 1994
J. Y. Ku, L. K. Chang and D. Mohr, “Analysis of IFR Driver Fuel Hot Channel Factors,” Fourth International Topical Meeting on Nuclear Thermal Hydraulics, Operation and Safety, Taipei, Taiwan, April 5-8, 1994.
Google Scholar
Little and Hardie, 1969
W.W. Little, R.W. Hardie
“2DB User’s Manual - Revision I”, BNWL-831
Rev. I, Battelle Pacific Northwest Laboratory (1969)
Google Scholar
Mahadevan et al., 2014
V. S. Mahadevan, E. Merzari, T.J. Tautges, “SHARP Coupled Multiphysics Toolkit for Reactor Analysis,” Proceedings of ICAPP 2014, Charlotte, NC, April 6-9, 2014.
Google Scholar
Mario, 1980
D. Mario Carelli, Aaron J. Friedland
Hot channel factors for rod temperature calculations in LMFBR assemblies
Nucl. Eng. Design, 62 (1–3) (1980), pp. 155-180
Google Scholar
Merzari et al., 2008
E. Merzari, H. Ninokata, E. Baglietto
Numerical simulation of flows in tight-lattice fuel bundles
Nucl. Eng. Design, 238 (7) (2008), pp. 1703-1719
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Merzari et al., 2015
E. Merzari, E. Shemon, Y. Yu, J. Thomas, A. Obabko, R. Jain, V. Mahadevan, J. Solberg, R. Ferencz, R. Whitesides
“Multi-Physics Demonstration Problem with the SHARP Reactor Simulation Toolkit”
Argonne National Laboratory Technical Report ANL-NE-15/44, December (2015), p. 21
Google Scholar
Mynatt, 1973
F. B. Mynatt, W.W. Engle jr., M.L. Gritzner, W.A. Rhoades and R.J. Rodgers , “The DOT III Two Dimensional Discrete Ordinates Transport Code,” ORNL–TM–4280 (1973).
Google Scholar
Parsons et al., 2007
I. Parsons, J. Solberg, R. Ferencz, M. Havstad, N. Hodge, A. Wemhoff. 2007 Diablo user manual. Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, UCRL-SM-234927.
Google Scholar
Shemon et al., 0000
E.R. Shemon, Y.Q. Yu, T.K. Kim, Applications of SHARP Toolkit to SFR Challenging Problems: Evaluation of Hot Channel Factors and Demonstration of Zooming Capability, ANL/NSE-18/4,2018.
Google Scholar
Shemon et al., 2014
E. R. Shemon, C. H. Lee, M. A. Smith and A. Marin-Lafleche, “NEAMS Neutronics: Development and Validation Status”, Proceedings of ICAPP 2014, Charlotte, NC, April 6-9, 2014.
Google Scholar
Yang, 2005
W.S. Yang
Potential Gains through Reduced Hot Spot Factors
ANL Intra-laboratory memo (2005)
Google Scholar
Yu et al., 2011
Y.Q. Yu, B.H. Yan, X. Cheng, H.Y. Gu
Simulation of turbulent flow inside different subchannels in tight lattice bundle
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 38 (11) (2011), pp. 2363-2373
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar