<title>The optimization for the straight-channel PCHE size for supercritical CO2 Brayton cycle</title>
<author>1,HongXu,2,ChengjieDuan,3,HaoDing,4,WenhuaiLi,5,YaoliZhang,6,GangHong,7,HoujunGong</author>
<Affiliation>1,College of Energy, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, 361105, China;2,China Nuclear Power Technology Research Institute Co. Ltd, Shenzhen, 518028, China;3,Fujian Research Center for Nuclear Engineering, Xiamen, Fujian, 361105, China;4,Nuclear Power Institute of China, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610213, China</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2020.12.002</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1738573320309463</URL>
The optimization for the straight-channel PCHE size for supercritical CO2 Brayton cycle
HongXu,ChengjieDuan,HaoDing,WenhuaiLi,YaoliZhang,GangHong,HoujunGong
College of Energy, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, 361105, China
China Nuclear Power Technology Research Institute Co. Ltd, Shenzhen, 518028, China
Fujian Research Center for Nuclear Engineering, Xiamen, Fujian, 361105, China
Nuclear Power Institute of China, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610213, China
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Printed Circuit Heat Exchanger (PCHE) is a widely used heat exchanger in the supercritical carbon dioxide (sCO2) Brayton cycle because it can work under high temperature and pressure, and has been a hot topic in Next Generation Nuclear Plant (NGNP) projects for use as recuperators and condensers. Most previous studies focused on channel structures or shapes. However, no clear advancement has so far been seen in the allover size of the PCHE. In this paper, we proposed an optimal size of the PCHE with a fixed volume. Two boundary conditions of PCHE were simulated, respectively. When the volume of PCHE was fixed, the heat transfer rate and pressure loss were picked as the optimization objectives. The Pareto front was obtained by the Multi-objective optimization procedure. We got the optimized number of PCHE channels under two different boundary conditions from the Pareto front. The comprehensive performance can be increased by 5.3% while holding in the same volume. The numerical results from this study can be used to improve the design of PCHE with straight channels.
Keywords:Printed circuit heat exchanger;Supercritical CO2;Heat transfer rate;Pumping power
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
In recent years, many studies of the supercritical carbon dioxide (sCO2) Brayton cycle has been carried out, proving that the sCO2 Brayton cycle is an energy conversion system with great potential [[1], [2], [3]]. This cycle has been suggested to use with the Next Generation Nuclear Plant (NGNP) project. Printed circuit heat exchanger (PCHE) is a typical compact heat exchanger [4], and it often be used as a compact heat exchanger in sCO2 Brayton cycles. Due to its structural design and material, it can be used in high pressure and high temperature conditions.
Researchers have carried out a lot of investigations to improve the performances of different PCHEs in previous studies. The PCHE with straight [[5], [6], [7]], zigzag [[8], [9], [10]], S-shaped fin [11,12], and airfoil fin channels [[13], [14], [15]] have been proposed, and the researchers have compared the temperature difference and the pressure loss of PCHE with different channel shapes. The constructions of PCHE headers have also be considered to increase the comprehensive performance of PCHEs by improving the flow uniformity. Koo et al. [16] discussed the effects of flow non-uniformity on comprehensive performance and optimized the angle and radius of curvature of the inlet chamber wall and the diameter of the inlet pipes. Shi et al. [17] investigated the optimal structures of the inlet header by using a surrogate model combined with genetic algorithm. Chu et al. [18] analyzed the flow non-uniformity of a PCHE with straight channels, four different inlet headers have been analyzed by them, and they proposed a modified inlet header which reduces the flow non-uniformity significantly. However, they mostly focused on the thermal and hydraulic performance of a single heat exchanger unit. Recently, researchers realized the importance of the geometry influence the flow performance. Lee and Kim [19] discussed the relationship between the effectiveness and the Euler number of the PCHE with zigzag channels, and they proposed an adequate objective function to optimize the PCHE. Saeed et al. [20] optimized the geometry of the sinusoidal fins, and the optimized model was numerically analyzed by using response surface methodology (RSM), which is combined with the genetic algorithm. Kwon et al. [21] proposed the cost-based objective function to optimize the airfoil-type PCHE. Yang et al. [22] optimized the allover size of a zigzag-channel PCHE with the non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm (NSGA-II) and provided guidelines for designers to choose the optimal size of the PCHE core. However, the changes in boundary conditions were not considered in his work and no definite heat exchanger designs under a specific condition were proposed. In fact, the boundary conditions have a significant influence on the size of the optimal designed PCHE, and the optimization results obtained by different boundary conditions are completely different.
In this work, the influence of inlet fluid conditions on the optimal design is taken into account, and two different boundary conditions have been studied respectively. The thermal-hydraulic performance of the PCHE with straight flow channels has been performed by a simplified numerical method. The aim of this work is to evaluate the optimal size of PCHE and weight between the two thermal and dynamic characteristics, like enhancing the heat exchange rate and reducing pressure loss when the volume of PCHE is fixed. Finally, we got the optimal designs of both high temperature recuperator and low temperature recuperator through Pareto-optimal solutions.
<Section>2. Model and numerical method</Section>
2.1. Geometrical model
The schematics of the straight PCHE channel configurations are shown in Fig. 1. Chemical etching on the face of metal flats is used to obtain the flow channels in PCHE, in which the hot fluid and the cold fluid flow alternatively. And one heat transfer unit consists of a hot flow channel, a cold flow channel and the solid domain around them (see Fig. 2).
Fig. 1. Geometry and dimensions of PCHE.
Fig. 2. Schematic of the nodal approach.
The straight-channel PCHE in Meshram’s work [23] is selected as the reference case. The geometric dimensions used in the current numerical study are shown in Table 1. The diameter of the semicircular channel is 2 mm, the height and width of the cross section are 2.5 mm and 3.2 mm, respectively. Fig. 1 shows the schematic diagram of the cold and hot plates, both of which is 1.6 mm thick, and the transverse clearance between each channel is 0.5 mm. The boundary conditions of each channel are shown in Table 2 and Table 3. The flow fraction is set as 0.6.
Table 1. Computational domain size parameters.
Table 2. Boundary conditions of high temperature recuperator.
Table 3. Boundary conditions of low temperature recuperator.
The following simplifications are assumed: (1) ignore the heat dissipation between the solid domains to the environment; (2) the influence of the header and subsequent mass flow misdistribution is not considered; (3) longitudinal heat conduction is not considered.
2.2. Numerical analysis
Modelica [24] is used for numerical evaluation of the PCHE. The alloy Inconel 617 is considered as the material for the PCHE and the properties of solid domains are presented in Table 4. The properties of sCO2 are selected from the REFPROP [25] to obtaining accurate result.
Table 4. Properties of solid domains.
The mass, momentum and energy equations for the fluid domain are shown as follows, which are simplified as one-dimensional issue:
@(1)
@(2)
@(3)
The hydraulic diameter,@ , is defined as,
(4)
where D is the diameter of the channel.
The Reynolds number, @, is obtained based on the hydraulic diameter in Eq.(4),
@(5)
where U is the average velocity of S–CO2, P is the density, and@is the dynamic viscosity.
The local Nusselt number Nu is calculated by the Gnielinski equation [26] and the local friction factor f is calculated by the Filonenko equation,
@(6)
@(7)
In this paper, the Nusselt number of high temperature recuperator is 8.8&times;103–4 × 104, and the Prandtl number is 0.7–1.4. Besides, the Nusselt number of low temperature recuperator is 4.3 × 103–4.4 × 104, and its Prandtl number is 0.9–1.8, Thus, the equation selected is suitable for the simulation below.
According to method developed by Kim et al. [27], the thickness between two neighboring hot and cold channels can be determined by integration considering the variation due to the curvatures. The average thickness of the plate is determined by Eq. (8), which considers the variation due to curvatures. Thus, the overall heat transfer coefficient h can be calculated by using Eq. (9).
@(8)
@(9)
Whereis the thermal resistance of walls,@,@ ,@are the heat transfer area of the PCHE, cold channel and hot channel, andare the heat transfer coefficients of the cold fluid and hot fluid, respectively, which are determined by
@(10)
@(11)
The total heat transfer rate Q, the pressure drop@and the pumping power p can be calculated by Eq. (12), (13), (14), (15).@is the average of the bulk temperature of sCO2 in the channels and@represents the average wall temperature. The channel unit is discretized into n sub-heat exchangers along the channel length by a nodal approach, as shown in Fig. 3, Fig. 11 nodes are selected to calculate the total heat transfer rate and pressure drop.
@(12)
@(13)
@(14)
@(15)
Fig. 3. Comparison with numerical results in Ref. [23], (a) temperature, (b) pressure drop.
The objective function, F, is defined as a linear combination of two different objectives, Ft and f with a weighting factor, β as follows,
@(16)
Where Ft is defined as the reciprocal of effectiveness, ε,
@(17)
Where Thot,in and Thot,out are the bulk temperatures at the inlet and outlet of the hot channels, respectively. Besides, Tcold,in is the bulk temperature at the inlet of the cold channel.
Fp, is defined as follow,
@(18)
Where@is the pressure drop the cold channel. In addition, ρavg and vavg are the averaged S–CO2 density and the averaged velocity in the channels, respectively.
The weighting factor is the same as Lee and Kim’s work [28], and the value of it is 0.09 to adjusted the two objective functions.
2.3. Validation of the numerical results
The influence of the number of nodes on the calculation is expressed in Table 5. It can be seen that the nodes number increases from 6 to 11, the temperature varies about 2.2%, and with the nodes number further rises, there is just a small change of the temperature. Thus, 11 nodes are selected in this paper to calculate the thermodynamic and hydraulic performance.
Table 5. The outlet temperature of the hot channel varies with nodes number.
Due to limited experiments on PCHEs, there are few data on the temperature and the pressure drop along the flow direction. Therefore, we simulated the same case as Ref. [23] and compared with the results of Ref. [23] to verify the reliability of the simulation. As for this case, the geometry of the cross-section is shown in Fig. 1, because we select the same parameter as the benchmark in this study. And the length of the PCHE is 0.2 m. Meanwhile, the boundary condition of the benchmark is shown in Table 6.
Table 6. Boundary conditions of the benchmark.
As shown in Fig. 3, the error bound of the fluid temperature between the results is within 2.5% and that of the pressure drop is within 5.1%. Therefore, the simplified one-dimensional numerical method that is proposed and utilized in this paper to simulate the thermal and hydraulic characteristics of sCO2 in PCHE channels is considered credible.
<Section>3. Optimization procedure</Section>
The procedure of the present multi-objective optimization is represented in Fig. 4. The primary goal of the optimization procedure is to find the optimal size of the PCHE core with the same volume, which can obtain the best performance. The optimal comprehensive performance includes two key aspects: a larger heat transfer rate and a less pressure loss. In this work, firstly, we input the variables x1 and x2 to the optimization procedure, which are the height and the width of the cross-section we preliminary designed, and the length of the PCHE core is determined by them because the volume is resumed unchanged. Then, the objective parameters y1 and y2 which are the heat transfer rate and pressure loss can be calculated by the objective function in chapter 2.2. Finally, the objective parameters y1 and y2 are used to evaluate the operation characteristics of the PCHE. Before the preliminary designs of optimization, we obtained the design space of the variables x1 and x2 by a roughly calculation, and they are set as: 40 mm ≤ x1 ≤ 80 mm, 40 mm ≤ x2 ≤ 80 mm. At last, in the reference case, the width, height, and length of the PCHE core are 45 mm, 41.6 mm and 385 mm, respectively. And the volume of the reference case is 1.0V. During the optimization process, all the geometric parameters of the cross-section are fixed except the number of channels and the length, height, width of the PCHE core.
Fig. 4. Multi-objective optimization procedure.
In order to find the relationship between the size of PCHE and the comprehensive performance, a simplified model is used to numerically calculate 25 pairs of design variables for each volume. Totally 6 vol in high temperature recuperator and 6 vol in low temperature recuperator are investigated, respectively. The volume rises with a step of 1.0V (0.00072 m3), and the volume of high temperature recuperator is from 1.0V to 6.0V, the volume of low temperature recuperator is also from 1.0V to 6.0V. Finally, we can get the heat transfer rate and pressure loss of 150 cases of high temperature recuperator, and 150 cases of low temperature recuperator. The results are used to optimize the size of the core for two PCHEs working in different condition.
<Section>4. Results and discussion</Section>
4.1. Optimization of high temperature recuperator
The heat transfer rate and pumping power are influenced by the design variables of PCHE with determined boundary conditions of fluids. In order to express the relationship intuitively, the calculation results of the 1.0 V (0.00072 m3) PCHE core are all fitted to the cloud chart, as shown in Fig. 5. The 1.0 V is the basic design of the PCHE, in which the width, height, and length of the PCHE core are 45 mm, 41.6 mm and 385 mm. It can be seen from Fig. 5 (a) that the heat transfer rate decreases along with the width under a certain height, and similarly, the heat transfer rate drops along with the height when the width is fixed. When the sizes of the PCHE is 80 × 80 × 113 mm3, we get the minimum heat transfer rate 32.34 kW. And the maximum heat transfer rate is 46.54 kW, with the sizes of the PCHE 40 × 40 × 450 mm3. So it can be seen that the heat transfer rate can be increased by up to 43.9% when the size of the PCHE core varies. Meanwhile, as shown in Fig. 5 (b), the change trend of pressure loss is similar to that of the heat transfer rate. The minimum of the pressure drop is 2.68 kPa, and the maximum is 33.76 kPa. So the pressure loss can be improved by up to 1159.7% with the variation of PCHE core. A little improvement in heat transfer performance brings nearly 10 times the hydraulic performance loss. It can be concluded that the effect on pressure loss is more evident than that of the heat transfer rate by changing the sizes of the PCHE core. Hence, the heat transfer rate and the pressure loss should be considered simultaneously.
Fig. 5. The relationship between design variables and objective parameters.
Since the optimization involves two decision variables in this study, the effect of one variable on the optimization objectives can be compensated by another one. Therefore, the optimization result can be determined by different heat transfer rate and pumping power. During the optimization process, the Pareto-optimal solutions are selected from the points around the Pareto front based on the crowding distance. The objective function values of the optimization process are shown in Fig. 6. The Pareto front is acquired by changing the size of the PCHE core while holding in the same volume. And sizes of PCHE core 45 × 41.6 × 385 mm3 is selected as a reference case to compare with the optimal solution. The Pareto-optimal solution shows us that as the heat transfer rate increases, the pumping power initially appears to increase gently. Then, as the heat transfer rate increases further, the pumping power increases rapidly. It can be interpreted that the length of the channel is getting longer and the number of channels is getting smaller, the fluid velocity increases. The endpoint of the Pareto optimal front represents the best heat transfer performance and the poorest flow performance. We can choose a design of PCHE with the largest heat transfer rate from the case a or the smallest pumping power from case b. Compared with the reference case, while achieving the same heat transfer rate with the same PCHE volume, the pumping power can be reduced by nearly 39.0% in case c. While achieving the same volume and the same pumping power, the heat transfer rate can be increased by around 4.0% in case d. The improvement in heat transfer is not as obvious as the improvement in pumping power.
Fig. 6. Objective function values corresponding to the prediction and reference case.
Fig. 7 shows the results obtained from the studies of the heat transfer coefficients variation in the reference case. The heat transfer coefficient of the hot fluid in the hot channel decreases from 3000 W/m2·K to 2700 W/m2·K along the flow direction, while the speed of decrease gradually slows down. In addition, we can see that the heat transfer coefficient of the cold fluid in the cold channel increases rapidly from 3140 W/m2·K to 3950 W/m2·K along the flow direction. The heat transfer coefficient of the cold fluid is much higher than that of the hot fluid.
Fig. 7. Heat transfer coefficients variation along flow direction.
Fig. 8 shows Pareto frontier curves at different PCHE volumes. The Pareto-optimal solution of both 6 PCHEs show us the same trend of objective parameters that, when the heat transfer rate is big enough, the pump power increases rapidly with a slight change of the heat transfer rate. It can be concluded that the volume of PCHE limits further improvement of the heat transfer performance. If the heat transfer rate and pumping power are both big, increasing the PCHE volume can reduce the pumping power under the same constraint of heat transfer rate, or increase the heat transfer rate with the pumping power remains unchanged. However, as the PCHE volume increases, the distance between Pareto optimal solutions corresponding to adjacent volumes becomes smaller and smaller. These results suggest that the benefits of increasing volume gradually diminish. In other words, the maximum heat transfer rate of the PCHE is determined by the temperature difference between the hot side and the cold side, and the further improvement of the heat transfer performance in terms of volume change is constrained by this.
Fig. 8. The Pareto-optimal solutions of different PCHE volumes.
It is impossible for us to design a PCHE with the largest heat transfer rate and the smallest pressure drop. Optimal design to achieve proper heat transfer performance and hydraulic performance seem to a better choice. The comprehensive performance is determined by objective function F, which is calculated by Eq. (16).
Fig. 9 shows the comparison of comprehensive performance with different PCHE volumes. It can be seen that the objective function drops with channels number at first and then rises mildly. Besides, the PCHE with big volume achieves better performance. The channels number with the minimum of the objective function seems to be the optimal design of PCHE. Table 7 indicates the optimal design in different cases by the results from Fig. 9. The results can greatly help PCHE designers to pick the suitable size of PCHE cores under definite boundary conditions.
Fig. 9. Comprehensive performance of different PCHE volumes.
Table 7. The optimal design in different cases.
4.2. Optimization of low temperature recuperator
Fig. 10 shows the relationship between design variables and objective parameters for the 1.0V PCHE core. Fig. 10 (a) shows us the minimum heat transfer rate 9.1 kW, with an 80 × 80 × 113 mm3 PCHE. And the maximum heat transfer rate is 16.4 kW, with the sizes of PCHE 40 × 40 × 450 mm3. The heat transfer rate increases by 80.2%. Meanwhile, as shown in Fig. 10 (b), the minimum of the pressure loss is 0.32 kPa, and the maximum is 15.63 kPa. The pressure loss increases by about 4784.4%. The trend of the heat transfer rate and pressure loss of the low temperature recuperator with changes in sizes is similar to that of the high temperature recuperator, which only has differences in specific values.
Fig. 10. The relationship between design variables and objective parameters.
Fig. 11. The Pareto-optimal solutions of different PCHE volumes.
Fig. 11 shows Pareto frontier between heat transfer rate and pumping power with different PCHE volumes, varying from 1.0 V to 6.0 V, 6 PCHE volumes have been studied in this chapter. The shape of the Pareto is similar to that in high temperature recuperator. The evaluation of comprehensive performance is based on the results from the Pareto front. Fig. 12 shows the comparison of comprehensive performance with different PCHE volumes. We can obtain the optimal design from it. And Table 8 indicates the optimal design in different cases by the results.
Fig. 12. Comprehensive performance of different PCHE volumes.
Table 8. The optimal design in different cases.
<Section>5. Summary</Section>
It is clear that the results calculated by this simplified model agree well with the benchmark as shown in Fig. 3, which validated the credibility of the present study. The variations of temperature and pressure drop are compared with the numerical study of Meshram [23]. Therefore, it can be concluded that the model used in this work is realizable.
Fig. 5 describes the relationship among heat transfer rate, pressure drop and the size of PCHE. The parameters of the cross-section show an obvious impact on both heat transfer and hydraulic performance. The number of channels, which determined by the size of the PCHE core, affects the inlet Reynolds number significantly. Besides, there is a negative correlation between the channels number and the Reynolds number. And the Nusselt number and friction factor vary with the channel number. The heat transfer rate changes linearly with the size, while the pressure drop changes non-linearly. Thus, it is necessary to balance the effects of channels number to heat transfer performance and hydraulic performance.
A significant difference in heat transfer coefficient in cold channel and hot channel has been given in Fig. 7. The fluid velocity is higher in the cold channel, leading to a better heat transfer performance.
In high temperature recuperator, compared with the reference case, the heat transfer rate increases by 0.2%, the pumping power reduce by 33.1%, and the comprehensive performance increases by nearly 5.3%. In the case c, the comprehensive performance increases by 5.2%. And in case d, the comprehensive performance increases by 4.3%. With the volume of the PCHE rises, the pumping power decreases slightly. However, the heat transfer rate has a maximum, no matter how we change the sizes of the PCHE or the volume. The maximum is depended on the inlet fluid conditions. It shows the limitations to optimize the size of PCHE by only increasing the thermal performance. The heat transfer rate and pumping power vary similarly in the low temperature recuperator.
Compared to the cases of high temperature recuperator, cases of low temperature recuperator have a smaller temperature difference of hot fluid and cold fluid from the inlet and observe a smaller flow rate in the cold channel. The Nusselt number is smaller and the friction factor is larger with the same sizes of PCHE. Compared Table 7 to Table 8, the influence of boundary conditions on the optimal design has been revealed. It can be seen that the optimal design of low temperature recuperator needs fewer channels than high temperature recuperator. It means the low temperature recuperator is longer than high temperature recuperator. It can be concluded that the boundary conditions not only influence the thermal-hydraulic performance but also have effects on the comprehensive performance with an optimal designed PCHE. It is necessary to analyze the sizes of PCHE when the boundary conditions changed.
<Section>6. Conclusions</Section>
We have demonstrated validation of the simplified one-dimensional numerical method in this paper, and the effect of PCHE sizes on the comprehensive performance of the straight-channel PCHE is investigated by this method and the size of PCHE core has been obtained by the Pareto optimal solution after a multi-objective optimization method carried out. Different sizes of the PCHE are simulated for each volume, six volumes of high temperature recuperator and 6 vol of low temperature recuperator are evaluated to optimize the sizes. The conclusions are as follows:
1.
The variation of heat transfer coefficients along flow direction is different between hot fluid and cold fluid.
2.
The pumping power drops by nearly 39% when compared to the reference case with the heat transfer rate and the PCHE volume remain unchanged.
3.
The heat transfer rate of the optimized proposed PCHE size was found up to 4% when the pumping power and the PCHE volume are the same.
4.
In high temperature recuperator, compared with the reference case, the heat transfer rate increased by 0.2%, the pumping power reduced by 33.1%, and the comprehensive performance can be increased by 5.3% while the volume remains unchanged with the optimal size of the PCHE.
5.
Definite designs of the PCHE are proposed to get the best comprehensive performance.
<Section>Declaration of competing interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 11705188).
<Section>References</Section>
[1]
Y. Yu, W. Bai, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Li, M. Yao, H. Wang
Coupled simulation of the combustion and fluid heating of a 300 MW supercritical CO2 boiler
Appl. Therm. Eng., 113 (2017), pp. 259-267
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[2]
A. Moisseytsev, J.J. Sienicki
Investigation of alternative layouts for the supercritical carbon dioxide Brayton cycle for a sodium-cooled fast reactor
Nucl. Eng. Des., 239 (2009), pp. 1362-1371
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[3]
R. Singh, S. Miller, A. Rowlands, P.A. Jacobs
Dynamic characteristics of a direct-heated supercritical carbon- dioxide Brayton cycle in a solar thermal power plant
Energy, 50 (2013), pp. 194-204
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[4]
S.K. Mylavarapu, X. Sun, R.E. Glosup, R.N. Christensen, M.W. Patterson
Thermal hydraulic performance testing of printed circuit heat exchangers in a high-temperature helium test facility
Appl. Therm. Eng., 65 (2014), pp. 605-614
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[5]
J.W. Seo, Y.H. Kim, D. Kim, Y.D. Choi, K.J. Lee
Heat transfer and pressure drop characteristics in straight microchannel of printed circuit heat exchangers
Entropy, 17 (2015), pp. 3438-3457
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[6]
Z. Zhao, Y. Zhang, X. Chen, X. Ma, S. Yang, S. Li
A numerical study on condensation flow and heat transfer of refrigerant in minichannels of printed circuit heat exchanger
Int. J. Refrig., 102 (2019), pp. 96-111
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[7]
Z. Ren, C. Zhao, P. Jiang, H. Bo
Investigation on local convection heat transfer of supercritical CO2 during cooling in horizontal semicircular channels of printed circuit heat exchanger
Appl. Therm. Eng., 157 (2019), p. 113697
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[8]
S.J. Yoon, J.E. Obrien, M. Chen, P. Sabharwall, X. Sun
Development and validation of Nusselt number and friction factor correlations for laminar flow in semi-circular zigzag channel of printed circuit heat exchanger
Appl. Therm. Eng., 123 (2017), pp. 1327-1344
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[9]
J. Pan, J. Wang, L. Tang, J. Bai, R. Li, Y. Lu, G. Wu
Numerical investigation on thermal-hydraulic performance of a printed circuit LNG vaporizer
Appl. Therm. Eng., 165 (2020), p. 114447
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[10]
H. Zhang, J. Guo, X. Huai, K. Cheng, X. Cui
Studies on the thermal-hydraulic performance of zigzag channel with supercritical pressure CO2
J. Supercrit. Fluids, 148 (2019), pp. 104-115
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[11]
A.M. Aneesh, A. Sharma, A. Srivastava, P. Chaudhury
Effects of wavy channel configurations on thermal- hydraulic characteristics of Printed Circuit Heat Exchanger (PCHE)
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 118 (2018), pp. 304-315
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[12]
Y.J. Baik, S. Jeon, B. Kim, D. Jeon, C. Byon
Heat transfer performance of wavy-channeled PCHEs and the effects of waviness factors
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 114 (2017), pp. 809-815
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[13]
X. Xu, T. Ma, L. Li, M. Zeng, Y. Chen, Y. Huang, Q. Wang
Optimization of fin arrangement and channel configuration in an airfoil fin PCHE for supercritical CO2 cycle
Appl. Therm. Eng., 70 (2014), pp. 867-875
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[14]
X. Cui, J. Guo, X. Huai, K. Cheng, H. Zhang, M. Xiang
Numerical study on novel airfoil fins for printed circuit heat exchanger using supercritical CO2
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 121 (2018), pp. 354-366
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[15]
F. Chen, L. Zhang, X. Huai, J. Li, H. Zhang, Z. Liu
Comprehensive performance comparison of airfoil fin PCHEs with NACA 00XX series airfoil
Nucl. Eng. Des., 315 (2017), pp. 42-50
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[16]
G. Koo, S. Lee, K. Kim
Shape optimization of inlet part of a printed circuit heat exchanger using surrogate modeling
Appl. Therm. Eng., 72 (2014), pp. 90-96
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[17]
H. Shi, T. Ma, W. Chu, Q. Wang
Optimization of inlet part of a microchannel ceramic heat exchanger using surrogate model coupled with genetic algorithm
Energy Convers. Manag., 149 (2017), pp. 988-996
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[18]
W. Chu, X. Li, T. Ma, Y. Chen, Q. Wang
Study on hydraulic and thermal performance of printed circuit heat transfer s urface with distributed airfoil fins
Appl. Therm. Eng., 114 (2017), pp. 1309-1318
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[19]
S.M. Lee, K.Y. Kim
Shape optimization of a printed-circuit heat exchanger to enhance thermal-hydraulic performance
Proceedings of International Congress on Advances in Nuclear Power Plants, 1 (2012)
12363
Google Scholar
[20]
M. Saeed, M.H. Kim
Thermal-hydraulic analysis of sinusoidal fin-based printed circuit heat exchangers for supercritical CO2 Brayton cycle
Energy Convers. Manag., 193 (2019), pp. 124-139
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[21]
J.G. Kwon, T.H. Kim, H.S. Park, J.E. Cha, M.H. Kim
Optimization of airfoil-type PCHE for the recuperator of small scale brayton cycle by cost-based objective function
Nucl. Eng. Des., 298 (2016), pp. 192-200
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[22]
Y. Yang, H. Li, M. Yao, Y. Zhang, C. Zhang, L. Zhang, S. Wu
Optimizing the size of a printed circuit heat exchanger by multi-objective genetic algorithm
Appl. Therm. Eng., 167 (2020), p. 114811
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[23]
A. Meshram, A.K. Jaiswal, S.D. Khivsara, J.D. Ortega, C. Ho, R. Bapat, P. Dutta
Modeling and analysis of a printed circuit heat exchanger for supercritical CO2 power cycle applications
Appl. Therm. Eng., 109 (2016), pp. 861-870
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[24]
Modelica Association
Modelica specification 3.3
(2016)
Google Scholar
[25]
E.W. Lemmon, M.L. Huber, M.O. Mclinden
NIST Standard Reference Database 23: Reference Fluid Thermodynamic and Transport Propert Ies-REFPROP 9.0
NIST NSRDS (2010)
Google Scholar
[26]
V. Gnielinski
New equations for heat and mass transfer in the turbulent flow in pipes and channels
NASA STI/recon technical report A, 75 (1975), pp. 8-16
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[27]
I.H. Kim, H.C. No, J.I. Lee, B.G. Jeon
Thermal hydraulic performance analysis of the printed circuit heat exchanger using a helium test facility and CFD simulations
Nucl. Eng. Des., 239 (11) (2009), pp. 2399-2408
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[28]
S.M. Lee, K.Y. Kim
Shape optimization of a printed-circuit heat exchanger to enhance thermal-hydraulic performance
International Congress on Advances in Nuclear Power Plants, ICAPP (2012)
2012
Google Scholar