<title>Nonlinear vibrations of a 3 × 3 reduced scale PWR fuel assembly supported by spacer grids</title>
<author>1,GiovanniFerrari,2,GiulioFranchini,3,LucaFaedo,4,FrancescoGiovanniello,5,StanislasLe Guisquet,6,PrabakaranBalasubramanian,7,KostasKarazis,8,MarcoAmabili</author>
<Affiliation>1,McGill University, Dept. of Mechanical Engineering, Macdonald Engineering Bldg., 817 Sherbrooke St. W, Montreal H3A 0C3, Quebec, Canada;2,Framatome Inc., 3315 Old Forest Rd., Lynchburg, 24501 VA, USA</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nucengdes.2020.110674</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029549320301680</URL>
Nonlinear vibrations of a 3 × 3 reduced scale PWR fuel assembly supported by spacer grids
GiovanniFerrari,GiulioFranchini,LucaFaedo,FrancescoGiovanniello,StanislasLe Guisquet,PrabakaranBalasubramanian,KostasKarazis,MarcoAmabili
McGill University, Dept. of Mechanical Engineering, Macdonald Engineering Bldg., 817 Sherbrooke St. W, Montreal H3A 0C3, Quebec, Canada
Framatome Inc., 3315 Old Forest Rd., Lynchburg, 24501 VA, USA
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Experimental study on vibrations of reduced-scale PWR fuel bundles.
Large amplitude vibrations in non-linear regime.
Evidence of damping increase with vibration amplitude.
Spacer grids as boundary conditions with nonlinear stiffness and friction.
Tests in presence of water flowing at typical coolant flow velocity.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The core of Pressurized Water Reactors (PWR) is composed by nuclear fuel assemblies, bundles of slender fuel rods containing uranium pellets, kept in position by spacer grids equipped with elastic elements for retention, and exposed to an axial flow of coolant. Fuel assemblies are subjected to fluid-induced vibrations causing fretting at the interface with spacer grids; events such as earthquakes may also constitute an external excitation resulting in large-amplitude vibrations of the fuel rods. The relationship between the excitation amplitude and the damping during large-amplitude forced vibrations of nuclear fuel assemblies in the presence of flowing fluid is not fully understood. The present experimental study investigated the vibrations of a 3 × 3 tube assembly composed by eight regularly spaced fuel rods installed around a guide tube and supported by spacer grids; tests were performed in still and flowing water. In addition to experimental modal analysis under small random excitation, stepped-sine experiments at different levels of harmonic excitation that caused large-amplitude vibrations were performed. The equivalent viscous damping ratios of the fundamental model at different excitation levels were extracted by fitting the results with a single degree-of-freedom model. The vibrations of the fuel assembly were strongly influenced by the vibrational behavior of the single rods, which constitute coupled oscillators. An increase of damping with the excitation amplitude was observed both in still and in flowing water and acted in the direction of structural safety. The water flow did not cause instabilities in the operational range; instead, the increment of flow speed increased the damping ratios in the linear (small-amplitude vibrations) and nonlinear (large-amplitude vibrations) regime.
Keywords:PWR fuel rods;Nonlinear vibrations;Fluid-structure interaction;Dynamic parameter identification;Damping identification;Spacer grids
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Pressurized Water Reactors (PWRs) are installed in civil plants to produce electricity and to produce propulsion in military submarines and vessels. The cores of large PWRs are large vessels containing up to more than two hundred nuclear fuel assemblies, which in turn are constituted by hundreds of slender fuel rods organized in a structured array. Fuel rods are hollow cylindrical zirconium tubes filled with pellets of enriched uranium; their typical length is 4 m while their diameter is approximately 10 mm. Uranium pellets are cylindrical, with a length close to 10 mm. Their diameter is slightly smaller than the internal diameter of the fuel rods. Axially, they are kept packed inside the rods by means of elastic elements pushing axially. Fuel rods are kept in structured arrays by means of spacer grids, square zirconium grids perpendicular to the axis of the rods. Spacer grids are spaced regularly along the fuel rods, so that in a typical assembly 8 spacer grids may be present. The cells of the spacer grids keep fuel rods at a relative distance of few millimeters and accommodate guide and instrumentation tubes as well. The cells of spacer grids are equipped with elastic elements such as springs, which support fuel rods by means of preload and consequent friction, while allowing thermal expansion. Moreover, they are equipped with fins to increase the mixing of the coolant. Fuel assemblies and fuel rods are in fact installed vertically and traversed by a coaxial flow of light water, which removes the heat due to irradiation, reaching typical speeds of 5–6 m/s. Water is kept at a pressure around 15 MPa and a temperature of 300 degrees Celsius, so that it remains liquid in the reactor. Fuel rods are pressurized internally by means of helium, thus balancing in part the external pressure.
Axial water flow causes flow-induced vibrations of single fuel rods and of entire fuel assemblies. In fact, fuel rods are free to vibrate between each couple of adjacent spacer grids. Axial flow is less prone to create instabilities and large amplitude vibrations than cross flow. However, in PWRs modest amplitude vibrations may become comparable in amplitude to the diameter of fuel rods during seismic events, since the latter are slender and flexible. Thus, a region of geometrically nonlinear dynamics may be entered. The amplitude of vibration is also not negligible with respect to the small mutual distance between fuel rods and fuel bundles, and it may even affect the coolant flow. The elastic elements of the spacer grids constitute loose boundary conditions and are the location of friction and impacts during vibrations; this may lead to fretting at the interface of the fuel rods with the spacer grids and to the release of fissile material into the primary circuit. Fretting is a major cause of fuel leak in PWRs (Kim, 2009). Important vibrations, then, may not be caused by fluid–structure interaction alone, but also by external excitations caused by accidents such as earthquakes. In these cases, the interaction between forced excitation and fluid–structure interaction may result in unexpected responses.
The Laboratory of Mechanical Vibrations and Fluid-Structure Interaction at McGill University has undertaken, in collaboration with Framatome Canada, the experimental study of forced large vibrations of a 3 × 3 reduced-scale PWR fuel assembly. Given the complexity of the dynamic study, the investigation was divided into three phases:
1)
The first phase involved forced vibrations of single fuel rods in reference boundary conditions (fixed–fixed), intended to investigate the relationship between peak vibration amplitude and forcing level in the geometrically nonlinear field (Ferrari et al., 2018);
2)
The second phase described forced vibrations of single fuel rods supported by spacer grids provided by Framatome, intended to investigate the effect on the vibration amplitude of the strongly nonlinear boundary conditions (Ferrari et al., 2019);
3)
The third phase (current paper) presents the results on the forced vibrations of a 3 × 3 tube assembly composed by eight regularly spaced fuel rods installed around a guide tube and supported by spacer grids, intended to investigate the dynamics of arrays of identical fuel rods and the effect of flowing fluid.
Phase 3) is the object of the present paper. The main differences of the setup used in the current analysis vis-à-vis the setup presented in (Ferrari et al., 2019) are related to the different configuration used in the experiments (here, a reduced scale 3 × 3 fuel assembly is used in the forced vibration analysis vs. the single rod used in (Ferrari et al., 2019)) and to the additional tests with fluid flow conditions presented in the current analysis (in (Ferrari et al., 2019) the single fuel rod was tested only in air and in still water). Because of this, for additional references detailing the estimation of damping and other parameters in the linear (small-amplitude vibrations) and in the nonlinear (large-amplitude vibrations) regime, the effect of nuclear fuel pellets and the dynamics, fretting and creep of spacer grids, the reader is directed to (Ferrari et al., 2018) and (Ferrari et al., 2019). The main findings of these two works on single fuel rods are: i) the rods exhibit a strongly nonlinear behavior under forced vibrations; this behavior is hardening for fixed–fixed rods (the peak frequency increases with the excitation amplitude) and softening (the frequency decreases) if spacer grids are employed; ii) the equivalent modal damping ratio for the fundamental resonant frequency is not constant but increases strongly with excitation amplitude; iii) a one-to-one internal resonance due to axial symmetry is present, giving rise to vibrations perpendicular to the direction of the excitation.
1.1. Vibrations of fuel assemblies in PWRs
Most applications of axial fluid flow through clusters of arrays of cylindrical elements are found in the nuclear and energy sector. As a consequence, the flow-induced vibrations of such systems were often studied, theoretically and experimentally (Bhattacharya, 2013, Chen, 1975c, De Pauw et al., 2015, Dragunov et al., 2013). Notable numerical studies are also available (De Santis and Shams, 2017, Hofstede et al., 2017, Kang et al., 2001, Kim and Kim, 2005, Liu et al., 2012, Liu et al., 2017, Païdoussis and Curling, 1985).
A complete discussion of the phenomena experienced by structured bundles of rods with tapered ends in axial flow can be found in (Païdoussis, 2004). Axial flow in the energy sector was studied first by (Burgreen et al., 1958, Païdoussis, 1965a, Païdoussis, 1965b, Païdoussis, 1965c, Pavlica and Marshall, 1966, Quinn, 1962, Quinn, 1965, Roström, 1964, Roström and Andersson, 1964a, Roström and Andersson, 1964b, Shields, 1960, SOGREAH, 1962). The first experiments were performed by (Chen and Wambsganss, 1972) and (Païdoussis, 1966a). Axial flow is inherently less disruptive than cross flow to slender elements; rods may reach conditions of buckling or flutter, but for extremely high flow velocities, rarely encountered in practical applications (greater than 50 m/s for flowing water (Païdoussis, 1966b)). In subcritical conditions, slender cylinders are subjected to stochastic fluid-induced vibrations resulting in the excitation of the lowest “dry” vibration modes (the normal modes of the structures in absence of surrounding liquid). The change in the natural frequency induced by flow depends on the boundary conditions; however, the added-mass effect on the natural frequency caused by still fluid alone is dominant. The phenomenon of subcritical vibrations remains unclear, but it may be understood as a random forced vibration of the fuel rods caused by the pressure oscillations of the turbulent fluid. Fluid flow in subcritical condition tends to increase the damping of externally induced vibrations proportionally to the velocity of the fluid. It must be noted that, for flow velocities different from zero, the eigenfunctions of the system are not orthogonal and the modal shapes vary with velocity; therefore, the usage of terms such as normal modes and natural frequencies is improper, although practically convenient.
Conditions of confined flow are obviously present because of the finite dimensions of the flow section in PWRs and because of the close distance between fuel rods. Confined flow corresponds to an increased added-mass effect, an increased flow damping and a lower flutter limit. Clustered cylinders were first studied by (Païdoussis, 1979, Païdoussis et al., 1982, Païdoussis et al., 1983a, Païdoussis et al., 1983b, Païdoussis and Besançon, 1981, Païdoussis and Suss, 1977).
Clustered cylinders in axial flow feature hydrodynamic coupling. The phenomenon was studied by (Chen, 1975a, Chen, 1975b, Chen, 1975c, Chung and Chen, 1977, Dalton, 1980, Lin and Chen, 1977, Lin and Raptis, 1986, Païdoussis et al., 1977, Païdoussis and Besançon, 1981, Païdoussis and Suss, 1977, Weppelink, 1979, Yamamoto, 1976). Experiments were conducted by (Chen and Jendrzejczyk, 1978) and (Moretti and Lowery, 1976). A cluster of closely spaced cylinders, each one having the same sequence of natural frequencies @ (truncating the infinite series of normal modes at the m-th mode), does not have the same series of frequencies of the rods @. Instead, the generic i-th mode corresponding to the natural frequency @ splits into multiple modes consisting in different combinations of the corresponding modal motions of the single rods. Correspondingly, the Frequency Response Function (FRF) of a bundle of n fuel rods will present, in a neighborhood of the natural frequency @ of the single rods, scattered resonant peaks with very similar natural frequencies, resulting in beating phenomena. This is a consequence of the fact that the fluid does not introduce a virtual added mass but a virtual added mass matrix due to inertial coupling.
Further complication is given by the fact that PWR fuel rods are not only clustered in an enclosed space, but also interconnected by flexible elements. Such architectures were investigated by (Païdoussis et al., 1983a, Païdoussis et al., 1983b). If a bundle of fuel rods is supported by a number k of spacer grids, the 1-st and the k-th spacer grids may be considered as boundary conditions, however a number of k-2 spacer grids remains, constituting intermediate flexible supports. Intermediate flexible supports may contribute to the scatter of the flexural frequencies of the single rods into bands. Loose multi-span supports may result in localized vibration modes (Yeh and Chen, 1990).
The flow across nuclear fuel assemblies is strongly influenced by the presence of the assemblies themselves; consequently, both in the parallel and in the perpendicular direction to the axis of the assembly, it is far from uniform. Contributing to this effect are the following factors:
•
Flow experiences concentrated head losses while it encounters the spacer grids and the (tapered) ends of the fuel rods.
•
Flow is accelerated when the presence of spacer grids and nuclear fuel rods reduces the flow section.
•
The duct is not infinitely extended around the fuel assemblies, therefore overall flow is, at various degrees, confined.
•
Spacer grids present fins that impart a transversal mixing component to flow, increasing turbulence and random vibrations.
•
Among the fuel rods, flow is strictly confined and is named subchannel flow. Subchannel flow velocity is largely different from “bulk” flow velocity; large spatial gradients of flow are present, contributing to turbulence and random vibrations.
•
Since flow is confined, large pressure drops due to viscosity are present along the axial extension of the assemblies.
Flow calculations are often proprietary, since they are related to the design of spacer grids. However, fluid flow across arrays of cylinders was already discussed by (Eifler and Nijsing, 1967) and (Hooper and Rehme, 1984). Currently, most investigations are carried out numerically (Chang and Tavoularis, 2007). (Rehme and Trippe, 1980) investigated the effect of spacer girds on the flow along fuel assemblies. More recent numerical works are also available (Khan et al., 2013, Ricciardi, 2016). Notable works on cross flow in heat exchangers (e.g. Brockmeyer et al., 2019) also provide useful insight on the numerical approach to fluid–structure interaction problems involving bundles.
Lastly, the buoyancy of fuel assemblies is in general may be neglected because 1) typical fuel assemblies are installed in a vertical configuration; 2) if a horizontal configuration is chosen, the effects of the buoyancy and of the weight of fuel rods (which are, anyway, modest) tend to cancel each other out.
1.2. Identification of damping
Abundant literature is available about the identification of the parameters describing the vibration of nuclear structures immersed in fluid flow (e.g. Adhikari and Woodhouse, 2001a, Adhikari and Woodhouse, 2001b, Bennet et al., 1997). The reader can refer to (Ferrari et al., 2019). Damping has received particular attention as it determines the vibration amplitude in resonant conditions. Damping for fuel assemblies in water was studied by (Brenneman and Shah, 2000, Collard et al., 2004, Connors et al., 1982, Fardeau et al., 1997, Hassan et al., 2011; Vandiver, 2012, Viallet and Kestens, 2003). Amabili has investigated the apparent increase of modal damping in various structures of practical interest and the existence of a unified damping model describing it (Alijani et al., 2016, Amabili, 2018a, Amabili et al., 2016, Amabili and Carra, 2012, Balasubramanian et al., 2017, Balasubramanian et al., 2018, Delannoy et al., 2015, Delannoy et al., 2016).
Since the development of a reduced order model of a fuel assembly, including fluid–structure interaction, confined flow, hydrodynamic coupling and nonlinear boundary conditions would be impractical, it was chosen instead to apply a single DOF approximation; the latter has, as its main purpose, the determination of the evolution of damping with the excitation amplitude and with the coolant flow. This research group has developed with success a one (Delannoy et al., 2015) or two (Delannoy et al., 2016) degree-of-freedom model based on a modified Duffing oscillator with linear, quadratic and cubic stiffness and a viscous modal damping ratio. The model describes the large amplitude vibrations of PWR fuel rods in reference boundary conditions (Ferrari et al., 2018) under forced excitation, provided that the damping parameter is modified at each forcing level applied to the structure. For nonlinear systems, in fact, the peak vibration amplitude is not proportional to the amplitude of the excitation.
1.3. Single DOF model for forced vibrations of fuel assemblies around the fundamental frequency
The single DOF model developed in (Le Guisquet and Amabili, 2019) is based on the modified Duffing oscillator (here expressed in dimensionless form) describing the modal vibration of the system around its fundamental frequency under a forced excitation
(1)@
where r is the circular frequency of excitation divided by the natural circular frequency @, q is the first harmonic of the displacement, t is dimensionless time, @ is the equivalent viscous modal damping ratio, @ and @ are the quadratic and cubic stiffness parameters, respectively. The dimensionless forcing amplitude is
(2)@
where F is the force amplitude in Newtons, m is the modal mass and h is the characteristic dimension of the system. This model captures the vibration of a single fuel rod with fixed–fixed boundary conditions (Ferrari et al., 2018), but not those of a single fuel rod installed in spacer grids (Ferrari et al., 2019). The combination of linear stiffness, quadratic stiffness and cubic stiffness cannot follow the large-amplitude responses obtained with a stepped-sine excitation, because they feature a strong nonlinearity (manifested by the reduction of the peak frequency with the forcing amplitude) starting from the lowest forcing levels, without the appearance of nonlinear jumps (regions of unstable solution for nonlinear systems (Amabili, 2008)). It is believed that the springs at the spacer grids are the location of large nonlinear stiffness and damping components, which cannot be captured by the stiffness and damping terms in (1). In the future, the direct experimental investigation of the interaction spacer grids-fuel rods and the inclusion of higher-order stiffness and damping terms may solve this issue. In (Ferrari et al., 2019), however, the identification of the stiffness evolution is abandoned and a simpler linear equation is applied to the lowest and the highest forcing levels of stepped sine experiments:
(3)@
@ is chosen so that the maximum peak vibration is perfectly reproduced; @ and m, the only unknown parameters, are determined through a least-squares procedure fitting the model on the experimental curves on the available frequency range.
2. Experimental setup for the fuel assembly
2.1. Experiments in air and still water
A welded assembly of three zirconium spacer grids and one open and hollow guide tube similar to those employed in PWRs was employed in this study. Each spacer grid is composed of 17 × 17 cells allowing the passage of 264 fuel rods and 25 guide tubes. The guide tube was point-welded to the central cell of each spacer grid. While the guide tube is welded, fuel rods are supported by springs and dimples present in the spacer grids (Fig. 1). The spring force acting on the fuel rods keeps them in position. For this study eight fuel rods were chosen, since it is the smallest number of fuel rods that can give a uniform and symmetrical distribution of rods around the guide tube. The middle spacer grid was cut removing vacant empty cells leaving intact only the central 9 cells. The two end spacer grids constitute two end conditions similar to the ones used on examining single rods in past studies by this same group (Ferrari et al., 2019). Thanks to the middle grid, the 8 fuel rods move as a bundle and not independently between the boundary conditions at the two ends. In any case, in PWRs as well, spacer grids are not present at the two extremities of fuel rods only, but also in between.
Fig. 1. (a) Typical PWR fuel assembly showing fuel rod and spacer grid (Source: energy.gov); (b) [A-A section] Boundary condition of fuel rod with spacer grid; (c) Photograph of fuel rods installed through a spacer grid (Ferrari et al., 2019).
The two end spacer grids were kept parallel at a distance of 900 mm by means of four ¾” threaded rods. The threaded rods were anchored to an acrylic frame (which has the secondary role of water tank if required) by means of bolts (Fig. 2). Great care was taken so that the spacer grids were not affected by compression, traction or torsion forces due to the bolts connecting the system to the acrylic frame. The axes of the rods were kept parallel to the ground, as gravity does not play a significant role in the dynamics of the beams, thanks to their light weight. To increase the realism of the tests, short dummy rods of the same diameter as the fuel rods were installed in the cells of the two end spacer grids adjacent to the fuel rods. The close presence of the dummy rods is likely to increase the stiffness of the constraint felt by the fuel rods under test. Since several cells of the spacer grids at the two ends remain unoccupied and unloaded outside the area occupied by fuel rods, guide tube and threaded rods, they were removed as necessary by means of pliers (Fig. 3).
Fig. 2. Transversal view of the assembled system: I, acrylic frame/tank; II, left spacer grid; III, reinforcement threaded rods; IV, fuel rod assembly; V, middle spacer grid; VI, right spacer grid.
Fig. 3. View of the disposition of the rods in the spacer grids: I, reinforcement threaded rods; II, spacer grid; III dummy rods, qty. 12; IV, fuel rods, qty. 8; V, guide tube.
The eight hollow zirconium rods that were sourced and employed for the experiments are shorter in length but otherwise identical to the ones used in the fuel assemblies of PWRs. The rods are 988 mm long and the length left free to vibrate between the two end spacer grids is 900 mm. The external diameter of the rods r is 9.50 mm and the wall thickness 0.61 mm. The material properties of the zirconium alloy are displayed in Table 1. One end of the zirconium rod is flared to facilitate the insertion into the spacer grids. The other end presents a clamping diameter. Fig. 4 shows one example of the fuel rod used in the test. At mid-length, the axial portion of the rods occupied by the thickness of the central grid is 32 mm.
Table 1. Material properties of a zirconium-alloy rod.
Fig. 4. (a) Zirconium fuel rod under test; (b) clamping end; (c) insertion end (Ferrari et al., 2018).
These test rods were provided by Framatome filled with cylindrical tungsten carbide pellets, which model uranium fuel pellets in terms of dimension and density. The weight of one rod complete with pellets is 5.80 times larger than in the empty configuration. A radial gap between the pellets and the internal wall of the zirconium rod is present. Being that the sum of the axial length of the pellets is slightly shorter than the axial clearance present inside the zirconium fuel rods, a modest axial gap is also present. In an operating nuclear reactor, axial springs keep fuel pellets tightly packed while allowing thermal expansion. The zirconium rods in the present study were tested without recovering the axial gap in some experiments, thus leaving the fuel pellets free to move axially and radially. In other experiments a simple threaded device (Fig. 5) was installed to keep the pellets in a tightly packed axial configuration. It must be noted that such precaution prevents axial play but does not prevent the radial motion of the pellets – although the latter becomes more difficult as the friction between the pellets limits or anyway modifies the radial motion. During real PWR operation, elastic elements (springs), instead of threaded elements, keep pellets in contact. The main difference between the two systems is that the force exerted by the springs varies during operation, while the compression given by the threaded element was kept constant. However, the focus of the study was not on the degree-of-freedom introduced by the motion of the pellets, but on the vibrations of entire nuclear fuel assemblies. The results of the experiments show that the difference between the vibration of the fuel assembly with free pellets and with fixed pellets is modest, thus supporting this experimental setup design.
Fig. 5. Threaded device used to pack fuel pellets axially (Ferrari et al., 2019).
Vibration experiments were conducted in presence of air and in presence of still water surrounding the nuclear fuel rods. In this study the body of still water was large enough to be considered as infinitely extended around the fuel rods. The body of water is contained in the transparent acrylic tank, which is 1524 mm long, 300 mm wide and 300 mm deep. The tank constitutes the frame for the vibrating system even when it is not filled with water (experiments in air). The tank does not include a lid so that water presents a free surface. This allows the access of the instrumentation and of the measurement systems, while it was verified that no sloshing waves of any meaningful amplitude occur. The distance between the topmost fuel rod and the free surface of water is 100 mm.
An electrodynamic exciter (Brüel & Kjær model 4810) was used to apply in the vertical direction a punctual and perpendicular excitation 240 mm away from one terminal spacer grid; this distance was chosen so that the low frequency modes of the assembly were excited without giving excessive interaction between the exciter and the structure during large amplitude vibrations. In fact, beam-like transversal vibrations similar to those in (Ferrari et al., 2019) were hypothesized for the entire fuel assembly. The excitation was applied to the central rod belonging to the horizontal row of three rods located on top in the experimental configuration. A force transducer (Brüel & Kjær model 8203) was interposed so that a real-time force measurement is obtained during vibration. The force transducer has a maximum linearity error equal to 1%. The forced vibration excitation system is shown in Fig. 6.
Fig. 6. Excitation system: I, electrodynamic exciter; II, extension rod; III, load cell; IV, glued connection to center-top fuel rod.
The weight of the vibrating structure is low; therefore, a non-contact measurement system based on laser Doppler vibrometry was employed to avoid the application of added masses. Laser Doppler vibrometers are capable of measuring the vibration of structures even in presence of surrounding water and clear acrylic walls. Laser heads by Polytec (Single point laser head model OFV-505 and Scanning laser head model PSV-400) were employed. One OFV-505 head was employed to measure the vertical vibration of the assembly, parallel to the direction of excitation. The resolution of the vibrometers is equal to 0.2 µm s−1/@ By aiming manually the head to several points along the assembly, the reconstruction of the mode shapes resulting from modal analysis was made possible. Broadband pseudo-random excitation signals were used to obtain the Frequency Response Function averaged over 5 experiments with a frequency resolution equal to 0.193 Hz. The H1 estimator was chosen to calculate the FRF; it uses the ratio between the cross spectral density of excitation and response as numerator and the auto spectral density of the excitation as denominator. The H1 was chosen since it removes uncorrelated noise at the output; in the present experiments, the output of the system is expected to be noisier than the input. For large-amplitude vibrations, one additional laser head (PSV-400) was also used to measure the horizontal vibration of the beam. Since the transversal section of the assembly is axisymmetric, normal modes are expected to appear in perpendicular couples sharing the same frequencies. Normal modes perpendicular to the direction of the excitation may be excited if the excitation amplitude is sufficient to activate nonlinear coupling. This justifies the presence of a laser directed horizontally (perpendicular to the direction of excitation). It must be noted that the structure is constituted by several identical rods coupled energetically through the three spacer grids. Therefore, the system is coupled and may feature various combinations of the vibration modes of the single rods. If water is present, hydrodynamic coupling contributes further to the complex coupling of the rods. This study is mostly focused on the large-scale vibration modes of the entire assembly as observed on the intermediate spacer grid and only secondarily on the individual vibration of the fuel rods between spacer grids. The joint vibration of the assembly is allowed by the presence of the intermediate spacer grid. In fact, for all the vibration modes where the displacement of the fuel rods does not have a node at mid-length, this element tends to force all rods to move together. Since the first vibration mode of an assembly was expected (and verified) to be flexural, parallel to the excitation, with a maximum transversal displacement at one half of the free length, the horizontal and vertical laser heads were aimed correspondingly on the central grid (Fig. 7). The system under test, constituted by one spacer grid and two assembly spans moving among two side grids, constitutes the basic module of the multi-span assemblies present in PWRs. The dynamics of multi-span assemblies, thus, may be reconstructed on the base of experiments on simpler subsystems, such as the ones under discussion, if suitable extrapolation models become available in the future.
Fig. 7. Laser measurement system: (a) transversal measurement in the vertical and horizontal direction; (b) location of the laser beam on the middle spacer grid.
A stepped-sine excitation technique was used to obtain frequency-amplitude curves at several forcing levels. A sinusoidal signal is employed to apply high energy levels at specific frequencies; the amplitude of the signal is kept accurately constant by means of a feedback control algorithm and the frequency varies slowly (by steps of 0.05 Hz) and monotonically in a neighborhood of the resonant frequency of interest – i.e., the fundamental one. At each frequency step, any transient is left to decay by discarding the initial 40 periods; afterwards, 10 periods are recorded at a sampling frequency of 1600 Hz and the frequency spectrum is reconstructed. Force feedback is required because the force generated by electrodynamic exciters is not proportional to the driving voltage around resonance. The monotonous variation of the frequency is required because hysteresis cycles and instabilities may arise. The stepped-sine algorithm is managed by a data acquisition and post-processing system (LMS TEST LAB) produced by Siemens. During the experiments the closed-loop control of the force was set with a tolerance of 0.5%. The laser Doppler vibrometers are instead extremely precise.
2.2. Experiments in axially flowing water
The experiments in flowing water share several common elements with the setup developed for the experiments in still environment. However, several additional pieces of equipment are required. The core of the test section (rods and spacer grids, reinforced by axial threaded rods), the excitation system and the measurement system were inherited from the experiments in still water with minor modifications. However, the experiments in flowing water were performed inside a Kempf & Remmers water tunnel available at McGill University (Fig. 8). This closed loop tunnel is powered by an impeller with an electric motor and can generate flows with mean velocities as large as 12 m/s. Deaeration capabilities are available so that the flowing fluid does not present bubbles during the experiments. The test section (Fig. 9), open to measurements, is a parallelepiped 260 by 260 by 1000 mm long, with the longest side parallel to the ground. The test section is provided with clear acrylic windows through which the beams of the laser Doppler vibrometers mentioned in the previous section can operate. The system under test was suspended at the center of the test section by means of eyelets and tie rods installed onto the ¾” threaded rods (Fig. 10). The suspension is stiff under vibration while not applying considerable forces onto the spacer grids. The excitation system constituted by electrodynamic shaker, extension rod, stinger and load cell was maintained, however the extension rod had to pass through a neoprene membrane in the walls of the test section (Fig. 9). The presence of the membrane does not affect the results of the experiments as: 1) the force sensor is located between the membrane and the system under test, so it measures the actual force applied to the assembly; 2) the membrane does not feature resonances in the frequency range of interest. The load cell and its cable were protected by a layer of silicone for protection against water infiltration. While the excitation was directed vertically to exploit the presence of a free surface in still water, it was directed horizontally, instead, in the water tunnel because of practical constraints. Consequently, the main vibration direction (direction of the modal analysis) was the horizontal one and the secondary vibration direction was the vertical one. The load cell is located at a distance of 138 mm from one fixed spacer grid and is glued on the middle rod on the side of the assembly.
Fig. 8. Kempf & Remmers water tunnel.
Fig. 9. Detail of the fuel assembly installed in the test section of the water tunnel. (a) Removable acrylic window; (b) passage of the excitation through neoprene membrane. The red arrow indicates the direction of the laser Doppler vibration measurement.
Fig. 10. (a) Connection of the fuel assembly to the heavyweight walls of the water tunnel; (b) list of components. The minimum distance between the walls of fuel rods and the walls of the water tunnel is indicated.
The water tunnel is equipped with a Venturi flowmeter; its accuracy is ±5% of the operating speed. The bundle was tested inside water flowing at a maximum velocity of 5 ± 0.25 m/s. This value was chosen because it corresponds, approximately, to the maximum velocity encountered in Framatome PWRs. It has to be noted that the flow velocity values mentioned in this article are measured by the Venturi effect and are, therefore, mean values over the inlet of the working section. Local velocity varies instead around and across the rods of the assembly because of the presence of the rods, of the spacer grids and of the tunnel walls. However, the measurement of local speed values is not object of this study and will be included in future works.
<Section>3. Experimental results</Section>
The fuel assembly was tested in still air, in still water and in flowing water. In the first two cases, the pellets were first left free to move axially (freely moving pellets) and then they were blocked by an axial screw (fixed pellets). Inside the water tunnel, only fixed pellets were tested, because fuel assemblies are not operated in PWRs with pellets left free to vibrate. Inside the water tunnel, more than one velocity value for the fluid flow was tested. A configuration of still water was tested to ensure the compatibility of the experiments in the tank and in the water tunnel. Subsequently, a test at 2.5 m/s and a test at 5 m/s were performed. These mean velocities were chosen as they are approximately equal to 0.5 and 1 time, respectively, the maximum coolant velocity used in Framatome PWRs. Considering the local flow velocity equal to the mean, nominal value, and neglecting the mixing effect of the spacer grids, the approximate values of the Reynolds number for the subchannel flow can be estimated as 58,900 at 5 m/s and 29,450 at 2.5 m/s. In total, seven configurations were tested (four inside the acrylic tank and three inside the water tunnel).
For each configuration, both linear (modal) and nonlinear analyses were performed. Linear and nonlinear experiments will be presented in two separate sections. Nonlinear experiments in still media required the measurement of the vibrations in two directions: parallel to the excitation and perpendicular to the excitation. In fact, it was shown that the presence of spacer grids does not prevent through additional damping the appearance of vibrations perpendicular to the excitation, due to nonlinear coupling or other mechanisms. In flowing water, the vibration perpendicular to the excitation was not measured since difficult to carry out. The maximum amplitude of flow-induced noise was in fact measured by running the water tunnel at 5 m/s in the absence of excitation. It resulted that the typical amplitude of vibration perpendicular to the excitation, measured during the experiments in the acrylic tank, is much lower than the amplitude of fluid-induced noise, so the measurement of the former was deemed unnecessary. Table 2 summarizes the entire experimental campaign.
Table 2. Experimental campaign. Experimental cases are categorized according to: surrounding medium; location; velocity of the surrounding medium; state of the fuel pellets; kind of vibration analysis.
3.1. Small-amplitude vibrations (linear results)
As anticipated, the PWR assembly is composed by identical fuel rods coupled through i) the central spacer grid; ii) the spacer grids at the two ends, connected to the frame; iii) hydrodynamic coupling. Consequently, the excitation of one fuel rod causes the vibrations of every other rod in the assembly. The normal modes of vibration of the assembly can be classified according to the corresponding vibration shape of the single rods. In (Ferrari et al., 2019), it is in fact described how for one rod installed on spacer grids the i-th normal mode is characterized by i- flexural half-waves along the length of the rod (Fig. 11). Each normal mode of the assembly tends to feature all fuel rods vibrating with the same number of flexural half-waves; however, several modes of the bundle can share the same number of flexural waves of the rods, while differing in the combination of the relative motion of the rods (which can be in-phase or with a phase of 180 degrees) and in the relative amplitude of the vibration of the single rods. The normal modes of the assembly characterized by the same underlying vibration shape of the single rods tend to group in one frequency band. Correspondingly, the FRF of the assembly can be divided into the areas of influence of the vibration shapes of the single rods. The order of these areas of influence respect the order of the modal shapes for the single rod and between these areas of influence there is no overlap. The tabular presentation of the modal parameters of each normal mode of the assembly will therefore divide the normal modes according to their type (the underlying vibration shape of the single rods) for convenience. It must be noted that the fundamental mode of vibration of the assembly is always the only one presenting no nodal points of the vibration of the single rods. Therefore, the fundamental mode of the assembly is not “split” into various modes of the same type. The study of the fundamental mode of vibration is the main objective of the PWR provider; the nonlinear investigation will focus correspondingly on the fundamental mode only. Moreover, PWR providers tend to measure the vibration in correspondence of the intermediate spacer grids. Thus, the study of modes other than the fundamental, and of even modes in particular (where the central spacer grid does not move) is considered less relevant. Lastly, it must be noted that it is possible to describe and divide the modes according to their number of flexural half-waves only because (as it was verified) the presence of still and flowing water does not alter sensibly the shape of the normal modes with respect to the case in air.
Fig. 11. Lowest four normal modes of vibration for a single PWR fuel rod installed on spacer grids (Ferrari et al., 2019).
Tables 3 and 4 show in a concise manner the Frequency Response Functions and the modal parameters extracted for the seven configurations under exam. The resonances of the FRFs are correlated to the rows of the tables of the modal parameters through progressive numbers. As anticipated, the modes are also classified according to the number of half-waves. The area of the FRFs is divided by two vertical lines into three regions, each one characterized by the same number of half-waves in the motion of the rods.
Table 3. Modal analysis for the assembly inside the tank.
Table 4. Modal analysis for the assembly inside the water tunnel.
The modal analysis of the assembly with free rods in air shows a fundamental frequency remarkably close to that in (Ferrari et al., 2019). However, the range of frequency of the other modes is different. The assembly with fixed pellets in air has higher natural frequencies. This may be justified by the fact that the stiffness of the system increases when pellets are compressed axially. A state of axial traction is introduced in the walls of the fuel rods by the pellets and the threaded device, while the packed pellets constitute a system with additional stiffness with respect to shear and bending. The introduction of still water gives lower natural frequencies and higher damping ratios for the fundamental mode. This is justified by the virtual added-mass effect of water and by the increased viscous dissipation in the liquid. The assembly with fixed pellets in water presents the highest damping ratios.
The assembly was tested in still water in the water tunnel as well. The purpose of this test is to ensure the comparability of the boundary conditions in the water tunnel and in the acrylic tank. The natural frequencies and the modal damping values in the water tunnel are in effect compatible to the corresponding configuration in the acrylic tank. Damping values are slightly lower overall. Subsequently an average velocity of 2.5 m/s was chosen as it is intermediate between the still condition and the approximate maximum velocity of the fluid flow encountered in Framatome PWRs. At this velocity damping increases with respect to the still condition, in particular for the first mode (where it increases by more than 100%). At the maximum testing velocity of 5 m/s, the damping of the fundamental mode increases with respect to the 0 and 2.5 m/s conditions. This seems to suggest that an increasing fluid flow contributes to damping vibrations, at least up to the velocities tested in this study. The natural frequencies at 2.5 and 5 m/s remain practically unchanged with respect to the still condition in the case under exam. The dependence of natural frequencies on the fluid velocity depends, however, on the specific boundary conditions, as it can be inferred in (Païdoussis, 1979).
The number of modes detected in the frequency range of interest increases with the presence of water, since the latter adds hydrodynamic coupling to the coupling due to the spacer grids. The number of modes is also larger in the tunnel, probably because of the confinement effect. However, it decreases with the flow speed as i- overall damping increases and some mode may not appear anymore and ii- flow-borne noise prevents the detection of the least prominent modes.
3.1.1. Modal shapes
As mentioned, the coupling between the rods constituting the assembly gives rise to vibration modes that can be divided according to the number of flexural waves in the rods. For any normal mode of the assembly, every rod presents the same number of flexural waves, but the vibrations of the rods are different in relative phase and amplitude. Moreover, the normal modes of the assembly are perfectly sorted in terms of the number of half-waves in the rods. Therefore, a normal mode characterized by a number i of half-waves in the rods will happen at a frequency lower than a normal mode with i + 1 half-waves; and, as a consequence, the FRF of the assembly can be divided into the areas of influence on the underlying vibration shapes of the rods, and these areas do not overlap. As an example, Table 5 shows the vibration shapes corresponding to the normal modes presented in the section relevant to the assembly in the tunnel without water flow. This case was chosen as it presents the largest number of normal modes of vibration. It must be noted that the normal modes that were measured and presented in this section are in no way representative of the total number of normal modes that shall be expected in a coupled system. Some modes may, in fact, be too damped to be detected by the modal analysis system. Because of the multiple and complex sources of coupling, moreover, it would be difficult to predict theoretically the number of normal modes that the bundled system should present.
Table 5. Vibration shapes of the assembly in the water tunnel at a flow velocity of 0 m/s. Only one half of the length of the assembly is represented (it has been verified that the vibration of the assembly is approximately symmetrical).
3.2. Large-amplitude vibrations (nonlinear results)
Nonlinear vibrations with stepped-sine excitation can be described by frequency-amplitude curves and frequency-phase curves (amplitude and phase diagrams with several curves measured at different force amplitude levels). The phase curves are here omitted as they do not show any notable phenomenon. Results for an increasing and a decreasing direction of the excitation frequency (UP and DOWN curves, respectively) are presented together in the charts. UP and DOWN curves differ since the response of nonlinear systems depends on the history of the systems themselves. It is anticipated that, as in (Ferrari et al., 2019), the nonlinear behavior is softening in nature (the peak frequency decreases with the amplitude of the excitation). All configurations were subjected to forces ranging in amplitude from a linear level (0.1–0.5 N) to a fully nonlinear level equal to 12 N. The range was deemed sufficient to develop linear and nonlinear dynamic behaviors comparable to those happening during the normal and the abnormal operation of PWRs, according to previous experiments by the authors and by the nuclear partner.
3.2.1. Assembly with freely moving pellets in air
Forces up to 12 N were applied to vibrate the assembly up to a vibration amplitude of approximately 3.5 mm, as shown in Fig. 12. A strong softening shift is present, which confirms the behavior of single rods in spacer grids observed in (Ferrari et al., 2019). Hysteresis between UP and DOWN curves is negligible and no nonlinear jumps are found. The horizontal vibration is more than 30 times smaller in amplitude than the excited (vertical) vibration, see Fig. 13. It might be noted, anyway, that the peak vibration amplitude of the horizontal mode happens at a higher frequency than the vertical mode. This suggests that the horizontal vibration is not given by measurement errors but constitutes a proper example of weak internal resonance. However, because of the much smaller amplitude, the participation of the companion mode to the global vibration response results negligible.
Fig. 12. Frequency–amplitude curves for the driven mode of the free-pellets rod in air, UP and DOWN directions.
Fig. 13. Frequency–amplitude curves for the companion mode of the free-pellets rod in air, UP and DOWN directions.
3.2.2. Assembly with fixed pellets in air
The nonlinear vibration of is similar in character to that with free pellets. The behavior is again softening with no hysteresis; slightly lower amplitudes are reached, as shown in Fig. 14. A jump behavior seems to develop in the 4–7 N range, but it disappears for higher forces. The horizontal vibration is 15 times lower than the vertical vibration in amplitude and the peak is at higher frequencies, see Fig. 15. In this case too, the companion mode can be neglected in the dynamic response of the system. With respect to the case with free pellets, the horizontal vibration has vibration peaks more clearly distinct from the driven mode.
Fig. 14. Frequency–amplitude curves for the driven mode of the fixed-pellets rod in air, UP and DOWN directions.
Fig. 15. Frequency–amplitude curves for the companion mode of the fixed-pellets rod in air, UP and DOWN directions.
3.2.3. Assembly with freely moving pellets in still water
The nonlinear vibration amplitude reached at the resonance peak by the freely moving pellets configuration in water for a harmonic excitation of 12 N is smaller than for the same system in air, as it is shown comparing Figs. 12 and 16. This is associated with an increase of damping. The companion mode shows two main peaks at different frequencies and remains approximately 15 times smaller than the driven mode as displayed by Fig. 17. Therefore, the companion mode is practically negligible.
Fig. 16. Frequency – Amplitude curves for the driven mode of the free-pellets rod in water, UP and DOWN directions.
Fig. 17. Frequency–amplitude curves for the companion mode of the free-pellets rod in water, UP and DOWN directions.
3.2.4. Assembly with fixed pellets in still water
The peak vibrations reached by driven and companion vibration are not dissimilar from those measured in water with free pellets, see Fig. 18, Fig. 19. Therefore, the companion mode, shown in Fig. 19, is practically negligible being one order of magnitude smaller than the driven mode, presented in Fig. 18. The amount of softening shift, about 4.5 Hz for a harmonic force of 12 N, which gives a vibration amplitude of about 2.5 mm, is close to the value measured in air with fixed pellets, previously shown in Fig. 14.
Fig. 18. Frequency–amplitude curves for the driven mode of the fixed-pellets rod in water, UP and DOWN directions.
Fig. 19. Frequency–amplitude curves for the companion mode of the fixed-pellets rod in water, UP and DOWN directions.
3.2.5. Assembly with fixed pellets inside the water tunnel, 0 m/s (no flow)
The frequency-amplitude curves in Fig. 20 show again a softening frequency shift without nonlinear jumps. The softening frequency shift of about 3 Hz for a harmonic excitation of 12 N is similar to the one observed in the water tank with fixed pellets at the same peak vibration amplitude, around 1.3 mm. However, the peak vibration amplitude reached, which is 1.3 mm, is significantly lower than the 2.5 mm obtained in that case for the same harmonic force of 12 N. The lower amplitude reached for the same harmonic force is due to the different setup in the tank and in the water tunnel, with different excitation points. In fact, the damping of the fundamental mode of the fuel assembly is similar in the two cases and the natural frequency increases slightly (about 1 Hz) in the water tunnel.
Fig. 20. Frequency–amplitude curves for the driven mode of the assembly inside the water tunnel, water velocity 0 m/s.
3.2.6. Assembly with fixed pellets inside the water tunnel, water velocity 2.5 m/s
The peak amplitude of the nonlinear curves in Fig. 21 for the largest harmonic force is almost unchanged with respect to the case of zero water flow velocity. This indicates that the equivalent damping associated to large-amplitude vibration is not far apart in these two cases. However, the peak amplitude for low forces is significantly reduced with respect to the case of no flow in the water tunnel. While the lowest forcing level is 0.1 N in still water, with fluid flow it has to be increased to 0.5 N. In effect, the random noise due to fluid flow appears as random vibrations, thus rendering the measurement of the response to low forcing levels excessively noisy and not meaningful.
Fig. 21. Frequency–amplitude curves for the driven mode of the assembly inside the water tunnel, water velocity 2.5 m/s.
3.2.7. Assembly with fixed pellets inside the water tunnel, water velocity 5 m/s
Again, the peak amplitude and frequency shift of the nonlinear curve for 12 N remain very similar to those obtained in the water tunnel for water velocities of 0 and 2.5 m/s. In effect, it is remarkable that, by increasing the flow velocity from 2.5 to 5 m/s, the peak frequencies at each forcing level change by less than 1% and the peak vibration amplitudes are approximately 3% lower. Also, there is absence of nonlinear jumps and nonlinear UP/DOWN hysteresis, as shown in Fig. 22. In addition, the curves for all the excitation levels are substantially noisier. This is due to flow-induced vibration creating “noise” since water speed is relevant.
Fig. 22. Frequency–amplitude curves for the driven mode of the assembly inside the water tunnel, water velocity 5 m/s.
<Section>4. Discussion</Section>
4.1. Small-amplitude (linear) experiments
With comparison to the results in (Ferrari et al., 2019), it was found that the assembly has fundamental frequencies extremely close, but slightly higher than the equivalent single rod. The damping values in the assembly are lower in air, but higher in water. Obviously, the fixed rods in (Ferrari et al., 2018) have higher frequencies, but much lower damping values. The comparison of modes other than the fundamental is difficult, since in the assembly the modes of the rod split into several modes because of coupling.
Besides, water tends to increase slightly damping and to reduce natural frequencies. The small difference between still conditions in the tank and in the tunnel could be explained by different proximity effects. Confinement is discussed in (Païdoussis, 2004); examples of flow alterations were also investigated experimentally in the literature (Bertocchi et al., 2019). It must also be noted that natural frequencies are extremely sensitive to the conditions of the installation and to thermal changes. The estimation of modal damping, even if estimated by advanced algorithms such as LMS Polymax (Peeters et al., 2004), presents some uncertainty due to the parameters of the estimation itself.
Flowing water appears to reduce the natural frequency by no more than 2.5% (likely because viscous friction creates a state of compression between the constraints) and increases modal damping dramatically (by 1.8 times at 2.5 m/s and by 2 times at 5 m/s).
4.2. Large-amplitude (nonlinear) experiments
Nonlinear curves show a softening behavior, extremely similar to the one attributed to single rods in (Ferrari et al., 2019). The decrease in the stiffness of the system for increasing forcing and vibration amplitudes has not been explained physically, so far, if not by a decrease in stiffness of the constraints at the spacer grids. Fuel rods in fixed–fixed boundary conditions show instead a hardening behavior (Ferrari et al., 2018), given by the axial tension built during flexural vibration. Compared to fixed rods, rods and bundles in spacer grids show a reduced, if not negligible, hysteresis: UP and DOWN curves share an almost identical path and no nonlinear jumps are detected. This is attributed to a much higher value of overall damping.
The damping and the symmetry break introduced by spacer grids is not sufficient to impair completely the appearance of vibrations perpendicular to the direction of excitation. These vibrations may appear in nuclear reactors as well. However, they do not reach amplitudes comparable to those of the directly driven excitation direction. Contrary to what shown in (Ferrari et al., 2018) for fixed rods, it is not possible to mention a proper companion mode or proper traveling waves due to axial symmetry and one-to-one internal resonance.
4.3. Identification of nonlinear parameters
Fig. 23, Fig. 24, Fig. 25 feature the experimental responses for different cases and identified linear models in terms of amplitude (@) and phase @ of the first harmonic of the dimensionless displacement (obtained by dividing by the tube thickness) at the highest excitation level for each case. Despite some discrepancies between the identified and the experimental responses, the linear oscillator enables a first approximation of the frequency response of the rod for a specific magnitude of excitation. In this case, it is used to identify the equivalent damping ratio in nonlinear regime.
Fig. 23. Frequency-response of the first harmonic of the dimensionless displacement for the experiments in air: (a) amplitude and (b) phase of the assembly with freely moving pellets; (c) amplitude and (d) phase of the assembly with fixed pellets. Experimental data are represented by red markers while identified data are represented by continuous black line.
Fig. 24. Frequency-response of the first harmonic of the dimensionless displacement for the experiments in still water: (a) amplitude and (b) phase of the assembly with freely moving pellets; (c) amplitude and (d) phase of the assembly with fixed pellets. Experimental data are represented by red markers while identified data are represented by continuous black line.
Fig. 25. Frequency-response of the first harmonic of the dimensionless displacement for the experiments in flowing water in the water tunnel for the assembly with fixed pellets: (a) amplitude and (b) phase at a velocity of 0 m.s−1; (c) amplitude and (d) phase at a velocity of 2.5 m.s−1; (e) amplitude and (f) phase at a velocity of 5.0 m.s−1. Experimental data are represented by red markers while identified data are represented by continuous black line.
Table 6 gives the frequency of the maximum vibration response and the equivalent modal damping ratio for each experimental configuration; data obtained for both the minimum and maximum levels of harmonic force are presented. The natural frequencies identified at the smallest excitations are predictably close to the ones obtained by experimental modal analysis. However, the estimated damping ratios of the linear responses are different (mostly higher) than the ones from experimental modal analysis. This discrepancy can be explained by the facts that: (i) some small responses show one-to-one internal resonance, hence a truncation of the peak amplitude of the driven mode; (ii) the stepped-sine test with sinusoidal signal provides excitations too large to remain in the linear field; (iii) the system may change slightly, for example because of changes in temperature, between the moment when the modal and the stepped-sine analyses are run.
Table 6. Identified natural frequencies and damping ratios of the minimum and maximum excitation for each experimental case.
Natural frequencies, as mentioned, are larger for the assembly in the tunnel than in the tank. The softening shift of frequency of the peak is very similar in the tank and in the water tunnel when taking data for the same vibration amplitude. In fact, the column in Table 5 that gives the frequency changes show data for different vibration amplitudes. Therefore, this column must be considered together with the column showing the vibration amplitude of the peak.
The softening natural frequency shift is also larger with fixed pellets and in presence of water instead of in air. While it is expected that water gives an added mass effect resulting in an increased softening behavior, the possible stiffness given by the axially fixed pellets should have an opposite effect. It must be concluded that the pellets do not increase the stiffness of the system. Flow velocity barely affects the natural frequencies and softening behaviour for larger excitation levels.
With regards to the identified damping, the axial constraint on pellets increases damping for the largest responses both in air and in water by approximately 26%. The presence of water affects positively the overall damping value as well. At the largest vibration amplitude, damping in water is 18% larger in the free-pellets configuration.
Damping ratios increase in the water tank with respect to the ones of comparable experiments in air, with an increase from 14% to 68%. The effect on the damping ratio of the water confinement in the tunnel at 0 m/s is negligible at both the minimum and at the maximum excitation levels. However, flowing water influences damping substantially at small excitations (linear regime). At the lowest forces, damping presents an 80% increase at 2.5 m/s and a 100% increase at 5 m/s. However, at the largest forces, the equivalent damping does not become higher than that identified without flow. In fact, at 12 N, the damping values are similar enough, considering possible identification errors. In conclusion, damping starts at a value twice higher in the water tunnel at 5 m/s with respect to the still condition; afterwards, it increases by one half of how much it would increase in still water, with a final result extremely similar to the one in still water and not far from the ones identified in the other configurations (the farthest large-amplitude damping value is measured in air with free pellets, and it is 33% lower). This seems to suggest that, in the small-amplitude regime, part of the excitation energy is dissipated because of the flow; afterwards, the damping increase is different in still and flowing water, up to reaching similar values at the maximum excitation level tested.
As expected, damping ratios estimated for the largest nonlinear responses (12 N) present a significant increase with respect to the ones at the lowest excitation levels (0.1/0.5 N) for all the cases under investigation. This increase is of the range 400%−600% in still fluids and 200%−300% in flowing water. These figures highlight the need of taking into account a nonlinear increase of the damping with the magnitude of excitation by means of nonlinear models, as applied phenomenologically by (Eichler et al., 2011, Jeong et al., 2013, Le Guisquet and Amabili, 2019, Lu et al., 2019) and as developed theoretically by (Amabili, 2018b, Amabili, 2018c, Amabili, 2018d). This increase of damping ensures a safer behavior of nuclear assemblies by limiting the increase of amplitude in case of large excitation.
<Section>5. Conclusions</Section>
A recent study investigated experimentally the dynamic response and damping of a single fuel rod supported by spacer grids (Ferrari et al., 2019). The experimental procedure was adapted successfully with few variations to a 3 × 3 cluster of nuclear fuel rods with a central guide tube in order to study the effect of the bundled structure and flowing water. The behavior of the fuel assembly in still media is remarkably similar to dynamic response of a single fuel rod supported by spacer grids around the fundamental frequency.
The bundled structure reached damping increases in the nonlinear regime similar to those of the single rod supported by spacer grids. However, much higher harmonic forces were required to develop similar vibration amplitudes. Vibration components orthogonal to the excitation are negligible with respect to the flexural vibration parallel to the excitation. Moreover, the periodicity of the structure and the presence of intermediate supports and hydrodynamic coupling between the fuel rods cause the presence of scattered modes characterized by different combinations of the motion of single rods. This effect is particularly important for even modes, which present a node at the intermediate (central) spacer grid.
As observed for a single fuel rod supported by spacer grids, the assembly has an initial (for relatively small vibration amplitudes) strong softening nonlinear behavior that cannot be modeled by the modified Duffing oscillator developed in (Delannoy et al., 2015). This initial strong softening behavior seems caused by the nonlinear boundary conditions due to the springs installed on the spacer grids. Therefore, the system cannot be described only by quadratic and cubic stiffness in the modified Duffing oscillator. In the future, dedicated experiments will be performed to characterize the interaction between spacer grids and fuel rods. It is also planned to add higher-order stiffness terms to the Duffing oscillator in order to reproduce the strongly softening behavior observed in the experiments.
The setup was installed in a water tunnel capable of fluid flows comparable to those existing in PWRs. A key factor was the presence of a stiff frame supporting the spacer grids without exerting large forces on them. The frame was also engineered to have minimal unwanted resistance to flow. Laser Doppler vibrometry was successfully used to measure vibrations without contact through water and acrylic walls. Since relatively large forces are required to excite large amplitude vibrations, a rubber-membrane was placed to prevent leak at the location of the stinger, which is used to excite the fuel assembly immersed in flowing water by means of an electrodynamic shaker. The water flow is given as the nominal mean flow traversing the tunnel. However, in the future dedicated studies by means of Pitot tubes and/or Particle Image Velocimetry are planned to estimate the local flow values around and among the fuel rods. In fact, the close spacing of fuel rods and the mixing effect of spacer grids might alter substantially the local flow.
The presence of water flow does not have an important effect on the natural frequencies for the specific boundary conditions constituted by spacer grids. As expected, no instabilities were detected in operative conditions, since axial flow values are too low to generate phenomena such as divergence or flutter. However, the strongly turbulent flow resulted in random noise superimposed onto the system vibration response. The damping ratio of the fundamental mode increases with flow. Therefore, water flow causes random vibrations, but dampens externally excited vibrations. Interestingly, while in still water the damping value increased six times for the force range under exam, it increased much less, approximately two times, for tests in water flow. Therefore, the damping ratio is higher for water flow, but the equivalent damping in the nonlinear regime increases less in case of large amplitude vibrations because of flow.
In conclusion, at the highest flow rate, the equivalent damping for large-amplitude vibrations is similar to the value obtained in the water tunnel with still water, while the damping ratio for small-amplitude vibrations is twice higher; the associated softening frequency shift is unchanged, and the peak vibration amplitude obtained with the same harmonic force is very similar. Therefore, it can be concluded that overall, in the flow and forcing ranges under exam, coolant flow does not change significantly the severity of forced vibrations in the nonlinear (large-amplitude) regime while it reduces vibration in the linear (small-amplitude) regime.
<Section>Credit authorship contribution statement</Section>
Giovanni Ferrari: Methodology, Investigation, Resources, Writing - original draft, Supervision. Giulio Franchini: Investigation, Visualization, Data curation. Luca Faedo: Investigation, Data curation, Visualization. Francesco Giovanniello: Investigation, Data curation, Visualization. Stanislas Le Guisquet: Methodology, Software, Formal analysis. Prabakaran Balasubramanian: Formal analysis, Software, Data curation. Kostas Karazis: Conceptualization, Methodology, Resources, Writing - review & editing. Marco Amabili: Conceptualization, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Supervision, Writing - review & editing.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
The authors would like to thank the NSERC CRD grant Program for its financial support (grant CRDPJ 490978-2015). The authors would also like to thank Framatome Canada Ltd. for their financial support.
<Section>References</Section>
Adhikari and Woodhouse, 2001a
S. Adhikari, J. Woodhouse
Identification of damping: part 1, viscous damping
J. Sound Vib., 243 (2001), pp. 43-61
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Adhikari and Woodhouse, 2001b
S. Adhikari, J. Woodhouse
Identification of damping: part 2, non-viscous damping
J. Sound Vib., 243 (2001), pp. 63-88
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Alijani et al., 2016
F. Alijani, M. Amabili, P. Balasubramanian, S. Carra, G. Ferrari, R. Garziera
Damping for large-amplitude vibrations of plates and curved panels, part 1: modelling and experiments
Int. J. Non Linear Mech., 85 (2016), pp. 23-40
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Amabili, 2008
M. Amabili
Nonlinear Vibrations and Stability of Shells and Plates
Cambridge University Press, New York, USA (2008)
Google Scholar
Amabili, 2018a
M. Amabili
Nonlinear Mechanics of Shells and Plates: Composite, Soft and Biological Materials
Cambridge University Press, New York, USA (2018)
Google Scholar
Amabili, 2018b
M. Amabili
Derivation of nonlinear damping from viscoelasticity in case of nonlinear vibrations
Nonlinear Dyn. (2018), pp. 1-13
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Amabili, 2018c
M. Amabili
Nonlinear damping in large-amplitude vibrations: modelling and experiments
Nonlinear Dyn., 93 (1) (2018), pp. 5-18
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Amabili, 2018d
M. Amabili
Nonlinear damping in nonlinear vibrations of rectangular plates: derivation from viscoelasticity and experimental validation
J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 118 (2018), pp. 275-292
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Amabili et al., 2016
M. Amabili, F. Alijani, J. Delannoy
Damping for large-amplitude vibrations of plates and curved panels, part 2: identification and comparisons
Int. J. Non Linear Mech., 85 (2016), pp. 226-240
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Amabili and Carra, 2012
M. Amabili, S. Carra
Experiments and simulations for large-amplitude vibrations of rectangular plates carrying concentrated masses
J. Sound Vib., 331 (2012), pp. 155-166
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Balasubramanian et al., 2018
P. Balasubramanian, G. Ferrari, M. Amabili
Identification and comparison of various damping models during large amplitude vibrations
Mecha. Syst. Sign. Process., 111 (2018), pp. 376-398
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Balasubramanian et al., 2017
P. Balasubramanian, G. Ferrari, M. Amabili, Z.J.G.N. del Prado
Experimental and theoretical study on large amplitude vibrations of clamped rubber plates
Int. J. Non Linear Mech., 94 (2017), pp. 36-45
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bennet et al., 1997
Bennet, G., Antunes, J., Mendes, J., Piteau, Ph., 1997. Some issues on the identification of experimental fluid-elastic forces. In: Transactions of the 14th International Conference on structural Mechanics in Reactor Technology (SMiRT 14), Lyon, France, August 17–22.
Google Scholar
Bertocchi et al., 2019
F. Bertocchi, M. Rohde, J.L. Kloosterman
Experimental investigation on the influence of gap vortex streets on fluid-structure interactions in hexagonal bundle geometries
Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow, 79 (2019), p. 108443
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Bhattacharya, 2013
Bhattacharya, A., 2013. Investigations on Flow and Flow-Induced Vibration of CANDU Fuel Bundles. Thesis. Ryerson University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
Google Scholar
Brenneman and Shah, 2000
Brenneman, B., Shah, S.J., 2000. Damping in fuel assemblies for axial flow. In: PVP-Vol.414-1, Emerging Technologies in Fluids, Structures, and Fluid/Structure Interactions – Volume 1, Seattle, Washington.
Google Scholar
Brockmeyer et al., 2019
Brockmeyer, L., Merzari, E., Solberg, J.M., Karazis, K., Hassan, Y., 2019. High Fidelity Simulation and Validation of Crossflow through a Tube Bundle and the Onset of Vibration. Lawrence Livermore National Lab. LLNL-TR-772580.
Google Scholar
Burgreen et al., 1958
Burgreen, D., Byrnes, J.J., Benforado, D.M., 1958. Vibration of rods induced by water in parallel flow. Transactions ASME80, 991–1003.
Google Scholar
Chang and Tavoularis, 2007
D. Chang, S. Tavoularis
Numerical simulation of turbulent flow in a 37-rod bundle
Nucl. Eng. Des., 237 (6) (2007), pp. 575-590
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chen, 1975a
S.S. Chen
Dynamic responses of two parallel circular cylinders in a liquid
ASME J. Pressure Vessel Technol., 97 (1975), pp. 78-83
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chen, 1975b
S.S. Chen
Vibrations of a row of circular cylinders in a liquid
ASME J. Eng. Industry, 97 (1975), pp. 1212-1218
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chen, 1975c
S.S. Chen
Vibration of nuclear fuel bundles
Nucl. Eng. Des., 35 (1975), pp. 399-422
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chen and Jendrzejczyk, 1978
S.S. Chen, J.A. Jendrzejczyk
Experiments on fluidelastic vibration of cantilevered tube bundles
ASME J. Mech. Des., 100 (1978), pp. 540-548
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chen and Wambsganss, 1972
S.S. Chen, M.W. Wambsganss
Parallel-flow induced vibration of fuel rods
Nucl. Eng. Des., 18 (1972), pp. 253-278
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chung and Chen, 1977
H. Chung, S.S. Chen
Vibration of a group of circular cylinders in confined fluid
J. Appl. Mech., 44 (1977), pp. 213-217
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Collard et al., 2004
Collard, B., Pisapia, S., Bellizzi, S., Broc, D., 2004. Flow induced damping of a PWR fuel assembly. In: Transactions of 8th International Conference on Flow-Induced Vibration, FIV2004, Paris, France.
Google Scholar
Connors et al., 1982
H.J. Connors, S.J. Savorelli, F.A. Kramer
Hydrodynamic damping of rod bundles in axial flow
Pressure Vessel Piping, 63 (1982), pp. 109-124
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Dalton, 1980
C. Dalton
Inertia coefficients for riser configurations
ASME J. Energy Resour. Technol., 102 (1980), pp. 197-202
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
De Pauw et al., 2015
B. De Pauw, W. Weijtjens, S. Vanlanduit, K. Van Tichelen, F. Berghmans
Operational modal analysis of flow-induced vibration of nuclear fuel rods in a turbulent axial flow
Nucl. Eng. Des., 284 (2015), pp. 19-26
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
De Santis and Shams, 2017
D. De Santis, A. Shams
Numerical modeling of flow induced vibration of nuclear fuel rods
Nucl. Eng. Des., 320 (2017), pp. 44-56
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Delannoy et al., 2015
Delannoy J., Amabili M., Matthews B., Painter B., Karazis, K., 2015. Non-linear damping identification in nuclear systems under external excitation. In: ASME 2015 International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition. Houston, Texas, USA, IMECE2015-52874.
Google Scholar
Delannoy et al., 2016
Delannoy J., Amabili M., Matthews B., Painter B., Karazis, K., 2016. Identification of non-linear damping of nuclear reactor components in case of one-to-one internal resonance. In: ASME 2016 International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition, Phoenix, Arizona, USA, IMECE2016-66311.
Google Scholar
Dragunov et al., 2013
Yu.G. Dragunov, V.I. Solonin, V.V. Perevezentsev, I.V. Petrov
Vibrations of fuel-element bundles in VVER fuel assemblies excited by turbulent coolant flow
At. Energ., 113 (2013), pp. 153-162
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Eichler et al., 2011
A. Eichler, J. Moser, J. Chaste, M. Zdrojek, I. Wilson-Rae, A. Bachtold
Nonlinear damping in mechanical resonators made from carbon nanotubes and graphene
Nat. Nanotechnol., 6 (6) (2011), p. 339
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Eifler and Nijsing, 1967
W. Eifler, R. Nijsing
Experimental investigation of velocity distribution and flow resistance in a triangular array of parallel rods
Nucl. Eng. Des., 5 (1967), pp. 22-42
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fardeau et al., 1997
Fardeau, P., Barbier, D., de Langre, E., Rigaudeau, J., 1997. Damping from axial coolant flow in the response of PWR fuel assemblies to horizontal seismic loads. In: Transactions of the 14th International Conference on Structural Mechanics in Reactor Technology (SMiRT 14), Lyon, France.
Google Scholar
Ferrari et al., 2018
G. Ferrari, P. Balasubramanian, S. Le Guisquet, L. Piccagli, K. Karazis, B. Painter, M. Amabili
Non-linear vibrations of nuclear fuel rods
Nucl. Eng. Des., 338 (2018), pp. 269-283
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ferrari et al., 2019
Ferrari, G., Franchini, G., Balasubramanian, P., Giovanniello, F., Le Guisquet, S., Karazis, K., Amabili, M., 2019, submitted. Nonlinear vibrations of a nuclear fuel rod supported by spacer grids. Nucl. Eng. Design.
Google Scholar
Hassan et al., 2011
M.A. Hassan, R.J. Rogers, A.G. Gerber
Damping-controlled fluidelastic instability forces in multi-span tubes with loose supports
Nucl. Eng. Des., 241 (2011), pp. 2666-2673
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hofstede et al., 2017
E.ter Hofstede, S. Kottapalli, A. Shams
Numerical prediction of flow induced vibrations in nuclear reactor applications
Nucl. Eng. Design, 319 (2017), pp. 81-90
Google Scholar
Hooper and Rehme, 1984
J.D. Hooper, K. Rehme
Large-scale structural effects in developed turbulent flow through closely-spaced rod arrays
J. Fluid Mech., 145 (1984), pp. 305-337
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jeong et al., 2013
B. Jeong, H. Cho, M.F. Yu, A.F. Vakakis, D.M. McFarland, L.A. Bergman
Modeling and measurement of geometrically nonlinear damping in a microcantilever–nanotube system
ACS Nano, 7 (10) (2013), pp. 8547-8553
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kang et al., 2001
H. Kang, K. Song, H.-K. Kim, K. Yoon, Y.H. Jung
Verification test and model updating for a nuclear fuel rod with its supporting structure
Nucl. Eng. Technol., 33 (1) (2001), pp. 73-82
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Khan et al., 2013
Khan, M.O., Hussain, S., Rafique, M., Ahmad, A., Akhtar, W., 2013. CFD study of single phase flow in a PWR spacer grid. In: Proceedings of 2013 10th International Bhurban Conference on Applied Sciences & Technology (IBCAST), Islamabad, pp. 243–248.
Google Scholar
Kim and Kim, 2005
H.K. Kim, M.S. Kim
Vibration analysis of PER fuel rod
J. Sound Vib., 282 (2005), pp. 553-572
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kim, 2009
K.T. Kim
The study on grid-to-rod fretting wear models for PWR fuel
Nucl. Eng. Des., 239 (2009), pp. 2820-2824
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Le Guisquet and Amabili, 2019
Le Guisquet, S., Amabili, M., 2019, submitted. Identification by means of a genetic algorithm of nonlinear damping and stiffness of slender and thin-walled structures subjected to large-amplitude vibrations. Part I: single-degree-of-freedom responses. Mech. Syst. Sign. Process.
Google Scholar
Lin and Chen, 1977
H.C. Lin, S.S. Chen
Acoustically induced vibrations of circular cylindrical rods
J. Sound Vib., 51 (1977), pp. 89-96
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lin and Raptis, 1986
W.H. Lin, A.C. Raptis
Acoustic resonances in cylinder bundles oscillating in a compressible fluid
ASME J. Pressure Vessel Technol., 108 (1986), pp. 197-201
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Liu et al., 2012
C.C. Liu, Y.M. Ferng, C.K. Shih
CFD evaluation of turbulence models for flow simulation of the fuel bundle with a spacer assembly
Appl. Therm. Eng., 40 (2012), pp. 389-396
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Liu et al., 2017
H. Liu, D. Chen, L. Hu, D. Yuan, H. Gao
Numerical investigations on flow-induced vibration of fuel rods with spacer grids subjected to turbulent flow
Nucl. Eng. Des., 325 (2017), pp. 68-77
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lu et al., 2019
Z.Q. Lu, G.S. Hu, H. Ding, L.Q. Chen
Jump-based estimation for nonlinear stiffness and damping parameters
J. Vib. Control, 25 (2) (2019), pp. 325-335
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Moretti and Lowery, 1976
P.M. Moretti, R.L. Lowery
Hydrodynamic inertia coefficients for a tube surrounded by rigid tubes
ASME J. Pressure Vessel Technol., 98 (1976), pp. 190-194
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Païdoussis, 1965a
M.P. Païdoussis
Pressure waves in horizontal liquid-filled flexible tubes
IMechE J. Mech. Eng. Sci., 7 (1965), pp. 380-390
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Païdoussis, 1965b
Païdoussis, M.P., 1965b. The amplitude of fluid-induced vibration of cylinders in axial flow. Atomic Energy of Canada Report AECL-2225.
Google Scholar
Païdoussis, 1965c
Païdoussis, M.P., 1965c. The stability of towed flexible cylinders in axial flow. Unpublished report, CRNL, Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd., Chalk River, Ontario, Canada.
Google Scholar
Païdoussis, 1966
M.P. Païdoussis
Dynamics of flexible slender cylinders in axial flow. Part 2: experiments
J. Fluid Mech., 26 (1966), pp. 737-751
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Païdoussis, 1966b
M.P. Païdoussis
Vibration of cylinders with supported ends, induced by axial flow
Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., 180 (1966), pp. 268-278
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Païdoussis, 1979
M.P. Païdoussis
The dynamics of clusters of flexible cylinders in axial flow: theory and experiments
J. Sound Vib., 65 (1979), pp. 391-417
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Païdoussis, 2004
M.P. Païdoussis
Fluid-structure Interactions: Slender Structures and Axial Flow
Elsevier Academic Press (2004)
Google Scholar
Païdoussis and Besançon, 1981
M.P. Païdoussis, P. Besançon
Dynamics of arrays of cylinders with internal and external axial flow
J. Sound Vib., 76 (1981), pp. 361-380
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Païdoussis et al., 1983a
M.P. Païdoussis, J.-P. Chaubernard, M.R. Genadry, K.N. El Barbir
Dynamics of a cluster of flexibly interconnected cylinders. Part 2. In axial flow
J. Appl. Mech., 50 (1983), pp. 429-435
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Païdoussis and Curling, 1985
M.P. Païdoussis, L.L.R. Curling
An analytical model for vibration of clusters of flexible cylinders in turbulent axial flow
J. Sound Vib., 98 (1985), pp. 493-517
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Païdoussis et al., 1982
M.P. Païdoussis, LI.R. Curling, J.O. Gagnon
Experiments on fluidelastic instability of cylinder clusters in axial flow
J. Fluids Eng., 104 (1982), pp. 342-347
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Païdoussis et al., 1983b
M.P. Païdoussis, K.N. El Barbir, M.R. Genadry, J.-P. Chaubernard
Dynamics of a cluster of flexibly interconnected cylinders. Part 1: In vacuum
J. Appl. Mech., 50 (1983), pp. 421-428
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Païdoussis and Suss, 1977
M.P. Païdoussis, S. Suss
Stability of a cluster of flexible cylinders in bounded flow
J. Appl. Mech., 44 (1977), pp. 401-408
Discussion 1978, 45, 455 and 703
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Païdoussis et al., 1977
M.P. Païdoussis, S. Suss, M. Pustejovsky
Free vibration of clusters of cylinders in liquid-filled channels
J. Sound Vib., 95 (1977), pp. 443-459
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Pavlica and Marshall, 1966
R.T. Pavlica, R.C. Marshall
An experimental study of fuel assembly vibrations induced by coolant flow
Nucl. Eng. Des., 4 (1966), pp. 54-60
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Peeters et al., 2004
B. Peeters, G. Lowet, H. Van der Auweraer, J. Leuridan
A new procedure for modal parameter estimation
Sound Vib., 38 (1) (2004), pp. 24-29
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Quinn, 1962
Quinn, E.P., 1962. Vibration of fuel rods in parallel flow. U.S. Atomic Energy Commission Report GEAP-4059.
Google Scholar
Quinn, 1965
Quinn, E.P., 1965. Vibration of SEFOR fuel rods in parallel flow. U.S. Atomic Energy Commission Report GEAP-4966.
Google Scholar
Rehme and Trippe, 1980
K. Rehme, G. Trippe
Pressure drop and velocity distribution in rod bundles with spacer grids
Nucl. Eng. Des., 62 (1–3) (1980), pp. 349-359
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ricciardi, 2016
G. Ricciardi
Fluid–structure interaction modelling of a PWR fuel assembly subjected to axial flow
J. Fluids Struct., 62 (2016), pp. 156-171
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Roström, 1964
Roström, K.G., 1964. Seven-rod fuel element — vibration test. Ab. Atomenergi (Stockholm), Arbetsrapport RRL-726.
Google Scholar
Roström and Andersson, 1964a
Roström, K.G., Andersson, N., 1964a. Boiler element for Marviken. Vibration tests with one rod. Ab. Atomenergi (Stockholm), Arbetsrapport RRL-724.
Google Scholar
Roström and Andersson, 1964b
Roström, K.G., Andersson, N., 1964b. Superheater element for Marviken. Vibration tests with one rod. Ab. Atomenergi (Stockholm), Arbetsrapport RRL-725.
Google Scholar
Shields, 1960
Shields, C.M., 1960. N.S. Savannah fuel design and development program — fuel rod vibration. U.S. Atomic Energy Commission Report GEAP-3583.
Google Scholar
SOGREAH, 1962
SOGREAH, 1962. Study if vibrations and load losses in tubular clusters. Societé Grenobloise d’etudes et applications hydrauliques, Special Report no. 3, EURAEC-288.
Google Scholar
Vandiver, 2012
J.K. Vandiver
Damping parameters for flow-induced vibration
J. Fluids Struct., 35 (2012), pp. 105-119
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Viallet and Kestens, 2003
Viallet, E., Kestens, T., 2003. Prediction of flow induced damping of a PWR fuel assembly in case of seismic and LOCA load case. In: Transactions of the 17th International Conference on Structural Mechanics in Reactor Technology (SMiRT 17), Prague, Czech Republic.
Google Scholar
Weppelink, 1979
Weppelink, H., 1979. Free vibrations of finite circular cylindrical shells and tubes with and without a surrounding fluid. M.Sc. Thesis. Technische Hogeschool Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands.
Google Scholar
Yamamoto, 1976
T. Yamamoto
Hydrodynamic forces on multiple circular cylinders
ASCE J. Hydraul. Div., 102 (1976), pp. 1193-1210
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yeh and Chen, 1990
Y.S. Yeh, S.S. Chen
Flow-induced vibration of component cooling water heat exchangers
ASME, New York (1990), pp. 153-163
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar