<title>Reactivity and power regulation in candle reactors</title>
<author>1,Volodymyr M.Khotyayintsev, 2, Olena M.Khotyayintseva,3,Artem V.Aksonov,4,VolodymyrGulik,5,Volodymyr M.Pavlovych</author>
<Affiliation>1,Faculty of Physics, Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv, 64 Volodymyrska St, 01601 Kyiv, Ukraine；2,Institute for Safety Problems of Nuclear Power Plants of NAS of Ukraine, 12 Lysogirska St, 03028 Kyiv, Ukraine；3,Institute for Nuclear Research of NAS of Ukraine, Nauky Avenu 47, 03680 Kyiv, Ukraine</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan,HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107631</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454920303297</URL>
Reactivity and power regulation in candle reactors
Volodymyr M.Khotyayintsev, Olena M.Khotyayintseva,Artem V.Aksonov,VolodymyrGulik,Volodymyr M.Pavlovych
Faculty of Physics, Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv, 64 Volodymyrska St, 01601 Kyiv, Ukraine
Institute for Safety Problems of Nuclear Power Plants of NAS of Ukraine, 12 Lysogirska St, 03028 Kyiv, Ukraine
Institute for Nuclear Research of NAS of Ukraine, Nauky Avenu 47, 03680 Kyiv, Ukraine
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Power regulation for a fission wave of constant shape in a TWR/CANDLE reactor is studied.
Characteristics of power regulation affect TWR/CANDLE design, and thus require numerical study.
Perturbation theory is developed, applicable to various reactor designs at realistic power levels.
General equation binding wave velocity, reactor parameters and reactivity is obtained.
Method of application of Monte Carlo codes to the power regulation studies is proposed.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
This work studies stationary nuclear fission wave in a fast spectrum CANDLE reactor, and the relation between the wave velocity/power, parameters of the core, and reactivity. Special perturbation theory is developed. A generally applicable equation is obtained that is linear in reactivity, small variations of the core parameters, and velocity-dependent contributions of different origin (assumed to be small). Numerical calculations confirm good accuracy of the perturbation theory, for particular model and example nuclear constants. The investigated properties are important for the needs of reactor design, and thus should be studied numerically applying reactor analysis codes. The obtained results can provide benefits for efficient application of the codes which calculate keff at fixed power, especially for Monte Carlo codes.
Keywords：Nuclear fission wave；Traveling wave reactor；CANDLESelf-regulating reactor
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Nuclear fission wave reactor, or CANDLE, or the traveling wave reactor (TWR) can be fed by depleted, natural or low enriched uranium, mixed uranium-thorium, or enriched thorium fuel (Sekimoto et al., 2001, Sekimoto and Kouichi, 2000, Sekimoto and Nakayama, 2014, Ismail et al., 2007, Yan and Sekimoto, 2008, Fomin et al., 2008, Fomin et al., 2011, Sekimoto, 2010) thereby opening practically unlimited resources of fuel for nuclear energy (Hyde et al., 2008), at relatively low nuclear waste, and no proliferation risk. CANDLE reactor requires no refueling for decades. The TWR, CANDLE and other breed-and-burn reactor concepts are reviewed in (Gilleland et al., 2016, Lopez-Solis and François, 2017). TWRs are also promising for transmutation of spent LWR/PWR fuel. The existence of nuclear fission wave in the media corresponding to used fuel of LWRs was reported in the work (Pavlovich et al., 2010); short-core CANDLE-like reactor designs for recycling of PWR spent fuel were presented in the works (Hartanto and Kim, 2012, Hartanto et al., 2016).
Many works study CANDLE or CANDLE-like reactors based on axial wave motion in a long initially uniform cylindrical core (the so-called classical TWR scheme). The main operation mode of such reactor – a nuclear fission wave of a constant shape moving at constant velocity – is referred to in this work as a “stationary wave” (for briefness). Precise numerical calculations of the stationary wave are presented in a number of publications (Sekimoto et al., 2001, Sekimoto and Kouichi, 2000, Sekimoto and Nakayama, 2014, Ismail et al., 2007, Yan and Sekimoto, 2008, Fomin et al., 2008, Fomin et al., 2011, Sekimoto, 2010, Osborne and Deinert, 2013, Shrestha and Rizwan-uddin, 2014, Gulik, 2013, Rusov et al., 2015, Kodochigov et al., 2014), and an impressive line of interesting reactor designs have been developed up to now (Ismail et al., 2007, Yan and Sekimoto, 2008, Sekimoto, 2010, Gilleland et al., 2016, Lopez-Solis and François, 2017, Fomin et al., 2019). Modified CANDLE/TWR designs and smooth startup of the reactor are studied in the works (Fomin et al., 2019, Saadi et al., 2012, Mandela et al., 2016, Tak et al., 2016, Leleko et al., 2017). Besides recladding, other possible solutions of the fuel integrity problem related to high burn-up in the wave reactors were proposed in the works (Osato et al., 2019, Rusov et al., 2015). Absolute majority of TWR designs considered in the literature are metal cooled fast spectrum reactors. Recently, the principal possibility has been shown of an axial stationary wave in a boiling water cooled TWR; this can become a real break-through since major TWR benefits can be achieved basing on well developed technologies of water cooled reactors (Chen et al., 2019).
According to the primary idea of the wave reactor, it operates as an autonomous inherently self-regulating or fully automated system (Teller et al., 1996, Feoktistov, 1989, Van Dam, 2000, Seifritz, 2000). “CANDLE reactors do not need shim control rods” (Sekimoto and Nakayama, 2014) used in conventional reactors to keep the reactor critical and maintain constant power level. Thus, CANDLE reactor is self-regulating.
In this work we consider a cylindrical core of a self-regulating fast spectrum CANDLE reactor, in which a stationary nuclear fission wave can exist. The core is infinite and initially uniform in the axial direction. Physically, the velocity (speed), the wave shape and other characteristics of a stationary wave in a self-regulating reactor are completely determined by the parameters of the core, such as its initial composition and radius, parameters of the heat removal system, and fixed external parameters of operation (coolant inlet temperature or coolant flow rate, for example). Variation of the parameters leads to the variation of the wave velocity and the reactor power. This work studies power regulation for a stationary wave, where “power regulation” means a change in the wave velocity (or power) due to the changes in reactivity (or ) and/or parameters of the core. Some of the parameters of the core can be varied only in the process of reactor designing; others – like coolant inlet temperature or pressure – can be used to change the power level in a stationary wave mode during the reactor operation (Sekimoto and Nakayama, 2014). Only stationary wave mode of the reactor is studied in this work. So, reactivity and all characteristics of the wave (except its current axial position) are considered only as stationary, no transients or temporal changes of the characteristics of the wave or reactivity are considered.
Studies of variation of power and wave velocity with variation of the reactor parameters were initiated by the pioneers of the wave reactor concept (Feoktistov, 1989, Van Dam, 2000). Van Dam concluded (Van Dam, 2000) that “power can be controlled via adjustment of the reactivity feedback factor by adjustment of the cooling conditions”. In the works (Fomin et al., 2008, Fomin et al., 2011) the results of numerical simulations show gradual decreasing of the wave velocity with decreasing of the core radius (from 510 to 22 cm/yr for uranium fuel (Fomin et al., 2008). In the work (Sekimoto and Nakayama, 2014), it was proposed to change power level of the CANDLE reactor in a stationary wave mode “by adjusting its coolant flow rate and/or coolant inlet temperature“, and thus eliminate the need in regulation control rods. Numerical calculations at fixed power were applied; for two designs of fast CANDLE reactors the dependence of coolant flow rate (or coolant inlet temperature) on the power level was obtained, in a range from the nominal power level to almost zero (Sekimoto and Nakayama, 2014). In our works (Pavlovych et al., 2008a, Pavlovych et al., 2008b, Khotyayintsev et al., 2010, Khotyayintseva et al., 2014, Khotyayintsev et al., 2014, Khotyayintsev et al., 2015) we developed analytical theory of a stationary wave for a particular model and studied mechanisms of the velocity formation for a stationary wave; also stable and unstable behavior of stationary wave solutions was demonstrated.
Naturally, the reactor is operated in a stationary wave mode at zero reactivity (). In this work, we introduce reactivity into the theory of a stationary wave, since it provides important benefits in TWR/CANDLE analysis. In particular, most numerical calculations of a stationary wave are performed using reactor analysis codes which calculate  at fixed power. In such calculations, both the power level and the parameters of the core are pre-fixed. At the same time, the natural power level for a stationary wave is determined solely by the parameters of the core. Since the natural power level is unknown before the calculation, it differs from the power level pre-fixed in the calculation. Therefore, the calculated  always differs from unity. So, the relation arises between  (or reactivity), parameters of the core, and stationary wave velocity (or power); it is referred to in this work as the equation of the velocity characteristic. The change of effective neutron multiplication factor with the wave velocity was obtained numerically in the work (Sekimoto and Kouichi, 2000). In our previous works we studied the velocity characteristic as the dependence of the wave velocity on the control parameter referred to as the effective absorber density. This work and previous our works are aimed at widely applicable qualitative conclusions first of all, while quantitative estimates are illustrative. The novelty of this work compared to our previous works (Khotyayintsev et al., 2010, Khotyayintsev et al., 2015) consists in including of reactivity and arbitrary number of control parameters into the equation of velocity characteristic. Besides that, main results of this work are not limited to any particular model and thus can be used as the theoretical basis for precise numerical study of the velocity characteristic applying powerful reactor analysis codes. Such studies are required since they provide information important for reactor designing. In particular, it concerns possible instability of stationary wave solutions resulting from the calculations at fixed power. The instability of the stationary wave solutions in a chosen range of the reactor power can be identified by the shape of the velocity characteristic, without simulation of the real long-time reactor dynamics.
<Section>2. The velocity characteristic of the TWR: Previous results</Section>
The analytical theory of the velocity characteristic was developed in our works (Pavlovych et al., 2008a, Pavlovych et al., 2008b, Khotyayintsev et al., 2010, Khotyayintseva et al., 2014, Khotyayintsev et al., 2014, Khotyayintsev et al., 2015). This section presents a review of the key findings of the works (Van Dam, 2000, Khotyayintsev et al., 2010, Khotyayintsev et al., 2015), which provide a basis for further generalizations of this work. The review explains the motivation and the main goal of this study.
2.1. Formulation of the eigenvalue problem
The models of the works (Pavlovych et al., 2008a, Pavlovych et al., 2008b, Khotyayintsev et al., 2010, Khotyayintseva et al., 2014, Khotyayintsev et al., 2014, Khotyayintsev et al., 2015) are simplified in many aspects since they are aimed at qualitative conclusions, first of all. Basic equations of the work (Khotyayintsev et al., 2015) include one-group neutron diffusion equation coupled to burn-up equations. The effective one-dimensional model of the infinite uniform core takes into account radial neutron leakage in the transverse buckling approximation:
@(2.1)
@(2.2)
here D is the diffusion coefficient, treated as constant for simplicity,B is the geometrical parameter that decreases with the core radius, v is the average speed of neutrons, ν is the mean number of fission neutrons, @and @ are the macroscopic fission and absorption cross sections respectively, @ is the number of fission neutrons for the i-th nuclide, @ and @ are the microscopic fission and absorption cross sections of the i-th nuclide respectively, f is the thermal feedback coefficient that is independent from the neutron flux and nuclear densities, f can be positive or negative. The last term in the expression (2.2) is the phenomenological thermal feedback term that takes into account the cumulative effect of all feedback mechanisms originating from the temperature changes, including the Doppler effect, radial and axial expansion of the core, and loss of coolant mass due to greater thermal expansion coefficient of liquids. These and other changes shift the neutron spectrum, alter the micro- and macroscopic neutron cross sections, and affect diffusion of neutrons. Thermal effects change all coefficients in Eqs. (2.1), (2.2) and the burn up equations. The feedback model used in the work (Khotyayintsev et al., 2015) is simple, familiar (Van Dam, 2000), and transparent in further consideration. In Section 4, we will enter  into the function g (2.2) by replacing , where ρ is reactivity, . From this point of view, this section presents a particular case corresponding to .
So, g (2.2) is the effective net neutron production cross section; it is referred to below as the neutron generation function. Nuclear densities of nuclides and fission products belonging to the nuclide transformation chain of the model Ni(x,t) are time and space dependent and satisfy the burn-up equations of the form:
@(2.3)
where @ is the microscopic neutron cross section of processes transforming the nuclide j to the nuclide i, @ is the characteristic decay time of the nuclide i, @ is the characteristic decay time of the nuclide j to the nuclide i. Explicit expression for the neutron generation function g, specific nuclide transformation chain, and particular form of burn-up Eq. (2.3) constitute the burn-up model of the core under study.
Let the stationary wave propagate along the Ox axis from right to left, and let the absolute value of its velocity be . For a solution in the form of a stationary wave, independent time and space dependences of neutron flux, nuclear densities and all other fields are reduced to the dependence on a single wave variable , @. Then@and basic equations in partial derivatives become ordinary differential equations. Since the wave is a very slow process, the term  in Eq. (2.1) is negligible. In terms of the flux to velocity ratio , the thermal feedback term in Eq. (2.2) takes the form , and Eqs. (2.1), (2.3) take the form:
@(2.4)
@(2.5)
The boundary conditions to Eqs. (2.4), (2.5) are as follows:
@(2.6)
@(2.7)
@(2.8)
where @  correspond to the initial composition of the core; for unstable nuclides, the initial densities are zero. The terms related to radioactive decays and thermal feedback in Eqs. (2.4), (2.5) include velocity u. Eqs. (2.4), (2.5) with boundary conditions (2.6), (2.7), (2.8) constitute a nonlinear boundary eigenvalue problem. In its basic features, the concept of the boundary eigenvalue problem is common for nonlinear and more widely known linear boundary eigenvalue problems. Any eigenvalue problem has a so-called trivial solution. For linear problems, trivial solution is a zero solution; for the nonlinear problem (2.4), (2.5), (2.6), (2.7), (2.8), trivial solution is a solution corresponding to zero burnup and unchanged fresh core composition . Eigenfunctions of an eigenproblem are its non-trivial solutions. Any eigenvalue problem includes a parameter. Trivial solution exists at any values of the parameter; the values of the parameter at which there exists a non-trivial solution are the eigenvalues of the problem. A set of eigenvalues constitutes the spectrum of the problem; so, the parameter is sometimes called a spectral parameter of the problem. The problem (2.4), (2.5), (2.6), (2.7), (2.8) includes several parameters (such as parameters of the core and the wave velocity), and its spectral parameter can be chosen among them in different ways. For the problem (2.4), (2.5), (2.6), (2.7), (2.8), only the eigenfunctions  with positive neutron flux  that make sense physically will be discussed below.
The eigenfunctions are referred to as “stationary wave solutions” (Khotyayintsev et al., 2010) in order to stress the difference with real asymptotic states established as a result of a long-term dynamics of the reactor at constant external conditions (Fomin et al., 2011, Fomin et al., 2019, Khotyayintsev et al., 2015). Common calculations of a stationary wave – steady-state, or time-dependent at fixed power – do not account for the real dynamics of the self-regulating reactor, and hence result in stationary wave solutions. To present real waves, stationary wave solutions should be stable, and that is not always the case (Khotyayintsev et al., 2014, Khotyayintsev et al., 2015, Khotyayintsev et al., 2012, Osborne and Deinert, 2016).
2.2. Equilibrium conditions in fluence representation
Neutron fluence ψ is defined as time integral of neutron flux. For a stationary wave, . Fluence grows monotonically with z from zero at  (in front of the wave) to its maximum final value  at  (behind the wave), . So, all fields including function g (2.2) can be considered as functions of fluence  instead of the wave variable z (Khotyayintsev et al., 2015, Pavlovych et al., 2008a, Pavlovych et al., 2008b, Khotyayintsev et al., 2010). Since at  neutron flux  tends to zero exponentially, both  and  at . Hence, integrating Eq. (2.4) from  to z by dz and taking into account that  we obtain
@(2.9)
Multiplying Eq. (2.9) by @, and integrating it once more from  to z by dz (taking into account that  at , and ) we come to another equation:
@, or @ (2.10)
since @ is positive, and @ is negative at @ . The functions of fluence  and  are defined as follows
@(2.11)
@(2.12)
Hence function M can be presented in the equivalent form:
@(2.13)
also G and M are linear in g, @,@ , and
@(2.14)
@(2.15)
Besides the conditions at @ (in front of the wave), stationary wave solution must satisfy the conditions at @ (behind the wave). Since ,  and @ at @ two equilibrium conditions for a stationary wave follow from Eqs. (2.9) and (2.10):
@(2.16)
@(2.17)
Eqs. (2.16), (2.17) are integral conditions that neutron generation function @ must satisfy; otherwise it does not correspond to the stationary wave solution. Functions of fluence g, G and M depend on the parameters of the core and the wave velocity u. The final fluence  is the characteristic of the eigenfunction. If  could be excluded from Eqs. (2.16), (2.17), we would obtain a single equation binding the wave velocity with all other parameters of the eigenproblem.
The applicability of both equilibrium conditions is essentially limited to (a) one-group diffusion approximation for neutronics, and (b) the effective one-dimensional description of the core in the approximation of radial buckling. So, the equilibrium conditions (2.16), (2.17) can be applied to any burn-up model. Particular burn-up models used in the works (Pavlovych et al., 2008a, Pavlovych et al., 2008b, Khotyayintsev et al., 2010, Khotyayintseva et al., 2014, Khotyayintsev et al., 2014, Khotyayintsev et al., 2015) do not limit the applicability of the equilibrium conditions.
2.3. The burn-up model
In the work (Khotyayintsev et al., 2015) neutron generation function g (2.2) is presented in the form2:
@(2.18)
where Σ0 = (σa1-ν1σf1) is the characteristic macroscopic cross section of the 238U corresponding to its initial number density N1,0. The control parameter of the model p, referred to as the effective absorber density is defined as follows:
@(2.19)
here Σma is the macroscopic absorption cross section of all nuclides not belonging to the nuclide transformation chain, such as nuclides of the coolant, construction materials, and nuclides chemically bonded with raw fuel (for example, oxygen or nitrogen). Therefore, the effective absorber density p (the absorber is non-burnable) accounts for all neutron losses (including side leakage) not related to the nuclides accounted for explicitly in Eq. (2.18). The parameter p can be considered as a spectral parameter of the eigenproblem.
Particular nuclide chain of the work (Khotyayintsev et al., 2015) corresponds to pure 238U raw fuel and includes only nuclides which predominantly determine the shape and parameters of the velocity characteristic. Eleven burn-up equations (see Eqs. (2)–(12) in the work (Khotyayintsev et al., 2015) account explicitly for the number densities  of 8 burnable nuclides (stable 238U (), 239Pu (), 240Pu (), 242Pu (), 241Am (), fission products (), and unstable 239Np () 241Pu ()), and 3 inert final products (, , ). The 239Np lifetime is  days, the half-life is 2.36 days; the 241Pu lifetime is  years, the half-life is 14.3 years. This nuclide chain is referred to below as the “11-nuclide chain”.
2.4. Perturbation theory
In the zero order approximation we neglect the effect of thermal feedback and radioactive decays. It is well known that stationary wave solutions can be obtained in such approximation (Chen et al., 2012, Pavlovych et al., 2008b, Sekimoto, 2010). In the problem (2.4)-(2.8), we assume feedback coefficient , the 239Np decay is prompt (), the 241Pu is stable (). Then, the feedback term , the 241Am and the 239Np densities are zero, and their contributions to function g (2.18) are zero. The burn-up equations (2.5) take the form:
@(2.20)
So, the eigenvalue problem includes no wave velocity in the zeroth order approximation. Zero-order burn-up Eqs. (2.20) are easily solved analytically in terms of fluence, and zero-order functions , g, G and M are found as explicit functions of fluence (Khotyayintsev et al., 2010). The equilibrium conditions (2.16), (2.17) take the form of a system of two algebraic equations that include no velocity:
@(2.21)
@(2.22)
This system has a single solution denoted as , . The stationary wave solution (the eigenfunction) exists if the effective absorber density p satisfies the condition . So,  is the eigenvalue of the problem in the zeroth-order approximation;  and  are determined by the fuel chain and corresponding microscopic nuclear constants . The final fluence  determines the limits of variation of fluence  for fluence-dependent functions  and . The latter is found from eq. (2.10). Further solving of the equation  provides the relationship between ψ and , where C is an arbitrary constant. That accomplishes the analytical solution of the eigenvalue problem in the zeroth-order approximation.
Numerical examples of the work (Khotyayintsev et al., 2015) cannot be considered as a calculation of a particular reactor design; they are aimed to illustrate the theory of the velocity characteristic. Quantitatively, they just provide a sense of the magnitude of the effects under study. The example calculation at typical nuclear constants for fast reactor (Khotyayintsev et al., 2015) provides the value , and  that corresponds to the 238U final density . The same nuclear constants are used in numerical calculations of this work. Quantitative studies for particular reactor composition and design require application of precise reactor analysis codes.
The analytical approach similar to our zeroth-order approximation is developed in the work of Chen, et al. (Chen et al., 2012) and previous works of the authors. Functions  and  used in the work (Chen et al., 2012) are similar to our functions  and  in the zeroth-order approximation. Accordingly, the conditions  (Chen et al., 2012) correspond to our conditions (2.21), (2.22) respectively;  is the maximum fluence (the equivalent of our final fluence ).
Since the wave velocity is excluded from the eigenvalue problem in the zeroth-order approximation, it remains arbitrary. The following characteristics of the wave can be found in the zeroth-order approximation: distributions of stable nuclides, flux to velocity ratio , heat power density to velocity ratio, and power to velocity ratio . So, the reactor power and peak neutron flux in the zeroth-order approximation are directly proportional to the wave velocity, and the wave velocity can be determined only at fixed reactor power or peak neutron flux. In the next approximation of the perturbation theory, the characteristics of the wave which can be found in the zeroth-order approximation become velocity-dependent, and other new effects arise. These effects depend on the wave velocity and vanish if thermal feedback and radioactive decays are neglected, as shown above; such effects are referred to below as velocity-dependent effects in a stationary wave.
If thermal feedback and β-decays of the 239Np and the 241Pu are taking into account then the following terms neglected in the zeroth-order approximation become non zero.
1) The feedback term  in the function g (2.18); the term vanishes at  or .
2) The two terms  and  in the equation  for the 239Np density, and the related term  in the function g (2.18); the terms vanish at , or .
3) The decay term  in the equation  for the 241Pu density; the term vanishes at  or . So, the limit  does not lead to the zeroth-order approximation if instability of the 241Pu is accounted for.
Since the eigenvalue problem in the zeroth-order approximation includes no wave velocity, all velocity-dependent effects in the stationary wave originate in these terms. The exact eigenvalue problem (2.4), (2.5), (2.6), (2.7), (2.8) includes the above mentioned terms of three different origins. These terms generate velocity-dependent changes in nuclear densities, and velocity-dependent corrections to the functions in the zeroth-order approximation: , , . We assume that velocity-dependent terms corresponding to ,  and  are small. Thus, the equilibrium conditions
@(2.23)
@(2.24)
provide small changes of p and :@ ,@ . Since @ and @ are small, and @ and @ are small, the changes of @ and due to small changes of p and  can be neglected as the higher order values. In other words, the small  and  are taken into account, but their changes are neglected: , . In linear approximation in , Eq. (2.24) takes the form:
@(2.25)
here, the term  according Eq. (2.22), and the derivatives are calculated at@ , @;  according to Eqs. (2.15), (2.18), and @ according to Eqs. (2.17), (2.21). So, @ falls out of Eq. (2.25) and hence it takes a form:
@(2.26)
Similar expansion for Eq. (2.23) determines small velocity-dependent change in final fluence . The velocity dependence of in Eq. (2.26) was found in the works (Khotyayintsev et al., 2010, Khotyayintseva et al., 2014, Khotyayintsev et al., 2014, Khotyayintsev et al., 2015), and the resulting equation of the velocity characteristic was presented in the following form:
@(2.27)
where w is the dimensionless wave velocity,
@(2.28)
L is the characteristic neutron migration length @ (about  cm typically for fast reactors), @ is the dimensionless thermal feedback coefficient,  are dimensionless constant parameters of the velocity characteristic. The values , , ,  were obtained for the example nuclear constants (Khotyayintsev et al., 2015).
The three velocity-dependent terms on the right-hand side (r.h.s.) of Eq. (2.27) are the first order corrections; they represent velocity-dependent effects related to thermal feedback, and β-decays of the 239Np and the 241Pu correspondingly. In the zeroth approximation, these terms are zero, and Eq. (2.27) takes its zero order form . The effects of different origin contribute additively to the Eq. (2.27) since the corresponding contributions to function g are small. The first two terms (caused by thermal feedback and the 239Np decay) grow linearly with velocity; the last term (caused by the 241Pu β-decay) falls with velocity. If the 241Pu is considered stable, the last term is zero. The velocity characteristic (2.27) is then linear
(2.29)
So, @ at 2 in the approximation of stable 241Pu. If the 241Pu decay is taken into account that the last term on the r.h.s. of Eq. (2.27) is zero at high velocities, In fact, Eq. (2.27) shows that the term caused by the 241Pu β-decay vanishes at high velocities and grows with decreasing of . Physical explanation of this velocity dependence is as follows. Typical half-width of the flux distribution in a stationary wave is about 1 m. At typical velocity 5 cm/year, the time of the wave propagation by that width is 20 years, or about the decay time  years of the 241Pu. At much higher velocities (at @ formally), the time of the wave propagation is much shorter than the decay time, and the decay process of the 241Pu is negligible. In this case, fission of the 241Pu is a dominant process, and the 241Am density is close to zero. At extremely low velocities (at  formally) the decay time is much shorter than the time of the wave propagation, and the burnout of the 241Pu is negligible. In this case, the 241Pu decay to 241Am is a dominant process. At @ the r.h.s. of Eq. (2.27) tends to @ and hence , where @ according to the example calculation. That is physically clear: with decreasing of the wave velocity, neutron production due to excellent fission of the 241Pu is substituted by neutron absorption by the 241Am (that predominantly absorbs neutrons), and hence positive contribution to function g is substituted by a negative one. The total number density of the 241Pu, 242Pu, 241Am and their fission products is small compared to the densities of the 238U and 239Pu. So, the corresponding change in function g related to instability of the 241Pu is small. According to Eqs. (2.27), (2.28), the velocity , or  corresponds to the crossover between the two cases discussed above. The estimate gives  cm/year at  cm and  obtained for the example calculation. So, the case  corresponds to extremely low velocities.
The limit @ does not lead to disappearing of the wave. The state without a wave corresponds to the trivial solution of the eigenvalue problem. The limit  means a limit case of a stationary wave with infinitely small but positive velocity. In this case, the neutron flux is almost zero. However, final fluence is nonzero, and hence final densities of the main stable nuclides 238U, 239Pu, 240Pu and fission products differ from their initial values. So, no disappearing of the wave occurs.
For a stationary wave, all temporal changes of nuclear densities and flux are related to slow motion of the wave. The corresponding time scale T can be estimated as ; so,  years at cm, cm/year. The equation for the 239Np density @ at the point x
@(2.30)
can describe both fast and slow temporal changes. For a stationary wave, the 239Np density changes on the time scale T, not ; so, the time derivative in Eq. (2.30) can be roughly estimated as , and the ratio of the derivative to decay term is estimated as follows:
@(2.31)
According to Eq. (2.28), this ratio is the dimensionless wave velocity . Its typical values are small:  at  years. So, in the Eq. (2.30) the derivative  is a small term of the order of w; the same is true for the term  and for the term  in the function g (2.18) (Khotyayintsev et al., 2010). The second term  on the r.h.s. of Eq. (2.27) is directly proportional to w, since it represents the cumulative effect originating from these three small terms. The predominant contribution originates from  (Khotyayintsev et al., 2010): neutron capture by the 239Np diminishes the number of the 239Np decays to fissile 239Pu, and fertile 240Pu is produced instead. Hence the number of fissions falls, and the number of captures grows. This effect arises since  is small compared to T but finite; at  the effect vanishes.
2.5. Velocity characteristic for the 11-nuclide chain
To verify the analytical perturbation theory, the eigenvalue problem (2.4), (2.5), (2.6), (2.7), (2.8), (2.18) for the stationary wave was solved numerically, and a series of points of the velocity characteristic was calculated. Both the analytical and numerical results are shown in Fig. 1 (Khotyayintsev et al., 2015). Solid lines correspond to Eq. (2.27); they show the velocity characteristic in the approximation of the first order perturbation theory. Dots correspond to the points obtained numerically. For each point, w was fixed. Using a simple asymptotic solution, boundary conditions at  were transferred from infinity to a finite point. The obtained boundary eigenvalue problem on semi-infinite interval was solved by applying shooting method: solutions of the initial value problem at different p were obtained numerically, and the spectral parameter p was adjusted until the solution satisfied the conditions  and  at .
Fig. 1. The velocity characteristics of the TWR in the variables “effective absorber density p – dimensionless velocity w” at different feedback coefficients:, , ,, for curves 1, 2, 3, 4 respectively; dots – numerical solution of the eigenvalue problem (2.4), (2.5), (2.6), (2.7), (2.8), (2.18), solid lines – Eq. (2.27) corresponding to the first order of the perturbation theory. Figure from the work (Khotyayintsev et al., 2015). Parameters  for the points A–D are used for numerical calculations in Section 4; points A, B, C correspond to the velocities 0.0015, 0.005, 0.015 respectively and  (no thermal feedback), point D corresponds to the velocity  and .
Fig. 1 shows good agreement between the perturbation theory and the numerical results for a wide range of velocities and feedback coefficients: the analytical estimate of p agrees with the numerical results at the same w within 0.0003, for  (or ), and . At higher and lower velocities the deviation grows. Small absolute changes of the absorber density p provide the changes of the wave velocity by a factor of ten and more. These facts confirm that velocity-dependent effects represented by the r.h.s. of Eq. (2.27) are small, and the applied first-order approximation of the perturbation theory is valid. The perturbation theory also predicts that peak neutron flux, reactor power, and wave velocity change almost in direct proportion to each other (see Section 7 of the work (Khotyayintsev et al., 2015), and accordingly, Fig. 1 shows also variation of the reactor power or peak neutron flux (in appropriate units) with the effective absorber density p.
Weak velocity dependence of power to velocity and flux to velocity ratios originates from weak velocity dependence of the densities of the main stable nuclides 238U, 239Pu, 240Pu. The key points of the explanation are as follows. Total fission heat power P can be presented in the form (Khotyayintsev et al., 2015) . Here  is the energy per fission, S is the core cross section,  is the initial density of heavy nuclides,  is the fuel burn-up depth ( equals to final number density of fission-product pairs); we neglect radial dependence of  and  for simplicity. So,  can depend on velocity only due to variation of η with velocity. According to Eq. (2.10), flux to velocity ratio  can depend on velocity only due to the variation of function M with velocity. Both η and M are determined by nuclear densities, either by final densities or the densities integrated over fluence (see Eqs. (2.13), (2.18)). Compared to the densities of other nuclides of the fuel chain, the densities of the nuclides 238U, 239Pu, 240Pu and their fission products are high, and provide main contributions to η and M. The densities of these nuclides weakly depend on the wave velocity since the first-order corrections are small compared to the densities in the zeroth-order approximation. The densities of the nuclides 239Np, 241Pu, 242Pu, 241Am can strongly vary with velocity, but their contributions to η and M are small since their densities are small. So, power to velocity and flux to velocity ratios are predominantly determined by their zero order values, and therefore, weakly depend on velocity.
In Eq. (2.27), both the proportional to γ term related to thermal feedback, and the proportional to b0 term related to the 239Np β-decay grow linearly with velocity. The last term, related to instability of the 241Pu, decreases with velocity; therefore, it competes with the terms growing with velocity. This competition results in a crossover of the velocity formation: the velocity characteristic is bifurcated (two-valued), its upper and lower branches join in the turning point, as shown in Fig. 1. The upper branch corresponds to greater wave velocities, and the cumulative effect of the 239Np decay and thermal feedback dominates. The lower branch corresponds to lower velocities, and the effect of instability of the 241Pu dominates.
Since the velocity characteristic shown in Fig. 1 is two-valued, two stationary wave solutions with different velocities exist at same parameters of the core. Our estimates at typical TWR parameters give from 5 to 10 cm/year approximately for the velocity in the turning point. The upper branch is falling, while the lower one is rising: at power levels below the turning point, greater absorption leads to greater wave velocity. So, the question arises about stability of the corresponding solutions. Time-dependent modeling of space and time evolution of the wave revealed unstable behavior of the states of the lower branch (Khotyayintsev et al., 2014, Khotyayintsev et al., 2015). So, stationary wave solutions do not represent real stationary waves in a self-regulating reactor if they correspond to any power level below the turning point, up to zero.
The work (Khotyayintsev et al., 2015) leads to a conclusion that exact data on the velocity characteristic can be important for CANDLE reactor design. The reasons are as follows.
1)
The interval of power levels for the operation of a self-regulating CANDLE reactor in a stationary wave mode is limited from below: its lower margin corresponds to the turning point of the velocity characteristic.
2)
The actual lower margin of the power levels should lie far enough from the turning point, since sensitivity of the reactor power to any controlled or uncontrolled change of the core parameters grows infinitely with approaching the turning point (see Fig. 1).
3)
For example, the inlet coolant temperature can be changed by the operator during the reactor operation in a stationary wave mode in order to change the power level. Temporal transient processes are beyond of the framework of this paper. However, the velocity characteristic shows what final state with the new power level can result from this or that change of the control parameter.
4)
Since stable or unstable operation modes of the reactor require different operation of the control system maintaining constant power level, and states of the lower branch are unstable, the shape and parameters of the velocity characteristic are also important for the TWRs with external power control.
2.6. Velocity characteristic for Van Dam’s analytical model
The well-known Van Dam’s model (Van Dam, 2000) includes thermal feedback, and allows exact analytical solution in the form of a stationary wave. For the Van Dam’s model, the eigenvalue problem for a stationary wave (2.4), (2.5), (2.6), (2.7), (2.8) is reduced to eq. (2.4) with boundary conditions (2.6), (2.7), and function g is presented in the form  where γ is a dimensional feedback coefficient (),  is constant, and  is a quadratic function of fluence. The model includes 5 independent parameters: , , , , and the length  where ;  is the lowest value for the core medium before the wave at ;  is the peak value achieved at . We have obtained the following equation of the velocity characteristic for Van Dam’s solution:
@(2.32)
where we have denoted @,@ . Physically q is similar to the parameter p in Eq. (2.18) since increase in both parameters makes the initial core medium more subcritical. If q is considered a control parameter, Van Dam’s equation of the velocity characteristic (2.32) can be compared with Eq. (2.27). Eq. (2.27) is valid if velocity-dependent effects are small. If the r.h.s. of Eq. (2.32) is small compared to the other two terms, or , Van Dam’s velocity characteristic (2.32) becomes linear
@(2.33)
where @. Eqs. (2.33), (2.27) become similar, if only the feedback term  remains in the r.h.s. of Eq. (2.27), the terms related to β-decays are neglected. Van Dam’s model does not take into account β-decays, in particular, the decay of the 241Pu. That is why Van Dam’s linear velocity characteristic (2.33) is different from two-valued characteristics (2.27) shown in Fig. 1.
Section 2 shows that existing theoretical results on the velocity characteristic are based on simplified models. Their accuracy is insufficient for the needs of reactor designing. So, for particular designs the equation of the velocity characteristic should be studied numerically, applying powerful reactor analysis codes. Theory of the velocity characteristic developed in the next sections of this work is aimed to provide adequate theoretical basis for such studies.
<Section>3. Equation of the velocity characteristic with reactivity: general results</Section>
The goal of this section is to develop a perturbation theory which is not based on any specific model, and hence, is applicable universally to any consistent model of the core. The theory includes reactivity and arbitrary number of control parameters.
Physical grounds for the existence of the equation of the velocity characteristic are as follows. From the point of view of physics of nonlinear wave phenomena (Vasiliev et al., 1987), a stationary wave of nuclear fission is an autowave: a self-sustaining and self-organizing nonlinear traveling wave which releases energy stored in the medium during its propagation. Among other autowaves, nuclear fission wave is most close to combustion waves and waves in reaction–diffusion systems. While solitons in conservative systems can have different propagation speeds in the same medium (depending on the conditions of initiation), the speed of the autowave is determined solely by the local properties of the medium, the speed remains unchanged if the conditions of initiation (ignition) are changed (at least for sufficiently small changes). The same is true for a self-regulating stationary nuclear fission wave. If the stationary wave exists, its velocity should be completely determined by the parameters of the core in its initial state, far in front of the wave (such as the initial nuclide composition of fuel, the core radius, or coolant and structural materials fractions). So, the parameters of the core  and the wave velocity u should be bound by some relation
@(3.1)
where f is a function of all  and u. Eq. (3.1) is the equation of the velocity characteristic of the reactor. Eq. (2.32) for Van Dam's model is a single example when exact Eq. (3.1) is known explicitly. A set of the two equilibrium conditions in fluence representation (2.16), (2.17) is also equivalent to Eq. (3.1); Eqs. (2.16), (2.17) are formally exact, but they are defined implicitly. Physically, Eq. (3.1) is a kind of equilibrium condition, for actual operation of the reactor in a stationary wave mode. If the parameters change, the point of equilibrium shifts to another velocity according to Eq. (3.1), and that is how the self-regulation of the stationary wave reveals itself (no time-dependent regulation is meant here).
In the context of a calculation of a stationary wave, the equation of the velocity characteristic arises as follows. Different kinds of such calculations exist (analytical or numerical, time-dependent or steady state, using Monte Carlo or deterministic reactor analysis codes, including  or not), and each of them is based on some mathematical model of the reactor, formulated explicitly, or implicitly. Any kind of calculation of a stationary wave can be substituted by solving of the equivalent eigenvalue problem, for the same model. So, the parameter of the wave – the wave velocity u – becomes a parameter of the eigenproblem, alongside with the parameters of the core , and  if the calculation includes , otherwise . Different formulations of the eigenvalue problem for a stationary wave can be found in the literature. Two simple examples are presented in 2.1 Formulation of the eigenvalue problem, 2.6 Velocity characteristic for Van Dam’s analytical model. More sophisticated examples are as follows (boundary conditions are implied, as well as non negativity of the neutron flux).
1)
Multi-group 3-D neutron transport equation3 coupled to burn-up equations for the nuclide chain including 20 heavy nuclides and 66 fission products (Sekimoto, 2010) (see Eqs. (3–14)–(3–17), and Figs. 3-1 and 3-2 of the book (Sekimoto, 2010);
2)
Coupled blocks of neutronics, burn-up and thermo-hydraulics (Sekimoto and Nakayama, 2014, Yan and Sekimoto, 2008).
Section 2 presents examples of important velocity-dependent effects and their particular origins; they show that accounting, or not accounting for particular velocity-dependent terms or effects in the calculation model can substantially alter the resulting velocity characteristic. So, both the reactor designs and the applied approximations can be different, and hence a variety of models can be applied to the studies of the velocity characteristic. To obtain universally applicable conclusions on the velocity characteristic, there is no need to solve all the various eigenvalue problems. Common properties of such problems will be used in this section, instead of solving all the problems.
Any eigenvalue problem for a stationary wave has a trivial solution corresponding to zero neutron flux and zero burnup of the initial core composition. The equation of the velocity characteristic arises as a condition under which a non-trivial solution exists which satisfies all boundary conditions of the problem. If the eigenvalue problem including  is solved numerically or analytically then its nontrivial solution (the eigenfunction) is found, and the eigenvalue , or reactivity . Then, the obtained eigenvalue  depends on the parameters of the eigenproblem  and u:
(3.2)
Eq. (3.2) is the equation of the velocity characteristic with reactivity; it arises from the calculation of  for a stationary wave. At  Eq. (3.2) includes Eq. (3.1) that corresponds to actual operation of the reactor. Physically, Eq. (3.2) is also a kind of equilibrium condition, for calculation models including . If the model includes no velocity-dependent effects contributing to Eq. (3.2), then function  is independent on u, and the wave velocity remains arbitrary.
The perturbation theory developed in this section is based on the assumption that function f in Eq. (3.2) weakly depends on the wave velocity u since velocity-dependent effects are small. The perturbation theory is developed in the form which is similar to the theory presented above in Section 2.4. In the zeroth-order approximation, we neglect all velocity-dependent effects. Then, the wave velocity can be excluded from the eigenvalue problem, the r.h.s. of Eq. (3.2) is independent of u, and Eq. (3.2) takes the form
@(3.3)
Since the theory of Section 2 corresponds to  and includes a single parameter , the zeroth approximation Eq. (3.3) takes the form , and its solution is , according to Section 2.4. Exact Eq. (3.2) can be presented in the form:
@(3.4)
where
@(3.5)
The assumption that velocity-dependent effects are small means that @ is small. At this point, we chose some reactor design as a basic one. Parameters of the basic design  satisfy Eq. (3.3) at ; in other words,  satisfy the equation
@(3.6)
Further consideration refers to a fixed basic design of the core and small deviations @ of the parameters from the basic design . Then, in linear approximation in  we obtain from Eq. (3.4):
@(3.7)
here the first term in the r.h.s. is zero according to Eq. @(3.6), @the derivatives are calculated at . From the definition (3.5) and Eq. (3.6), it follows:
The term in square brackets in Eq. (3.7) is the change of  due to small changes of the parameters ; since @ is small, its change can be neglected. Denoting
@(3.8)
@(3.9)
we obtain finally:
@(3.10)
here @ are the reactivity coefficients for a stationary wave,@ , @and the term @ accounts for all velocity-dependent effects taken into account. Eqs. (2.27), (2.32) present particular cases of Eq. (3.10) at  (multiplied by a constant factor). Eq. (3.10) was obtained under the assumption that (a) velocity-dependent effects are small, and (b) variations of the control parameters @ are sufficiently small to allow linearization of the exact equation of the velocity characteristic in . The following comments amend the result presented by Eq. (3.10).
1)
In Eq. (3.10), coefficients  and function  are defined by Eqs. (3.8), (3.9). So, @ and @ are independent of @ and ρ. Coefficients @ can be calculated in the zeroth-order approximation; they are independent of the wave velocity and insensitive to all velocity-dependent effects. Coefficients  and function  are different for substantially different basic reactor designs.
2)
Flux to velocity and power to velocity ratios are zero-order values. If velocity-dependent corrections to them are small, then neutron flux and power change in direct proportion to the wave velocity, for sufficiently small variations of control parameters.
3)
Since velocity-dependent effects are small, the velocity-dependent term  in Eq. (3.10) is the sum of independent contributions of different origin (for example, originating in temperature change or in kinetics of different unstable nuclides):
(3.11)
Eqs. (3.10), (3.11), and comments 1) – 3) above constitute main results of the perturbation theory.
In this section, no explicit expressions for the reactivity coefficients , or for the velocity-dependent term  are obtained since they are different for each particular model. As an example, we will find explicit analytical expressions for  and reactivity coefficients  in the next section, for a particular simple model. The goal of this section is different. As it was mentioned in the end of Section 2, the equation of the velocity characteristic should be studied numerically since only powerful reactor analysis codes can provide the data of sufficient accuracy for the needs of reactor designing. The theory presented in this section can be helpful in such numerical studies. The key points are as follows.
1)
If velocity-dependent effects are small, the exact relation (3.2) between reactivity, the wave velocity, and several control parameters of the core acquires simple structure shown by Eq. (3.10). Then, it is much easier to find numerically (or analytically) a single function of the velocity , and a single constant  for each control parameter  than to study unknown multivariable relations (3.2) or (3.1).
2)
Eq. (3.10) shows that the same velocity change can be achieved either by changing any of the parameters  or by changing the reactivity ρ. Hence, function  can be found calculating numerically the dependence  at fixed control parameters. The reactivity coefficient for a stationary wave can be found as a slope of the dependence  at any fixed reasonable value of the velocity u:
@(3.12)
Most reactor codes applied for the calculations of a stationary wave at present can calculate such dependencies directly since they are designed to calculate  at fixed power. Eq. (3.12) is also applicable if the dependence  is found neglecting the velocity-dependent effects.
The results of this section presented above, and Eq. (3.10) in particular, are approximate. They were based on the assumption that velocity-dependent effects are small, and on further linearization in . So, numerically calculated dependencies differ (more or less) from similar dependencies following from Eq. (3.10). Applicability of the theory to a particular design and calculation model can be checked numerically, and calculations of  at fixed reactor parameters, and  at constant velocity or power are sufficient for that. Possible algorithm of numerical study corresponding to this and previous items will be discussed in Section 5. An illustrative example of such numerical check is presented in Section 4, for a simple model.
<Section>4. Application to particular models</Section>
The main results of this work are obtained in Section 3; this section is supplementary. Here we specify and illustrate generally applicable results of Section 3, using particular models with reactivity and the effective one dimensional one group approximation. We also check the accuracy of the perturbation theory comparing it with the numerical solution of the eigenvalue problem. We obtain analytical expressions for the reactivity coefficients in the one-dimensional one group approximation and arbitrary burn-up model. In this section, reactivity is introduced into function g (2.2) as follows
@(4.1)
4.1. Velocity characteristic with reactivity for particular model
To specify the velocity-dependent term  in Eq. (3.10) we will use the model of the work (Khotyayintsev et al., 2015) (see Section 2) as an example; reactivity is introduced into function g (2.18) according to Eq. (4.1). Since the effective absorber density p is a single control parameter of the model, Eq. (3.10) takes the form  where a is the reactivity coefficient corresponding to the parameter p. Comparing this equation with Eq. (2.27), we obtain that the equation with reactivity reads
@(4.2)
That is the equation of the velocity characteristic with reactivity and the effective absorber density p as a control parameter, for the 11-nuclide fuel chain; its complete derivation is based on one-dimensional one group approximation. In the work (Khotyayintseva et al., 2016) the equivalent equation was obtained in a more complicated way than above. As a particular case of Eq. (3.10), Eq. (4.2) can be written for an arbitrary set of control parameters :
@(4.3)
where @ and δ are constant parameters of the velocity characteristic, ai are the reactivity coefficients corresponding to the parameters . The reactivity coefficients are considered in the next subsection.
Eq. (4.3) was obtained for a simplified model and the case of pure 238U fuel. However, it can be applied to various CANDLE designs and fuels if , R and δ are best fit parameters. Changes in the initial core composition can affect the shape of the velocity characteristic. If the Th-U chain substitutes the U-Pu one, then practically stable 235U replaces unstable 241Pu, and the 233Pa (the half-life is 27 days) replaces the 239Np. Hence for the case of the thorium-based fuel, the last term in Eq. (4.3) should be zero, and no lower branch of the stationary wave would exist. For various fuel types, fuel transformation chains can include unstable heavy nuclides besides the 241Pu, 233Pa and 239Np. Additional unstable nuclides and fission products can contribute to velocity dependent effects in a stationary wave and affect the shape of the velocity characteristic. Only numerical calculations of the velocity characteristic can confirm the applicability of Eq. (4.3) to each specific reactor design.
Fig. 2 shows variation of the velocity with reactivity  for two values of feedback coefficient γ, at two fixed p. Solid lines correspond to Eq. (4.2) at , other parameters are the same as in Fig. 1. Dots correspond to the numerical solution of the boundary eigenvalue problem for a stationary wave (2.4), (2.5), (2.6), (2.7), (2.8) and (4.1) for the 11-nuclide chain. A series of points of the velocity characteristic was obtained for a series of values of w, applying the shooting method; reactivity ρ was adjusted at fixed w until the boundary condition at  was satisfied. As a particular case of Eq. (3.10), Eq. (4.2) can be used to illustrate theoretical predictions following from eq. (3.10). Since a is negative in Eq. (4.2), the theory predicts that the shape of the curves  and  should be the same (only the scale can differ). Fig. 1, Fig. 2 demonstrate that feature: the corresponding curves shown by solid lines are similar. Eq. (4.2) also predicts that the shape of the curve  should remain unchanged in the case of small change of the control parameter p, and Fig. 2 demonstrates that: the corresponding curves in Fig. 2 are just shifted horizontally.
Fig. 2. The velocity characteristic in the variables “reactivity– dimensionless velocity”  for the 11-nuclide chain at different feedback coefficients γ and effective absorber densities p; dots – direct numerical solution, solid lines – theory (Eq. (4.2)); ,  (1); ,  (2); ,  (3); ,  (4).
Fig. 2 also shows good agreement between the perturbation theory and the numerical results: the analytical estimate of ρ agrees with the numerical results at the same w within  for the curves 3 and 4, and within less than  for the curves 1 and 2 which show greater variation of ρ. Absolute changes of reactivity shown in Fig. 2 are less than 0.02 which is small compared to unity; therefore, the three velocity-dependent terms in Eq. (4.2) remain small, and Eq. (4.2) is valid at all velocities shown in Fig. 2. The range of w shown in Fig. 2 corresponds to the velocities up to  cm/year approximately (see the estimate in Section 2.4). That is much greater than typical velocities of the wave about 4 cm/year (Sekimoto, 2010, Sekimoto and Nakayama, 2014) which correspond to realistic power levels. So, at realistic power levels the perturbation theory is applicable with good accuracy, and the velocity-dependent effects are small.
However, Eq. (3.10) shows that the curves  and  are not always similar, for arbitrary control parameter . If the reactivity coefficient  for the parameter  is positive, then the orientation of the curves would be mirror symmetric with respect to the vertical axis to that shown in Fig. 1, Fig. 2.
At fixed w, Eq. (4.2) takes the form
@(4.4)
where @ is a constant dependent on γ and w, and reactivity coefficient a is a constant independent of γ and w. So, the theory predicts that the dependence  at fixed w is linear, and its slope a is independent of γ and w. In order to check this prediction, the dependence  at fixed w was calculated numerically (Khotyayintseva et al., 2016) for 4 combinations of γ and w. Since at  Eq. (4.2) coincides with Eq. (2.27), solid lines in Fig. 1 correspond to Eq. (4.2) at . Accordingly, the values of γ, w and p for each of the points A, B, C, D shown in Fig. 1 satisfy Eq. (4.2) at . The values of γ and w remained fixed, the eigenvalue problem was solved numerically, and ρ was calculated for a series of values of p. The reactivity varied over the range . For all the 4 combinations of γ and w, analytical estimate (4.4) at  agrees with the numerical results within 1 per cent (see straight lines and dots in Fig. 1 of the work (Khotyayintseva et al., 2016).
Applying powerful reactor analysis code, the dependencies of the same kind (the dependence of  on control parameters of the core at fixed total heat power) were calculated in the work (Yan and Sekimoto, 2008), for a particular CANDLE design. Figs. 18 and 19 of the work (Yan and Sekimoto, 2008) show strong variation of  (by 0.014) with coolant to fuel ratio, for fixed fuel pin pitch, and fixed coolant channel diameter, correspondingly. Both dependencies are very close to straight lines (described by Eqs. (3) and (4) of the work (Yan and Sekimoto, 2008), for the change of coolant to fuel ratio by more that 10 percent.
4.2. Reactivity coefficients
The equation of the velocity characteristic (2.27) was obtained in Section 2 applying the effective one-dimensional one-group diffusion approximation, and the two equilibrium conditions for a stationary wave (2.16), (2.17). The expression for reactivity coefficients is derived below applying the same approximation and the same two equilibrium conditions. The derivation is valid for any consistent burn-up model since particular choice of the burn-up model does not affect the applicability of the equilibrium conditions (2.16), (2.17).
Function g including reactivity is given by Eq. (4.1). According to Eq. (3.8), the zeroth-order approximation is sufficient to find reactivity coefficients for a stationary wave. So, we neglect the effect of thermal feedback and radioactive decays below. The equilibrium conditions in the zeroth-order approximation include no velocity; they include reactivity now, and take the form:
@(4.5)
@(4.6)
Let @ ,  corresponds to the basic design of the reactor under study. Then
@(4.7)
(4.8)
Now, let the reactor parameters change . Then, , , and in linear approximation with respect to , Eqs. (4.5), (4.6) take the form:
(4.9)
(4.10)
where the first terms are zero in both equations, according to Eqs. (4.7), (4.8); here and below the derivatives are constants calculated at the point  , , if otherwise stated. From Eqs. (2.14), (2.15), it follows correspondingly , , and the derivative , since @ according to Eq. (4.7). Hence the Eqs. (4.9), (4.10) are simplified, and the variations  satisfy the following two linear equations:
(4.11)
(4.12)
Since Eq. (4.12) includes no variation of final fluence , Eq. (4.12) takes the form of Eq. (3.10) at @:
(4.13)
The variation of final fluence  can be found from Eq. (4.11) taking into account Eq. (4.13).
From the definition of function M (2.13), it follows
@(4.14)
@(4.15)
Here we have taking into account that the derivatives in the Eqs. (4.12), (4.13) can be calculated at @ instead of @ since@  is small. It is convenient to introduce a kind of weighted average over the wave; for an arbitrary quantity q presented as a function of fluence the average @ is defined as follows:
@(4.16)
Accordingly,@ , and fluence can be expressed in arbitrary units here. Since  according to Eq. (4.1), the final expression for the reactivity coefficients takes the form:
@(4.17)
Eq. (4.17) can be applied directly if zero-order analytical solutions for nuclear densities  are known (Pavlovych et al., 2008b, Khotyayintsev et al., 2010, Chen et al., 2012), and function g can be expressed as . In fact, zero-order function g in Eq. (4.17) can be replaced by the exact one, calculated numerically, since the difference between the exact and the zero-order functions is small. Since numerical calculations of a stationary wave usually provide space distributions of the fields, the following equivalent form of the average (4.16) can be more suitable:
@(4.18)
Here axial position x and neutron flux  can be expressed in arbitrary units;  and  for the wave moving from right to left,  and  for the wave moving from left to right.
Calculation of particular reactivity coefficient requires specifying of control parameters of the model. In Eq. (4.2) the control parameter p is defined by Eq. (2.19). So, zero order function g (4.1) takes the form:
@(4.19)
Hence, @, @, and Eq. (4.17) at @ is reduced to the following expression for the reactivity coefficient a for the parameter p:
@(4.20)
Since velocity-dependent effects can be neglected in the above derivation, Eqs. (4.17), (4.20) are applicable to any initial core composition, raw fuel, and nuclide chain. Eq. (4.20) includes as a particular case the result for the 11-nuclide chain obtained in the work (Khotyayintseva et al., 2016).
In the end of Section 4.1 we checked the accuracy of the perturbation theory comparing theoretical and numerical results, for the 11-nuclide chain. Calculations have shown practically linear variation of reactivity with the control parameter  for the points A, B, C, D (Fig. 1). The theory also predicts that reactivity coefficient a is independent of the wave velocity w, velocity dependent effects, and the feedback coefficient γ. To check that, the reactivity coefficient a was calculated in different ways using analytical expression (4.20). The value  (for which theoretical curves in Fig. 2 and linear dependencies (4.4) were obtained) was calculated neglecting all velocity-dependent effects. Explicit analytical solutions  of the zero-order burn-up equations were substituted into Eqs. (4.20), (4.16). The values  were calculated taking into account velocity-dependent effects at different values of w and γ. The exact nuclear distributions calculated numerically for the points A, B, C, D (Fig. 1), correspondingly, were substituted into Eqs. (4.20), (4.18). All 5 values of the reactivity coefficient are equal within 1 per cent accuracy.
<Section>5. Discussion</Section>
As shown in Section 2.5, the shape and parameters of the velocity characteristic can be critically important for feasibility of the CANDLE reactor design. In particular, interval of power levels for the operation of a self-regulating reactor in a stationary wave mode should correspond to the upper branch of the velocity characteristic, because the states of the lower branch are unstable and do not represent real stationary waves (Khotyayintsev et al., 2014, Khotyayintsev et al., 2015). Precise data on the velocity characteristic for particular reactor design can be obtained applying powerful reactor analysis codes, which calculate  at fixed power. The theoretical basis presented in this work can be helpful in such studies. The specificity of such calculations is as follows.
1)
Calculation of a stationary wave and  must be repeated many times at different values of power and control parameters in order to obtain a series of points (see dots in Fig. 1, Fig. 2, for example). So, the scope of calculations multiplies as compared to a single calculation of a stationary wave.
2)
Numerical studies of the velocity characteristic require much higher accuracy than calculations of neutron flux and nuclear density distributions for the stationary wave. Fig. 2 gives an idea of the required accuracy. Variation of reactivity by 0.002 provides significant variation of power near the turning point. So, to resolve such a curve,  must be calculated with the accuracy at least about 0.0001. At the same time, in the works (Hartanto et al., 2016, Hartanto and Kim, 2012, Saadi et al., 2012, Sekimoto et al., 2001, Gulik, 2013) the deviation of  in a stationary wave mode is about 0.001, or even 0.01, and that is satisfactory since small changes of  weakly affect basic characteristics of the wave.
As it was mentioned in the introduction, among the dependences calculated in the work (Sekimoto and Nakayama, 2014) were the dependences of the coolant flow rate on the power level, and of inlet coolant temperature on the power level. These are examples of numerical study of the velocity characteristic in the form of the dependence  (dependence of control parameter on power). Such kind of calculation (at , for simplicity) requires satisfying the condition  at each new power value, where ε is the required accuracy. So, λ must be adjusted iteratively at each new point. Instead of that, we propose to eliminate the iterations, and calculate the two kinds of dependencies:  (dependence of reactivity on power) at fixed control parameters, and  (dependence of reactivity on control parameter) at fixed power. Elimination of the iterations, and calculation of the dependencies  and  give several advantages at once.
1)
Both dependencies  and  can be directly calculated using reactor analysis codes which calculate  at fixed power.
2)
Elimination of the iterations reduces the calculation time. The calculation time is not doubled if the second control parameter is added since only the dependence  must be calculated for the added parameter.
3)
In the work (Sekimoto and Nakayama, 2014) the dependence of the control parameter on power was calculated within a limited interval of power levels, and the obtained fragment of the velocity characteristic  was monotonic (see Fig. 3 of the work (Sekimoto and Nakayama, 2014). As it was shown in Section 4.1, the slope of the lower branch of the dependence  can be positive or negative. So, the slope of such a limited fragment is not indicative whether the fragment belongs to the upper branch, or to the lower branch. Calculation of power dependence on reactivity  (instead of power dependence on the control parameter ) is preferable in this connection, since for , the upper branch is always falling, and the lower one is rising, and the branches can be identified uniquely by any limited monotonic fragment of the velocity characteristic.
Improving of the  calculation accuracy is not a big problem for deterministic codes; for example, the  misfit less than 10−6 was applied to the iterations in the work (Sekimoto and Nakayama, 2014). That can yet become a challenge for Monte Carlo codes. The calculated values of the  for a sequence of burn-up steps are randomly scattered due to statistical nature of the Monte Carlo method, and the standard deviation falls inversely proportional to the square root of the calculation time per one step. For example, in the work (Saadi et al., 2012) Monte Carlo method was applied, and the reported maximum reactivity swing in a stationary wave mode was about 0.002 (180 pcm). Reducing of the obtained swing by the factor of 30 would require increase in calculation time by the factor of 1000, approximately. That seems unreal even for powerful computers. That is why it seems hardly feasible for Monte Carlo codes to satisfy the above mentioned condition  at  and less by means of successive iterations. If the iterations are excluded, and the dependencies  and  are calculated instead of , then special methods can be developed to achieve the required accuracy for . But this question is out of the scope of this paper.
Numerical calculations of the dependencies  and  allow to restore the equation of the velocity characteristic (3.10) for arbitrary number of control parameters, and to check its applicability to particular design. For a single control parameter, the algorithm can look as follows. 1) Choose some value of the control parameter . 2) Calculate reactivity as function of reactor power  at ; identify the branches (upper and/or lower) and choose an appropriate power level . 3) Calculate reactivity as function of the control parameter  at ; the obtained dependence must be close to linear; approximate it with a straight line and determine the reactivity coefficient  as its slope according to Eq. (3.12). Combining of the results of the two calculations gives the restored equation of the velocity characteristic (3.10) in the form:
@(5.1)
The best choice of fixed  corresponds to small absolute values of . The proposed algorithm is based on the results of the perturbation theory and Eq. (3.10). Their applicability to the studied design can be checked using the same two calculations;  and  must weakly depend on the choice of fixed values  and , and any other reasonable choice of  and  must remain the total of the r.h.s. of Eq. (5.1) unchanged, within acceptable accuracy. Similar numerical check of the accuracy of eq. (3.10) for the 11-nuclide chain and example nuclear constants was presented in Section 4.
Eq. (3.10) presents the main result of this work. According to Eq. (3.11) the term  is the sum of contributions from velocity-dependent effects of different origin; so, Eq. (3.10) takes the form
@(5.2)
Here all terms in the r.h.s. can be interpreted as different contributions to reactivity, or reactivity effects. The velocity-dependent terms  can be interpreted as reactivity feedback terms. Since all terms in the r.h.s. of Eq. (5.2) are additive and independent, different contributions to reactivity can be studied separately, one by one.
Eq. (5.2) reveals helpful similarity between reactivity for a stationary wave in TWR, and reactivity for conventional reactors. From the other side, Eq. (5.2) can seem trivial. Below, we demonstrate the difference between the two reactivities, reactivity for a stationary wave in TWR, and reactivity for conventional fast reactor (CFR). Using the results obtained in this work different variation of reactivity for TWR and CFR can be shown explicitly. Simplest reactor models are sufficient for that.
Consider two eigenproblems for an infinite 1-D reactor in one-group diffusion approximation. Problem #1 is a standard criticality problem for CFR (Duderstadt et al., 1976):
(5.3)
Here function g is the net neutron production cross section.
Problem #2 is the eigenvalue problem for a stationary wave in TWR; it includes the same equation with boundary conditions (5.3) coupled to burn-up equations of the form:
@(5.4)
For CFR (problem #1) z is the space coordinate and  is neutron flux in arbitrary units; for TWR (problem #2) z is the space coordinate in the moving frame. In both problems we neglect thermal feedback and burn-up equations (5.4) include no radioactive decays. The wave velocity has been excluded and  stands for the flux to velocity ratio in problem #2. Both problems can be formally considered as steady-state space problems. So, their interpretation can be free from considerations related to temporal changes.
First of all, consider small changes of reactivity @ from @ due to small change of net neutron production , provided that initial space distributions of neutron flux and nuclear densities are equal for CFR and TWR. Standard perturbation theory for Eq. (5.3) in linear approximation in  (see for example (Duderstadt et al., 1976), Eq. (5–312)) results in the following relation:
@(5.5)
where  is the unperturbed eigenfunction. Eq. (5.5) is valid both for the CFR and for the TWR. So, it can seem that variation of reactivity is similar for CFR and TWR. To check that, consider function  that depends on a single parameter , and  caused by a small change of the parameter .
For CFR
@(5.6)
and Eq. (5.5) results in the following relation for the reactivity coefficient for problem #1
(5.7)
At the same time, for problem #2 Eqs. (4.16), (4.17) are equivalent to the following relation that includes different kind of integration
@(5.8)
In the particular case of function g (2.18) (at @), the parameter  equals p, and@ . Then@ , and for CFR we obtain from Eq. (5.7):
@ where
@(5.9)
That is different from the corresponding expression (4.20) for the TWR
@(5.10)
since the average @ differs from the average @ (5.9):
@(5.11)
The weight @ falls from the wave front (where  is small) to its tail (where @); so, a fission neutron produced at the wave front is more important in the integral (5.11) than the same neutron produced at the tail of the wave. For the average (5.9), fission neutrons are equally important if they are produced in the points of the left and right sides of the distribution  with equal values of neutron flux ϕ.
From Eqs. (5.9), (5.10), it is apparent that reactivity coefficients for the same parameter @ are different for the CFR and the TWR. That seems to contradict to Eq. (5.5). This equation shows that equal changes of net neutron production  provide equal changes of reactivity  both for CFR and TWR, but in fact,  are different for CFR and TWR, for the same . Besides the change in reactivity, the change of the parameter  provides the change in flux distribution . Problem #2 is a nonlinear problem; for a stationary wave, flux distribution and nuclear density distributions are coupled, and change together. So, nuclear densities also change  and contribute to the change in net neutron production for the TWR
@(5.12)
That is different from  (5.6) for the CFR since nuclear densities change for the TWR.
The above analysis shows that different variation of reactivity for TWRs and CFRs originates in self consistency of flux and nuclear density distributions in a stationary wave, which is a distinguishing feature of a stationary wave. Simple examples considered above just allow us to demonstrate this difference explicitly. Therefore, Eq. (5.2) reflects completely different inner regulation in a stationary wave, including power regulation, in spite of formal similarity of reactivity in Eq. (5.2) to reactivity in conventional reactors.
<Section>Conclusions</Section>
In this work we study the equation of the velocity characteristic of the traveling wave/CANDLE reactor. That is a relation between  (or reactivity), the velocity of a stationary wave (or the reactor power), and control parameters of the reactor model. Such relation characterizes solutions in the form of a stationary wave obtained from the calculations including ; at  the equation of the velocity characteristic corresponds to actual operation of the reactor in a stationary wave mode. The equation of the velocity characteristic gives valuable information required for consistent TWR designing. The results of the work lead to the following conclusions.
Power regulation for a stationary wave and its relationship with reactivity reflect a special kind of equilibrium in a stationary wave related to self consistency of neutron density and flux distributions. Variation of reactivity for a stationary wave differs from variation of conventional reactivity, and reactivity coefficients corresponding to similar parameters are different.
Under the realistic power levels, the relationship between reactivity, wave velocity, and control parameters of the reactor can take on a simple mathematical form, for different descriptions of neutronics, burn-up chains, or the reactor models. The obtained equation of the velocity characteristic (3.10) is linear with respect to reactivity and small variations of the reactor parameters; also velocity-dependent contributions to reactivity of different origins are additive, and thus, can be studied separately.
The equation of the velocity characteristic can be studied combining two types of calculations: 1) calculation of variation of  with power at fixed control parameters, 2) calculation of variation of  with the control parameter at fixed power. This allows the designer to identify any calculated monotonic fragment of the velocity characteristic as belonging to its upper or lower (unstable) branch. The need in satisfying the condition  at each calculated point of the velocity characteristic is eliminated; the latter can be critically important for the application of Monte Carlo reactor codes.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Volodymyr M. Khotyayintsev: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation. Olena M. Khotyayintseva: Investigation, Writing - original draft. Artem V. Aksonov: Investigation, Validation. Volodymyr Gulik: Software, Validation, Writing - original draft. Volodymyr M. Pavlovych: Supervision.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Appendix A. Supplementary data</Section>
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:
Supplementary data 1.
<Section>References</Section>
Chen et al., 2019
X.-N. Chen, F. Gabrielli, A. Rineiski, T. Schulenberg
Boiling water cooled travelling wave reactor
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 134 (2019), p. 342
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chen et al., 2012
Xue-Nong Chen, Edgar Kiefhaber, Dalin Zhang, Werner Maschek
Fundamental solution of nuclear solitary wave
Energy Convers Manage, 59 (2012), p. 40
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Duderstadt et al., 1976
Duderstadt, James J, Hamilton, Louis J., 1976. Nuclear Reactor Analysis. John Wiley & Sons, New York/Sidney/London/Toronto.
Google Scholar
Feoktistov, 1989
L. Feoktistov
Neutron-fission wave
Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 309 (4) (1989), p. 864
(in Russian)
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fomin et al., 2011
S.P. Fomin, O.S. Fomin, Yu.P. Mel’nik, V.V. Pilipenko, N.F. Shul’ga
Nuclear burning wave in fast reactor with mixed Th-U fuel
Progr. Nucl. Energy, 53 (2011), p. 800
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fomin et al., 2019
S.P. Fomin, A.I. Kirdin, M.S. Malovytsia, V.V. Pilipenko, N.F. Shul’ga
Optimization of ignition zone of advanced fast reactor, working in nuclear burning wave mode
Probl. Atomic Sci. Technol., 3 (121) (2019), p. 80
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fomin et al., 2008
S. Fomin, Yu. Mel’nik, V. Pilipenko, N. Shul’ga
Initiation and propagation of nuclear burning wave in fast reactor
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 50 (2008), p. 163
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gilleland et al., 2016
John Gilleland, Robert Petroski, Kevan Weaver
The traveling wave reactor: design and development
Engineering, 2 (2016), p. 88
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gulik, 2013
Gulik, V., Pavlovych, V., Tkaczyk, A.H., 2013. Using SERPENT Monte Carlo and Burnup code to model Traveling Wave Reactors (TWR). In: Proceedings of Joint International Conference on Supercomputing in Nuclear Applications and Monte Carlo 2013 (SNA&MC2013), 27 – 31 October 2013, Paris, France.
Google Scholar
Hartanto and Kim, 2012
Donny Hartanto, Yonghee Kim
A compact breed and burn fast reactor using spent nuclear fuel blanket
Proceedings of PHYSOR (2012), p. 15
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hartanto et al., 2016
Donny Hartanto, Chihyung Kim, Yonghee Kim
An optimization study on the excess reactivity in a linear breed-and-burn fast reactor (B&BR)
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 94 (2016), p. 62
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hyde et al., 2008
Roderick Hyde, Muriel Ishikawa, Nathan Myhrvold, John Nuckolls, Lowell Wood
Nuclear fission power for 21st century needs: enabling technologies for large-scale, low-risk, affordable nuclear electricity
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 50 (2008), p. 82
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ismail et al., 2007
Ismail, Y. Ohoka, P.H. Liem, H. Sekimoto
Long life small CANDLE-HTGRs with thorium
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 34 (2007), p. 120
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Khotyayintsev et al., 2010
Khotyayintsev, V., Pavlovych, V., Khotyayintseva, O., 2010. Travelling-wave reactor: velocity formation mechanisms. In: PHYSOR 2010, on CD-ROM.
Google Scholar
Khotyayintsev et al., 2012
V.M. Khotyayintsev, A.V. Aksenov, O.M. Khotyayintseva, V.M. Pavlovych. Neutron Flux Oscillations in the Traveling Wave Reactor. The 4-th International Conference “Current Problems in Nuclear Physics and Atomic Energy” (NPAE-Kyiv2012), Book of Abstracts, Kyiv 2012, 110. Conference presentation.
Google Scholar
Khotyayintsev et al., 2014
V.M. Khotyayintsev, O.M. Khotyayintseva, A.V. Aksonov, V.M. Pavlovych
Study of the stability of the stationary wave of nuclear fissions
Nucl. Phys. Atomic Energy, 15 (3) (2014), p. 253
(in Russian)
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Khotyayintsev et al., 2015
V.M. Khotyayintsev, A.V. Aksonov, O.M. Khotyayintseva, V.M. Pavlovych, V. Gulik, A.H. Tkaczyk
Velocity characteristic and stability of wave solutions for a CANDLE reactor with thermal feedback
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 85 (2015), p. 337
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Khotyayintseva et al., 2014
O.M. Khotyayintseva, V.M. Khotyayintsev, V.M. Pavlovych
Temperature feedback effect to stationary wave of nuclear fusion
Nucl. Phys. Atomic Energy, 1 (15) (2014), p. 26
(in Russian)
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Khotyayintseva et al., 2016
O.M. Khotyayintseva, V.M. Khotyayintsev, V.M. Pavlovych
Reactivity in the theory of the stationary nuclear fission wave
Nucl. Phys. Atomic Energy, 17 (2) (2016), p. 157
(in Ukrainian)
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kodochigov et al., 2014
N.G. Kodochigov, S.E. Sorokin, Y.P. Sukharev
Neutron-physical aspects of the substantiation of the concept of a fast reactor with an open fuel cycle
At. Energy, 117 (4) (2014), p. 183
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Leleko et al., 2017
Yu.Y. Leleko, V.V. Gann, A.V. Gann
Nuclear reactor on cylindrical standing burning wave with an external negative reactivity feedback
Probl. Atomic Sci. Technol., 2 (108) (2017), p. 138
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lopez-Solis and François, 2017
R. Lopez-Solis, J.-L. François
The breed and burn nuclear reactor: a chronological, conceptual, and technological review
Int. J. Energy Res., 1 (2017), 10.1002/er.3854
Google Scholar
Mandela et al., 2016
Mandela, Muhamad, Su’ud, Zaki, Sekimoto, Hiroshi
Design and analysis on initial core for Pb-Bi cooled fast reactors using modified CANDLE burn-up
Approach. Indian J. Sci. Technology, 9 (28) (2016), 10.17485/ijst/2016/v9i28/97799
Google Scholar
Osato et al., 2019
Hiroki Osato, Jun Nishiyama, Toru Obara
Application of melt-refining process to transition state of CANDLE burning fast reactor
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 128 (2019), p. 77
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Osborne and Deinert, 2016
Osborne, A. G., Deinert, M. R., 2016. Fission waves can oscillate. arXiv:1606.02557v1 [nucl-th].
Google Scholar
Osborne and Deinert, 2013
A.G. Osborne, M.R. Deinert
Comparison of neutron diffusion and Monte Carlo simulations of a fission wave
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 62 (2013), p. 269
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Pavlovich et al., 2010
Pavlovich, V. M., Khotyayintsev, V. M., Khotyayintseva, O. M., 2010. Nuclear burning wave reactor: wave parameter control. Nucl. Phys. Atomic Energy 11 (1), 49. (in Ukrainian).
Google Scholar
Pavlovych et al., 2008a
V. Pavlovych, V. Khotyayintsev, O. Khotyayintseva
Physical principles of the nuclear burning wave reactor
Part I. Nucl. Phys. Atomic Energy, 2 (24) (2008), p. 39
(in Russian)
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Pavlovych et al., 2008b
V. Pavlovych, V. Khotyayintsev, O. Khotyayintseva
Physical principles of the nuclear burning wave reactor. Part II
Nucl. Phys. Atomic Energy, 3 (25) (2008), p. 62
(in Russian)
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Rusov et al., 2015
Rusov, V.D., Tarasov, V.A., et al., 2015. On Some Fundamental Peculiarities of the Traveling Wave Reactor. Sci. Tech. Nucl. Installations 2015, Article ID 703069, 23 p., http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2015/703069.
Google Scholar
Saadi et al., 2012
Saadi, M. Kheradmand, A. Abbaspour, A. Pazirandeh
Startup of “CANDLE” burnup in a Gas-cooled Fast Reactor using Monte Carlo method
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 50 (2012), p. 44
Google Scholar
Seifritz, 2000
W. Seifritz
Solitary burn-up waves in a multiplying medium
Kerntechnik, 65 (2000), p. 5
Google Scholar
Sekimoto, 2010
Hiroshi Sekimoto
Light a CANDLE
(second ed.), Tokyo Institute of Technology (2010)
Google Scholar
Sekimoto and Kouichi, 2000
Sekimoto, Hiroshi, Kouichi, Ryu, 2000. A new reactor burnup concept CANDLE. Proc. of PHYSOR2000, 1-9.
Google Scholar
Sekimoto and Nakayama, 2014
H. Sekimoto, S. Nakayama
Power level control of CANDLE reactor without control rods
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 63 (2014), p. 427
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Sekimoto et al., 2001
H. Sekimoto, K. Ryu, Y. Yoshimura
CANDLE: the new burnup strategy
Nucl. Sci. Eng., 139 (2001), p. 306
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Shrestha and Rizwan-uddin, 2014
R. Shrestha, Rizwan-uddin
Modeling space–time evolution of flux in a traveling wave reactor
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 70 (2014), p. 90
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tak et al., 2016
Tak, Taewoo, Choe, Jiwon, Jeong, Yongjin, Lee, Deokjung, Kim, T. K., 2016. Study for requirement of advanced long life small modular fast reactor. In: AIP Conference Proceedings 1704, 020001, DOI: 10.1063/1.4940059.
Google Scholar
Teller et al., 1996
Teller, E., Ishikawa, M., Wood, L., 1996. Completely automated nuclear reactors for long-term operation. International Conference on Emerging Nuclear Energy Systems, Obninsk, Russia.
Google Scholar
Van Dam, 2000
H. Van Dam
Self-stabilizing criticality waves
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 27 (2000), p. 1505
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Vasiliev et al., 1987
V.A. Vasiliev, Yu.M. Romanovskii, D.S. Chernavskii, V.G. Yakhno
Autowave Processes in Kinetic Systems: Spatial and Temporal Self-Organization in Physics, Chemistry, Biology, and Medicine
Springer, Berlin (1987)
Google Scholar
Yan and Sekimoto, 2008
M. Yan, H. Sekimoto
Design research of small long life CANDLE fast reactor
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 35 (2008), p. 18
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar