<title>Wall resolved large eddy simulation of reactor core flows with the spectral element method</title>
<author>1,EliaMerzari, 2, AleksandrObabko，3，PaulFischer，4，ManueleAufiero</author>
<Affiliation>1，Argonne National Laboratory, 9700 S. Cass Avenue, Lemont, IL 60439, USA；2，Milano Multiphysics, Italy；3，Pennsylvania State University, 228 Hallowell, University Park, PA, 16801, USA</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nucengdes.2020.110657</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029549320301515</URL>
Wall resolved large eddy simulation of reactor core flows with the spectral element method
EliaMerzari,  AleksandrObabko，PaulFischer，ManueleAufiero
Argonne National Laboratory, 9700 S. Cass Avenue, Lemont, IL 60439, USA
Milano Multiphysics, Italy
Pennsylvania State University, 228 Hallowell, University Park, PA, 16801, USA
<Section>Highlights</Section>
The spectral element methods is used to model the flow in reactor cores.
Applications to wire-wrapped rod bundles, PWR bundles and MSRs.
Coherent structure are observed in the simulation of an MSR graphite block.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Numerical simulation is an intrinsic part of nuclear engineering research supporting the design of nuclear power plants. With the advent of Petascale computing (i.e., computers capable of more than 1 PFlop), the simulation of portions of reactor components with turbulence-resolving techniques is now possible. These simulations can provide invaluable insight into the flow dynamics, which is difficult or often impossible to obtain with experiments alone. The spectral element method in particular has emerged as a powerful method to deliver massively parallel calculations at high fidelity by using Large Eddy Simulation or Direct Numerical Simulation. In this work we review the fundamentals of the method and the reasons it is compelling for the simulation of nuclear reactor core flows. We review a series of wall-resolved large eddy simulations of reactor cores applied to three reactor types. In particular we discuss the simulation of the flow in a 17 × 17 rod bundle related to light water reactor (LWR) applications; the flow in a 37-pin wire-wrapped rod bundle related to liquid metal reactor (LMR) applications and the flow through a graphite block with application to molten salt reactors (MSR).
Keywords：LES；Rod bundles；Nek5000
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
In the past two decades Computational Fluid dynamics (CFD) has emerged as an important tool for nuclear engineers. While the use of multi-phase CFD remains somewhat controversial, single-phase CFD has wide-spread support and use. CFD is now in widespread use both in reactor design and in safety analysis, as testified by the increasing number of articles in the field. For example, (Roelofs, 2018) presents examples of CFD’s importance for advanced reactors. The majority of the work conducted in industry, research centers, and academia, however, remains limited to Reynolds Averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) (Conner et al., 2010) and occasionally Unsteady Reynolds Averaged Navier Stokes (URANS). This is driven primarily by the high Reynolds numbers involved in nuclear reactor flows as well as the limit in available computational resources. Despite significant advancements in turbulence modeling in recent years, RANS is limited in terms of accuracy. Turbulence modeling remains a source of uncertainty in complex engineering flows. Models that can predict well the flow field and pressure drop in one configuration can fail even when small variations are considered – (Merzari et al., 2010). Wall-resolved Large Eddy simulation (LES) and Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS) provide a much lesser degree of uncertainty, and they can provide valuable and unprecedented insight into the flow physics. Historically, however, these methods have been limited to small geometries, such as sub-channels – (Grötzbach and Wörner, 1999).
Funded by the Unites States’ Department of Energy, The Nuclear Energy Advanced Modeling and Simulation (NEAMS) Program (Sofu and Thomas, 2017) aims to develop an integrated multi-physics simulation capability ‘pellet-to-plant’ for the design and analysis of future generations of nuclear power plants. NEAMS embraces a multi-resolution hierarchy designing the code suite structure to ultimately span the full range of length and time scales present in relevant reactor design and safety analyses. Advanced reactors, such as liquid metal reactors, rely on innovative component designs to meet cost and safety targets. Heuristic assumptions typically employed in the safety analysis of the current fleet are not likely be sufficient. In order to span a wider design range, advanced modeling and simulation capabilities that rely on minimal assumptions (i.e., less closure models) play an important role in optimizing the design. The thermal-hydraulic component of NEAMS relies on a philosophy that relies on a hierarchical multiscale approach (Fig. 1). In particular, NEAMS has invested in developing scalable high-order software that can leverage large scale supercomputers to deliver simulations of unprecedented detail and scale – (Merzari et al., 2017). For example, the simulation of large portions of fuel assemblies has been demonstrated, including conjugate heat transfer calculations – (Obabko et al., 2019). These simulations can provide invaluable insight into the flow dynamics, which is difficult or often impossible to obtain with experiments alone. Moreover, they allow investigation of global effects that otherwise are impossible to elucidate with smaller portions of the system.
Fig. 1. Multi-scale strategy of the thermal-hydraulic component of NEAMS.
At the centerpiece of the NEAMS strategy for the simulation of turbulent flows is the spectral element method – (Patera, 1984, Fischer et al., 2008). This method offers high-order accuracy (crucial for LES and DNS), low levels of numerical dissipation and dispersion, and a computational cost that scales only weakly with the polynomial order. These ingredients, when combined with scalable preconditioners, make the method particularly attractive for large-scale LES/DNS simulations. In this manuscript we review the fundamentals of the method and the reasons it is compelling for the simulation of nuclear reactor core flows (Section 2). We discuss the implementation in Nek5000 (Fischer et al., 2015), an open-source spectral element code in development at Argonne National Laboratory (Section 2.1). Moreover, we review a series of wall-resolved large eddy simulations of portions of reactor cores applied to three reactor types (Section 3). In particular we discuss the simulation of the flow in a 17 × 17 rod bundle related to light water reactor (LWR) applications; the flow in a 37-pin wire-wrapped rod bundle related to liquid metal reactor (LMR) applications and the flow through a graphite block with application to molten salt reactors (MSR)-Fig. 2.
Fig. 2. Examples of large-scale wall-resolved LES simulation of nuclear reactor flows. a) Instantanoeus velocity magnitude for the flow in a 17 × 17 LWR bare rod bundle. b) Temperature outside a graphite block in a thermal MSR. c) Velocity magnitude in a 37-pin wire-wrapped rod bundle.
<Section>2. The spectral element method for nuclear reactor core flows</Section>
Let us consider primarily the velocity (1), continuity (2), and energy (3) equations that describe the constant-property incompressible flow of a Newtonian fluid in the absence of other body or external forces:
@(1)
@(2)
@(3)
where u is the velocity, p is the pressure, T is the temperature,  p is the density of the fluid,v  represents the kinematic viscosity, 人 is the thermal conductivity, q is the heat generation in the fluid and cp is the heat capacity. In natural convection cases the Boussinesq or low Mach approximations (Tomboulides et al., 1997) are applied, leading to a different formulation, which is available in Nek5000. For the sake of simplicity, however, we limit the discussion here to the set of Eqs. (1), (2), (3), which are fairly representative of single-phase forced convection in reactor core. We also restrict our discussion to wall-resolved LES.
We note that in advection-dominated problems such as the ones described by (1), (2), (3) at moderate to high Reynolds and Peclet numbers, the high-wavenumber component of transported quantities does not decay exponentially, as observed in diffusion-dominated problems. Therefore, both meaningful signals and numerical errors can persist in time, and appropriate numerical schemes need to be selected in order to avoid excessive dispersion.
The spectral element method (SEM) is a subclass of Galerkin methods, or weighted residual methods. It is nondissipative and delivers low numerical dispersion – (Deville et al., 2002). The functional space of  and T utilizes a polynomial expansion. The foundational idea is to minimize the error of the numerical computation in the energy norm over a chosen space of polynomials of order N for the function f:
@(4)
where h represents Lagrangian polynomials constructed on  N+1 Gauss Lobatto Legendre (GLL) collocation points in the local element e coordinate system rst. In fact, stability restricts our attention to certain acceptable classes of basis functions h. If modal, they are typically linear combinations of orthogonal polynomials. If nodal, the nodes are typically chosen to be the zeros of orthogonal polynomials or, equivalently, quadrature points associated with a particular Gauss quadrature rule. Such distributions tend to cluster points toward the ends of the interval. Virtually all such combinations ensure stability, that is, reasonably small condition numbers of the resultant matrices – (Deville et al., 2002). An example of undesirable choice are Lagrange interpolants based on uniform point distributions. Moreover, in SEM, one typically (though not always) employs numerical quadrature to evaluate integrals. With  GLL points any polynomial integrand of order up to  will be evaluated exactly. Moreover, a diagonal mass matrix results from the GLL quadrature. The error incurred is again on par with the truncation error. This property, combined with a tensor product formulation of the differential operator, allows a significant reduction in the computational cost per time-step of SEM at high order, which scales linearly with the number of grid points and has only a weak dependence on the polynomial order. On the other hand, the computational cost of standard finite elements scales with the sixth power of the polynomial order.
The cost of resolving (1), (2), (3) is well known to scale with the Reynolds number for wall-resolved LES calculations. In fact, well-resolved LES calculations should have a resolution comparable to the Taylor microscale (@), where k is the turbulent kinetic energy and ∊ is the turbulent dissipation. This length-scale depends on the Reynolds number, leading to a Reynolds scaling for grid resolution requirements and related costs – (Pope, 2001). It is therefore essential to limit as much as possible resolution requirements due to numerics and provide a low cost per grid-point. The spectral element method converges exponentially in N, which implies that significantly fewer gridpoints per wavelength are required to accurately propagate a signal (or turbulent structure) over the extended times associated with flow simulations at high Reynolds number. For LES, the subgrid-scale model typically employed with SEM relies on forms of explicit filtering: the energy content of the last few wavenumbers is filtered to mimic the effect of subgrid-scale dissipation. This is considered equivalent to deconvolution LES or hyper-viscosity methods (Stolz et al., 2005). Several variants can be considered, but they are not discussed here. The simplest form is the explicit filter, a linear combination of the solution and a downsampled solution through spectral interpolation (Fischer and Mullen, 2001).
2.1. Implementation of SEM in Nek5000
In Nek5000 (Fischer et al., 2015) the domain is decomposed globally into smaller domains (elements), which are assumed to be curvilinear hexahedra (brick meshes) that conform to the domain boundaries. Locally, functions within each element are expanded according to (4) and operators are cast in tensor-product form. The pressure can be solved at the same polynomial order of the velocity N ( formulation) or at lower order  ( formulation). We note that Nek5000 employs only pure hexahedral non-conformal meshes. While this somewhat limits the application of the code, recent advances have allowed to apply Nek5000 to very complex geometries using a tet-to-hex technique – (Yuan et al., 2019).
Temporal discretization is based on a high-order splitting that is third-order accurate in time and reduces the coupled velocity-pressure Stokes problem to four independent solves per timestep: one for each velocity component and one for the pressure. The velocity problems are diagonally dominant and thus easily solved by using Jacobi preconditioned conjugate gradient iteration. Two time-stepping schemes, both up to third order, are available: Backward Differentiation Formulae (BDF) and Operator-integration-Factor Splitting (OIFS) – (Fischer, 2003). The pressure substep requires a Poisson solver at each step, which is performed through multigrid-preconditioned GMRES iteration coupled with temporal projection to find an optimal initial guess.
Particularly important components of Nek5000 are its scalable coarse-grid solvers that are central to parallel performance. For both weak scaling and strong scaling using Algebraic Multi Grid (AMG) for the coarse-grid solve is essential above 250,000 elements. Nek5000 employs a pure MPI parallel implementation. Fig. 3 reports a recent scaling study on a Blue Gene/Q supercomputer, showing good scaling up to 1,000,000 MPI ranks for a 217-rod wire-wrapped pin bundle. An extensive discussion of the scalability of Nek5000 is provided in Offermans et al. (2016).
Fig. 3. Scaling study in a wire-wrapped rod bundle in which Nek5000 exhibits good strong scaling even at 1,000,000 MPI ranks: a) pressure distribution in a 217-pin wire-wrapped rod bundle; b) strong scaling illustrating the change in simulation time as the processor count increases.
2.2. Validation
We do not discuss in detail validation as part of this manuscript. We note, however, that several validation studies have been conducted for Nek5000 for geometries of interest to nuclear engineers. Examples include: the flow in helical coils (Lai et al., 2019, Merzari et al., 2019), rod bundles (Walker et al., 2014), rod bundles with wire-wrappers (Goth et al., 2018) and spacer grids (Busco et al., 2019), T-junctions (Merzari et al., 2013, Obabko et al., 2013), parallel jets (Lomperski et al., 2017) and buoyant cavities (Martínez et al., 2015).
<Section>3. Wall-resolved reactor core LES with SEM</Section>
We discuss here a series of simulations performed with SEM for representative core flows. These involve: the flow in a 17 × 17 LWR bare rod bundle; the flow around a graphite block in a thermal MSR, the flow in a 37-pin wire-wrapped LMR rod bundle. The problems have been selected because they are representative of the flow in various reactor types. The focus is not on validation, as several validation studies have already been conducted for Nek5000 for this class of flows – (Walker et al., 2014, Busco et al., 2019, Goth et al., 2018).
3.1. Light water reactor bare bundle
We examine a full 17 by 17 pressurized water reactor (PWR) bare rod bundle assembly (289 pins). The pitch-to-diameter ratio  @ is . At several locations the pins are replaced by guide tubes as common in most assembly designs. The ratio of guide tube diameter to pin diameter ratio is . The design is consistent with most PWRs.
The mesh is being tuned to reach an appropriate wall resolution at  @ for LES at @. This implies a  @ at the wall, 10 points within  @ and resolution consistent with the Taylor microscale (evaluated using precursor RANS models). The current mesh comprises roughly 27,700 elements per 2D layer as illustrated in Fig. 4. It includes symmetry boundaries at the domain boundaries in the cross section. At the pin surfaces, no-slip boundary conditions are assumed. The mesh comprises 100 layers in the streamwise direction In the streamwise direction we apply periodic boundary conditions for a total of  million elements (roughly 2 billion degrees of freedom at N = 9). The length in the streamwise direction is @. A constant mass flow rate is imposed on the streamwise direction. The CFL is kept below  using the OIFS scheme in Nek5000.
Fig. 4. Simulation in 17 × 17 bare rod bundle. a) Mesh (element boundaries); b) Gauss-Lobatto-Legendre collocation points for .
Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 present snapshots of the velocity field obtained after an initial transient. We note that we performed a large part of the initial transient at lower polynomial order ( @and@ ). Both figures illustrate the significant effect of the guide tubes on the flow field. Fig. 7 presents the average streamwise flow distribution and the corresponding rms. The rms of the streamwise velocity peaks near wall as typical of wall-bounded turbulence. In fact in the open region the flow profile matches well the profile typical of channel flow in the developed region: @ (Fig. 8). There is a significant flow redistribution near the guide tubes with lower flow in the narrow gap region.
Fig. 5. Simulation in 17 × 17 bare rod bundle. Cross section in the streamwise direction. a) Instantaneous velocity in the streamwise direction; b) detail near center pin.
Fig. 6. Simulation in 17 × 17 bare rod bundle. a) Instantaneous velocity in the streamwise direction cross section at ; b) instantaneous velocity in the streamwise direction cross section at .
Fig. 7. Simulation in 17 × 17 bare rod bundle. a) Average streamwise velocity; b) rms of the streamwise velocity.
Fig. 8. Simulation in 17 × 17 bare rod bundle. a) Velocity and rms profiles (streamwise components, respectively solid and dotted lines) in the narrow gap; b) streamwise velocity in the open region.
We note that while the results presented here are for a bare bundle, spacer grid LES simulation have also been conducted with Nek5000 for a scaled PWR fuel rod bundle with a 5 × 5 lattice – (Busco et al., 2019, Makarashvili et al., 2018). In order to overcome meshing difficulties, a tet-to-hex strategy was adopted (Yuan et al., 2019). The strategy consists first in creating a tetrahedral mesh for the spacer grid region. Next the mesh is converted to hexahedra. Then prismatic layers are created, and the mesh is extruded to inlet and outlet regions. Comparisons for the velocity field and rms with experimental PIV data were carried out. Overall the comparison was satisfactory given the complexity of the geometry.
The data can be used to investigate in detail the anisotropy of the flow field as done in Busco et al. (2019). For example, the effect of geometry inhomogeneity on the flow field is evident from Fig. 8 where the velocity in the narrow gaps has significantly different peaks. This has an impact on anisotropy as the rms of the streamwise velocity near the guide tubes does not have a minimum in the center of the channel near the guide tubes as typical of channel flow. This will lead to a potentially stronger anisotropy in these gaps (e.g., due to incomplete relaxation to isotropic turbulence) and it may also be a challenge to capture with standard RANS models.
3.2. Molten salt reactor graphite block
Molten salt reactors (MSR) are a type of nuclear fission reactors in which the primary coolant (or even the fuel itself) is a molten salt mixture. Depending on the nature of the fuel, MSRs have two primary classes: in the first class, fissile material is dissolved in the molten salt while in the second class, the molten salt serves as the low pressure coolant to solid fuel. In liquid fuel designs fission occurs within the fuel salt, in the core region which then flows into an intermediary heat exchanger, where the heat is transferred to a secondary liquid-salt coolant. MSRs are often considered as graphite moderated reactors with a thermal neutron spectrum.
Liquid Fuel designs present a different design space from what is typically encountered in other nuclear engineering applications. Unlike other technologies, the heat deposition at steady state operation is primarily in the coolant/fuel and this poses unique challenges. In fact, combined with the high Prandtl number of the fluid (i.e., which requires lower reliance on conduction) this may lead to significant hot spots in the presence of recirculation.
We examine the flow around a molten salt graphite block for a generic thermal salt reactor with inter-gap flow between blocks and channel holes. We consider the following geometric parameters: @ and . h is the half-width of the gap, D is the diameter of the cylindrical holes and FtF is the flat-to-flat of the graphite block. The geometry under consideration is shown in Fig. 9, periodic boundary conditions are applied in the cross section and in the streamwise direction. A constant mass flow rate is imposed on the streamwise boundary, separated by . The length of the streamwise domain was judged sufficient after an initial sensitivity test.
Fig. 9. Simulation in a MSR graphite block. a) Mesh (element boundaries); b) Gauss-Lobatto-Legendre collocation points for .
The mesh consists of roughly 380,000 elements, designed to meet LES requirements at @ for a total of 100,000,000 grid points. This implies a @ at the wall, 10 points within  @ and resolution consistent with the Taylor microscale (evaluated using precursor RANS models). All spatial units in the figures are normalized by the hole diameter. The Reynolds number is @, with@  as the hydraulic diameter, a value representative of molten salt designs.
For this case we solve for the energy equation as well, assuming a Prandtl number @. Future calculations will be conducted at higher Prandtl numbers, more representative of actual salts. The power distribution is obtained by a SERPENT calculation (@) and mapped onto the mesh. The power distribution is shown in Fig. 10. We note that the gaps receive more power per-unit-volume than the cylindrical holes as expected due to the increased moderator-to-fuel ratio in that region. In the calculations presented here the total power is re-normalized such as the average value of the power is @. In fact, the solution of the periodic problem is independent of the average value Q.
Fig. 10. Power distribution from SERPENT. Units in . Spatial units are in mm.
To account for the presence of periodic boundaries we reformulate the energy equation. Let us assume constant properties and consider the transformation:
@(5)
where  is an arbitrary constant inlet temperature, z is the streamwise coordinate, and:
@(6)
where Q is the average volumetric power density deposited in the fluid and  is the average velocity. Applying this transformation to (3), we obtain an equation for :
@(7)
where q is the local volumetric power density deposited in the fluid and it is a function of position. w is the streamwise velocity. We note that unlike that in other formulations (Merzari et al., 2012) with , the source term is not always negative and in fact changes sign. The source will be positive when:
@(8)
which in case of constant power corresponds to , i.e., the temperature equation will have a source term only in regions with a streamwise velocity smaller than the bulk (slow moving regions). In cases where heating is non–homogeneous, like the present case, the ratio  also plays a role.
Fig. 11, Fig. 12 present some instantaneous field results for the simulation after an initial transient to reach a statistical steady state. We note the presence of a large inhomogeneity in the streamwise velocity for what concerns the streamwise velocity. This has a considerable impact on the temperature distribution as (8) indicates. This is shown in Fig. 12, which reveals significant temperature gradients in the gaps. This is a consequence of the relatively low velocities in the gap and higher energy deposition in the region. We also note the presence of a sinusoidal pattern propagating in the streamwise direction with a large wavelength. This is consistent with the presence of large scale coherent structures in the gaps. We note also significant cross flow velocities in the gap, alternating in sign. These observations point to the presence of two gap vortex streets (Chang and Tavoularis, 2007, Tavoularis, 2011, Merzari and Ninokata, 2011) in the each gap generating at the edges of each gap and cylindrical hole.
Fig. 11. Simulation in a MSR graphite block. Cross section in the streamwise direction. a) Instantaneous velocity in the streamwise direction; b) detail near center pin.
Fig. 12. Simulation in a MSR graphite block. Cross section at . a) Instantanous velocity in the streamwise direction; b) instantaneous velocity in the x-direction; c) instantaneous  temperature.
The average velocity and temperature profiles are presented in Fig. 13 and Fig. 14, after a time averaging procedure over @ is applied. We note that the streamwise velocity profile presents two inflection points in the transition region between gap and cylindrical hole. We also note that minima of the velocity correspond closely to maxima of the temperature and vice versa.
Fig. 13. Simulation in a MSR graphite block. Cross section in the streamwise direction. a) Average streamwise velocity; b) detail near center pin of the average temperature  distribution.
Fig. 14. Simulation in a MSR graphite block. Line profiles in middle channel. a) Average streamwise velocity; b) average temperature  distribution; c) Profiles normalized by maximum and compared.
In the regions where cylindrical holes and gaps merge we observe a strong peaking of the rms of the crossflow velocity (Fig. 15). Meanwhile, in the center of the gap the streamwise velocity rms is nearly zero as the local Reynolds number drops to laminar levels. In the cylindrical holes the turbulence is sustained with peaks near wall typical of wall turbulence. These observations are consistent with the presence of two gap vortex streets in the gaps (Lexmond et al., 2005).
Fig. 15. Simulation in a MSR graphite block. Cross section in the streamwise direction. a) rms of the streamwise velocity; b) rms of the velocity in direction x.
3.3. Liquid metal reactor fuel assemblies
Wire-wrapped rod bundles are the commonly used design for liquid metal fuel assemblies. CFD analysis is now commonly used to assess flow and temperature distributions (e.g, Brockmeyer et al., 2017). High fidelity simulations play an important role in this field as they allow to provide additional data to benchmark turbulence models in the absence of detailed experimental data which is very difficult to obtain in such geometries – (Merzari et al., 2016).
Building on legacy and experience with Nek5000 with wire-wrap rod bundles (Fischer et al., 2007, Merzari et al., 2016, Goth et al., 2018) we have conducted the LES campaign for a 37-pin multi-wrap (, with W being the helical wrapping length of the wires) conjugate-heat-transfer geometry. We first obtained the hydro/isothermal solution for a single wire-wrap pitch with periodic conditions in axial direction. We constructed the minimally periodic fluid domain mesh and obtained a well converged isothermal solution. This axially periodic solution has been then replicated 4 times in axial direction in addition to the fully-developed turbulent inlet that uses recycling technique over a single wire-wrap pitch length. Then the replicated solution was used as initial condition to the conjugate heat transfer case that was by design an exact numerical solution to the full geometry case provided the mesh layout and resolution was preserved in the fluid portion of the full mesh as compared to a single wire-wrap. And in the last stage, after the accelerated thermal relaxation for ’frozen-in-time’ replicated initial condition was achieved, time-dependent velocity and temperature calculations were conducted quickly and efficiently.
In order to accelerate convergence and decrease time-to-solution and CPU usage, we first conduct the isothermal solution on fluid mesh without solid domain in single wire-wrap pitch periodic geometry. The mesh comprises 990, 000 elements; it is shown in Fig. 16 along with the conjugate heat transfer mesh of the cladding. The mesh strategy and resolution are designed to meet LES resolution requirements. A similar mesh has been used to compare successfully against PIV experimental data – (Goth et al., 2018, Goth et al., 2018).
Fig. 16. Simulation in wire-wrapped fuel assembly. a) Conjugate heat transfer mesh (37 pins); b) three-dimensional detail (37 pins); c) comparison with a PIV experiment for previous research (Goth et al., 2018).
Fig. 17 shows snapshots of the velocity magnitude in single periodic wire-wrap at lower resolution @ and Reynolds number of @. This case has @ DOFs and is computed with (BDF – second order) timestep  @ and standard explicit filtering involving two (highest wavenumber) filtered modes and default amplitude of 5%. Increasing the spatial resolution to  @ was sufficient to obtain isothermal axially-periodic LES solution to the prototypical Reynolds of @ with @ DOFs. In order to minimize the resolution and higher Reynolds number effect on time-to-solution, we managed to keep the same timestep @ of  at a cost of a slightly higher characteristic/OIFS @. Fig. 18 shows the velocity distribution for this higher Reynolds, which presents considerably finer structures than the lower Reynolds numbers.
Fig. 17. Simulation in a 37-pin wire-wrapped fuel assembly at . a) Instantaneous streamwise velocity; b) instantaneous velocity at .
Fig. 18. Simulation in a 37-pin wire-wrapped fuel assembly at . Instantaneous streamwise velocity.
The solution so obtained was replicated and used for the full scale inlet-outlet conjugate heat transfer calculation. The flux profile imposed at the inner solid boundary is consistent with a sinusoidal profile. Inlet recycling boundaries and turbulent outflow condition are applied. The mesh comprises 4 billion grid points. Heating is not applied to the outer pins or within the wires. The average normalized temperature at the outlet plane is shown in Fig. 19 illustrating the details of downstream heating. We also show one the average velocity components through the domain. These results will be used to further benchmark turbulence models and thermal stress models for wire-wrapped rod bundles, extending such comparisons to conjugate heat transfer calculations. As a future additional step, we will use this data to develop distributed resistance models for subchannel analysis – (Ninokata et al., 1987).
Fig. 19. Simulation in a 37-pin wire-wrapped fuel assembly at . a) Averaged temperature velocity at outlet plane; b) Average x-velocity at .
These LES calculations can also be used to compute the dynamic fluid load on the fluid rods for Fluid-Structure Interaction (FSI) calculations. An example of the spectrum that can be obtained from such calculations is shown in Fig. 20 – (Brockmeyer et al., 2018). We applied a one-way coupled FSI methodology to a 7-pin wire-wrapped rod bundle (Brockmeyer et al., 2019), with PSD (power spectral density) computed from Nek5000 calculations loaded into structural models. The results, demonstrate how the contact strongly affects vibration and provide two bounding cases: the case with fixed contact has orders of magnitude less vibration than the case without contact. From these results, we conclude that contact modeling for simulations of wire-wrapped rod bundle FIV is likely to be a strong source of uncertainty. LES simulations used in conjunction with a one-way coupled approach can provide an important mean to assess this uncertainty.
Fig. 20. Simulation of vibration in a wire-wrapped rod-bundle. Frequency spectra of force magnitude for the center pin at 0.5 helical pitches. From Brockmeyer et al. (2018).
<Section>4. Conclusions</Section>
In this manuscript we have presented the basis of the spectral element method and reviewed the reasons it is compelling for the simulation of turbulent nuclear reactor core flows. We have presented select recent large scale calculations. These simulations are invaluable for nuclear engineers to gain insight into the flow physics and benchmark lower-fidelity models.
In particular we have demonstrated the use of Nek5000 for LWR, MSR and LMR core simulations. The application of high fidelity methods to LWR and LMR fuel assemblies continues a trend toward using such simulations to benchmark RANS turbulence models. The data developed here will largely be available to stimulate further model development.
The application of high fidelity methods to graphite blocks is somewhat novel and helped gain some unexpected insight on the flow physics in such geometry. In fact we observed that coherent structures can develop in the cross section due to large inhomogeneity of the streamwise velocity and the formation of inflection points.
Given its applicability to a variety of reactor types and its exceptional scalability, we expect that the spectral element method will continue to play an important role in nuclear engineering modeling and simulation. In particular, we have demonstrated that it has a unique niche application in providing high-fidelity data for complex large-scale geometries present in nuclear reactor cores.
The submitted manuscript has been created by UChicago Argonne, LLC, Operator of Argonne National Laboratory (“Argonne”). Argonne, a U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science laboratory, is operated under Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357. The U.S. Government retains for itself, and others acting on its behalf, a paid-up, nonexclusive, irrevocable worldwide license in said article to reproduce, prepare derivative works, distribute copies to the public, and perform publicly and display publicly, by or on behalf of the Government.
<Section>Acknowledgement</Section>
This research used resources of the Argonne Leadership Computing Facility, which is a DOE Office of Science User Facility supported under Contract DE-AC02-06CH11357.
<Section>References</Section>
Brockmeyer et al., 2017
L. Brockmeyer, L.B. Carasik, E. Merzari, Y. Hassan
Numerical simulations for determination of minimum representative bundle size in wire wrapped tube bundles
Nucl. Eng. Des., 322 (2017), pp. 577-590
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Brockmeyer et al., 2019
L. Brockmeyer, E. Merzari, J. Solberg, Y. Hassan
One-way coupled simulation of fiv in a 7-pin wire- wrapped fuel pin bundle
Proceedings of the Final SESAME Workshop. Petten, Netherlands (2019)
Google Scholar
Brockmeyer et al., 2018
L. Brockmeyer, A. Obabko, E. Merzari, Y. Hassan
Analysis of pressure field on wire-wrapped pin bundle surface for concerns of FSI
ASME 2018 5th Joint US-European Fluids Engineering Division Summer Meeting, American Society of Mechanical Engineers (2018)
pp. V001T08A008–V001T08A008
Google Scholar
Busco et al., 2019
G. Busco, E. Merzari, Y.A. Hassan
Invariant analysis of the reynolds stress tensor for a nuclear fuel assembly with spacer grid and split type vanes
Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow, 77 (2019), pp. 144-156
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chang and Tavoularis, 2007
D. Chang, S. Tavoularis
Numerical simulation of turbulent flow in a 37-rod bundle
Nucl. Eng. Des., 237 (6) (2007), pp. 575-590
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Conner et al., 2010
M.E. Conner, E. Baglietto, A.M. Elmahdi
CFD methodology and validation for single-phase flow in PWR fuel assemblies
Nucl. Eng. Des., 240 (9) (2010), pp. 2088-2095
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Deville et al., 2002
M.O. Deville, P.F. Fischer, E.H. Mund
High-order methods for incompressible fluid flow,, vol. 9, Cambridge University Press (2002)
Fischer, 2003
Fischer, P., 2003. Implementation considerations for the OIFS/characteristics approach to convection problems.
Google Scholar
Fischer et al., 2015
P. Fischer, J. Lottes, S. Kerkemeier, O. Marin, K. Heisey, A. Obabko, E. Merzari, Y. Peet
Nek5000: Users manual. In Technical Report. Technical Report ANL/MCS-TM-351
Argonne National Laboratory (2015)
Google Scholar
Fischer et al., 2008
P. Fischer, J. Lottes, D. Pointer, A. Siegel
Petascale algorithms for reactor hydrodynamics
J. Phys: Conf. Ser., 125 (1) (2008), Article 012076
CrossRefGoogle Scholar
Fischer et al., 2007
Fischer, P., Lottes, J., Siegel, A., Palmiotti, G., 2007. Large eddy simulation of wire wrapped fuel pins i: hydrodynamics in a periodic array. In Joint International Topical Meeting on Mathematics & Computation and Super computingin Nuclear Applications (M&C+ SNA 2007).
Google Scholar
Fischer and Mullen, 2001
P. Fischer, J. Mullen
Filter-based stabilization of spectral element methods
Comptes Rendus de l’Académie des Sciences-Series I-Mathematics, 332 (3) (2001), pp. 265-270
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Goth et al., 2018
N. Goth, P. Jones, D. Nguyen, R. Vaghetto, Y. Hassan, A. Obabko, E. Merzari, P. Fischer
Comparison of experimental and simulation results on interior subchannels of a 61-pin wire-wrapped hexagonal fuel bundle
Nucl. Eng. Des., 338 (2018), pp. 130-136
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Goth et al., 2018
N. Goth, P. Jones, T.D. Nguyen, R. Vaghetto, Y. Hassan, N. Salpeter, E. Merzari
PTV/PIV measurements of turbulent flows in interior subchannels of a 61-pin wire-wrapped hexagonal fuel bundle
Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow, 71 (2018), pp. 295-304
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Grötzbach and Wörner, 1999
G. Grötzbach, M. Wörner
Direct numerical and large eddy simulations in nuclear applications
Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow, 20 (3) (1999), pp. 222-240
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lai et al., 2019
J.K. Lai, E. Merzari, Y.A. Hassan
Large eddy simulation of the flow behavior in a simplified helical coil steam generator
J. Fluids Eng., 141 (2) (2019), Article 021401
Google Scholar
Lexmond et al., 2005
Lexmond, A.S., Mudde, R.F., Van der Hagen, T., 2005. Visualization of the vortex street and characterization of the cross flow in the gap between two subchannels. NURETH-11. Avignon, France.
Google Scholar
Lomperski et al., 2017
S. Lomperski, A. Obabko, E. Merzari, P. Fischer, W.D. Pointer
Jet stability and wall impingement flow field in a thermal striping experiment
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 115 (2017), pp. 1125-1136
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Makarashvili et al., 2018
Makarashvili, V., Yuan, H., Merzari, E., Obabko, A.V., Karazis, K.,2018). Nek5000 simulations on turbulent coolant flow in a fuel assembly experiment-areva/anl collaboration for advancing cfd tools. Technical report, Argonne National Lab. (ANL), Argonne, IL (United States).
Google Scholar
Martínez et al., 2015
Martínez, J., Merzari, E., Acton, M., Baglietto, E., 2018. Direct numerical simulation of the turbulent flow inside a differentially heated cavity. In Proceedings of the International Topical Meeting on Advances Thermal Hydraulics 2015, ATH 2018. Orlando, Florida.
Google Scholar
Merzari et al., 2016
E. Merzari, P. Fischer, H. Yuan, K. Van Tichelen, S. Keijers, J. De Ridder, J. Degroote, J. Vierendeels, H. Doolaard, V. Gopala, et al.
Benchmark exercise for fluid flow simulations in a liquid metal fast reactor fuel assembly
Nucl. Eng. Des., 298 (2016), pp. 218-228
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Merzari and Ninokata, 2011
E. Merzari, H. Ninokata
Proper orthogonal decomposition of the flow in a tight lattice rod-bundle
Nucl. Eng. Des., 241 (11) (2011), pp. 4621-4632
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Merzari et al., 2017
E. Merzari, A. Obabko, P. Fischer, N. Halford, J. Walker, A. Siegel, Y. Yu
Large-scale large eddy simulation of nuclear reactor flows: Issues and perspectives
Nucl. Eng. Des., 312 (2017), pp. 86-98
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Merzari et al., 2013
E. Merzari, W. Pointer, P. Fischer
Numerical simulation and proper orthogonal decomposition of the flow in a counter-flow t-junction
J. Fluids Eng., 135 (9) (2013), Article 091304
Google Scholar
Merzari et al., 2010
E. Merzari, W. Pointer, A. Obabko, P. Fischer
On the numerical simulation of thermal striping in the upper plenum of a fast reactor
Proceedings of the 2010 International Congress on Advances in Nuclear Power Plants-ICAPP’10 (2010)
Google Scholar
Merzari et al., 2012
E. Merzari, W. Pointer, J. Smith, A. Tentner, P. Fischer
Numerical simulation of the flow in wire-wrapped pin bundles: effect of pin-wire contact modeling
Nucl. Eng. Des., 253 (2012), pp. 374-386
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Merzari et al., 2019
E. Merzari, H. Yuan, A. Kraus, A. Obabko, P. Fischer, J. Solberg, S. Lee, J. Lai, M. Delgado, Y. Hassan
High-fidelity simulation of flow-induced vibrations in helical steam generators for small modular reactors
Nucl. Technol., 205 (1–2) (2019), pp. 33-47
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ninokata et al., 1987
H. Ninokata, A. Efthimiadis, N.E. Todreas
Distributed resistance modeling of wire-wrapped rod bundles
Nucl. Eng. Des., 104 (1) (1987), pp. 93-102
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Obabko et al., 2019
A. Obabko, E. Merzari, L. Brockmeyer, P. Fischer, T. Sofu, B. Jackson, M. Steer, R. Vaghetto, Y. Hassan
Nek5000 simulations for 37- and 61-pin wire-wrap geometries with conjugate heat transfer
Proceedings of the 18th International Topical Meeting on Nuclear reactor Thermal Hydraulics, NURETH-18, Portland, OR (2019)
Google Scholar
Obabko et al., 2013
A.V. Obabko, P.F. Fischer, T.J. Tautges, V.M. Goloviznin, M.A. Zaytsev, V.V. Chudanov, V.A. Pervichko, A.E. Aksenova, S.A. Karabasov
Large eddy simulation of thermo-hydraulic mixing in a t-junction
Nuclear Reactor Thermal Hydraulics and Other Applications, InTech (2013)
Google Scholar
Offermans et al., 2016
Offermans, N., Marin, O., Schanen, M., Gong, J., Fischer, P., Schlatter, P., Obabko, A., Peplinski, A., Hutchinson, M., Merzari, E., 2016. On the strong scaling of the spectral element solver nek5000 on petascale systems. In: Proceedings of the Exascale Applications and Software Conference 2016, ACM, p. 5.
Google Scholar
Patera, 1984
A. Patera
A spectral element method for fluid dynamics: Laminar flow in a channel expansion
J. Comput. Phys., 54 (3) (1984), pp. 468-488
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Pope, 2001
Pope, S.B., 2001. Turbulent flows.
Google Scholar
Roelofs, 2018
F. Roelofs
Thermal Hydraulics Aspects of Liquid Metal Cooled Nuclear Reactors
Woodhead Publishing (2018)
Google Scholar
Sofu and Thomas, 2017
Sofu, T., Thomas, J., 2017. Us doe neams program and sharp multi-physics toolkit for high-fidelity sfr core design and analysis. In: Intern. Conf. on Fast Reactors and Related Fuel Cycles: Next Generation Nuclear Systems for Sustainable Development. FR17. Yekaterinburg, Russian Federation, 26–29 June.
Google Scholar
Stolz et al., 2005
S. Stolz, P. Schlatter, L. Kleiser
High-pass filtered eddy-viscosity models for large-eddy simulations of transitional and turbulent flow
Phys. Fluids, 17 (2005), Article 065103
CrossRefGoogle Scholar
Tavoularis, 2011
S. Tavoularis
Rod bundle vortex networks, gap vortex streets, and gap instability: a nomenclature and some comments on available methodologies
Nucl. Eng. Des., 241 (7) (2011), pp. 2624-2626
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tomboulides et al., 1997
A. Tomboulides, J. Lee, S. Orszag
Numerical simulation of low mach number reactive flows
J. Sci. Comput., 12 (2) (1997), pp. 139-167
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Walker et al., 2014
J. Walker, E. Merzari, A. Obabko, P. Fischer, A. Siegel
Accurate prediction of the wall shear stress in rod bundles with the spectral element method at high reynolds numbers
Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow, 50 (2014), pp. 287-299
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yuan et al., 2019
H. Yuan, E. Merzari, Y. Yu, V. Makarashvili, A. Obabko, M. Yildiz, G. Botha, Y. Hassan
Applying tet-to-hex meshing method to complex nuclear reactor geometries for spectral element code
Proceedings of the 18th International Topical Meeting on Nuclear reactor Thermal Hydraulics, NURETH-18, Portland, OR (2019)
Google Scholar