<title>3D neutronic/thermal-hydraulic nuclear reactor core calculation (NRCC) code development for PWRs</title>
<author>1,MahdiAghili Nasr,2,MahdiZangian</author>
<Affiliation>1,Engineering Department, Shahid Beheshti University, P.O. Box: 1983969411, Tehran, Iran</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2020.103517</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0149197020302651</URL>
3D neutronic/thermal-hydraulic nuclear reactor core calculation (NRCC) code development for PWRs
MahdiAghili Nasr,MahdiZangian
Engineering Department, Shahid Beheshti University, P.O. Box: 1983969411, Tehran, Iran
<Section>Highlights</Section>
The NRCC code has been developed for static core calculations of PWRs.
The 3D thermal-neutronic internal coupling is performed during the fuel cycle.
The NRCC code neutronic calculations are performed using average current nodal expansion method.
The NRCC code thermal-hydraulic calculations are performed using homogeneous two-phase single heated channel method.
PARCS2.7 and COBRA-EN codes have been used for NRCC code by code verification.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
For some nuclear problems, such as fuel loading pattern optimization (LPO), a computing code is required that in addition to the ability in multi-physics calculations, has a high computational speed. In this paper, an efficient coupling method is proposed for the neutronic and thermal-hydraulic (NTH) simulation of a pressurized water reactor (PWR) during the fuel cycle and the Nuclear Reactor Core Calculations (NRCC) code is developed to verify it. This code has an acceptable capacity for LPO problems owing to the use of simple methods of average current nodal expansion in neutronic calculations, two-phase single heated channel in thermal-hydraulic calculations, and a method for cross sections interpolation of library files. In order to test the models proposed, the results of NRCC code modeling for the core of the BEZNAU NOK reactor were verified against PARCS 2.7 and COBRA-EN using the code-by-code method. The numerical results show that the methods used for high-speed multi-physical calculations have good accuracy.
Graphical abstract
Keywords:Multi-physics core calculation code;Thermal-neutronic coupling;Average current nodal expansion method;Single heated channel method;Burnup;Fuel cycle
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Multi-physics Static Core Calculations (MSCC) must be performed to investigate the behavior of nuclear reactors. These calculations are used as input for other stages of the reactor design such as dynamic behavior of the core, reactor control, safety assessment, accident modeling, fuel loading pattern optimization (LPO) and among others. Neutronic and Thermal-hydraulic (NTH) models must be properly implemented for MSCC. Since thermal-hydraulic parameters such as temperature and density of the material affect neutron cross sections that lead to change in power distribution and effective multiplication factor, these parameters must be coupled with those of neutronic (Duderstadt and Hamilton, 1976).
In recent years, various codes have been developed for core calculations to assist nuclear engineers. Some of these codes use the Monte Carlo approach for neutronic calculations (e.g. MCNP code (D. Pelowitz, 2008)). Although the Monte Carlo method in neutronic calculations is very accurate due to the ability of detailed modeling of geometry and fundamental particle physics, it is time-consuming for transient and LPO problems. Also, providing the temperature-dependent cross sections for these calculations in Mont Carlo codes remains a challenge (M. Zangian et al., 2013). Some other codes such as PARCS (Downar et al., 2010), CITATION (T.B. Fowler et al., 1971), and DONJON (E. VARIN et al., 2005) perform neutronic calculations by numerically solving the neutron diffusion equation. To use these codes, in a two-step approach, the neutron cross sections in several energy groups should be generated using cell calculation codes such as WIMS (Deen and Woodruff, 1995) and DRAGON (G. Marleau et al., 2012). Also, various methods can be used for thermal-hydraulic calculations of nuclear reactor cores. For example, the Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) method used in the FLUENT (FLUENT, 2006) and CFX (ANSYS CFX, 2011) software. Since in CFD method the Navier-Stokes equations are solved directly along with the state equation, it is very time-consuming for thermal-hydraulic calculations of reactor cores. For this reason, simpler methods such as sub-channel and single heated channel methods can be used in COBRA-EN (Basile et al., 1999), RELAP (Fletcher and Schultz, 1999), and TRACE (TRACE TM, 2007) codes. In recent years, the coupled well-known codes of NTH have been used for MSCC, some of them are summarized below.
H.Asaka et al., 2001 modeled the uncontrolled withdrawal of control rod incident at the core of the AP-1000 reactor with the J-TRAC/SKETCH-N couplings. The SKETCH-N neutronic code calculates the power distribution and the multiplication factor by solving the kinetic and steady state form of the neutron diffusion equation in three dimensions. This coupling is done using the interface module based on the message-passing library parallel virtual machine. In a study by O. Noori-Kalkhoran et al., 2014a, 2014b, LOFA accident was modeled to analyze the safety of the WWER-1000 reactor core using the coupling of PARCS, COBRA-EN, and WIMSD-5B codes. In the works of M. Aghili Nasr et al., 2019 and M. Yarizadeh-Beneh et al., 2016, to loading pattern optimization in WWER-1000 reactor core with the coupling of PARCS and COBRA-EN codes, MSCC was performed during the reactor fuel cycle. Also, R. Akbari et al. (2020) have developed the DRPACO package which consists of the coupling system of DRAGON/PARCS/COBRA codes to optimize the SMART reactor core. In another study conducted by O. Noori-Kalkhoran et al., 2014a, 2014b, with a coupling of PARCS and WIMSD-5B codes for cross sections calculations, rod ejection accident is simulated in WWER-1000 reactor. N. Vahman et al., (2016), presented the results of Turbo-Generator load reduction test for Bushehr Nuclear Power Plant (BNPP). They used a coupled system of WIMSD-5B and PARCS codes for neutronic and RELAP5/MOD3.2 code for thermal-hydraulic calculations. A. Dokhane et al. (2017) investigated the coupling of the SIMULATE 3 K and TRACE codes for Oskarshamn-2 reactor stability events and compared their results with the TRACE/PARCS coupling. A. Erfaninia et al., 2017 coupled MCNP code and CFX software to compare the safety of fuel assembly with square and hexagonal geometries in SMR reactors. In a research conducted by M. Ahmadi et al. (2019), with coupling the MCNPX code and FLUENT software, design basis accident (DBA) analysis for the MNSR research reactor was performed. M. Ajami et al. (2020) developed a CMS (nuclear reactor Core Modular Simulator) module to simulate transient thermo-neutronic behavior for the core of a WWER-1000 reactor during reactivity insertion accidents. CMS is composed of a neutronic module of point kinetic equations, a thermal-hydraulic module of the time-dependent single heated channel, and a reactivity calculation module.
In most researches in recent years for MSCC, NTH modeling has been done using separate codes, and an interface program has been used for the thermal-neutronic coupling. This interface program, which is responsible for data transfer and convergence between NTH codes, reduces the computational speed due to the operations of writing and reading in the input and output files of the codes and implementation of additional programming commands. On the other hand, it is very time-consuming to directly calculations of the neutron cross sections using cell codes. In this study, a code called Nuclear Reactor Core Calculation (NRCC) has been developed for the MSCC of PWR using the FORTRAN programming language. NRCC code benefits from the nodal expansion method for solving the three-dimensional multi-group diffusion equations and homogeneous two-phase single heated channel method for thermal-hydraulic calculation. This code is capable of performing multi-physics calculations during the fuel cycle taking into account the effects of fuel burnup, temperature, density of materials, and boric acid concentration. To apply these effects on the neutron cross sections, a library generator has been developed based on the WIMS-D5 cell computing code, called GDP (Generator Diffusion Parameters). Therefore, for MSCC calculations using the NRCC code, it is not required interface program. The most important parameters calculated by the NRCC code include the power distribution in the core, multiplication factor, number of fuel cycle day, critical boric acid concentration, burnup distribution, temperature and density distribution of coolant, the temperature distribution in fuel rod and Departure from Nucleate Boiling Ratio (DNBR) in each thermal channel during the fuel cycle.
The next sections of the paper are: Section 2 provides an overview of the NTH coupling for MSCC calculations during the fuel cycle, as well as how the NTH are related by the state variables and neutron cross sections. In section 3, NRCC code subroutines are introduced first, and then describe methods for interpolating cross sections, neutronic calculations, thermal-hydraulic calculations, critical boric acid concentration, and burnup. Section 4 describes the GDP code and section 5 first verified the NRCC code in comparison to the PARCS2.7 neutronic and the COBRA-EN thermal-hydraulic codes, separately and finally, the results of the NTH coupling during the fuel cycle of the BEZNAU reactor are checked.
<Section>2. Computational models</Section>
MSCC during the fuel cycle requires three neutronic, thermal-hydraulic and burnup computational modules. Since the neutron cross sections depend on the material composition along with the density and temperature of each cell in the reactor core, after each burnup step, thermal-hydraulic calculation, acid boric concentration, and cell homogenization calculation must be done again. Each burnup step is accompanied by several coupled neutronic and thermal-hydraulic calculations to converge power distribution. The coupling process of the multi-physics static core calculation is shown in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. The coupling process of the multi-physics static core calculation.
Since cell homogenization calculations for each node in the reactor core are time-consuming, in this study the neutron cross sections library is used. For this purpose, at each step of the fuel cycle, distribution of the burnup, density, temperature, and critical boric acid concentration (state variables) are calculated and the neutron cross sections are interpolated from this library according to state variables (R. Akbari-Jeyhouni et al., 2018a,b). The change in cross sections using the partial derivatives of the state variables is calculated through Eq. (1).
@(1)
<Section>3. Nuclear Reactor Core Calculation (NRCC) code</Section>
Nuclear Reactor Core Calculation (NRCC) code has been developed for the MSCC of PWRs. This code has been written in the FORTRAN programming language and benefits from coupled neutronic calculations using average current nodal expansion method (Finnemann et al., 1977) and thermal-hydraulic calculations using the homogeneous two-phase single heated channel method. The reasons for choosing these methods are lower computation time and memory occupation, which makes NRCC code suitable for LPO problems.
NRCC code consists of seven subroutines which are described in Table 1.
Table 1. The main subroutines of NRCC code.
The flowchart of the NRCC code is illustrated in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2. The flowchart of the NRCC code.
First, in the NRCC code, the input file and the cross sections libraries are read by the INP subroutine. Then the IDP subroutine interpolates the cross sections from the stored tables according to the initial state variables specified in the input file and sends them to the NEM subroutine. The NEM subroutine performs neutronic calculations generating numerical solution of energy multigroup, three-dimensional diffusion equation in rectangular geometry, and the power distribution in the core is sent to the SHC subroutine. The SHC subroutine performs thermal-hydraulic calculations of the core concerning the axial power distribution in each thermal channel. In order to couple NTH, the cross section interpolation using the new state variables is re-performed by the IDP subroutine. This process is repeated enough in a computational loop until the maximum error reaches a specified value by the user. After the convergence of the thermal-neutronic calculations, for the criticality of the core, the critical boric acid concentration is calculated according to the effective multiplication factor in the CBA subroutine. Since the amount of boric acid in the moderator has a great effect on the neutron cross sections, the cross sections interpolation and the convergence of the thermal-neutronic calculations are performed again after its calculation. Finally, according to the number of days for current step, specified by the user in the input file, and power distribution, the burnup value is calculated in each node of the core in the BPC subroutine and all calculations (cross-sections interpolation, neutronic, thermal-hydraulic and boric acid concentration) is repeated. The most important variables computed in the NRCC code are:
•
Power distribution,
•
Effective multiplication factor,
•
Acid boric concentration,
•
Burnup distribution,
•
fuel cycle length,
•
Distribution of coolant temperature, pressure, and density in each thermal channel,
•
Radial temperature distribution in fuel pellets and clad,
•
Distribution of the DNBR parameter in each thermal channel.
All the parameters stated above will be calculated during the fuel cycle.
3.1. Diffusion parameters interpolation (IDP) subroutine
The IDP subroutine has been developed to interpolate neutron cross sections according to the state variables of the library file. In this subroutine, the position of the desired state variable (the variable at which the cross sections are to be calculated) is found in the library table, then using Eq. (2) the weight value for each variable is calculated.
@(2)
In Eq. (2),@is the value of state variable SV at which the cross sections should be calculated.@and@are the values of state variable sv in the state variables table where is between them. After calculating the weight for each state variable, the new cross sections (XS) are calculated by the weighting of cross sections in the library file using Eq. (3).
@(3)
The cross section weighting starts with the burnup variable and ends with that of coolant density. To clarify the concept of weighting, a cross sections tree diagram with respect to state variables is shown in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3. The cross sections tree diagram in the interpolation process.
3.2. Nodal expansion method (NEM) subroutine
The purpose of neutronic calculations is to determine the neutron flux (power) distribution and the effective multiplication factor (keff) in the reactor core. The basic equation modeling the neutron population and its interactions is the neutron transport equation, which has various deterministic and probabilistic methods for the solution of it. These methods are generally complex and have high computational costs. In the two-step method with the homogenization of cells (as fuel assemblies), the neutron angular flux is nearly isotropic and the diffusion approximation can be applied to determine the neutron flux. The first step is to perform the 2D lattice transport calculation to homogenize each assembly and in the next step, the 3D calculations of the reactor core are performed by solving the diffusion equation.
The general form of the neutron diffusion equation is according to Eq. (4) (B. Christensen, 1986):
@(4)
Over the past few decades, much effort has been made to develop various methods for numerically solving the diffusion equation (such as finite element, finite difference and nodal expansion). In this study, the average current nodal expansion method is used to solve the diffusion equation. In the nodal expansion method, the flux function is expanded to the polynomial based on
@(5)
In Eq. (5) n is the order of the solution,@is a polynomial of degree i in@and@is the zero-order flux expansion and defined in two dimensions as
@(6)
The variable is a dimensionless parameter defined as follows:
@(7)
where@is the thickness of node m in the u direction.
The properties of the orthogonal functions are used to obtain@according to
@(8)
The expanded flux coefficients by the weighted residual equations are obtained by
@(9)
The NEM has a structure similar to the Finite Difference Method (FDM), but due to considering a shape function similar to the Finite Element Method (FEM) and the neutron balance equation for each node, it can be calculated with large nodes (even the size of a fuel assembly). This feature for NEM reduces the unknown variables (number of nodes) and with high accuracy, reduces the computational time in comparison to the FDM and FEM.
3.2.1. Zeroth order of average current nodal expansion method
The zeroth order of average current nodal expansion method (2nd-degree flux expansion) is based on the derivation of the multi-group neutron continuity equation (Eq. (10)) in each node (N. Poursalehi et al., 2012).
@(10)
To calculate the outgoing partial currents of each node, the definition of Fick's law and the surface flux in the diffusion approximation is used. Finally, using Eq. (11), outgoing partial currents from each node are calculated
@(11)
In Eq. (11) coefficients are defined as follow:
@(12)
@(13)
@(14)
@(15)
The continuity of the interface currents and boundary conditions along node can be used to obtain the incoming partial currents (). Thus, for the inner boundaries, the outgoing currents will be equal to the adjacent node currents and for external boundaries, if@is the albedo coefficient at the boundary, then Eq. (16) can be used:
@(16)
Finally, using Eq. (11), the outgoing currents could be eliminated from Eq. (10) and the zero order nodal equation is obtained as
@(17)
3.2.2. Second order of average current nodal expansion method
To obtain higher accuracy in the nodal method with coarse meshes, the polynomial degree of flux expansion can be increased. In the second order of the nodal expansion method, the degree of polynomial equals four, so two unknown coefficients,@and , arise. Using the first and second order of orthogonal functions ( and ) as weighting functions in Eq. (9), Eq. (18) is derived to calculate these unknown coefficients (N. Poursalehi et al., 2013):
@(18)
where ,@,@ ,@ and @. The coefficients@and@are calculated by
@(19)
@(20)
the@is calculated by
@(21)
Also, the first and second transverse leakage moments@and , in the u direction, can be obtained by
@(22)
@(23)
Finally, Eq. (24) is obtained for calculating the outgoing partial currents of each node in the higher order flux expansion
@(24)
The coefficients in Eq. (24) are obtained as follow:
@(25)
@(26)
@(27)
@(28)
@(29)
In the neutron continuity equation, the outgoing partial currents () can be eliminated using Eq. (24) and the second order nodal equation is obtained (Eq. (30)).
@(30)
3.2.3. Calculation of effective multiplication factor
In this study, the power method is used to calculate the effective multiplication factor. This method first estimates the multiplication factor and then, after calculating the average neutron flux values in the volume of each node in each step, the multiplication factor is calculated by
@(31)
In Eq. (31), n is the number of computational loops,@is the volume of each node,@is the fission source at each node, and M is the total number of nodes.@is calculated from Eq. (32):
@(32)
Flowchart of the neutronic calculations using the NEM subroutine is illustrated in Fig. 4:
Fig. 4. The Flowchart of neutronic calculations by NEM subroutine.
3.3. Single heated channel (SHC) subroutine
Two aspects of thermal-hydraulic calculations are particularly important in nuclear reactor core design. First, the thermal-hydraulic variables as safety parameters in operating the reactor and secondly, the influence of thermal-hydraulic parameters (such as density and temperature of moderator and fuel) on the neutron cross sections. In this research, the single heated channel method with the homogeneous two-phase model has been used for thermal-hydraulic calculations. The SHC method has a high calculation speed than other methods such as Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) and Direct Numerical Simulation (DSN) because it does not directly solve the Navier–Stokes equations and does not consider geometric details. In SHC method, the calculations are divided into two parts. Fluid hydrodynamic computation for calculating the distribution of temperature and pressure in a fluid bulk and calculations of the heat transfer part of the thermal structure used to calculate the temperature distribution in the clad and fuel pellet.
3.3.1. Fluid hydrodynamic calculations
Fluid hydrodynamic equations include mass, momentum, and energy conservation equations along the channel axis (R. Akbari et al., 2017). As shown in Fig. 5, at the reactor core, each fuel assembly can be considered a thermal channel.
Fig. 5. Thermal channel in SHC analysis.
For each thermal channel, mass equation is used to calculate the static fluid velocity distribution as Eq. (33) (R.B. Bird et al., 2002):
@(33)
The momentum equation is used to calculate the fluid pressure distribution as
@(34)
Energy equation is used to calculate the fluid enthalpy distribution as
@(35)
The temperature distribution is obtained by the calculated enthalpy distribution and fluid pressure in each channel and interpolating from the coolant physical library. In two-phase state, the fluid properties are calculated by averaging the liquid and vapor properties. The equations of mass, momentum, and energy at steady state are first order Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) and are discretized using the backward Euler method (C. Gerald and P. Wheatley, 2006).
3.3.2. Heat transfer calculations in thermal structures
To calculate the outer surface temperature of the clad, the convection heat transfer coefficient of the fluid must be calculated. In this study, the Dittus-Boelter correlation is used to calculate the single-phase heat transfer coefficient (B. Zohuri and N. Fathi, 2015) and the Thom correlation in the two-phase model (J. R. S. Thom et al., 1965).
The Dittus-Boelter equations are expressed as
@(36)
@(37)
@(38)
@(39)
@(40)
@(41)
In Eq. (36),@is the hydraulic diameter calculated from
@(42)
The Thom equations are also expressed as follow:
@(43)
@(44)
@(45)
@(46)
@(47)
@(48)
@(49)
@(50)
Finally, using the parameters defined in the Thom correlation, the outer surface temperature of the clad is calculated by
@(51)
For the inner surface temperature of the clad, the conduction heat transfer equation in cylindrical geometry is based on
@(52)
In Eq. (52)@is obtained from
@(53)
The@parameter in Eq. (53) is calculated from
@(54)
By using the heat transfer coefficient of the gas inside the gap and the inner surface temperature of the clad, the outer surface temperature of the fuel pellet is calculated using
@(55)
The Stefan-Boltzmann heat transfer equation is used to calculate the temperature distribution in the fuel pellet as
@(56)
After discretization of the Boltzmann heat transfer equation by finite difference method, a linear system is obtained in the form
@(57)
Matrix entries in Eq. (57) are defined as follow:
@(58)
@(59)
@(60)
@(61)
In Eq. (58), the value of@is calculated from
@(62)
The temperature dependence of the thermal conductivity coefficient of UO2 fuel is calculated using the MATPRO correlation:
For temperatures below 1650 °C:
@(63)
For temperatures above 1650 °C:
@(64)
Finally, the linear system (Eq. (57)) is solved using the Guess-Seidel method (C. Gerald and P. Wheatley, 2006).
3.3.3. Calculations of critical heat flux and DNBR parameter
In order to calculate CHF, several correlations have been proposed using experiments on thermal-hydraulic test loops. These correlations may differ depending on the conditions and facilities of the test. In this study, the Bowring correlation was used to calculate the Critical Heat Flux (CHF), with a maximum error of 7%. The Bowring correlation in the SI system is defined as Eq. (65) (Todreas and Kazimi, 1990):
@(65)
In Eq. (65), the coefficients of A, B, and C are calculated as follow:
@(66)
@(67)
@(68)
@(69)
@(70)
For :
@(71)
For :
@(72)
Finally, the DNBR, which is one of the most important parameters in safety of PWR reactors, is defined as
@(73)
Flowchart of thermal-hydraulic calculations using the SHC subroutine is illustrated in Fig. 6.
Fig. 6. The Flowchart of thermal-hydraulic calculations using the SHC subroutine.
3.4. Critical boric acid (CBA) calculation subroutine
To operate a nuclear reactor, the effective multiplication factor must be approximately equal to one at each instant to become a critical system. Various tools can be used to keep the core critical during the fuel cycle. The use of burnable poison in some of the fuel assemblies and soluble boric acid in the coolant are ways to reduce excess reactivity at the beginning of the fuel cycle. By reducing excess reactivity due to fuel burnup, the amount of critical boric acid concentration is reduced during the fuel cycle to keep the core critical. To calculate the critical boric acid concentration in the NRCC code for the first step, neutronic calculations are performed with the initial boron concentration (read from the input file). In the second step, if the core is not critical, the concentration of boron is calculated by
@(74)
In the next steps, if the@is not equal to 1, the critical boric acid concentration is calculated using the linear interpolation
@(75)
In Eq. (75), i is the critical boric acid computational loop number.
3.5. Burnup calculation (BPC) subroutine
The Burnup parameter indicates fuel consumption and is defined as the amount of thermal energy produced during the fuel cycle per unit of fuel mass (J.R. Rubens Maiorino et al., 2018). In the NRCC code, using Eq. (76), burnup value is calculated for each node of the core at the time specified by the user, summing with the burnup values of the previous cycles.
@(76)
In Eq. (76),@is the energy released from the fission in the j node,@is the number of days in the i cycle.
<Section>4. Generator of diffusion parameters (GDP) code</Section>
The GDP code was developed to construct multi-group neutron cross section libraries. This code implements the WIMS-D5 code for each set of state variables including coolant density, critical boric acid concentration, fuel temperature, coolant temperature, and burnup, and stores their multi-group cross sections in a binary format with a specific structure. Flowchart of GDP code is illustrated in Fig. 7.
Fig. 7. The Flowchart of GDP code.
<Section>5. Results and discussions</Section>
In this section, to evaluate the correct behavior of NRCC code, the results are verified with PARCS2.7 and COBRA-EN codes for the BEZNAU NOK pressurized water reactor. First, a brief description of the BEZNAU reactor is presented, and then the results of the NTH calculations are presented separately in the NRCC code. Finally, the parameters of the thermal-neutronic coupling during the fuel cycle are investigated.
PARCS (Purdue's advanced reactor core simulator) code can solve the steady-state and time-dependent, multi-group neutron diffusion in orthogonal and non-orthogonal geometries. The PARCS code is also capable of solving of transport equation using the Simplified PN method for problems where the diffusion equation is not accurate enough. This code can be used to calculate burnup over a fuel cycle that in this case, the neutron cross sections of the fuel assemblies should be generated in the PMAX file and the depletion card activated. According to the effect of temperature on the neutron cross sections, PARCS code has the ability for limited calculation (single phase and 1D) of the thermal-hydraulic of the core to obtain temperature distribution. The PARCS code solves the neutron diffusion equation in a variety of methods, for example, Finite Difference Method (FDM), Analytic Nodal Method (ANM), Multigroup NEM (NEMMG), ANM/NEM nodal hybrid, Triangular Polynomial Expansion Nodal method (Hexagonal Geometry) which is selected according to the user's wishes (Downar et al., 2010).
Cobra-EN thermal-hydraulic code is based on the flow channel method and can simulate the transient and steady state mods for light water reactor cores according to user's variations in power distribution, outlet pressure, mass flow rate, and so on (Basile et al., 1999).
5.1. Description of NOK BEZNAU reactor core
The BEZNAU reactor is a pressurized light water reactor built in 1965 in Switzerland with 1130 MW thermal capacity. The core of this reactor is made up of 121 fuel assemblies with 2.44%, 2.78% and 3.48% enrichments, some of which have Pyrex Glass rods as burnable poison. The arrangement of fuel assemblies in the BEZNAU core is shown in Fig. 8. The configuration of the rods in a fuel assembly is shown in Fig. 9. Also, the main technical specifications and operating conditions for the BEZNAU reactor are given in Table 2.
Fig. 8. The arrangement of FAs in the BEZNAU core.
Fig. 9. The configuration of the rods in a fuel assembly.
5.2. Neutronic verification of NRCC code
To verify the neutronic calculations in NRCC code, one-eighth of the BEZNAU reactor core is considered due to the symmetry, and the relative power distribution calculated by NRCC code (by turning off thermal-hydraulic computing module) is compared with the values calculated by PARCS2.7 code (Fig. 10). In this comparison, the same neutron cross sections fed into both codes using a developed library convertor. Verification was performed assuming a core without xenon and samarium (beginning of fuel cycle), and with critical boric acid concentration. As can be seen in Fig. 10, the maximum relative deviation in the calculated power distribution is 1.18%. In this study, the 69-group WIMSD-formatted library based on ENDF/B-VII.0 is used in the WIMS code. Also, in neutronic calculations, each fuel assembly is divided into 4 radial nodes (2-X and 2-Y) and 10 axial nodes.
Fig. 10. Comparison of the relative power distributions at the BOC, without thermal-hydraulic calculations.
The relative power in each fuel assembly is calculated using Eq. (77) (R. Akbari et al., 2018a,b).
@(77)
5.3. Thermal-hydraulic verification of NRCC code
For the thermal-hydraulic verification of the NRCC code (by turning off the neutronic computation module), a thermal channel was considered. The temperature distribution of the coolant and fuel elements, as well as the DNBR parameter for single-phase and two-phase states, as compared with COBRA-EN code.
The graphs of the fluid bulk temperature distribution, the surface temperature of the clad, the fuel center temperature, and the DNBR distribution for the single-phase state, calculated by the NRCC and COBRA-EN codes are shown in Fig. 11, Fig. 12, Fig. 13, and Fig. 14, respectively. The maximum relative deviation calculated by the NRCC code compared to COBRA-EN in the single-phase state for the fluid bulk temperature is 0.12%, the clad surface temperature is 0.26% and the fuel center temperature is 0.83%.
Fig. 11. Comparison of fluid bulk temperature distribution in single-phase state.
Fig. 12. Comparison of the clad surface temperature distribution in single-phase state.
Fig. 13. Comparison of the fuel center temperature distribution in single-phase state.
Fig. 14. Comparison of the DNBR.
As shown in Fig. 14, the Bowring correlation is more conservative in calculating CHF. Because the use of this correlation can provide an underestimation of DNBR and increase the safety margin in design.
The two-phase fluid temperature distribution graphs are also shown in Fig. 15, Fig. 16 and Fig. 17. The maximum relative deviation calculated by the NRCC code compared to the COBRA-EN in the two-phase state for the fluid bulk temperature is 0.1%, the clad surface temperature is 0.12% and the fuel center temperature is 1.24%.
Fig. 15. Comparison of fluid bulk temperature distribution in two-phase state.
Fig. 16. Comparison of the clad surface temperature distribution in two-phase state.
Fig. 17. Comparison of the fuel center temperature distribution in two-phase state.
5.4. Thermal-neutronic coupling verification of NRCC code during the fuel cycle
For verification of the NTH coupling of the NRCC code, the cross sections library was produced for each fuel assembly of the BEZNAU reactor and was given as input to the NRCC and PARCS2.7 codes (A code was developed to convert the cross sections library to PMAXS format). Then the power distribution and critical boric acid concentration during the fuel cycle are compared in two codes. In this multi-physics verification, the thermal-hydraulic computation module is used for both codes and temperature feedbacks is applied in neutronic calculations. In Fig. 18, Fig. 19 and Fig. 20, the relative power distribution for one-eighth of BEZNAU reactor core is shown at the beginning of the fuel cycle, one day after the start of the fuel cycle and the end of the fuel cycle respectively.
Fig. 18. Comparison of the relative power distributions at the BOC, with thermal-neutronic coupling.
Fig. 19. Comparison of the relative power distributions at the one day after the start of the fuel cycle, with thermal-neutronic coupling.
Fig. 20. Comparison of the relative power distributions at the EOC, with Thermal-neutronic coupling.
The Power Peaking Factor (PPF) value, the maximum deviation of the relative power distribution and Root Mean Square (RMS) during the fuel cycle are given in Table 3.
Table 2. BEZNAU reactor specification (FASR of NOK Beznau, 1971).
Table 3. Power distribution deviation parameters during the fuel cycle.
Eq. (78) defines the Root Mean Square (RMS) of relative power.
(78)
As can be seen in Table 3, the maximum deviation of relative power distribution during the fuel cycle in the NRCC code is 1.95% compared to the PARCS2.7 code.
Fig. 21 illustrates the changing of critical boric acid concentration calculated by the NRCC and PARCS2.7 codes during the fuel cycle.
Fig. 21. Changes in critical boric acid concentration during the fuel cycle (NRCC and PARCS2.7).
The relative deviation of the critical boric acid concentration at the BOC is 0.24% and after the xenon equilibrium is 0.42%. The reason for the closeness of the NRCC code results with the PARCS2.7 and COBRA-EN codes is the similarity between the algorithms and the computational models.
To investigate the effectiveness of thermal-hydraulic (TH) calculations on neutronic and burnup calculations, the diagram of changes in critical boric acid concentration during the fuel cycle for two modes with and without (averaged temperatures and densities) TH is shown in Fig. 22. The temperature and density feedback effects are included in TH calculations which cause a 25-day difference in fuel cycle length of the BEZNAU reactor core.
Fig. 22. Changes in critical boric acid concentration during the fuel cycle (with and without TH).
<Section>6. Conclusion</Section>
In this paper, we proposed an efficient coupling method for performing the three-dimensional thermal-neutronic calculations during the fuel cycle of the PWRs and developed the NRCC code to verify it. The NRCC code uses the average current nodal expansion method, homogeneous two-phase single heated channel method, and the group cross sections interpolation of the libraries depending on the state variables. The NEM has a structure similar to the FDM, but due to considering a shape function similar to FEM and the neutron balance equation for each node has a much smaller number of unknown variables than similar methods. The SHC method uses the conservation equations of mass, momentum, and energy in the axial direction of the heat channel, and cross-flow between channels is not taken into account. Applying these methods has led to the acceptable efficiency of the NRCC code for performing fuel load pattern optimization. The NRCC code is verified against PARCS 2.7 and COBRA-EN, separately. The maximum relative deviation for power distribution at the BOC is 1.18%, the fuel center temperature in single-phase state 0.83%, in two-phase state 1.24%, and critical boric acid concentration after xenon equilibrium 0.42%. Although the numerical solution methods in our code are different from the COBRA & PARCS codes, due to the use of the same models and group parameters, there should not be much difference in the results that this is shown by the low relative deviation. To reliability analyze the NRCC code, validation by the actual data of a PWR is required which will be performed in future works. This code can be improved by adding convergence acceleration methods such as Jacobian-Free-Newton-Krylov (JFNK) to NEM, pin-by-pin power distribution calculations, and sub-channel thermal-hydraulic calculations.
<Section>Author contribution</Section>
Mahdi Aghili Nasr: Equations drive, Programming, Software, Verification, Writing. Mahdi Zangian: Methodology, Programming, Review & Editing, Supervision.
<Section>Declaration of competing interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Appendix A. Supplementary data</Section>
The following is the Supplementary data to this article:
Multimedia component 1.
<Section>Research data for this article</Section>
Data not available / No data was used for the research described in the article
About research data
References
Aghili Nasr et al., 2019
M. Aghili Nasr, M. Zangian, M. Abbasi, A. Zolfaghari
Neutronic and thermal-hydraulic aspects of loading pattern optimization during the first cycle of WWER-1000 reactor using Polar Bear Optimization method
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 133 (2019), pp. 538-548
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ahmadi et al., 2019
M. Ahmadi, A. Rabiee, A. Pirouzmand
Development of a 3D thermohydraulic-neutronic coupling model for accident analysis in research miniature neutron source reactor (MNSR)
Nuc. Eng. and Technology, 51 (2019), pp. 1776-1783
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ajami et al., 2020
A. Ajami, M. Zangian, A. Minuchehr, A. Zolfaghari
A coupled neutronic/thermal–hydraulic module for the transient analysis of WWER-1000 reactor during reactivity insertion accidents
Prog. Nucl. Energy (2020), pp. 121-103249
Google Scholar
Akbari et al., 2018a
R. Akbari, M. Abbasi, F. Faghihi, S.M. Mirvakili, J. Mokhtari
A novel multi-objective optimization method, imperialist competitive algorithm, for fuel loading pattern of nuclear reactors
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 108 (2018), pp. 391-397
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Akbari et al., 2020
R. Akbari, D. Rezaei Ochbelagh, A. Gharib, J.R. Maiorino, F. D'Auria
Small modular reactor full scope core optimization using Cuckoo Optimization Algorithm
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 122 (2020), p. 103271
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Akbari et al., 2018b
R. Akbari, D. Rezaei Ochbelagh, A. Gharib
Assessment of an integral small modular reactor during rod ejection accident by using DRAGON/PARCS codes
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 108 (2018), pp. 136-143
Google Scholar
Akbari et al., 2017
R. Akbari, D. Rezaei, A. Gharib
Thermal-Hydraulics analysis of pressurized water reactor core by using single heated channel model
Journal of Applied and Computational Mechanics, 3 (2017), pp. 192-198
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
ANSYS CFX-Solver Modeling Guide, 2011
ANSYS CFX-Solver Modeling Guide
ANSYS Inc. (2011)
Asaka et al., 2001
H. Asaka, V.G. Zimin, T. Iguchi, Y. Anoda
Coupling of the Thermal-hydraulic Code TRAC with 3-D Neutron Kinetics Code SKETCH-N. OECD/CSNI Workshop on Advanced Thermal-hydraulic and Neutronic Codes: Current and Future Applications Summary and Conclusions
NEA/CSNI/R, Barcelona, Spain (2001)
10-13 April 2000
Google Scholar
Basile et al., 1999
D. Basile, M. Beghi, R. Chierici, E. Salina, E. Brega
COBRA-EN: an Upgraded Version of the COBRA-3C/MIT Code for Thermal-Hydraulic Transient Analysis of Light Water Reactor Fuel Assemblies and Cores
ENELCRTN, Milano (1999)
Google Scholar
Bird et al., 2002
R.B. Bird, W.E. Steward, E.N. Lightfoot
Transport Phenomena
Chemical engineering department university of Wisconsin-Madison (2002)
Google Scholar
Christensen, 1986
B. Christensen
Three-dimensional Static and Dynamic Reactor Calculations by the Nodal Expansion Method
Risø National Laboratory, Risø-R-496 (1986)
Google Scholar
Deen and Woodruff, 1995
J.R. Deen, W.L. Woodruff
WIMS-D4M USER MANUAL
Argonne National Laboratory (1995)
Google Scholar
Dokhane et al., 2017
A. Dokhane, J. Judd, I. Gajev, O. Zerkak, H. Ferroukhi, T. Kozlowski
Analysis of Oskarshamn-2 stability event using TRACE/SIMULATE-3K and comparison to TRACE/PARCS and SIMULATE-3K stand-alone
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 102 (2017), pp. 190-199
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Downar et al., 2010
T. Downar, Y. Xu, V. Seker
PARCS v2.7 US NRC Core Neutronics. Simulator USER MANUAL
Department of Nuclear Engineering and Radiological Sciences University of Michigan, N. Hudson, Rockville (2010)
Google Scholar
Duderstadt and Hamilton, 1976
J. Duderstadt, L. Hamilton
Nuclear Reactor Analysis
Department of Nuclear Engineering the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan (1976)
Google Scholar
Erfaninia et al., 2017
A. Erfaninia, A. Hedayat, S.M. Mirvakili, M.R. Nematollahi
Neutronic-thermal hydraulic coupling analysis of the fuel channel of a new generation of the small modular pressurized water reactor including hexagonal and square fuel assemblies using MCNP and CFX
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 98 (2017), pp. 213-227
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Finnemann et al., 1977
H. Finnemann, F. Bennewitz, M.R. Wagner
Interface current techniques for multidimensional reactor calculations
Atomkernenergie, 30 (1977), pp. 123-128
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fletcher and Schultz, 1999
Fletcher, G.D., Schultz, R.R., 1999. RELAP5/MOD3.3 Code Manual. Idaho National Engineering Laboratory Idaho.
Google Scholar
FLUENT 6.3 User's Guide, 2006
FLUENT 6.3 User's Guide
FLUENT Inc. (2006)
Fowler et al., 1971
T.B. Fowler, D.R. Vondy, G.W. Cunningham
Nuclear Reactor Core Analysis Code: CITATION
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, ORNL-TM-2496 (1971)
Google Scholar
FSAR, 1971
FSAR
Final Safety Analysis Report) of the NOK Beznau
(1971)
Google Scholar
Gerald and Wheatley, 2006
C. Gerald, P. Wheatley
Applied Numerical Analysis
California Polytechnic State University (2006)
Google Scholar
Marleau et al., 2012
G. Marleau, A. Hebert, R. Roy
A USER GUIDE FOR DRAGON VERSION4
Institut de génie nucléaire, Département de génie mécanique, Ecole Polytechnique de Montréal, IGE–294 (2012)
Google Scholar
Noori-Kalkhoran et al., 2014a
O. Noori-Kalkhoran, A. Minuchehr, A. Akbari-Jeyhouni, A.S. Shirani, M. Rahgoshay
Simulation of rod ejection accident in a WWER-1000 Nuclear Reactor by using PARCS code
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 65 (2014), pp. 132-140
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Noori-Kalkhoran et al., 2014b
O. Noori-Kalkhoran, A. Minuchehr, A.S. Shirani, M. Rahgoshay
Full scope thermal-neutronic analysis of LOFA in a WWER-1000 reactor core by coupling PARCS v2.7 and COBRA-EN
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 74 (2014), pp. 193-200
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Pelowitz, 2008
D. Pelowitz
MCNPX User's Manual Version 2.6.0
Los Alamos National Laboratory, LA-CP-07-1473 (2008)
Google Scholar
Poursalehi et al., 2013
N. Poursalehi, A. Zolfaghari, A. Minuchehr
Development of a high order and multi-dimensional nodal code, ACNEC3D, for reactor core analysis
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 55 (2013), pp. 211-224
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Poursalehi et al., 2012
N. Poursalehi, A. Zolfaghari, A. Minuchehr
Performance comparison of zeroth order nodal expansion methods in 3D rectangular geometry
Nucl. Eng. Des., 252 (2012), pp. 248-266
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Rubens Maiorino et al., 2018
J. Rubens Maiorino, F. D'Auria, R. Akbari-Jeyhouni
An overview of thorium utilization in nuclear reactors and fuel cycles
12th International Conference of the Croatian Nuclear Society, Zadar, Croatia, vol. 198 (2018)
Google Scholar
Thom et al., 1965
J.R.S. Thom, W.M. Walker, T.A. Fallon, G.F.S. Reising
Boiling in sub-cooled water during flow up heated tubes or annuli
Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., 180 (1965)
Google Scholar
Todreas and Kazimi, 1990
N.E. Todreas, M.S. Kazimi
Nuclear Systems I: Thermal Hydraulic Fundamentals
The University of Massachusetts Institute of Technology (1990)
Google Scholar
TRACE V5.0 Theory Manual (TM), 2007
TRACE V5.0 Theory Manual (TM)
Field Equations, Solution Methods, and Physical Models, vol. 1, prepared for the U.S. NRC, Washington DC (2007)
Vahman et al., 2016
N. Vahman, R. Akbari-Jeyhouni, D. Rezaei Ochbelagh, R. Amrollahi
An assessment of a VVER-1000 core during Turbo-Generator load reduction test using RELAP5/MOD3.2 and WIMSD-5B/PARCSv2.7
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 93 (2016), pp. 155-164
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
VARIN et al., 2005
E. Varin, A. Hebert, R. Roy, J. Koclas
A USER GUIDE FOR DONJON VERSION 3.01
Institut dé genie nucléaire, Département de génie physique, E cole Polytechnique de Montréal. IGE–208 Rev. 4 (2005)
Google Scholar
Yarizadeh-Beneh et al., 2016
M. Yarizadeh-Beneh, H. Mazaheri-Beni, N. Poursalehi
Improving the refueling cycle of a WWER-1000 using cuckoo search method and thermal-neutronic coupling of PARCS v2.7, COBRA-EN and WIMSD-5B codes
Nucl. Eng. Des., 310 (2016), pp. 247-257
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zangian et al., 2013
M. Zangian, A. Minuchehr, A. Zolfaghari
FDBACE code for fast Doppler broadening ACE format based on parallel processing
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 62 (2013), pp. 170-177
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zohuri and Fathi, 2015
B. Zohuri, N. Fathi
Thermal-hydraulic Analysis of Nuclear Reactors
Springer International Publishing Switzerland (2015)
Google Scholar