<title>Upscaled heat transfer coefficients for a liquid metal-cooled fast nuclear reactor</title>
<author>1,A.D.Pérez-Valseca,2,C.G.Aguilar-Madera,3,C.G.Aguilar-Madera,4,G.Espinosa-Paredes</author>
<Affiliation>1,División de Ciencias Básicas e Ingeniería, Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana-Iztapalapa, Mexico City,09340, Mexico;2,División de Ciencias Biológicas y de la Salud, Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana-Iztapalapa, Mexico City, 09340, Mexico;3,Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Facultad de Ciencias de la Tierra, Linares, Nuevo León, 67700, Mexico;4,CONACYT-Centro de Ingeniería y Desarrollo Industrial, Ciudad del Carmen, Campeche, 24150, Mexico</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2020.120622</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0017931020335584</URL>
Upscaled heat transfer coefficients for a liquid metal-cooled fast nuclear reactor
A.D.Pérez-Valseca,C.G.Aguilar-Madera,C.G.Aguilar-Madera,G.Espinosa-Paredes
División de Ciencias Básicas e Ingeniería, Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana-Iztapalapa, Mexico City,09340, Mexico
División de Ciencias Biológicas y de la Salud, Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana-Iztapalapa, Mexico City, 09340, Mexico
Universidad Autónoma de Nuevo León, Facultad de Ciencias de la Tierra, Linares, Nuevo León, 67700, Mexico
CONACYT-Centro de Ingeniería y Desarrollo Industrial, Ciudad del Carmen, Campeche, 24150, Mexico
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Application of the Volume Averaging Method (VAM) to upscale the energy point model.
Calculation of heat transfer effective coefficients for a Liquid Metal-cooled Fast Reactor.
Solution of three closure problems (boundary-value problems) to obtain the closure variables.
Derivation of the upscaled model with two equations and nine effective coefficients.
The average temperature with the upscaled model resembles that with the pin-scale direct model.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
In this paper, we calculate the heat transfer effective coefficients for a Liquid Metal-Cooled Fast Reactor. We upscaled the local energy equation of a fuel pin and its surrounding liquid metal (cooler fluid) to the whole fuel assembly representing the entire nuclear reactor core. Such an upscaling procedure was carried out within the volume averaging framework. The upscaled model contains two coupled energy equations, and jointly three closure problems are presented which assist to numerically compute the effective coefficients. The closure problems consist of boundary-value problems, whose solution must be carried out in a representative geometry of fuel assembly. The closure problems were solved to obtain the closure variables, with which the effective coefficients related to conductivity and convection heat transfer were obtained. The upscaled model results were compared with the more-intensive numerical solution of the pin-scale mathematical model. An acceptable agreement was found validating the mathematical structure of the upscaled model, the closure problems, and the definitions of effective parameters.
<Section>Graphical abstract</Section>
Keywords:Heat transfer;Liquid metal-cooled fast reactor;Volume averaging method;Fuel assembly;Hexagonal array;Effective coefficients
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
In a nuclear reactor different phenomena take place simultaneously. In the nuclear core, the neutronic process derived by the fission is intimately linked to the heat transfer process between the fuel rods and coolant. The nuclear core is heterogeneous containing many fuel assemblies, and in turn, each assembly contains multiple fuel pins. The core contains different zones: fuel enrichment, control bars, and graphite. A lot of effort for understanding physics of nuclear reactors include the analysis of the interaction between the fuel and coolant (see, for example, the works of Uršic and Leskovar [1], Aufiero et al. [2], Du et al. [3], Li et al. [4] and Dubey and Sharma [5]). These authors based on the analysis of the nuclear core with the subchannel approach [6], which establishes a representative channel composed of a rod and the fluid around it. In this approach, the governing equations for mass, momentum, and energy for the fuel rod are considered with its individual properties of materials. For Liquid Metal-cooled Fast Reactor (LMFR), the methodology of subchannel analysis has been frequently used. Wu et al. [7] presented the thermal-hydraulic analysis of the fuel including the interaction between two different types of subchannels for Sodium-Cooled Fast Reactors (SFR). However, the researchers did not consider the feedback effects of neutronic processes. Sanchez et al. [8] analyzed the fuel rod bundles and core of SFR reactors using a thermal-hydraulic sub-channel based program. At present, there are other numerical simulators as the SUBAC code [9] which is also based on the subchannel analysis, calculating flow and temperature distributions in wire-wrapped fuel assemblies of SFR.
Besides the subchannel approach, the analysis of nuclear reactors has been made by a porous media approximation, where the pin fuel (solid phase) behaves as the solid matrix while the coolant (liquid phase) fills the pore space constituted by the void space between pins fuel. Chen et al. [10] used such an approach to analyze the MYRRA reactor. They proposed a macroscopic continuum differential model of a pin bundle flow and solved such a model using computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations. The porous media approximation has been used in hexagonal arrays of fuel [11], incorporating a code of 2D thermal-hydraulics analysis of modular high-temperature reactors (HTGR) following a prismatic array. The software is based on the solution of a coupled set of mass, energy and momentum conservation equations for the gas flow, and the energy conservation equation for the solid phase. Saadati et al. [12] used the porous media approach to verify the results of MCNP (Monte Carlo N-Particle) code for a VVER1000/446 reactor. In these reactors, metal particles are added into the reactor coolant increasing the cooling capacity, i.e., the coolant fluid is a two-phase flow.
In this work, the subchannel analysis in the core of liquid metal-cooled fast reactors, specifically a SFR, is based on the volume averaging method (VAM) [13], the VAM has been widely applied in different areas of science and technology [e.g. [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22], [23]]. The systematic application of VAM to equations governing the transport phenomena at local scale leads to averaged equations valid at higher scales. Besides providing the form of the up-scaled equation, the volume averaging method allows knowing the mathematical link with physics at lower scales. In the nuclear core are considered two phases, the solid phase is the fuel rods and the liquid phase is the liquid metal. The effective heat transfer coefficients at the scale of the reactor through the solution of closure problems are calculated in a representative cell of the systems.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the SFR description and its characteristics are defined. In Section 3 the local mathematical model including the interfacial boundary conditions is stated. In Sec., 4 the development of the upscaled local model, the solutions of temperature deviations variables, the closure problems formulation, and the upscaled closed transport equations as well as effective coefficients are described in detail. The estimation of effective coefficients as well as closure variables projections in the representative cell are presented in Section 5. In Section 6, the comparison between the upscaled model and the pin-scale model are discussed. Finally, we briefly present the conclusions in Section 7.
<Section>2. Liquid metal-cooled fast reactor description</Section>
The Generation IV International Forum (GIF) defines two types of Liquid Metal-cooled Fast Reactors [24]: the Sodium-cooled Fast Reactor and the Lead-cooled Fast Reactor (LFR). The SFR design can be cooled by sodium and a sodium-potassium alloy. For LFR designs, the coolants are lead and eutectic lead-bismuth alloy. In this work, we used a Sodium-cooled Fast Reactor as a reference. This reactors, have several nuclear ages of experience since the beginning of this technology dates back to the 1940s [25]. The schematic diagram of pool-type Sodium-cooled Fast Reactor is depicted in Fig. 1. The primary objective of this reactor is the electricity generation. The fuel is a mix of Uranium and Plutonium located in the core. The neutronic process generates a large amount of energy in heat form, which is continuously removed by the coolant. The coolant flows through the core to extract the heat and then it moves through a heat exchanger to produce steam which in turn moves a turbine, generating electricity. In this work, we focus exclusively on the nuclear core.
Fig. 1. Sodium-cooled fast reactor; pool-type design diagram [24].
The core of SFR is formed by hexagonal assemblies as illustrated in Fig. 2. This figure shows the radial core layout; it includes the fuel, reflectors, and control rods [26]. The fuel zone is divided into inner and outer sections; each one has different Uranium-Plutonium concentrations. The reactor thermal power is 3600MW, the inlet coolant temperature is 668.15 K with an average temperature of 5 m/s. The average temperature of fuel is 1500 K and 743 K for the coolant [26]. The core consists of 453 fuel assemblies, 330 radial reflectors, and 33 control subassemblies. The inner and outer zones have 225 and 228 fuel assemblies, respectively.
Fig. 2. Radial core layout of SFR.
Fig. 3 illustrates the fuel assembly dimensions, the pin to pin distance, and the fuel rod radius (local scale). The fuel assembly depicted in Fig. 3a shows 271 fuel pins while Fig. 3b represents the fuel rods distribution. The active zone of the fuel assembly is 100.566 cm length.
Fig. 3. (a) Hexagonal fuel assembly, (b) distribution of fuel pins in the assembly. Modified from [26], (c) subassemblies in the nuclear core.
In Fig. 3c a set of assemblies is presented. The arrangement depicted can be seen as a porous medium with the representative volume defined, which coincides with a unitary cell representing the entire system.
<Section>3. Local mathematical model</Section>
The local equations presented below consider the heat transport processes in the fuel rod, including the thermal fluid composing the cooling metal. The direct mathematical model representing the local approximation to describe the subchannel of an assembly fuel is constituted by a set of partial differential equations (PDE), i.e.
Fuel rods
@(1)
Liquid metal
@(2)
The interfacial boundary conditions:
@(3)
@(4)
And the initial conditions:
@(5)
where Afm is the interfacial area between the fuel rod (solid phase) and the liquid metal (fluid phase). The subscript represents the fuel rod and the liquid metal. The source term is the volumetric power, given by
@(6)
where P0 is the nominal thermal power and Vf is the fuel volume.
The entrances of fluid phase in the fuel assembly, in general, are a function of the position and time:
(7)
where Am is the entrance area of the liquid metal.
The coupling processes and feedback in core of the reactor is: neutronic process requires the information of the fuel rod @ and the liquid metal temperature @ to calculate the reactivity and consequently the source term of Eq. (1). Then, the source term is used to recalculate the fuel temperature as well as a new metal temperature; computationally this represents a recursive flow of information.
<Section>4. Upscaled model</Section>
Within the volume averaging framework, the core of the nuclear reactor is treated as a hierarchical porous medium (see Fig. 3). In this way, the governing equations valid at the fuel pin-scale are spatially smoothed, and the final upscaled equation results from the following sequence:
•
Average the local equations for each phase, applying the average superficial operator.
•
Apply the spatial decomposition to the point variables.
•
Obtain a non-closed problem in terms of average quantities and spatial deviations.
•
Definition of spatial deviations and their formal solution, whose mathematical structure derives in the closure problems.
•
Solve numerically the closure problems and estimate the effective coefficients involved in the upscaled heat transport equations.
4.1. Upscaling of local equations
In order to obtain the upscaled local equations, we introduce the averaging domain, (or representative elementary volume, REV), represented in Fig. 4. Notice that , where is the volume of fuel rods and is the liquid metal volume.
Fig. 4. The averaging volume in a fuel assembly.
The system characteristic lengths presented in Fig. 4 are related through the expression:
@(8)
where La is the characteristic fuel assembly length, while @ and @ are the rod fuel and liquid metal characteristic lengths, respectively. Both @ and @ have the same order of magnitude. According to the VAM theory, the fulfillment of the length-scale constraints given by Eq. (8) guarantees that average quantities have a smooth behavior, i.e., it is similar to the continuum theory but applied to a scale many times greater. The restriction (8) constitutes a scaling law as pointed out by Wood [27].
To average the local model, we introduce the superficial averaging operator of a continuous property, in our case this property is the temperature . The phase temperature defined in terms of superficial average is given by
@(9)
And the intrinsic average is defined as
@(10)
Note that the average quantity is evaluated at the centroid (x) of the averaging volume (V). The superficial and intrinsic averages are related by
@(11)
where @ is the volume fraction of each phase @, within the averaging domain. Applying the volume averaging operator to the local equations we obtain the average equation [23]. Besides the volume average definitions for the upscaling procedure, we use the spatial averaging theorem [28]. This theorem is useful since we encounter averages of gradients and we need converting these to gradients of averages [29], [30], [31], [32], [33].
The systematic application of the average volume method to the local model leads to the following equations:
Averaged model for solid phase
@(12)
Averaged model for fluid phase
@(13)
where @ represents the interfacial area within the averaging volume, is the normal unit vector pointing from the solid phase to the fluid phase, where . Eqs. (12)and (13) consider that physical properties (density, heat capacity, and conductivity) are constants within the averaging volume.
The local variable can be represented as a decomposition of the intrinsic average, , and the spatial deviations,. This decomposition is applied to both phases, i.e.:
@(14)
@(15)
In the liquid phase, there is a convective term that includes the metal velocity. This variable is also decomposed according to
@(16)
Applying the spatial decomposition to Eqs. (12) and (13), and using the next relation
@(17)
We derive the upscaled equations for fuel and coolant, respectively:
@(18)
@(19)
The following restrictions over the average spatial deviations are met:
(20)
which results from the length-scale restrictions above mentioned.
The set of upscaled equations [Eqs. (18) and (19)] has a greater number of unknown variables (@,@,@,) than the local equations. The deviations variables and need to be defined to obtain a closed set of equations. Determining the spatial deviation functions in terms of the corresponding average quantities is known as closure. The closure problems complement the degree of freedom in the application of the volume averaging method (VAM), i.e. upscaling through the VAM generates more variables than equations; the equations quantifying deviations of the average variables constitute the closure, so the mathematical problem is well-posed. The upscaling process we use in this work, to integrate information from scales of major resolution into a scales where the domain can be considered as homogeneous, uses local theory since during the development certain length-scale constraints are fulfilled. This implies that the variable is evaluated at the centroid of the unit cell, thus the problem is local. When the independent variable is evaluated in a place different from the centroid, the problem is non-local. Non-local problems or evolving heterogeneities problems have been studied by Quintard and Whitaker [34], Cushman [35], Goyeau et al. [36] among others, they found that the analysis of this kind of problems are extremely complex and suggested avoid them whenever possible.
4.2. The formal solution of temperature deviations
By inspection of Eqs. (18) and (19), it is noted they are unclosed as contain additional variables; the temperature deviations@ and @. A set of closed equations is obtained if such temperature deviations are written in terms of average quantities. To obtain the spatial deviations of temperature, we need to look for their solutions whether they are analytical, numerical, or in terms of general expressions (formal solutions).
In this tenor, firstly we work on the governing equation for the solid phase. The closure equations arise of the substitution of the spatial decomposition Eq. (14) into the local Eq. (1), obtaining Eq. (21) and then subtract the expression (18), in this way is obtaining an expression for the deviation of temperature, which is an unknown variable:
@(21)
@(22)
Note that the spatial deviation of the source power@,@ ,@ is zero for early times when the power profiles are not affected by the fissionable material consumption. Now, the Eq. (22)can be simplified providing the following inequality is satisfied:
@(23)
Which is supported on the following analysis of orders of magnitude:
@(24)
@(25)
As described in Eq. (8), , then the quantity expressed in (24) is much greater than that of (25). Whit this simplification, the equation for the solid temperature reduces to:
@(26)
Similarly using the corresponding analysis of orders of magnitude, the deviations equation for the metal temperature is given by
@(27)
The interfacial boundary conditions, Eqs. (3) and (4), are now rewritten substituting the spatial decomposition to complete the boundary-value problem for temperature deviations:
@(28)
@(29)
Eqs. (26)–(29) contain macroscopic sources associated with the average quantities , and . If such quantities are null, the trivial solution satisfies the boundary-value problem for temperature deviations. The nontrivial solution, which is more useful and interesting, comes from proposing that the general solution is given by a finite sum of the linear combination of macroscopic sources. This procedure is carried out for two reasons: i) the linear nature of the boundary problem given by Eqs. (26)–(29), and ii) the macroscopic sources behave as constants due to the length-scale constraints within the validity domain of temperature deviations, defined in (8). Thereby, the general solutions, named as formal solutions for the temperature deviations are:
@(30)
@(31)
where the vectors , @, @, and the scalars and are called as closure variables. In Appendix A we summarize the boundary-value problems solving these closure variables.
4.3. The upscaled closed transport equation
To obtain the upscaled closed transport equation for each phase, we substitute (30) into (18) for the solid phase, and after grouping terms we get:
@(32)
where the effective transport coefficients are defined according to the following expressions
@(33)
@(34)
@(35)
@(36)
@(37)
In an analogous manner for the liquid phase, substituting (31) into (19) yields:
@(38)
where the effective coefficients are defined as follows:
@(39)
@(40)
@(41)
@(42)
@(43)
The solution to closure problems in a specific unit cell leads to mapping the closure variables , , , , and in the above equations, and through these closure variables, in turn, we are able to obtain the effective coefficients , , , , , , , and .
With the volume averaging method was possible to obtain the upscaled model, including the effective coefficients. On the other hand, is possible doing an analysis using other methodologies like asymptotic expansion framework. Both approaches, the volume averaging method and the asymptotic expansion framework present certain similitudes and also deep differences in several aspects within their methodology. We think that the best reference concerning their comparisons is that one of Davit and coworkers [37]. To the best of our knowledge, there are very few works devoted to analyzing heat transport with asymptotic methods. In one of such works, the obtained upscaled heat transfer model in our work encompasses some of the models derived with the double-scale asymptotic method by Auriault and Ene [38], although the initial physics includes only heat transport by conductive mechanisms. Our derived two-equation model resembles that formulation where the thermal barrier resistance between the phases increases. For the heat transport problem in the nuclear reactor, it is agreed that the unit cell is periodic, which is an a priori assumption in the asymptotic method. However, in our results the effect of different dimensionless number as the Péclet or Reynolds number is implicit during the solution of the closure problems, i.e. the closure scheme is general for different flow and heat transport scenarios; meanwhile following the asymptotic expansion, the order of magnitude of dimensionless numbers must be assumed at one of the first steps of the methodology and it can lead to different upscaled model.
<Section>5. Numerical estimation of effective coefficients</Section>
The numerical estimation of the effective coefficients defined in Eqs. (30) and (36) is done by the previous solution of the closure problems presented in Appendix A. We considered turbulent flow for modeling the cooling movement as typically large Reynolds numbers are met in nuclear reactors with flow velocities around 5 m/s (design velocity of SFR). In this part, we use the software Comsol Multiphysics for solving the velocity fields, and , and the closure problems. We recall that each closure problem allows the computation of specific effective coefficients:
•
Closure problem 1 solves for , , and .
•
Closure problem 2 solves for , , and .
•
Closure problem 3 solves for .
The properties for solid phase (fuel rod) are [39].: Specific Heat 390.98 J/(kg K), Conductivity 2.529 W/(m K) and Density 10,162.89 kg/m3. For liquid phase (metal) are [40].: Specific Heat 1269 J/(kg K), Conductivity 68.8 W/(m K), Density 845 kg/m3 and Viscosity 2.510−4Pa-s. The properties are considered constants, at the beginning of the volume average procedure we imposed that such length-scales constraints Eq. (7)) are satisfied, thus we assume that in Eqs. (11) and ((12) the physical properties are constant. The idea of constant properties inside the averaging volume is one of the core assumptions. In other manner, the algebraic effort can lead to extremely complex mathematical formulations complicating its applicability in engineering applications. One can consider that behind of such assumption is the fact that the dynamics of the heat transport process at the pin-fuel scale is too rapid in comparison with the dynamic at the reactor scale. In that sense, the properties can be evaluated at the temperature of the centroid of the REV. This gives relevancy to the correct selection of what we called as REV, in other words the heterogeneous system must satisfy disparities of space- and time-scales of a particular transport process.
The fuel rod has three areas: fuel, gap, and clad. The fuel, consists of (U, Pu)O2 pellets, the gap contains helium and the clad is strengthened steel. The fuel rod properties were calculated from a weighted average of the properties of each section, these are:
The closure variables present symmetric or asymmetric behavior around orthogonal planes and periodicity, according to the conditions stated in the closure problems and the system geometry. This behavior contributes to shaping the effective transport coefficients given that they can also be symmetric or asymmetric.
We present results solving closure problems in the subchannel representative unitary cell by using Comsol Multiphysics software, which is based on the finite-element method. The closure problems are taken as a set of PDE with boundary conditions. Various numerical aspects were kept by default configuration within the Comsol environment, but some of most relevant are the following: the elements for subdomains consist of numerous tetrahedrons which automatically are refined near boundaries with objective to better computation of derivatives; the PARDISO (Parallel Direct Sparse Solver) method is used to solve directly the linearized system of equations in each iteration, this method is able to handle large sparse matrices. COMSOL uses a finite number of test functions to approximate the solution in each element subdomain. This finite number of test functions, and the same dependent variable, can be seen as a subset of the infinite Hilbert space. The test functions employed were second-order polynomials (quadratic shape functions). Fig. 5 shows the 3D subchannel geometry employed to solve the closure problems, and it also presents the number of appropriate domain elements. We note that such a number of tetrahedral elements is enough to ensure the independence of results (flow and closure variables) with the grid mesh. In the representative cell, the fuel rod is enclosed for other rods and the subchannel act as assembly boundaries. The fuel rod is represented by the gray cylinders and the blue area between rods contains the liquid metal flowing in the subchannel.
Fig. 5. (Left) representative unitary cell, and (right) computational cell with 50595 domain elements.
The Euclidean norm of closure variables and is presented in Fig. 6. These variables are used to obtain the transport coefficients of the solid phase, given by Eqs. (33)–(36). In Fig. 6 two types of graphics are shown. On the left-hand side, we plotted the closure variable at the boundary between the solid and liquid in the unitary cell. Such location is of interest as several effective coefficients depend explicitly on the solution there, and it is include depicts the closure variable along a central horizontal cutting plane of Fig. 5, the figure was made to measure four cutting planes, in order to visualize the behavior of more cells. On right-hand side, is showed the solution in a quarer of cell. The results are present in this geometry to have better resolution and a close up of the fields. It is possible to observe the periodicity and symmetry of the closure variables when it is projected onto the xy plane. Also it is evident that the is more intense at the rod wall and less intense at the center, whereas remains with low intensity at the fluid bulk and increases its intensity at the road-fluid interface.
Fig. 6. Closure variables fields (m). (Left) closure variables in the unit cell and (right) along a quarter of unitary cell.
In Fig. 7, we present the corresponding Euclidean norm of closure variables and . The general trend of these closure variables is similar to that presented by and , but the former are one order of magnitude larger. The projection of these variables onto the xy plane lets observe periodicity and symmetry of the variables into the representative cell. The Fig. 8 illustrates the closure variables fields and , which are used to determine the transport coefficient related to the interfacial heat transfer process, given by Eqs. (37)and (43), and the pseudo-convective coefficients . In this case, the closure variables are symmetric in the cell, and if they are projected onto the xy plane it is possible to observe the periodicity of the cell. It is important to remark that and are at least three order of magnitude greater than the other closure variables. This indicates that the contribution to the temperature deviations may be dominated by temperature differences between fuel and fluid. Thus under certain circumstances, the formal solution may be rewritten in a more simplified fashion providing the temperature difference is at least the same order of magnitude that the temperature local gradients.
Fig. 7. Closure variables fields (m). (Left) closure variables in the unit cell and (right) along a quarter of unitary cell.
Fig. 8. Closure variables fields (dimensionless). (Left) closure variables in the unit cell and (right) along a quarter of unitary cell.
In a nuclear reactor could be variation in the inlet flow due to one event like Unprotected Loss of Flow (ULOF). It is a transient event initiated when the power of the primary pump is lost, or a shaft break occurs. During the operation of reactors loss of circulating fluid is a key aspect of safety. In the procedure of this work, the effective coefficients can be recalculated according to the local Reynolds number for cases where the fluid velocity decreases. However, the rigorous computation of the effective coefficients must also encompass dynamic effects at the pin-fuel scale, i.e. in the pre-asymptotic regime. Within the volume averaging method, this can be achieved by solving the closure problems at the transient state where the flow perturbations are supplied as input data at the level of the closure problem. This procedure has been applied previously to estimate transient neutron effective diffusion coefficients in nuclear reactors [41] and also has been suggested, as an example, in the context of mass [42] and heat [43] transport problems. The investigation of the effects of loss of fluid will be investigated in ongoing works, where also the flow problem be analyzed.
For the simulation of each scenario, it is useful to calculate the effective coefficients varying the cooling flow velocity. The minimum velocity is around 0.6 m/s, which corresponds to the velocity established in the benchmark for uncertainty in modeling, design, operation, and safety analysis of SFRs [39]. In our simulations, we evaluated the effective coefficients for different flow velocities ranging from the benchmark to 5 m/s. In the benchmark, the design parameters and operation limits for this type of reactors are established a priori.
Tables 1 and 2 present the upscaled effective coefficients and in the solid phase , fluid phase , and crossed ones and , respectively.
Table 2. Upscaled coefficients components of the effective pseudo-velocity vector .
According to the results of Table 1, it is interesting to note that the thermal tensors do not exhibit appreciable differences in their inner components, meaning that the assembly is practically isotropic. The xx and yy components of crossed coefficients and are almost 300 times smaller than , and 20 times lower than . For the material conductivities, the upscaled fuel coefficient is about 1.5 times smaller than the local value, while is about 2.8 lower compared to the bulk value. It means that the heat transfer resistance between the fuel and liquid metal changes appreciably at a large scale. It is of primary importance as the correct temperature prediction is crucial for the operation and forecasting of nuclear reactors under different transient scenarios. The results related to variations of cooler velocity shows that the effective coefficients remain practically invariable.
The upscaled coefficients (Table 2) are associated with the conductive-convective heat transport process, they are directly related to the intrinsic average temperatures, and with the velocity of the cooling liquid. For this reason, the predominant components of and are the axial ones (zz-components).
The volumetric heat transfer coefficient obtained with Eq. (37) is showed in Table 3. Due to the volume of the unitary cell is small, the value of the heat transfer coefficient is large, allowing the heat produced in the fuel is transported to the liquid metal. This parameter is weakly affected by the fluid velocity since it depends mainly on the fluid-rod temperature difference through the closure variable .
Table 3. Volumetric heat transfer coefficient.
<Section>6. Comparison of the upscaled model with pin-scale numerical simulations</Section>
As a manner to validate the definition and correct computation of effective coefficients. In this section, we present the comparison of numerical results obtained with the upscaled model for the nuclear assembly given by Eqs. (32)–(43), and the pin-scale direct numerical simulation. The pin-scale model is the point formulations for the heat transfer process, which is described by the local mathematical Eqs. (1)–(5). The heat transfer problem at pin-scale is stated in a geometry including several fuel rods and far from the boundaries of the core and the upper and lower ends of fuel assemblies (see Fig. 9a). We consider symmetry conditions at the external assembly boundaries because it is surrounded by others assemblies (see Fig. 3c). The values of specific heat, conductivity, and density for each phase are summarized in Section 5. The upscaled equations are applied in an equivalent geometry of a fuel assembly (see Fig. 9c), the values of the effective coefficients are given in Tables 1 and 2. The velocity of metal is 5 m/s and inlet temperature is 668.15 K, the source term is taken like volumetric power constant in all the directions of the fuel rod. In the subassembly, the central rod has a nominal value of the source, the rods around the central rod has 0.9 of nominal value, the next rods has 0.8 and the rods in the boundary of the assembly have 0.7 of the value. For the upscaled model, the volumetric power is distributed uniformly and is taken as the average of the power source in the assembly, which is 0.773 of the nominal value. We solve the pin-scale model and upscaled model in the dominium of less scale (see Fig. 9b and d), taking the tenth part of length assembly, considering a volume far of the axial boundaries and focus mainly on the radial profile of temperatures.
Fig. 9. (a) and (b) Representative assembly of the nuclear core for pin-scale numerical simulations. (c) and (d) equivalent homogenized geometry of fuel assembly where the upscaled model is solved.
In Fig. 10, the comparison is presented, note that in the pin-scale model we show one domain where it is possible to distinguish zones that belong to fuel rod and zones occupied by coolant fluid. On the other hand in the upscaled model, the whole domain is homogenized and we have to plot separately the temperature distribution of coolant fluid and fuel rods as both coexist in the same undistinguishable domain. At the pin-scale numerical simulation, the average temperature of the fuel is 1498.5 K and for the liquid metal the average value is 668.9 K. Meanwhile the numerical solution of the upscaled problem yields 1502.05 K for the fuel temperature and 669.9 K for the liquid metal. The differences between pin-scale and upscaled model predictions are 0.2% for the fuel and 1% for the liquid metal, respectively. In this regarding an excellent agreement was obtained.
Fig. 10. Comparison between temperatures of fuel (K) and liquid metal (K) of pin-scale numerical simulation and the solution of the upscaled model using the effective coefficients previously calculated.
In Fig. 11 temperature profiles of and are shown. It is possible to observe the distribution of temperature in the axial direction, which is caused by the movement of the liquid metal. The coolant liquid metal temperature increases in the axial direction as a consequence of heat transfer taking place while the fluid phase moves from bottom in to top; the heat is partly removed from the rod and fresh coolant enters at the bottom.
Fig. 11. Temperature of fuel (K) and liquid metal (K) for the solution of upscaled model.
The Fig. 12 shows the temperature profile through one of the vertex the assembly (see the red line in the left scheme in Fig. 12). In the graph, the crest of the curves corresponds to the fuel rod center, showing that the maximum temperature is in the rods. Between crests the curve decreases corresponding to the metal temperature. Note that within the fuel road the temperature decreases gradually until the interface rod-fluid is reached. At this point, the temperature decreases abruptly until the fluid bulk temperature. On the other hand, taking the same position in the assembly but now with the upscaled model, the temperature profile for the fuel and liquid metal is an horizontal line. It is an expected result since the upscaled model averages the temperature variations through all the assembly. Furthermore, in the upscaled, model the volumetric power is distributed uniformly in the whole domain as the fuel rod and fluid are homogenized in an equivalent domain where individual domains do not exist anymore.
Fig. 12. Temperature profile of the pin-scale numerical simulation and of the upscaled model through the assembly.
<Section>7. Conclusions</Section>
Applying the volume averaging method, we develop the two-equation model for the heat transfer process in a fuel nuclear assembly, which includes a solid phase (fuel) and a liquid phase (liquid metal). In this way the effective coefficients related to the conductive and convective heat transfer were obtained in the context of the closure variables. We estimated the effective coefficients by solving the closure problem in a representative unit cell of the fuel assembly, which is periodic in the domain. In turn, the pin-scale velocity field was obtained by the numerical solution of the momentum equation under turbulent conditions, which are often found in nuclear reactor operations.
We report on the numerical values of the conductivity tensors and other new coefficients associated with the convective phenomena at pin-scale, as well as the heat transfer coefficient. In order to validate the upscaled model formulation and the effective coefficients involved, the averaged model solution was compared with the pin-scale direct numerical simulation, in a representative fuel assembly. The results of the upscaled model encompass closely those obtained with the computationally more expensive pin-scale mathematical model.
The procedure developed at this work can be applied to the whole core reactor. However, for that case other scales are involved, and it would be necessary an additional averaging procedure where the fuel sub-assembly can be seen as homogeneous domain within the core-length scale. In this new scaling process, new closure problems would be required to quantify the variable deviations taking place at the core length scale.
The idea of deriving an upscaled model is to model the behavior of the nuclear core without losing information of each zone. In this work, we obtained an upscaled model and it was compared with an assembly, but it is only a part of a bigger project, which includes the comparison at different levels, as the complete nuclear core. In future works, we want to present the comparison pin to pin and demonstrate that the upscaled model can be used to describe the different scales of the core, in this way will be able to simplify the traditional model to describe the thermal hydraulic nuclear phenomena.
<Section>Author declaration</Section>
We wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. We confirm that the manuscript has been read and approved by all named authors and that there are no other persons who satisfied the criteria for authorship but are not listed. We further confirm that the order of authors listed in the manuscript has been approved by all of us. We confirm that we have given due consideration to the protection of intellectual property associated with this work and that there are no impediments to publication, including the timing of publication, with respect to intellectual property. In so doing we confirm that we have followed the regulations of our institutions con cerning intellectual property. We understand that the Corresponding Author is the sole contact for the Editorial process. He is responsible for communicating with the other authors about progress, submissions of revisions and final approval of proofs. We confirm that we have provided a current, correct email address which is accessible by the Corresponding Author.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgments</Section>
A.-D- Pérez-Valseca acknowledges the financial support from CONACYT–SENER during her Ph.D. studies.
<Section>Appendix A. Closure problems</Section>
We obtain the closure variables and scalars by solving the corresponding boundary-value problems. Closure problem 1 solves , the closure problem 2 solves , and the closure problem 3 solves .
Plus periodicity conditions of closure variables and constraints .
<Section>References</Section>
[1]
M. Uršicˇ, M. Leskovar
Temperature profile modeling in fuel-coolant interaction codes
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 55 (2012), pp. 5350-5356
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[2]
M. Aufiero, A. Cammi, C. Fiorina, L. Luzzi, A. Sartori
A multi-physics time-dependent model for the lead fast reactor single-channel analysis
Nucl. Eng. Des., 256 (2013), pp. 14-27
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[3]
P. Du, J. Shan, B. Zhang, L.K.H. Leung
Thermal-hydraulics analysis of flow blockage events for fuel assembly in a sodium-cooled fast reactor
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 138 (2019), pp. 496-507
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[4]
S. Li, L. Cao, M.S. Khan, H. Chen
Development of a sub-channel thermal hydraulic analysis code and its application to lead cooled fast reactor
Appl. Therm. Eng., 117 (2017), pp. 443-445
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[5]
A. Dubey, A.K. Sharma
Melting and multi-phase flow modelling of nuclear fuel in fast reactor fuel rod
Int. J. Therm. Sci., 125 (2018), pp. 256-272
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[6]
N.E. Todreas, M.S Kazimi
Nuclear Systems I: Thermal Hydraulic Fundamentals
Hemisphere Publishing Corporation, USA (1990), p. 705
Google Scholar
[7]
Y.W. Wu, X. Li, X. Yu, S.Z. Qiu, G.H. Su, W.X. Tian
Subchannel thermal-hydraulic analysis of the fuel assembly for liquid sodium cooled fast reactor
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 68 (2013), pp. 65-78
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[8]
Sanchez, V., Imke, U., Ivanov, A., & Gomez, R. SUBCHANFLOW: a thermal hydraulic sub-channel program to analyse fuel rod bundles and reactor cores. (2010).
Google Scholar
[9]
R.L. Sun, D.L. Zhang, Y. Liang, M.J. Wang, W.X. Tian, S.Z. Qiu, G.H. Su
Development of a subchannel analysis code for SFR wire-wrapped fuel assemblies
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 104 (2018), pp. 327-341
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[10]
X. Chen, R. Li, A. Rineiski, W. Jäger
Macroscopic pin bundle model and its blockage simulations
Energy Convers. Manage., 91 (2015), pp. 93-100
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[11]
A. Nouri-Borujerdi, S.I.T. Ghomsheh
An improved porous media approach to thermal–hydraulics analysis of high-temperature gas-cooled reactors
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 76 (2015), pp. 485-492
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[12]
H. Saadati, K. Hadad, A. Rabiee
Safety Margin and Fuel Cycle Period Enhancements of VVER-1000 Nuclear Reactor Using Water/Silver Nanofluid
Nuclear Engineering and Technology (2018)
Google Scholar
[13]
S. Whitaker
The Method of Volume Averaging
Kluwer Academic Publishers, London (1999)
Google Scholar
[14]
A.G. Malan, R.W. Lewis
Modelling coupled heat and mass transfer in drying non‐hygroscopic capillary particulate materials
Int. J. Numer. Methods Bio., 19 (9) (2003), pp. 669-677
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[15]
C.A. Aggelopoulos, C.D. Tsakiroglou
The longitudinal dispersion coefficient of soils as related to the variability of local permeability
Water Air Soil Pollut., 185 (1-4) (2007), pp. 223-237
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[16]
G.E. Kapellos, T.S. Alexiou, A.C. Payatakes
A multiscale theoretical model for diffusive mass transfer in cellular biological media
Math. Biosci., 210 (1) (2007), pp. 177-237
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[17]
C.H. Bruneau, I. Mortazavi
Numerical modelling and passive flow control using porous media
Comput. Fluids, 37 (5) (2008), pp. 488-498
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[18]
C.C. Frippiat, A.E. Holeyman
A comparative review of upscaling methods for solute transport in heterogeneous porous media
J. Hydrol., 362 (1) (2008), pp. 150-176
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[19]
R. Banki, H. Hoteit, A. Firoozabadi
Mathematical formulation and numerical modeling of wax deposition in pipelines from enthalpy–porosity approach and irreversible thermodynamics
Int. J. Heat Mass Trans., 51 (13) (2008), pp. 3387-3398
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[20]
V. Gurau, J.A. Mann Jr.
A critical overview of computational fluid dynamics multiphase models for proton exchange membrane fuel cells
SIAM J. Appl. Math., 70 (2) (2009), pp. 410-454
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[21]
M. Dentz, P. Gouze, J. Carrera
Effective non-local reaction kinetics for transport in physically and chemically heterogeneous media
J. Contam. Hydrol., 120 (2011), pp. 222-236
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[22]
P. De Jaeger, C. T'Joen, H. Huisseune, B. Ameel, M. De Paepe
An experimentally validated and parameterized periodic unit-cell reconstruction of open-cell foams
J. Appl. Phys., 109 (10) (2011), Article 103519
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[23]
F. Zhou, N.E. Hansen, D.J. Geb, I. Catton
Obtaining closure for fin-and-tube heat exchanger modeling based on volume averaging theory (VAT)
J. Heat Transf., 133 (11) (2011), Article 111802
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[24]
Generation IV International Forum
A Technology Roadmap for Generation IV Nuclear Energy Systems
Issued by the U.S. DOE Nuclear Energy Research Advisory Committee and the Generation IV International Forum (2002)
GIF-002-00
Google Scholar
[25]
IAEA
Status of Fast Reactor Research and Technology Development
IAEA-TECDOC-1691, Vienna, Austria (2012)
Google Scholar
[26]
A. Facchini, V. Giusti, R. Ciolini, K. Tucek, D. Thomas, E. D'Agata
Delailed neutronic study of the power evolution for the European Sodium Fast Reactor during a positive insertion of reactivity
Nucl. Eng. Des., 313 (2017), pp. 1-9
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[27]
B. Wood
The role of scaling laws in upscaling
Adv. Water Res., 32 (2009), pp. 723-736
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[28]
F.A. Howes, S. Whitaker
The spatial averaging theorem revisited
Chem. Eng. Sci., 40 (1985), pp. 1387-1392
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[29]
T.B. Anderson, R. Jackson
A fluid mechanical description of fluidized beds
Ind. Eng. Chem. Fundam., 6 (1967), pp. 527-539
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[30]
S. Whitaker
Diffusion and dispersion in porous media
AICHE J., 13 (1967), pp. 420-427
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[31]
J.C. Slattery
Flow of viscoelastic fluids through porous media
AICHE J., 13 (1967), pp. 1066-1071
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[32]
F. Valdés-Parada
Integral formulation for the solution of closure problems in upscaling processes
Rev. Mex. Ing. Quím., 9 (2010), pp. 53-66
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[33]
C. Aguilar-Madera, F. Valdés-Parada, B. Goyeau, A. Ochoa-Tapia
One-domain approach for heat transfer between a porous medium and fluid
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 54 (2011), pp. 2089-2099
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[34]
M. Quintard, S. Whitaker
Transport in chemically and mechanically heterogeneous porous media IV: large-scale mass equilibrium for solute transport with adsorption
Adv. Water Resour., 22 (1998), pp. 33-57
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[35]
J.H. Cushman
Dynamics of Fluids in Hierarchical Porous Media
Academic Press, London (1990)
Google Scholar
[36]
B. Goyeau, D. Benihaddadene, D. Gobin, M. Quintard
Averaged momentum equation for flow through a nonhomogeneous porous structure
Transp. Porous Media, 28 (1997), pp. 19-50
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[37]
Y. Davit, et al.
Homogenization via formal multiscale asymptotics and volume averaging: How do the two techniques compare?
Adv. Water Res., 62 (2013), pp. 178-206
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[38]
J.L. Auriault, H.I. Ene
Macroscopic modeling of heat transfer in composites with interfacial thermal barrier
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 37 (18) (1994), p. 2885
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[39]
Benchmark for Uncertainty Analysis in Modelling (UAM) for Design, Operation and Safety Analysis of SFRs, Core Definitions
AEN-WPRS (2017)
Google Scholar
[40]
A.E. Waltar, D.R. Todd, P.V. Tsvetkov
Fast Spectrum Reactors
Springer, New York (2012), p. 720
p
Google Scholar
[41]
C.G Aguilar-Madera, G. Espinosa-Paredes, L. Molina-Espinosa
Time-dependent neutron diffusion coefficient for the effective diffusion equation
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 112 (2019), pp. 20-30
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[42]
F. Municchi, M. Icardi
Generalized multirate models for conjugate transfer in heterogeneous materials
Phys. Rev. Res., 2 (2020), pp. 1-12, 10.1103/PhysRevResearch.2.013041
Google Scholar
[43]
C. Moyne
Two-equation model for a diffusive process in porous media using the volume averaging method with an unsteady-state closure
Adv. Water Res., 20 (2-3) (1997), pp. 63-76
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar