<title>Applying second law of thermodynamic for optimization of horizontal steam generator</title>
<author>1,M.E.Bahmanyar,2,N.Taheranpour,3,S.Talebi</author>
<Affiliation>1,Department of Energy Engineering and Physics, Amirkabir University of Technology (Tehran Polytechnic), 424 Hafez Ave., Tehran, P.O. Box 15875-4413, Iran</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2021.103636</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0149197021000081</URL>
Applying second law of thermodynamic for optimization of horizontal steam generator
M.E.Bahmanyar,N.Taheranpour,S.Talebi
Department of Energy Engineering and Physics, Amirkabir University of Technology (Tehran Polytechnic), 424 Hafez Ave., Tehran, P.O. Box 15875-4413, Iran
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Thermal-hydraulic of horizontal steam generator (SG) was modeled.
•
Entropy generation is applied to design optimization.
•
Effects of important parameters were investigated on SG entropy generation.
•
Decreasing the entropy generation enhances the performance of SG.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
One of the essential components in a pressurized water reactor is the steam generator (SG) that has an important role in efficiency of nuclear power plants. In the present work, a horizontal steam generator (HSG) was investigated based on entropy generation as a consequence of second law of thermodynamic. The thermal hydraulic operation parameters were calculated by considering a single-phase model for the primary loop related to the tube and two-phase model for the secondary loop related to steam generator shell. Then, the effect of each parameter against different constraints such as length-to-diameter ratio, mass flow rate, tube diameter, and inlet temperature on the generated entropy was investigated. To validate the physical equations and the framework used in this model, the results of the developed code are compared with the research articles related to enthalpy generation. The results showed that a significant increase in length-to-diameter ratio and tube diameter resulted in a decrease in entropy generation number (EGN). Therefore, it is concluded that decreasing the entropy generation enhances the performance of steam generators as well as their economic efficiency.
cGraphical abstract</Section>
Image 1
Keywords:VVER-1000 reactor;Entropy generation,Steam generator,Thermal hydraulic
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
One of the essential components widely used in nuclear power plants (NPP) is the steam generator, which according to the design of NPP, has a different variety. Generally, a nuclear steam generator has two main roles: producing vapor for a turbine generator, which is provided by the transferred heat from the primary coolant loop to secondary coolant loop; acting as a barrier to prevent leakage of the radioactive water from the primary to the secondary loop. In this study, the VVER-1000 steam generator designed horizontally was used. The main feature of the primary loop is single-phase flow and the secondary loop is two-phase. As a result, modeling and analyzing a HSG is so complex. Munshi and et al., 1985 simulated transient conditions of the primary loop in a PWR steam generator using a simplified two-fluid computer code. Two-dimensional model of the HSG was developed using RELAP code by Zarifi et al. (2009). Abbasi and Hadad (2012) studied two important accidents that occurred in the secondary loop of a VVER-1000 nuclear reactor by RELAP/Mod3.2 code. Due to the considerable energy losses in thermal systems, limitation of energy resources and growth of population, the development of energy systems is essential. At present, more than 440 nuclear power units are operating in the world. Therefore, an analysis of the steam generator can help to improve the power plant efficiency. There are a lot of methods to optimize thermodynamic systems, one of them is entropy generation which is based on the second law of thermodynamics and has been widely used in recent years. According to it, the entropy changes in every system is due to the existed irreversibilities. These undesirable irreversibilities are calculated by the entropy generation number. In fact, the performance of thermal systems such as a steam generator is improved by minimizing entropy generation. Bejan, 2002 determined several basic methods for minimizing entropy generation. These methods were very efficient and enable designers to search for the best performance range to design constraints. Much research has been conducted on the entropy generation of thermodynamic systems. Bejan, 1980 made a thermodynamic optimization on heat exchangers by the entropy generation number. In this way, the amount of usable energy wasted in the heat exchanger can be provided. However, many researchers have studied the optimization and development of various systems using the EGM method. Grazzini and Gori, 1988 defined two different entropy generation numbers. Then, the value of the three entropy generator numbers was evaluated according to NTU at several mass flow rates. Oğulata et al., 2000 investigated a cross-flow heat transfer to minimize entropy generation. Then, the variation of some operating parameters such as mass flux, dimensionless, and heat transfer area against entropy generation was studied and the results were close to the experimental samples. (Ordóñez and Bejan, 2000) reported on entropy generation minimization (EGM) in a simple parallel-plate counter flow heat exchanger. They optimized the design of thermal systems by changing the external and internal geometric features. Lerou et al. (2005) conducted a similar study on counter flow heat exchanger geometry. Zhou et al. (2014) optimized the plate heat exchanger by minimizing entropy generation. They showed that the geometric parameters of heat exchanger can be optimized by a specific heat transfer ratio. Cheng et al. (2008) investigated the optimization of tubes and shell side of heat exchangers using the genetic algorithm by minimizing the entropy generation. Unlike the single-phase type in thermal systems, slightly researches have been conducted on the two-phase type. Goudarzi and Talebi, 2015a, Goudarzi and Talebi, 2015b carried out a study on two-phase and single-phase natural circulation based on entropy generation method. Hermes, 2012 proposed a thermodynamic model based on minimizing the entropy generation for optimal design of evaporators and condensers. This study emphasizes that high efficiency does not mean better thermodynamic performance. Talebi , 2014 investigated the different thermal-hydraulic effects on entropy generation using a drift flux model. They showed that uniform distribution of power in boiling channel can be effective in improving the entropy generation. Revellin et al., 2009 proposed two different methods for modeling two-phase flows: 1. Two-phase model 2. Mixed model. Moreover, they demonstrated entropy generation for mix oil refrigerant and pure refrigerant to calculate the optimization parameters such as pipe diameter, smooth pipe and reinforced pipe. Reddy et al. (2002) used the second law of thermodynamic for waste heat recovery. It was concluded that the temperature difference between water steam and hot gases has considerable effect on irreversibility. The main purpose of this study is to analyze the nuclear steam generator based on the second law of thermodynamics. First, thermal calculations were performed along with the momentum equation. Then, the effect of the operational conditions such as mass flow rate, water inlet temperature and geometric constraints, which include tube diameter ratio and length-to-diameter ratio (l/dout), on the HSG entropy generation was studied. Afterwards, the transferred heat, pumping power, and effectiveness against the tube diameter ratio and length to diameter parameters were investigated. So far, analysis of thermodynamic performance for a nuclear horizontal steam generator has not been reported by the entropy generation method. The results presented a new approach for an optimum design of the SG, which helped to improve the power plant performance.
<Section>2. Description of system</Section>
In nuclear power plants, the heat generated in the fuel as a result of the nuclear fission is transferred by the horizontal pipes of the steam generator from the primary coolant loop (sub-cooled pressurized coolant) to secondary coolant loop. Fig. 1 shows the schematic of the horizontal steam generator in longitudinal and cross-sectional view. The hot water of reactor enters the hot collector via hot leg, then by passing through the horizontal pipes exit the SG through the cold collector. Therefore, heat transfer takes place through the walls of the horizontal pipes. In the secondary side, the steam-water mixture is circulated between the tubes and heated to the saturated temperature. Moreover, the mixture of water and steam flows upward via the tube bundle. The separated liquid comes down via the downcomer, then, the dry steam leaves the SG and directed to the collector.
Fig. 1
Fig. 1. Schematic of the horizontal steam generator; a: longitudinal view, b: cross-sectional view (Egorov, 2019).
Due to the structure of the SG, two models are required to simulate the SG. One is related to the single-phase flow of horizontal pipes and other is related to the two-phase flow of the shell side (FSAR, 2003; Zarifi et al., 2009).
<Section>3. Mathematical model</Section>
In the present work, the horizontal steam generator (HSG) of a VVER nuclear reactor is considered as a case study and its simplified schematic is shown in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2
Fig. 2. Schematic view of different regions of the horizontal steam generator (HSG).
According to Fig. 2, the purple region showed the primary loop. The secondary loop was divided into 4 segments; downcomer, separator, tube bundle, and the mixer. The mixer section is located between the two volume of separator and tube bundle, into which the feedwater was sprayed. To simplify, the effective assumptions are considered as follows: The inlet feed water was in the liquid state, quality of steam at the separator outlet was 100% and water throughout the tube side was at the single-phase condition (FSAR, 2003). Moreover, the whole water in tube bundle region (red region) is considered as an upward two-phase flow. Instead of several pipes of different lengths in this work, a single pipe with different lengths is considered. In addition, the reversal flow in the secondary and primary loop was ignored. The thermal-physical properties of fluid were dependent on temperature and pressure and were not constant.
<Section>4. Entropy generation formulation</Section>
Entropy plays a key role in irreversible processes so that the efficiency of the system is reduced compared to the reversible processes due to entropy generation. In other words, the entropy generation in an irreversible process is a criterion for measuring deviation from the reversible process. The factors and parameters that reduce entropy generation and increase system efficiency are of particular importance. To investigate the effect of these parameters (heat transfer and friction) on the entropy generation, the second law of thermodynamics is analyzed. The entropy changes for a closed system are equal to (Sonntag et al., 2015):
@(1)
Most mechanical-thermal processes are characterized by heat transfer and fluid friction losses. Analysis of the second law of thermodynamics seeks to minimize these losses by minimizing entropy generation. Non-Dimensional entropy generation due to heat transfer and fluid friction can be calculated as follows (Revellin et al., 2009):
@(2)
According to the second law of thermodynamics, entropy production is always greater than zero, so by minimizing the entropy production, the thermal efficiency of the system can be improved. The first law of the thermodynamics can be expressed as follows (Sonntag et al., 2015):
@(3)
@ and@are the change in heat added to system, internal energy, and work done by the system. The entropy of the system and work done is equal to (Sonntag et al., 2015):
@(4)
@(5)
By replacing Eqs.4, 5 in Eq.3 we have:
@(6)
By defining a new property called Enthalpy, this relation can be written as follows.
@(7)
By deriving the enthalpy of system and applying the first and second law of thermodynamics in Eq. (7), entropy generation can be obtained as follows (Revellin et al., 2009; Azwan Shaedi et al., 2019):
@(8)
@(9)
@(10)
The change in the fluid energy is equal to:
@(11)
@(12)
@(13)
@(14)
@(15)
@(16)
As can be seen, the entropy generation consists of two parts: the first part is related to heat transfer and second part is related to pressure drop. By minimizing entropy generation for a set of SG regions, we improve the SG thermal efficiency based on parameters affecting entropy generation. These parameters include outlet temperature, mass flux, tube diameter, and l/dout which determine the pressure drop. In the following, we obtain two parts related to pressure drop and heat transfer for different regions of SG by combining the first law of thermodynamics with heat transfer and the equations governing pressure drop.
4.1. Combining thermodynamics with heat transfer
Numerical calculations in exergy and energy topics are performed based on the control volume. Due to the complexity of phenomena in a horizontal steam generator, the thermal analysis is too complicated to perform. To solve this problem, each region should be considered as a control volume. Therefore, by considering parameters at the inlet of primary and secondary loop such as mass flow rate, pressure and temperature, we can calculate the heat transferred from the primary loop to the secondary loop as well as output parameters by coupling the heat transfer equation with continuity equations. The thermodynamics of the system consists of accounting for the first law of thermodynamics as follows (Bergman et al., 2011; Bejan, 1995):
@(17)
@(18)
@(19)
The flow in the primary loop is considered as single-phase and in the secondary loop as two-phase. The first law of thermodynamics for the primary and secondary loop is written as follows.
@(20)
@(21)
where @ is the heat transfer rate transferred from the horizontal pipes to the secondary coolant loop.
The subscripts p, s, o, and i indicate respectively the primary and secondary side as well as the outlet and inlet of the SG. The heat transfer Q̇ from the primary to secondary loop can be obtained as follows (Massoud, 2006).
@(22)
@(23)
The mean logarithm of temperature is equal to:
@(24)
where Tp, out,Tp,in, and A are the outlet and inlet temperature of the primary loop and external area of the tube, respectively. The overall heat transfer coefficient (U) is equal to (Massoud, 2006):
@(25)
where Ui and U0 are the overall heat transfer coefficient based on the internal and external tube diameter.
The overall heat transfer coefficient from the primary loop to the secondary loop can be obtained as the sum of the thermal resistance of each material in the heat transfer due to the temperature difference. The schematic view of the primary and secondary loop, as well as the horizontal tube and thermal resistance from the primary fluid to the secondary fluid, are shown in Fig. 3, Fig. 4 (Massoud, 2006):where @,@ and@are the single-phase heat transfer coefficient associated with primary fluid, two-phase heat transfer coefficient associated with secondary fluid and tube thermal conductivity, respectively. By substituting Eq. (26) in Eq. (22), the heat transfer rate transferred from the horizontal tube to steam generator shell is expressed as follows:
@(27)
htp is the two-phase heat transfer coefficient related to the secondary fluid and hsp is the single-phase heat transfer coefficient related to primary fluid which is obtained as follows (Massoud, 2006):
@(28)
Fig. 3
Fig. 3. Schematics of a simple shell and tube.
Fig. 4
Fig. 4. Electric resistance for heat conduction in cylinder pipe with multiple layers.
@(26)
The following relationship is used to calculate the heat transfer coefficient in a wide range of flow regimes such as sub-cooled, saturation, and forced convection evaporation. In this study, we use Chen's correlation to calculate the convection heat transfer coefficient due to forced convective and nucleate boiling in the shell side as follows (Chen, 1966).
@(29)
The first term in Eq. (29) used for sub-cooled regime and improves the Dittus Boelter equation by factor f. The second term in Eq. (29) used for nucleate boiling and improves (Forster and Zuber, 1955) correlation by factor S. The F and S factors are obtained by:
@(30)
Otherwise
@(31)
where:
@(32)
@(33)
where ΔT and ΔP can be expressed as:
@(34)
where Pw and Tsat are the saturation pressure and saturation temperature based on the wall temperature and shell pressure.
Based on the above statements, the heat transfer coefficient is not uniform. For this reason, the average heat transfer coefficient is calculated by merging the local heat transfer with the area of the horizontal tubes and dividing them by total area of the surface (Ayhan and Sökmen, 2016). One of the important parameters in evaluating the performance of steam generators is a effectiveness, which is equal to the actual to maximum ratio of the heat transfer rate Referring to (Massoud, 2006; Laskowski et al., 2015). The effectiveness of a SG is defined as follows:
@(35)
4.2. Equations governing pressure drop
The total pressure drop due to the change in potential, kinetic, and the fraction is sum of the momentum pressure drop, static pressure drop, and friction on the wall (Jong-Taek et al., 2015).
@(36)
Pressure drop due to elevation head for two-phase fluid is given by:
@(37)
@(38)
There is no change in elevation for horizontal pipe (H = 0) so pressure drop due to static is zero. The momentum pressure drop due to the variation of kinetics energy in two-phase fluid calculated as follows (Jong-Taek et al., 2015; Massoud, 2006):
@(39)
where@are the void fraction, vapor quality, and mass flux, respectively.
@(40)
The fraction pressure drop in single phase given by:
@(41)
@(42)
@(43)
In this study, Taborek, Ishihara, and Palen correlation has been used to predict the two-phase friction coefficient.
@(44)
@(45)
@(46)
where N, and f are the number of rows and single-phase friction factor for tube bundle. The experimental value of, which is the multiplier factor for the two-phase fluid, is as follows (Jong-Taek et al., 2015; Massoud, 2006):
@(47)
In which the X is obtained as follows:
@(48)
@(49)
Local pressures drop in two phase and single phase given by (Massoud, 2006; Todreas and Kazimi, 2011):
@(50)
@(51)
@(52)
As previously mentioned, entropy generation consists of two separate parts: pressure drop and heat transfer. Therefore, in order to calculate entropy generation in SG, it is necessary to calculate the pressure drop and heat transfer coefficient. The flow in horizontal pipe is single-phase and in shell side is two-phase, so pressure drop in horizontal pipes is equal to (Massoud, 2006):
@(53)
fsp in the above equation is calculated from the Halland correlation (Jong-Taek et al., 2015):
@(54)
The pressure drop in shell side is obtained from the calculation of momentum equation for each section. To do this, the value of the mass flow rate in each section must be calculated. By taking the mass flow rate in downcomer (ṁd), mass flow rate in other sections using mass conservation equation can be written in terms of ṁd. According to Fig. 5, to calculate pressure drop in closed-loop, it is necessary to solve the momentum equation to determine the ṁd value.
Fig. 5
Fig. 5. Process flow diagram (PFD) in the HSG
Therefore, the mass flow rate of downcomer (ṁd) can be calculated with acceptable accuracy.
According to the flow diagram in the steam generator, the saturated liquid separated from the saturated vapor along with the mixing water of feed-water moves down from the point I through the down-comer, then by removing the heat from the horizontal tubes, enters the steam generator shell and moves up to point IV. Finally, the saturated vapor separated from the two-phase fluid and enters the steam turbine (Zarifi et al., 2009). The total pressure drop along the closed-loop (I, II, III, IV) is equal to zero. It is necessary to calculate the pressure drop in four regions, which include pressure drop in down-comer (ΔPI,II), local pressure drop (ΔPII,III), pressure drop in tube bundle (ΔPIII,IV), and pressure drop in dryer-separator (ΔPIV,I)
@(55)
The fluid in the down-comer is assumed to be saturated liquid state. In this case, the pressure drop in the down-comer is equal to:
@(56)
where H is the height from the bottom of the steam generator to the perforated sheet; f can be obtained from Eq. (54); Dd, Ad and ṁd are the hydraulic diameter, area and downcomer mass flow rate. The local pressure drop at the lower part of the tubes is calculated as follows:
@(57)
where KII,III is the local friction factor at the lower part of SG (Massoud, 2006). The pressure drop in the tube bundle consists of three parts: gravitational, momentum, frictional parts. By considering every row of the tubes as a segment, the pressure drop can be calculated as follows:
@(58)
where G is the mass flux and ρ and α are the local density and void fraction, respectively. As, in tube bundle, the area perpendicular to flow changes by changing the elevation, according the assumptions, the value of G can be defined as (G = ṁd/Aseg). it is assumed that quality increases with height at constant rate (Vijayan et al., 2005; Ayhan and Sökmen, 2016). Here, f2φ is the two-phased friction factor. In this study, f2φ can be obtained by consolini method which is based on (Zukauskas, 1983) friction factor as follows:
@(59)
@(60)
@(61)
In Eqs. (59), (61), k and f are a parameter accounting for geometry and single friction factor; for a staggered array such as, k ≈ 1 and Gref = 400 kg s-1. The total pressure drop in dryer can be estimated as follows:
@(62)
where@and ṁs are the local friction factor in the separator and feedwater mass flow rates, respectively. Finally, by substituting Eqs. (62), (56) in Eq. (55), an equation in terms of ṁd is obtained in which the value of ṁd is calculated by solving the equation. An important aspect in heat exchangers is total pumping power which can be obtained as follows:
@(63)
<Section>5. Entropy generation in steam generator</Section>
Entropy generation in the steam generator occurs due to three main sources of irreversibility on both sides: The heat transfer due to the temperature difference between the wall of the horizontal tubes and the cooling around it, pressure drop due to viscous flow and mixing effect. By assuming that the temperature difference of the walls of the tubes is negligible, the irreversibility within the steam generator is treated as an adiabatic open system. For this reason, the total entropy generation is obtained based on the sum of the entropy changes of incompressible fluid as follows (Revellin et al., 2009; Azwan Shaedi et al., 2019):
(64)
The first term in Eq. (64) is devoted to the irreversibility of heat transfer and the second term is related to pressure drop due to fluid fraction. Subsequently, entropy generation must be calculated for six irreversibility regions, which include horizontal tube, down-comer, tube bundle, mixer, and local regions.
5.1. Entropy generation associated with the horizontal tubes
Entropy changes for tube can be calculated as:
@(65)
where Δp, and Tlm are the pressure drop and the average temperature logarithm in the horizontal tubes, respectively. By replacing the pressure drop in Eq (65), the entropy generation in the horizontal tubes is obtained as follows:
@(66)
@(67)
5.2. Entropy generation associated with the down-comer
Heat transfer does not take place across the down-comer, so the first term related to heat transfer irreversibility in Eq (64) is omitted. By placing the pressure drop obtained for the down-comer in Eq (68), the entropy changes along the down-comer are expressed as follows.
@(68)
5.3. Entropy generation associated with tube bundles
Based on dh = cp. dT, the entropy generation can be written as follows.
@(69)
By placing the pressure drop obtained for tube bundle in Eq (69), the entropy generation associated with tube bundles can be calculated as:
@(70)
where ṁd, hb2 and hb1 are the mass flow rate of the downcomer as well as the enthalpy of the saturated liquid (Tsat) at the outlet and inlet of the tube bundle.
5.4. Entropy generation in mixer
Entropy changes at the entrance of the separator can be written as follows.
@(72)
where hmix is the enthalpy of the mixture of feedwater and outlet flow of the tube bundle.
5.5. Entropy generation in local regions
Local pressure drop occurs at the bottom of the separator and downcomer. Therefore, entropy generation related to local friction is computed as follows: (Massoud, 2006; Todreas and Kazimi, 2011):
@(73)
@(74)
The total entropy generation for the steam generator is equal to the sum of the entropy production of the regions:
@(75)
In addition, the entropy generation number can be defined as follows (Bejan, 1982):
@(76)
<Section>6. Results and discussion</Section>
The main purpose of this work was to introduce the opportunities that improve the efficiency of the steam generator. The influence of geometrical constraints and operation variables on entropy was investigated. Moreover, some parameters essential in optimizing the performance of the heat exchanger such as the effectiveness, heat transfer rate, entropy generation number, pumping power parameter and Bejan number compare to the generated entropy was studied. The results show that the efficiency of the SG is improved by reducing the irreversibility of the processes. As a case study, a typical VVER-1000 steam generator is considered. Table 1 summarizes the technical data of VVER-1000 steam generator.
Table 1. Characteristic of VVER-100 horizontal steam generator (FSAR, 2003).
The comparison of the calculated thermal power, outlet temperature, and void fraction in the present work with the values of the VVER-1000 FSAR and similar research is summarized in Table 2 and Table 3. The thermal parameters results were very close to other studies and the average void fraction was between the void fraction around the hot and cold leg. For high differences in average logarithmic temperature, low Prandtl number and high Reynolds number, the entropy generated due to heat transfer is much more than the friction (Yilmaz et al., 2001). Therefore, the results indicated that the proposed model of the steam generator had sufficient accuracy and the assumptions were effective.
Table 2. Comparison of horizontal steam generator design parameters with present results, RELAP code results and FSAR reference.
Table 3. Comparison of void fraction at the secondary side outlet of HSG.
To study the effect of inlet temperature on performance of the steam generator, the variation of the dimensionless entropy generation, as well as the effectiveness, was investigated in Fig. 6. Assuming the constant mass flow rate and geometrical parameter, this study was performed at different inlet temperatures in the primary. According to Fig. 6a, for a specific inlet temperature in the tube, increasing the feedwater inlet temperature reduces the entropy generation number. Moreover, for a certain inlet temperature of feedwater, an increase in the temperature at the primary side leads to a decrease in the EGN. Fig. 6b shows the effect of the inlet temperature on the effectiveness. However, if the inlet temperature of one side was considered constant and the other side increased and vice versa, in both cases, the effectiveness was reduced continuously. Comparison of Fig. 6a and b indicated that the increase of the entropy generation number led to an increase in the effectiveness, which is not in agreement with the thermodynamic analysis. Effectiveness depends only on heat transfer and pressure drop is not considered. Thus, entropy generation method is a better tool to improve the performance.
Fig. 6
Fig. 6. a. EGN versus inlet temperature of the secondary loop with a different values of the inlet temperature of primary loop. b. effectiveness versus inlet temperature of the secondary loop with a different values of the inlet temperature of primary loop.
The change in the entropy generation number against the inlet mass flow rate of feedwater and horizontal tubes is shown in Fig. 7. Also, it is observed that for a specified mass flow rate at the primary loop, EGN increases with increasing mass flow rate at the secondary loop. Moreover, it can be seen that for the constant mass flow rate at the secondary loop, an increase in the mass flow rate at the primary loop leads to a decrease in EGN.
Fig. 7
Fig. 7. EGN versus secondary mass flow rate with different values of primary mass flow rate.
The EGN and effectiveness were plotted against the tube diameter ratio in the format of the heat transfer area ratio in Fig. 8a. As shown in Fig. 8a, increasing the outer diameter of tube for fixed diameter ratios led to an increment in the EGN. For a known value of the outside diameter of horizontal tube, increasing the diameter ratio leads to a decrease in EGN. As expected, entropy generation is inversely related to effectiveness. Therefore, the performance of steam generators increases by minimizing the entropy generation. Bejan number is equal to the ratio of heat transfer irreversibility to total irreversibility and is considered as a criterion to show the importance of the generated entropy by the heat transfer. Inner to outer diameter variation against (Be) is illustrated in Fig. 8b. According to Fig. 8b, the Be was close to the unity and more than 0.5, the entropy generated due to the heat transfer was much more than the friction. An increase in the ratio of the inner diameter to outside diameter of the tube leads to an increase in the Be number. According to previous studies, the generated entropy related to the heat transfer is due to the difference in temperature, and absolute temperature. Therefore, the high temperature difference caused greater irreversibility. Since the effectiveness depends on the temperature difference, more differences between the temperatures of each side of the heat exchanger caused greater effectiveness. In other words, if the other parameters were assumed to be constant, the reduction in irreversibility caused increases the efficiency of the steam generator, which resulted in an improvement in the power plant performance. In addition, the heat transfer rate and pumping power against the inner diameter to outer diameter for the d-out known are illustrated in Fig .8b. As can be seen, by assuming a constant outer diameter of the pipe, increasing the inside diameter of the pipe leads to a decrease in the pumping power and heat transfer rate.
Fig. 8
Fig. 8. a. Effectiveness and EGN versus the inside to outside diameter ratio. b. pumping power and Bejan number versus the inside to outside diameter ratio.
The change in the entropy generation number versus length-to-diameter ratio (l/dout) for different external diameters is shown in Fig. 9a. As shown in Fig. 9a, for fixed values of the length-to-diameter ratio, entropy generation increased with increasing in d-out. In addition, for a fixed d-out, the heat transfer area increased by increasing the average length that leads to a better heat transfer rate. Fig. 9b demonstrates the impact of l/dout on the heat transfer rate and pumping power for a specified tube outside diameter (dout = 0.014 m).
Fig. 9
Fig. 9. a. effectiveness and EGN versus the length to outside diameter ratio. b. pumping power and Bejan number versus the length to outside diameter ratio.
As can be seen, increasing the l/dout leads to a decrease in heat transfer rate. Moreover, changes in the tube length affect the pressure drop and lead to increase the pumping power.
<Section>7. Conclusion</Section>
In this study, the analysis of the second law of thermo-dynamics is performed to determine the generated entropy in a VVER horizontal steam generator. The main purpose was to carry out a study into the changes of entropy generation against various operational and constructional constraints. The calculation was made by considering two control volumes. Each volume was divided into smaller sections and the required parameters were calculated using conservation and heat transfer equations. After comparing the results with the values of the VVER-1000 NPP FSAR, the effect of the total entropy generation, heat transfers and pressure drop in form of pumping power were investigated against parameters such as inlet temperature, tube diameter ratio, inlet mass flow rate, and tube l/dout.
It can be concluded that for constant values of outside diameter of tube, inlet temperature, and mass flow rate, the entropy generation decreased with decreasing in the tube thickness and increasing in the heat transfer area (l/dout parameter). Furthermore, effectiveness in most cases has a significant relationship with the EGN so that an increase in entropy production will lead to a decrease in effectiveness. However, this relationship was different for various water inlet temperatures.
The present work is unique in the literature on the investigation of generated entropy in VVER steam generator. However, only the impact of heat transfer and the pressure drop was analyzed. The steam generator is a complex device and has a lot of parameters that the designer should consider all of them. Therefore, the obtained results have a lot of advantages for designers to assist them in the best decision.
<Section>Credit author statement</Section>
Navid Taheranpour: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Writing- Original draft preparation, Writing- Reviewing and Editing, Investigation. Saeed Talebi: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Supervision, Reviewing & Editing, Investigation. M.E.Bahmanyar: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Data Curation, Writing- Reviewing & Editing, Investigation.
<Section>Declaration of competing interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Appendix A. Supplementary data</Section>
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:
Multimedia component 1.
Multimedia component 2.
<Section>References</Section>
Abbasi and Hadad, 2012
S. Abbasi, K. Hadad
Analysis of the loss of heat sink transients in the secondary circuit of a VVER-1000 using RELAP5/MOD3. 2
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 47 (2012), pp. 28-37
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ayhan and Sökmen, 2016
H. Ayhan, C.N. Sökmen
Investigation of passive residual heat removal system for VVERs: effects of finned type heat exchanger tubes
Appl. Therm. Eng., 108 (2016), pp. 466-474
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Azwan Shaedi et al., 2019
S. Azwan Shaedi, N. Mohd Ghazali, O. Jong Taek, R. Ahmad
Entropy generation minimization of two-phase flow in a mini channel with genetic algorithm
J. Nov. Carbon Resour. Sci. Green Asia Strat., 6 (1) (2019), pp. 39-43
Google Scholar
Bejan, 1980
A. Bejan
Second law analysis in heat transfer
Energy, 5 (1980), pp. 720-732
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bejan, 1982
A. Bejan
Second-law analysis in heat transfer and thermal design
Adv. Heat Tran., ume I5 (1982)
Google Scholar
Bejan, 1995
A. Bejan
Entropy Generation Minimization: the Method of Thermodynamic Optimization of Finite-Size Systems and Finite-Time Processes
Taylor & Francis (1995)
Google Scholar
Bejan, 2002
A. Bejan
Fundamentals of exergy analysis, entropy generation minimization, and the generation of flow architecture
Int. J. Energy Res., 26 (2002)
0-43
Google Scholar
Bergman et al., 2011
T.L. Bergman, F.P. Incropera, D.P. DeWitt, A.S. Lavine
Fundamentals of Heat and Mass Transfer
Wiley (2011)
Google Scholar
Chen, 1966
J.C. Chen
Correlation for boiling heat transfer to saturated fluids in convective ﬂow
Ind. Eng. Chem. Process Des. Dev., 5 (1966), pp. 322-329
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Cheng et al., 2008
L. Cheng, J. Guo, M. Xu
Optimization design of shell-and-tube heat exchanger by entropy generation minimization and genetic algorithm
Appl. Therm. Eng., 29 (2008), pp. 2954-2960
Google Scholar
Egorov, 2019
M.Y. Egorov
Vertical steam generators for VVER NPPs
Nuclear Energy and Technology, 5 (1) (2019), pp. 31-38
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Forster and Zuber, 1955
H. Forster, N. Zuber
Dynamics of vapor bubbles and boiling heat transfer
AIChE J., 1 (1955), pp. 531-535
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
FSAR, 2003
FSAR
Final Safety Analysis Report (FSAR) for VVER-1000 Reactor, Ministry of Russian Federation of Atomic Energy (Atomenergoproekt)
Russian Federation, Moscow (2003)
Google Scholar
Ghazanfari et al., 2014
V. Ghazanfari, G.R. Ansarifar, M.H. Esteki
Drift flux modeling of the VVER-1000 horizontal nuclear steam generator
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 76 (2014), pp. 36-43
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Goudarzi and Talebi, 2015a
N. Goudarzi, S. Talebi
An approach to stability analysis and entropy generation minimization in the single-phase natural circulation loops
Energy, 80 (2015), pp. 213-226
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Goudarzi and Talebi, 2015b
N. Goudarzi, S. Talebi
Improving performance of two-phase natural circulation loops by reducing of entropy generation
Energy, 93 (2015), pp. 882-899
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Grazzini and Gori, 1988
G. Grazzini, F. Gori
Entropy parameters for heat exchanger design
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 31 (1988), pp. 2547-2554
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hermes, 2012
C. Hermes
Thermodynamic Design of Condensers and Evaporators: Thermodynamic Design of Condensers and Evaporators: Formulation and Applications
(2012)
Google Scholar
Jong-Taek et al., 2015
O. Jong-Taek, C. Kwang, C. Nguyen-Ba
Pressure Drop and Heat Transfer during a Two-phase Flow Vaporization of Propane in Horizontal Smooth Mini-Channels
(2015)
Google Scholar
Laskowski et al., 2015
R. Laskowski, M. Jaworski, A. Smyk
Entropy generation in a condenser and related correlations
Arch. Therm., 36 (2015), pp. 27-48
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lerou et al., 2005
P. Lerou, T. Veenstra, J. Burger, H. Ter Brake, H. Rogalla
Optimization of counterflow heat exchanger geometry through minimization of entropy generation
Cryogenics, 45 (2005), pp. 659-669
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Massoud, 2006
M. Massoud
Engineering Thermofluids: Thermodynamics, Fluid Mechanics, and Heat Transfer
Springer Berlin Heidelberg (2006)
Google Scholar
Munshi et al., 1985
P. Munshi, R. Bhatnagar, K.S. Ram
Steam generator transient studies using a simplified two-fluid computer code
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 12 (1985), pp. 155-157
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Oğulata et al., 2000
R.T. Oğulata, F. Doba, T. Yilmaz
Irreversibility analysis of cross flow heat exchangers
Energy Convers. Manag., 41 (2000), pp. 1585-1599
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ordóñez and Bejan, 2000
J.C. Ordóñez, A. Bejan
Entropy generation minimization in parallel‐plates counterflow heat exchangers
Int. J. Energy Res., 24 (2000), pp. 843-864
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Rabiee et al., 2016
A. Rabiee, A.H. Kamalinia, K. Haddad
Horizontal steam generator thermal hydraulic simulation in typical steady and transient conditions
Nucl. Eng. Des., 305 (2016), pp. 465-475
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Reddy et al., 2002
B. Reddy, G. Ramkiran, K.A. Kumar, P. Nag
Second law analysis of a waste heat recovery steam generator
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 45 (2002), pp. 1807-1814
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Revellin et al., 2009
R. Revellin, S. Lips, S. Khandekar, J. Bonjour
Local entropy generation for saturated two-phase flow
Energy, 34 (2009), pp. 1113-1121
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Sonntag et al., 2015
R. Sonntag, Claus Borgnakke, J. Van Wylen
Fundamentals of Thermodynamics
(fifth ed.) (2015)
Google Scholar
Talebi, 2014
S. Talebi
Effect of thermal-hydraulic parameters on the entropy generation in a boiling channel
Multiphas. Sci. Technol., 26 (2014)
Google Scholar
Todreas and Kazimi, 2011
N. Todreas, M.S. Kazimi
Nuclear Systems I: Thermal Hydraulic Fundamentals
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (2011)
Google Scholar
Vijayan et al., 2005
P. Vijayan, M. Gartia, G. Rao, D. Pilkhwal, D. Saha
Steady State Behaviour of Single-phase and Two-phase Natural Circulation Loops
2nd RCM on the IAEA CRP, Corvallis, Oregon State University, USA (2005)
Google Scholar
Yilmaz et al., 2001
M. Yilmaz, O.N. Sara, S. Karsli
Performance evaluation criteria for heat exchangers based on second law analysis
Exergy An Int. J., 1 (2001), pp. 278-294
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zarifi et al., 2009
E. Zarifi, G.R. Jahanfarnia, S.K. Mousavian, F. D'Auria
Semi 2D modeling of the horizontal steam generator PGV-1000 using the RELAP5 code
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 51 (2009), pp. 788-798
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhou et al., 2014
Y. Zhou, L. Zhu, J. Yu, Y. Li
Optimization of plate-fin heat exchangers by minimizing specific entropy generation rate
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 78 (2014), pp. 942-946
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zukauskas, 1983
A. Zukauskas
Banks of plain and finned tubes
Heat Exchanger Design Handbook, Fluid Mechanics and Heat Transfer, 2 (1983)
224-221-224-217
Google Scholar