<title>Experimental study on the release of droplets via bubble bursting under different liquid phase conditions</title>
<author>1,HaoChen,2,HaifengGu,3,HuanwenLv,4,XiangYu,5,JunlongWang,6,HanyuLuo</author>
<Affiliation>1,College of Nuclear Science and Technology, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, 150001, China;2,Science and Technology on Reactor System Design Technology Laboratory, Nuclear Power Institute of China, Chengdu, 610213, China</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2020.103617</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0149197020303620</URL>
College of Nuclear Science and Technology, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, 150001, China
Science and Technology on Reactor System Design Technology Laboratory, Nuclear Power Institute of China, Chengdu, 610213, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
The distribution of quantity and sizes of droplets generated by bubble bursting at liquid surface under condition of distill water and TiO2 aerosols were study.
The entrainment of aerosols by bubble bursting at liquid surface under different conditions were study.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
When a gas passes through the surface of a liquid pool, bubbles are formed at the liquid surface.Thus, the liquid can be directly released into the atmosphere via bubble bursting above the pool surface.This phenomenon is prevalent in several fields, such as chemical industries marine aerosol environments, and nuclear engineering.If a liquid pool contains aerosols, the aforementioned phenomenon will directly become a means of releasing the through fall droplets.This is an important mechanism for releasing liquids and aerosols from pools.Therefore, it is important to study the phenomenon of bubble bursting and to derive the distribution of droplets to evaluate the mechanism of release.With this objective, an experimental visualization platform was designed; the process of bubble bursting was photographed using a high-speed camera,and the images were processed to obtain the distributions of the droplets released.The results shows that hundreds of droplets are formed via bubble bursting at the surface of the liquid, and the distribution of the droplets is different under different conditions of the liquid.In distilled water, the number of droplets formed via bubble bursting is less than in regular water, while the sizes of the droplets increase with an increase in temperature.Furthermore, in a suspension of TiO2at a temperature of about 16 °C, the mass concentration is not a key factor inthe release of the droplets.However, at high temperatures of about 50 °C and 77 °C,with an increasing mass concentration ofTiO2, the number of droplets formed via bubble bursting increases, while the dropletsizes decrease.This indicates that with an increase in the concentration of aerosols, more droplets and aerosols will be released via bubble bursting.
Keywords:High-speed camera;Aerosol;Bubble bursting;Distribution of droplets
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
When a gas passes through the surface of a liquid pool, the liquid phase will be entrained at the surface of the liquid pool.This phenomenon is prevalent in the chemical industry, marine aerosol environments, and especially in the field of nuclear engineering.During severe accidents, such as a core melt accident due to loss of coolant accidents (LOCAs), bubbles would be formed by decay heat.Droplets would be formed above the liquid surface via the bursting of these bubbles and would then be carried by gas flow, resulting in the droplets being released. Although the short-term effects of bubble bursting, such asthe release of aerosols,are not significant, it is important to estimate the long-term effects, such asthe release of radioactive materials, especially in the later stages of a severe accident (Günther et al., 2003). When the gas flow rate is low, the airflow forms bubble flows, and the bubbles burst at the surface of the pool, resulting in a large number of entrainment droplets. When the gas flow rate increases,the airflow rises in the form of turbulence, and droplets are formed during the direct momentum exchange between the airflow and the liquid.In this study, we focus primarily on entrainment ata low gas flow rate,and on the droplets generated via bubble bursting at the liquid surface.
Research on droplet release began as early as the last century.In an early study, Davis(Davis, 1940) (1940) analyzed the carryover of soluble salts caused by high-pressure steam in industrial boilers.From the experiments, Davis proposed that the mechanism of the droplet formation is as follows:initially, when the bubble cap bursts, the rim of the bubble sinks, and then the depressed portion at the bubble center rises due to the momentum of inflowing liquid and a spout is thrown upwards.Finally, separate droplets are formed under the action of surface tension.Although Davis collected droplets in an experimental study and made assumptions about the formation of the droplets, this hypothesis lacks strong confirmation,and he believed that the entrainment droplets are primarily formed via a single process.Subsequently, Newitt et al. (Knelman et al., 1954; Newitt et al., 1954)(1954) studied bubble bursting at a liquid level using a method involving photography and a microscopeloaded with an MgO-coated slide glass. With images of bubbles bursting and the information on droplets obtained using MgO-coated slide glass, they found that the entrainment droplets are primarily composed of two different types of droplets:a large group of droplets with small sizes and a small group of droplets with larger sizes. According to the images of the bubbles bursting and the distribution of the droplets, the authors speculated that the droplets were formed via two different processes. The entrainment droplets generated via bubble bursting at the liquid surface are divided into film droplets and jet droplets. The droplets formed from the cap film are called film droplets and are more in quantity but small in size.After the cap bursts, liquid drains into the dip at the surface and forms a jet that releases jet droplets, which are of a small quantity but larger in size. Although droplets were collected, thefilm droplets were mixed with jets droplets. With advancements in experimental technology, high-speed photographic equipment has improved greatly and is now extensively used in experimental study. Spiel(Spiel, 1994a, 1994b, 1998) (1993) investigated the release of droplets via bubble bursting for seawater and freshwater. With a high-speed camera, Spiel filmed the entire bubble breaking process and achieved a deeper understanding of bubble bursting: a tiny hole initially appears on the bubbleand is what leads to the bursting. A microscopeloaded with a slide glass coated with MgO was used to observe and measure the droplets.The distribution of the droplets for distilled water was obtained at room temperature.Spiel's research focuses primarily on the bubble crushing process and does not provide the distribution of the droplets produced via bubble bursting under different conditions. Meanwhile, engineering-related experiments on droplet entrainment have also been conducted, and they focus primarily on liquid entrainment under simulations of real severe accident conditions(Koch et al., 2000; Blanchard and Syzdek, 1988; Cosandey and von Rohr, 2001; Cosandey et al., 2003; Gupta, 2015).However, owing to the different research backgrounds, most studies have focused only on the amount of entrainment to fit the empirical approach of engineering. There is a dearth of mechanism analysis on the formation of droplets during the bubble crushing process.
From the reviews, we find that previous studies that addressed the mechanism were engineering studies.However, previous studies do not include a variable study of the mechanism of bubble breakage to form droplets. Furthermore, the engineering studies ignored the processes of carryover of the droplets. The data on droplets generated via bubble bursting at a liquid surface still require improvement. Consequently, we studied the phenomenon of single bubble bursts at a liquid surface via a visualization experiment and focused primarily on the process of bubble bursting, which produces small film dropletsthat are more easily carried from a pool. Images of the droplets were processed using an image processing program to obtain and study the distribution of the droplets, including thenumbers and sizes under different conditions.
<Section>2. Experimental method</Section>
A diagram of the experiment facilities used to study bubble bursting at a liquid surface is presented in Fig. 1. As shown in the diagram, the experimental platform consists primarily of three parts: turbid liquid preparation, heating, and a visual experiment, which involve the preparation of an aerosol solution, temperature control, and the visualization of bubble bursting, respectively. During the experiment, the liquid is prepared in a water tank for turbid liquid preparation is driven by a peristaltic pump to cycle through the pipes and tanks to keep the aerosols in uniform suspension in the water, creating a liquid phase circulated by a peristaltic pump.The driven liquid cycle through the pipes and overflows back into No.15 water tank in Fig. 1 through the opening at the top of the No.4 water tank in Fig. 1. And the aerosol concentration at the liquid surface is basically consistent with the concentration in the luqid body through intermittent overflow.The flows are heated via a coiler in the bath tank, andthe liquid pool environment required for the study is formed in the water tank of the visual experiment portion of the study. Air is dried and injected into the tank through an orifice plate to form continuous single bubbles. During the experiment, the bubble size is controlled by changing the size of the air cavity under the orifice plate. Bubbles form and rise in the water tank, eventually bursting at the surface of the liquid.This is recorded using high-speed photography.
Fig. 1. Experimental platform.
1 computer; 2 high-speed camera; 3 LED light; 4 water tank; 5 air compressor; 6 gas tank; 7 drying machine; 8 needle valve; 9 ball valve; 10 water pump; 11 coil; 12 water tank; 13 liquid level meter; 14 PID heater; 15 water tank; 16 peristaltic pump; 17 electric whisk; 18 PID heater.
The experiments were conducted on distilled water and TiO2 aerosol.The details of the conditions and the bubble sizes photographed by the high-speed camera are presented in Table 1. The bubble size is the curvature radius of the bubble cap on the liquid surface, which were obtained by fitting the contour curvature of bubbele cap.
Table 1. Experimental conditions.
The concentrations of aerosol in our experiments were the initial concentrations configured in the water tank (4). During the experiment, the concentration is monitored through a sampling port at the bottom of the water tank to ensure that the concentration remains stable. Polydisperse TiO2 particle aerosol was used in the experiments,and the particle sizes were measured in air by Aerosol Spectrometer System Promo 3000HP which can only measure particle size in air, and the particle size distribution in air are presented in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2. Particle size distribution of TiO2 in air.
Liquid properties under different conditions are shown in Fig. 3. The surface tension of aerosol suspension under different conditions were measured by using platinum plate method. And the Engler viscosity method is used to measure the Kinematie viscosity of the aerosol suspension under different conditions. As the liquid temperature increases, the surface tension decreases; as the aerosol concentration increases, the surface tension increases. Addition of aerosol has little effect on the viscosity of the liquid. Furthermore, the instability of the aerosol suspension will make it difficult to measure the properties precisely. So we can reduce the error of measurement by averaging multiple experiments and refining our operation during the experiment.
Fig. 3. Liquid properties under different conditions.
<Section>3. Processing of the images of bubbles bursting and releasing droplets</Section>
3.1. Divide the process of bubble bursting and preliminary image processing
During bubble bursting at the liquid surface, images were captured via high-speed photography and are shown in Fig. 4. The images show that the bubbles do not burst directly into droplets (Kim and No, 2005).From the successive images of the process of bubble bursting, we can divide this process into successive but separate stages based on the obvious characteristic changes.After beingformed at the liquid surface, the bubbles remain stable at the liquid surface, and the film is thinned via drainage under the action of gravity and surface tension. This stage is called drainage of the bubble cap.Then a tiny hole appears on the bubble cap, as shown in Fig. 4(a), and thefilm starts curling around the hole and liquid accumulates to form a ring, as shown in Fig. 4(c). This process can be described as the stage where the puncture appears and the film curls.Finally, when the mass of the liquid ring has accumulated to a certain mass, the ring breaks and forms liquid jets, with the flying jets breaking up to form dropletsthat elongate and fly away from the pool, as shown in Fig. 4(d), (e), and (f).
Fig. 4. Process of bubble busting.
After dividing the bubble bursting process into stages and analyzing the images, it is evident that the bubble liquid film is torn apart and eventually forms separate dropletsthat fly away in the last stage.The motion of multiple droplets in the last stage are captured clearly via high-speed photography.The images are stored ona computer as digital matrices; the values in the matrices correspond to the gray values in the images.
When the displacement of the droplets changes in continuous images, the distribution of the gray values in those images will also change. Based on the changes inthe gray values between the continuous images, the moving regions of multiple droplets can be determined, i.e., the images of the contours of multiple moving droplets can be obtained using the optical flow method to process the continuous images. This method is called the optical flow method and is similar to the method through which changes in light and shadows are perceived by the human eye.Subsequently, we perform image processing to obtain the droplets.
A brief description of the primary image processing process presented in Fig. 5 is as follows: (a) Using the optical flow method to obtain the region of liquid droplets, which are moving in the continuous images, (b) Grayscale processing of the optical flow color map to obtain the distribution of the gray value in the image,(c) Binarize the grayscale images, changing the gray value to 0 or 1, (d)Eroding and dilating the areas with droplets to obtain the areas of the droplets in the image (see Fig. 5).
Fig. 5. Image processing for bubble droplet region recognition.
3.2. Droplet recognition and size acquisition
After primary processing of the images, the single droplets are contained in single white areas.The corresponding area in the original image is then processed and an image containing more accurate information on the droplets is obtained. The connected white regions in the image can identified automaticallyvia the image processing.A rectangular boundary of a single connected region, which can be thought of as a single droplet is obtained, and the boundary coordinates of the single connected region are obtained, as shown in Fig. 6.
Fig. 6. Identifying droplets by identifying connected regions in the image.
The images of the single droplets were obtained from the processed images using the separated area coordinates. Images of the single droplets images as shown in Fig. 7. And the minimum limit of pixel are required to be connected to identify a droplet is the pixel matrix of 3 × 3,which could identity the boundary of the droplet (see Fig. 8).
Fig. 7. Binary images of single droplets.
Fig. 8. Single droplet image processing.
Images of the single droplets are then processed separately, and the size of the droplet is obtained by the following steps:initially, the long axis of the droplet is obtained using image processing software, and then sliced along the vertical direction of the long axis of the image of droplet which is white area in the image.The slices are then integrated to obtain the volume of the single droplet.
Finally, the droplet volume is converted to an equal-volme spherical diameter using a spherical volume formula. The actual size of a single pixel of the images taken by the high-speed camera in our experiment is around 4.239 μm to 4.255 μm, after pre-processing the images.
<Section>4. Experimental study of the distribution of droplets formed viabubble bursting at the liquid surface of distilled water</Section>
When bubbles burst at the surface of a pool, a direct release path for droplets is formed. The droplets are produced, and they enter the gas phase above the pool before migrating with the gas flow, which forms the release pathway of the liquid phase.
This section primarily presents our study of the distribution of droplets for distilled water. The bubbles at the liquid surface in the experiments were photographedwitha high-speed camera at 16 °C,40 °C, and 60 °C,respectively(Gupta, Schmidt, Freitag, et al.).The cap sizes measured are in the range of 8–11 mm,as shown in Fig.9.
As the images show, under the conditions of distilled water, the range of the diameter of the bubble cap is within 2 mm.The number of droplets depend strongly on the bubble size generated by the single bubble bursting,but in our study the different of the bubbles size captured by high-speed camera is less than 2 mm, so the effect of bubble size is not considered in this paper compared with other factors, such as the temperature and concentration of aerosol.We focus primarily on the number and size of the droplets generated by single bubble bursting under the conditions of different temperature and aerosol. Based on previous studies(Chen et al., 2018; Wei et al.),the dimensionless radial distance and dimensionless height of the location of the puncture are used to describe the relative position of the puncture point on the cap.
The distribution of the number of droplets for the experiment with distilled water are obtained and presented in Fig. 10. The transverse coordinates represent the dimensionless radial distance of the puncture point and the vertical coordinates represent the number of droplets generated by a single bubble bursting.
Fig. 9. Sizes of the bubble cap for distilled water under the conditions of(a)16 °C(b)40 °C(c)60 °C.
Fig. 10. Number of droplets formed viabubble bursting (a)16 °C(b)40 °C(c)60 °C.
As shown in the charts, droplet formation occurs primarily when the dimensional radial distance of the punctured position is in the range of [0.8, 1]; this means that the puncture appears a certain distance away from the bubble's center.In essence, when the bubble starts to burst from the bottom of the bubble cap, it is easier forthe droplets to be formed.Conversely, when the bubble bursts from the top, the cumulative mass of the liquid film ring is not sufficient to emit the jets that form separated droplets, or the droplets fly into the liquid pool; this means that the droplets are not released.
For distilled water,it was observed that the number of droplets (which were photographedwitha high-speed camera)formed via bubble bursting has a wide range, with 5 to 35droplets produced by a single bubble bursting (Fig. 11).However, with an increase inthe temperature ofthe liquid phase, the number of droplets formed via bubble bursting exhibits a decreasing trend, and the range of number distribution is reduced accordingly. When the temperature increases to 60 °C,the number of droplets produced by a single bubble bursting was reduced to less than 15.
Fig. 11. Comparison of the number of droplets for distilled water.
The sizes of the droplets are obtained by processing the images of the droplets. As shown in Fig. 12, the droplet sizes range from 50 to 600 μm,and under the condition of 16 °C, the droplet sizes peak at approximately 200 μm.The main range, 60–400 μm and the probability of the distribution approximation can be described in the form of a normal distribution. When the temperature rises to 40 °C, the droplet sizes also peak at approximately 200 μm, but the probability of droplets larger than 200 μmin diameter increases, which are more than the smaller droplets. In essence, with a decrease in the number of droplets, the droplet sizes exhibit an increasing trend. When the temperature continues to rise to 60 °C, the sizes of the droplets increase noticeably, with droplets larger than 400μmbeing formed frequently.From Fig. 13,we can find that the droplet size is obviously larger than that at low temperature.
Fig. 12. Sizes of droplets formed viabubble bursting at (a)16 °C(b)40 °C(c)60 °C.
Fig. 13. Cumulative probability distribution of droplets under condition of distill water.
Under the condition of a temperature of 60 °C, as the results show,it is harder to form droplets via bubble bursting, with some of the bubbles breaking up without forming droplets.Furthermore,the number of droplets formed via a single bubble is less than 15. As shown in Fig. 14,when the jets break to form droplets, the film of jets breaks to emit a single large droplet from every single jet and several smaller follow-up droplets, which form the releasing droplets.
Fig. 14. Droplet formation at 60 °C.
For distilled water, as the temperature rises, the surface tension of the liquid phase decreases, which leads to a decrease in the power of the liquid film that crumbles when the bubble breaks.Consequently, the bubble's liquid film has a lower speed during the crushing and crumbling process, resulting in the accumulation of more liquid before the liquid film ring is broken. Thus, the liquid film jets have larger sizes during the emission process, and in the liquid phase,it is more difficult to form separated droplets from the jets of the liquid film.Thus,the number of droplets generated via bubble bursting is reduced, and the sizes of the droplets increased.
<Section>5. Experimental study of the distribution of droplets formed via bubble bursting in a suspension ofTiO2aerosols</Section>
When there are aerosols in the liquid phase, the aerosol particle will enter the liquid surface region.When a bubble reaches the surface of the liquid, the liquid phase is ejected to form the liquid film and the aerosols flow into a part of the bubble film along with the liquid phase, forming part of the bubble film. In this case, bubble bursting at the liquid surface will result in the release of aerosols by carryover of the droplets (see Fig. 15).
Fig. 15. Aerosol particles entering the bubble film.
According to the previous researches, the calculation and evaluation of the total amount of aerosols released by this process is the multiplication of the entrainment amount and the concentration of the aerosols.The liquid entrainment is obtained based on the experimental results for distilled water or untreated tap water, and the aerosol concentration in the entrainment droplets is assumed to be consistent with the main concentration of the liquid pool. However, when there are aerosol particles in the liquid phase, the process of bubble bursting is different, which results in a different distribution of the droplets above the surface of the liquid. Therefore, in this section, the numbers and sizes of droplets generated by single bubbles bursting under different conditions of TiO2 aerosols are examined, and the data onthe droplets distribution in the case of single bubble bursting is obtained.
5.1. Study of the effect of aerosol concentration
First, experiments on bubble bursting were conducted at room temperature, and the mass concentration of TiO2 was continuously increased from 0.05 g/L to 0.1 g/L and 0.2 g/L.According to previous studies (Weiet al.), the mass concentration of aerosol is the main factor influencing the distribution of the location of the puncture position.As the concentration increases, more bubbles tend to break at the bottom region.which means more bubbles will burst from the bottom of bubble cap,and the probability of bubbles bursts without releasing droplets will decrease,and under the condition of aerosol TiO2, the probability is mainly affected by the mass concentration of aerosol.
The distributions of the droplets were obtained at a temperature of around 16 °C.As shown in Fig. 16, under this condition, the droplets primarily formed via bubble bursting start bursting from the bottom of the cap. In essence, the radial dimensionless distance of the initial point of the bubble breaking is in the range of [0.8, 1], which is same as for distilled water. The number of droplets formed by a single bubble bursting, as captured using high-speed photography in the experiments, are fluctuant.
Fig. 16. Number of droplets formed viabubble burstingwith (a)0.05 g/L(b)0.1 g/L(c)0.2 g/L TiO2, at room temperature.
As seen in the charts, with the TiO2 aerosols, more droplets are formed by a larger number of single bubbles bursting,the number of droplets ranges from 10 to 55. With an increase in the mass of TiO2, there is no obvious fluctuation in the upper and lower limits of the number of droplets formed via bubble breakage; however, more points in the charts are observed between 0.8 to 1which is the radial dimensionless distance of the initial point of the bubble breaking, indicating that more bubbles start bursting from the bottom of the cap and that the droplets are formed more easily.
As the sizes of the droplets produced by single bubble bursting were obtained, more than five hundred droplets were photographed and measured under each condition,as shown in Fig. 17. We found that with the addition of aerosols, the sizes of the droplets formed via bubble bursting tend to decrease in contrast with the trend for distilled water.Furthermore, the droplet sizes were predominantly around 200 μm and the shape is similar to the normal distribution range from 0 to 400 μm.When the mass concentration of TiO2 increased from 0.05 g/L to 0.1 g/L and 0.2 g/L, the increase in surface tension is not apparent, and there is no significant change in the size distribution of the generated droplets. For the room temperature condition, adding aerosols to distilled water leads to more liquid being carried over; however, from Fig. 18, we can find that with an increasing mass concentration of TiO2,the droplet sizes are not affected significantly.According to previous studies (Weiet al.),with the mass concentration of aerosol in liquid increasing, the bubble at liquid surface will burst start at the bottom of the cap with a higher probability. Which means the probability of droplets formation would be higher,and the aerosol would be more likely carry overed from the pool.
Fig. 17. Sizes of droplets formed viabubble bursting with (a)0.05 g/L (b) 0.1 g/L(c) 0.2 g/L TiO2, at room temperature.
Fig. 18. Cumulative probability distribution of droplets at room-temperature with aerosols.
After studying the influence ofthe mass concentration of TiO2 at a room temperature of around 16 °C, the temperature was increased to around 50°Cand the experiments were conducted under conditions of 0.05 g/L, 0.1 g/L, and 0.2 g/L TiO2. The droplets were photographedwitha high-speed camera, with data onthe number of droplets and droplet sizes obtained via image processing.The results are presented in Fig. 19 and Fig. 20.
Fig. 19. Number of droplets formed viabubble burstingwith (a)0.05 g/L (b)0.1 g/L (c)0.2 g/L TiO2,at around 50 °C.
Fig. 20. Sizes of droplets formed viabubble bursting with (a)0.05 g/L(b)0.1 g/L(c) 0.2 g/L TiO2, at around 50 °C.
Fig.19 shows that at a temperature of around 50 °C the number of droplets generated by a single bubble bursting increases with increasing mass concentration. When the concentration of TiO2 added is increased to 0.05 g/L, the upper limit ofthe number of droplets formed viabubble bursting is 30 per bubble more than for distilled water. For a TiO2 concentration of 0.1 g/L,the upper limit increases to 55 per bubble.With the concentration continuously increasing,the number of droplets can reach approximately 90 per bubble.
We obtained the concurrent sizes of the droplets (Fig. 20). Comparing the distribution of the droplet sizes, it is evident that with increasing TiO2,the droplets would tend to be small. For a 0.05 g/L concentration of TiO2 aerosols in the liquid pool,the droplet sizes are mainly distributed near 300 μm,and with the concentration increased to 0.1 g/L,the droplet sizes are mainly distributed near 200 μm. With the concentration increased to 0.2 g/L,the droplet sizes are mainly distributed near 150 μm.And from Fig. 21 we can find that at around 50°C the effect of aerosol is great. With the mass increasing, the droplet sizes tend to decrease.
Fig. 21. Cumulative probability distribution of droplets at around 50 °C with aerosols.
With more TiO2in the suspension, more TiO2aerosols flow into the bubble liquid cap uniformly and spread all over the cap.Consequently, the surface tension at the liquid surface increases and the disturbance energy threshold  which is required for a hole to appear on the bubble cap,also increases.This results in the thickness h of the liquid film becoming thinner when the bubble is broken (Israelachvili, 2011; Casteletto et al., 2003). At higher temperatures, the concentration of TiO2 has a significant influence on droplet generation, indicating that with the increase in the amount of aerosols in the liquid pool, the droplets are more easily carried out of the liquid phase at higher temperatures,and the droplets will carry more aerosols.
At a high temperature of around 77 °C, we compared the droplet formation at mass concentrations of 0.1 g/L and 0.2 g/L TiO2.At 0.1 g/L TiO2, particles flow into the bubble film cap uniformly with liquid flow,and they form independent particles.The liquid flow and the thinning effect ofthe bubble liquid cap is evident, as shown in Fig. 22.
Fig. 22. Aerosols are evenly distributed on the bubble cap.
With TiO2increasing to 0.2 g/L, more aerosols flow into the bubble film cap.The bubble film was evenly covered with aerosols, and the liquid film ring was torn more easily to form small droplets, as shown in Fig. 23.
Fig. 23. Process of bubble bursting under the condition of 0.2 g/L TiO2.
The droplets formed via bubble bursting were photographedwitha high-speed camera, and data onthe droplet number and sizes were obtained via image processing.The results are presented in Fig. 24 and Fig. 25.
Fig. 24. Number of droplets formed viabubble bursting with (a) 0.1 g/L (b)0.2 g/L TiO2, at 77 °C.
Fig. 25. Sizes of droplets formed viabubble bursting with 0.2 g/L TiO2 at 77 °C.
From Fig. 24,it is evident that at high temperatures, the number of droplets generated by a single bubble bursting increases with increasing mass concentration. When the concentration of TiO2 is 0.1 g/L,the number of droplets generated via bubble bursting is mainly concentrated in the range of 25–55, and the max count in our experiment reached the point of about 65. Increasing TiO2 to 0.2 g/L,the number of droplets formed in the experiment increased,as shown in Fig. 24(b). The number of droplets is mainly 25–85,and a maximum of 98 droplets were captured in our experiment.
The sizes of the droplets obtained in these experiments are presented in Fig. 25. The shape of the distribution is similar to that of a normal distribution,and with an increasing TiO2 mass concentration, andthe droplet size exhibits a corresponding decreasing trend which can be find in Fig. 26.
Fig. 26. Cumulative probability distribution of droplets at 77 °C with aerosols.
Studying the experiments on aerosols, it was found that at the same temperature, when the concentration of TiO2 in the pool increases, the number of droplets formed by a single bubble bursting mainly tends to increase except at room temperature, and the droplet size exhibits a decreasing trend.In addition, according to previous studies (Weiet al.),with the mass concentration of aerosol in liquid increasing, the bubble at liquid surface will burst start at the bottom of the cap with a higher probability, which leading more probability of droplets formation.This indicates that with an increase in the concentration of TiO2 in the liquid, droplets will be easier released as the source,and aerosols would be easier carried out of the liquid pool as well.
5.2. Study of the phenomenon of Aerosol agglomeration on a pool surface
When the experiment is conducted at a high temperature for a long duration, the uniformly distributed TiO2 aerosol particles agglomerate at the surface of the liquid phase. We capture the phenomenon of aerosol agglomeration on the surface of the bubble with high-speed photography under the condition of 0.1 g/L TiO2 at 77 °C, as shown in Fig. 27. Compared with Fig. 18,which shows the initial stable stage of the experiment,the agglomerated aerosols were no longer evenly distributed on the bubble cap,and the bubble-bursting process is affected significantly, as shown in Fig. 28. It is difficult for droplets to form and detach from the curling film in the process of bubble breakage.
Fig. 27. Aerosols agglomerated on the bubble cap.
Fig. 28. Bubble bursting after aerosol agglomeration.
After distinguishing the phenomenon of aerosol agglomeration, the distribution of droplets released above the liquid surface were studied. The number of droplets is presented in Fig. 29, andthe dropletsizes before and after agglomeration are presented in Fig. 30.
Fig. 29. Number of droplets formed by bubble bursting under the condition of 0.1 g/L TiO2 at 77 °C.
Fig. 30. Sizes of droplets formed viabubble bursting under the condition of 0.1 g/L TiO2 at 77 °C.
As shown in Fig. 29, the red points in the charts indicate the number of droplets formed via bubble bursting before the aerosols agglomerated, and the number of droplets ranges primarily from 10 to 65. After the aerosols agglomerated, the number reduced significantly and was mostly less than 15 per bubble bursting, and sometimes there were no droplets formed.
For the droplet sizes, from Figs. 30 and 31 it can be seen that before the aerosols were agglomerated, the size of the droplets was primarily distributed around 200 μm, and the shape of the size distribution is similar to the normal distribution range from 0 to 400 μm, as shown inFig.25(a). After the aerosol particles agglomerated, the size of the droplets increased significantly,and fewer butlarger droplets were observed in our experiments.
Fig. 31. Cumulative probability distribution of droplets vis bubble bursting at under the condition of 0.1 g/L TiO2 at 77 °C.
In our experiment, the agglomeration of aerosols on the surface of the liquid phase became apparent after about four hours. The phenomenon of aerosol agglomeration leads to a change in the force on the surface of the liquid cap.
Base on the images of the bubble on the surface of liquid pools, it is inferred that when the aerosol on the surface of liquid phase is not agglomerated, the aerosols are uniformly distributed on the surface of liquid phase, the force on the bubble film is stable, and the surface tension is uniform.Furthermore, the addition of TiO2aerosols leads to an increase in surface tension. After aerosol agglomeration, the aerosols are no longer uniformly distributed in the bubble film, the force on the bubble film is unstable, and the surface tension is nonuniform, leading to an unstable drainage of the bubble cap.This means that the bubble is more easily broken when the bubble cap is still thick, and it is hard to form and release droplets via bubble bursting.
<Section>6. Conclusion</Section>
In this study, droplets formed viabubble bursting at the liquid surface under different liquid phase conditions were photographed with a high-speed camera. Using animage-processing program to process the images of droplets, the distributions of the droplets were obtained. The distribution of the droplets by single bubbles were studied primarily based on thenumbers and sizes of the bubbles under different conditions. The main conclusions drawn are as follows:
(a)
The phenomenon of droplets released via bubble bursting is primarily the process of the bubble beginning to break from the bottom region of the bubble cap.
(b)
For distilled water, when the temperature increases, the number of droplets formed via bubble bursting tends to decrease, while the droplet size increases, indicating that for distilled water, the entrainment of droplets caused by bubble bursting at the liquid surface will be harder with an increase in temperature.
(c)
With the addition of TiO2 aerosol to water, the number of droplets generated via bubble bursting increases, but the size decreases. This is different from the trend for droplets formed via bubble bursting at the surface of distilled water.The effect of a continued increase in the aerosol concentration is weakened at room temperature.
(d)
At high temperatures,for water with TiO2,an increase in TiO2results in higher numbers and smaller sizes of droplets beingformed by a single bubble bursting at the liquid surface.With TiO2 aerosols increasing, droplets are easier carried out and released.
(f)
At high temperatures, with a continuous flow of air through the liquid pool, aerosol agglomeration occurs on the surface of the liquid phase. After this phenomenon occurs, the entrainment release ability of the droplets generated by the bubble breakage is significantly weakened.
<Section>Credit author statement</Section>
Conducting experiments: Hao CHEN and Xiang YU; Image processing: Hao CHEN, Junlong Wang and Hanyu Luo; Data analysis and manuscript preparation: Huanwen Lv and Haifeng GU.
<Section>Declaration of competing interest</Section>
We declare that we have no known competing financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that can inappropriately influence our work.
<Section>Acknowledgment</Section>
This study was funded by the Science and Technology on Reactor System Design Technology Laboratory of the Nuclear Power Institute of China.
<Section>Appendix A. Supplementary data</Section>
The following is the Supplementary data to this article:
<Section>References</Section>
Blanchard and Syzdek, 1988
D.C. Blanchard, L.D. Syzdek
Film drop production as a function of bubble size
J. Geophys. Res. Oceans, 93 (C4) (1988), pp. 3649-3654
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Casteletto et al., 2003
V. Casteletto, I. Cantat, D. Sarker, et al.
Stability of soap films: hysteresis and nucleation of black films
Phys. Rev. Lett., 90 (4) (2003), Article 048302
CrossRefGoogle Scholar
Chen et al., 2018
H. Chen, H. Gu, X. Yu, et al.
Experimental study on bubble bursting and droplet releasing characteristics under different liquid phase conditions
2018 26th International Conference on Nuclear Engineering, American Society of Mechanical Engineers (2018)
V009T16A068-V009T16A068
Google Scholar
Cosandey and von Rohr, 2001
J.O. Cosandey, P.R. von Rohr
Entrainment of soluble and non soluble tracers from a boiling water surface
Nucl. Eng. Des., 208 (1) (2001), pp. 87-97
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Cosandey et al., 2003
J.O. Cosandey, A. Günther, P.R. von Rohr
Transport of salts and micron-sized particles entrained from a boiling water pool
Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci., 27 (8) (2003), pp. 877-889
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Davis, 1940
R.F. Davis
The physical aspect of steam generation at high pressures and the problem of steam contamination
Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., 144 (1) (1940), pp. 198-216
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Günther et al., 2003
A. Günther, S. Wälchli, P.R. von Rohr
Droplet production from disintegrating bubbles at water surfaces. Single vs. multiple bubbles
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 29 (5) (2003), pp. 795-811
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gupta, 2015
S. Gupta
Experimental investigations relevant for hydrogen and fission product issues raised by the Fukushima accident
Nuclear Eng. Technol., 47 (1) (2015), pp. 11-25
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gupta, Schmidt, Freitag, et al
S. Gupta, E. Schmidt, M. Freitag, et al.
Experimental investigations on containment spray performance under severe accident conditions
Paper (2016), pp. 16-18
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Israelachvili, 2011
J.N. Israelachvili
Intermolecular and Surface Forces
Academic press (2011)
Google Scholar
Kim and No, 2005
C.H. Kim, H.C. No
Liquid entrainment and off-take through the break at the top of a vessel
Nucl. Eng. Des., 235 (16) (2005), pp. 1675-1685
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Knelman et al., 1954
F. Knelman, N. Dombrowski, D.M. Newitt
Mechanism of the bursting of bubbles
Nature, 173 (4397) (1954), p. 261
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Koch et al., 2000
M.K. Koch, A. Voßnacke, J. Starflinger, et al.
Radionuclide re-entrainment at bubbling water pool surfaces
J. Aerosol Sci., 31 (9) (2000), pp. 1015-1028
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Newitt et al., 1954
D.M. Newitt, N. Dombrowski, F.H. Knelman
Liquid entrainment - 1. The mechanism of drop formation from gas or vapour bubbles
Trans. Inst. Chem. Eng., 32 (1954), p. 244
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Spiel, 1994a
D.E. Spiel
The sizes of the jet drops produced by air bubbles bursting on sea and fresh water surfaces
Tellus, 46B (1994), p. 325
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Spiel, 1994b
D.E. Spiel
The sizes of the jet drops produced by air bubbles bursting on sea-and fresh-water surfaces
Tellus B, 46 (4) (1994), pp. 325-338
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Spiel, 1998
D.E. Spiel
On the births of film drops from bubbles bursting on seawater surfaces
J. Geophys. Res.: Oceans, 103 (C11) (1998), pp. 24907-24918
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wei et al.,
Yansong Wei , et al. "Experimental investigation of the puncture position and film rolling speed of bubbles bursting under different liquid pool conditions." Prog. Nucl. Energy 129.
Google Scholar