<title>Thermo-mechanical assessment of the optimized CFETR water cooled ceramic breeder blanket</title>
<author>1,MaulikPanchal,2,AbhishekSaraswat,3,ParitoshChaudhuri</author>
<Affiliation>1, stitute for Plasma Research, Bhat, Gandhinagar, 382428, India;2,Homi Bhabha National Institute, Trombay, Mumbai, 400094, India</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Fusion Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.fusengdes.2020.111836</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0920379620303847</URL>
Thermo-mechanical assessment of the optimized CFETR water cooled ceramic breeder blanket
MaulikPanchal,AbhishekSaraswat,ParitoshChaudhuri
Institute for Plasma Research, Bhat, Gandhinagar, 382428, India
Homi Bhabha National Institute, Trombay, Mumbai, 400094, India
<Section>Highlights</Section>
An experimental facility has been developed for gas pressure drop measurements across the pebble beds.
Experiments have been performed using the nitrogen gas on the stainless steel spheres, alumina pebbles and lithium meta-titanate pebbles.
The gas pressure drop increases with a decrease in the diameter of the pebble and inlet gas velocity.
The predicted values of pressure drop by Ergun’s equation agree well with the experimental data.
The obtained values of gas pressure drop will support to benchmark the simulation results in the future.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The nearly spherical shaped ceramic pebble beds in the breeder blanket of the future fusion reactor are purged by low-pressure gas to channelize the produced tritium fuel into the tritium extraction system. The required pumping power for the flowing gas in pebble beds can be estimated using the pressure drop across the pebble beds. The aim of this work is to measure the gas pressure drop experimentally across packed pebble beds as a function of pebble sizes, pebble shapes, pebble materials, and gas velocity. The pebble beds are packed in a cylindrical-shaped stainless steel container with an inner diameter of 24 mm and a length of 130 mm. The various experiments have been performed on stainless steel spheres (Diameter: 1 mm, 2 mm, 3 mm, and 4 mm), alumina pebbles (Mean diameter: 1 mm and 1.5 mm), and lithium meta-titanate pebbles (Mean diameter: 1 mm and 1.3 mm). The gas flow has been controlled and measured using a digital mass flow controller. The static differential pressure across the pebble beds has been monitored by a differential pressure transducer. The pressure drop significantly increases with a decrease in the diameter of pebbles/spheres and an increase in the packing fraction of the bed. The material type does not affect the results which are too obvious for the fixed pebble bed which is considered in these experiments. The obtained experimental results of gas pressure drop have been compared and agreed well with the prediction of the Ergun’s correlation.
Keywords:Pressure drop;Pebble bed;Lithium meta-titanate;Breeder blanket
<Section>1. Introduction<Section>
The breeding blanket is an important component of the future fusion reactor. One of the main functions of the breeding blanket is to breed the tritium fuel from the lithium ceramic pebble beds and to provide radioactive shielding. In order to breed the tritium fuel, various lithium ceramic candidates have been considered as promising tritium breeding materials. Lithium meta-titanate (Li2TiO3), lithium ortho-silicate (Li4SiO4), lithium meta-zirconate (Li2ZrO3), lithium aluminates (LiAlO4) and lithium oxide (Li2O) have been identified as potential tritium breeding materials [1]. The tritium breeding materials in the form of pebble beds of nearly spherical shaped pebbles have many advantages over the tritium breeding materials in the form of sintered pellets or blocks. The main advantages are: less thermal stress cracking arises due to less temperature gradient across each small-sized pebble, purge gas network in pebble bed is more stable and uniform for tritium generation and recovery, pebbles can be easily filled in the complex geometry of canisters, rearrangements of pebbles can drop the thermal stresses in pebble beds during thermal expansion and thermo-mechanical properties of pebble beds can be optimized by tuning the pebble bed parameters like filling gas pressure, gas type, pebble material, pebble size and packing fraction [2]. These pebble beds are purged by low-velocity helium gas to channelize the generated tritium fuel into the tritium extraction system. The pressure drop of the purge gas while flowing in the pebble beds is an important parameter to be characterized. The accurate data of the purge gas pressure drop across pebble beds are required to calculate the gas pumping power for the purge gas supplying systems. In this work, the pressure drop across packed pebble beds has been measured as a function of pebble sizes, pebble shapes, pebble materials, and flowing gas velocity. The pebble beds are packed in a cylindrical-shaped stainless steel container with an inner diameter of 24 mm and a length of 130 mm. Various experiments have been performed on stainless steel spheres (Diameter: 1 mm, 2 mm, 3 mm, and 4 mm), alumina pebbles (Mean diameter: 1 mm and 1.5 mm), and lithium meta-titanate pebbles (Mean diameter: 1 mm and 1.3 mm). The gas flow has been controlled and measured using a digital mass flow controller. The static differential pressure across the pebble beds has been monitored by a differential pressure transducer. The obtained experimental results of gas pressure drop have been compared with the prediction of Ergun’s correlation for spherical shaped pebbles [3]:
Where@is the gas pressure drop,@is the length of the bed,@is the void fraction of bed,@is the dynamic viscosity of flowing gas,@is the gas density,@is the superficial velocity and@is the diameter of packed pebbles in the container.@and@are the two constants of Ergun’s correlation. In 2013, A. Abou-Sena et al. [4]@has experimentally measured the helium gas pressure drop across pebble beds and compared them with the prediction of Ergun’s correlation. The glass pebbles (diameter: 0.25–1.2 mm) packed in a rectangular canister (dimension: 56 mm × 206 mm × 396 mm) were investigated in their study. In 2014, A. Abou-Sena et al. [5]@reported helium gas pressure drop results obtained by performing experiments on the pebble bed packed into a cylindrical container (inner diameter: 30 mm and length: 120 mm). The glass pebbles (diameter: 0.25–1.2 mm) and lithium ortho-silicate pebbles (diameter: 0.25 - 0.45 mm) were investigated in their study and results are also compared with the prediction of Ergun’s correlation. In 2017, D. Liu et al. [6]@reported results of the helium gas pressure drop obtained using the stainless steel spheres (0.5–2 mm) packed in a rectangular cavity (20 mm × 20 mm). The details of the present experimental facility and comparisons of the obtained results are discussed in the following section.
<Section>2. Experimental facility and procedures<Section>
mainly consists of the gas supply cylinder, pressure gauges, gas valves, K-type thermocouple, digital mass flow controller (DMFC), cylindrical-shaped pebble bed container, gas distribution plates, samples (pebbles/spheres), a differential pressure transducer (DPT), datalogger and support structure. The pebble bed is formed between two Teflon made gas distribution plates. On these plates, the through-holes of 0.7 mm diameter have been randomly provided to pass only the gas from the plate and not the pebbles. The diameter and length of the pebble bed are kept 24 mm and 130 mm, respectively. A DMFC [7]@(Make: Sierra) has been installed before the test section to control the standard volumetric flow rate of the gas. The pressure and temperature of flowing gas have been monitored to convert the standard volumetric flow rate into the actual volumetric flow rate. The actual volumetric flow rate has been converted into the gas velocity from the known cross-section area of the pebble bed. The pressure drop has been measured across the 100 mm length of the pebble bed using a DPT [8]@(Make: Siemens). The differential pressure across 100 mm length of the pebble bed has been measured between the two gas distribution plates as shown in Fig. 2 in order to neglect the additional pressure drop produced due to the gas distribution plates. The accuracy of the DMFC and DPT are ± 1.0 % of full scale and ± 0.075 % of calibrated span, respectively. In this experiment, nitrogen gas has been passed through a packed bed to measure the pressure drop. During all the experiments, the temperature of the gas has been measured ∼ 25 °C. As discussed earlier, experiments have been performed on stainless steel spheres, alumina pebbles, and lithium meta-titanate pebbles to study the effect of particle diameter and particle shapes on the pressure drop results. The details of all the investigated materials are discussed in the next section. The process data from the pressure gauges, DMFC, and DPT are simultaneously captured and stored in a PC using a memory data logger for data analysis after experiments. The pictures of the investigated materials are also shown in Fig. 3 for more information.
Fig. 1
Fig. 1. Schematic of gas pressure drop measurement facility.
Fig. 2
Fig. 2. Assembled view of the test facility.
Fig. 3
Fig. 3. Investigated materials with case ID (A 4 mm diameter SS sphere is placed with the ceramic pebbles for size comparison).
<Section>3. Results and discussions</Section>
The details of the case ID for different experiments with the details of pebble size, the aspect ratio of pebble bed (diameter of pebble bed/diameter of pebbles), packed mass of the sample, the density of materials, and estimated packing fraction are mentioned in Table 1. The pebbles have been packed using a mechanical vibrator for all the performed cases to maximize the packing fraction. By doing this, any kind of gap or void space in the pebble bed can be eliminated during the experiments which may produce an error in the measurements.
Table 1. Case ID for experiments with parameter.
As discussed earlier, the pressure,@and temperature,@of the flowing gas have been monitored during experiments to convert the standard volumetric flow rate,@into the actual volumetric flow rate,@using the following formula:
The superficial gas velocity,@can be calculated from the following equation:@
For all the investigated cases mentioned in the Table 1, the differential gas pressures across the 100 mm length of pebble bed have been measured as a function of the superficial gas velocity. The used parameters are mentioned in Table 2 while comparing the experimentally measured data with the prediction of Ergun’s correlation. The constant value of dynamic viscosity is considered as the total increase in the dynamic viscosity is found only by 0.05 % with the gas pressure range of this study. The density of the nitrogen gas is considered as a function of the gas pressure [9].
Table 2. Parameter details used in Ergun’s correlation.
Fig. 4 shows the measured gas pressure drop results obtained using the stainless steel spheres of diameter 1 mm, 2 mm, 3 mm, and 4 mm. The results are also compared with the prediction of Ergun’s correlation. The comparison error in percentage values is also shown in the same graph. The Ergun’s equation can be applicable for pebble bed cases with a large aspect ratio where the wall effect is not present (aspect ratio > 10) [10]. When the aspect ratio of pebble bed is less than 10 than there will be a deviation in the comparison of results that occurs with Ergun’s prediction [11]. At low Reynolds number (), the pressure drop value increases due to the wall friction, whereas, at high Reynolds number in the turbulent regime the pressure drop decreases due to the channeling effect near the wall. In cases of the stainless steel spheres, the measured deviation (Table 3, Table 4, Table 5, Table 6) shows the clear influence of the wall effect which causes increasing or decreasing the pressure drop. In the case of SS4, the highest deviation has been found where the experimental data are lower than the Ergun’s prediction due to channeling near the wall. For the utilized differential pressure transmitter (DPT), the accuracy lies within the ±0.075 mbar as per calibration done by manufacturer. At low Reynolds number and high aspect ratio, the measured values are found higher while at high Reynolds number, the deviation increases as the aspect ratio decreases. In the alumina and lithium meta-titanate pebbles the above effect is not captured due to the nearly spherical shape and diameter variation in pebbles.
Fig. 4
Fig. 4. Results of SS spheres compared with Ergun’s correlation.
Table 3. Comparison with Ergun’s correlation (case: SS1, Aspect ratio: 24).
Table 4. Comparison with Ergun’s correlation (case: SS2, Aspect ratio: 12).
Table 5. Comparison with Ergun’s correlation (case: SS3, Aspect ratio: 8).
Table 6. Comparison with Ergun’s correlation (case: SS4, Aspect ratio: 6).
Fig. 5 shows pressure drop results obtained using the alumina pebbles of diameter 1 ± 0.2 mm and 1.5 ± 0.2 mm also compared with the prediction of Ergun’s correlation. Similarly, Fig. 6 shows pressure drop results obtained using the lithium meta-titanate pebbles of diameter 1 ± 0.15 mm and 1.3 ± 0.15 mm also compared with the prediction of Ergun’s correlation. Fig. 7 shows the results of SS spheres, alumina pebbles, and lithium meta-titanate pebbles of all diameters. The inlet pressure of gas before entering the test section has been measured using a pressure gauge for all the performed cases. The shape of alumina and lithium meta-titanate pebbles are not perfectly sphere like stainless steel spheres. In Ergun’s correlation, the alumina and lithium meta-titanate pebbles are considered as perfectly spherical. This may lead to some deviation in comparisons with the correlation for the alumina and lithium meta-titanate pebble beds. Fig. 8 shows the comparisons of the pressure drop results of all the investigated materials with different diameters and it also clearly shows the effect of particle diameter on the pressure drop. The highest results of pressure drop have been measured in the case of lithium meta-titanate pebbles of 1 ± 0.15 mm diameter due to the highest packing fraction of pebble bed (64.05 %) in that case. The highest packing fraction has been observed because the shapes of the lithium meta-titanate pebbles are not perfectly spherical. The packing fraction in the case of lithium meta-titanate pebbles of 1.3 ± 0.15 mm are observed comparatively lower due to the less mass of pebbles are packed in that case. The lowest pressure drop has been measured in the case of SS304 spheres of 4 mm in diameter. The results of the case ‘SS1’ and ‘AL1’ are nearly the same as diameter and the packing fraction of both the cases is nearly close which shows the material type does not affect the pressure drop results.
Fig. 5
Fig. 5. Results of Alumina pebbles compared with Ergun’s correlation.
Fig. 6
Fig. 6. Results of Lithium meta-titanate pebbles compared with Ergun’s correlation.
Fig. 7
Fig. 7. Comparison of results with Ergun’s correlation and the inlet gas pressure with density.
Fig. 8
Fig. 8. Comparisons of all experimental results.
<Section>4. Conclusions</Section>
The gas pressure drop has been measured experimentally using a developed test facility. The stainless steel spheres (1 mm, 2 mm, 3 mm and 4 mm), alumina pebbles (1 ± 0.2 mm, 1.5 ± 0.2 mm) and lithium meta-titanate (1 ± 0.15 mm and 1.3 ± 0.15 mm) pebbles have been investigated to study the effect of particle sizes, shape, materials and flowing gas velocity on the pressure drop. It has been observed that the pressure drop decreases with an increase in the diameter of particles and increases with the increase in the packing fraction of the pebble bed. The material type does not affect the results which are too obvious for the fixed pebble bed which is considered in these experiments. In all cases of different diameters, the pressure drop is an increasing function of gas velocity and inlet pressure. The experimentally obtained results of pressure drop have been reasonably comparable with the theoretical prediction of Ergun’s correlation. These experimental data of pressure drop will be useful to benchmark the numerical models are being developed at present. These numerical models will be used for the accurate prediction of gas pressure drop for the complex geometries of packed pebble bed for the solid breeder unit of future fusion reactors.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Maulik Panchal: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Validation, Data curation, Writing - original draft. Abhishek Saraswat: Writing - review & editing, Software. Paritosh Chaudhuri: Supervision.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
None.
<Section>Acknowledgments</Section>
Thankful to the help of Mr. Shrikant Verma, Mr. Ankush Deoghar, Mr. Hardik Tailor, Mr. Aroh Shrivastava, Mr. Vimal Kanpariya, Mr. Vrushabh Lambade, and IPR workshop.
<Section>Appendix A. Supplementary data</Section>
The following is Supplementary data to this article:
<Section>References</Section>
[1]
N. Roux, et al.
Ceramic breeder material development
Fusion Eng. Des., 41 (1998), pp. 31-38
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[2]
P.J. Gierszewski, et al.
Ceramic sphere-pac breeder design for fusion blankets
Fusion Eng. Des., 17 (1991), pp. 95-104
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[3]
S. Ergun, et al.
Fluid flow through packed columns
Chem. Eng. Prog., 48 (1952), pp. 89-94
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[4]
Ali Abou-Sena, et al.
Experimental study and analysis of the purge gas pressure drop across the pebble beds for the fusion HCPB blanket
Fusion Eng. Des., 88 (2013), pp. 243-247
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[5]
Ali Abou-Sena, et al.
Measurements of the purge helium pressure drop across pebble beds packed with lithium orthosilicate and glass pebbles
Fusion Eng. Des., 89 (2014), pp. 1459-1463
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[6]
D. Liu, et al.
Experimental study on helium pressure drop across randomly packed bed for fusion blanket
Fusion Eng. Des., 122 (2017), pp. 47-51
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[7]
https://www.sierrainstruments.com.
Google Scholar
[8]
https://new.siemens.com.
Google Scholar
[9]
https://webbook.nist.gov/chemistry/name-ser/.
Google Scholar
[10]
K. Vollmari, et al.
Pressure drop investigations in packings of arbitrary shaped particles
Powder Technol., 271 (2015), pp. 109-124
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[11]
R.K. Reddy, et al.
CFD modeling of pressure drop and drag coefficient in fixed and expanded beds
Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 86 (2008), pp. 444-453
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar