<title>A double-layered model for near-field temperature in a nuclear waste repository</title>
<author>1,YaoXue,2,De'anSun,3,LeiWang,4,YongfuXu</author>
<Affiliation>1,Department of Civil Engineering, Shanghai University, Shanghai, 200444, China;2,School of Urban Railway Transportation, Shanghai University of Engineering Science, Shanghai, 201620, China;3,Department of Civil Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2021.103646</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0149197021000184</URL>
A double-layered model for near-field temperature in a nuclear waste repository
YaoXue,De'anSun,LeiWang,YongfuXu
Department of Civil Engineering, Shanghai University, Shanghai, 200444, China
School of Urban Railway Transportation, Shanghai University of Engineering Science, Shanghai, 201620, China
Department of Civil Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200240, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
A double layered model for analyzing the heat conduction was proposed for repository.
•
Expression of temperature at any point in surrounding rock was obtained.
•
A method for determining equivalent radius of the repository scale was given.
•
The thicker the buffer layer is, the higher the temperature increases.
•
Change in thermal conductivity of rock has little impact on temperature in repository.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The temperature distribution is an important issue for the design and safety assessment of the repository for disposing high-level radioactive nuclear waste (HLRW). In order to analyze the heat conduction property near the canister containing HLRW, in this paper two kinds of double-layered model are established respectively for the unit cell scale and repository scale, and the corresponding analytical solutions are obtained in terms of the heat conduction equations for the buffer layer and surrounding rock by the separate variable method. Then, the proposed analytical solutions are verified by checking against the existing ones for a special case in the literature. Finally, a parametric study is performed to investigate the temperature behavior in the buffer layer and surrounding rock with different parameters.
Keywords:Nuclear waste;Double-layered model;Waste canister;Analytical solution;Temperature field
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
In recent decades, lots of high-level radioactive waste (HLRW) has been accumulated with the worldwide rapid development of nuclear power generations. The safe disposal of nuclear waste attracts widespread global concern, and it is also a big challenge for science, technology, and engineering. At present, the deep geological repository at 500–1000 m underground has been widely considered as the most possible method to isolate the HLRW from the human life. A repository is composed of the vitrified waste, a canister, buffer layer (usually made of compacted bentonite), and a natural geological barrier (i.e., surrounding rock). The decay heat released from the nuclear waste canisters will be transferred to the buffer layer and then surrounding rock, resulting in high temperature in the near field. A typical thermal criterion for a geological repository after the closure is that the peak temperature in the buffer layer, that is, the canister surface temperature, should remain below 100 °C by considering the possibility of groundwater vaporization, subsequent enrichment of precipitated substances such as salts on the canister surface and illitization of smectite at high temperature when potassium (K+) exists in the groundwater(Zhou et al., 2021a). Besides, the expansion of the buffer material and surrounding rock caused by temperature rising will generate thermal stress. It will affect the mechanical stability of the whole disposal repository. In view of the above reasons, it is necessary to further study the temperature distribution in the disposal repository to provide a reference for its design and safety evaluation.
For the thermal conduction in the repository, mathematical models and the corresponding numerical solutions have been developed during past twenty years. Rossi et al. (2004) proposed a mathematical model considering the diffusion effects of temperature and water evaporation and condensation, meanwhile temperature and humidity changes could be described in the buffer zone of the HLRW storage. Sizgek (2005) first established a three-dimensional thermal model for repositories and found that the temperature in the repository was very sensitive to the cooling time of nuclear waste and the amount of waste loaded. After comparing theoretical results with the in-situ test data (a full-scale heating test) from the Grimsel test site, the reliability of a multi-scale coupled thermo-hydro-mechanical (T-H-M) model proposed by Gens et al. (2009) has been proved. Cho et al. (2014) built a kind of three-dimensional hydro-thermal model with TOUGH2, analyzed the temperature field in a geological repository for disposing HLRW in Korea, and found that the hydro-thermal model reduced the maximum peak temperature in the repository by about 10 °C compared to the heat conduction model with constant thermal conductivity. Meanwhile, Lee et al. (2014) carried out the sensitivity analysis of thermal-hydro (TH) model parameters and Zhao et al. (2014) simulated the near-field temperature for the deep geological disposal of HLRW in China. Guo (2017) built a simplified near-field model for the deep geological repository involving a canister and developed a method to account the effects of four vertical outside boundaries on the temperature field.
However, the research for the accurate solution of temperature distribution in the repository is not as much as numerical solution. A model of heat source in terms of the distribution point was built by Claesson and Probert (1998), and the temperature expression near the nuclear waste canister can be obtained by the superposition principle of liner function. Base on the research by Claesson and Probert (1998) an analytical model of the compound (line, point, area) heat source was established by Hökmark and Claesson (2005) and the analytical solution was obtained using the model. In this model the difference of heat flux was considered among the top, bottom and middle on the canister surface. Meanwhile, using the analytical model of line heat source, Ikonen (2005) analyzed the evolution of the temperature field in the KBS-3V type repository in Olkiloto in Finland. Then, Li et al. (2011) built a simplified analytical model for the repository and investigated the thermal behavior of surrounding rock driven by the nuclear waste decay heat.
As introduced above, it is clear that, (i) the temperature distributions obtained by mathematical models are reliable comparing the heating tests, and (ii) the accurate solutions of temperature distribution obtained from the thermal conduction model for single material have been studied. However, most thermal conduction model cannot get an accurate solution for temperature distribution in the repositories and most accurate solutions in the literature did not take the difference in thermal conductivity between the buffer layer and surrounding rock into consideration.
This study aims to establish a double layer (buffer layer and surrounding rock) mathematical model of thermal conduction for two scale (unit cell scale and repository scale), and provide analytical solutions that can be directly employed to investigate the temperature behavior in repositories. Then, the radius of the external boundary circle can be determined by relying on the resident temperature in repositories. Besides, a parametric study is implemented to analyze the temperature distribution in the repository scale with different thermal conductivities and thickness of buffer layer and rock, which can be helpful to the repository designment in future.
<Section>2. Description of model</Section>
2.1. Geometry of repository
The disposal repository consists of vertical/inclined shaft, disposal tunnels, and deposition holes. The deposition holes have two forms, that are horizontal and vertical disposals. The overall conceptual design model of the disposal repository is shown in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. Conceptual design model of the disposal repository (Rosborg and Werme, 2008).
The main process during the thermal evolution from the canister is heat conductions. The power released from the spent nuclear fuel will cause the rising temperature at the canister surface and the thermal gradient at the interface between the buffer layer and surrounding rock. The detailed model of repository is shown in Fig. 2. Here, x, y, and z form a kind of Euler coordinate system. The black solid lines represent the tunnels with space D’ and the red lines show the canisters with space D. The thermal problem in the repository involves at least two scales: the repository scale and the unit cell scale. The unit cell scale means that the single canister is wrapped by the buffer layer and then surrounding rock. The repository scale means that temperatures in all the unit cell are influenced each other in the repository. In this paper, the temperature distribution on the plane (z = 0) was taken great consideration.
Fig. 2. Canister distribution in the disposal repository.
In order to obtain the analytical solution of the temperature field near the canister, a mathematical model is built after the following assumptions: (1) The buffer layer is in full contact with the canister and surrounding rock, and there is no air gap among them; (2) During the exothermic process of nuclear waste, the heat flux changes little along the z-direction of the canister, and thus the change in the heat flux along the z-direction is ignored; (3) The buffer material and surrounding rock are homogeneous, isotropic, and impermeable and the thermal material parameters are constant; (4) The initial temperature in the buffer layer and surrounding rock are the same and constant at the different depths in the repository. (5) The main process during the thermal evolution in the canister is heat conduction and the heat transfers caused by radiation and convection are negligible; (6) The tunnel space (D’) is equal to the canister space (D).
2.2. Determination of initial and thermal boundary conditions
According to the underground temperature measurements of the deep boreholes in Beishan, Gansu Province, China, the temperature gradient is 0.024 °C/m, and the annual average ground surface temperature is about 10 °C (Wang, 2007). Taking the depth of the repository as 500 m as an example, the initial temperature in the repository is 22 °C. The initial uniform temperatures in the buffer layer and the geological rock body are set to T0. Like Fig. 3 shows, the initial condition is expressed as: where a and b are the radius distances from the canister axis to the inner and outer edge of buffer layer, respectively; c is the radius distance from the canister axis to the outer edge of surrounding rock, which will be determined in next section. T1 and T2 are the temperatures in the buffer layer and rock respectively.
Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of initial temperature and inner boundary condition.
@(1)
@(2)
There are two boundary conditions at the interface between the canister and buffer layer: (1) the temperature boundary and (2) heat flux boundary. If the temperature boundary condition is considered, it is necessary to understand the temperature evolution on the outer surface of the canister during the operation of the repository. The maximum temperature on the canister surface is an important thermal criterion. The maximum temperature on the canister surface is limited to the design temperature of +100 °C. The requirement is set to avoid the ground water boiling on the canister surface. In this paper, a heat flux boundary condition is considered. It is necessary to understand the HLRW type, the loading amount, the initial decay power, and the decay rate of the HLRW in the canister. The planned geological repository in China is ready to dispose the vitrified HLRW produced by nuclear power station after treatment. The release formula of the heat source from the HLRW is basically an exponential one for the decay of the radioactive nuclear element. Therefore, the keys to calculate the source term is to understand the composition of the HLRW in China, and then to obtain the corresponding coefficient by ORIGEN-ARP program (Gauld et al., 2006). At present, the calculation for the HLRW in China is still in progress. As a reference, this work had been done in Finland (Anttila, 2005). Fig. 4 shows the decay powers of European Pressurized Reactor (EPR) nuclear waste with the burn-up values of 40, 50, and 60 MWd/kgU in one hundred years.
Fig. 4. Variation in decay power of EPR fuel with time under burn-up values of 40, 50 and 60 MWd/kgU.
The decay power of the HLRW in the canister can be expressed as:
@(3)
where P(0) is an initial decay power of nuclear waste, ti is a time constant, ai is an index coefficient, satisfying a1+a2+a3+a4+a5 = 1, and t is the cooling time. Table 1, Table 2, Table 3 show the time constant ti and the coefficient ai corresponding to the EPR nuclear waste with burn-up values of 40, 50, and 60 MWd/kgU, respectively.
Table 1. Time constant and coefficient of EPR fuel of 40 MWd/kgU.
Table 2. Time constant and coefficient of EPR fuel of 50 MWd/kgU.
Table 3. Time constant and coefficient of EPR fuel of 60 MWd/kgU.
In deriving the analytical solution in this paper, some parameters are assumed as follows: the burn-up value is 40MWd/kgU, the cooling time is 40 years, the canister height is 5.25 m, the canister diameter is 1 m, and the HLRW stored in each waste canister is 2.12 tons. Therefore, the initial decay power of the canister is 1647 W (777W/tU). The ratio of the cylinder surface area to the total surface area of a canister is 0.95. Thus, the initial decay power of the canister is modified as 1565 W. The decay power of the canister with time can be expressed as
@(4)
The heat flux boundary condition at r = a can be expressed as.
@(5)
where k1 is the thermal conductivity of buffer layer, P(t) is the decay power of the HLRW stored in the canister, H is the canister height.
The same temperature and heat flux are used as continuous boundary conditions at the interface between the buffer layer and surrounding rock. The thermal boundary condition at r = b is expressed as
@(6)
@(7)
where k2 is the thermal conductivity of rock.
2.3. Determination of calculation parameters
The thermal parameters of surrounding rock are mainly dependent on the temperature (Xu et al., 2019b). Kukkonen (2000) studied the variation in thermal parameters of the Olkiluoto rock in Finland with temperature. The thermal conductivity of the rock decreases slightly as a function of temperature and the thermal conductivity is 2.7, 2.61, and 2.49 W/(m × K) at the temperatures of 22, 60, and 100 °C. The temperature at the canister surface will be conservatively overestimated when low thermal conductivity is used. The value of 2.61 W/(m × K) (corresponding to a temperature of 60 °C) is adopted in the examples in this paper. The heat capacity of granite increase slightly as a function of temperature and the heat capacity of rock is 737, 784, and 832 J/(kg × K) at the temperatures of 22, 60, and 100 °C, and herein their value is assumed 784 J/(kg × K), which is corresponding to the temperature of 60 °C. The density of rock is uniformly taken as ρ2 = 2630 kg/m3.
The thermal parameters of buffer material (compacted bentonite), which are much lower than those of other materials, strongly depend on the saturation degree. Ikonen (2005) and Liu et al. (2007) studied the relationship between the thermal parameters of GMZ bentonite and the degree of saturation, where the thermal conductivity and specific heat are both linear with the degree of saturation,
(8)k1 = 0.0107Sr+0.4304（R2 = 0.9111）
(9)c1 = 0.018Sr+1.1947（R2 = 0.8780）
where k1, c1, and Sr are the thermal conductivity, specific heat, and degree of saturation, respectively. R2 is the correlation coefficient.
Fig. 5 shows the relationship between the thermal conductivity of compacted GMZ bentonite and temperature from Xu et al. (2019a), which shows that the temperature takes little impact on the effective thermal conductivity of buffer material.
Fig. 5. Change in thermal conductivity with temperature (ρd = 1.6 g/cm3) (Xu et al., 2019a,b).
The designed dry density of the bentonite in the repository is 1500–1700 kg/m3(Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB, 2017), and then the initial dry density of the bentonite ρd = 1600 kg/m3 is adopted. The initial moisture constant of the bentonite is taken as the natural moisture constant (w0 = 10.4%), and thus the dry density of the bentonite is uniformly set to ρ1 = 1770 kg/m3.
The detailed parameter information is listed in Table 4.
Table 4. Detailed parameter value.
The effective thermal conductivity of 1.07 W/(m × K) and the effective specific heat of 1014 J/(kg × K) of the compacted bentonite (corresponding to the saturation degree of 60%) are chosen in this paper. In addition, the radius of the canister and the thickness of the bentonite layer are both assumed to be 0.5 m, and the distance between two canisters is 90 m. The detailed parameter information is listed in Table 4.
<Section>3. Thermal model for unit cell scale</Section>
3.1. Computational diagram and governing equation
For the unit cell scale, it is assumed that the canister radius is a, the distance from the outer edge of the buffer layer to the canister axis is b, and the radius of the surrounding rock zone extends infinitely outward from b; the temperature on the zone far away from the canister is equal to t0. Fig. 6 is a schematic of the thermal conduction model with double layered media.
Fig. 6. Thermal conduction model of two-layered media for unit cell scale with infinite outer boundary.
Based on the cylindrical coordinate method, the heat conduction equations in the buffer layer and surrounding rock is expressed as
@(10)
@(11)
where the subscripts 1 and 2 denote the buffer and rock, respectively, T is the temperature, α= k/(ρC) is the thermal diffusivity, k is the thermal conductivity, ρ is the bulk density, C is the specific heat, r is the radius distance from the canister axis, t is time.
For the case of unit cell scale, the temperature on the external surface of rock is expressed as
@(12)
3.2. Analytical solution
After homogenizing boundary conditions, the separate variable method is applied in the governing equations and boundary conditions. The analytical solutions to temperature in the buffer layer and surrounding rock are expressed as:
@(13)
@(14)
where A1, B1, A2, B2 and  are indefinite coefficients which could be defined by the boundary conditions; (m = 1, 2, 3) shows the mth eigenvalue sort by size, which can be defined by the function as
@(15)
where Q=(k2/k1)(α1/α2)1/2
The specific forms of parameters can be shown as follows:
@(16)
@(17)
@(18)
@(19)
@(20)
@(21)
These integrals in above equations must be evaluated numerically.
3.3. Verification
In order to verify the accuracy of the analytical solution to the temperature in the repository proposed in this paper, it will be compared with results in literature. The solution proposed by Zhou et al. (2020) and (Zhou et al., 2021b) is a semi-analytical solution, which are derived by the Laplace transforms and showed the temperature development on the canister surface. Fig. 7 shows the comparison between the analytical solution in this paper and the semi-analytical solution in Zhou's research. What could be found that the temperature curve simulated by the solution in this paper is similar with that in Zhou's research, which means that the analytical solution is correct. The temperature will rise rapidly in the first ten years. After that time, it will drop slowly due to the continuous heat release.
Fig. 7. Comparison of temperatures obtained by analytical solution and semi-analytical solution.
<Section>4. Thermal conduction model for repository scale</Section>
4.1. Computational diagram and governing equation
If we put the emphasis on the temperature distribution on the plane (z = 0), it is clear that the repository can be split into several units. Each unit contains individual canister wrapped by the buffer layer and surrounding rock. Because the location of canisters in the repository is symmetry, the heat flux on the symmetrical axes is equal to 0. In other word, each split unit in the repository is individual and the heat flux cannot get through the external boundary during the exothermic process of the HLRW. The position of each unit on cross-section (z = 0) is shown in Fig. 8.
Fig. 8. Schematic diagram of model for repository scale on cross-section (z = 0).
In order to obtain the temperature distribution in each unit easily, it is necessary to replace square adiabatic external boundary with a circle one, as shown in Fig. 9. However, the radius of circle boundary (rc) plays an important role in this model. There are two main ways to determine the radius value: (1) The circumference of square boundary is equal to the circle one, that is rc = 2D/π; (2) The area of square zone is equal to the circle one, that is rc = D/π0.5. How to determine rc will be discussed in the following section.
Fig. 9. Influential area with circular and square boundaries in repository.
The canister containing the HLRW is wrapped by the buffer layer and then surrounding rock. The thermal conduction model with double layered media is shown in Fig. 10. Here c is the radius distance from the canister axis to the outer edge of surrounding rock.
Fig. 10
Download : Download high-res image (266KB)Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 10. Single canister for two-layered media with finite outer boundary.
4.2. Analytical solution
After homogenizing boundary conditions, the separate variable method is applied in the governing equations and boundary conditions. The analytical solutions to temperature in the buffer layer and surrounding rock can be expressed as
@(22)
@(23)
where A1, B1, A2, B2 and  are indefinite coefficients which could be defined by the boundary conditions;  = 0, R1 (r, ) = R2 (r, ) = 1;  (m = 1, 2, 3) shows the mth eigenvalue sort by size, which can be defined by the function as
@(24)
The specific forms of parameters can be shown as follows:
@(25)
@(26)
@(27)
@(28)
@(29)
@(30)
These integrals in above equations can be evaluated numerically.
4.3. Radius of external boundary
For the condition space D/2 = 45 m, Fig. 11 shows four kinds of external circle boundary. The red (c = 45 m) and blue circles (c = 63.6 m) are the inscribed and circumscribed circles of the square. In addition, the area of black full circle (c = 50.7 m) is equal to the square area and the circumference of the dotted circle one (c = 57.3 m) is equal to the square one.
Fig. 11. Four kinds of external circle boundary.
Fig. 12 shows the variation in temperature at six different locations in the repository for EPR nuclear waste with the burn-up value of 40 MWd/kgU and cooling time of 60 years under four different external boundaries, and it indicates that the temperatures at the same location calculated under different external boundaries are the same within the first several years and quite different within the later thousands of years. It is obvious that the smaller the external boundary radius is, the higher the temperature is at any location after the disposal time of 10 years. In addition, the external boundary radius takes a great impact on the value at which the temperature will be unchanged after the disposal time of 1000 years.
Fig. 12. Temperature development with different external boundary radii.
It is obvious that the radius of external boundary circle must be between c = 45 m and c = 63.3 m. The boundary circumference takes impact on the speed of thermal exchange. However, the heat flux cannot get through the boundary in the model. Therefore, the circumference impact can be ignored. Besides, according to the thermal theory:
@(24)
where q, C, and M are the heat, specific heat capacity and mass, respectively. Area of boundary affect the temperature after the disposal time of 1000 years, which is an important problem for the repository design. From the above reason, in this paper, the relationship between the distance of two adjacent canisters and the radius of external boundary circle is rc = D/π0.5.
4.4. Temperature between repository scale and unit cell scale
Fig. 13 shows the temperature development on the canister surface for the unit cell scale and repository scale. The parameter values used in the two models are shown in Table 4. It is clear that the peak temperatures on the canister surface are 101.7 °C at 6 years for the repository scale and 99.7 °C at 11 years for the unit cell one.
Fig. 13. Comparison of temperature on the canister surface for single and multi-canister models.
The peak temperature for the repository scale is little higher than that for the unit cell scale, because the heat released from other the canister in the repository. Besides, the time when the peak temperature occurs is moved up compared by the latter. Designing a repository within the thermal design limits requires the use of a thermal analysis model, and the thermal analysis model needs to describe accurately the temperature changes as a function. The multi-canister thermal analysis model is desirable for the above reason and can also be used for the fast verification of numerical analysis.
<Section>5. Parametric study</Section>
5.1. Location
Fig. 14 shows the temperature development in the repository for EPR nuclear waste with the burn-up value of 40 MWd/kgU and cooling time of 40 years, where the distances from the canister center are 0.5, 5, 15, 30 and 50 m respectively. It indicates that the temperature development in these positions show different performances before one thousand years and they will gradually converge to a value after that time. The temperature in the buffer layer near the canister will rise sharply in first several years and it will drop slowly after that time, because the decay power of nuclear waste decrease gradually. The peak temperature appears on the interface between the canister and buffer layer after the disposal time of 10 years. However, the temperature far away from the canister begin to rise at the disposal time of 10 years and converge to a value after 1000 years. The temperature in rock increases more slowly with time than the buffer layer where r = 5, 15, 30, 50 m and it will converge to one value after the disposal time of 1000 years. It can be predicted that the temperature gradient near the canister is greater than that far away from the canister (Zhou et al., 2021b).
Fig. 14. Temperature development in different locations.
It is obvious that the temperature development can be divided into three stages: Most of heat will be released by the HLRW in first ten years. The temperature near the canister will increase rapidly and the temperature far away from the canister will be almost unchanged. During the next 90 years, the temperature near the canister will drop and rise at the location far away from it, which are due to the decrease in thermal power from the fuel and the heat transfer, respectively, resulting in uniform distribution in the repository. After 100 years, the temperature will rise steadily and converge to a constant value in the 1000 years, because residual heat will be released from the fuel.
It can be seen form Fig. 15 that the temperature in the buffer layer is always higher than that in rock, and the inner surface of the buffer layer is the most complicated position for the temperature change during the process of heat release from the HLRW. Therefore, in the following section the temperature at this boundary (r = 0.5 m) is analyzed and discussed in detail.
Fig. 15. Change in temperature with distance at different disposal times.
5.2. Thermal conductivity of buffer layer
Many research results (Liu et al., 2007; Lee et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2019a, 2019b) have shown that the thermal conductivity of buffer materials depends on degree of saturation. Fig. 16 shows the temperature-time curves on the canister surface with the burn-up value of 40 MWd/kgU and cooling time of 60 years when the thermal conductivity of the GMZ bentonite is equal to 0.45, 0.75, 1.07 and 1.50W/(m × K), respectively (corresponding to the saturation degrees of 0%, 30%, 60%, and 100%, according to Liu et al. (2007)). The thermal conductivity of bentonite has little effect on the initial value and final convergence value during temperature development in the repository. However, it has a significant effect on the heating rate and maximum temperature. If the heat transfer coefficient of buffer material becomes larger, the heating rate will become smaller, which results in the decrease in the maximum temperature on the canister. Therefore, the heat transfer property of the buffer material is getting better with the infiltration of groundwater after the closure of the disposal repository. The temperature on the canister surface calculated by the analytical solution in this paper may be higher than the actual temperature in the repository environment, and the results can be used to design the repository.
Fig. 16. Change in temperature on canister surface for different thermal conductivities in buffer layer.
5.3. Thermal conductivity of rock
The thermal conductivity of Olkiluoto rock was measured from laboratory with core drilled samples (Kukkonen 2000), and are 2.70, 2.61 and 2.49 W/(m × K) at temperatures of 22, 60 and 100 °C, respectively. Fig. 17 shows the temperature-time curves on the canister surface with the burn-up value of 40 MWd/kgU and cooling time of 60 years when the thermal conductivity of rock is equal to 2.49, 2.61 and 2.70 W/(m × K), respectively. It can be seen in Fig. 17 that the peak temperature on the canister surface is 104.3, 101.6 and 100.2 °C, that is, as the thermal conductivity of rock increases, the temperature on the canister surface decreases, but not to a great extent. Therefore, the thermal conductivity of the rock hardly affects the temperature in the repository.
Fig. 17. Variation of temperature on canister surface with different thermal conductivities.
5.4. Buffer layer thickness
Fig. 18 shows the temperature-time curves on the canister surface with the burn-up value of 40 MWd/kgU and cooling time of 60 years when the buffer layer thickness is equal to 0.5, 1.0, 1.5 and 2.0 m, respectively (i.e., b = 1.0, 1.5, 2.0 and 2.5 m). According to Fig. 18, with increasing the buffer layer thickness, the higher the temperature on the canister surface is. That is, the thicker the buffer layer is, the harder the heat conduction is. Therefore, the repository designers should consider reducing the thickness of the buffer layer as much as possible on the basis of ensuring that the buffer layer can exert its safety function.
Fig. 18. Variation of temperature on canister surface with different buffer layer thickness.
<Section>6. Conclusions</Section>
In this paper, two kinds of double layered model were established for analyzing the heat conduction near single waste canister, and the analytical solution to near-field temperature distribution during the exothermic process of nuclear waste was obtained by the separate variables method. The effects of thermal parameters of the buffer layer and surrounding rock, buffer layer thickness on the temperature of the canister surface were analyzed. The following conclusions can be obtained.
1.
On basis of the double layered model for analyzing the heat conduction near the canister, the expression of temperature at any point in the surrounding rock was obtained by the separate variables mothed. The temperature distribution was obtained near the canister at the center of one disposal panel (z = 0).
2.
The present double model was verified by comparing with a semi-analytical solution based on the Laplace transform. The influential radius of the canister at the center on one disposal panel was determined as rc = D/π0.5. The residual temperature for the repository scale is significantly higher than that for the unit cell scale.
3. For all the parameters, the position is the most important one. The temperature increases sharply near the canister, and the temperature in the buffer layer is always higher than that in surrounding rock. The change in the thermal conductivity of the rock has little impact on the temperature development during the exothermic process from the nuclear waste. And the buffer layer plays an important role in the temperature development. The more thicker the buffer layer is, the higher the temperature increases.
<Section>Declaration of competing interest</Section>
The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest associated with publication.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China with Grant Nos. 41630633 and 42077229.
<Section>References</Section>
Anttila, 2005
M. Anttila
Radioactive Characteristics of the Spent Fuel of the Finnish Nuclear Power plants. Posiva Working Report POSIVA 2005-71, Posiva Oy, Olkiluoto
Finland (2005)
Google Scholar
Cho et al., 2014
W.J. Cho, J.S. Kim, H.J. Choi
Hydrothermal modeling for the efficient design of thermal loading in a nuclear waste repository
Nucl. Eng.Design, 276 (2014), pp. 241-248
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Claesson and Probert, 1998
J. Claesson, T. Probert
Thermoelastic stress due to a rectangular heat source in a semi-infinite medium
Eng. Geol., 49 (1998), pp. 223-229
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gauld et al., 2006
I.C. Gauld, S.M. Bowman, J.E. Horwedel
ORIGEN-ARP: Automatic Rapid Processing for Spent Fuel Depletion, Decay, and Source Term Analysis
ORNL, USA (2006)
ORNL/TM-2005/39
Google Scholar
Gens et al., 2009
A. Gens, M. Sanchez, L. Do, N. Guimaraes, et al.
A full-scale in situ heating test for high-level nuclear waste disposal: observations, analysis and interpretation
Geotechnique, 59 (4) (2009), pp. 377-399
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Guo, 2017
R.P. Guo
Thermal response of a Canadian conceptual deep geological repository in crystalline rock and a method to correct the influence of the near-field adiabatic boundary condition
Eng. Geol., 218 (2017), pp. 50-62
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hökmark and Claesson, 2005
H. Hökmark, J. Claesson
Use of an analytical solution for calculating temperatures in repository host rock
Eng. Geol., 81 (2005), pp. 353-364
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ikonen, 2005
K. Ikonen
Thermal Analysis of Repository for Spent EPR-type fuel. Posiva Report POSIVA 2005-06, Posiva Oy, Olkiluoto
Finland (2005)
Google Scholar
Kukkonen, 2000
I. Kukkonen
Thermal properties of the Olkiluoto mica gneiss: results of laboratory measurements
Posiva Working Report POSIVA 2000-40, Posiva Oy, Finland, Olkiluoto (2000)
Google Scholar
Lee et al., 2014
J.O. Lee, K. Birch, H.J. Choi
Coupled thermal-hydro analysis of unsaturated buffer and backfill in a high-level waste repository
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 72 (2014), pp. 63-75
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lee et al., 2016
J.O. Lee, H. Chol, J.Y. Lee
Thermal conductivity of compacted bentonite as a buffer material for a high-level radioactive waste repository
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 94 (2016), pp. 848-855
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Li et al., 2011
J. Li, M.S. Yim, D. Mcnelis
A simplified methodology for nuclear waste repository thermal analysis
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 38 (2011), pp. 243-253
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Liu et al., 2007
Y.M. Liu, M.F. Cai, J. Wang
Thermal properties of buffer material for high-level radioactive waste disposal
Chin. J. Geotech. Eng., 26 (2007), pp. 3891-3896
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Posiva, 2017
Posiva, SKB
Safety functions
Performance Targets and Technical Design Requirements for a KBS-3V. Posiva SKB Report 01, Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB, Stockholm, and Posiva Oy, Finland, Olkiluoto (2017)
Google Scholar
Rosborg and Werme, 2008
B. Rosborg, L. Werme
The Swedish nuclear waste program and the long-term corrosion behaviour of copper
J. Nucl. Mater., 379 (2008), pp. 142-153
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Rossi et al., 2004
L. Rossi, H.I. Inyang, J. Graham-Eagle, S. Pennell
A model of coupled heat and moisture transport in an annular clay barrier
ASCE J. Environ. Engng, 130 (2004), pp. 855-862
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Sizgek, 2005
G.D. Sizgek
Three-dimensional thermal analysis of in-floor type nuclear waste repository for a ceramic waste form
Nucl. Eng. Des., 235 (2005), pp. 101-109
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang, 2007
J. Wang
Deep Geological Disposal of High Level Radioactive Waste in china: Latest Progress by 2007, Chinese-German Workshop on Radioactive Waste Disposal
Beijing Research Institute of Uranium Geology, Beijing (2007)
2007
Google Scholar
Xu et al., 2019a
Y.S. Xu, D.A. Sun, Z.T. Zeng, H.B. Lv
Effect of aging on thermal conductivity of compacted bentonites
Eng. Geol., 253 (2019), pp. 55-63
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Xu et al., 2019b
Y.S. Xu, D.A. Sun, Z.T. Zeng, et al.
Temperature dependence of apparent thermal conductivity of compacted bentonite as buffer material for high-level radioactive waste repository
Appl. Clay Sci., 174 (2019), pp. 10-14
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhao et al., 2014
H.G. Zhao, H. Shao, H. Kunz, et al.
Numerical analysis of thermal process in the near field around vertical disposal of high-level radioactive waste
Rock. Mech. Geol. Eng, 6 (2014), pp. 55-60
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhou et al., 2020
X.Y. Zhou, D.A. Sun, Y.Z. Tan, A.N. Zhou
Canister spacing in high-level radioactive nuclear waste repository
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 141 (2020), p. 107335
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhou et al., 2021b
XY Zhou, DA Sun, YF Xu
A new thermal analysis model with three heat conduction layers in the nuclear waste repository
Nucl. Eng. Des., 371 (2021), p. 110929, 10.1016/j.nucengdes.2020.110929
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhou et al., 2021a
XY Zhou, YS Xu, DA Sun, YZ Tan, YF Xu
Three-dimensional thermal-hydraulic coupled analysis in the nuclear waste repository
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 151 (2021), p. 107866, 10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107866
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar