<title>Numerical method development for oxidation particle formation during sodium spray fires in SFR containment</title>
<author>1,HongpingSun,2,JianDeng,3,YapeiZhang,4,WenxiTian,5,SuizhengQiu,6,G.H.Su</author>
<Affiliation>1,School of Nuclear Science and Technology, Shanxi Engineering Research Center of Advanced Nuclear Energy, State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, China;2,Nuclear Power Institute of China, Chengdu 610041, China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107674</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454920303728#!</URL>
Numerical method development for oxidation particle formation during sodium spray fires in SFR containment
HongpingSun,JianDeng,YapeiZhang,WenxiTian,SuizhengQiu,G.H.Su
School of Nuclear Science and Technology, Shanxi Engineering Research Center of Advanced Nuclear Energy, State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, China
Nuclear Power Institute of China, Chengdu 610041, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
A method for simulating vapor to particle conversion under sodium spray was developed.
The method was implemented into the SOFAC code for further assessment.
The method benchmarked against the ABCOVE and FAUNA experimental database.
The comparative results show the reliability of the particle generation method developed in this work.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
A new method was developed to predict particle generation during sodium spray fire by combining the spray combustion models and the classical nucleation theory. 224 data points calculated in the evaluation process show that the influence of oxygen concentration and temperature on the particle formation can be almost neglected when the sodium droplet mean diameter is less than 0.2 cm though observed data and the spray droplet diameter has the greatest effect on particle generation among them. Subsequently, the correlation between particle generation number and sodium burning rate can be obtained by fitting method as well as the conversion between the particle number and mass. The calculation results of the code with and without this method show that the predicted thermal-hydraulic responses, suspended aerosol concentration and particle distribution agree well with the experimental data in both cases, which shows the reliability of the particle generation method developed in this work.
Keywords:Sodium spray fire;Particle generation;SFR;Numerical model development
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Sodium-cooled fast reactor (SFR) belongs to the fourth generation nuclear power system. The liquid metal sodium with active chemical properties is easy to cause combustion when exposed to the air, and large amount of sodium is the biggest fire hazard source in the SFR. Therefore, the safety of sodium fire is one of the most important safety problems which are different from that of light water reactor (LWR). In a severe accident of SFR, sodium may be released into the containment with fission products, and spray fire occurs during coolant leakage phase. During the coolant blowdown phase, the sodium spray disperses into small droplets, which leads to the intense sodium combustion (Herranz and Kissane, 2012). Thus, it is very necessary to take protection measures during sodium spray fire in view of the safety problems. Simultaneously, the oxide aerosols formed after combustion carry fission product source terms to diffuse and migrate in the containment. It is of great significance for radiation protection to accurately simulate the oxide aerosol behaviour (LaChance and Wigeland, 2012). The accurate simulation of the conversion of superheated oxide into aerosol during sodium spray fire is the basis for accurately simulating the aerosol behavior of combustion products.
The simulation method of aerosol particles conversion should be established during the analysis of sodium spray fire. Many researchers in the world have carried out experiments and theoretical studies on thermal hydraulic response and aerosol behavior during sodium spray fires. And many famous experiments have been finished in different facilities, such as CSTF in America (Hilliard et al., 1979), POLLUX in France (Saux, 1996), SAPFIRE in Japan (Miyake, 1996) and FAUNA in Germany (Cherdron et al., 1988). For theoretical research, NACOM (Tsai, 1980) was developed to calculate the thermal behavior of Na-spray fire based on pre-ignition and vapor phase combustion models. Subsequently, the sodium evaporation model (Newman, 1983) was developed, and the sodium fire occurred in the gas phase. For particle generation research, theoretical assessment of particle generation from sodium pool fires has been carried out by Garcia (Garcia et al., 2016), which has a great contribution to the exploration of particle generation model in sodium fire accident. And then more and more Na-spray codes have been developed for thermal-hydraulic calculation (PULSAR (Saux, 1996), FEUMIX (Rigollet-Pichon, 1996), NABRAND (Cherdron et al., 1988), ECART (Manzini and Torsello, 2013) CONTAIN-LMR (Murata et al., 1993), ASTEC-NA (Lebel, 2018), and so on). However, the models used for the calculation of aerosol conversion in most codes under spray fires are either classical experimental correlations or transformation fraction parameters. Then the diffusion behavior of oxide aerosols is simulated by considering the aerosol dynamic models. In general, the mechanism theoretical method for simulation of oxide aerosol conversion during sodium spray fires seems inadequate, especially the model of the transition from superheated oxidation vapor to particles in the combustion process.
The main objective of this work is to develop a new numerical method for simulating the conversion of oxide to aerosol particles during sodium spray fires. In order to simulate the transformation of aerosol particles during sodium spray fires, this paper calculates the particles number based on classical nucleation theory (Becker and Döring, 1935, Seinfeld, 1986, Zeldovich, 1942). 224 test points based on nucleation theory were used to evaluate the three main factors that affect the number of particles generated during spray combustion, including spray droplet diameter, sodium temperature and oxygen concentration. The combustion rates were calculated by the spray sodium combustion models (Tsai, 1980), and the relationship between the particle number and the burning rate was obtained by polynomial fitting method. The number of particles generated can be converted to the aerosol mass by treating the particles as spheres. The new method was then embedded in the SOFAC code developed by considering the spray burning models and aerosol dynamic models. The ABCOVE (Hilliard et al., 1985) and FANUA (Cherdron and Charpenel, 1985) experiments were selected to be simulated for assessment of the improved code with new developed conversion method. This work contributes to a new numerical method of aerosol particle generation during sodium spray fire for existing simulation tools devoted to SFR design and safety analysis.
<Section>2. Mathematical models</Section>
2.1. Classical nucleation theory
There are many types of phase transformation mechanism for gas-particle conversion. The main mechanism of nucleation is the formation of clusters in metastable volume vapor by thermal fluctuation (Christensen, 2000). The process of nucleation is also the process of thermodynamic system from metastable to steady state to achieve thermal equilibrium. Sodium vapor combustion is the main way in the sodium spray fire, which refers to the mixture of vapor generated from the surface of the droplet and the surrounding oxygen. And the condensed oxide particles generated in sodium spray fires are formed by the method of homogeneous and heterogeneous nucleation to make the system reach thermal equilibrium (Newman, 1983). Therefore, there is also a process of formation of primary clusters by superheated vapor generated by oxidation in this way (Herranz et al., 2018). In this paper, the particles produced during the combustion of strong sodium droplets do not consider the non-homogeneous nucleation process. The homogeneous nucleation model was chosen to simulate the process of vapor conversion to particles in sodium spray fire, and it is assumed that the diameters of new particles are uniform.
Actually, the transformation model of gas-to-particles has been researched for a long time. According to the investigation data, there are many theoretical models to simulate the nucleation in the chemical reaction process. Therefore, reliable and well-known classical nucleation theory (Becker and Döring, 1935, Seinfeld, 1986, Zeldovich, 1942) was selected to evaluate the particle nucleation during sodium spray fire in this work. The calculation of particle nucleation number by classical nucleation theory is related to three factors, including the rate of molecule combination at critical state (@), the non-equilibrium factor (@) and particle equilibrium concentration of the critical cluster (@). Then the nucleated particles rate (m−3·s−1) through this theory can be calculated as:
@(1)
The molecular collision formation rate in the critical cluster of the three terms (s−1) can be given by (Christensen and Livbjerg, 1996):
@(2)
In Eq. (2), the critical particle diameter,, which is the minimum particle size that can be formed in the nucleation process, can be calculated as:
@(3)
The key to Eq. (3) is to approximately consider that the surface tension of the minimal particles is consistent with that of the liquid. The molecular volume,, is calculated by cloud density though condensation:
@(4)
The second term in the classical nucleation theory equation is the non-equilibrium factor in the nucleation process,@,which is mainly related to the number of molecules formed in the critical state (Zeldovich, 1942):
@(5)
The third term of Eq. (1) is used to calculate the particle equilibrium concentration of the critical cluster,, which can be calculated by:
(6)
where  is the difference between a mechanical term related to the molecular number in critical size clusters and the logarithmic term of component saturation pressure ratio (Seinfeld, 2006), it mainly comes from Gibbs free energy difference between gas and solid and can be get by:
(7)
Finally, the total number of particles generated in the sodium spray combustion area can be obtained by:
(8)
The VR was defined as the sodium spray combustion zone, which is approximately the volume of all sodium droplets. Through the homogeneous nucleation numerical models, the number of particles converted during the spray combustion is realized. According to the characteristic parameters of the oxide aerosols, the mass of aerosol transformation can be obtained. The relationship between the nucleated particles rate and sodium spray burning rate will be further discussed in the following contents.
2.2. Sodium spray combustion models
In the past, many studies have been done on the chemical reaction of sodium with oxygen. Newman (Newman, 1983) has made a detailed analysis on the process of sodium fire reaction. Usually, the chemical reaction of sodium with oxygen will produce two kinds of oxides, including sodium monoxide and peroxide. The two oxidation reactions of sodium and oxygen are as follows:
@(9)
@(10)
Current studies on sodium droplet combustion show that there are two main stages. First, the surface of high temperature sodium droplets reacts with oxygen (pre-ignition phase combustion), and then the heat of oxidation is transferred to sodium droplets to raise their temperature and generate sodium vapor, which burns with surrounding oxygen. Among them, vapor combustion phase is the main mode of sodium droplet combustion, however the pre-combustion stage plays a decisive role in vapor combustion, as shown in the Fig. 1. These models belong to the NACOM models (Tsai, 1980), which has been used for many years in several different codes. Actually, it is based on the assumption that diffusion in the boundary layer around the sodium droplet is the rate limiting step to combustion.
Fig. 1. The process of Na-droplet combustion.
2.2.1. Pre-ignition phase combustion
When sodium droplets come into contact with air, the surface of sodium droplets reacts immediately with oxygen. The heat of chemical reaction on the surface is more easily transferred to the inner side of Na-droplets due to the high thermal conductivity. The formation of chemical reaction heat on the surface of sodium droplets depends on the oxidation rate of the surface of sodium droplets. Therefore, the reaction rate control equation of sodium droplets before ignition is as follows:
@(11)
where @ is stoichiometric combustion ratio, @ is the molar density of air, @ is the oxygen mole fraction, @ is the order of reaction, @ is the ideal gas constant. The reaction parameter,@,is 5.2794 × 10−4J/mole and (frequency factor) is 320 m/s (Muthu et al., 2016). is usually taken as unity. The diffusion rate of oxygen can be estimated by the Tsai’s model (Tsai, 1980):
@(12)
where @ is the mass transfer coefficient. It is mainly used to calculate O2 transport to the surface of Na-droplets and can be estimated as:
@(13)
where @ is the O2 molecular diffusivity, @ is the Na-droplet diameter, @ is the Reynolds number and @ is the Schmidt number.
@(14)
where @ is the relative velocity, @, @ are density and viscosity of air respectively.
2.2.2. Vapor phase combustion
When the temperature of Na-droplets is close to the boiling point, the vapor combustion occurs due to sodium evaporation. The heat generated by combustion feeds back to the droplet surface and assists the vaporization of sodium, thus maintaining the vapor phase combustion. The ignition of vapor phase combustion of Na-droplets depends on the relevant conditions. In short, the pre-ignition phase plays a key role in the combustion of sodium droplets. The rate of Na mass transport to reaction zone can be get by:
@(15)
Therefore, the relationship between the mass of sodium consumed and the diameter of Na-droplets can be written as follows:
@(16)
where @ is sodium molar mass, @ is the Na-spray rate.
2.2.3. Droplet motion model
The motion equation of Na-droplet is different from that of steel ball model. The rigid sphere model takes into account the inertia force produced by vapor released from the droplet surface. The governing equation for the motion of combustion droplets can be get by:
@(17)
where @ is the Na-droplet motion rate, @ is the gravity acceleration,  @is the gas density,@ is the Na-droplet density and @ is the drag coefficient. Using the existing droplet movement model to calculate the drag coefficient of droplets assumed to be spheres, which is a function of a Reynolds number:
@(18)
@(19)
@(20)
@(21)
The above equations are used to solve the problem of sodium droplets falling from the top of the compartment to the floor. The fourth-order Runge-Kutta method is used to solve the governing equation.
2.2.4. Combustion rate calculation model
The droplet size distribution in spray is related to many factors (spray rate, opening size and shape, etc.). At present, functions are used to calculate the size distribution of sodium droplets internationally, including Nukiyama-Tanasama (N-T), Log-Normal and Rosin-Rammler distribution functions. Of these, N-T equation, which is in good agreement with the experimental results, is used to calculate the distribution of Na-droplets:
@(22)
where@  is the volume fraction of group i droplets, @ is the volume mean diameter of droplets. The maximum and minimum droplets size is equal to 1% of the average droplets volume of the two groups. Droplets between the maximum and minimum droplet sizes are divided into 11 groups with a constant size range of . Therefore, the number of droplets () in each group can be calculated according to the distribution model:
@(23)
where @ is the time step. Lagrangian method is used to track each group of droplets burning out or reaching the ground. The total burning rate of Na-spray is superimposed on all droplet burning rates at different sizes and heights:
@(24)
By comparing the sodium droplet temperature with the ignition temperature, the corresponding combustion rate calculation model is selected.
<Section>3. Development of particle generation method</Section>
3.1. Evaluation of particle generation number
In the sodium spray fires, the main factors affecting the nucleation include sodium droplet distribution, temperature and oxygen concentration. Thus, a theoretical assessment method was selected to evaluate the effect on the particle generation number for the three parameters based on the classical nucleation theory. Table 1 displays the data points for the three parameters used for evaluation. If the oxygen concentration of low concentration is considered, such as 1%, it is found that the combustion models are not applicable in the test. Thus we didn’t consider the oxygen concentration of 1%. Other parameters in the testing process use the default or constant values of the relevant parameters. During this calculation, the relevant hypothesis is made, which assumes that the formed particles have a single particle size. It can be seen that a total of 224 cases need to calculate the number of particles predicted by the nucleation theory in the sodium spray fire.
Table 1. Test matrix for the method.
According to the 224 calculation results, the influence of different parameters on the number of particles produced by sodium spray fire can be analyzed. Fig. 2 to Fig. 5 display the calculation results of particle production number under different conditions. In general, the number of particles generated by the classical nucleation theory changes regularly with the test parameters with considering the uncertainties in the models. Among these results, it can be seen that when the particle size is less than 0.2 cm, the oxygen concentration and sodium temperature have little effect on the number of particles produced. The reason for this phenomenon is mainly related to the NACOM spray combustion models. When the droplet size of the spray droplet is small, especially when less than 0.2 cm, the NACOM combustion models holds that the droplets burn almost all. Therefore, some parameters of the classical nucleation theory calculated according to the model are almost the same. The number of particles calculated by the method decreases rapidly with the increase of droplet diameters (Fig. 2a and Fig. 3a). The reason is that the smaller the droplets, the larger the contact area between sodium droplets formed by sodium and air at the same sodium mass, hence the higher the particle nucleation rate after oxidation reaction. The particle number slightly changes with the variation of sodium temperature and oxygen concentration. It can been seen that the particle number decreases as the sodium temperature increases (Fig. 2b and Fig. 4a), which can be explained that higher sodium temperature leads to a lower particle nucleation rate. In Fig. 2(b), the number of particles (NT) is decreasing with increasing droplet temperature for droplets of diameter less than 0.2 cm and the same is increasing for 0.2 cm diameter particles. In general, it comes down to the setting of some uncertain parameters in the calculation model, and similar phenomena can also be observed in Fig. 3 (b) and Fig. 4 (b). Particle number grows with the increase of oxygen concentration (Fig. 3b and Fig. 4b), and the reason is that the higher the oxygen concentration is, the sodium combustion will be, and more particles will be formed. The change of critical particle diameter with sodium temperature and droplet diameter is shown in Fig. 5. It can be seen that with increase of sodium temperature and droplet diameter, the critical particle diameter decreases gradually, which is similar to the change trend of particle number.
Fig. 2. Change of particle number with ddroplet and Tdroplet for 21% O2 cases.
Fig. 3. Change of particle number with ddroplet and CO2 for Tdroplet =950 K cases.
Fig. 4. Change of particle number with Tdroplet and CO2 for ddroplet=0.3 cm cases.
Fig. 5. Change of the critical particle diameter with Tdroplet and ddroplet for 21% O2 cases.
Among the above results, the sodium droplet diameter has the greatest influence on the number of particle generated during sodium spray fires. The total particle number of 224 test cases varies from 1021 to 1026. And the critical particle diameter ranges from 9.0 × 10−11 to 1.0 × 10−8 m. An interesting phenomenon observed is that when diameter of sodium droplet is less than 0.2 cm, the influence of sodium temperature and oxygen concentration on the number of particles generated can be almost negligible.
3.2. Achievement of fitting correlations
During the actual process of sodium spray combustion, the particle conversion rate is also related to the three parameters: sodium droplet diameter, temperature and oxygen concentration. For all cases discussed, 224 burning rate points can be obtained according to the spray combustion models as mentioned above. Actually, a correlation between particle generation number and sodium burning rate can be obtained by polynomial fitting method, as shown in Fig. 6. Thus, the correlation fitted can be written as:
@(25)
Fig. 6. Particle number vs. sodium burning rate.
A comparison was made between the correlation prediction and the theoretical values, as shown in the Fig. 7. The deviation between the fitting correlation and theoretical cases is within 60%, which is an acceptable range. Meanwhile, an equation used to calculate the critical particle diameter can be get in a similar approach:
@(26)
Fig. 7. Correlation predicted value vs. NT_test.
The main function of Eq. (25) and Eq. (26) is to convert the particle number to aerosol mass. A hypothesis made in this work is that all the particles generated during the sodium spray fire are spherical. Based on this assumption, the particle generation number can be converted to the aerosol mass:
@(27)
Where @ is the correction coefficient. Rightfully, the relationship between the Eq. (8) and the Eq. (24) was established in this way. Thus, the aerosol mass of sodium oxide during sodium spray fire can be calculated as:
@(28)
where @ is the proportion of sodium oxide. Since the sodium oxide includes sodium monoxide and sodium peroxide, the value of  ranges from 1.35 to 1.69. The number of generated particles is transformed into aerosols mass, and then their behaviors are calculated by the aerosol dynamics models.
3.3. Application of the method
China has made great efforts to study the SFR, and the first commercial demonstration reactor is under construction. Thus, many codes have been developed for the safety analysis of the SFR. The SOFAC code was developed to simulate the thermal hydraulic response and oxide aerosol behavior during sodium spray fires in compartment, including the spray burning models (Tsai, 1980), the aerosol dynamics models (Gelbard, 1982), heat transfer models and heat balance equations (Muthu et al., 2016, Tsai, 1980) and auxiliary models. The program is compiled by Fortran language based on module programming mode. The SOFAC program is concerned about aerosol behavior after sodium spray fire, hence the mechanism behavior of aerosols is considered in the aerosol module, such as multiple aerosol segments owing to particle size distribution, mechanism deposition and agglomeration. The main depositional methods include Brownian diffusion, gravitational deposition, thermophoresis and diffusiophoresis. The agglomeration modes are composed of Brownian diffusion, differential gravitational settling and turbulent agglomeration by shear forces and inertial forces. More details can be found in the reference (Gelbard, 1982).
However, the initial version of program is similar to most codes discussed in the introduction, which use the input conversion fraction method to simulate aerosol mass transformation, as shown in Fig. 8. Accurate simulation of aerosol conversion process in sodium spray combustion is essential for subsequent aerosol dynamic behavior analysis. Therefore, a bridge between combustion module and aerosol module can be built through the above new developed method, which is the main significance of this work. The method developed has been implanted into SOFAC code for further assessment. In the following chapters, an analysis was made on the comparison results of the experimental data and the code predictions before and after improvement.
Fig. 8. Relationship between burning and aerosol models.
<Section>4. Modelling of the benchmark tests</Section>
4.1. Description of the experiments
Many sodium spray fire experiments have been carried out around the world. In this work, two types of experiments are selected to validate the code and models: (1) sodium instantaneous sodium spray experiment; (2) sodium continuous spray experiment. The Hanford Engineering Development Laboratory (HEDL) has carried out a series of experiments with sodium for the liquid metal reactor safety assessment (Hilliard et al., 1979), including ABCOVE experiments in the containment system test facility (CSTF). The FAUNA device in the Germany was built to study the consequences of sodium spray fire (Cherdron and Charpenel, 1985). Fig. 9 displays the diagram of the CSTF, which is a cylindrical vessel. It can be seen that the container diameter is 7.6 m, accompanied by a height of 20.3 m and a total free volume of 852 m3. Fig. 10 displays the vessel of FAUNA (Cherdron and Charpenel, 1985), the device consists of a cylindrical steel containment with a diameter of 6.0 m, height of 6.0 m and a volume of 220 m3. There are many experimental instruments in the both facilities to detect thermal hydraulic and aerosol parameters, including the atmosphere pressure and temperature, aerosol suspended concentration and so on. In this work, the AB5, AB6, FS3 and FS4 experiments were chosen for the assessment. The detailed parameter information can be found be in Ref. (Cherdron and Charpenel, 1985, Hilliard et al., 1979, Hilliard et al., 1985).
Fig. 9. The schematic diagram of ABCOVE (Hilliard et al., 1979).
Fig. 10. The schematic diagram of FAUNA (Cherdron et al., 1988).
4.1.1. Experimental conditions
Table 2 shows the experiment conditions of AB5, AB6, FS3 and FS4. Since the beginning of the AB5 test, sodium with an injection rate of 256 g/s from 13 to 885 s was injected into the container through two nozzles. In the AB6 test, sodium with a rate of 42.8 g/s between 620 and 5400 s was injected into the vessel only through a spray nozzle after the start of the test. The initial sodium droplet temperature was 836.15 and 833.15 K respectively for AB5 and AB6. During these two experiments, sodium was continuously sprayed into the vessel and oxygen source term was also provided to maintain sodium combustion. In FS3 and FS4 tests, sodium was instantaneously sprayed into the vessel. These two experimental conditions were basically the same, the sodium spray with a temperature of 773.15 K was injected into the vessel at the rate of 56 kg/s and 60 kg/s within 0.53 s for FS3 and FS4 tests, respectively. The hypothesis of this simulation was assumed that the combustion products are all sodium monoxide during spray fires.
Table 2. The test conditions of AB1, AB2, FS3 and FS4.
4.1.2. Input model description
Both experimental vessels are built as a single control volume because of the lumped parameter program. For the vessel of AB series tests, there is a layer of fiberglass insulation, which was simulated by heat structure. The physical properties of fiberglass insulation as input data are set as Ref. (Soto, 1994). Heat structures were also well modeled, including the floor, wall, ceiling and internal structures. Each heat structure was designated as a horizontal or vertical one, where the internals were divided into two heat structures, one horizontal and the other vertical. Table 3 illustrates the initial parameters needed in aerosol module. For the aerosol size distribution, there are two very important parameters, including geometric deviation (GSD) and aerodynamic mass median diameters (AMMD). The setting of these values are mainly taken from the Ref. (Soto, 1994, Hilliard et al., 1979). Moreover, the other uncertain parameters in the aerosol module are also set for the best estimation simulation, such as dynamic and agglomeration shape factors, turbulence dissipation, slip coefficient etc.
Table 3. Aerosol initial and uncertainty parameters.
<Section>5. Results and discussion</Section>
An analysis of comparison between improved code prediction and the data was made in this section. For the validation of program and models, we mainly consider two types of experiments. One is the instantaneous spray sodium fire, such as the FAUNA experiment; the other is the continuous spray type, such as the ABCOVE experiment. Actually, there were multiple measuring points in the tests and the average data were selected with the consideration of the lumped parameter code. Specific analysis contents include thermal hydraulic response, aerosol mass and size distribution.
Fig. 11, Fig. 12 and Fig. 13 display the thermal hydraulic response comparative results, which shows a good agreement between code predictions and the data. After the start of the sodium spray for AB5 and AB6, the heat released by the combustion of sodium increases the pressure and temperature gradually, and then the rate of increases gradually slows down owing to the decreases of oxygen concentration. Subsequently, the pressure and temperature gradually drop due to natural cooling from 3600 s when the spray stops. The code accurately captures this phenomenon, which is consistent with the data. For FS3 and FS4, only the pressure response in the vessel is concerned within 30 s due to the short time of sodium spray, which also shows that the code predictions agree well with the data. It can be seen that the code prediction with new method is slightly larger than when there is no such method. It can be explained that the sodium combustion rate caused by the method is also slightly higher, resulting in more heat release. During most of the heating period, the code prediction with new method is more consistent with the experiment data in the middle and late combustion phase. In the cooling phase, the temperature drop rate with new method is relatively high owing to the higher temperature difference between gas and surrounding heat structures.
Fig. 11. Thermal-hydraulic comparison results in AB5.
Fig. 12. Thermal-hydraulic comparison results in AB6.
Fig. 13. Gas pressure in FS3 and FS4.
Fig. 14, Fig. 15 and Fig. 16 illustrate the comparison results of aerosol suspended concentration. In the AB5 test, code prediction with new method illustrates a better agreement with data from 13 to 300 s. The simulation results are higher than data during 300–885 s owing to the uncertainties in this test. Subsequently, the aerosols deposit gradually after the end of combustion. In the AB6 test, aerosol suspended concentration increased to a peak value after 400 s of sodium spray combustion, and then gradually decreased due to deposition. There was a relatively state from 1500 to 3600 s due to the balance between particle generation and removal, which was captured accurately by the code. Once the sodium spray is over, the aerosol concentration drop rapidly because of natural deposition. As shown in Fig. 16, aerosols form in a short time due to rapid combustion and then deposit gradually in FS3 and FS4 tests. The code prediction of aerosol concentration with new method is also slightly larger than that without this one. As explained above, the sodium spray burning rate calculated by new method is higher, thus the prediction of aerosol suspended concentration shows the same trend in general.
Fig. 14. Suspension Na aerosol concentration in AB5.
Fig. 15. Suspension Na aerosol concentration in AB6.
Fig. 16. Suspended aerosol concentration in FS3 and FS4.
Fig. 17 and Fig. 18 show the comparative results of AMMD in AB5 and AB6 tests. With the formation of aerosol particles during sodium spray fire, the AMMD first increased gradually due to the agglomeration of particles. In the AB5 test, the AMMD reached the maximum value after a period of fluctuation owing to coupling effect of various deposition and agglomeration. Then due to the natural sedimentation mechanisms, the deposition of large particles causes the AMMD to decrease gradually. The AMMD variation of AB6 test is basically the same as that of AB5. Differently, the sodium spray start time is 620 s, thus the initial AMMD was set to 0 as a default in the code. Once the sodium spray started, the aerosol generated in the combustion process, and the AMMD rose rapidly. It can be observed that in the middle phase of combustion, the AMMD remains relatively stable, similar to the aerosol suspended concentration changes. The whole process of AMMD variation predicted by the code is consistent with the trend of data for both cases, indicating the correctness of the simulation. It can also be seen that the code prediction with new method is more closer to the data, which further explains the reliability of the method.
Fig. 17. Comparison results of AMMD in AB5.
Fig. 18. Comparison results of AMMD in AB6.
The distributions of aerosols for AB5 and AB6 are shown in Table 4. The predicted results of the code in both modes are slightly lower than the data, however it can be seen that the code prediction with new method is more consistent with data. The total aerosol deposition mass errors predicted by the code with PG method are 2.8% and 2.5% for AB5 and AB6, respectively. Fig. 19 and Fig. 20 display the percentage of aerosol deposition at different locations in the tests. On the whole, more than 90% of aerosols are settled on the horizontal heat structures, indicating that the gravity settlement is the most important approach among the natural deposition mechanisms.
Table 4. Aerosol distribution in AB5 and AB6 (kg, Na).
Fig. 19. Na-aerosol distribution in AB5.
Fig. 20. Na-aerosol distribution in AB6.
<Section>6. Conclusions</Section>
In this work, the classical nucleation theory was applied to simulate the particle generation number during sodium spray fires. And then 224 data test points are calculated to evaluate the three main factors that affect the particle generation during sodium spray fires, including spray droplet diameter, sodium temperature and oxygen concentration. The results show that the spray droplet diameter has the greatest effect on the particle generation number among the three factors. The number of particle generation significantly decreases with the increase of the droplet diameter. Changes in sodium temperature and oxygen concentration only slightly decrease or increase the number of particles generated. An interesting phenomenon observed in the test data is that when the particle diameter is less than 0.2 cm, the particle generation number is almost only related to the droplet diameter, and the effect of sodium temperature and oxygen concentration can be almost negligible. Subsequently, the number of aerosol particles is associated with the combustion rate by the method of polynomial fitting. The particle number is transformed into the particle mass under the assumption that all the particles generated are spheres. This approach builds a connection between sodium combustion and aerosol behavior. The comparison results show that the thermal hydraulic responses, suspended aerosol concentration and particle size distribution predicted by the code agree well with the data with and without this method in both cases. And it is further explained that the sodium spray burning models and aerosol dynamic models are correct in the code. As for the new method, it is necessary that more mechanistic experiments should be carried out to validate the correctness of the method. Overall, this work established a set of method to provide a theoretical basis for aerosol particles conversion during sodium spray fires, which can be applied to the development of the SFR accident analysis code in the future.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Hongping Sun: Conceptualization, Software, Writing - original draft. Jian Deng: Methodology, Data curation. Yapei Zhang: Writing - review & editing. Wenxi Tian: Visualization. Suizheng Qiu: Investigation, Writing - review & editing. G.H. Su: Supervision, Project administration.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgment</Section>
The authors appreciate the financial support from National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 11875216).
<Section>References</Section>
Becker and Döring, 1935
R. Becker, W. Döring
Kinetische Behandlung der Keimbildung in übersättigten Dämpfern
Ann. Phys., 24 (1935), pp. 719-752
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Cherdron and Charpenel, 1985
W. Cherdron, J. Charpenel
Thermodynamic Consequences of Sodium spray Fires in Closed Containments. Pt. 2 (No. KFK-3831). Kernforschungszentrum Karlsruhe G.m.b.H. Laboratorium für Aerosolphysik und
Filtertechnik, Germany (1985)
Google Scholar
Cherdron et al., 1988
Cherdron W., J.S., Freudenstein K., 1988. Sodium fire research programs for SNR safety in the FRG. IAEA specialist's meeting on sodium fires. Obninsk: International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), 38-42.
Google Scholar
Christensen and Livbjerg, 1996
K.A. Christensen, H. Livbjerg
A field study of submicron particles from the combustion of straw
Aerosol Sci. Technol., 25 (1996), pp. 185-199
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Soto, 1994
Francisco J. Soto, F.E.H., Lubomyra N. Kmetyk, 1994. MELCOR 1.8.2 Assessment: Aerosol Experiments ABCOVE AB5, AB6, AB7 and LACE LA2. Sandia National Laboratories, SAND94-2166•UC-610.
Google Scholar
Garcia et al., 2016
M. Garcia, L.E. Herranz, M.P. Kissane
Theoretical assessment of particle generation from sodium pool fires
Nucl. Eng. Des., 310 (2016)
Google Scholar
Gelbard, 1982
Gelbard, F., 1982. MAEROS User Manual. Sandia National Laboratories. NUREG/CR-1391.
Google Scholar
Herranz et al., 2018
Herranz L.E, G.M., Kissane M.P., Spengler C., 2018. A lumped parameter modelling of particle generation from Na-pool fires in SFR containment. Progress in Nuclear Energy 109, 223-232.
Google Scholar
Herranz and Kissane, 2012
Hilliard, H.K., McCormack, J.D., J.A., Postma, A.K., 1979. Aerosol behavior during sodium pool fires in a large vessel-CSTF tests AB1 and AB2. Hanford Engineering Development Laboratory.
Google Scholar
Hilliard et al., 1979
Hilliard, H.K., McCormack, J.D., J.A., Postma, A.K., 1979. Aerosol behavior during sodium pool fires in a large vessel-CSTF tests AB1 and AB2. Hanford Engineering Development Laboratory.
Google Scholar
Hilliard et al., 1985
R.K. Hilliard, J.D. McCormack, L.D. Muhlestein
Results and Code Predictions for ABCOVE Aerosol Code Validation with low Concentration NaOH and NaI aerosol - CSTF TEST AB7
HEDL-TIME (1985), pp. 85-91
Google Scholar
Christensen, 2000
LaChance J., S.J., Wigeland R., 2012. Sodium Fast Reactor Safety and Licensing Research Plan – Volume II. Sandia National Laboratories.
Google Scholar
LaChance and Wigeland, 2012
LaChance J., S.J., Wigeland R., 2012. Sodium Fast Reactor Safety and Licensing Research Plan – Volume II. Sandia National Laboratories.
Google Scholar
Lebel, 2018
Luke S.Lebel, N., 2018. New developments in modeling sodium spray fires with ASTEC-Na. Annals of Nuclear Energy 119, 23-35.
Google Scholar
Manzini and Torsello, 2013
Manzini G., P.F., Torsello G., 2013. Sodium safety-Spray and pool fires ECART modeling. The 15th International Topical Meeting On Nuclear Reactor Thermal-Hydraulics, Pisa.
Google Scholar
Miyake, 1996
Miyake O. , T.H., 1996. Overview of PNC Studies of Source Term and sodium fires for FBRs. IAEA/IWGFR TCM on Evaluation of Radioactive Materials Release and Sodium Fire in Fast Reactor, IWGFR/92, O-arai, Japan.
Google Scholar
Murata et al., 1993
Murata, K.K., Carroll, D.E., Bergeron, K.D., Valdez, G.D., 1993. A Computer Code for Containment Analysis of Accidents in Liquid-metal Cooled Nuclear Reactors (No.SAND91-1490). Sandia National Labs., Albuquerque, NM.
Google Scholar
Muthu et al., 2016
Muthu Saravanan S., M.R.P., Nashine B.K., Selvaraj P., Chellapandi P., 2016. NAFCON-SF: A sodium spray fire code for evaluating thermal consequences in SFR containment. Annals of Nuclear Energy 90, 389-409.
Google Scholar
Newman, 1983
R.N. Newman
The ignition and burning behaviour of sodium metal in air
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 12 (1983), pp. 119-147
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Rigollet-Pichon, 1996
Rigollet-Pichon L., M.J.C., 1996. The Modelling of Sodium Jet Fires in a Global Computer Code FEUMIX3. IAEA/IWGFR TCM on Evaluation of Radioactive Materials Release and Sodium Fire in Fast Reactor, IWGFR/92, O-arai, Japan.
Google Scholar
Saux, 1996
Saux W.L., M.J.X., 1996. The Modelling of sodium Jet Fires in a Two Dimensional Computer Code PULSAR2.1. IAEAI/WGFRTCM on Evaluation of Radioactive Materials Release and Sodium Fire in Fast Reactor, IWGF/92, O-arai, Japan.
Google Scholar
Seinfeld, 2006
Seinfeld J.H., P.S.N., 2006. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics: from Air Pollution to Climate Change. Wiley. ISBN: 978-0-471-72018-8.
Google Scholar
Seinfeld, 1986
J.H. Seinfeld
Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics of Air Pollution
Wiley, New York (1986)
Google Scholar
Tsai, 1980
Tsai, S.S., 1980. The NACOM code for analysis of postulated sodium spray fires in LMFBRS. BNL-NUREG-51180. Engineering and Advanced Reactor Safety Division, Department of Nuclear Energy, Brookhaven National Laboratory, USA.
Google Scholar
Zeldovich, 1942
J. Zeldovich
Theory of the formation of a new phase, cavitation
Zh. Eksp. Theor. Fiz., 12 (1942), pp. 525-538
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar