<title>Helium bubble formation in refractory single-phase concentrated solid solution alloys under MeV He ion irradiation</title>
<author>1,N.Jia,2,Y.Li,3,H.Huang,4,S.Chen,5,D.Li,6,Y.Dou,7,X.He,8,W.Yang,9,Y.Xue,10,K.Jin</author>
<Affiliation>1,School of Materials Science and Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, 100081, China;2,Shanghai Institute of Applied Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 201800, China;3,China Institute of Atomic Energy, Beijing, 101213, China;4,Advance Research Institute of Multidisciplinary Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, 100081, China</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Materials</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.jnucmat.2021.152937</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022311521001604#!</URL>
Helium bubble formation in refractory single-phase concentrated solid solution alloys under MeV He ion irradiation
N.Jia,Y.Li,H.Huang,S.Chen,D.Li,Y.Dou,X.He,W.Yang,Y.Xue,K.Jin
School of Materials Science and Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, 100081, China
Shanghai Institute of Applied Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 201800, China
China Institute of Atomic Energy, Beijing, 101213, China
Advance Research Institute of Multidisciplinary Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, 100081, China
<Section>Abstract</Section>
In order to investigate the compositional effects on helium bubble formation in the refractory concentrated solid-solution alloys with single-phase body-centered cubic structures, TiVNbTa and TiVTa alloys, as well as a conventional V-alloy are irradiated with 1.5 MeV He ions to the fluences of 2 × 1016 and 1 × 1017 ion/cm2 at 700 °C. Under the same irradiation fluence, the average sizes of helium bubbles in TiVNbTa and V-alloy are similar, but the bubbles in TiVTa are much larger. Moreover, while the bubbles in TiVNbTa and V-alloy are uniformly distributed at both fluences, bubble clusters are observed in the TiVTa sample irradiated to the higher fluence. Both faceted and spherical bubbles are observed in all the three alloys, but the edges of the faceted bubbles have different preferential orientations: mostly <110> in TiVTa, mostly <100> in V-alloy, and co-appearance in TiVNbTa. Radiation induced segregation becomes more significant with increasing irradiation fluence; V-enrichment as well as Ti-, Nb-, and Ta-depletion around He bubbles is observed in TiVNbTa under the high fluence irradiation, while the segregation in the other two alloys is much less considerable.
Keywords:Ion irradiation;Helium bubble;High entropy alloy;Concentrated solid solution alloy;Radiation-induced segregation
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The structural materials used in nuclear reactors face combined challenges from the displacement damage and the production of helium (He) atoms [1]. The accumulation of He and the interaction with the irradiation-induced vacancies may lead to the formation of He bubbles, especially at elevated temperatures. The bubble formation usually results in the degradation of mechanical properties and may threaten the safety and reliability of the reactors. Therefore, understanding the formation process and enhancing the resistance to He bubbles are important to the development of next-generation nuclear reactors, in which the structural alloys may suffer from higher irradiation dose at higher temperatures than the current reactors [2,3].
Single-phase concentrated solid solution alloys (SP-CSAs), including high entropy alloys (HEAs), have received significant attentions in the past few years, due to their outstanding mechanical properties over a wide temperature range, strong corrosion resistance, as well as promising irradiation resistance [4], [5], [6], [7]. Substantial results on the ion irradiation experiments, with both heavy ions and He ions, have demonstrated that controlling chemical complexity can delay the irradiation induced defect evolution, suppressing the void and He bubble formation, as well as the radiation-induced segregation (RIS). Most previous ion irradiation experiments on SP-CSAs are focused on the NiCoFeCr-based alloys, partially due to the capability of systematically tuning the number, type, and concentration of alloying elements without changing the structures. Regarding the He bubble formation, Yang et al. compared the He ion irradiation resistance of CrMnFeCoNi with a pure Ni and a 304 stainless steel (304SS), and found that the bubble size in CrMnFeCoNi is the smallest after irradiation at 450 °C, attributed to the lower mobility of He atoms and point defects [8]. In addition, Wang et al. found that with increasing Fe concentration in NiFex (x = 0, 20, 35, or 50 at.%) alloys, the average bubble size decreases while the bubble number density increases, indicating that the growth of He bubbles is suppressed by increasing the alloy chemical complexity [9]. Furthermore, Zhang et al. proposed that increasing the number of alloying elements with large differences in the d-electron counts is an effective way to increase the chemical disorder, which may suppress the growth of He bubbles through modifying the energy dissipation process, defect energetics, and chemically-biased atomic transport properties [1].
Despite the extensive investigations on the irradiation response of the NiCoFeCr-based SP-CSAs, these alloys face some inherent problems, such as the high neutron cross section due to the high concentration of Co [10], relatively lower strength at elevated temperatures [11], as well as the possible large swelling at high irradiation above 100 displacements per atom (dpa) [12]. Recently, the SP-CSAs consisting of refractory metal elements, including refractory HEAs (RHEAs), have drawn much attention in the community of nuclear materials, due to their low neutron activity and the outstanding high temperature properties [13,14]. Several compositions have been proposed and some of them have exhibited outstanding irradiation resistance. However, one of the challenges of this type of alloys is their phase stability. For example, large amount of precipitates appear in the NbTiVZrx alloys after annealing at 700 °C [15], second-phase particles enriched in Cr and V are observed in W-Ta-Cr-V alloy annealed at 1073 K [16], and intermetallic phases form in AlTiVNb after severe plastic deformation and subsequent annealing at 700 and 900 °C [17]. Such instability may threaten the reliability of performance during service.
TiVTa and TiVNbTa are RHEAs with a single-phase body-centered cubic (BCC) structure at their homogenized states. These two alloys hold an outstanding strength-ductility trade off at both room and elevated temperatures [18,19]. Such outstanding properties grant them potential applications in the nuclear engineering field, but their irradiation response remains largely unknown. In this work, the microstructural response of the equiatomic TiVTa and TiVNbTa alloys to MeV He ion irradiations is investigated, primarily on the helium bubble formation and growth, and a comparison is made with the conventional V-4Cr-4Ti alloy (termed as V-alloy) to evaluate the resistance to the He bubble formation in the single-phase RHEAs.
<Section>2. Experimental</Section>
The alloy ingots of the equiatomic TiVNbTa and TiVTa, as well as the conventional V-4Cr-4Ti (4 wt.% of Cr and Ti), were prepared using induction levitation melting under argon atmosphere. The purity of the raw metals is better than 99.95 wt.%. For TiVTa and TiVNbTa, the slabs with 12 mm thick were cut from the as-cast ingots. The slabs were cold-rolled to 50 % thickness reduction, and then annealed at 1300 °C for 12 h followed by water quenching. Such heat treatment grants the samples homogenized elemental distribution in the matrix, large grain size that excludes the impact of grain boundaries, as well as low enough initial dislocation density. For V-alloy, the as-cast ingots were homogenized at 1100 °C for 12 h. During annealing all the samples were coated with tantalum foils, and sealed in quartz tubes filled with high purity argon to prevent oxidation. The composition of the alloys measured using scanning electron microscope (SEM)-energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) are listed in Table 1. Considering the reasonable difference between the nominal and measured compositions, only the nominal composition will be used in the following text unless stated otherwise. The alloys were annealed at 700 °C for 24 h to examine the thermal stability. The crystal structures of the homogenized and annealed samples were identified using x-ray diffraction (XRD) with CuKα radiation (D8 Advance, Bruker) in a 2θ range from 20° to 90°. The microstructure of the homogenized and annealed alloys was investigated using a JSM-7001F SEM, equipped with a backscatter electron (BSE) detector.
Table 1. Chemical compositions (in at. %) of the homogenized alloys, characterized with SEM-EDS.
The specimens for He ion irradiations were cut from the homogenized alloys, mechanically ground with SiC abrasive papers to 7000 grit, and then polished with OP-S suspension. The He ion irradiations were performed using a 4 MV Pelletron accelerator located at the Shanghai Institute of Applied Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (SINAP-CAS). The specimens were irradiated with 1.5 MeV He ions to the fluence of 2 × 1016 and 1 × 1017 ion/cm2 at 700 °C, and the irradiation flux was maintained at 1.25 × 1012 ion/cm2/s. The three alloys were irradiated side-by-side, so that they experienced the same thermal and irradiation conditions. Fig. 1 shows the depth profiles of displacement damage and implanted He ions in the sample irradiated to the fluence of 1 × 1017 ion/cm2, simulated using the Stopping and Range of Ions in Matter (SRIM) code under the Kinchin-Pease mode. The threshold displacement energies for the elements of Ti, Cr, V, Nb, and Ta were assumed as 30, 40, 40, 78, and 91 eV, respectively, according to the Ref. [20,21]. The peak positions of the displacement and ion profiles are ~2500-3000 nm for all these three alloys. The peak displacement doses and He concentrations are 1.5-2 dpa and ~5 at.%, respectively, at 1 × 1017 ion/cm2.
Fig. 1. Displacement damage and implanted He profiles in the samples irradiated to the fluence of 1 × 1017 ion/cm2.
The microstructure of the post-irradiated alloys was investigated using transmission electron microscope (TEM). Before that the cross-sectional TEM samples were taken out from the near center positions of the irradiated samples using the focused ion beam (FIB) lift-out techniques in an FEI Helios Nanolab 600i instrument. 30 keV Ga ions were used for trenching and initial thinning; then the samples were polished with gradually reduced ion energies down to 1 keV to remove most of the FIB damage. The TEM observation was performed on an FEI Talos F200X microscopy equipped with EDS detectors, operated at 200 kV. The size distribution of He bubbles was characterized in the under-focused condition in the bright field (BF) mode, and more than 100 bubbles were taken into consideration during statistical analyses, assisted with the Image-pro plus software. In order to calculate the bubble volume density, the foil thickness was estimated according to the cross-sectional images from the FIB-SEM observation, with an assumed uncertainty of ±10%. The chemical segregation near the He bubbles was characterized using TEM-EDS. The raw image sizes for the mappings were 1024 × 1024 with the pixel size of 95.72 pm for TiVTa, and 512 × 512 with the pixel of 191.4 pm for TiVTaNb and V-alloy. The dwell time was set at 10-20 μs, and at least 90 frames were taken for measurements.
<Section>3. Results and discussion</Section>
Fig. 2(a) shows the XRD spectra of the as-prepared alloys at the homogenized state, in which only the peaks belonging to the BCC lattices can be observed. The corresponding SEM-BSE images are shown in Fig. 2(b-d). For TiVNbTa and TiVTa, the microstructures are uniform without secondary phases observed (except some inevitable minor black defects or oxides formed during polishing). In contrast, some large acicular precipitates are observed in the V-alloy.
Fig. 2. (a) and (e) XRD spectra of the as-prepared homogenized and the annealed alloys, respectively. (b-d) SEM-BSE images of the homogenized V-alloy, TiVNbTa, and TiVTa, respectively. (f-h) SEM-BSE images of V-alloy, TiVNbTa, and TiVTa annealed at 700 °C for 24 h, respectively. (i) atomic-scale image of an acicular precipitate in the V-alloy with the inset of an iDPC image. (j) STEM-HAADF image of the acicular precipitate in the V-alloy and the corresponding EDS-mappings. (k) and (l) atomic-scale image of <111>-oriented TiVNbTa and <100>-oriented TiVTa, respectively.
To overview the thermal stability of these alloys before the irradiation experiments, they were annealed at 700 °C for 24 h, and the structures/microstructures are shown in Figs. 2(e-h). Little change could be observed in the XRD patterns, except some possible minor peak splitting in the TiVTa within the detection uncertainty. From the SEM images, no precipitates are observed both along the grain boundaries and inside grains in TiVNbTa, indicating a high thermal stability. In contrast, precipitates are observed along the grain boundaries for both the V-alloy and TiVTa, although no significant changes are observed in the matrix.
Atomic-scale structures are shown in Fig. 2 (i-l) for the acicular precipitate in V-alloy, TiVNbTa, and TiVTa, characterized using an aberration-corrected FEI Titan Themis Z scanning TEM (STEM). Fig. 2(i) shows the STEM- high angle annular dark field (HAADF) image of an acicular precipitate in the V-alloy. The inset shows an integrated differential phase contrast (iDPC) image illustrating both the heavy and light atoms, which are further identified as the Ti and N atoms, respectively, according to the EDS mappings in Fig. 2(j). Such precipitates are commonly seen in this commercial V-alloy [22]. Fig. 2(k) and (l) show the atomic-scale images of TiVNbTa and TiVTa, respectively, illustrating the simple ordered atomic arrangements in the matrix with BCC solid solution structure, corresponding well with the XRD results.
Here we should note that this work only considers the irradiation effects in the matrix/grain interior of the alloys, and therefore the original acicular precipitates in the V-alloy and the near grain boundary regions are all evaded when preparing the FIB samples.
Fig. 3(a-c) overview the bubble formation regions of the three alloys irradiated at 700 °C to a fluence of 1 × 1017 ion/cm2. The depths of the peak bubble regions correspond well with the SRIM predicted peaks of the implanted He and displacement profiles, indicating that the long-range migration of He atoms and/or irradiation defects are in general suppressed. Nonetheless, comparing between Fig. 3(a-c), it can be found that the spatial distribution of the He bubbles is the narrowest in the V-alloy, in which few He bubbles can be observed in the region shallower than 2200 nm. In contrast, the He bubbles in TiVTa and TiVNbTa have wider distributions towards the surface, suggesting a relatively faster He diffusion in these two alloys. Fig. 3(d-f) show the under-focused, on-focused, and over-focused TEM-BF images, respectively, obtained at the same place near the peak He bubble region of TiVNbTa, demonstrating a typical Fresnel contrast feature of He bubbles.
Fig. 3. Under-focused TEM-BF images showing He bubble distribution in (a) V-alloy, (b) TiVNbTa, and (c) TiVTa, between 1500 and 3200 nm below surface. (d), (e), and (f) are the under-focused, on-focused, and over-focused images, respectively, obtained at the same place near the He bubble peak of TiVNbTa alloy.
Fig. 4 shows the He bubbles in the He peak regions of the samples irradiated to the fluences of 2 × 1016 and 1 × 1017 ion/cm2. Under the lower fluence irradiation, the He bubbles are randomly and uniformly distributed in all the three alloys, and their bubble sizes follow normal-like distributions (see Fig. 5(a-c)). This observation indicates a homogeneous nucleation and growth process of the He bubbles.
Fig. 4. Under-focused TEM-BF images comparing the morphology of the He bubbles in the He peak regions of the samples irradiated to the fluence of 2 × 1016 ion/cm2 (up) and 1 × 1017 ion/cm2 (down). (a) and (d) for V-alloy, (b) and (e) for TiVNbTa, and (c) and (f) for TiVTa.
As the irradiation fluence increasing to 1 × 1017 ion/cm2, although the He bubble distributions in the V-alloy and TiVTaNb remain uniform, a number of He bubble clusters can be observed in TiVTa, in which the large bubbles with tens of nanometers diameter are surrounded by several small bubbles. These He bubble clusters are mainly located around the He peak region, while the He bubbles away from this region are still randomly distributed. This observation may be attributed to two possible reasons. First, the He bubbles in TiVTa may undergo a coarsening process through a migration and coalescence mechanism, in which the small bubble can migrate through the random rearrangement of bubble surfaces by the diffusion of matrix atoms [23]. In the peak He region, the high density and small spacing of He bubbles could facilitate the aggregating and merging of small He bubbles through such short-range migration, and therefore the large He bubbles as well as the He bubble clusters are formed. Another possible mechanism is that, with increasing irradiation dose, the radiation-induced/enhanced compositional fluctuation may lead to the formation of local elemental segregation or even clustering. Such chemical inhomogeneity may serve as local sinks of He bubbles, which provide preferential nucleation sites of He atoms [24,25]. These two mechanisms may play roles simultaneously in TiVTa.
Fig. 5 shows the size distribution and the density of He bubbles in the He peak regions of the three alloys. It can be observed that both the size and density of He bubbles are increased in all the three alloys with increasing irradiation fluence, as expected. However, as discussed above, the size of He bubbles in TiVTa turns from a unimodal distribution with an average of ~11 nm to a bimodal distribution with the two peaks located at ~9 and 16 nm (see Fig. 5c). The He bubble density in the He peak region of V-alloy is the highest among the three alloys, while that in TiVTa is lowest, as shown in Fig. 5(d). The difference of He bubble density between these two alloys can reach up to an order of magnitude. The size and density data of the He bubbles are listed in Table 2. The average bubble sizes in TiVNbTa and V-alloy are much smaller than those in TiVTa, for both irradiation fluences.
Table 2. He bubble size and density in the He peak regions of the alloys. dmin, dmax, and dave is the minimum, maximum, and average diameter of He bubble, respectively.
Fig. 6 shows the under-focused TEM-BF images of the He bubbles at higher magnifications, obtained in the bubble peak region of the samples irradiated to the fluence of 1 × 1017 ion/cm2. Both spherical and faceted bubbles can be observed in all the three alloys. However, interestingly, the faceted bubbles in different alloys seem to have different preferential orientations. For example, most of the faceted bubbles observed in V-alloy are with edges along the <100> directions, as shown in Fig. 6(a). Also, elongated bubbles can be observed, which could be due to the stress field from local defects such as loops and small precipitates, or the coalescence of cubic bubbles on a {100} plane [26]. Nevertheless, the edges of the faceted bubbles in TiVTa are mostly along the <110> directions, as shown in Fig. 6(c). Here we should note that, unlike these two alloys, the faceted bubbles with preferential orientation along both <100> and <110> directions are frequently observed in TiVNbTa, as shown in Fig. 6(b). Such different preferential edge directions indicate different preferential crystallographic planes of the bubble surfaces among the three alloys.
Both the states of He bubbles (e.g., gas pressure or He density) and the properties of the solid lattice (e.g., surface energy and volumetric energy) can affect the shape of the bubbles [27], [28], [29], [30]. In general, the bubbles with high gas pressure are typically spherical, and decreasing gas pressure in bubbles tend to turn the spherical shape into faceted corresponding to the low-index crystallographic planes with low surface energy. According to the calculations based on density functional theory, the surface energy of the closest packed surface {110} is not always lower than the second most close packed surface {001} in some BCC metals [31]. Both truncated {110} dodecahedral and {001} cubic bubbles have commonly been observed in the BCC alloys [32]. In the present case, the observed differences on the preferential orientations should stem from the variation of surface energies due to the composition change. This finding may stimulate the interests of future theoretical works, such as the first-principles calculations on the compositional dependence of the surface energies.
Fig. 7 shows the elemental distribution around the He bubbles. The segregation tendency of elements in the three alloys is different from each other. For TiVNbTa, although the segregation is only moderate at the lower irradiation fluence, the V-enrichment can still be identified around the He bubbles. With increasing fluence, the V-enrichment, as well as the Nb-, Ta-, and Ti- depletion become much more significant as shown in Fig. 7(d). In contrast, although slight elemental segregation can also be observed in TiVTa with the same trend (V-enrichment and Ta- and Ti-depletion), it is much less significant than in TiVNbTa for both fluences. As for V-alloy, no obvious element segregation is observed around He bubbles, as shown in Fig. 7(e, f), which is reasonable due to the very low Ti and Cr concentration.
Fig. 5. The He bubble size distribution in (a) V-alloy, (b) TiVNbTa, and (c) TiVTa. (d) the histogram showing the density of He bubbles in the He peak regions.
Fig. 6. Comparison of the morphology of the He bubbles in the helium peak regions of (a) V-alloy, (b) TiVNbTa, and (c) TiVTa irradiated to the fluence of 1 × 1017 ion/cm2.
Fig. 7. STEM-HAADF images and the corresponding EDS-mappings of the He bubbles in the peak region of the samples irradiated to the fluence of 2 × 1016 ion/cm2 (left) and 1 × 1017 ion/cm2 (right), showing the elemental distribution around the He bubbles. (a) and (d) TiVNbTa, (b) and (e) TiVTa, (c) and (f) V-alloy. In these images every 3-11 pixels are combined in an average mode for clarity.
The elemental segregation in the CrFeCoNi-based SP-CSAs under irradiation at elevated temperatures has been systematically discussed [12,[33], [34], [35]]. For most cases with the alloys having high thermal stability, the atomic size difference plays a critical role in the segregation behavior: the vacancies preferentially exchange with the oversized elements, and the undersized elements tend to diffuse as interstitials, resulting in a net flux of that undersized element to sinks [9,34]. The He bubble surfaces are more efficient sinks for vacancies than interstitials [9], which induces a net flux of vacancies towards bubbles during the growth. In our case, the irradiated TiVNbTa follows this trend that, the oversized Ti, Ta, and Nb atoms are preferentially exchanged with vacancies away from the He bubbles, resulting in the undersized V enriched around bubbles. It needs to be noted that the segregation on the surface of He bubbles may have a negative feedback to the He aggregation. For example, K. Ono et al. reported that Cr segregation on the bubble surface retards the mobility of the bubbles in Fe-9Cr [36]. Besides, it is possible that the surface energy may change to some extent by the enrichment of V, which results in the formation of the faceted bubbles with the edges along both <001> and <110> preferential directions.
On the other hand, the thermodynamic instability may trigger the elemental segregation in the matrix at high temperatures and under irradiations. Such chemical fluctuation in the matrix is able to compensate or even override the size-dominant segregation behavior at defects (e.g., He bubbles in our case) [33,34]. For example, the depletion of Cr/Fe and the enrichment of Ni at the Frank dislocation loops have been reported to be strongly suppressed due to the phase separation in NiCoFeCrMn/Pd alloys. In our case, some scattered needle-like shaped segregations of Ti can be observed in the irradiated TiVTa at the high irradiation fluence, near the He bubbles. This effect may retard the enrichment of V and depletion of Ti around the bubbles guided by the atomic size difference. This observation is also consistent with the formation of He bubble clusters as discussed above, that the chemical fluctuations in TiVTa may promote the aggregation of He bubbles. Furthermore, we should note that the atomic and defect diffusion behavior will intrinsically affect the radiation-induced segregation. The theoretical calculations of such information are very limited in the refractory SP-CSAs at present, and are highly desired in future studies.
The previous studies have shown a general trend that the formation and growth of He bubble in the FCC-structured Ni-containing SP-CSAs is suppressed with increasing the compositional complexity, and compared with the conventional alloys [1,9]. However, the present study shows that this conclusion may not necessarily apply to the BCC structured refractory SP-CSAs. Furthermore, considering the metastable feature of most of the refractory SP-CSAs, the present study highlights the needs of attention on the phase stability after high temperature irradiations. The irradiation induced segregation and/or precipitation may affect both bubble formation by providing helium atom traps and potentially the mechanical properties of the alloy, which require further experimental and theoretical studies.
<Section>4. Conclusions</Section>
In summary, the He bubble formation in two single-phase BCC-structured RHEAs, TiVNbTa and TiVTa, as well as a conventional V-alloy, have been investigated in response to MeV He ion irradiation at 700 °C to the fluences of 2 × 1016 and 1 × 1017 ion/cm2. Under the same irradiation fluence, the average size of He bubbles in TiVTa is the largest, and in V-alloy is the smallest, while the order of the He bubble density is opposite. Moreover, the He bubbles are distributed uniformly in TiVNbTa and V-alloy at both irradiation fluences, but He bubble clusters are formed in TiVTa at the higher fluence of 1 × 1017 ion/cm2. Both faceted and spherical bubbles appear in all the three alloys, but the faceted bubbles have different preferential orientations, probably due to the modified surface energy by varying principal alloying elements. Significant irradiation-induced segregation, with V-enriched and Ti-, Ta-, and Nb-depleted, is observed in TiVNbTa near the He bubbles under the high fluence irradiation, while the segregation in TiVTa and the conventional V-alloy is much weaker. Unlike in the FCC-structured NiCoFeCr-based SP-CSAs, the direct correlation between the compositional complexity and He bubble formation remains unclear in the BCC-structured refractory SP-CSAs and deserves further investigations.
<Section>Declaration of Interests</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
N. Jia: . Y. Li: Investigation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing, Visualization, Formal analysis. H. Huang: Investigation, Writing - review & editing. S. Chen: Investigation. D. Li: Investigation. Y. Dou: Investigation. X. He: Investigation. W. Yang: Conceptualization, Investigation, Resources. Y. Xue: Conceptualization, Investigation, Resources. K. Jin: Conceptualization, Investigation, Resources, Writing - review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
No.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
This work has been financially supported by the Beijing Municipal Natural Science Foundation (Grant No. 1194027) and the Innovation Fund of the Zhejiang Kechuang New Materials Research Institute (ZKN-18-P07). The authors acknowledge the Analytical and Testing Center of Beijing Institute of Technology for assisting the TEM analyses.
<Section>References</Section>
[1]
Y. Zhang, X. Wang, Y.N. Osetsky, Y. Tong, R. Harrison, S.E. Donnelly, D. Chen, Y. Wang, H. Bei, B.C. Sales, K.L. More, P. Xiu, L. Wang, W.J. Weber
Effects of 3d electron configurations on helium bubble formation and void swelling in concentrated solid-solution alloys
Acta Mater., 181 (2019), pp. 519-529
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[2]
G.S. Was, Z. Jiao, E. Getto, K. Sun, A.M. Monterrosa, S.A. Maloy, O. Anderoglu, B.H. Sencer, M. Hackett
Emulation of reactor irradiation damage using ion beams
Scripta Mater., 88 (2014), pp. 33-36
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[3]
S.J. Zinkle, G.S. Was
Materials challenges in nuclear energy
Acta Mater., 61 (3) (2013), pp. 735-758
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[4]
Z. Li, S. Zhao, R.O. Ritchie, M.A. Meyers
Mechanical properties of high-entropy alloys with emphasis on face-centered cubic alloys
Prog. Mater. Sci., 102 (2019), pp. 296-345
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[5]
Y. Qiu, S. Thomas, M.A. Gibson, H.L. Fraser, N. Birbilis
Corrosion of high entropy alloys
NPJ Mater. Degrad., 1 (2017), p. 15
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[6]
C. Lu, L. Niu, N. Chen, K. Jin, T. Yang, P. Xiu, Y. Zhang, F. Gao, H. Bei, S. Shi, M.R. He, I.M. Robertson, W.J. Weber, L. Wang
Enhancing radiation tolerance by controlling defect mobility and migration pathways in multicomponent single-phase alloys
Nat. Commun., 7 (2016), p. 13564
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[7]
Z. Xu, Z. Li, Y. Tong, W. Zhang, Z. Wu
Microstructural and mechanical behavior of a CoCrFeNiCu4 non-equiatomic high entropy alloy
J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 60 (2021), pp. 35-43
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[8]
L. Yang, H. Ge, J. Zhang, T. Xiong, Q. Jin, Y. Zhou, X. Shao, B. Zhang, Z. Zhu, S. Zheng, X. Ma
High He-ion irradiation resistance of CrMnFeCoNi high-entropy alloy revealed by comparison study with Ni and 304SS
J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 35 (3) (2019), pp. 300-305
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[9]
X. Wang, K. Jin, D. Chen, H. Bei, Y. Wang, W.J. Weber, Y. Zhang, K.L. More
Effects of Fe concentration on helium bubble formation in NiFex single-phase concentrated solid solution alloys
Materialia, 5 (2019), Article 100183
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[10]
N.A.P.K. Kumar, C. Li, K.J. Leonard, H. Bei, S.J. Zinkle
Microstructural stability and mechanical behavior of FeNiMnCr high entropy alloy under ion irradiation
Acta Mater., 113 (2016), pp. 230-244
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[11]
J.X. Fu, C.M. Cao, W. Tong, Y.X. Hao, L.M. Peng
The tensile properties and serrated flow behavior of a thermomechanically treated CoCrFeNiMn high-entropy alloy
Mater. Sci. Eng. A, 690 (2017), pp. 418-426
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[12]
B. Kombaiah, K. Jin, H. Bei, P.D. Edmondson, Y. Zhang
Phase stability of single phase Al0.12CrNiFeCo high entropy alloy upon irradiation
Mater. Des, 160 (2018), pp. 1208-1216
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[13]
O.A. Waseem, H.J. Ryu
Powder Metallurgy Processing of a WxTaTiVCr high-entropy alloy and its derivative alloys for fusion material applications
Sci. Rep., 7 (1) (2017), p. 1926
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[14]
O.N. Senkov, S. Gorsse, D.B. Miracle
High temperature strength of refractory complex concentrated alloys
Acta Mater., 175 (2019), pp. 394-405
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[15]
D.J.M. King, S.T.Y. Cheung, S.A. Humphry-Baker, C. Parkin, A. Couet, M.B. Cortie, G.R. Lumpkin, S.C. Middleburgh, A.J. Knowles
High temperature, low neutron cross-section high-entropy alloys in the Nb-Ti-V-Zr system
Acta Mater., 166 (2019), pp. 435-446
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[16]
O. El-Atwani, N. Li, A.Devaraj M.Li, J.K.S. Baldwin, M.M. Schneider, D. Sobieraj, J.S. Wróbel, D. Nguyen-Manh, S.A. Maloy, E. Martinez
Outstanding radiation resistance of tungsten-based high-entropy alloys
Sci. Adv., 5 (2019), p. eaav2002
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[17]
B. Schuh, B. Völker, V. Maier-Kiener, J. Todt, J. Li, A. Hohenwarter
Phase Decomposition of a Single-Phase AlTiVNb high-entropy alloy after severe plastic deformation and annealing
Adv. Eng. Mater., 19 (4) (2017), Article 1600674
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[18]
N. Jia, Y. Li, X. Liu, Y. Zheng, B. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Xue, K. Jin
Thermal stability and mechanical properties of low-activation single-phase Ti-V-Ta medium entropy alloys
JOM, 71 (10) (2019), pp. 3490-3498
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[19]
C. Lee, G. Kim, Y. Chou, B.L. Musicó, M.C. Gao, K. An, G. Song, Y.-C. Chou, V. Keppens, W. Chen, P.K. Liaw
Temperature dependence of elastic and plastic deformation behavior of a refractory high-entropy alloy
Sci. Adv., 6 (2020), p. eaaz4748
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[20]
Y. Lu, H. Huang, X. Gao, C. Ren, J. Gao, H. Zhang, S. Zheng, Q. Jin, Y. Zhao, C. Lu, T. Wang, T. Li
A promising new class of irradiation tolerant materials: Ti2ZrHfV0.5Mo0.2 high-entropy alloy
J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 35 (3) (2019), pp. 369-373
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[21]
M. Moschetti, A. Xu, B. Schuh, A. Hohenwarter, J.P. Couzinié, J.J. Kruzic, D. Bhattacharyya, B. Gludovatz
On the room-temperature mechanical properties of an ion-irradiated TiZrNbHfTa refractory high entropy alloy
JOM, 72 (1) (2019), pp. 130-138
Google Scholar
[22]
B. Zhu, S. Yang, M. Zhang, J. Ding, Y. Long, F. Wan
Formation and evolution of platelet-like Ti-rich precipitates in the V–4Cr–4Ti alloy
Mater. Charact., 111 (2016), pp. 60-66
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[23]
H. Trinkaus, B.N. Singh
Helium accumulation in metals during irradiation – where do we stand?
J. Nucl. Mater., 323 (2-3) (2003), pp. 229-242
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[24]
B. Mazumder, M.E. Bannister, F.W. Meyer, M.K. Miller, C.M. Parish, P.D. Edmondson
Helium trapping in carbide precipitates in a tempered F82H ferritic–martensitic steel
Nucl. Mater. Energy, 1 (2015), pp. 8-12
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[25]
W. Kesternich
Helium trapping at dislocations, precipitates and grain boundaries
Radiat. EIT, 78 (1-4) (2006), pp. 261-273
Google Scholar
[26]
C.W. Chen
The shapes of irradiation-produced voids in nickel
Phys. Stat. Sol., 16 (1973), pp. 197-210
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[27]
F. Granberg, X. Wang, D. Chen, K. Jin, Y. Wang, H. Bei, W.J. Weber, Y. Zhang, K.L. More, K. Nordlund, F. Djurabekova
Origin of increased helium density inside bubbles in Ni(1−x)Fe alloys
Scripta Mater., 191 (2021), pp. 1-6
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[28]
Z. Yan, T. Yang, Y. Lin, Y. Lu, Y. Su, S.J. Zinkle, Y. Wang
Effects of temperature on helium bubble behaviour in Fe–9Cr alloy
J. Nucl. Mater., 532 (2020), Article 152045
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[29]
S.M. Hafez Haghighat, G. Lucas, R. Schäublin
State of a pressurized helium bubble in iron
EPL (Europhysics Letters), 85 (6) (2009), p. 60008
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[30]
A. Ofan, L. Zhang, O. Gaathon, S. Bakhru, H. Bakhru, Y. Zhu, D. Welch, R.M. Osgood
Spherical solid He nanometer bubbles in an anisotropic complex oxide
Phys. Rev. B, 82 (10) (2010), Article 104113
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[31]
L. Vitos, A.V. Ruban, H.L. Skriver, J. Kolla´r
The surface energy of metals
Surf. Sci., 411 (1998), pp. 186-202
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[32]
S.J. Zinkle
Radiation-induced effects on microstructure
Compr. Nucl. Mater. (2012), pp. 65-98
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[33]
M.R. He, S. Wang, S. Shi, K. Jin, H. Bei, K. Yasuda, S. Matsumura, K. Higashida, I.M. Robertson
Mechanisms of radiation-induced segregation in CrFeCoNi-based single-phase concentrated solid solution alloys
Acta Mater. (2017), pp. 182-193
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[34]
C. Lu, T. Yang, K. Jin, N. Gao, P. Xiu, Y. Zhang, F. Gao, H. Bei, W.J. Weber, K. Sun, Y. Dong, L. Wang
Radiation-induced segregation on defect clusters in single-phase concentrated solid-solution alloys
Acta Mater., 127 (2017), pp. 98-107
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[35]
B. Kombaiah, P.D. Edmondson, Y. Wang, L.A. Boatner, Y. Zhang
Mechanisms of radiation-induced segregation around He bubbles in a Fe-Cr-Ni crystal
J. Nucl. Mater., 514 (2019), pp. 139-147
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[36]
K. Ono, K. Arakawa, K. Hojou
Formation and migration of helium bubbles in Fe and Fe–9Cr ferritic alloy
J. Nucl. Mater., 307–311 (2002), pp. 1507-1512
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar