<title>Steam condensation on tube-bundle in presence of non-condensable gas under free convection</title>
<author>1,G.Bois,2,JinhoonKang,3,JeongminMoon,4,YoungchangKo,5,Sang-GyuLim,6,ByongjoYun</author>
<Affiliation>1,School of Mechanical Engineering, Pusan National University, Busan 46241, Republic of Korea;2,Korea Hydro & Nuclear Power Central Research Institute, Daejeon 34101, Republic of Korea</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2021.121619</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0017931021007225</URL>
Steam condensation on tube-bundle in presence of non-condensable gas under free convection
G.Bois,JinhoonKang,JeongminMoon,YoungchangKo,Sang-GyuLim,ByongjoYun
School of Mechanical Engineering, Pusan National University, Busan 46241, Republic of Korea
Korea Hydro & Nuclear Power Central Research Institute, Daejeon 34101, Republic of Korea
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Steam condensation on tube-bundle in presence of non-condensable gas was experimentally investigated.
•
The condensation heat transfer coefficient was analyzed for the present data.
•
The heat transfer for tube-bundle was significantly influenced by shadow and suction effects.
•
A bundle factor correlation was proposed to predict the heat transfer coefficient for tube-bundle.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
In the presence of non-condensable gases, the effects of thermal-hydraulic parameters on steam condensation on a tube-bundle heat exchanger differ from those for a single-tube because the geometry of the tube-bundle enhances shadow and suction effects. In this study, experiments were performed to investigate these effects on three types of tube-bundle heat exchangers with pitch-to-diameter ratios of 2.0, 2.5, and 3.0, and pressures, air mass fractions, and wall subcooling of 200–500 kPa, 0.2–0.7, and 20–55 K, respectively. The local bundle factor was defined as the difference in condensation heat transfer coefficients between a single-tube and tubes in a tube-bundle. Therefore, a local bundle factor correlation, which accounts for the shadow and suction effects, was developed. The applicable ranges of the local bundle factor correlation for local pressure loss, Bird's suction factor, and blockage fraction were 0.267–0.734, 1.12–1.98, and 0.044–0.304, respectively. An average bundle factor was derived from the local bundle factor. The developed correlation applying the average bundle factor predicted the heat transfer coefficients for the obtained experimental data within an error of 8.50 %.
Keywords:steam condensation;tube-bundle;shadow effect;pitch-to-diameter ratio;bundle factor
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Nuclear power plants are equipped with several safety systems against design-based accidents and severe accidents. Most of these systems are designed as active systems, which require external electric power and are therefore vulnerable to a station blackout (SBO) situation. To replace these active systems, the nuclear industry has recently been developing passive safety systems, which operate via inherent and natural forces, such as buoyancy, without using electricity. One of these passive safety systems is the passive containment cooling system (PCCS), which is intended to replace the spray cooling system in a containment building. A PCCS suppresses overpressure inside a containment building by condensing steam released from a primary reactor coolant system in design-based accidents, such as loss-of-coolant accidents (LOCA). Several developed and underdeveloped nuclear power plants, such as iPOWER [1,2], VVER 1200 [3], and HPR 1000 [4], have adopted PCCSs with tube-bundle heat exchangers for double containment buildings. The PCCS of iPOWER, for example, consists of tube-bundle heat exchangers installed in a containment building and cooling-water tanks located at the top of an auxiliary building, as shown in Fig. 1. The PCCS condenses steam released on the tube-bundle heat exchanger during an accident. Simultaneously, natural circulation flow is established on the tube side of the bundle heat exchanger via an increase in coolant temperature resulting from condensation heat transfer from the outer wall of the tube-bundle. Through these heat transfer processes, removing thermal energy via continuous condensation of steam in a containment building is possible without electricity. Thus, the heat removal performance of the PCCS is governed primarily by steam condensation on the outside surfaces of the heat exchangers. To properly design and evaluate the performance of a PCCS, accurately predicting the condensation heat transfer of its tube-bundle will be necessary.
Fig. 1. Schematics of PCCS for heat removal from containment building of nuclear power plant
Some experimental studies have been conducted to investigate the condensation of steam mixed with air, as in nuclear power plant accidents. However, most previous experimental studies were limited to using single-tubes instead of tube-bundles. For example, Dehbi [5] performed experiments to observe the effects of thermal-hydraulic parameters, such as air mass fraction, pressure, and wall subcooling, using a tube with a diameter of 38.0 mm and a length of 3.5 m. They also proposed a correlation representing the tendency of the condensation heat transfer coefficient (HTC). Lee et al. [6] obtained experimental data using a single-tube with a diameter of 40.0 mm and length of 1.0 m and developed a correlation based on dimensionless parameters derived from governing equations related to condensation and free convection. Fan et al. [7] performed condensation experiments on a wide range of thermal-hydraulic parameters, using a tube with a diameter of 32.1 mm and length of 2.0 m. They inferred that the influence of wall subcooling on condensation heat transfer was dependent on pressure and developed a corresponding correlation. Kang et al. [8] experimented with three tubes of different diameters, 21.5, 33.6, and 42.4 mm, to observe the effect of curvature on condensation. They determined that the curvature effect is greater than the value of the Popiel correlation [9], which was developed to account for the curvature effect in existing condensation models and correlations. Based on their experimental data, Kang et al. then proposed a new correlation for the curvature effect.
On the contrary, heat transfer studies on tube-bundles are limited, mainly including that by Bae et al. [10], who performed experiments to investigate the characteristics of steam condensation heat transfer on a tube-bundle. Their tube-bundle heat exchanger consisted of 18 tubes, each with a diameter of 30.8 mm, length of 5.0 m, and pitch of 63.6 mm. They observed that the average HTC for the tube-bundle was less than that for a single-tube. They also reported that the performance of steam condensation heat transfer was deteriorated by the air layer in the tube-bundle and named the phenomenon as the shadow effect. Bian et al. [11] analyzed the trend of heat transfer and air distribution on a 3 × 3 tube-bundle with respect to the pitch-to-diameter ratio through computational fluid dynamics (CFD) analysis. Their analytical results showed that the air layer around the condensing tubes was thicker than that on a single-tube by other adjacent tubes in the tube-bundle. This air layer is the major cause of deteriorating condensation heat transfer, and heat transfer is significantly affected by the pitches.
As mentioned previously, many studies on single-tubes have been performed by several researchers, but those on tube-bundles are rare. Thus, data that can be used to analyze condensation by PCCSs are limited, and a correlation for the prediction of condensation on tube-bundles has never been developed. In addition, experiments to investigate the condensation characteristics of tube-bundles according to geometric parameters, such as the pitch-to-diameter ratio of the tubes, have not been attempted. Therefore, in this study, the effects of pitch-to-diameter ratio and thermal-hydraulic parameters on steam condensation in the presence of air on a bundle heat exchanger under free-convection conditions were experimentally investigated. A correlation for the prediction of condensation on the tube-bundle was then developed based on the experimental results.
<Section>2. Experimental setup</Section>
2.1. Test apparatus
The tube-bundle test facility consisted of a test section, cooling-water supply system, steam supply system, and air supply system, as shown in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2. Loop of apparatus for experiment on condensation on tube-bundle
The test section was composed of a pressurized vessel and tube-bundle heat exchanger. The pressurized vessel, which simulated a containment building, was made of a stainless-steel 304 cylindrical tank with an inner diameter of 1.0 m and a height of 2.8 m. A heater and a steam sparger were installed at the lower section of the pressurized vessel to provide steam. The heater, which had a maximum power of 50 kW, generated steam in the vessel, whereas the steam sparger supplied additional steam into the pressurized vessel from the steam supply system when necessary.
The tube-bundle heat exchanger, which consisted of 10 tubes, was installed at the center of the pressurized vessel. The tubes were made of 304 stainless steel having a diameter (d) of 21.5 mm, thickness of 5 mm, and length (L) of 1,328 mm. The staggered arrangement, such as a triangular arrangement, is known to have a better heat transfer performance than the aligned arrangement when the Reynolds number is less than 102 [12], which in the present experiments, ranges from 5.0–1.9 × 102. Therefore, the tube-bundle heat exchanger was designed in a triangular array, with the arrangement and numbering of tubes shown in Fig. 3. The tubes were divided into four groups according to their locations. The tube-bundle heat exchanger here was designed for a variety of pitch-to-diameter ratios (p/d), specifically, 2.0. 2.5, and 3.0.
Fig. 3. Top view of arrangement of tube-bundle
An external steam supply system provided additional steam to the pressurized vessel when the set-up required more steam than that generated by the internal heater in the pressurized vessel. The system consisted of a steam generator and circulation pump. A heater with a maximum allowable power of 150 kW was installed in the steam generator. The generated steam was injected into the pressurized vessel through a pipe connected to the top of the steam generator. To inject the steam uniformly, a steam sparger consisting of porous tubes was installed at the bottom of the pressurized vessel and immersed in water during operation. At a pressure of 500 kPa, a total of 94.9 g/s steam was generated by both the heaters in the pressurized vessel and the external steam generator. Condensed water was circulated using a circulation pump from the pressurized vessel to the steam generator to constantly maintain the water level in the pressurized vessel.
The cooling water in the tube side of an actual PCCS flows via natural circulation caused by the temperature difference between the top and bottom of the heat exchanger tube. The experiment in this study was performed under forced-circulation conditions to observe the condensation characteristics with respect to the cooling-water conditions. The conditions of the cooling water were controlled by a cooling-water supply system, which consisted of a pump, pre-heater, and heat exchanger.
In the experiment, air was used as the non-condensable gas, and an air supply system was used to control the amount of air in the pressurized vessel. This system consisted of a vacuum pump and a compressor, which injected or exhausted air from the pressurized vessel when necessary.
The outer wall of the experimental apparatus was insulated to minimize heat loss to the atmosphere.
2.2. Instruments for measurements
The pressure, temperature, and mass flow rate of the steam–air mixture, cooling water, and tube outer wall temperatures were measured to investigate the condensation heat transfer characteristics of the tube-bundle heat exchanger. Fig. 4 shows the locations of the instruments for measuring the thermal-hydraulic parameters in the pressurized vessel and tube-bundle heat exchanger.
Fig. 4. Locations of instruments in pressurized vessel and tube-bundle
The pressure of the steam–air mixture in the pressurized vessel was measured using a pressure transmitter installed at the top of the vessel. K-type thermocouples, each with an outer diameter of 1.58 mm, were installed at five locations (T∞1 – T∞5) along the axial direction at equal intervals [8] to measure the bulk temperature.
The flow rate and pressure of the cooling water flowing inside 10 tubes of the tube-bundle heat exchanger were measured using electromagnetic flowmeters installed at each inlet pipe of the tube and a pressure transmitter in the cooling-water distributor to each tube, respectively. The cooling water flow rate in each tube was controlled to the same preset value using the valve installed at each tube inlet. The temperatures of the cooling water and condensing tube outer wall were measured using K-type thermocouples, each with an outer diameter of 0.5 mm. The thermocouples for the cooling-water temperature were installed at five locations (Tc1 – Tc5) along the flow direction at intervals of 332 mm. The thermocouples used to measure the outer-wall temperature were installed at four positions (Tw1 – Tw4) along the axial direction. Each position was located at the center of two adjacent temperature-measuring locations for the cooling water. For this, two thermocouples for the outer-wall temperature were placed opposite at each elevation. The thermocouples were embedded in 0.5-mm grooves on the tube wall surface to minimize flow disturbance by the thermocouple and measurement uncertainty.
In the tube-bundle heat exchanger, each tube had a wall temperature distribution in the angular direction. The outer-wall temperature of the tube was measured as the tubes were rotated for observing the temperature distribution before the main experiment. The largest temperature difference was observed in the symmetrical axis of each tube, as shown in Fig. 4. Therefore, each tube was installed such that the two opposing thermocouples for measuring the wall temperature lay along the symmetry axis: one of the thermocouples faced the center of the bundle, whereas the other the outside. The deviation for the wall temperature distribution for all tubes was 2.84 K.
In the experiment, the bias error for the pressure of the steam–air mixture or the cooling water was 0.8 kPa, whereas that for the mass flow rate of the cooling water was 0.5 % of the reading value. The bias errors for the measured temperatures of the bulk, cooling water, and tube outer wall were 0.5, 0.2, and 2.0 K, respectively. The total error for each measured parameter was estimated with a 95 % confidence limit by considering random error in addition to the bias error, which is provided in the related figures.
2.3. Data reduction
When the flow reached a steady-state condition, the heat transfer rate of steam condensation on the tube-bundle heat exchanger was equal to the rate of heat removed by the cooling water on the tube side. Therefore, the condensation heat transfer rate of each tube was determined as follows:
@(1)
where@is the mass flow rate, and hout,i and hin,i are the enthalpies of the cooling water at the outlet and inlet, respectively. These enthalpies were obtained from steam table at the corresponding pressure and temperature of the cooling water.
As in previous studies [[5], [6], [7], [8],10], the HTC of each tube was obtained based on the temperatures between the bulk and outer wall:
@(2)
where As@,@, and@are the outer-wall surface area of condensing tube, the average bulk temperature, and the average outer wall temperature for ith tube, respectively. The wall subcooling was defined as the difference between the temperatures of the bulk and the outer wall:
@(3)
The HTC of the tube-bundle heat exchanger was defined as the average HTC of 10 tubes as follows:
@(4)
The air mass fraction (Wa,∞) in the pressurized vessel was calculated based on the density of a real gas:
@(5)
where ρs and ρa are the densities of steam and air, respectively.
Dalton's law of additive pressure and the assumption that the temperature of steam-air mixture was equal to the saturated temperature at the given partial pressure of steam were used to obtain the properties of the gases. Therefore, the partial pressures of steam and air were obtained as follows:
@(6)
@(7)
2.4. Experiment conditions
This experiment was conducted to investigate the condensation heat transfer characteristics of the tube-bundle heat exchanger with respect to the thermal-hydraulic parameters, such as the pressure, air mass fraction, and wall subcooling, similar to past experiments involving single-tubes. The effect of p/d ratio was also investigated under the same thermal-hydraulic conditions. The ranges of the thermal-hydraulic parameters were determined based on the conditions of postulated nuclear power plant accidents. The p/d range was determined such that it satisfied the design conditions of the PCCS heat exchanger [10]. The experimental conditions are listed in Table 1.
Table 1. Range of parameters in experiment on tube-bundle
<Section>3. Experiments and results</Section>
First, experiments were performed using a tube-bundle heat exchanger with a p/d of 2.0 to observe the tendency of condensation HTC with respect to thermal-hydraulic parameters. The effect of p/d on the condensation heat transfer was then investigated using tube-bundle heat exchangers with p/d = 2.5 and 3.0.
The characteristics of condensation heat transfer were analyzed based on the HTC of each of the 10 tubes and the average HTC of the tube-bundle. The experimental data were compared to single-tube data of Kang et al. [8] obtained from a similar test facility to analyze the characteristics of condensation.
3.1. Condensation heat transfer per tube in bundle
The typical distributions of the cooling water temperature (Tc) of tubes, bulk temperature (T∞) in the pressurized vessel, and local HTC of tubes in the test for p/d = 2.0 along the axial direction are shown in Fig. 5. The cooling water temperature at each tube inlet was the same and increased linearly along the flow direction. The bulk temperatures were also the same regardless of the axial direction. It indicates that steam and air were mixed well in the pressurized vessel during experiments. The maximum difference of the local HTCs along the axial direction in each tube was less than 2.5 %.
Fig. 5. Axial distributions of (a) cooling water temperature, and (b) bulk temperature and heat transfer coefficient
The effect of p/d on condensation on the tube-bundle was investigated experimentally using the 10 tubes constituting the tube-bundle. Fig. 6 shows the HTC data at a pressure of 500 kPa, air mass fraction of 0.7, and wall subcooling of 25 K. As shown, the HTC of each tube at a given tube location increased with p/d. In addition, at a given p/d, the HTCs of tubes 5 and 6, which were located in the center of the tube-bundle, were lower than those of the other tubes. This trend was more pronounced as p/d decreased.
Fig. 6. Distribution of HTCs in tube-bundle at Wa,∞ = 0.7
The wall temperature of tube 5 was analyzed to investigate the characteristics of wall temperature with respect to the tube location. In tube 5, the wall temperatures toward the bundle center were 1.98, 1.05, and 0.16 K lower than the average wall temperature of the tube-bundle for p/d = 2.0, 2.5, and 3.0, respectively, whereas the wall temperatures toward the outside were lower by 0.85, 0.69, and 0.80 K, respectively. The wall temperatures of tube 5 were clearly lower than those of the other tubes, with the wall temperature toward the bundle center tending to be significantly low.
A low wall temperature indicates that a high air mass fraction near the condensing surface (Wa,w). To estimate the distribution, the air mass fractions near the 10 tubes were derived from the average wall temperature of each tube. Fig. 7 shows the distribution of air mass fraction near the condensing tubes observed at p/d = 2.0 and 3.0 experimentally. The air mass fractions near tubes 5 and 6 located at the center were higher than those of other tubes when p/d = 2.0. However, as p/d increased, the air mass fractions of tubes 5 and 6 decreased, and their distribution in the tube-bundle became more uniform. This result is related to the inflow of steam to the center and the outward diffusion of air near the condensing surface. When the gap between the adjacent tubes was reduced, the steam supply and air diffusion were degraded because of the interference of the tubes. This phenomenon is called the shadow effect, which weakened the condensation heat transfer and was enhanced as p/d decreased.
Fig. 7. Distribution of air mass fraction near 10 tubes for p/d = (a) 2.0, and (b) 3.0
The uniformity of the HTC in the tube-bundle can be quantified as the standard deviation (σ) of the HTC. The standard deviation was reduced to 8.9 %, 4.8 %, and 3.3 % as p/d was increased from 2.0 to 3.0. A larger gap size between the tubes facilitated the steam supply, and the distribution of HTC in the tube-bundle became more uniform. For instance, when p/d = 2.0, the average HTC of tubes 5 and 6 was 15.3 % lower than that of the tube-bundle. Contrarily, when p/d = 3.0, this reduction in the average HTC lowered to 2.1 %. Therefore, the heat transfer of the tubes located in the center is significantly influenced by p/d.
The HTC data of the tubes at an air mass fraction of 0.2 are presented in Fig. 8. As shown, the HTC distribution at an air mass fraction of 0.2 was more uniform than that at an air mass fraction of 0.7. When the p/d values were 2.0, 2.5, and 3.0, the standard deviations of the HTC were 6.3%, 5.1%, and 5.2%, respectively. Similarly, at an air mass fraction of 0.7, the standard deviation decreased with an increase in p/d. However, this change was not statistically significant. This result is related to the area occupied by the diffusion layer of air concentrated near the condensing surface. At an air mass fraction of 0.2, the region of the diffusion layer shrunk because the steam condensation rate was high. Therefore, the interference effect of the adjacent tubes on condensation was reduced.
Fig. 8. Distribution of HTCs in tube-bundle at Wa,∞ = 0.2
To investigate the HTC characteristics with respect to the tube location, the average HTC data of each group were compared with the HTC of a single-tube [8] in Fig. 9. As shown, all groups had lower HTCs than that of a single-tube at most air mass fractions. The average HTCs of groups A, B, C, and D (see Fig. 3) were lower by 13.1, 1.8, 4.1, and 2.2 %, respectively. The HTC of group A, tubes located in the center of the bundle, was particularly degraded. However, those of the other groups outside the bundle decreased relatively less. This result is related to the incoming steam mass flow rate. A large amount of steam flowed toward the tube-bundle because the total condensation rate in the tube-bundle was much greater than that in a single-tube. Therefore, steam with a high mass flux flowed around the outer tubes in the tube-bundle, which enhanced the turbulence and improved the heat transfer performance. This phenomenon is known as the suction effect.
Fig. 9. Comparison of HTCs for groups of tubes to that of single-tube (a) Group A, (b) Group B, (c) Group C, and (d) Group D
Therefore, it can be concluded that the heat transfer performance of the tube-bundle is generally reduced by the shadow effect, whereas heat transfer reduction for the outer tubes is relieved by the suction effect.
3.2. Parametric effect on condensation on tube-bundle
The HTC data, which were obtained under a pressure of 200 kPa and wall subcooling of 25 K, were analyzed to investigate the effect of air mass fraction on the average HTC of the tube-bundle. As shown in Fig. 10, the HTC of the tube-bundle decreased as the air mass fraction increased, similar to that of the single-tube. However, the variation in the air mass fraction of the tube-bundle was slightly larger than that of a single-tube. At an air mass fraction of 0.2, the HTC of the tube-bundle was 2 % higher than that of the single-tube, whereas at an air mass fraction of 0.7, it was 19 % lower. This result clearly shows that the air mass fraction had a greater influence on the HTC of the tube-bundle than that of a single-tube.
Fig. 10. Variation of HTCs with respect to air mass fraction
The significant effect of the air mass fraction on the HTC of the tube-bundle can be explained by the suction effect and diffusion layer thickness. To analyze the suction effect, the suction factor correlation proposed by Bird et al. [13] was applied to a lumped single-tube representing the tube-bundle as follows:
@(8)
where B is the suction parameter, which is defined as follows:
@(9)
where Ws,w and Ws,∞ are the steam mass fractions at the wall and bulk, respectively.
According to the aforementioned equations, the suction factor decreased to 1.75, 1.40, 1.28, and 1.13 when the air mass fractions were 0.2, 0.4, 0.5, and 0.7, respectively. The increase in air mass fraction caused decrease in the amounts of steam and in the suction effect, which led to a reduction in steam condensation.
Likewise, the diffusion layer thickness for a lumped single-tube representing the tube-bundle was calculated using the McAdams correlation [14,15] as follows:
@(10)
where ShL, GrL, Sc, and δ are the Sherwood number, Grashof number (GrL=gρm,Avg.(ρm,w-ρm,∞)L3/μm,Avg.2), Schmidt number (Sc=μm,Avg./ρm,Avg.Dm,Avg.), and diffusion layer thickness, respectively. Most steam-air mixture properties of the dimensionless numbers were obtained using the average of wall and bulk temperatures. The steam-air mixture density (ρm) was obtained by summing each gas density. μm and Dm represent the viscosity [16] and diffusion coefficient [17] of steam-air mixture, respectively.
The diffusion layer thickness increased to 1.91, 2.44, 2.72, and 3.26 mm when the air mass fractions were 0.2, 0.4, 0.5, and 0.7, respectively. This result indicates that the diffusion layers of the tube-bundle were also thickened. The blockage fraction (αblock) of the tube-bundle is defined as the fraction of the region occupied by the diffusion layer in the gap between adjacent tubes as follows:
@(11)
According to the aforementioned equation, the blockage fraction increased to 17.8, 22.7, 25.3, and 30.4 % when the air mass fractions were 0.2, 0.4, 0.5, and 0.7, respectively.
The velocity of the steam flowing to the bundle increases locally because of the blockage region, which increases pressure loss. Therefore, because the increase in pressure loss reduced the supply of steam, the effect of the air mass fraction on the tube-bundle increased.
The wall subcooling effect on the HTC was investigated based on data obtained at a pressure of 500 kPa. As shown in Fig. 11, both the HTCs of the tube-bundle and single-tube tended to decrease as wall subcooling increased. For air mass fractions of 0.2, 0.4, and 0.7, the HTC of a single-tube changed in proportion to powers of −0.23, −0.21, and −0.21, respectively, with respect to the wall subcooling, whereas that of the tube-bundle was proportional to powers of −0.24, −0.22, −0.21, respectively. In this way, the difference in HTC between a single-tube and the tube-bundle with respect to the wall subcooling was negligible, unlike with respect to the air mass fraction.
Fig. 11. HTCs with respect to wall subcooling
The effect of pressure on the tube-bundle HTC for air mass fractions of 0.2, 0.4, and 0.7 and a wall subcooling of 40 K is shown in Fig. 12. Both the HTCs of a single-tube and tube-bundle increased similarly with respect to pressure; moreover, the difference in tendencies was not significant. In steam condensation, the pressure influences free convection caused by the density difference of the steam–air mixture between the bulk side and condensing surface. Under the same thermal-hydraulic conditions, the steam–air mixture densities in the tube-bundle and in a single-tube were the same. Therefore, the pressure effect on the condensation of the tube-bundle was the same as that for a single-tube.
Fig. 12. Variation of HTCs with respect to pressure
Data obtained at a pressure of 500 kPa and air mass fractions of 0.2, 0.4, and 0.7 were analyzed to evaluate the effect of p/d. Fig. 13 shows the changes in HTC with respect to p/d. At an air mass fraction of 0.2, the HTC of the tube-bundle decreased by approximately 3.4 % as p/d increased from 2.0 to 3.0. By contrast, at an air mass fraction of 0.7, HTC increased by 9.4 % when p/d increased to 3.0 from 2.0. Furthermore, the p/d effect on condensation is enhanced by increases in the air mass fraction. This relation is related to the blockage fraction, which was described previously.
Fig. 13. HTC variation with respect to p/d
The diffusion layer thickness at an air mass fraction of 0.2 was estimated to be 0.96 mm, and the blockage fraction (αblock) was reduced to 8.9, 6.0, and 4.4 % at p/d values of 2.0, 2.5, and 3.0, respectively. However, the blockage fraction at an air mass fraction of 0.7 decreased by 15.7, 10.5, and 7.9 %, respectively, because the diffusion layer thickness was 1.7 mm. Thus, the change in blockage fraction with respect to p/d increases with the air mass fraction. Therefore, the change in pressure loss due to the blockage fraction also increases.
<Section>4. Development of bundle factor correlation</Section>
In this study, the correlation for an average bundle factor (ψbundle), which accounts for the difference between the HTCs of a single-tube and the tube-bundle, was proposed. The average bundle factor was derived based on the local bundle factor (ψlocal), which is the ratio of the HTC of the single-tube to that of each tube in the tube-bundle as follows:
@(12)
The single-tube HTC in Eq. (12) was determined from the experimental data obtained by Kang et al. under thermal-hydraulic conditions corresponding to those applied in the present tube-bundle experiment. The shadow and suction effects were considered in the development of the correlation.
The shadow effect was hypothesized to be due to pressure losses of the steam flow in the tube-bundle. The pressure loss of the steam flow in the tube-bundle under the steam condensation can be calculated via the application of the method for single-phase flow pressure loss [18]. In this study, because the steam flow in the tube-bundle was symmetrical with respect to the bundle center, the pressure loss for 1/4th of the bundle was considered, as shown in Fig. 14. A detailed derivation of the pressure loss in the tube-bundle is given in the Appendix.
Fig. 14. Schematic of steam flow in tube-bundle
While developing the correlation, a dimensionless pressure loss parameter was used to account for the pressure loss distribution in the tube-bundle. This parameter is defined as the ratio of the local pressure loss (ΔPloss,local) for ith and jth tube along respective x and y directions to the total pressure loss (ΔPloss,total) as follows:
@(13)
The correlation for the local bundle factor was developed based on the aforementioned dimensionless pressure loss (ΔPloss*), suction factor (Θ), and blockage fraction (αblock), with the boundary condition that the HTC in the tube-bundle converges to that in a single-tube [11]. Thus, in this study, the bundle factor approached unity as p/d increased. The local bundle factor correlation, which was obtained based on the experimental data, is as follows:
@(14)
The applicable ranges of the correlation for ΔPloss*, Θ, and αblock were 0.267–0.734, 1.12–1.98, and 0.044–0.304, respectively.
The local bundle factor correlation was evaluated by comparing local bundle factors of individual tubes. The evaluation was performed in group with respect to tube location. As shown in Fig. 15, the proposed correlation predicted the local bundle factor for each group within an error range of 11 % with a confidence of 95 %.
Fig. 15. Comparison of correlation-predicted HTCs to tube-bundle experimental data
Because tube-bundles for PCCSs are normally designed with large numbers of tubes along one direction, most of the steam flows in the direction perpendicular to the smaller number of layers. Therefore, in this study, the layer average bundle factor (ψlayer) was derived based on the main flow direction as follows:
@(15)
The applicability of the proposed correlation was evaluated against the layer average HTC data obtained in the experiment, which was predicted based on the HTC for a single-tube and the layer average bundle factor:
@(16)
Here, the HTC for a single-tube was obtained using the single-tube correlation by Kang et al. [8] as follows:
@(17)
where Wa,∞, Ja, Re*, Ar, and km,Avg. are the air mass fraction at the bulk, Jakob number (Ja=cp,m,Avg.(T∞-Tw)/hfg), diffusion Reynolds number (Re*=ρm,Avg.Udiffusiond/μm,Avg.), aspect ratio for vessel (Ar=L/(rvessel-rtube)), and the thermal conductivity of steam-air mixture, respectively. Udiffusion is the characteristic velocity derived from the diffusion theory:
@(18)
where@is the local diffusion velocity of steam-air mixture along the radial direction:
@(19)
where Wa,w is the air mass fraction at the outer wall (r=rtube).
The HTCs predicted by the correlation were compared with the HTCs from the experimental data, and the accuracy of the correlation was quantified using mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) and root mean square error (RMSE):
@(20)
@(21)
When the single-tube correlation was applied to each layer without the layer average bundle factor, the HTC was overestimated with the error increasing with the air mass fraction, as shown in Fig. 16. As tabulated in Table 2, the MAPE and RMSE of the single-tube correlation for the layer average HTC were 9.38 % and 12.43 %, respectively. However, when the layer average bundle factor was applied with the single-tube correlation, the MAPE and RMSE decreased to 7.20 % and 8.60 %, respectively. This result demonstrates that the proposed correlation can be used successfully for the prediction of condensation HTC for each layer of the bundle heat exchanger.
Fig. 16. Evaluation of developed bundle factor correlation with respect to layer average HTC
Table 3. MAPE and RMSE of tube-bundle average HTC data
The average bundle factor (ψbundle) for whole tubes in the bundle can also be derived from the local bundle factor. For simplicity, the average bundle factor is expressed as follows:
@(22)
where@is the average value of (ΔPlocal*)i,j0.005 and is expressed as a fitting equation for numerical calculation result according to the number of condensing tube layers:
@(23)
The average bundle factor in the present study ranges from 0.796 to 0.997.
The bundle average HTC predicted by the correlation was evaluated against the experimental data, as shown in Fig. 17. For this comparison, single-tube correlation of Kang et al. [8] was also applied for the calculation of reference HTC. As shown in the figure, the single-tube correlation data agree well with the tube-bundle data for high HTCs, whereas they were overpredicted as the HTC decreased. As tabulated in Table 3, the single-tube correlation exhibited a MAPE of 8.94% and an RMSE of 11.53 %. However, when the average bundle factor was applied with the single-tube correlation, MAPE and RMSE decreased to 7.26 % and 8.50%, respectively. In addition, the correlation for the tube-bundle predicted 95 % of the experimental data within a 14.9% error.
Fig. 17. Comparison of correlation-predicted HTCs to tube-bundle experimental data
The applicability of the average bundle factor (ψbundle) correlation was further evaluated using Bae et al.’s [10] experimental data, which were obtained using a 3 × 6 tube-bundle with tube diameters and lengths of 30.8 mm and 5.0 m, respectively. For the evaluation, Kang et al.’s and Bae et al.’s correlations were used with the average bundle factor:
@(24)
where@is the HTC derived from the heat and mass transfer analogy:
@(25)
Fig. 18 shows the evaluation results, and Table 4 summarizes the error statistics. In the evaluation, Bae et al.’s single-tube correlation overpredicted the tube-bundle data, with MAPE and RMSE of 8.78 % and 10.61 %, respectively. However, when the average bundle factor was applied to Bae et al.’s single-tube correlation, the MAPE and RMSE were reduced to 7.04 % and 8.63 %, respectively. Kang et al.’s single-tube correlation had a MAPE of 13.45 % and an RMSE of 15.87 %. Similar to the results for Bae et al.’s correlation, the application of the average bundle factor reduced them to 8.96 % and 11.30 %, respectively.
Fig. 18. Evaluation of correlations with respect to Bae et al.’s experimental data
Table 4. MAPE and RMSE of Bae et al.’s and Kang et al.’s correlations
As demonstrated in the evaluation, the newly developed bundle factor correlations improved the accuracy of the prediction of layer and bundle average HTCs of the bundle.
<Section>5. Conclusions</Section>
In this study, the condensation heat transfer characteristics of the tube-bundle with respect to thermal-hydraulic parameters and p/d were experimentally investigated using a tube-bundle heat exchanger consisting of 10 tubes. The results of this study can be summarized as follows.
(1)
Data of 10 tubes were analyzed to investigate the local heat transfer characteristics with respect to their installation locations. Because of the shadow effect of the tube-bundle, the HTC of the tube located in the bundle center decreased compared to that of a single-tube under the corresponding thermal-hydraulic conditions. The shadow effect was enhanced by increase in the air mass fraction or decrease in p/d. On the contrary, because of the suction effect, the HTCs of tubes located outside the tube-bundle were higher than those of tubes located in the center region.
(2)
Depending on the experimental conditions, the average HTC of the tube-bundle was different from that of a single-tube because of suction and shadow effects. When the air mass fraction increased, the steam flow was reduced because the suction effect decreased, and the shadow effect was enhanced. Meanwhile, the pressure loss of the steam flow increased because of the shadow effect, and the steam supply in the tube-bundle decreased. Therefore, the condensation heat transfer performance decreased. However, as p/d increased, the heat transfer improved with a decrease in pressure loss.
(3)
In this study, bundle factor correlations were developed based on the heat transfer characteristics of the bundle heat exchanger. The local bundle factor correlation was formulated based on ΔPloss*, Θ, and αblock, which account for the shadow and suction effects. The applicable ranges of the correlation were 0.267–0.734, 1.12–1.98, and 0.044–0.304 for ΔPloss*, Θ, and αblock, respectively. Moreover, the average bundle factor correlation was obtained based on the local bundle factor, which ranged from 0.796 to 0.997. Evaluation against experimental data showed that the predictive performance on the HTC of the tube-bundle was improved via the application of the average bundle factor to existing single-tube correlations.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Jinhoon Kang: Conceptualization, Methodology, Visualization, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Jeongmin Moon: Validation, Data curation. Youngchang Ko: Validation, Data curation. Sang-Gyu Lim: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investigation. Byongjo Yun: Conceptualization, Investigation, Resources, Data curation, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
None
<Section>Acknowledgments</Section>
This research was supported by the Nuclear Research & Development Program of the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning (MSIP) [grant number NRF-2019M2D2A1A03056998], and the Nuclear Safety Research Program through the Korea Foundation of Nuclear Safety (KOFONS) funded by the Nuclear Safety and Security Commission (NSSC), Republic of Korea [grant number 2003001].
<Section>Appendix</Section>
The pressure loss of the tube-bundle with respect to 1/4th region (see Fig. 14) is derived. The number of layers in the x and y directions for the 1/4th region is defined as follows:
where Nx,max and Ny,max are the number of the layers with respect to the x and y directions, respectively, for the entire region of the tube-bundle.
The total mass flow rate of the steam flowing into the tube-bundle is equal to the steam condensation rate as follows:
where A and B are the unit cell sizes in the x and y direction, respectively:
The , which is the average mass flux of steam condensed on the tube, was calculated from the diffusion equation [19]:
where Dm,∞ is the diffusivity of the steam–air mixture.
As the steam flows through the layers of the bundle, the steam mass flux decreases due to condensation. To account for this change of the mass flux, the same amount of steam is assumed to be condensed at each layer. Thus, the steam mass flux along each direction for each layer was calculated as follows:
where z refers to the x or y direction, and k is i or j, which are the layer number in each direction, respectively. Gz,ref, the amount of steam mass flux condensed in each layer, is the reference mass flux in each direction and is explained later.
Furthermore, the steam flows in the x and y directions were assumed to be independent of each other. The pressure loss at the local point (i, j) was then defined as the root mean square of the pressure losses in the x and y directions as follows:
.
The pressure loss of the tube-bundle was conventionally calculated based on the maximum mass flux at each layer as follows:
.
The maximum mass fluxes occurring in the gap between adjacent tubes were derived for each direction as follows:
where A' and B' are the gap in each direction. They were calculated as follows by considering the tube diameter (d) and diffusion layer thickness (δ):
.
Kz,k is the formloss coefficient for layer k of the tube-bundle, which is constant in the turbulent flow and inversely proportional to the Reynolds number (Rez,k) in the laminar flow where Rez,k is less than 1.0×103 [18]. Because the maximum Re in the present experiment was less than 1.9×102, the flow was laminar. Therefore, Kz,k can be expressed as follows:
where Rez,k is the Reynolds number for steam calculated based on the maximum mass flux of steam:
where μs,∞ is the steam viscosity.
The total pressure losses from the outer layer to the center of the bundle along x and y directions were derived:
The total pressure loss along x or y directions were equal:
The reference mass flux in x or y directions were derived as follows:
.
<Section>References</Section>
[1]
H. Ha, S. Lee, H. Kim
Optimal design of passive containment cooling system for innovative PWR
Nuclear Engineering and Technology, 49 (5) (2017), pp. 941-952
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[2]
S.W. Lee, S. Heo, H.U. Ha, H.G. Kim
The concept of the innovative power reactor
Nuclear Engineering and Technology, 49 (7) (2017), pp. 1431-1441
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[3]
D.K. Zaitsev, E.M. Smirnov, A.A. Smirnovskii, V.V. Bezlepkin, M.A. Zatevakhin, O.I. Simakova, S.E. Semashko, R.A. Sharapov
Numerical modeling of steam-gas flow in NPP containment with VVER and passive heat removal
Atomic Energy, 115 (2014), pp. 246-252
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[4]
J. Xing, D. Song, Y. Wu
HPR1000: Advanced pressurized water reactor with active and passive safety
Engineering, 2 (1) (2016), pp. 79-87
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[5]
A.A. Dehbi
The effects of noncondensable gases on steam condensation under turbulent natural convection conditions (Ph. D thesis)
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Department of Nuclear Engineering (1991)
Google Scholar
[6]
Y.G. Lee, Y.J. Jang, D.J. Choi
An experimental study of air–steam condensation on the exterior surface of a vertical tube under natural convection conditions
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 104 (2017), pp. 1034-1047
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[7]
G. Fan, P. Tong, Z. Sun, Y. Chen
Development of a new empirical correlation for steam condensation rates in the presence of air outside vertical smooth tube
Annals of Nuclear Energy, 113 (2018), pp. 139-146
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[8]
J. Kang, H. Kim, J. Bak, S.G. Lim, B. Yun
Condensation of steam mixed with non-condensable gas on vertical heat exchanger tubes in circumstances with free convection
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer (2021), p. 169
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[9]
C.O. Popiel
Free convection heat transfer from vertical slender cylinders: A review
Heat Transfer Engineering, 29 (6) (2008), pp. 521-536
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[10]
B.U. Bae, S. Kim, Y.S. Park, K.H. Kang
Experimental investigation on condensation heat transfer for bundle tube heat exchanger of the PCCS (Passive Containment Cooling System)
Annals of Nuclear Energy (2020), p. 139
CrossRefGoogle Scholar
[11]
H. Bian, Z. Sun, N. Zhang, Z. Meng, M. Ding
Numerical investigations on steam condensation in the presence of air on external surfaces of 3 × 3 tube bundles
Progress in Nuclear Energy, 111 (2019), pp. 42-50
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[12]
T.L. Bergman, A.S. Lavine, F.P. Incropera, D.P. DeWitt
Introduction to Heat Transfer
John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ (2011)
Ch. 11
Google Scholar
[13]
R.B. Bird
Transport phenomena
Applied Mechanics Reviews, 55 (1) (2002), pp. R1-R4
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[14]
M.H. Anderson, L.E. Herranz, M.L. Corradini
Experimental analysis of heat transfer within the AP600 containment under postulated accident conditions
Nuclear Engineering and Design, 185 (2–3) (1998), pp. 153-172
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[15]
W.M. Rohsenow, H.Y. Choi
Heat, Mass, and Momentum Transfer
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ (1961)
Google Scholar
[16]
C.R. Wilke
A viscosity equation for gas mixtures
The Journal of Chemical Physics, 18 (4) (1950), pp. 517-519
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[17]
T. Fujii
Theory of Laminar Film Condensation
Springer, New York (1991), p. 201
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[18]
A. Žukauskas
Heat transfer from tubes in crossflow
Advances in Heat Transfer, 8 (1972), pp. 93-160
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[19]
P.F. Peterson
Theoretical basis for the Uchida correlation for condensation in reactor containments
Nuclear Engineering and Design, 162 (2–3) (1996), pp. 301-306
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar