<title>Experimental study of heat transfer characteristics on condensation in the presence of NCG through thermal resistance analysis</title>
<author>1,KeyuanZhang,2,JianHu,3,ZezhaoNan,4,ZengqiaoChen,5,NaihuaWang</author>
<Affiliation>1,Institute of Thermal Science and Technology, Shandong University, Jinan 250061, China;2,State Key Laboratory of Nuclear Power Safety Monitoring Technology and Equipment, China Nuclear Power Engineering Co., Ltd, Shenzhen 518000, China</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2020.103591</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0149197020303383</URL>
Experimental study of heat transfer characteristics on condensation in the presence of NCG through thermal resistance analysis
KeyuanZhang,JianHu,ZezhaoNan,ZengqiaoChen,NaihuaWang
Institute of Thermal Science and Technology, Shandong University, Jinan 250061, China
State Key Laboratory of Nuclear Power Safety Monitoring Technology and Equipment, China Nuclear Power Engineering Co., Ltd, Shenzhen 518000, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
A new model of thermal resistance on condensation in the presence of noncondensable gas is presented.
The thermal resistance distribution of filmwise condensation with the existence of NCG is analyzed quantitatively.
A new perspective on heat transfer characteristics on condensation in the presence of NCG is presented.
Heat transfer enhancement with dropwise condensation and the limitations are studied when noncondensable gas exists.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
As an efficient approach of heat transfer, condensation is applied to the passive containment cooling system in the nuclear power plant for a fast export of heat. However, the existence of noncondensable gases in the containment will inhibit condensation heat transfer then increase the risks to the nuclear power reactors. In order to search effective methods to improve the condensation heat transfer, this study investigated condensation in the presence of NCG experimentally focusing on two aspects: (i) to search heat transfer characteristics of filmwise condensation; (ii) to evaluate possible heat transfer enhancement taken by dropwise condensation. For the first one, a new numerical model was developed to quantitatively analyze the thermal resistance distribution in the condensation process. The result indicated that the effect of various parameters on condensation heat transfer depended on the variation of both the thermal resistances of the liquid film and NCG accumulation layer. It provided a reliable explanation for the divergence of early perspectives around the effects on condensation heat transfer of subcooling or system pressure. For the second one, dropwise mode was proved to significantly enhance the condensation heat transfer when the noncondensable gas existed. However, this heat transfer enhancement is limited by the NCG accumulation in the gaseous mixture.
Graphical abstract
Keywords:Noncondensable gas;Heat transfer characteristics;Surface treatment;Dropwise condensation;Heat transfer enhancement
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
One of the key features of advanced light water reactors is the passive containment cooling system (PCCS). Its functional objective is to reduce the containment temperature and pressure following a loss-of-coolant accident (LOCA) or main steam line break (MSLB) accident by removing heat from the containment atmosphere (International Atomic Energy Agency, 2009; De la Rosa et al., 2009). An innovative PCCS for concrete containment consists of several two-phase closed loops. Each loop is provided with an evaporator inside the containment, a condenser immersed in a water pool, and the connecting pipes (Yin et al., 2019). During the accident, steam from the reactor coolant system (RCS) condenses on the evaporator exterior surface. The fluid inside the evaporator changes into steam and subsequently flows into the condenser through the riser due to the buoyancy force. The steam is then condensed by the water pool when passing through the condenser. Hence, heat from the containment is conveyed to the water pool and the environment eventually by evaporation and boiling. Condensate inside the condenser then returns to the evaporator through the downcomer, and loop circulation is established. The condensation on the external evaporator surface dominates heat transfer performance of the whole loop because of low condensation heat transfer coefficient (HTC) of vapor with noncondensable gases (NCGs) in the containment.
Noncondensable gases in the condensing vapor deteriorate heat transfer even at an extremely low concentration (Tadeusz et al., 2011). Researchers in decades have investigated heat transfer characteristics of condensation in the presence of NCG to explore effective methods of heat transfer enhancement. However, sharp divergences exist among the condensation researches. Typical correlations obtained from experimental studies on condensation in the presence of NCG are summarized in Table 1. Uchida's (Uchida et al., 1965) and Tagami's (Tagami, 1965) correlations, as the first published results, were widely used in engineering due to their simple mathematical expressions. After that, modified formulas were presented by Kataoba (Kataoka et al., 1992) and Murase (Murase et al., 1993), in which only NCG mass fraction was taken into consideration. Dehbi (Dehbi et al., 1991) claimed that wall subcooling and total pressure are also vital parameters affecting condensation of vapor with NCG, and the condensation HTC decreases as the wall subcooling increases. The wall subcooling in his research was in the range of 10–50 K. Condensation HTC obtained by Lee et al. (2017) showed similar declining trends with subcooling increase. Liu et al. (2000) conducted an experiment of condensation over a vertical tube with a lower subcooling . However, the result showed that the condensation HTC of the steam-air mixture increases as the subcooling increases. Kawakubo et al. (2009) performed experiments under similar situations as Liu. They found that the condensation HTC increases as the wall subcooling rises until 20 K and then decreases. Su et al. (2013, 2014) investigated the influences of parameters on condensation heat transfer under different wall subcooling. For comparison, the subcooling was set ranging from 27 K to 70 K in the earlier research, while it ranged from 13 K to 25 K in the later. Their results did not make a significant difference. By contrast, Fan et al. (2018) used the same experimental facilities as Su and studied the dependency of condensation HTC on various parameters, especially wall subcooling. They concluded that the exponent of subcooling is not a constant but linearly related to the subcooling itself and total pressure. Zhu et al. (2019) investigated the condensation mechanism of the helium-nitrogen mixture on a vertical plate. The result indicated that the condensation HTC of nitrogen increases with the increase of system pressure but decreases with wall subcooling.
Table 1. Researches of condensation in the presence of NCG.
Dehbi (2015) provided a reasonable explanation for the distinctions between Liu's investigation and others. He thought that the disturbance taken by pressure change is negligible when summarizing the influence of wall subcooling on condensation in Liu's tests. But the assumption cannot account for all the inconsistent results. Another possible reason for the divergence is that the variations of different thermal resistances of condensation in the presence of NCG change with experimental conditions. As shown in Fig. 1, condensation heat transfer in the presence of NCG is determined by two thermal resistances (Huang et al., 2015; Shamsabadi et al., 2020). One is the conduction thermal resistance of condensate attached on the surface (Liu et al., 2020). The other is the diffusion thermal resistance through the NCG accumulation layer neighboring the liquid-gas interface (Bian et al., 2019; Lu et al., 2020). The influences of parameters such as NCG accumulation, wall subcooling, and pressure on the individual resistance are different, leading to a complex variation of condensation HTC. Although much research has been done on the effects of NCG accumulation, wall subcooling, and pressure on condensation, few studies have been done on quantitative analysis of both individual thermal resistances on condensation in the presence of NCG.
Fig. 1. Procedure analysis and thermal resistance composition of filmwise condensation in the presence of NCG.
Sustaining a dropwise mode of condensation is an efficient method for heat transfer enhancement in pure steam condensation (Rose, 2002; Ahlers et al., 2019; Singh et al., 2019). Droplets replace the continuous liquid film attaching on the surface, reducing the condensate thermal resistance greatly. However, whether the shift to dropwise mode can improve condensation heat transfer in the presence of NCG has not been fully clarified when considering the addition of diffusion thermal resistance. Most literature indicated that the HTC of dropwise condensation is greater than that of filmwise condensation when NCG exists (Ma et al., 2008; Hu et al., 2016; Chen et al., 2017; Yuan et al., 2019), but there are still several exceptions. For example, Chung et al. (2004) compared filmwise and dropwise condensation on vertical plates. They found that the HTC of dropwise condensation is slightly lower than that of filmwise condensation in cases with high wall subcooling. Gu et al. (2020) studied the condensation heat transfer characteristics of moist air on 3D finned tubes. The result indicated that the thermal resistance of condensation on the hydrophobic 3D finned tubes is larger than that on hydrophilic tubes although dropwise condensation occurs. It is evident that there are still unknown limitations on the evaluation of heat transfer performance in dropwise condensation in the presence of NCG.
Therefore, it is critical to study and generalize about heat transfer characteristics of filmwise and dropwise condensation in the presence of NCG further. A quantitative analysis of partial thermal resistances in the condensation process is necessary to intuitively explore the inner relation between condensation heat transfer performance and various macro parameters. Experiments on both filmwise and dropwise condensation in the presence of NCG were conducted in this study. The purpose of our research could be divided into three aspects: (1) to investigate heat transfer characteristics of filmwise condensation in the presence of NCG; (2) to explain the divergence among earlier researches on condensation in the presence of NCG, through the thermal resistance analysis; (3) to evaluate the efficiency and limitations of dropwise condensation when NCG mixes with steam.
<Section>2. Experimental method and apparatus</Section>
2.1. Experimental apparatus
The schematic of the experimental apparatus is shown in Fig. 2. The pressure vessel is a cylindrical stainless steel tank, which is 2580 mm high and 620 mm in diameter, serving to stimulate the post-accident containment. It is fully insulated with fiberglass to reduce heat loss to outside. The test section is positioned inside the vessel and sealed. A vacuum pump precisely controlled the air in the test section before an experiment started. Steam was generated at the bottom of the vessel by electrical heaters with a maximum capacity of 12 kW. Saturated steam was supplied to the test section in the vessel through an orifice plate, then mixed with the air held herein. A condenser tube was located on the central axis of the test section, with cooling water flowing inside. The steam-air mixture condensed on the external tube surface. The condensate was recycled to the vessel bottom by gravity. The cooling water with a constant temperature maintained by the thermostatic water bath (Lauda Proline RP855C) was pumped into the tube from the bottom. After absorbing heat in the tube, the cooling water flowed into the cooling coil for pre-cooling, then returned to the thermostatic water bath for temperature control.
Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of the experimental apparatus. 1- storage tank; 2- data acquisition; 3- high speed camera; 4- viewports; 5- electric actuator; 6- vacuum pump; 7- pressure vessel; 8- cooling coil; 9- thermostatic water bath; 10- electrical heaters.
The condensation phenomenon in the test section was observed through two viewpoints and imaged by a high-speed camera (Phantom Fastcam Mini AX200) at 1000 fps. One precise pressure transducer was installed at the top of test section to measure the overall pressure in the vessel. One pressure gauge was also installed on the vessel to monitor pressure visually. An electromagnetic flowmeter is mounted on the water supply rig to measure the volume flow rate of cooling water. Thermocouples and pressure gauges were arranged at the inlet and outlet of the tube to measure the temperature and pressure of cooling water.
Fig. 3 presents the installation of thermocouples on the condenser tube. Sixteen T-type thermocouples were mounted on the external surface of the tube to measure the temperature distribution along the axis at 140 mm intervals (Fig. 3 (a)). The local surface temperature at each location was monitored by two thermocouples on the opposite to each other (Fig. 3 (b)). The schematic of mounting a thermocouple is displayed in Fig. 3 (c). Each thermocouple junction with a diameter of 0.3 mm was completely submerged in a thermocouple hole which is 0.6 mm in diameter and 0.3 mm in depth. The other part of the hole was filled with the soldering tin for the fixation of thermocouple junction. Eight thermocouples were mounted inside the vessel to measure the bulk temperature of the atmosphere. Data were recorded by the data acquisition system (Fluke 2680A).
Fig. 3. The installation of thermocouples on the condenser tube.
The conditions for the experimental process are listed in Table 2. The temperature of cooling water was controlled in a range from 60 °C to 90 °C when pumped out, ensuring that wall subcooling ranges from 2 to 40 K. The experimental runs have been conducted for steam partial pressure ranging from 0.1 MPa to 0.2 MPa (abs) and air mole fraction ranging from 0 to 0.3.
Table 2. Details of conditions for the experimental process.
2.2. Surface engineering
For sustaining condensation with different modes, two test tubes were prepared: a bare tube of type 304 stainless steel and a plasma vapor deposition (PVD) modified tube with type 304 stainless steel tube as substrate. Both test tubes were 1080 mm long, 19 mm in outer diameter, and with a thickness of 1 mm. The PVD equipment consisted of a 6-m-long cylindrical vacuum chamber, a vacuum pump, an incoming gas delivery system, a mechanical drive, and a heating system. In preparation, a cleaned substrate tube was fixed on the center axis of the vacuum chamber. Dry metallic nanoparticles of Ni and Ti were added as the coating material. The inert gases such as Ar and N2 filled the vacuum chamber after vacuum pumping. When preheating the substrate tube to a proper temperature, the electrodes on both sides of the vacuum chamber started to provide a strong electric field. Various metal ions came into space under the force of the electric field, and the movement of electrons with high energy ionized inert gases into plasmas. The ions penetrated the material surface violently and then deposited onto it. The ions altered the elemental composition of the substrate and then caused chemical and physical changes in the substrate by transferring their energy and momentum to the electrons and atomic nuclei of the substrate material. They also created a crystal structural change of the substrate.
Surface characterizations of the bare tube and modified tube were performed by 50x electron microscope imaging on the samples (Fig. 4 (a)). Each sample was a square slice with a side length of 4 mm, and its central area was selected as the main observation zone. The images establish that the external surface of the modified tube is rougher than that of the bare tube visually. An analysis of morphology and surface roughness was followed by a white light interferometer. As described in Fig. 4 (b), the average roughness of the bare tube was 267.21 nm, whereas that of the modified surface was 432.18 nm. The root mean square (RMS) roughness quantified the surface roughness of both test tubes. It was 361.35 nm on the bare surface, whereas 552.96 nm on the modified surface.
Fig. 4. External surface analysis on the bare tube and the modified tube: (a) measurement of surface features by 50x electron microscope; (b) analysis of morphology and surface roughness by the white light interferometer.
As another means of characterizing surface properties, the static contact angles of the bare and modified tube were also measured to distinguish the wettability of two kinds of surfaces. Each contact angle was obtained via a sessile droplet method by dropping a DI water droplet with a volume of 5@on the horizontal tube. The environmental temperature was kept at 22°C in the measurement. The images on static contact angles are shown in Fig. 5. The contact angle on the bare tube surface was . The bare tube surface was hydrophilic. In contrast, the modified tube surface showed better hydrophobicity with a contact angle of . It was more beneficial to the formation of dropwise condensation.
Fig. 5. Contact angles on the bare tube surface (a) and the modified tube surface (b).
2.3. Data reduction and uncertainty
The test section in the vessel is isolated, and there is no mass exchange between the test vessel and the outer environment. Any heat remained in the test section can effectively affect the properties of the water-steam-air mixture, especially the temperature and the system pressure. Thus, the electric power of heaters, which is the only heat source in the experiment, is precisely controlled to ensure the temperature and system pressure of the gaseous mixture is constant. During this period, the test section reaches the thermal equilibrium. Because the heat removed by cooling water in the condenser tube is equal to the heat absorbed by the only cold source. The thermal equilibrium of the whole experimental apparatus is also considered to make sense during the measurement under a steady state.
Steam in the vessel is assumed to be saturated. The steam partial pressure can be obtained by the equations of state explicit in Helmholtz energy. The air mole fraction in the steam-air mixture is calculated by Dalton's law of partial pressure.
@(1)
where@is the total pressure of the steam-air mixture.@is the mixture temperature in the bulk flow.
The received heat of cooling water is determined by the flow rate and the temperature difference between the inlet and outlet. The condensation heat rate equals to the received heat of cooling water during the measurement. Thus, the condensation heat rate can be expressed as:
@(2)
where,@is the volume flow rate of cooling water.@and@denote the cooling water temperature at the outlet and inlet of the condenser tube, respectively. The thermophysical properties such as specific heat capacity@and density@depends on the reference temperature of cooling water, which is defined as:
@(3)
Hence, the average condensation heat transfer coefficient can be obtained by Newton cooling law:
@(4)
where@is the effective heat transfer area on the external surface of the condenser tube.@denotes the wall subcooling, which is defined as the difference between the average wall temperature@and the saturated temperature of steam in the bulk flow .
@(5)
The average thermal resistance of condensation is calculated by Eq. (6).
@(6)
The uncertainties of calculated parameters were evaluated by the Monte Carlo method. Monte Carlo method (MCM) is a numerical method that calculates error propagation through repeated sampling and statistics technology. It has better applicability and accuracy on calculating the uncertainties through the nonlinear equations compared to the traditional error propagation model (Colorado et al., 2012). Fig. 6 presents the detailed procedure of uncertainty analysis based on MCM. Generally, this procedure is mainly divided into three parts: input selection, data propagation, and output statistics. For each sampling, the input variables such as the volume flowrate@and the bulk flow temperature@were assigned with random values in their own distributions at first. Then a target output@was obtained by these variables through the propagation model described in Fig. 6. Target outputs from 500 thousand samplings formed a new probability distribution for . Finally, the uncertainty of@could be obtained by analyzing the probability distribution.
Fig. 6. The detailed procedure of uncertainty analysis based on MCM.
The accuracy of the instruments are listed in Table 3. The uncertainty of temperature consisted of the systematic error caused by the installation and the accuracy of thermocouples. Because the systematic error could be estimated and modified as the temperature correction, only the thermocouple accuracy was considered. The accuracy of T-type thermocouples, pressure transmitter and electromagnetic flowmeter were ,@and , respectively. Consequently, the average condensation heat transfer coefficient@was estimated to be within 20%.
Table 3. The accuracy of the instruments.
<Section>3. Results and discussion</Section>
3.1. Verification
The average HTCs of pure steam condensation on the bare tube under different steam pressure are depicted in Fig. 7. The results present that the condensation heat transfer coefficient declines gradually with the increase of subcooling but remains constant with the addition of pressure. The Collier correlation (Colorado et al., 2012) is one of the modified Nusselt equations which takes interface fluctuation into account, which is defined as:
@(7)
where@represents the correction factor of interface fluctuation, which depends on the liquid film Reynolds number:
@(8)
Fig. 7. The average HTC of pure steam condensation varied with wall subcooling under different steam pressure.
The Reynolds number of the liquid film@can be calculated by pure condensation heat rate@and the thermophysical properties of steam around the interface:
@(9)
where@represents the mass rate of pure steam condensation.@is the characteristic length.@represents the dynamic viscosity of liquid film, which varies with the condensate temperature. And@denotes the latent heat of steam.
The estimations of the Collier's correlation are also marked as the black solid line in Fig. 7. It can be found that the experimental results are well consistent with the prediction of the average condensation HTC by the Collier correlation. The relative errors are less than 15%, indicating that the experimental apparatus and procedure are reliable.
3.2. Heat transfer characteristics of filmwise condensation in the presence of NCG
A series of filmwise condensation experiments in the steam-air mixture were performed on the bare tube after the verification. The heat transfer characteristics of filmwise condensation in the presence of NCG were analyzed. The influencing mechanisms of variables including wall subcooling, air mole fraction and steam partial pressure were summarized. More importantly, the thermal resistances during the condensation process were precisely quantified via applying a theoretical model of thermal resistance to the experimental analysis. The liquid-gas interface temperature was exactly obtained by a developed iterative method based on the thermal resistance model in experiments. Both of them provided a new viewpoint on the exploration of condensation in the presence of NCG.
3.2.1. Model of thermal resistance
Fig. 8 reveals the equivalent thermal resistance in the heat transfer process of filmwise condensation. The heat from the steam-air mixture is transferred to the liquid-gas interface by both natural convection and condensation, then passes through the liquid film to the external surface of the tube. If neglecting heat loss, the heat flux across the liquid film is equal to the heat flux from the mixture to the liquid-gas interface.
Fig. 8. The equivalent thermal resistance in the condensation heat transfer process.
According to energy conservation, the total heat flux from the mixture to the wall can be expressed as:
@(10)
where@represents the temperature of the liquid-gas interface. ,@and@denote conduction heat transfer coefficient through the liquid film, condensation heat transfer coefficient at the interface and convection heat transfer coefficient in the NCG accumulation layer, respectively.
The thermal resistances of NCG accumulation layer and liquid film can be calculated by Eqs. (11), (12)
@(11)
@(12)
Heat transfer through the NCG accumulation layer to the interface includes the released latent heat due to steam condensation and the sensible heat transfer due to the natural convection of mixture around the interface, which is expressed as:
@(13)
Generally, the natural convection of the steam-air mixture is evaluated by the Grashof number:
@(14)
where@and@denote the density of mixture at the interface and bulk flow temperature, respectively.@denotes the kinematic viscosity of mixture at the reference temperature .
Based on the mass and heat transfer analogy, the mass transfer and sensible heat transfer from the mixture to the interface can be expressed as:
@(15)
@(16)
where the constants@and@vary with the flow patterns of the gaseous mixture.@equals to 0.59 and@equals to 0.25 for laminar flow.
However, the steam concentration gradient between the interface and bulk flow is large when NCG exists. The intense steam diffusion from the bulk flow to the interface should be carefully taken into account. The effect that effectively strength natural convection around the interface is named the suction effect (John, 2011). A correction factor@is added in the definition of the Sherwood number to reflect the enhancement of mass and heat transfer by the suction effect:
@(17)
@(18)
The suction factor@depends on the mass driving force , which is:
@(19)
The mass transfer driving force is a dimensionless number governing the total mass flux from the liquid-gas interface in the condensation process, which is a negative number expressed as:
@(20)
where Ws,b and Ws,i, denote the steam mass fraction in the bulk flow and above the interface. Wa,b, and Wa,i denote the air mass fraction in the bulk flow and above the interface.
Then the convective heat transfer coefficient@can be calculated by the modified Nusselt number and the thermal conductivity of mixture at the reference temperature:
@(21)
The sensible heat flux is obtained by Newton cooling law:
@(22)
Total heat flux through the NCG accumulation layer@can be obtained from Eqs. (2), (4), (10):
@(23)
Hence, the released latent heat@equals to . The condensation heat transfer coefficient at the liquid-gas interface is calculated as:
@(24)
The steam mass flux per unit area on the interface is:
@(25)
where@denotes the enthalpy of vaporization at the saturated temperature of .
As to the heat conduction in the liquid film, the modified Nusselt theory developed by Collier and Thome (1994) is also available on the heat transfer analysis through liquid film.
@(26)
where@represents the correction factor of interface fluctuation, which satisfies . The Reynolds number of the liquid film is smaller than@in Eq. (9), which is evaluated by the mass flux at the interface:
@(27)
where ,@and@represent the density, thermal conductivity and dynamic viscosity of liquid film.
The reference temperature of the liquid film is defined as:
@(28)
where@denotes the modified enthalpy of vaporization.
Since the average surface temperature@is lower than the temperature of liquid-gas interface , the heat from the internal conduction is added into Eq. (29):
@(29)
3.2.2. Determination of interface temperature
The liquid-gas interface temperature@should be determined in the theoretical model of thermal resistance. However, it cannot be obtained by experimental measurement directly. Thus, an iterative method is developed to resolve this problem. Fig. 9 shows the iteration procedure for the determination of interface temperature . The iteration steps are:
1.
Input the structural parameters and physical property parameters such as the effective length , the bulk flow temperature ;
2.
Input the interface temperature@whose initial value is ;
3.
Calculate the convective heat transfer coefficient@by solving Eqs. (14), (15), (16), (17), (18), (19), (20), (21) with ;
4.
Calculate the condensation heat transfer coefficient@at the interface by solving Eqs. (22), (23) with@and ;
5.
Calculate the conduction heat transfer coefficient@through the liquid film by solving Eqs. (25), (26) with@and ;
6.
Obtain a new value@by solving the variation of Eq. (10), which is:
(30)
7.
Compare@with . If the relative error is larger than 0.1%, assign the value of@to@and repeat step 2–7;
8.
If the relative error is less than 0.1%, the iteration is terminated. The interface temperature@equals to .
Fig. 9. The iteration procedure foe the determination of interface temperature.
3.2.3. Results
Fig. 10 shows the measured condensation HTCs varied with air mole fraction when steam partial pressure is fixed at 0.1 MPa. As can be seen, the average condensation HTC decreases with the increase of air mole fraction, but almost keeps constant when the wall subcooling rises. The average condensation HTC drops sharply by at least 70.17% as the air mole fraction increases from zero to 0.05 and then declines much more slowly as the air mole fraction continues to rise.
Fig. 10. Condensation HTCs varied with different air mole fraction. ΔT = 6.0 K, 13.0 K, 17.5 K. Ps = 0.1 MPa.
Fig. 11 presents the thermal resistances of the NCG accumulation layer plotted as the green solid line and the liquid film thermal resistances plotted as the blue solid line when the wall subcooling is 6.0 K. As can be seen, the thermal resistance of the NCG accumulation layer is much larger than that of the liquid film. The black solid line represents the average thermal resistances of condensation. The thermal resistance of the NCG accumulation layer shows highly consistent with the average thermal resistance of condensation. It indicates that the NCG accumulation layer dominates condensation heat transfer when air mole fraction exceeds 0.05 and wall subcooling is below 10 K.
Fig. 11. The thermal resistances of the liquid film and NCG accumulation layer vs. air mole fraction. .
However, the domination is not absolute. The dynamic characteristics of both thermal resistances are also displayed in Fig. 11. It is noted that the thermal resistance of the NCG accumulation layer almost linearly increases as air mole fraction rises, but liquid film thermal resistance decreases slightly with air mole fraction ranging from zero to 0.3. The red solid line marks the thermal resistance ratio of liquid film to NCG accumulation layer. Based on the resistance ratio, the calculated results can be divided into two regimes: regime I with low air mole fraction@and regime II with high air mole fraction . The resistance ratio is greater than 0.225 in regime I. It means that the liquid film thermal resistance is closer to that of the NCG accumulation layer. There is an intersection point between the green line and the blue line observed in regime I. It can be inferred that the domination of the NCG accumulation layer on condensation heat transfer has gradually lost while the mixture condensation changes to pure steam condensation. The resistance ratio is less than 0.255 in regime II. It indicates that the liquid film thermal resistance is insignificant and the thermal resistance of the NCG accumulation layer dominates condensation heat transfer. Therefore, the linear growth of NCG accumulation layer thermal resistance no longer causes a sharp drop of condensation HTC, as described in Fig. 10.
The increase of NCG accumulation layer thermal resistance with air mole fraction is continuous, according to Fig. 11. There is a certain air mole fraction as the critical value to distinguish whether liquid film or NCG accumulation layer is dominant in condensation heat transfer if the wall subcooling and steam partial pressure are fixed. In other words, the effect of wall subcooling (or steam partial pressure) on condensation HTC can be quite different as wall subcooling (or steam partial pressure) changes in the steam-air mixture with a given air mole fraction. It depends on which thermal resistance dominates the condensation heat transfer, and how both partial thermal resistances change.
Fig. 12 illustrates the measured condensation HTCs varied with wall subcooling for@when steam partial pressure is 0.1 MPa. When the air mole fraction is fixed, for example, at 0.05, the measured condensation HTC takes a temporary rise until wall subcooling reaches 5.8 K and then drops gradually as wall subcooling continues to increase. This tendency is similar to the result obtained by Kawakubo. A higher air mole fraction can cause a significant decline of condensation HTC. The wall subcooling corresponding to the maximum condensation HTC also increases with the rise of air mole fraction. Therefore, an empirical correlation is developed to identify the relationship between the average condensation HTC and variables including air mole fraction and wall subcooling when steam partial pressure is fixed. It is expressed as:
@(31)
where@is air mole fraction ranging from 0.05 to 0.3.@is wall subcooling ranging from 2 K to 25 K.
Fig. 12. Condensation HTCs varied with wall subcooling. Xa = 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, Ps = 0.1 MPa.
This correlation also acts as the fitting function to estimate the condensation HTC under different air mole fraction and wall subcooling. As detailed in Fig. 12, the fitting lines with different colors represent the values of condensation HTC estimated by Eq. (31) when air mole fraction is fixed at 0.05, 0.1, 0.2 and 0.3, respectively. The relevance of each fitting line is a bit different. The relative errors between experimental results and the estimations are up to 11% when the air mole fraction is 0.05. Because wall subcooling is small, and the measurement is more sensitive to the accuracy of thermocouples. By contrast, the relative errors between experimental results and the estimations are within 8% when the air mole fraction is larger than 0.05. The estimated values are in good agreement with the measured results.
Under the same conditions, the thermal resistances of the liquid film and NCG accumulation layer varied with wall subcooling are reported in Fig. 13. The thermal resistance of the NCG accumulation layer falls with the rise of wall subcooling when air mole fraction ranges from 0.05 to 0.3. It's due to the increasing force of steam diffusion towards the liquid-gas interface. Conversely, the liquid film thermal resistance increases gradually as wall subcooling rises. Because the liquid film grows thicker when wall subcooling increases. Comparing Fig. 13 (a)–(d) shows that the limited change of air mole fraction hardly affects the domination of the NCG accumulation layer in condensation heat transfer. However, the gradients of two partial thermal resistances are quite different in different air mole fractions.
Fig. 13. Thermal resistances of liquid film and NCG accumulation layer vs. wall subcooling. . (a); (b); (c) ; (d) .
Fig. 14 provides the gradients of two thermal resistances given in Fig. 13 (a)–(d). The results indicate that both the thermal resistance gradients of liquid film and NCG accumulation layer change regularly with wall subcooling and air mole fraction. For a fixed air mole fraction, for example, five percent, as shown in Fig. 14 (a), the absolute values of thermal resistance gradients of the liquid film (the blue solid line) and NCG accumulation layer (the green solid line) decline as wall subcooling increases. But the absolute value of the NCG accumulation layer drops a bit faster than that of the liquid film. The absolute value of the NCG accumulation layer finally drops to the same value as that of liquid film at a subcooling degree of 6.4 K. It indicates that the variants of two partial thermal resistances are balanced. An extra increase in wall subcooling can disturb this balance again. The thermal resistance of the NCG accumulation layer decreases much more slowly as wall subcooling rises, while the thermal resistance of liquid film rises at a slight-falling speed. The average thermal resistance of filmwise condensation starts to increases, and the average condensation HTC reduces. The trend is in line with the variation of average thermal resistance of condensation (the black solid line) displayed in Fig. 14 (a). The average thermal resistance of condensation approaches to the minimum when wall subcooling is 5.7 K, as this wall subcooling is closest to 6.4 K in the testing range.
Fig. 14. The gradients of thermal resistances of liquid film and NCG accumulation layer vs. wall subcooling. . (a) ; (b) ; (c) ; (d) .
The absolute values of two partial thermal resistance gradients also reduce with the rise of wall subcooling when air mole fraction reaches 0.1, 0.2, or 0.3, as detailed in Fig. 14 (b)–(d). But the absolute value of the NCG accumulation layer drops faster as air mole fraction increases. Since the thermal resistance of the NCG accumulation layer occupies a larger part of the total thermal resistance, the rise of air mole fraction dramatically enlarges the absolute value of the NCG accumulation layer but hardly affects that of the liquid film. Thus, the absolute value of the NCG accumulation layer goes down to the same level as that of liquid film at a larger wall subcooling as air mole fraction exceeds 0.05. The absolute value of the NCG accumulation layer equals that of liquid film at@when air mole fraction is 0.1, and at@when air mole fraction is 0.2. As shown in Fig. 14 (b)–(c), the average thermal resistance of condensation also reaches the minimum when wall subcooling rises to around 8.5 K and 17.5 K, respectively. No intersection point appears within the subcooling range in Fig. 14 (d). It indicates that the reduction of NCG accumulation layer thermal resistance exceeds the increase of liquid film thermal resistance by a significant margin. So, the average thermal resistance of condensation keeps decreasing until wall subcooling reaches the highest with an air mole fraction of 0.3.
The effect of steam partial pressure on filmwise condensation heat transfer in the presence of NCG was also investigated experimentally in this study. Fig. 15 plots the average condensation HTCs varied with wall subcooling when steam partial pressure is 0.1 MPa, 0.15 MPa, and 0.2 MPa. The results obtained demonstrate that the rise of steam partial pressure can effectively improve the condensation heat transfer when both air mole fraction and wall subcooling are low enough. When the air mole fraction is 0.05, the increase of steam partial pressure takes a considerable enhancement on filmwise condensation heat transfer (Fig. 15 (a)). This is because the saturated temperature of steam rises and accelerates vapor diffusion in the NCG accumulation layer. The condensing rate rises due to the decrease in NCG accumulation layer thermal resistance. On the other hand, the increase of condensing rate also accelerates the condensate accumulation on the external surface of the tube. Thus, it can be found that the average condensation HTC drops a bit faster with the increase of wall subcooling when steam partial pressure is higher.
Fig. 15. Average condensation HTC vs. wall subcooling when steam partial pressure is 0.1 MPa, 0.15 MPa and 0.2 MPa. (a) ; (b) ; (c) ; (d) .
The heat transfer enhancement provided by the rising steam partial pressure also weakens as wall subcooling increases, as described in Fig. 15. We can infer that the heat transfer enhancement may even turn into a heat transfer deterioration if the wall subcooling continues rising. It is confirmed when air mole fraction increases to 0.1 or 0.2, as detailed in Fig. 15 (b)–(c). Average condensation HTC turns to decrease in the subcooling range of 13.0 K–17.0 K, as steam partial pressure rises from 0.1 MPa to 0.15 or 0.2 MPa. The condensation HTC measured in 0.15 MPa is less than that measured in 0.1 MPa when wall subcooling exceeds 15.0 K. These can be reasoned that the rise of liquid film thermal resistance caused by accelerated condensate accumulation exceeds the decline of NCG accumulation layer thermal resistance due to stronger vapor diffusion. Basing on the above analysis of thermal resistance, at a larger subcooling the resistance gradient of the NCG accumulation layer reduces to the same level as that of the liquid film when air mole fraction or steam partial pressure is higher. It reasonably explains why the heat transfer deterioration caused by the rising steam partial pressure starts at 11.7 K when the air mole fraction is 0.1 and at 15.3 K when air mole fraction is 0.2. The thermal resistance of the liquid film is so little that it can hardly affect condensation heat transfer of mixture with thirsty percent of air, even steam partial pressure increases to 0.2 MPa. As expected, condensation HTC keeps a small growth with the rise of steam partial pressure unexpectedly, as shown in Fig. 15 (d).
3.3. Heat transfer characteristics of dropwise condensation in the presence of NCG
Earlier literature has suggested that the HTC of dropwise condensation is higher than that of filmwise condensation in pure steam. Because droplets attached on the wall have a larger heat transfer area, and the thermal resistance of droplets is much smaller than that of the liquid film. According to Section 3.2, the liquid film can efficiently affect condensation heat transfer in the presence of a low concentration of NCG or with high wall subcooling (steam partial pressure). It was predicted that the shift to dropwise mode is an effective approach to enhance condensation heat transfer when NCG mixes with steam. Experiments were repeated under the same conditions as filmwise condensation on the modified tube to confirm this inference.
The averaged HTC of dropwise condensation is compared to that of filmwise condensation for different air mole fractions, as detailed in Fig. 16. The steam partial pressure is fixed at 0.1 MPa. The wall subcooling is selected as 9.5 K. As can be seen, dropwise condensation has a better heat transfer performance than filmwise condensation when air mole fraction ranges from zero to 0.3. However, the condensation HTC enhancement, which represents the percentage increases on the average HTC of filmwise condensation, falls gradually from 123% at@to 33.7% at . The result illuminates that the heat transfer enhancement taken by dropwise condensation in the presence of NCG is available but limited by NCG concentration in the mixture. The liquid film attached on the bare tube is thick when the air mole fraction is 0.05 (Fig. 17 (a), (c), (e)). The thermal resistance of liquid film accounts for a quarter of total condensation thermal resistance (see Fig. 13). Thus, the shift to dropwise mode can dramatically reduce the liquid film thermal resistance and the average thermal resistance of condensation. By contrast, the liquid film is so thin that the thermal resistance of liquid film hardly affects condensation heat transfer while air mole fraction exceeds 0.3 (Fig. 17 (b), (d), (f)). The reduction of liquid film thermal resistance is negligible as the condensation mode changes to dropwise. Although the slide or roll of droplets is still conducive to the improvement of vapor diffusion in NCG accumulation layer, the heat transfer enhancement taken by dropwise condensation becomes much slighter in mixture with high air concentration.
Fig. 16. The comparison of averaged HTCs between dropwise and filmwise condensation. , .
Fig. 17. The visualization of condensation on bare tube and modified tube. , (a) , ; (b) , ; (c) , ; (d) , ; (e) , ; (f) , .
Wall subcooling is also one of the critical parameters determining the heat transfer performance of dropwise condensation in the presence of NCG. In general, the rise of wall subcooling may reduce the HTC of dropwise condensation in pure steam. The same is proved to be available to the mixture with a little NCG in our study. Fig. 18 reveals the measured HTCs of dropwise condensation varied with wall subcooling for fixed air mole fractions. It can be found that the dropwise condensation HTC declines more sharply with the rise of wall subcooling when air mole fraction is 0.05, in comparison to filmwise condensation. The condensation mode transition from complete dropwise mode to coexisting mode accounts for the decrease of condensation HTC. Because more condensate accumulates on the external surface of modified tube as wall subcooling rises, the thermal resistance of condensate in coexisting condensation is much higher than that in complete dropwise condensation. The visualization also confirms this viewpoint. As shown in Fig. 17 (a), droplets which fall off the tube wall always converge into intermittent water flow then flows to the bottom by gravity. Comparing Fig. 17 (c) to Fig. (a) shows that the condensation mode is a complete dropwise condensation when wall subcooling is below 7.5 K. Although the water flow appears on the tube surface, it is just formed temporarily. At the next time, the sweeping area re-contacts with the gaseous mixture, and then numbers of small droplets generate (Fig. 17 (c)). However, the dropwise condensation may turn to be the coexisting condensation as wall subcooling is higher. As displayed in Fig. 17 (e), the water flow turns to be continuous over the tube due to the larger condensing rate. The existence of continuous flow reduces the effective heat transfer area and the refresh rate of droplets, resulting in a dramatic drop in condensation HTC. By contrast, the continuous water flow hardly appears when the air mole fraction is 0.2 or 0.3 because of the poor condensing rate (Fig. 17 (b)). The rise of wall subcooling accelerates the refresh rate of droplets, but the increasing condensing rate is still not enough to form a continuous water flow (Fig. 17 (d), (f)). The condensation mode has not shifted to the coexisting condensation mode. Hence, the average HTC of dropwise condensation shows approximately constant or a slight increase with the effect of wall subcooling.
Fig. 18. Dropwise condensation HTCs vs. wall subcooling for . .
<Section>4. Conclusion</Section>
This work carried out a series of experiments for investigating condensation heat transfer in the presence of NCG over the vertical tube. The subjects included both filmwise and dropwise condensation. The heat transfer characteristics of filmwise condensation with the existence of NCG was analyzed. The thermal resistances in filmwise condensation were accurately quantified through a theoretical model of thermal resistance and an iteration of interface temperature. In addition, a modified tube was tested for the research of dropwise condensation in pure steam and steam-air mixture. The heat transfer performance of dropwise condensation was discussed. The main conclusions of the present research are as follow:
(1)
Whether the thermal resistance of liquid film can be neglected in condensation depends on NCG mole fraction, while wall subcooling and steam partial pressure are fixed.
(2)
The effect of wall subcooling on condensation heat transfer in the presence of NCG prefers to be a multi-parameter function of NCG mole fraction, wall subcooling and steam partial pressure, rather than a constant or a single function of any parameter.
(3)
Dropwise condensation provides a significant heat transfer enhancement on most of the conditions with the existence of NCG. The heat transfer coefficient gains a rapid increase when NCG mole fraction is small but rises weakly when the thermal resistance of liquid film is negligible with a high NCG concentration.
<Section>Credit author statement</Section>
Keyuan Zhang: Methodology, Investigation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing; Jian Hu: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – original draft; Zezhao Nan: Investigation, Resources, Writing – original draft; Zengqiao Chen: Methodology, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing; Naihua Wang: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Supervision.
<Section>Declaration of competing interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgment</Section>
The scientific calculations in this paper have been done on the HPC Cloud Platform of Shandong University.
<Section>References</Section>
Ahlers et al., 2019
M. Ahlers, A. Buck-emden, H. Bart
Is dropwise condensation feasible ? A review on surface modifications for continuous dropwise condensation and a profitability analysis
J. Adv. Res., 16 (2019), pp. 1-13
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bian et al., 2019
H. Bian, Z. Sun, N. Zhang, Z. Meng, M. Ding
Numerical investigations on steam condensation in the presence of air on external surfaces of 3 × 3 tube bundles
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 111 (2019), pp. 42-50
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chen et al., 2017
X. Chen, J.A. Morrow, M.M. Derby
Mini-channel flow condensation enhancement through hydrophobicity in the presence of noncondensable gas
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 115 (2017), pp. 11-18
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chung et al., 2004
B.J. Chung, S. Kim, M. Kim, M. Ahmadinejad
Experimental comparison of film-wise and drop-wise condensations of steam on vertical flat plates with the presence of air
Int. Commun. Heat Mass Tran., 31 (8) (2004), pp. 1067-1074
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Collier and Thome, 1994
J.G. Collier, J.R. Thome
Convective Boiling and Convection
(third ed.), Clarendon Press, Oxford (1994)
Google Scholar
Colorado et al., 2012
D. Colorado, X. Ding, J.A. Hernández, B. Alonso
Hybrid evaporator model: analysis under uncertainty by means of Monte Carlo method
Appl. Therm. Eng., 43 (2012), pp. 148-152
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
De la Rosa et al., 2009
J.C. De la Rosa, A. Escrivá, L.E. Herranz, T. Cicero
Review on condensation on the containment structures
Prog. Nucl. Eng., 51 (2009), pp. 32-63
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Dehbi, 2015
A. Dehbi
A generalized correlation for steam condensation rates in the presence of air under turbulent free convection
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 86 (2015), pp. 1-15
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Dehbi et al., 1991
A. Dehbi, M. Golay, M. Kazimi
Condensation experiments in steam-air and steam-air-helium mixtures under turbulent natural convection
National Heat Transfer Conference (1991)
Google Scholar
Fan et al., 2018
G. Fan, P. Tong, Z. Sun, Y. Chen
Development of a new empirical correlation for steam condensation rates in the presence of air outside vertical smooth tube
Ann. Nucl. Eng., 113 (2018), pp. 139-146
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gu et al., 2020
Y. Gu, et al.
Condensation heat transfer characteristics of moist air outside 3-D finned tubes with different wettability
Energy, 207 (2020), p. 118202
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hu et al., 2016
H. Hu, G. Tang, D. Niu
Experimental investigation of convective condensation heat transfer on tube bundles with different surface wettability at large amount of noncondensable gas
Appl. Therm. Eng., 100 (2016), pp. 699-707
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Huang et al., 2015
J. Huang, J. Zhang, L. Wang
Review of vapor condensation heat and mass transfer in the presence of noncondensable gas
Appl. Therm. Eng., 89 (2015), pp. 469-484
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
International Atomic Energy Agency, 2009
International Atomic Energy Agency
Passive Safety Systems and Natural Circulation in Water Cooled Nuclear Power Plants
(2009), pp. 127-131
IAEA-TECDOC-1624
Google Scholar
John, 2011
H.L. John
A Heat Transfer Textbook
(fourth ed.), Phlogiston Press, Cambridge Massachusetts (2011)
Google Scholar
Kataoka et al., 1992
Y. Kataoka, T. Fukui, S. Hatamiya, T. Nakao, M. Naitoh, I. Sumida
Experiments on convection heat transfer along a vertical flat plate between pools with different temperatures
Nucl. Technol., 99 (1992), pp. 386-396
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kawakubo et al., 2009
M. Kawakubo, M. Aritomi, H. Kl, T. Komeno
An experimental study on the cooling characteristics of passive containment cooling systems
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 46 (2009), pp. 339-345
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lee et al., 2017
Y. Lee, Y. Jang, D. Choi
An experimental study of air-steam condensation on the exterior surface of a vertical tube under natural convection conditions
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 104 (2017), pp. 1034-1047
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Liu et al., 2000
H. Liu, N.E. Todreas, M.J. Driscoll
An experimental investigation of a passive cooling unit for nuclear plant containment
Nucl. Eng. Des., 199 (2000), pp. 243-255
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Liu et al., 2020
P. Liu, J.Y. Ho, T.N. Wong, K.C. Toh
Convective filmwise condensation on the outer surface of a vertical tube: a theoretical analysis
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 161 (2020), p. 120266
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lu et al., 2020
J. Lu, H. Cao, J. Li
Diffusion layer model for condensation of vapor with the presence of noncondensable gas under natural convective condensation
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 118 (2020), p. 103078
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ma et al., 2008
X. Ma, X. Zhou, Z. Lan, Y. Li, Y. Zhang
Condensation heat transfer enhancement in the presence of noncondensable gas using the interfacial effect of dropwise condensation
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 51 (2008), pp. 1728-1737
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Murase et al., 1993
M. Murase, Y. Kataoba, T. Fujii
Evaporation and condensation heat transfer with noncondensable gas present
Nul. Eng. Des., 141 (1993), pp. 135-143
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Rose, 2002
J.W. Rose
Dropwise condensation theory and experiment: a review
Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., 216 (2002), pp. 115-128
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Shamsabadi et al., 2020
H. Shamsabadi, S. Rashidi, J.A. Esfahani, A. Keshmiri
Condensation in the presence of non-condensable gases in a convergent 3D channel
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 152 (2020), p. 119511
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Singh et al., 2019
M. Singh, N.D. Pawar, S. Kondaraju, S.S. Bahga
Modeling and simulation of dropwise
J. Indian Inst. Sci., xxx (2019), pp. 1-15
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Su et al., 2013
J. Su, Z. Su, G. Fan, M. Ding
Experimental study of the effect of noncondens-able gases on steam condensation over a vertical tube external surface
Nucl. Eng. Des., 5 (2013), pp. 201-208
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Su et al., 2014
J. Su, Z. Su, M. Ding, G. Fan
Analysis of experiments for the effect of noncon-densable gases on steam condensation over a vertical tube external surface under low wall subcooling
Nucl. Eng. Des., 278 (2014), pp. 644-650
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tadeusz et al., 2011
B. Tadeusz, C. Henryk, S. Malgorzata
Comparative investigations of the condensation of R134a and R404A refrigerants in pipe minichannels
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 54 (2011), pp. 1963-1974
Google Scholar
Tagami, 1965
T. Tagami
Interim Report on Safety Assessments and Facilities Establishment Project for June 1965 Vol. NO. 1
Japenese Atomic Energy Research Agency (1965)
Google Scholar
Uchida et al., 1965
H. Uchida, A. Oyama, Y. Togo
Evaluation of post-incident cooling systems of light-water power reactors
Proceedings of the Third International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy, vol. 13 (1965), pp. 93-104
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yin et al., 2019
X. Yin, Y. Tian, D. Zhou, N. Wang
Numerical study of flow boiling in an intermediate-scale vertical tube under low heat flux
Appl. Therm. Eng., 153 (2019), pp. 739-747
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yuan et al., 2019
J. Yuan, Y. Wang, J. Xu, X. Ji, J. Xie
Convective dropwise condensation heat transfer in mini-channels with biphilic surface
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 134 (2019), pp. 69-84
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhu et al., 2019
S.L. Zhu, Y. Li, R.P. Zhang
Experimental study on the condensation characteristics of nitrogen with non-condensable gas
Cryogenics, 98 (2019), pp. 29-38
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar