<title>The low void worth core design (‘CFV’) based on an axially heterogeneous geometry</title>
<author>1,P.Sciora,2,L.Buiron,3,F.Varaine</author>
<Affiliation>1,Alternative Energies and Atomic Energy Commission, CEA, DES, SPRC, F-13108 Saint-Paul Lez Durance Cedex, France</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nucengdes.2020.110763</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029549320302570</URL>
The low void worth core design (‘CFV’) based on an axially heterogeneous geometry
P.Sciora,L.Buiron,F.Varaine
Alternative Energies and Atomic Energy Commission, CEA, DES, SPRC, F-13108 Saint-Paul Lez Durance Cedex, France
<Section>Highlights</Section>
A fast core design with a negative sodium void worth and with comparable performances with a homogeneous core.
Physical explanations of the different phenomena which are combined to enhance the neutron leakages.
Impact on the safety issues: coupled zones, A,B,C approach, LOF transient.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Since many years, various core designs have been proposed to improve the safety of sodium fast reactors. The macroscopic parameters that are the sodium void worth and the Doppler constant were focusing attention because they are the easiest way to evaluate the core behavior in case of transient, even if this simplified approach has been improved by the use of quasi-static transient evaluations (A,B,C or K,G,H coefficients).
To reduce the positive sodium void worth, different designs have been proposed by different countries: by using axially or radially heterogeneous core, addition of sodium plenum, addition of fertile layers,… The CFV (Low Void worth Core) is based on these past designs and propose a combination of different specific geometries, precisely defined, to highly reduce the sodium void worth to a negative value. The main performances of the oxide core are conserved, compared to a similar homogeneous core.
Each specificity of the CFV is studied: height of the fissile zone, height and position of the fertile layer, height of the sodium plenum, thickness of the fissile plugs, need of a boron upper protection and the use of different fissile heights depending on the radius.
The paper presents the inequalities which governs the CFV geometry. The physical phenomena are described and explained. The different safety issues are also discussed: decoupling risk linked to the insertion of the fertile layer, the elementary feedback coefficients, the simplified approach of the A,B,C coefficients and a calculation of a Loss of Flow transient with the MACARENA system code.
Keywords：Sodium fast reactor;Negative sodium void worth;Core design;Heterogeneous core;Loss of Flow transient
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The Generation IV International Forum (GIF) was created by the United States and Europe with the aim of targeting and coordinating R&D actions on the various fields of interest identified for the design of new generation reactors. The forum experts thus defined the main objectives to be achieved for the design of such systems: sustainability, safety, fuel cycle economy, management of nuclear waste and strengthening of non-proliferation aspects (GIF, 2013). An additional objective of reactor R&D should be to make a design capable of generating economically-competitive electricity. Depending on the time and the country, R&D on fast reactor designs has often pursued one or many of the following main goals focused in France:
Increase the production of Plutonium, which is used as fuel in fast reactors (breeder cores)
Increase the safety margins (reducing the sodium void coefficient effect, the burn-up reactivity swing, increase the Doppler effect)
Improve the global performances of the core: reactivity swing, irradiation time, power shape stability
Improve the minor actinides transmutation capability (waste management purpose)
The safety improvement aspect represents a generic item grouping the main objectives in terms of the natural behavior of reactor cores by seeking to achieve, as far as possible, passive safety in most accident situations. Passive safety often means that the core can be stabilized in a state compatible with maintaining the integrity of the various containment barriers of radioactive elements (fuel element cladding and reactor vessel) without the need to trigger active systems.
Considering the large mean free path associated with a fast neutron spectrum, heterogeneities at the core level can be used to improve the core behavior, while maintaining a quite simple assembly design. This can be seen as an advantage compared to thermal reactors for instance, in which spatial heterogeneities must be built at the assembly level, with varying pin geometries or composition (Youinou and Vasile, 2005).
Various designs have been proposed using axial and radial heterogeneous core concepts, associated with different kinds of reflectors with specific properties: diffusion depending on temperature, spectrum moderation, capture… Indeed, the large migration area of fast reactors implies a crucial choice with the reflector linked to the global neutron balance; on the opposite, the reflector of the LWR is mainly used to limit the form factor of the flux distribution.
Research on fast reactors at CEA and in France is mainly based on the improvement of the safety issues, with the objective of being at least at the same level of safety as the GEN III reactors such as the EPRTM. This research focused on oxide fuel core and this whole topic will not be applicable to all the concepts. For example, the use of sodium plenum on the top of the fissile zone doesn’t allow the use of a sodium bond largely recommended with metallic fuel. In fact, in this case, the fission gas plenum will be placed at the top of the fuel pins.
Starting from the former SFR cores designed in the framework of European Fast Reactor (EFR) collaboration, studies focused on two main axes:
•
The decrease of the excess reactivity in the core: it means in particular to reduce the burn-up reactivity swing per cycle aiming a core with an inner conversion ratio close to unity. Reducing the reactivity swing decreases the reactivity “stored” per control rod at the beginning of a cycle and thus the potential reactivity insertion in case of inadvertent control rod withdrawal.
•
The reduction of the reactivity effect of the sodium voiding. During Unprotected Loss of Flow and of Heat Sink (ULOF and ULOHS) transients, the thermal sodium expansion feedback coefficient plays an important role during the course of the accident. The sodium void effect of a core is also often used as a macroscopic indicator for the core behavior during such transients.
In 2009, studies resulted in a first design of core: the “SFR-V2b” (Sciora, et al., 2009). Based on a large pellet and a small spacing wire between the pins, this core exhibits an increased MOX fraction and a reduced sodium fraction in the sub-assembly. The reactivity swing of the core during cycle was about 1.5 $ and the sodium void worth was reduced about 2 $ compared to the EFR core (Lefèvre, 1996). However, the total reactivity insertion due to sodium voiding is still about + 5 $, and the core behavior during unprotected transients is not significantly improved compared to past designs.
Studies have been carried out to further reduce the sodium void effect seeking to obtain a negative value while trying to keep the same performances as the ones of the SFR-V2b core. Based on the studies already realized on the subject, a focus was done on the axially heterogeneous concepts (Section 3).
<Section>2. The sodium void effect</Section>
Total sodium void worth in a fast reactor core can be divided into three components:
•
A leakage component, that comes from the increased mean free path of the neutrons after voiding, since scattering on sodium nuclei has been removed. This component is mainly negative (with an increase of temperature) and depends strongly on the core geometry.
•
An absorption component, which comes from the removal of the captures on sodium nuclei. This component is mainly positive (with an increase of temperature) and increases with the sodium volume fraction in the assembly.
•
A “spectrum” component, which comes from the spectrum hardening due to the removal of scattering on sodium nuclei and the subsequent increase in 238U fissions. This component is mainly positive with an increase of the coolant temperature.
In order to reduce the sodium void worth, various methods can be applied: by decreasing the absorption and spectrum component, or by increasing the leakage one. These two effects have been schematized in a simplified way on the Fig. 1, presenting the sodium void effect of a homogeneous core with a sodium plenum (2D-RZ model). The leakage component is of course also present in the central fissile zone of the geometry but in a reduced proportion compared to the geometry leakage at the boundaries of the core.
Fig. 1. Sodium void worth (Δk/k) of a homogeneous core (2D-RZ model) of 1000 MWth.
2.1. The absorption and spectrum component
Studies on the absorption component pin-point some interesting solutions, such as:
•
Reducing the volume fraction of sodium in the sub-assembly. This approach was deeply investigated and has led to the SFR V2b core design. Its sub-assembly was dimensioned with large annular pellets, a small spacer wire and so a reduced sodium volume fraction. This point is however limited by thermo-hydraulics considerations (Schmitt Overall et al., 2010).
•
Using thorium-based fuel but needing new fuel cycle development (IAEA-TECDOC, 2005).
•
Adding some moderator materials, like zirconium hydride, and this generally leads to reduced performances. This limits the spectrum hardening in case of sodium voiding and helps maintaining a significant absorption component in the core.
Considering the target of starting building a SFR prototype (the ASTRID project) in France foreseen in few decades, only the first solution was retained for the current design as the others would require years of R&D.
2.2. The leakage component
Based on the interest of increasing the neutron leakages in voiding conditions, two main solutions have already been proposed and partially used (Section 3). Both of them implement an upper sodium “reflector” which will be removed in accident phase because of the sodium heating:
•
The upper sodium plenum zone: placed on the top of the fissile zone, it replaces the traditional axial upper fertile blanket. In case of sodium heating, thermal sodium expansion is mainly located in the upper part of the fissile zone, and also the plenum is one of the first regions to be heated. Neutron leakages are also increased during the transient without any time delay. This solution is mainly implemented and used in the different Russian BN reactors (IAEA, 2000).
•
The Gas Expansion Modules (GEM): located on the radial boundary of the fissile zone, they have the same goal than the plenum zone. However, their operating conditions are different because these sub-assemblies do not receive directly the hot sodium of the core because of the presence of wrapper that leads to a kind of radial thermo-hydraulic isolation. In depth explanations can be found in the different references presented in Section 3.
<Section>3. Past public studies</Section>
The next presented studies are not exhaustive but sum up the main options already described in the literature.
3.1. The Russian BN-800
The reactor (Chebeskov, 1996, IAEA, 2000) design presents a sodium void effect about 1 $ (470 +/− 220 10−5 Δk/k), which corresponds to an important reduction thanks to the use of sodium plenum and a boron carbide neutronic protection on the top of the core. In the case of a sodium voiding, the neutron current leaking through the upper part of the core increases due to the removal of the sodium in the plenum. The presence of an upper boron carbide protection prevents these neutrons from streaming back into the core. During normal operations, the sodium plenum acts as a neutron reflector. An alternative design for this reactor implied the use of an internal blanket (Fig. 2). Dimensions are presented in the Table 1.
Fig. 2. Axially heterogeneous design of the BN-800 core to obtain a decreased sodium void effect (Chebeskov, 1996).
Table 1. Characteristics of the BN 800 core with an internal blanket (IAEA, 2000).
The “internal” fertile blanket was relatively small and enabled a decrease in the sodium void reactivity to a value close to zero, without degrading the power peaking factor.
3.2. Japanese concepts
3.2.1. Pr Takeda’s concept
In the same ways, some Japanese studies considered the use of an internal blanket. Pr Takeda wrote some short notes and papers on this subject (Takeda, et al., 1992, Takeda and Kuroishi, 1983). In (Takeda and Kuroishi, 1983), an upper sodium plenum along with an axial internal blanket was added to a fast reactor core of 2600 MWth. The dimensions of the internal blanket as well as the core geometry were then adapted to reduce sodium void worth, breeding ratio, power peaking factor and core operations. The dimensions of the final core obtained are presented in the Table 2.
Table 2. Characteristics of a Japanese core with an internal blanket (Takeda, et al., 1992).
Fig. 3. RZ model of the optimized LMFR core (Takeda and Kuroishi, 1983).
The whole demarche of conception is described in (Takeda, et al., 1992). The thickness of the internal blanket is the result of a compromise between its effect on the sodium void worth and on the power peak factor: The thicker the internal blanket is, the lower the sodium void worth is. As a consequence, the axial flux is disturbed, the fissile zones are reduced and decoupled, and also the power peaking factor is increased. In order to maintain a significant effect of the plenum during sodium voiding, the upper axial blanket had to be removed and the internal blanket was shifted by 5 cm below the core middle plane.
3.2.2. Saito’s concept
In (Saito, 1998, Saito, 2002), an oxide design core of 3100 MWth has been optimized for transmutation of minor actinides (Fig. 4). Considering the increase of the sodium void worth and of the reactivity loss, solutions have been proposed to meet criteria relative to safety issues. Several passive safety constraints have been implemented with the use of different innovations, focalizing their studies on two main transients: Unprotected Loss of Flow and Unprotected Transient Over Power.
•
ULOF: sodium plenum, inner fertile layer, GEM (Gas Expansion Module).
•
UTOP: BRCM (Burnup Reactivity Compensation Module), FDRM (Fuel Dilution and Relocation Modules).
Fig. 4. Heterogeneous configuration with sodium plenum (left); concept of fuel dilution and relocation module – FDRM (right).
GEMs are based on the same idea than the plenum sodium: increase the neutron leakages in case of “Loss Of Flow” accident but they are inserted around the fissile zone and also concerns the radial leakages.
BRCMs are a kind of burnable poisons: thanks to the gas released from boron carbide firstly inserted in the core, this absorber element is slowly moved downwards with the burn-up increase. FDRMs aim to protect fast UTOP thanks to a sodium tube at the center of the sub-assembly, facilitating fuel evacuation; and to protect slow UTOP with a connecting metal and the bound insertion of depleted uranium, allowing MOX dilution.
3.2.3. A metallic fuel concept
A 3000 MWth core with metallic fuel has been designed (Yokoyama, 2005). The safety performances are equivalent to the one obtained by the CEA in 2009 for the SFR V2B. In (Yokoyama, 2005), they tried to reduce the sodium void worth to a negative value and obtained − 1.3$ and kept a small reactivity swing during irradiation (0.4$). To obtain these goals, some innovations have been introduced in the core: a very small inner zone, a higher outer one and a sodium plenum (Fig. 5). By doing this, the ratio surface/volume is increased, especially with an important part in contact with the sodium reflector: the plenum zone. By voiding the core and the plenum, neutron leakages are enhanced and the reactivity is decreased in this part of the geometry.
Fig. 5. Metallic fueled core, minimizing the sodium void worth (Yokoyama, 2005).
<Section>4. The ‘Cœur à Faible Vidange (CFV)’ concept (Low void worth core)</Section>
Considering the various options described in the previous parts, the so-called « Cœur à Faible Vidange » (Low Void worth core), or CFV core, was developed at CEA. This core is a synthesis of the options presented above and exhibits outstanding performances. In this part, the motivation behind the core design will be described and an analysis of the core performances will be carried out.
To reduce the sodium void worth by increasing the leakage component, different core modifications can be done. Based on the Unprotected Loss of Flow (ULOF) accident, which corresponds to a loss of primary sodium flow without control rod insertion, the more effective leakage will be at the top of the core, where the risk of boiling sodium principally exists.
i.
The use of a sodium plenum on the top of the fissile zone of the core
Obviously, the use of a sodium plenum zone seems essential, because in nominal condition, this zone is already filled with hot sodium. In an incidental case, the upper sodium reflector gradually expands and finally almost disappears while sodium is heating. In a “conventional” core (axially homogeneous with a typical fissile height around 85 cm), the maximum effect is known to be about ≈−1 $ on the total sodium void worth, in spite of a large thickness of this zone. In order to obtain larger sodium void reduction it is then necessary to further increase the leakage in case of voided sodium case. This can be done by increasing the neutron current towards the upper part of the core in voided conditions.
ii.
An axial heterogeneous core, with the insertion of an internal fertile layer
The addition of an axial fertile layer transforms the cosine axial flux profile in a new disturbed one with two small humps like a camelback (Fig. 16). As it will be presented in Section 5.2, the inner blanket zone allows reducing the axial power peaking factor if its thickness is adapted to the height of the core: a too small layer won’t have any effect on the flux as the neutrons will diffuse through without interacting with it, and a too large one will decouple both axial fissile zones of the core (upper and lower). The position and radius of the blanket were adjusted in the CFV case to limit the impact on core performances: if the fertile layer is shifted up or down around the core mid-plane, the axial geometry can be made dissymmetrical with a larger bump upward or downward. In these conditions, neutrons leakage is enhanced in the desired axial directions (up or down). Concerning its radius, by limiting the layer to the inner zone of the core, the impact on the radial power shape and on the plutonium content ratio is reduced. The impact of the fertile layer in the outer zone is also limited on the sodium void worth. These two arguments lead to a fertile layer only in the inner zone, but with a limited outer zone at two rings of assemblies.
iii.
The use of absorbing protection near the upper border of the fissile zone
Finally, the use of an upper Boron Carbide protection prevents neutrons from returning to the core when the sodium plenum is voided. In nominal conditions, on the top of the core, neutrons interact mainly with the plenum zone fulfilled with sodium: interactions with the absorbing zone are limited. In case of sodium heating, the neutrons mean free path increase and the reflector property of the plenum zone is reduced. The absorbing protection reduces their diffusion and return to the core.
iv.
A core geometry using different heights depending on the radius
To improve the effect of the plenum as a reflector, the surface between fissile and plenum zone is increased: the outer core is designed so that it has a higher active zone than the inner one. Furthermore, a consequence of this option is an optimization of the power density of the core and in particular the integrated power of the sub-assemblies of the outer zone: this will be presented in the next part.
All these geometrical considerations can be translated into inequalities between the various dimensions of the core, which are dictated by neutron behavior in the core. In the next part, these inequalities will be derived for an oxide core.
<Section>5. Analysis of the physical phenomena of the ‘CFV’</Section>
5.1. Description of the cores studied and sodium void worth definition
The physical analysis (5 Analysis of the physical phenomena of the ‘CFV’, 6 Physical analysis of the core) is done on a 2400 MW thermal power reactor with a CFV design. The core is illustrated on the Fig. 7. The sub-assemblies used correspond to the SFR V2b one (Sciora, et al., 2009), Pu composition corresponds to Pu2035 (Sciora, et al., 2009). The homogeneous core used for the transient comparison at the Section 7 is presented on the Fig. 6.
Fig. 6. Core geometry of the 2400 thMW homogeneous design.
Fig. 7. Core geometry of the 2400thMW CFV design.
The calculation tool used for this core physics study is ERANOS (Rimpault, 2002), based on the nuclear library JEFF3.1. The solver used is VARIANT (Palmiotti et al., 1993, Carrico et al., 1992) (transport option) on the 3D-model of the core and the BISTRO solver (Palmiotti et al., 1987) (transport) when the 2D RZ model is used. Most of the values are obtained on 2D core models, using the transport theory at 33 groups. 3D-model are mainly used for the calculations of the feedback coefficients at the Section 7 (Fig. 8).
Fig. 8. Sodium void worth depending on the sodium plenum height (homogeneous core).
The fissile zone of the homogeneous core is 1 m height, the inner zone of the CFV core (fissile + fertile layer) is 80 cm height and the outer fissile zone is 90 cm height.
The different performances are partially presented in the reference (Sciora et al., 2009). Main characteristics of interest are summarized in the Table 3.
Table 3. Main characteristics of the CFV core studied.
5.1.1. Sodium void worth definition
As the geometry of these two cores is different, the sodium void worth has to be defined and the voided zones precised. The sodium void effect is calculated by voiding the ‘hot’ zones of the core, namely the fissile zone, the internal fertile blanket and the plenum. Here conservative assumptions are retained:
•
Radial neutron protections are not voided.
•
Axially, the lower parts of the core (fertile blanket, gas plenum, and reflector) are not voided as they are related to “cold” as their temperature depends only on the inlet temperature sodium of 395 °C, assuming no loss of secondary flow.
•
The neutron protection above the plenum is not voided. Indeed, preliminary thermal hydraulics calculations indicate that the decrease of the hydraulic section of this area will condense sodium in this part of the core. However, this has no significant impact on the calculation of the void effect because of the reduced reaction rate on the sodium nuclei in this region.
For instance, in the case of a core having no upper sodium plenum, voiding protection on a neutron height equivalent to a sodium plenum would reduce the void effect of about 0.3 $. In all cases, voiding of the radial as well as upper protections would reduce the sodium voiding and improve the behaviour of the core.
5.2. The plenum thickness
To ensure that neutron leakage is significant in voided conditions, the plenum must be large enough in order to create an important voided zone above the core and limit the impact in nominal conditions. Furthermore, the addition of an absorber layer above the plenum prevents the neutron form scattering back to the core. In nominal condition, the plenum plays the role of reflector; in voided situations, the absorber layer prevents a significant part of the leaking neutrons from returning to the core. Thus, a plenum thickness of few neutron mean free paths (~30 cm) leads to very good plenum effect and a low penalization of the absorber layer on the core regarding the nominal core multiplication factor. The chosen height is a compromise between the minimum value imposed by the mean free path of neutrons in this region (10 cm), and the scattering length (60 cm). Beyond this value, the efficiency of the reflector is stabilizing, as it can be seen on the Fig. 9.
Fig. 9. Separation of eigenvalues depending on the thickness of the fertile blanket.
This leads to the following inequality, the minimal sodium plenum height on the top of the inner zone is:
5.3. The inner fertile layer thickness
To amplify the plenum effect on sodium void worth, it was decided to increase the flux gradient at the core/plenum axial interface. This gradient may therefore fall sharply during the voiding. The addition of a fertile blanket at the middle plane of the core will thus increase the flux in the upper part of the core. For a given core height, the larger the blanket thickness is, the higher the flux level near the plenum and the minimum the void worth will be. It is however important to keep a core without any decoupled zone from a neutronic point of view. Indeed, if the both lower and upper zones are decoupled, the effect of the rods, when inserted from the top of the core won’t have any effect on the lower fissile zone until these regions are directly reached.
A fertile layer is chosen instead of a steel mainly because it reduces the core volume. In fact, it is possible to have an even more negative void worth value thanks to a steel layer, but coupling issues and important power factor would remain. And the power no more generated in the fertile layer will impose an increase of the core volume. For these reasons, the fertile layer was decided to be a better compromise.
The fertile layer thickness must then be optimized with regards to these two opposite contributions. The thickness should be sufficient to deform the initial shape of the cosine axial distribution of flux while it should not decouple the upper and lower part of the core. A first estimate of this thickness is the scattering length of neutrons in the fertile area:
D is the diffusion coefficient of neutron in the layer and ∑a the macroscopic absorption cross section.
The thickness of the fertile blanket could evolve towards values slightly above 15 cm. A lower value won’t have any significant effect, a upper one would lead to safety issues with decoupled cores.
To settle the upper limit enabling the correlation of lower and upper zones of the core, it is interesting to estimate separation of eigenvalues (SEV) factor, which can be a relevant indicator of the axial coupling (Maillot et al., 2016). This was done using two core models: the first is one-dimensional and represents the inner core in its axial direction. The second one is a 2D-RZ model. The described core is presented in (Sciora et al., 2011). The obtained values with these both models are presented below on the Fig. 10.
Fig. 10. Sodium void effect depending on the blanket thickness for three different core heights.
The figure above shows that the larger the fertile blanket thickness is, the higher the SEV factor is. This is consistent with a gradual decorrelation of the different areas of the core. Decoupling occurs significantly for a thickness of about 30 cm with the 1D model (axial decoupling), and around 35–40 cm in RZ modeling. This value is in fact intrinsic to the breeding zone and represents the maximum thickness that neutrons can pass through without being significantly captured: it is 2–3 times the scattering length. In conclusion, the relevant thickness of the fertile zone should be between 15 and 40 cm.
The intersection between the two curves shows the transition from a primarily radial decoupling (thin fertile blankets) to a substantially axial decoupling (thick fertile blankets). This change takes place for a blanket thickness of about 30 cm. In order to limit the axial decoupling because of safety issues linked to the insertion of control rods as previously mentioned, the fertile layer thickness will be lower than 30 cm.
5.4. Core heights and axial position of the inner fertile layer
The core height was settled to 80 cm in order to maximize the sodium void effect, while optimizing the shape factor and thus limiting the central component. By limiting the active height, the leakage component in the plenum is further amplified by increasing the level and flux gradient in the upper part of the core.
Fig. 11. Sodium void worth and axial form factor depending on the axial position of the fertile layer.
The three curves in the graph above (Fig. 11) correspond to the evolution of the sodium void effect with the thickness of the fertile blanket for three core heights: 80 cm, 90 cm and 100 cm. In the thickness range of blanket (15 to 30 cm), only a limited inner core of 80 cm gives access to a negative void effect. The blanket thickness can also be expressed as a ratio depending of the height of the inner fissile zone:
In addition, to further strengthen the plenum effect, a slight asymmetry in the distribution pattern of axial flux was created by shifting down slightly (a few centimeters, ≈ 5 cm) the level of the fertile blanket. This arrangement increases the flux in the upper part of the core and thereby improves the component of leakage in the upper plenum. An acceptable axial shape factor (i.e. axial power factor < 1.45) is kept due to the presence of the fertile blanket (Fig. 12).
Fig. 12. Spectrum of the core in both conditions (nominal and voided).
This can be expressed by the following ratio between the inner fertile layer position and inner fissile zone height.
Finally, two different core heights of the inner and outer zone (crucible effect) increase the core interface with the plenum and therefore further improve the void effect in terms of leakage. This geometrical pattern does increase the volume of the fissile zone without increasing the outer radius of the core, allowing a gain in terms of reactivity, and therefore inventory of fissile material.
This ratio is limited by a minimum value to avoid significant differences of sub-assembly integral power, maximum linear power and also of associated flow rates or outlet temperatures. These considerations may be also adapted thanks to the use of different size of pins between the two zones, a reduced plutonium content…
The presence of the inner fertile layer in the inner fissile zone only is an optimization of the total length of fissile pins (Pu inventory), of the radial peaking factor, and of the small interest on the sodium voiding worth. However, to keep a low sodium void effect, the outer fissile zone have to be reduced at the minimum, it means one or two rings of sub-assemblies, depending of the size of the core. This can be traduced by the following inequality:
The different ratios presented in this part are summed up in the Table 4 with the associated physical aimed effects. They have to be used as recommendations for core designer who aims having negative worth core.
Table 4. Ratios to design a core with a reduced sodium void worth (i.e. a ‘CFV’ core).
<Section>6. Physical analysis of the core</Section>
6.1. Sodium void worth and flux
The neutron spectrum in the fissile zone for the nominal and voided conditions is presented on the Fig. 13. No specificities are observed on the energetic distribution of the in-core flux. The flux spectrum is hardened due to the voiding of sodium and the increase in 238U fissions.
Fig. 13. Axial distribution pattern of the flux in both situations (nominal and voided).
Axial profiles in the inner fuel zone in nominal and voided conditions are presented on Fig. 14.
Fig. 14. Sodium density and void effect in the plenum.
Voiding the core directly impacts the flux. The specificity of the CFV concept is visible on the graph of axial distribution of flux. Its profile is modified and the flux is redistributed on the fissile zone (symmetry around the fertile blanket) in case of voided condition. A significant drop in the level of flux at the interface with the plenum is observed: −30%. This is directly due to the disappearance of the sodium reflector, and the appearance of an absorbent area (the enriched boron carbide at the top of the plenum).
6.2. Sodium density and related feedback coefficient
The reactivity effect of the change in density of sodium is not linear. Indeed, it is divided into two main effects presented on Fig. 15:
•
A central component (mainly located in the centre of the core) whose effect is nearly linear with the increase in the void fraction. It is the case for sub-assemblies with low sodium volume fraction such as the ones considered for the SFR V2b and CFV cores.
•
A leakage component mainly driven by the upper sodium plenum in the case of the CFV concept. The plenum is a reflector whose effectiveness depends on the sodium concentration:
o
With a low concentration (important void fraction), the reactivity effect of the plenum is linear (reflector economy). In this case, it evolves first linearly with the volume fraction of sodium in the plenum.
o
When the sodium fraction reaches a sufficient value (i.e the scattering length is near of the plenum thickness), the gain in reactivity due to the reflector stabilizes: the plenum effectiveness on the sodium void decreases, even if it remains very efficient compared to the central component.
Fig. 15. Spatial distribution of the sodium void effect for 4 different voiding cases: 1%, 50%, 75% and 100%.
This shows that in the CFV concept, the contribution of the plenum to the sodium void effect is more important when the voided volume fraction is high, as illustrated in Fig. 15 and Fig. 16. This can be of importance in case of transient with a global elevation of temperature on the whole core: the sodium feedback coefficient will be positive until the sodium start boiling enough to make it negative. However, in case of non homogeneous transient with a more important increase of temperature at the top of the core (like ULOF), the negative plenum effect will be preponderant and the global sodium coefficient will be negative as it will be presented in the Section 7. Positions of the rods are represented with the black dotted lines. The spatial distribution is also impacted by their positions (Fig. 17).
Fig. 16. Schemes of a homogeneous core and of a ‘CFV’ core with the different voided zones (marked with a red star) (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.) (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Regardless of the modified sodium density, the sodium void rate is nearly constant in the fissile zone: +1 pcm/cm3/%Na. This is equivalent to the observed linear evolution of the Fig. 15. In the plenum, the sodium void rate is even more negative than the sodium void density is significantly modified.
6.3. Analysis of the sodium void worth
The “spatial” mapping of the sodium voiding contribution has been done considering the different zones of the geometry and of the both different components defined in Section 2. For the CFV core, the rods are inserted at the top of the fissile zone, that’s why the sodium void worth is increased about 1 $ compared to the Table 4 (Explanations at Section 6.4). Results are given for an End Of Cycle core.
The distribution of the sodium void worth on the different mediums (Table 5 and Table 6) shows that the total effect in the fissile and fertile area of the core is almost constant over the both cores (≈4.5 $). The gain on the void effect in the CFV case is directly related to the component associated with the sodium plenum.
Table 5. Sodium void reactivity distribution on a homogeneous core.
Table 6. Sodium void reactivity distribution on a CFV core.
The decomposition of the sodium void effect into central component and leakage terms shows that the gain is only visible on the leakage term. The central component, mainly located in the centre of the core remains almost the same (≈±20%). The associated void effect is unchanged and the gain on the global void effect is mainly due to the gain on the term of leakage in the plenum medium.
The spatial distribution of the voiding effect of the core CFV is presented in Fig. 17. The core of a homogeneous 2400MWth core is given in comparison. The scale corresponds to a voiding effect per volume (pcm/cm3).
Fig. 17. Spatial distribution of the sodium void effect of the both cores of 2400 MWth.
The SFR V2b (2400 MWth) presents a spatially flattened distribution of the sodium void effect with a peak factor at core centre. The CFV core has a slightly pronounced radial distribution around the interface between the inner and outer zone. However, this distribution could probably be improved by optimizing the spatial distribution of the power map. The impact of the plenum zone in dark blue and its impact on the upper area of the core are highly visible. The zones where voiding is negative can quickly be identified. The upper gas plenum volume (between 1.1 and 1.2 on the ordinate axis for the inner zone) presents a negative void effect, but less important than the plenum one due to the lower sodium fraction in the upper gas plenum. Because of the more important steel fraction than in the plenum zone, the variation of reflective effect between nominal and voided conditions is reduced. The most this zone will be reduced, the better the sodium effect will be.
This distribution is a direct result of the flux φ, adjoint flux φ* and leakage current J changes at the core/plenum axial interface. These values were calculated at the interface at the top of the fissile zone for the homogeneous core and the CFV concept. The indicator φ*ΔJ, which represents the importance of the leaking neutrons was calculated over the entire interface Core/Plenum (inner and outer zone) and is also presented in Table 7.
Table 7. Flux, adjoint flux and leakage currents at the Core/Plenum interface for the both cores.
The CFV core exhibits higher values of nominal flux at the interface (about 35%). This impacts the leakage current at the interface: in nominal situation, as in a voided one, they are higher by about 50%. The effect is visible on the physical term φ*.ΔJ, which drives the sodium void effect of the CFV core.
The Fig. 18 shows a visualization of the axial distributions of flux on these both cores. They are drawn in the periphery of inner core. The peaking factor of the CFV core is significantly reduced compared to the homogeneous core, while the flux shape is tilted toward the upper part of the core due to the inner fertile blanket.
Fig. 18. Axial flux distribution on the homogeneous and CFV core.
6.4. ‘S’ curve and rods worth
The ‘S’ curve of the CFV core presents no specificity. This consolidates the fact that both upper and lower zones of the core are coupled, which was a safety issue when designing the core. It’s presented on Fig. 19, calculated at the end of Cycle. If the both zones were not fully coupled, the control of the core would have been very difficult. The insertion of the rods from the top would have reduced the fission rate in the upper zone but would have a reduced effect on the lower zone. And the fission rate could have on the opposite even increased in the lower fissile part, despite the rods insertion, which is not acceptable.
Fig. 19. ‘S’ curve of the CFV core.
The axial flux distribution in the fertile blanket does not present any important decrease. The flux is nearly constant over the fissile and fertile zones. The choice of the thickness layer based on an optimization of the sodium void effect does not lead to conflict with the achievement of a monotonous efficiency of the rods.
The first twenty centimetres of the ‘S’ curve of the core are calculated with the rods in the plenum zone to the level of the top of the outer pins. The fact that the flux at the interface inner core/Plenum was increased involves a good efficiency of the rods in the bottom of the plenum. This could partially enable to pilot the reactor with control rods inserted in the sodium plenum. In fact, the efficiency of the rods at the interface between outer fissile zone and plenum is equivalent to the efficiency of the rods at their normal “parking” place in a homogeneous core, e.g at the interface between fissile and upper blanket: 0.25 pcm/mm.
For this core, the rods were parked at the interface between inner fissile upper limit and plenum with a differential effect about 0.5 pcm/mm. By putting them 20 cm upper (i.e. at the interface between outer fissile zone and plenum), the sodium voiding is improved of about − 1 $: in nominal conditions, the absorbing section is reduced near the fissile zone and the flux is increased at the interface as it is presented on the Fig. 20.
Fig. 20. Spatial distribution of the sodium void effect depending on the rods insertion (left: rods at the inner fissile upper interface = 1.1 right: rods at the outer fissile upper interface = 1.3).
<Section>7. ‘ULOF’ transient evaluation</Section>
To understand the difference of behaviour between a CFV core and a homogeneous core, an application has been made on the ULOF (Unprotected Loss Of Flow) transient.
Feedback coefficients are calculated on the both 3D model of the cores. They are presented in the Table 8.
Table 8. Feedback coefficients (10−5 Δk/k2/K, except for the Doppler constant, 10−5 Δk/k2) of a homogeneous and a CFV core.
The main difference is the addition of a sodium plenum component which is strongly negative. The Doppler Effect is also impacted because of the presence of the fertile layer. However, the difference is reduced because the inner layer acts like a fissile zone thanks to its very close temperature to a fissile zone.
7.1. Simplified approach
The difference can also be presented thanks to the ABC or K,G,H coefficients. These two methodologies allow estimating quasi-static reactivity balance results and passive behaviour of the core during safety transients.
The ABC coefficients are presented in the reference (Wade and Fujita, 1989). They are defined thanks to the following equation.
•
P, F = normalized power and flow, respectively
•
= change from normal coolant inlet temperature
•
= externally imposed reactivity
•
A,B,C = integral reactivity parameters that are measurable on the operating plan via perturbations introduced through the communication paths
•
C = inlet temperature coefficient of reactivity (ȼ/°C)
•
(A + B) = reactivity decrement experienced in going to full power and flow from zero-power isothermal at coolant inlet temperature (ȼ)
•
B = power/flow coefficient (ȼ /100% power/flow)
•
A = net (power/flow) reactivity decrement (ȼ)
Simplify evaluations for the Loss Of Flow transient or for the Loss of Heat Sink can be made.  represents the variation of the sodium outlet temperature for the first transient ;  represents the variation of the inlet sodium temperature.  is the sodium variation in the core at nominal power.
Table 9. Overshoot temperature of sodium in case of ULOF.
As expected and aimed in (Wade and Fujita, 1989, Wade and Chang, 1987), the three coefficients presented in Table 9 are negative for these both cores. And the sodium coefficient near from 0 with the CFV core allows to reduce the B and C coefficients. B and C coefficients are negative and implies a negative temperature coefficient.
Both indicators present a decrease of the sodium temperature during the loss of flow transients. A,B,C are coefficients that can be measured on a reactor, on the contrary of the elementary feedbacks. Their improvement should be somehow directly interpreted as an improvement of the reactor safety.
The larger is the following ratio, the more the overshoot in sodium temperature is reduced.
Table 10. A,B,C coefficients.
This criteria (Table 10) shows that instead the equilibrium temperature is reduced at the end of the ULOF, the overshoot peak temperature of sodium is equivalent between the both cores, relatively to the asymptotic value.
Another way to apprehend this simplified approach is to use the K,G,H coefficients (Gauthé and Sciora, 2017, Stauff, 2011). They can be defined by writing a reactivity balance of this form:
with
•
k, coefficient linked to the core inlet temperature (Tin) with ΔTc and P constant
•
g, coefficient of the average core heating with Tin and p constant
•
h, coefficient of the thermal power with Tin and ΔTc constant
Table 11. KGH coefficients for a homogeneous and a CFV core.
K coefficient of the CFV is more negative mainly because of the sodium effect and of the Doppler effect (Table 11). The inner fertile part of the Doppler effect of the CFV core acts as equal to the fissile part because the increase of temperature is linked with the sodium inlet temperature.
G coefficient is the same but it’s mainly due to compensation between sodium effect and rods effect. The rods at the top position of the homogeneous core have a more important differential effect than in the CFV core where the top position is located in the plenum zone.
H coefficient is different because the change of power mainly impacts the fissile zones and the fertile layer. The Doppler constant in these zones of the CFV core is increased compared to the homogeneous core.
For the ULOF, the equilibrium output temperature can be defined as:
With this simplified approach, around 50 °C less are obtained with the CFV core. Knowing that the increase of the sodium temperature because of the ULOF is around 400 °C, it’s a reduction of around 15% of this ULOF consequence.
Concerning the ULOHS, the sodium equilibrium temperature obtained with the 0% of neutronic power, without taking into account the decay heat power can be written with the following equation:
The values obtained for the two cores are:
•
Homogeneous core: Tout = 975 °C
•
CFV core: Tout = 740 °C
An important reduction of the temperature at the end of the ULOHS is observed. Other parameters of interest can be found and evaluated thanks to the methodology presented in (Gauthé and Sciora, 2017).
As primary conclusions, transients like ULOF or ULOHS should be more favourable with the CFV core, but the Over Power transients should be equivalent. This will be checked with an ULOF transient in the next part.
7.2. Transient simulation
Simulations of an ULOF have been done with the MACARENa code (Droin et al., 2017). The transient is defined by an exponential reduction of the primary flow with a half-time of 10 s. Calculations are done with derivations made of around 10 sub-assemblies. A more detailed description of the core would permit to follow more precisely the start of the boiling, but the main conclusions of this study would be unchanged. It should be also noticed that this topic has been investigated into deepest studies (Alpy, 2016, Poplavsky et al., 2011, Faure et al., 2019, Mambelli, 2018). This part only points out the global difference of behaviour in case of such transients.
As expected, the cores behaviours are very different (Fig. 21):
•
A power excursion occurs after 30 s of transient in the case of the homogeneous core. In the case of the CFV core, the sodium starts boiling in the plenum after 35 s, and this boiling phase continue more than 500 s without any degradation of the cladding at first stage of analysis.
•
The evolution of power, for the homogeneous core is first a slight increase and then a decrease of a few percent during the first 30 s, before the boiling occurs. In the case of the CFV core, the decrease of power starts immediately as the pumps stop, thanks to the negative sodium feedback coefficient. Then the decrease of power is mostly larger than in the case of the homogeneous core with a reduction of about 50% of the nominal power after 35 s.
•
In the boiling phase, the behaviour of the CFV core is stabilized and oscillating: when the boiling starts in the plenum zone, the power decreases, and then the sodium returns to the liquid phase, the reactivity increases and the power also.
•
The comparison of the main reactivity terms for the both cores presents significant differences :
o
The sodium density coefficient is positive for the homogeneous core, and negative for the CFV core, thanks to the plenum zone which supports the main increase of temperature.
o
The Doppler is negative in the case of the homogeneous core, because the fuel temperature increases thanks to the increase of the sodium temperature (and instead of the power decrease). In case of the CFV core, the Doppler is positive and tends to reduce the power decrease.
o
In both cases, the fuel reactivity is negative because the fuel is considered linked to the cladding.
o
The other feedbacks are calculated but are not presented on these figures to simplify the understanding of the transient.
Fig. 21. Evolution of the reactivity terms and of the power for the both cores during an ULOF.
The CFV core presents an improved intrinsic behavior of the core during this kind of transient. However, with this core of 2400 thMW, the negative sodium void worth of − 1.8 $ is not sufficient to avoid the sodium boiling. The stabilized boiling allows nevertheless to delay or to delete the fuel melting accident.
This improved behavior can also be seen on other kind of Loss of flow transients, like the Unprotected Loss Of Heat Sink (ULOHS).
<Section>8. Conclusions</Section>
Different concepts have been studied over the world in order to improve the sodium void effect of sodium cooled fast reactor. The ‘CFV’ is an innovative concept based on these different past design. It is an optimized combination which leads to significantly improve the reduction of sodium void worth without degrading the main performances of the core.
The CFV is an optimization of the core geometry, resulting in a significant increase of the neutron leakage in voided conditions. The CFV geometry is based on a sodium plenum zone in the upper part of the core, an absorbing zone above the plenum, a heterogeneous axial core with an inner fertile zone and a heterogeneous radial core with different heights for the inner and outer zone of the core.
A physical analysis was performed to clearly explain the different key contributions: spatial distribution, density effects, isotopic contributions, axial distribution. Various geometrical inequalities governing the design of a low sodium void effect have been derived from these physical considerations, and it was verified that the design thus obtained exhibited an acceptable flux profile. It was shown that the presence of an inner fertile layer did not modify the control rods efficiency, allowing standard operating schemes to be used for such a core.
A comparison with a probabilistic code was realized in the reference (Sciora et al., 2011): the sodium void effect and the correlation of the core fissile zones are confirmed. Though a systematic bias is observed between deterministic and stochastic sodium void worth predictions, way of improvements are identified and efforts are on-going to adapt the actual calculation scheme to the specificities of this innovative core design: new calculations new schemes developed in the APOLLO-3 code (Faure et al., 2018).
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
P. Sciora: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. L. Buiron: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. F. Varaine: Conceptualization, Formal analysis.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>References</Section>
Alpy, 2016
N. Alpy, et al.
Phenomenological investigation of sodium boiling in a SFR core during a postulated ULOF transient with CATHARE 2 system code: a stabilized boiling case
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol. (2016)
Google Scholar
Carrico et al., 1992
C.B. Carrico, E.E. Lewis, G. Palmiotti
Three dimentional variational nodal transport methods for cartesian, triangular, and hexagonal criticality calculations
Nucl. Sci. Eng., 111 (1992), pp. 168-179
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chebeskov, 1996
A.N. Chebeskov
Evaluation of sodium void reactivity on the BN-800 fast reactor design
Physor, 2 (1996), p. C-49
Google Scholar
Droin et al., 2017
J.B. Droin, et al.
Physical tool for unprotected loss of flow transient simulations in a sodium fast reactor
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 106 (2017), pp. 195-210
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Faur et al., 2018
B. Faure, et al.
Neutronic calculation of an axially heterogeneous ASTRID fuel assembly with APOLLO3®: analysis of biases and foreseen improvements
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 115 (2018), pp. 88-104
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Faure et al., 2019
B. Faure et al., 2019, “Impact of neutronics parameters in a loss-of-flow transient simulation of a low-void sodium-cooled nuclear reactor”, M&C 2019, Portland, United States.
Google Scholar
Gauthé and Sciora, 2017
P. Gauthé, P. Sciora, 2017, “Sensitivity studies of SFR unprotected transients with global neutronic feedback coefficients”, IAEA-CN245-123, FR17.
Google Scholar
GIF, 2013
GIF 2013, 2013, Annual Report.
Google Scholar
IAEA, 2000
IAEA, 2000, “Transient and accident analysis of a BN-800 type LMFR with near zero void effect”, IAEA-TECDOC-1139.
Google Scholar
IAEA-TECDOC, 2005
IAEA-TECDOC-1450, 2005, “Thorium fuel cycle – Potential benefits and challenges”.
Google Scholar
Lefèvre, 1996
J.C. Lefèvre, et al.
European fast reactor design
Nucl. Eng. Des., 162 (1996), pp. 133-143
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Maillot et al., 2016
M. Maillot et al., 2016, “A search for theories enabling analyss of spatial effects in highly coupled SFR cores”, Physor, Sun Valley, Idaho, pp. 1916-1925.
Google Scholar
Mambelli, 2018
S. Mambelli, 2018, “Analytical and experimental study of chugging boiling instability: the CHUG project,” MSc Thesis, ETH Zurich.
Google Scholar
Palmiotti et al., 1993
G. Palmiotti, C.B. Carrico, E.E. Lewis
Variational nodal methods with anisotropic scattering
Nucl. Sci. Eng., 115 (1993), pp. 233-243
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Palmiotti et al., 1987
G. Palmiotti, J.M. Rieunier. C. Gho, M. Salvatores, 1987, “BISTRO Optimized Two Dimensional Sn Transport Code”, Topical Meeting on Advances in Reactor Physics, Mathematics and Computation, Paris, France.
Google Scholar
Poplavsky et al., 2011
V. Poplavsky, et al.
Studies on influence of sodium void reactivity effect on the concept of the core and safety of advanced fast reactor
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol. (2011)
Google Scholar
Rimpault, 2002
G. Rimpault et al., 2002, “The ERANOS code and data system for fast reactor neutronic analyses, Proceedings of PHYSOR 2002”, Physor 2002, Seoul, Korea.
Google Scholar
Saito, 1998
Saito, et al.
Applicability evaluation to a MOX fueled fast breeder reactor for a self-consistent nuclear energy system
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 32 (1998), pp. 681-688
Google Scholar
Saito, 2002
Saito, et al.
Feasibility study of large MOX fuelled FBR core and applicability of various coolants and fuels aimed at the self-consistent nuclear energy system
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 40 (2002), pp. 587-596
Google Scholar
Schmitt Overall et al., 2010
D. Schmitt et al. Overall Optimization methodology for sodium-cooled fast reactor core conception 2010 ICAPP San Diego, Paper 10222.
Google Scholar
Sciora et al., 2011
P. Sciora et al., 2011, “Low void effect core design applied on 2400 MWth SFR reactor”, ICAPP, Nice, Paper 11048.
Google Scholar
Sciora et al., 2009
P. Sciora, et al., A break even oxide fuel core for an innovative French sodium-cooled fast reactor: neutronic studies results 2009 Global Paris, Paper 9528.
Google Scholar
Stauff, 2011
N. Stauff, 2011, “Multi-criteria methodology to design a sodium-cooled carbide-fueled GEN-IV reactor”, PhD manuscript.
Google Scholar
Takeda and Kuroishi, 1983
T. Takeda, T. Kuroishi
“Optimization of internal blanket configuration of large fast reactor”, Short Note
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 30 (1983), pp. 481-484
Google Scholar
Takeda, et al., 1992
T. Takeda et al, 1992, “Neutronic Decoupling and nonlinearity of sodium void worth of an axially heterogeneous LMFBR in ATWS analysis”, International conference on Design and Safety of Advanced Nuclear Power Plants, vol. 3, 28.5/1-6.
Google Scholar
Wade and Chang, 1987
D. C. Wade and Y. I. Chang, 1987, “The integral fast reactor (IFR) concept: physics of operation and safety”, International Topical Meeting on Advances in Reactor Physics Mathematics and Computation, Paris.
Google Scholar
Wade and Fujita, 1989
D.C. Wade, E.K. Fujita
Trends versus reactor size of passive reactivity shutdown and control performance
Nucl. Sci. Eng., 103 (1989), pp. 182-195
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yokoyama, 2005
T. Yokoyama, et al.
A study on reactivity insertion controlled LMR cores with metallic fuel
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 47 (2005), pp. 251-259
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Youinou and Vasile, 2005
G. Youinou, A. Vasile
Plutonium multirecycling in standard PWRs loaded with evolutionary fuels
Nucl. Sci. Eng., 151 (1) (2005), pp. 25-45
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
