<title>Experimental investigation on flow regimes and transitions of steam-water two-phase flow in narrow rectangular horizontal channels</title>
<author>1,K.Zhang,2,Z.M.Zhu,3,B.J.Shang,4,G.L.Song,5,W.X.Tian,6,JianDeng</author>
<Affiliation>1,School of Nuclear Science and Technology, State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Shanxi Key Laboratory of Advanced Nuclear Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, 28 Xianning West Road, Xi'an, 710049, China;2,Science and Technology on Reactor System Design Technology Laboratory, Nuclear Power Institute of China, Chengdu, 610213, China</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2020.103601</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0149197020303474</URL>
Experimental investigation on flow regimes and transitions of steam-water two-phase flow in narrow rectangular horizontal channels
K.Zhang,Z.M.Zhu,B.J.Shang,G.L.Song,W.X.Tian,JianDeng
School of Nuclear Science and Technology, State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Shanxi Key Laboratory of Advanced Nuclear Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, 28 Xianning West Road, Xi'an, 710049, China
Science and Technology on Reactor System Design Technology Laboratory, Nuclear Power Institute of China, Chengdu, 610213, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Flow pattern data of steam-water two-phase in narrow rectangular channels are obtained.
The effect of heat flux on flow pattern transition is analyzed.
New flow regime transition criterias in narrow rectangular horizontal channels are developed.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Experimental investigations on atmospheric steam-water two-phase flow regimes and transitions in two transparent narrow rectangular channels with cross-section areas of 1 mm × 20 mm and 2 mm × 20 mm were carried out under conditions of 0.007 ≤ Jf ≤ 0.27 m s−1, 0.05 ≤ Jg ≤ 65.2 m s−1, 0 < q ≤ 18 kW m−2. Four flow patterns were observed in narrow rectangular horizontal channels under heated condition, i.e., bubbly flow, slug flow, churn flow and annular flow. New dryout phenomenon of annular flow was observed under high wall heat flux conditions. The liquid phase occupies half of the middle of narrow channel above the bottom rectangular plate. Below the top plate, liquid phase is concentrated to a slender streamline in the middle of upper half narrow channel by high speed steam flow. For the flow regime transitions, the critical values of void fraction for transitions from bubbly flow to slug flow, slug flow to churn flow, and churn flow to annular flow in narrow rectangular horizontal channels under heated condition are 0.7, 0.8 and 0.9, respectively. The heat flux decays flow regime transitions because the generated bubbles from heated wall surfaces promote the separation of bubbles in the upstream and downstream. Flow regime transitions under larger surface tension condition need greater vapor phase velocities to disturb the mainflow. In a general, new flow regime transition criteria were developed and can present excellent predictions for the present data of flow regimes and transitions in narrow rectangular horizontal channels under heated condition.
Graphical abstract
Keywords:Flow patterns;Two-phase friction multipliers;Horizontal tube bundles;Cross-flow;New correlations
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Narrow rectangular plates with large ratios of widths to gap clearances are widely used in compact heat exchangers (Sahar et al., 2016; Zhang and Sethi, 2016), electronic component coolers (Ceriotti et al., 2003; Liang et al., 2015) and nuclear fuels (Gong et al., 2015; Kim and Davis, 1995) owing to the notable advantages of high efficiency of heat transfer and easy fabrication. Accurate predictions of two-phase distributions, pressure drops, flow boiling heat transfer coefficients and critical heat fluxes are of vital importance in the design and safety operation of these applied equipment. Correspondingly, it is also important to obtain two-phase flow regimes and transitions in narrow rectangular channels, which determine two-phase flow and boiling heat transfer. In recent years, numerous experimental and theoretical researches on thermal-hydraulic characteristics in narrow rectangular channels were carried out. However, most works were concerning on two-phase flow behaviors in narrow rectangular vertical channels (Chalgeri and Jeong, 2019a, b; Chen et al., 2015; Hosler, 1967; Jinliang, 1999; Kim et al., 2018; Mei et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2012; Wei et al., 2017; Xu et al., 1999). Few researches were performed on flow regimes and transitions of two-phase flow in narrow rectangular horizontal channels.
The earliest research on two-phase flow and heat transfer characteristics in horizontal rectangular channels was conducted by Richardson (1959). Three channels with various geometric parameters were tested and air-water two-phase flow was used as the working fluid. Experimental results show that small gap clearance minimizes the occurrence of stratified and wave flows because liquid phase is easy to reach the top of channels. Hosler (1967) obtained flow regimes and transitions of steam-water two-phase flow in a narrow rectangular vertical channel under the condition of system pressure ranges between 2 MPa and 14 MPa. Three primary flow regimes were identified, i.e., bubbly flow, slug flow and annular flow. It's found that system pressure has a significant effect on flow patterns. The transitions from bubbly flow to slug flow or slug flow to annular flow occur at larger mass qualities with an increasing system pressure. Lowry and Kawaji (1988) investigated adiabatic air-water two-phase flow regimes in three narrow rectangular channels with gap clearances (δ) equal to 0.5 mm, 1.0 mm and 2.0 mm for a vertical upflow and a horizontal flow. The two-phase flow patterns could not be predicted accurately by the correlations developed by Taitel et al. (1980), which can present excellent estimations for flow in circular pipes. They pointed out that additional data for a wider range of velocities and gap clearances and for various liquid viscosities and surface tensions were necessary. An experimental study on flow patterns and transitions of adiabatic air-water two-phase flow in a small horizontal rectangular channel with a cross-section-area (19.05 mm × 3.18 mm) was carried out by Wambsganss et al. (1991) under a large mass flux range (50–2000 kg m−2s−1) condition. They concluded that the occurrence of bubbly flow will not be influenced by the narrow gap clearance. Besides, the existing flow pattern maps for circular pipes, capillary tubes and larger rectangular channels are not applicable to the small rectangular channel. Wilmarth and Ishii (1994) compared adiabatic air-water two-phase flow regime characteristics in narrow rectangular channels with gap clearances of 1 mm and 2 mm. They found five flow patterns and three transition regions for horizontal flow. The five flow patterns are separately stratified smooth flow, plug flow, slug flow, dispersed bubbly flow and wavy annular flow. Churn flow pattern was not observed in the test. Fujita et al. (1995) carried out experimental investigations on adiabatic N2-water two-phase flow characteristics in narrow rectangular horizontal passages. They presented that surface tension and liquid viscosity have an obvious effect on two-phase flow behavior. Xu et al. (1999) obtained air-water two-phase behaviors in vertical narrow rectangular channels with gap clearances of 0.3 mm, 0.6 mm and 1.0 mm. Four flow patterns were observed in the rectangular channel with δ = 0.6, 1.0 mm, i.e., bubbly flow, slug flow, churn-turbulent flow and annular flow. The flow pattern transition will occur at smaller gas flow rates with a decrease of gap clearances. However, bubbly flow could not be found in the channel with δ = 0.3 mm even if the velocity of air is quite small, which may be pertinent to the influence of surface tension force and the frictional shear stress in narrow rectangular channels. Hibiki and Mishima (2001) proposed new flow regime transition criteria in narrow rectangular vertical channels. They found that the criteria can not give satisfactory predictions for rectangular channels with a gap clearance less than 1.0 mm. Satitchaicharoen and Wongwises (2004) studied the effects of gap clearance, channel width and liquid viscosity on flow regimes for vertical upward gas-liquid flow in mini-gap channels. Experimental results indicate that the transition lines shift to a higher value of superficial air velocity with an increasing gap clearance. Yun and Kim (2004) analyzed the effect of mass velocity on two-phase flow patterns of CO2 in a horizontal narrow rectangular channel with a width of 16 mm and a gap clearance of 2 mm. Three flow patterns of bubbly, slug and annular flow were observed during the flow boiling process. The large deviations between the flow maps for air-water two-phase flow and CO2 may be due to the differences in adiabatic and heated conditions. Chen et al. (2009) obtained air-water two-phase flow patterns in three horizontal rectangular channels with a fixed width of 3 mm and three gap clearances of 3, 6 and 9 mm. They presented that stratified flow pattern will disappear when mass velocity is larger than 200 kg m−2s−1. Ali et al. (2010) investigated the effect of flat plate inclination on flow regimes of air-water two-phase flow in narrow rectangular channels. It's worth noting that two-phase flow patterns in narrow rectangular passages were similar for all the orientations except the horizontal flow condition. Most recently, researches (Chalgeri and Jeong, 2019a, b; Chen et al., 2015; Kim et al., 2018; Mei et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2012; Wei et al., 2017) on two-phase flow regimes and transitions in narrow rectangular channels were focused on the effects of flow directions, working fluids and channel orientations for vertical flow.
In a general, most previous works are concerning on two-phase flow behaviors in narrow rectangular channels for vertical upflow and downflow. Though several works were performed to study two-phase flow regimes and transitions in narrow rectangular horizontal channels, almost all the experiments were conducted on adiabatic gas-liquid flow under non-heated conditions, except Yun and Kim (2004) for boiling CO2. In fact, the conventional working fluid in actual nuclear plate fuels under serious accident of nuclear reactor is usually steam-water two-phase flow. In addition, it has been demonstrated that surface tension and liquid viscosity have significant effects on two-phase flow distributions in narrow rectangular channels. Therefore, it's necessary to carry out further researches on thermal-hydraulic characteristics of steam-water two-phase flow in narrow rectangular horizontal channels.
In this paper, experimental investigations on steam-water two-phase flow regimes and transitions in two transparent narrow rectangular channels with cross-section-areas of 1 mm × 20 mm and 2 mm × 20 mm were carried out under atmospheric pressure and heated conditions. The effects of gap clearance, heat flux and surface tension on two-phase flow patterns and transitions were analyzed. New flow regime transition criteria for steam-water two-phase flow in narrow rectangular horizontal passages under heated condition was developed.
<Section>2. Test facility description</Section>
2.1. Test loop
Fig. 1 represent the test loop. The test loop consists of a water supply branch, an air supply, preheating sections for water and air, a test section and a condenser. The deionized water in a water tank was delivered by a ram pump with a maximum working pressure of 30 MPa and a maximum flow rate of 2.0 t/h. In the branch of air supply, compressed air with a maximum flow rate of 13 m3/min was measured by three vortex flowmeters. Before entering to the test section, the deionized water and air were heated by an S-shaped preheater and an air heating tank, respectively. The air heating tank is mainly composed of a stainless steel square box and 49 silicon carbon electric heating rods with a maximum long-term working temperature of 1500 °C. After flowing through the test section, the deionized water was cooled by a condenser and went back to the water tank. The high temperature air went through the test section and exhausted into the atmosphere. In order to measure temperatures and pressures of air and water, several copper-constantan thermocouples and Rosemount pressure tranducers were used to monitor and record the temperatures and working pressures of working fluids, for example, the inlet and outlet water temperatures of the preheater, the outlet air temperature of the air heating tank, the inlet and outlet temperatures of working fluids in the test section, the inlet and outlet pressures of working fluids in the test section and so on. A National Instruments acquisition system and an interface panel based on LabVIEW were employed to obtain and save the experimental data (see Fig. 2).
Fig. 1. Test loop.
Fig. 2. Test section.
2.2. Test section
The test section was composed of a transparent stainless steel box, two silica glass plates and 32 copper-constantan thermocouples. The stainless steel box consisted of two parts. One is the stainless steel surrounded by thick glass fiber cottons, which can be used to reduce the heat loss of high temperature air through the box. The other is the silica glass that provides a transparent condition for researchers to observe steam-water two-phase flow behaviors in rectangular channels. The red and black lines in Fig. 3 (a) separately represent the materials of stainless steel and silica glass. The narrow rectangular channel was generated by milling out the two silica glass plates. In the present paper, two narrow rectangular passages with gap clearances of 1.0 mm and 2.0 mm were fabricated. Fig. 3(a)~(c) present the front view, the side view and the simple three-dimensional structure of the narrow rectangular channel with δ = 2 mm. The width and length are 20 mm and 450 mm, respectively. The two left and right ends of the narrow rectangular passages were sealed by molten silica glasses. Besides, four perforated holes on the two silica glass plates were processed. The two holes on the top plate were used to connect with the inlet and outlet pipelines while those on the bottom plate were connected with inpulse lines of Rosemount pressure tranducers to obtain inlet and outlet pressures of working fluids (Pin and Pout) in narrow rectangular horizontal channels. To obtain the inner wall temperature and heat flux of the silica glass plates, 32 copper-constantan thermocouples with an outer diameter of 0.5 mm were distributed symmetrically along the central line. The detailed locations of these thermocouples are shown in Fig. 3(a) and (b). The visualization system mainly consisted of a short duration light source and a high-speed video camera with frame rates ranged between 1000 and 160,000 fps. In this experiment, the local flow patterns in narrow rectangular channels were observed and recorded from the front view, i.e., the side surface with an area of 20 mm × 450 mm. The high-speed camera in the flow direction was fixed and located at the middle of the test section. The field of view of the camera can cover no more than 240 mm.
Fig. 3. Each small flow distance in the flow direction.
<Section>3. Experimental methods and conditions</Section>
3.1. Test procedures
In this test, subcooled deionized water was delivered into the test section first. After the water temperature was adjusted to the target value by regulating the heating power of the S-shaped preheating section, the air heating tank and air compressor were put into work. Air in the transparent stainless steel box presents an approximate uniform high temperature field for the flow in narrow rectangular horizontal channels. The inlet subcooled water will gradually turn into steam-water two-phase flow along the flow channel. The flow pattern and void fraction are mainly controlled by regulating the heating power of air heating tank and the flow rate of deionized water.
3.2. Experimental conditions
The working pressure in the test section is atmospheric pressure. The superficial velocity of saturated water (Jf) changed from 0.007 to 0.27 m s−1. The superficial velocity of saturated steam (Jg) ranged between 0.05 and 65.2 m s−1. Here, Jf and Jg are defined as,
@(1)
(2)
@Wf is the flow rate of subcooled water. ρf and ρg are separately densities of water and steam. W is the width of the rectangular channel. x is mass quality, which can be calculated based on the average system pressure, the average heat flux along the flow channel, the heating length and the inlet temperature of water.
The 32 copper-constantan thermocouples were distributed on eight cross sections as shown in Fig. 3. Each cross section was installed four thermocouples. It is assumed that the heat flux in the axial direction can be neglected. Then, the average heat flux (qi) along each small flow distance (ΔLi, i = 1–8) in the flow direction can be calculated as,
@(3)
Here, λ is the thermal coefficient of silica glass. d is the distance between two thermocouples buried in the upper or lower plate of silica glasses under the same flow section, i. e, 6 mm  and  are the local surface temperatures of upper silica glass.  and  are the local surface temperatures of lower silica glass.
Then, the working fluid temperature (Tf, 1) in the inlet section of narrow rectangular channel can be calculated as approximately,
@(4)
Therefore, the working fluid temperature (Tf, i) in the small flow distance (ΔLi, i = 2–8) is calculated as,
@(5)
The working fluid temperature (Tf, 9) in the outlet section of narrow rectangular channel is calculated as,
@(6)
The calculation method of working fluid enthalpy is same with that of working fluid temperature. For example, the working fluid enthalpy (Hf, i) in the small flow distance (ΔLi, i = 2–8) can be calculated as,
@(7)
If the working fluid temperature is smaller than the saturated temperature, the mass quality (x) is equal to 0; otherwise, x can be calculated based on the working temperature enthalpy, pressure and temperature. For example, the mass quality (xi) in the small flow distance (ΔLi, i = 2–8) is calculated as,
@(8)
3.3. Uncertainty analysis
Uncertainties for the majority of the experimental data were mainly produced by data measurement errors caused by the instrumentation and collection errors or the data acquisition system. Assuming the instrumental error was uniformly distributed, the standard uncertainty  could be predicted using the following equation (Tian et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2017),
@(9)
Here, @ and @ are separately the instrument error and the acquisition system error. The maximum error of the National Instruments acquisition system is 0.02%. As a result, all the data uncertainties calculated based on the expression are shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Instrumentation list.
<Section>4. Results and discussion</Section>
In the present experiment, four distinct flow regimes were observed for two narrow rectangular horizontal channels. They are bubbly flow, slug flow, churn flow and annular flow.
4.1. Four flow patterns
4.1.1. Bubbly flow and intermittent flow
Fig. 4 present the different stages of bubbly flow pattern and intermittent flow pattern for δ = 1 mm. It can be seen that the dimension of bubbles at the early stage of bubbly flow pattern are quite small. Isolated bubbles are attached to the top and bottom surfaces of heated walls. Several bubbles departed from wall surfaces will be cooled and collapsed in the subcooled main flow. In this stage, bubbles will not squeeze each other. The effects of bubble growth and bubble motion on main flow can be negligible. As wall heat fluxes increase or water flow rates decrease, more bubbles will be generated on the heated wall surfaces. Several small bubbles begin to appear in the main flow. Besides, due to the squeeze of narrow channel and the impact of heat flux, a few large bubbles with irregular shape in main flow can be observed. This stage is called the initial stage of bubbly flow in the present paper. With a further increasing heat flux, the number of large bubbles increases gradually. Bubbles begin to squeeze each other and coalesce into new larger bubbles as shown in Fig. 4 (c), even slug bubbles as shown Fig. 4 (d). At this stage, bubbly flow tends to transit into intermittent flow. It's worth noting that slug bubbles appear only under low heat fluxes (q) and small inlet subcooling degrees (ΔTsub < 20 °C) conditions. When q is high and ΔTsub is large (ΔTsub > 20 °C), slug bubbles will not be observed due to the violent disturbulance of continuously generated bubbles from heated wall surfaces. The corresponding steam-water two-phase flow behavior is shown in Fig. 4 (e). The various stages of bubbly flow and intermittent flow for δ = 2 mm are shown in Fig. 5. Compared with the bubbly flow for δ = 1 mm, more small spherical bubbles can be observed in bubbly flow for δ = 2 mm during the early stage.
Fig. 4. Bubbly flow pattern and intermittent flow pattern for δ = 1 mm.
Fig. 5. Bubbly flow pattern and intermittent flow pattern for δ = 2 mm.
4.1.2. Slug flow
The two-phase flow behaviors of slug flow patterns in narrow rectangular horizontal channels for gap clearances equal to 1 mm and 2 mm are similar. Fig. 6 (a) present the typical slug flow pattern. The head and tail of slug bubbles present semicircles. In addition, the widths of slug bubbles are approximately equal to gap clearances. Besides, it can be seen that several small bubbles with various sizes exist between two slug bubbles. Specially, very long slug bubbles can be observed under several working conditions, as shown in Fig. 6 (b). This phenomenon is more likely to appear in narrow rectangular horizontal channel with δ = 2 mm.
Fig. 6. Slug flow pattern.
4.1.3. Churn flow
Fig. 7 (a) shows the typical churn flow pattern in narrow rectangular horizontal channels for δ = 1 mm and 2 mm. It can be clearly seen that the gas phase and liquid phase blend together owing to the combined effects of large steam velocities and wall heat fluxes. Besides, the interface between steam-water two phases presents an irregular shape. Specially, continuous bright and dark stripes appear at the late stage of churn flow pattern in rectangular channel with δ = 2 mm, as shown in Fig. 7 (b). This is because gas phase space in rectangular channel for δ = 2 mm is larger than that for δ = 1 mm. Therefore, liquid film is easier to be entrained by high speed steam flow, leading to a nonuniform distribution of two-phase density on the cross-section of flow narrow passage. Correspondingly, bright and dark stripes were observed. As the void fraction (α) increases, the phenomenon of bright and dark stripes will not disappear until the steam-water two-phase flow is transited into annular flow.
Fig. 7. Churn flow pattern.
4.1.4. Annular flow
With a further increase of mass quality for churn flow, the steam velocity is so large that most liquid phases are gathered around the surfaces of rectangular channels. Then, two-phase flow in narrow rectangular horizontal channels with δ = 1 mm begin to transit from churn flow to annular flow pattern, as shown in Fig. 8 (a). The two-phase flow is quite stable and no fluctuation is found. It can be seen that the dark stripes present threadiness. Due to the intense vaporization of liquid film on the heated wall surfaces, the liquid film of annular flow in the present channel is different from uniform and smooth liquid films in unheated channels. Besides, a dryout phenomenon appears at the late stage of annular flow pattern under high wall heat flux conditions, as shown in Fig. 8 (b). The liquid phase occupies half of the middle of narrow channel above the bottom rectangular plate. Below the top plate, liquid phase is concentrated to a slender streamline in the middle of upper half narrow channel by high speed steam flow. This is because the liquid phase is difficult to rewet the heated wall surfaces. The liquid film thickness above the bottom plate is larger than that below the top plate is pertinent to the effect of gravity. Besides, the wall temperatures on the top plate are significantly higher than those on the bottom plate under annular flow patterns. However, the wall temperatures on the top and bottom plates are nearly same under bubbly flow, slug flow and churn flow patterns.
Fig. 8. Annular flow pattern for δ = 1 mm.
Fig. 9 (a) present the two-phase flow behavior at initial stage of annular flow in rectangular channel with δ = 2 mm. Due to the larger gap clearance, the wider vapor phase space can weaken the liquid film entrainment. As a consequence, the dark stripes are inapparent under annular flow pattern in rectangular channel with δ = 2 mm. Fig. 9 (b) indicates that there is no obvious difference in flow behaviors at the late stage of annular flow in the present two narrow rectangular horizontal channels.
Fig. 9. Annular flow pattern for δ = 2 mm.
4.2. Flow regime transition criteria
Fig. 10 present the flow maps of steam-water two-phase flow in narrow rectangular horizontal channels with δ = 1 mm and δ = 2 mm under heated condition. It can be seen that flow patterns overlap and interweave except the transition from churn flow to annular flow, which may be due to the comprehensive effects of flow excursion instability, flow pattern transition instability and wall heated condition. The reason why no overlap occurs between churn flow and annular flow may be because the vapor phase and liquid phase possess independent flow passages. It's worth noting that the overlapping regions of bubbly flow, slug flow and churn flow are termed as intermittent flow region. In the present paper, the intermittent flow regime was not taken into consideration in the new developed flow regime transition criteria. As can be seen in Fig. 10 (a) and Fig. 10 (b), the flow regimes in the narrow rectangular horizontal channels are classified as bubbly flow, slug flow, churn flow and annular flow.
Fig. 10. Flow maps in narrow rectangular horizontal channels.
4.2.1. Transition from bubbly flow to slug flow
Mishima and Ishii (Kaichiro and Ishii, 1984) presented that the critical value of void fraction (α) for the transition from bubbly flow to slug flow in narrow rectangular channels under unheated condition was equal to 0.2. Based on drift flux model, the correlation between Jg and Jf for the transition from bubbly flow to slug flow under unheated condition is as follows,
@(10)
Here, the area averaged void fraction α can be calculated by Butterworth (1975) correlation developed from Lockhart and Martinelli (1949) experimental results.  and  are calculated by the following equations, respectively.
@(11)
@(12)
In the present paper, α is around 0.7 for narrow rectangular horizontal channels under heated condition when bubbly flow begins to transit into slug flow, which is much larger than 0.2 under unheated condition. This is because the velocities of two phases are constant values under unheated condition. Adjacent isolated bubbles can not coalesce into a slug bubble until they can breakthrough each other's surface tension. In heated narrow rectangular channels, void fraction increases along the flow passage. The bubble volume in the downstream is larger than that in the upstream since continuous bubbles generated from the heated wall surfaces flow into the mainflow and coalesce with bubbles in the downstream. Consequently, bubble velocity in the upstream is smaller than that in the downstream and bubbles in the upstream can not catch up with those in the downstream. Then, the transition from bubble flow to slug flow under heated condition is delayed significantly.
In narrow rectangular horizontal channels, buoyance can be neglected. Besides, due to the space constraint of narrow channel, the drift velocity of vapor phase can be approximately equal to 0. Then, Eq. (4) can be converted to the following equation,
@(13)
Here,@  is equal to 0.7.
Besides, Considering the bubbles generated from heated wall surfaces is beneficial to delay the transition from bubbly flow to slug flow, a correction factor (C) is introduced to represent the effect of wall heat flux on the flow regime transition,
@(14)
In the present paper, C can be predicted by the following expression,
@(15)
@(16)
Here,  is Boiling number. q is the wall heat flux. Hfg is the latent heat of vaporization.  is the density of vapor phase.  is the dynamic viscosity of water.
Fig. 11 present the comparison between flow pattern experimental data and the predictions of the present flow regime transition criteria. The flow pattern data were obtained under large subcooling degree and low heat flux conditions. It can be seen that the modified flow regime transition criteria, i.e., Eqs. (7), (9), (10), (11), can present more accurate predictions for the transition from bubbly flow to slug flow in narrow rectangular horizontal channels than the original flow regime transition criteria, i.e., Eqs. (4), (5), (6).
Fig. 11. Comparison between the present data and predictions of new flow regime transition criteria.
4.2.2. Transition from slug flow to churn flow
Based on the present data, the critical value of void fraction for the transition from slug flow to churn flow is equal to 0.8. The ideal model of slug bubble is shown in Fig. 12. Since the thickness of liquid film (Wδ) is much smaller than that of slug bubble (Wb), the velocity of liquid film can be regarded as zero approximately.
Fig. 12. The ideal model of slug bubble.
Then, according to the conservation of volume flux, the following equation can be obtained,
@(17)
Here, A and Ab are separately the cross-section areas of flow passage and slug bubble. Vb is the velocity of slug bubble. Eq. (11) can be converted into the following equation,
@(18)
Here, Wδ is the thickness of liquid film.  in Eq. (12) is equal to 0.8.
In fact, experimental results show that the thickness of liquid film in narrow rectangular horizontal channel under heated condition is larger than that under unheated condition. This is because the bubbles generated by heated wall surfaces will not coalesce with the slug bubble immediately. They will merge into the liquid film and stay for a certain period, which results in a thicker liquid film, as shown in Fig. 13. Therefore, a modified correlation is developed to calculate the thickness of liquid film,
@(19)
Fig. 13. The effect of wall heat flux on the liquid film of churn flow.
Here, G is mass velocity of steam-water two-phase.  is the thickness of liquid film in narrow rectangular channels under unheated condition. In the present paper,  is equal to 1.7 mm. Combined Eq. (12) and Eq. (13), the criteria of transition from slug flow to churn flow is obtained.
4.2.3. Transition from churn flow to annular flow
For annular flow, the conversation equations for vapor phase and liquid phase are as follows (Ishii, 1976),
@(20)
@(21)
Here, Ag and Af are separately the cross-section areas of vapor phase and liquid phase. dP is the pressure drop per unit length along the flow passage. The frictional force of two-phase interface (Si) and the frictional force of liquid phase on wall surfaces (FfW) are separately calculated by the following expressions,
@(22)
@(23)
Combined with , Eqs. (14), (15) can be converted into,
@(24)
@(25)
Here, the cross-section circumference of flow passage (P) is equal to 2(W+δ). The circumference of two-phase interface (Pi) can be calculated by the following equation(Peng et al., 1995),
@(26)
For separated flow, the momentum conservation equations for vapor phase and liquid phase are as follows,
@(27)
@(28)
Here, Pg and Pf are the lengths of vapor phase and liquid phase contacts with wall surfaces, respectively. Due to  and , . Besides, when ,  and . When ,  and . Then, we can obtain the following equations,
@(29)
@(30)
Combining Eqs. (18)~(19) and (21)–(22),
@(31)
Since @ and @, then Eq. (25) can be converted into,
@(32)
When two-phase flow is annular flow, void fraction is quite high. According to the experimental results, Ag and Af can be regarded as constant values approximately. Since the system pressure is also a constant value during the experimental process, the physical properties of two-phase are unchanged. Then, we can obtain the following equations,
@(33)
Similarly, due to , the following equation can be obtained,
@(34)
The mass transfer between two phases results from the vaporization of liquid phase. Therefore, the generated heat from wall surfaces dominate the two-phase mass transfer. Here, neglecting the superheated steam,
@(35)
Combining Eqs. (28), (29),
@(36)
Here@,@ , @ and @ are calculated as,
@(37)
@(38)
@(39)
According to the experimental data, the friction factor of two-phase interface in narrow rectangular horizontal channels under heated condition () can be calculated as,
@(40)
The friction factor of liquid phase on wall surfaces (ff) is calculated by the following expression,
@(41)
where Dh is the hydraulic diameter of narrow rectangular channel, which can be calculated as,
@(42)
In a general, the criteria of transition from churn flow to annular flow can be calculated by the following correlation,
@I(43)
Here, @.
4.2.4. Comparison between the previous data and the new developed criteria
Fig. 14 present the comparision between the present flow pattern data and the new developed flow regime transition criteria. It can be concluded that the developed criteria can provide excellent predictions for the flow regime transition in narrow rectangular horizontal channels under heated condition.
Fig. 14. Comparison between experimental data and predictions of new developed criteria.
In order to test the application of the new developed flow regime criteria, several previous data are selected and analyzed, as shown in Table 2. Fig. 15 present the comparison of the previous flow pattern map data with the new developed flow regime criteria. Though the narrow rectangular channel size are similar in the present paper and the experiments conducted by Wambsganss et al. (1991), Wilmarth and Ishii (1994), there are distinct differences in the criteria lines of flow regime transition, which may be due to the wall surface heated condition in the present test. Fig. 15. (b) indicates that the transition lines in the present paper are lower right of those obtained by Rin Yun (Yun and Kim, 2004), which may be due to the difference in surface tensions of working fluids. Surface tension has a significant effect on bubble geometry and flow patterns. The surface tension of steam-water two-phase under the present experimental conditions is much larger than that of CO2 in Rin Yun's test. Obviously, flow regime transitions under larger surface tension condition need greater vapor phase velocities to disturb the mainflow. This speculation is also verified by the comparison between experimental results obtained by Hosler (1967) and predictions by the new developed flow regime transition criteria, as shown in Fig. 15 (c). Surface tension of steam-water two-phase flow increases with an increasing system pressure. Correspondingly, the transition lines of flow regimes move in the right direction.
Table 2. The chosed experimental data.
Fig. 15. The comparison between previous data and predictions of new developed criteria.
<Section>5. Conclusions</Section>
Experimental investigations on atmospheric steam-water two-phase flow regimes and transitions in two transparent narrow rectangular channels with cross-section areas of 1 mm × 20 mm and 2 mm × 20 mm were carried out under conditions of 0.007 ≤ Jf ≤ 0.27 m s−1, 0.05 ≤ Jg ≤ 65.2 m s−1, 0 < q ≤ 18 kW m−2. The effects of gap clearance, heat flux and surface tension on two-phase flow patterns and transitions were analyzed. New flow regime transition criteria for steam-water two-phase flow in narrow rectangular horizontal passages under heated condition was developed. The main conclusions are as follows:
1)
Four flow patterns were observed in narrow rectangular horizontal channels under heated condition, i.e., bubbly flow, slug flow, churn flow and annular flow. Besides, flow patterns overlap and interweave except the transition from churn flow to annular flow.
2)
A new dryout phenomenon appears at the late stage of annular flow pattern under high wall heat flux conditions. The liquid phase occupies half of the middle of narrow channel above the bottom rectangular plate. Below the top plate, liquid phase is concentrated to a slender streamline in the middle of upper half narrow channel by high speed steam flow.
3)
The critical values of void fraction for flow regime transitions from bubbly flow to slug flow, slug flow to churn flow, and churn flow to annular flow in narrow rectangular horizontal channels under heated condition are 0.7, 0.8 and 0.9, respectively.
4)
The heat flux decays flow regime transitions in narrow rectangular horizontal channels. Flow regime transitions under larger surface tension condition need greater vapor phase velocities to disturb the mainflow.
5)
There are significant differences in flow pattern distributions between the previous data for adiabatic air-water two-phase flow or CO2 in narrow rectangular channels and the present steam-water two-phase flow data. The new developed criteria can present excellent predictions for the present data of flow regimes and transitions in narrow rectangular horizontal channels under heated condition.
<Section>Credit author statement</Section>
In the present paper, Z.M. Zhu and B.J. Shao made a survey on flow regimes and transitions of two-phase flow in narrrow rectangular horizontal channels. K. Zhang, G.L. Song and Jian Deng designed the test facilities and conducted the experiments. K. Zhang, G.H. Su and S.Z. Qiu finished the data processing and analysis on experimental results. The test was funded by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. 11805149 and 11622541) hosted by K. Zhang and W.X. Tian, respectively.
<Section>Declaration of competing interest</Section>
There are no conflicts of interest.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. 11805149 and 11622541). The authors would also like to express their thanks to the National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2017YFE0302100).
<Section>References</Section>
Ali et al., 2010
M.I. Ali, M. Sadatomi, M. Kawaji
Adiabatic two-phase flow in narrow channels between two flat plates
Can. J. Chem. Eng., 71 (2010), pp. 657-666
Google Scholar
Butterworth, 1975
D. Butterworth
A comparison of some void-fraction relationships for co-current gas-liquid flow
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 1 (1975), pp. 845-850
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ceriotti et al., 2003
L. Ceriotti, K. Weible, N.F.d. Rooij, E. Verpoorte
Rectangular channels for lab-on-a-chip applications
Microelectron. Eng., 67 (2003), pp. 865-871
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chalgeri and Jeong, 2019a
V.S. Chalgeri, J.H. Jeong
Flow patterns of vertically upward and downward air-water two-phase flow in a narrow rectangular channel
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 128 (2019), pp. 934-953
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chalgeri and Jeong, 2019b
V.S. Chalgeri, J.H. Jeong
Flow regime identification and classification based on void fraction and differential pressure of vertical two-phase flow in rectangular channel
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 132 (2019), pp. 802-816
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chen et al., 2015
C. Chen, P.-z. Gao, S.-c. Tan, H.-y. Chen, C. Xu, Z.-t. Yu
Theoretical calculation of the characteristics of annular flow in a rectangular narrow channel
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 85 (2015), pp. 259-270
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chen et al., 2009
I.Y. Chen, Y.M. Chen, B.-C. Yang, C.-C. Wang
Two-phase flow pattern and frictional performance across small rectangular channels
Appl. Therm. Eng., 29 (2009), pp. 1309-1318
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fujita et al., 1995
H. Fujita, T. Oharaz, M. Hirota, H. Furuta
Gas-liquid flows in flat channels with small channel clearance
Multiphase Flow (1995), pp. 441-451
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gong et al., 2015
D. Gong, H. Shanfang, W. Guanbo, W. Kan
Heat transfer calculation on plate-type fuel assembly of high flux research reactor
Sci. Technol. Nuclear Install., 2015 (2015), pp. 1-13
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hibiki and Mishima, 2001
T. Hibiki, K. Mishima
Flow regime transition criteria for upward two-phase flow in vertical narrow rectangular channels
Nucl. Eng. Des., 203 (2001), pp. 117-131
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hosler, 1967
E.R. Hosler
Flow patterns in high pressure two-phase (steam-water) flow with heat addition
Fluid Flow (1967)
Google Scholar
Ishii, 1976
M. Ishii
Thermo-fluid Dynamic Theory of Two-phase Flow, vol. 75 (1976)
Jinliang, 1999
X.U. Jinliang
Experimental study on gas-liquid two-phase flow regimes in rectangular channels with mini gaps
Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow, 20 (1999), pp. 422-428
Google Scholar
Kaichiro and Ishii, 1984
M. Kaichiro, M. Ishii
Flow regime transition criteria for upward two-phase flow in vertical tubes
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 27 (1984), pp. 723-737
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kim and Davis, 1995
G. Kim, D.C. Davis
Hydrodynamic instabilities in flat-plate-type fuel assemblies
Nucl. Eng. Des., 158 (1995), pp. 1-17
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kim et al., 2018
T.H. Kim, V.S. Chalgeri, W. Yoon, B.J. Yun, H.J. Ji
Visual observations of flow patterns in downward air-water two-phase flows in a vertical narrow rectangular channel
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 114 (2018), pp. 384-394
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Liang et al., 2015
G. Liang, Z. Jin, S. Huang
Numerical study on layout of micro-channel heat sink for thermal management of electronic devices
Appl. Therm. Eng., 88 (2015), pp. 480-490
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lockhart and Martinelli, 1949
R.W. Lockhart, R.C. Martinelli
Proposed correlations of data for isothermal two-phase two-component flow in pipes
Chem. Eng. Prog. Symp. Ser., 45 (1949), pp. 39-48
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lowry and Kawaji, 1988
B. Lowry, M. Kawaji
Adiabatic vertical two-phase flow in narrow flow channels
AICHE Symp. Ser., 84 (1988), pp. 133-139
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Mei et al., 2018
Y. Mei, S. Gong, H. Gu, W. Ma
A study on steam-water two phase flow distribution in a rectangular channel with different channel orientations
Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci., 99 (2018), pp. 219-232
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Peng et al., 1995
X.F. Peng, B.X. Wang, G.P. Peterson, H.B. Ma
Experimental investigation of heat transfer in flat plates with rectangular microchannels
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 38 (1995), pp. 127-137
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Richardson, 1959
B.L. Richardson
Some Problems in Horizontal Two-phase Two Component Flow
(1959)
Google Scholar
Sahar et al., 2016
A.M. Sahar, M.R. Özdemir, E.M. Fayyadh, J. Wissink, M.M. Mahmoud, T.G. Karayiannis
Single phase flow pressure drop and heat transfer in rectangular metallic microchannels
Appl. Therm. Eng., 93 (2016), pp. 1324-1336
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Satitchaicharoen and Wongwises, 2004
P. Satitchaicharoen, S. Wongwises
Two-phase flow pattern maps for vertical upward gas–liquid flow in mini-gap channels
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 30 (2004), pp. 225-236
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Taitel et al., 1980
Y. Taitel, D. Bornea, A.E. Dukler
Modelling flow pattern transitions for steady upward gas-liquid flow in vertical tubes. [Bubble, slug, churn and dispersed-annular; also existence regions and transitions]
AIChE J., 26 (1980), pp. 345-354
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tian et al., 2016
W.X. Tian, K. Zhang, Y.D. Hou, Y.P. Zhang, S.Z. Qiu, G.H. Su
Hydrodynamics of two-phase flow in a rod bundle under cross-flow condition
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 91 (2016), pp. 206-214
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wambsganss et al., 1991
M.W. Wambsganss, J.A. Jendrzejczyk, D.M. France
Two-phase flow patterns and transitions in a small, horizontal, rectangular channel
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 17 (1991), pp. 327-342
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2010
J. Wang, Y. Huang, Y. Wang
Photographic study on two-phase flow patterns of water in a single-side heated narrow rectangular channel
J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 133 (2010)
Google Scholar
Wang et al., 2012
J. Wang, Y. Huang, Y. Wang, M. Song
Visualized investigation on flow regimes for vertical upward steam–water flow in a heated narrow rectangular channel
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 45 (2012), pp. 115-123
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wei et al., 2017
L. Wei, L.M. Pan, Y.M. Zhao, Q.Y. Ren, W.Z. Zhang
Numerical study of adiabatic two-phase flow patterns in vertical rectangular narrow channels
Appl. Therm. Eng., 110 (2017), pp. 1101-1110
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wilmarth and Ishii, 1994
T. Wilmarth, M. Ishii
Two-phase flow regimes in narrow rectangular vertical and horizontal channels
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 37 (1994), pp. 1749-1758
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Xu et al., 1999
J.L. Xu, P. Cheng, T.S. Zhao
Gas–liquid two-phase flow regimes in rectangular channels with mini/micro gaps
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 25 (1999), pp. 411-432
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yun and Kim, 2004
R. Yun, Y. Kim
Flow regimes for horizontal two-phase flow of CO2 in a heated narrow rectangular channel
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 30 (2004), pp. 1259-1270
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhang et al., 2017
K. Zhang, Y.D. Hou, W.X. Tian, Y.Q. Fan, G.H. Su, S.Z. Qiu
Experimental investigations on single-phase convection and steam-water two-phase flow boiling in a vertical rod bundle
Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci., 80 (2017), pp. 147-154
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhang and Sethi, 2016
Y. Zhang, V. Sethi
Compact heat exchange reactor for synthesis of mixed alcohols
Catal. Today, 259 (2016)
Google Scholar