<title>Design and evaluation of reactor vault cooling system in PGSFR</title>
<author>1,SujinYeom,2,Ji-WoongHan,3,SeunghoRyu,4,DeheeKim,5,Jae-HyukEoh,6,Sun-RockChoi</author>
<Affiliation>1,Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, Republic of Korea;2,KEPCO Research Institute, Republic of Korea</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nucengdes.2020.110717</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029549320302107</URL>
Design and evaluation of reactor vault cooling system in PGSFR
SujinYeom,Ji-WoongHan,SeunghoRyu,DeheeKim,Jae-HyukEoh,Sun-RockChoi
Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, Republic of Korea
KEPCO Research Institute, Republic of Korea
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Design of RVCS(Reactor Vault Cooling System) of PGSFR.
Analysis of RVCS design parameters to improve cooling performance.
RVCS design evaluation by CFD analysis.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
In the Prototype Gen-IV Sodium-cooled Fast Reactor (PGSFR), a Reactor Vault Cooling System (RVCS) is prepared to maintain the structural integrity of the reactor vessel and the concrete during normal operation as well as to mitigate accidents during severe accident conditions. In this research a series of analysis was described during the RVCS design refinement process. The one-dimensional design code analysis was used to examine various design parameters that are able to enhance RVCS cooling capability without deteriorating RVCS performance in severe accident condition. As a results RVCS gap distance was decreased by 10 mm. Multi-dimensional thermal–hydraulic CFD analysis were utilized to analyze the real geometry effects on flow field. Based on the analysis, RVCS design refinement has been done within an acceptable range. In order to evaluate the RVCS design refinement to design requirement under more realistic condition, a Head Access Area (HAA)-RVCS integrated reactor system model was built and an integrated simulation was performed at normal operating conditions. It was found that proposed RVCS fulfills the design requirements of normal operation condition.
Keywords:Reactor vault cooling system;Head access area;PGSFR;HAA-RVCS integrated reactor model
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Sodium-cooled Fast Reactor (SFR) is considered one of the most mature and near-term deployable reactor types among the Generation-IV reactors (Locatelli et al., 2013). The Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute (KAERI) developed the Prototype Gen-IV Sodium-cooled Fast Reactor (PGSFR), a 150 MWe metal fueled pool-type reactor (Yoo et al., 2016). Since the PGSFR was designed with a pool-type concept, all of the primary sodium system is enclosed by the reactor vessel and reactor head. The containment vessel (CV) surrounding the reactor vessel (RV) is installed to secure the containment function in case of a reactor vessel leak accident. The vessel supporting structure is attached to the concrete structure. Since the core outlet temperature of the SFR during normal operation is very high (Fast Reactor Database, 2006), the reactor structures, including the concrete wall, are exposed to a high temperature environment. Those structures are exposed to much harsher conditions during a severe accident (Choi et al., 2018). For this reason, it is necessary to provide a means to maintain reactor structures’ temperatures below the design limits. The ASME code proposed that the design temperature limit for the reinforced concrete be maintained at less than 66℃ globally and 93℃ locally for normal operation conditions (ASME, 0000).
In order to secure cooling capability on reactor structures, many countries developed and employed their own cooling system concepts. The Power Reactor Inherent Safety Module (PRISM) by General Electric employed the reactor vessel auxiliary cooling system which removed heat directly from the reactor to the atmosphere by natural circulating air flow (Triplett et al. 2012). The Superphenix and the Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor (PFBR) utilized cold pool sodium to cool the reactor vessel and the extra forced-cooling system to cool the concrete (Guidez and Prele, 2016, Baldev Raj, 2015). The reactor main vessel cooling system, which was installed in the China Experimental Fast Reactor (CEFR), was used to cool the main vessel and enhance its structural integrity (Song et al., 2019). The KALIMER-150 and 600 employed a similar reactor vessel cooling system in which the air cooling process completely depends on natural convection (Sim, 1999, Eoh et al., 2006).
Fig. 1 shows the schematic of the reactor structures in the PGSFR. The Reactor Vault Cooling System (RVCS) is employed in the PGSFR and is very similar to the passive reactor vessel cooling system of the KALIMER-150. In a relatively small reactor such as PGSFR whose vessel surface area comparing to decay heat is large, the RVCS can be used for the decay heat removal in severe accident as well as for the cooling of reactor vessel supporting structure in normal operation. The main functional specification of RVCS in PGSFR is the same as the previously described. Choi et al. (Choi et al., 2018) has been evaluated the performance of the existing RVCS design at severe accident condition.
Fig. 1. Schematics of the reactor structures in the PGSFR.
As shown in Fig. 1, the RVCS consists of the CV, air separator (AS), reactor support wall and airflow stacks. The reactor vessel is surrounded by the CV with the clearance being filled with an inert gas. The AS is disposed concentrically between the CV and the reactor support wall to separate a hot air upward flow path from a cold air downward flow path. It is thermally insulated to prevent undesirable heat transfer to the reactor support concrete wall as well as to cold air in the annular flow path.
Incoming cold air flows downward along the outer annular space located between the AS and reactor support wall. At bottom region of reactor support wall, the air flow turns in the opposite direction and enters the inner annular space between the AS and CV. The air flow is heated up while passing through the upward flow path, and heated air continues to enter the horizontal outlet duct and is finally discharged to the environment through the air stack. There are two separated rectangular air inlet ducts and outlet ducts in the RVCS.
The heat transfer in the RVCS configuration is a coupled phenomenon consisting of natural convection, heat transfer from the reactor core to the CV and heat transfer from CV to surrounding concrete structures. To design and evaluate the RVCS, it is very important to develop a refined model that can reproduce real phenomena within the integrated reactor geometry. Eoh et al. (Eoh et al., 2006) have developed one-dimensional design code for RVCS and proved its capability by comparison of the results between one-dimensional analysis and CFD analysis on the cavity cooling system of pool-type reactor.
This paper describes RVCS design modification process to satisfying design requirements under normal reactor operation condition and presents one- and multi-dimensional numerical analysis model and the related results. The one-dimensional design code analysis is used to examine various design parameters that are able to enhance RVCS cooling capability without deteriorating RVCS performance in severe accident condition. Based on one-dimensional analysis appropriate design parameter candidate and design modification strategy is selected. Multi-dimensional thermal–hydraulic CFD analysis is utilized to evaluate and refine the candidate design in views of local velocity and temperature distribution within RVCS flow path. In order to evaluate the RVCS design refinement to design requirement under more realistic condition, a Head Access Area (HAA)-RVCS integrated reactor system model is built and an integrated simulation is performed at normal operating conditions.
<Section>2. Thermo-Hydraulic models</Section>
2.1. One-dimensional analysis
To analyze the effects of the design parameters on the RVCS’s thermal hydraulic characteristics, we utilized a one-dimensional system code (PARS2-LMR) (Eoh et al., 2006) that modeled convection, conduction, and radiation heat transfers through the heat transfer path of the RVCS, namely from the reactor core to air. Fig. 2 shows the equivalent heat transfer circuit employed in PARS2-LMR code. R represents the thermal resistance and the subscripts ‘cv’, ‘cd’ and ‘rad’ represent the convection, conduction and radiation heat transfer, respectively. Those resistances are expressed as follows:
Fig. 2. Equivalent Heat Transfer Circuit.
Thermal resistance for convection:
(1)Rcv,i=1hiAi
Thermal resistance for conduction:
(2)Rcd,i=lnDout,j/Dinn,j2∙π∙kj∙Δx
Thermal resistance for radiation
(3)Rrad,k=1σ∙As,k∙1εk+Aout,kAinn,k∙1εk-1
where h, ε and σ stand for convection heat transfer coefficient, emissivity, and Stefan-Boltzmann constant, respectively. A, x and D represent the heat transfer area, thickness and diameter of each structure. Subscript inn, out, and I, j, k represent inner, outer, and calculation nodes.
The air flow rate and related removed heat are evaluated by momentum and energy equations.
Momentum equation:
(4)∂ṁ∂t∑ΔSiAi=∮ρgds-ṁ22∑1ρ-Ai2ki+fiΔSidi
Energy equation
Sodium
(5)∂∂tAΔxρCpTi,Na=ṁNaCp,inTin-Cp,otTotNa+QVL-QRV+Qcond,st
Air
(6)∂∂tAΔxρCpTi,a=ṁaCp,inTin-Cp,otTota+Qce
where subscript Na, a, in and ot represent sodium, air, in and out, respectively. QVL, QRV, Qcond,st and Qce represent the transferred heat via the redan, the transferred heat via the reactor vessel, the conduction heat within sodium and heat from the containment vessel’s external surface, respectively. Qce is calculated by the sum of the convection heat transfer to air and the radiation heat transfer to the inner surface of the AS from the containment structure’s outer surface.
(7)Qce=hAceTce-Ta+σ·AceTce4-Tis41/∊ce+Ace/Ais1/∊is-1
where subscripts ce and is represent the external surface of the CV and the inner surface of the AS, respectively. The Skupinski equation (Skupinski et al., 1965) and the Dittus-Boelter equation (Winterton, 1998) are used to calculate convection the heat transfer coefficient for air and sodium, respectively, as follows.
Sodium:
Skupinski equation
(8)Nu=4.82+0.0185·Pe0.827102<Pe<104
Air:
Dittus-Boelter equation
(9)Nu=0.023·Re0.8Pr0.4
The pressure losses in the RVCS flow path were estimated based on the PGSFR design by considering the friction loss and form loss (Idelchik, 1996).
2.2. Multi-dimensional CFD analysis
Multi-dimensional analysis based on the commercial CFD software STAR-CCM+ (STAR-CCM, 0000) was performed on three separate geometry models: (1) RVCS fluid model (2) RVCS fluid–solid coupled model (3) HAA-RVCS integrated reactor model.
Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes equations for CFD analysis are given as
(10)∂ρ∂t+∇∙ρv=0
(11)∂ρv∂t+∇∙ρv=∇∙σ+fb
(12)∂ρE∂t+∇∙ρEv=fb∙v+∇∙v∙σ-∇∙q
where,ρ, v, E, σ, fb, q are density, velocity, total energy, viscosity stress tensor, body force and heat flux, respectively. Transport equations of k-ω SST model for turbulent flow analysis are written as follows.
(13)∂ρk∂t+∇∙ρkv=∇∙μ+σkμt∇k+Pk-ρβ∗fβ∗∙ωk-ω0k0+Sk
(14)∂ρω∂t+∇∙ρωv=∇∙μ+σωμt∇ω+Pω-ρβfβ∙ω2-ω02+Sω
where,k, ω, μ, μt, are turbulent kinetic energy, specific dissipation rate, dynamics viscosity, turbulent viscosity, respectively, and P, S are production and source term given user input, respectively. k0, ω0 are ambient turbulence values. fβ∗ and fβ are free-shear modification and vortex-stretching modification and model coefficients are given asβ∗ = 0.09, β=9/125, σk=0.5, σω=0.5.
Surface-to-surface (S2S) radiative heat transfer model was applied to consider radiative heat transfer in air flow regions of the RVCS and the HAA, nitrogen region of the gap between the containment vessel and the reactor vessel, argon region inside the reactor vessel. Buoyance force was also reflected in the momentum equation.
The objective of CFD analysis on RVCS fluid geometry was the local fluid flow refinement by modulating air separator’s clearance and air inlet–outlet disposition. The target of evaluation of RVCS fluid–solid geometry was to determine the insulator thickness. The targets for HAA-RVCS integrated reactor analysis reflecting the revised design were to evaluate completeness of RVCS design with more realistic boundary condition under normal operation condition. (2), 10, and 40 million levels of grid were used on three geometry models, respectively.
Fig. 3 shows the analysis domain of the RVCS fluid model. The radiation heat transfer was considered. The analysis domain included half of the RVCS consisting of inlet and outlet ducts and downward and upward flow paths.
Fig. 3. Analysis domain for the RVCS fluid model.
Fig. 4 shows the analysis domain in the RVCS fluid–solid coupled model. The model considered the radiation heat transfer and conjugate heat transfer between the solid and fluid. In this model the duct layout and respective position was changed by reflecting the analysis results and design modification. The constant temperature boundary conditions were assumed in the RVCS fluid model and the RVCS fluid–solid model.
Fig. 4. Analysis domain for the RVCS fluid–solid coupled model.
Fig. 5 shows the analysis domain for the HAA-RVCS integrated reactor model, which considered the radiation heat transfer and conjugate heat transfer between the solid and fluid. To consider heat transfer interaction between structures and surrounded environment, the HAA and reactor internals were additionally modeled and included in the existing analysis domain. We also modeled the upper shield structure to prevent heat transfer from the reactor inside to the reactor head. Adiabatic conditions were assumed on the concrete floor and other walls. By integrating HAA-RVCS to reactor, detailed temperature profiles of reactor can be reflected. Other boundary conditions were determined based on the current design.
Fig. 5. Analysis domain for the HAA-RVCS integrated reactor model.
<Section>3. Design parameter analysis under severe accident condition</Section>
In order to find the design modification strategy which is able to not only secure main functions of RVCS at severe accident condition but also satisfy the design modification requirement for avoid design interference, one-dimensional analysis have been performed on various RVCS design parameters under severe accident conditions such as shut down condition with the loss of decay heat removal system.
To select the design point for design parameter analysis, the heat removal performance of the RVCS in terms of time was presented in Fig. 6. (a), (b) and (c) show the decay heat and removed heat, the temperature, and the air flow rate in the RVCS, respectively. In Fig. 6 (a) the removed heat is less than the generated decay heat in the early stage. This heat unbalance between generation and removal increases the structures’ temperature as shown in Fig. 6 (b), and the natural circulation flow rate in the RVCS increases as shown in Fig. 6 (c). It increases heat removal via the RVCS and the structure temperature reaches its peak when the removed heat is equal to the decay heat. A further increase in heat removal decreases the structure temperature. We determined the design point at the peak temperature and performed a parametric analysis.
Fig. 6. Heat removal performance of the RVCS.
Nominal design values and their analysis ranges with respect to the design parameters are summarized in Table 1. The nominal design values were based on current architecture engineering design of the PGSFR. To improve the effects of the different design parameters on RVCS performance, we evaluated the heat removal rate, air flow rate and temperature at exit.
Table 1. Range of design parameter analysis.
The height of the chimney is the major parameter and is the driving force to natural circulation flow. Its allocation and height should be determined so that there is no interference with existing chimneys of the DHRS or overall plant buildings. To analyze the effects of chimney height on the RVCS, the chimney height was varied as described in Table 1.
Fig. 7 shows the analysis results of the chimney height effect on RVCS performance. The heat removal rate, air flow rate and exit temperature were plotted in a single graph with three different Y-axes. The dotted line represents the initial nominal design value. An increase in chimney height improved the heat removal rate by increasing the air flow rate even when the exit temperature decreased. However even though the overall RVCS performance improved, the rate of improvement gradually decreased as the chimney height increased. Thus, it is clear that proper selection of chimney height is needed by considering not only improvement itself but also the improvement rate.
Fig. 7. Effects of chimney height on RVCS performance.
The effect of air passage sectional area on heat removal performance is plotted in terms of hydraulic diameters in Fig. 8. As the figure shows, a larger hydraulic diameter of air passage increases the flow rate. This results in RVCS performance improvement even with a decrease in the exit temperature. However, the improvement in the heat removal rate decreases as the hydraulic diameter increases.
Fig. 8. Effects of air passage hydraulic diameter on RVCS performance.
The gap distance in the downward flow path surrounded by the AS and CV was determined considering the heat transfer and pressure loss. The effect of the gap distance on heat removal rates is plotted in Fig. 9. A smaller gap distance, which induces the faster air flow over the CV surface, enhances the convection heat transfer. However, it produces a higher pressure loss within the gap. As the gap distance decreases, the heat removal rate and exit air temperature increase. Meanwhile, the air flow rate shows little change until the gap distance is greater than 2 m and then it starts to decrease in a range of less than 2 m due to the contribution of the increased pressure loss.
Fig. 9. Effects of the gap distance between the CV and AS on RVCS performance.
Since radiation heat transfer is an important heat transfer mechanism between high-temperature structures, we evaluated the effects of emissivity variation on RVCS performance and plotted the results in Fig. 10. Increase of the emissivity contributes to the improvement of heat removal performance even though its effect was relatively small in comparing to other design parameters. This is an effective way to improve performance that can be implemented without dramatic geometrical modification.
Fig. 10. Effects of RV emissivity on RVCS performance.
The analysis revealed that increasing the chimney height, air passage area and RV wall emissivity and decreasing the gap distance are effective design modifications for RVCS performance improvement. However, we choose a decrease in gap distance by 10 mm as the only design strategy in the RVCS of the PGSFR which is able to avoid interference with the existing architecture engineering design as well as to avoid deterioration of cooling performance in severe accident condition. Emissivity variation was not considered since it does not affect the geometrical modification. We performed a multi-dimensional CFD analysis based on the revised geometry.
<Section>4. CFD analysis for examine RVCS design</Section>
The actual thermo-fluid interactions in the RVCS are multi-dimensional phenomena. To evaluate revised RVCS geometry having decreased gap distance by 10 mm and find a further complement, we performed CFD analysis based on the revised RVCS design using STAR-CCM + .
Fig. 11 shows the temperature and velocity fields for the revised geometry. There is a relatively hot temperature region at the bottom of the RVCS in the downward flow path as shown in Fig. 11 (a). There is also a hot temperature region at the upper part of the air outlet duct in the upward flow path as shown in Fig. 11 (b). The hot spot in the upward flow path was due to the stagnated flow region that formed at the top of the gap between the CV and the concrete structure as shown in Fig. 11 (c).
Fig. 11. Air temperature and velocity distribution in RVCS flow path.
We performed a series of CFD analysis to analyze the reason for hot spot in downward flow path as shown in Fig. 11 (a) on various geometries with different clearances of the AS as given in Fig. 12. Figures (a) to (c) show the velocity distribution at the vertical plane near the hot spot region in the reactor with different clearance geometries. With a 500 mm clearance, the design bottom of the downward flow path is affected by the recirculated hot flow coming from the upward flow path. The locally hot region in the downward path is formed by this hot recirculated flow. This recirculated flow can be restricted to the upward flow path by reducing the clearance of the AS to less than certain critical value as shown in Fig. 12 (b) and (c). The locally hot region of the downward flow path can be reduced in this way. However, the flow resistance in the overall flow path will inevitably increase. A comparison of the CFD analysis results determined that the final clearance design value should be 400 mm to restrict a recirculated flow crossing and avoid too much of an increase of the flow resistance.
Fig. 12. Effects of air separator clearance on velocity distribution.
For the purpose of reducing the hot temperature region at the upper part in the upward flow path, the inlet and outlet ducts were switched from a concentrated arrangement (Fig. 13 (a)) to a crossed arrangement (Fig. 13 (b)) and its effects on temperature distribution were compared. As shown in Fig. 13, hot temperature gas is gathered at upper part of upward flow path due to buoyancy effects. This hot gas is delivered to two outlet ducts.
Fig. 13. Effects of inlet and outlet arrangement on air temperature fields in upward flow path.
In case of a concentrated arrangement, hot gas flow is directed and is merged to one side where two outlet ducts are located near to each other. It forms a wide concentrated hot temperature region at upper part near outlet ducts where flow is stagnated. In case of a crossed arrangement, however, flow is divided into two outlet ducts which are located far apart to each other. Thus the concentrated single hot gas region which has appeared in a concentrated arrangement can be divided into two relatively narrow regions above outlet ducts located separately. As a results a widely concentrated hot temperature region can be dispersed by rearranging the inlet and outlet ducts alternatively. Therefore, the crossed arrangement was selected as the final layout of the inlet and outlet ducts.
Even though the area of hot temperature can be reduced by changing the duct arrangement, the air maximum temperature in the stagnated flow region is so high that the concrete temperature affected by air temperature cannot satisfy the design requirement (Yoo et al., 2016). In order to meet the temperature design requirements for the concrete, an insulator was installed and the stagnation region was reduced by a design modification for elevating the air outlet duct location. A series of CFD analyses were done to determine the insulator thickness as shown in Fig. 14. The specific heat and thermal conductivity of the insulation material were 903 J/kgK and 0.038 W/mK respectively. The hot temperature in the stagnation region was removed with the installation of an insulator on the CV, and the outlet duct and its maximum value could be reduced to less than the design requirements when thickness was increased to 0.2 m. Finally, we found that installation of the insulator was necessary to preserve the concrete integrity from the hot temperature region formed at the top of the gap near the air outlet duct in the RVCS and its minimum thickness was 0.2 m.
Fig. 14. Effects of insulator thickness on temperature distribution.
Based on decided design parameters of the RVCS determined by the analysis described above, we did a CFD analysis on the full reactor geometry reflecting detailed temperature profiles of reactor to examine the temperature distribution in the RVCS and the supporting structure in detail. Fig. 15 (a)-(d) show the velocity and temperature distribution in the HAA-RVCS integrated reactor geometry. The average temperatures of major locations, such the inlet and outlet of the core, predicted designed values within a difference of less than 1%. As shown in Fig. 15 (c) the air temperatures in the four exit nozzles at the bottom of the HAA ranged from 43 ℃ to 47 ℃ due to the heat transferred from the reactor head and motors. The vertical temperature variation from the reactor head to the hot pool sodium in Fig. 15 (d) reveals that the upper shield structure effectively prevents heat transfer to the reactor head. Fig. 15 (e)-(f) give the velocity and temperature distribution in the upward flow path of the RVCS at the air outlet duct plane. The estimated averaged mass flow rate and temperatures at the exit are around 6.4 kg/s and 168 ℃. Based on the calculated velocity and temperature at major points, it is confirmed that the HAA-RVCS integrated reactor analysis model reasonably predicts thermo-hydraulic phenomena.
Fig. 15. Velocity and temperature distribution in the full HAA-RVCS integrated reactor geometry.
Fig. 16 shows the inner and outer vertical temperature of the AS. The outer temperature of the AS indicates the surface temperature of the insulator attached to the AS. The inner temperature of the AS indicates the temperature of AS. The elevation represents the distance from the reactor head. To compare the vertical temperature variation at various azimuthal positions, we plotted the temperatures at three different planes. Plane A and plane B make up the vertical section, including the center of the pump and that of the IHX, respectively. Plane C is the plane orthogonal to plane A. Due to the clover shaped redan, horizontal distance from the redan to the reactor vessel becomes maximum at plane C and minimum at plane B.
Fig. 16. Inner and outer vertical temperature distribution of air separator in the RVCS.
The outer vertical temperatures at three planes show almost constant values which are less than 70℃ due to insulator with regardless of elevation. However, the inner vertical temperatures vary with the distance from the reactor head because of different heat transfer from the reactor system. The highest peak temperature appears at an elevation of −4 m of plane B where the reactor vessel is immediately exposed to the hot pool wall, redan, at the closest distance in cover gas region formed by the free surface’s elevation differences of hot and cold pool. The vertical temperature decrease with the increase of downward distance from the reactor head due to cold pool sodium’s existence and the internal structure’s arrangement. The second peak temperature appears at an elevation of −15 m and its reason will be explained in Fig. 18.
To investigate RVCS design completeness, the concrete vertical temperatures in the downward flow path on respective planes are compared in Fig. 17. The outer concrete temperature is constant since it is fixed to 20 ℃ as a boundary condition. The inner temperature indicates the concrete surface temperature in the downward flow path of the RVCS. Most of inner concrete temperature is about 40 ℃ except for the upper and lower region, which is below design requirement of concrete. In the upper region, the temperature of the concrete surface is 60 ℃ because it directly contacts the insulator. At the bottom region the temperature of the concrete surface starts to increase and reaches 84℃ locally. Therefore, it was proved that the proposed RVCS design can maintain the concrete temperature below the design limit, that is at less than 66℃ globally and 93℃ locally for normal operation conditions, defined by the ASME code rules.
Fig. 17. Vertical temperature distribution of inner & outer concrete in the RVCS.
Fig. 18. Effect of radiation heat transfer on vertical temperature distribution in the RVCS.
To clarify the reason of temperature variation in Fig. 16, Fig. 17, CFD calculation has been performed again excluding radiation heat transfer effects in RVCS and its results are shown in Fig. 18.
In Fig. 18, the temperatures of air separator and inner concrete from calculation excluding radiation heat transfer are plotted as dotted line. Results in Fig. 16, Fig. 17, which include radiation heat transfer effects are re-plotted as solid line. The effect of radiation heat transfer is the difference between solid and dotted line. It was found that radiation heat transfer is a dominant heat transfer mechanism between the reactor vessel and the air separator due to the high temperature of the reactor vessel. However, its contribution becomes small between AS insulator and inner concrete due to the low temperature of AS insulator. Local temperature increase at bottom region of the air separator and the inner concrete, is induced by the increase of radiation heat transfer from convex bottom of the reactor vessel and by the leakage of radiation heat transfer through open area at the end of the air separator respectively.
<Section>5. Conclusion</Section>
The design parameters of the RVCS and their contribution to RVCS performance were analyzed based on one-dimensional analysis code. An increase in the chimney height, the air passage area and the RV wall emissivity and a decrease in the RVCS gap distance were proven to be effective design modifications for improvement of the RVCS performance. We chose a decrease in the gap distance by 10 mm to be the only applicable design modification which can avoid design interference with the existing design of the PGSFR and any deterioration of cooling performance at severe accident condition.
We performed a series of multi-dimensional analyses using STAR-CCM + based on the revised RVCS design. Design refinements on the AS clearance, duct arrangement and insulator thickness were done. We examined the completeness of RVCS design based on HAA-RVCS integrated reactor models and found that a proposed RVCS design can restrict the concrete temperature to below design requirements. We also found that radiation heat transfer is the main cause of local temperature increases near bottom region in RVCS.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Sujin Yeom: Conceptualization, Methodology. Ji-Woong Han: Supervision, Writing - original draft. Seungho Ryu: Visualization. Dehee Kim: Software. Jae-Hyuk Eoh: Software. Sun-Rock Choi: Review.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. 2012M2A8A2025624)
<Section>References</Section>
Locatelli et al., 2013
Giorgio Locatelli, Mauro Mancini, Nicola Todeschini
Generation IV Nuclear Reactors: Current Status and Future Prospects
Energy Policy, 61 (2013), pp. 1503-1520
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yoo et al., 2016
Jaewoon Yoo, Jinwook Chang, Jae-Yong Lim, Jin-Sik Cheon, Tae-Ho Lee, Sung Kyun Kim, Kwi Lim Lee and Hyung-Kook Joo, “Overall System Description and Safety Characteristics of Prototype Gen IV Sodium Cooled Fast Reactor in Korea,” Nuclear Engineering and Technology, Vol.48, 2016, pp.1059-1070.
Google Scholar
Fast Reactor Database, 2006
Fast Reactor Database 2006 Update, IAEA-TECDOC-1531, 2006.
Google Scholar
Choi et al., 2018
Chiwoong Choi, Taekyeong Jeong, Sangjun An
Thermal-hydraulic analysis of passive reactor vault cooling system(RVCS) in PGSFR using MARS-LMR
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 117 (2018), pp. 333-342
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
ASME, 0000
ASME Section III, Div.2, Code for Concrete Reactor Vessels and Containments.
Google Scholar
Triplett et al., May 2012
Brian S. Triplett, Eric P. Loewen, Brett J. Dooies
PRISM: A Competitive Small Modular Sodium-cooled Reactor
Nucl. Technol., 178 (May 2012)
Google Scholar
Guidez and Prele, 2016
Joel Guidez, Gerard Prele
Superphenix Technical and Scientific Achievements
ATLANTIS Press (2016)
Google Scholar
Baldev Raj, 2015
Baldev Raj, P. Chellapandi and P. R. Vasudeva Rao, Sodium Fast Reactors with Closed Fuel Cycle, CRC Press, 2015.
Google Scholar
Song et al., 2019
Ping Song, Dalin Zhang, Tangtao Feng, Shibao Wang, Jing Chen, Xin’an Wang,
Xiuli Xue, Yapei Zhang, Mingjun Wang, Suizheng Qiu and G.H. Su, “Numerical approach to study the thermal-hydraulic chracteristics of Reactor Vessel Cooling system in sodium-cooled fast reactors”, Progress in
Nuclear Energy, 110 (2019), pp. 213-223
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Sim, 1999
Y.S. Sim, et al.
Analysis of the Relations between Design Parameters and Performance in the PSDRS
J. KNS, 31 (3) (1999), p. 276
Google Scholar
Eoh et al., 2006
Jae Hyuk Eoh, Se Yun Kim, Bo Young Choi, Tae Ho Lee, Seong O Kim, “Design and performance analysis of the passive cavity cooling system of KALIMER-600,” Proceedings of the KNS, 2006.
Google Scholar
Skupinski et al., 1965
E. Skupinski, J. Tortel et L. Vautrey, “Determination Des Coefficients De Convection D’un Alliage Sodium-Potassium Dans Un Tube Circulaire,” International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, Vol.8, 1965, pp.937-951.
Google Scholar
Winterton, 1998
R.H.S. Winterton
Where Did the Dittus and Boelter Equation Come From?
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 41 (1998), pp. 809-810
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Idelchik, 1996
I.E. Idelchik
Handbook of Hydraulic Resistance
(3rd Ed.,), Hemisphere Publishing Corporation (1996)
Google Scholar
STAR-CCM, 0000
CD-adapco, STAR-CCM+ User’s Manual.
Google Scholar