<title>Analysis of AP1000 severe accident induced by SBO using MAAP5</title>
<author>1,MengWang,2,WenzhenChen,3,YinyongTao</author>
<Affiliation>1,College of Nuclear Science and Technology, Naval University of Engineering, Wuhan, 430033, China;2,China Nuclear Power Operation Technology Corporation, Wuhan, 430223, China;3,Sanmen Nuclear Power PlantCo.Ltd., Sanmen, 317112, China</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2020.103615</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0149197020303607</URL>
Analysis of AP1000 severe accident induced by SBO using MAAP5
MengWang,WenzhenChen,YinyongTao
College of Nuclear Science and Technology, Naval University of Engineering, Wuhan, 430033, China
China Nuclear Power Operation Technology Corporation, Wuhan, 430223, China
Sanmen Nuclear Power PlantCo.Ltd., Sanmen, 317112, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
A representative MAAP5 model of AP1000 is developed for the severe accident induced by SBO.
Significant differences in the damage progression are observed.
The auto depressurization system has a significant impact on the success of IVR.
The hydrogen igniters can control the hydrogen risk in the containment.
The ERVC system has enough capability to maintain the integrity of the RPV lower head.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The total loss of AC power is an essential initiating event of PWR which can lead to a severe accident like Fukushima in Japan. For such improbable accidents, three cases of severe accidents of AP1000 induced by the station blackout (SBO) were simulated based on MAAP5 code. This particular analysis was conducted at 100% core power with different approaches. For the case with auto depressurization system (ADS), the primary system pressure appeared to uphold a low level for a longer duration and the external reactor vessel cooling (ERVC) system had sufficient capacity to eliminate the heat from the molten pool with a ratio of ex-vessel heat flux to critical heat flux (CHF) at about 0.49. For the case without ADS, the reactor pressure vessel (RPV) rupture will occur due to the creep effect inducing a sudden shock to the containment, and the peak pressure in the containment is still under the level at which the inelastic deformation may take place. The hydrogen production of the case without ADS in the core is 83% more than that of having ADS, while the hydrogen mole fraction in the upper containment is lower before the RPV failure. Overall, our findings are meaningful and significant for comprehending the detailed process of AP1000 severe accident induced by SBO, which is the basic standard for the development of the severe accident management guidelines (SAMG).
Keywords:AP1000;Severe accident;MAAP5;SBOIVR-ERVC;Hydrogen risk
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Station blackout (SBO) has long been identified as a predominant accident scenario, even dating back to WASH-1400. The Fukushima severe accident provided direct evidence as to its importance (Hatamura et al., 2014). The SBO accident has gained considerable attention from the nuclear safety researchers after the Fukushima accident. Linet al. (2016) evaluated the SBO mitigation strategies for Maanshan PWR using the TRACE code. Wilhelmet al. (2018) investigated the possible management measures of SBO severe accident for a generic German PWR.
The severe accident can be categorized as low pressure and high-pressure consequence depending on the pressure inside the reactor pressure vessel (RPV), which will affect the behavior of fuel rod cladding. Moreover, the success of in-vessel retention (IVR) is highly dependent on the pressure inside the RPV. The severe accident induced by SBO in the case of AP1000 could be differentiated as a high or low consequence, which is depending on the various conditions of the auto depressurization system (ADS). In this study, we conducted three severe accident sequences based on the modular accident analysis program-version 5.04/5.05 (MAAP5.04/5.05) (Electric Power Research Institute, 2017) to get the phenomena affected by the states of ADS and hydrogen igniters. The results are meaningful to understand the detailed process of the severe accident and will support the development of severe accident management guidelines (SAMG).
<Section>2. Method and model</Section>
2.1. Description of the analysis model
The AP1000 is a 2-loop PWR with a total power of 3415 MWt of which 3400 MWt is from the core, and the other 15 MWt is from the main pumps. The reactor core is equipped with 157 fuel assemblies. Each fuel assembly is comprised of 264 fuel rods, and the remaining 25 positions are control rods and the central instrument tubes (Westinghouse, 2011a).
Each loop of the reactor coolant system (RCS) consists of one hot and two cold legs. Every loop is equipped with a Delta 125 type steam generator (SG) having two main pumps at the bottom attached to the cold legs (Westinghouse, 2011b). On each main steam line outside the containment, there are one power-operated relief valve (PORV) and six safety relief valves (SRVs). The net vessel volume of AP1000 pressurizer (PZR) is 59.46 m3 with an inner diameter of 2.53 m. The electrical heaters are installed through the PZR bottom head, and the total power is 1600 kW. The PZR and hot leg of loop 1 are joined together by a surge line with a diameter of 0.4572 m. Three stages of ADS and two SRVs are installed at the PZR upper dome (Lin, 2008).
The passive core cooling system (PXS) and passive containment cooling system (PCS) of AP1000 are completely independent of dynamic pumps (Westinghouse, 2011c, 2011d). Natural forces such as gravity, natural circulation, and natural convection are solely responsible to maintain the flow of the cooling water. The external reactor vessel cooling (ERVC) system is designed to maintain the integrity of the RPV lower head through the flooding of the reactor cavity (Sun, 2016).
2.2. Nodalization of the RCS and the secondary side of SG
The AP1000 has two cold legs in each loop so that the downcomer, lower plenum, core and upper plenum are divided into four arrays, as shown in Fig. 1. The reactor has 17 water nodes and the primary side of each SG has 4 water nodes. Noticeably, the surge line connected PZR with the RCS is modeled as a RCS water node. The secondary side of U-tube SG used in MAAP5 is a two-region model, of which region 1 comprises the tube bundle and riser and region 2 consists of the lower and upper downcomers and steam dome.
Fig. 1. Nodalization of the RCS
2.3. Nodalization of the core
MAAP5 code allows a detailed nodalization of the core to determine the complex severe accident process within the RPV. The core is differentiated into concentric radial rings and axial rows. As shown in Fig. 2, the core is divided into 7 concentric radial rings and 33 axial rows. The active region is represented by axial rows from 3 to 32, while row 33 has been identified as the upper non-active region, corresponding to the upper core support plate and the upper non-active section of the fuel assembly. The lower non-active region is divided into two layers as row 1 (lower socket), row 2 (plenum of fuel rods and plugs). The lower core support plate of AP1000 is positioned below the top of the lower head (Westinghouse, 2011e), so that it is modeled as a lumped material heat sink in the lower plenum with its own lumped mass, area, and height.
Fig. 2. Nodalization of the core.
2.4. Nodalization of the lower head
Since the metal layer thickness is 0.3–0.7 m, which is usually determined by the type of reactor. In order to display the transient behaviors of the oxidic pool and the metal layer, the RPV lower head is divided into 25 axial nodes (see Fig. 3). The height of each axial node is about 0.08 m, so that the metal layer can submerge several axial nodes. Briefly, the RPV lower head is equipped with five lumped material heat sinks which are the second supports, vortex suppression plate, support columns, flow skirt, lower core support plate (including the radial keys) according to the arrangement height from the inside bottom of the RPV. The RPV lower head wall is divided into 5 layers for all axial nodes.
Fig. 3. Nodalization of the lower head.
2.5. Nodalization of the ERVC flow channel
The nodding diagram of the ERVC flow channel is shown in Fig. 4. The ERVC flow channel below the top of the RPV lower head is divided into 25 axial nodes. Each length of the flow channel node is equal to that of the RPV lower head. The vertical section of the flow channel between the top of the PRV lower head and the ERVC outlet is divided in to 10 axial nodes surrounding the cylindrical part of RPV. The cooling water enters into the ERVC flow channel from the bottom and the mixture of the water and steam returns to the containment under the mechanism of natural circulation.
Fig. 4. Nodalization of the ERVC flow channel.
2.6. Nodalization of the containment
As shown in Fig. 5, the containment is divided into 13 nodes with 30 interconnected junctions. Briefly, Node 1 is 1#SG compartment and PZR doghouse, node 2 is 2#SG compartment, vertical access tunnel (VCT) and reactor drain tank (RCDT), node 3 is the core makeup tank (CMT) compartment, node 4 is the reactor cavity, node 5 is the internal refueling water storage tank (IRWST), node 6 is the upper compartment, node 7 and 8 are the compartments for PXS-A and PXS-B, node 9 is the control volume system (CVS) and normal residual heat removal system (RNS) compartment, node 10 is PCS upper dome, node 11 is PCS riser, node 12 is PCS downcomer, node 13 is the environment. A total of 48 distributed heat sinks and 11 lumped heat sinks are allocated to different compartments.
Fig. 5. Nodalization of the containment.
Junctions 22 and 31 connect 5# and 2# containment nodes separately and will be opened at certain core exit temperature to submerged node 4. The PCS model is represented by compartment nodes from 10 to 13 along with junctions 23–26. Junction 27 is the normal leakage of the containment, positioned between the environment and node 6. Junction 28 is used to determine the containment failure, which will be opened at certain inside pressure of the containment.
The mass flow of PCS water spray is introduced through the parameter of WWSP2 (26). The value of WWSP2 (26) is determined by a lookup table according to the time duration after the PCS spray open. The transportation of heat from containment towards the environment is facilitated by distributed heat structures of 26/27/28/30/31/32. In order to track the condensed water film, the values of NIWALL (26)/(27)/(28)/(30)/(31)/(32) are all set as 0 and NIWALL (29) is 1. The downward movement of condensed water inside the containment wall depends on the arrangement of the heat sinks and finally goes back to the IRWST. The water film that exists outside the steal containment could also be tracked with the help of NIWALL(i) model settings.
In MAAP5, certain parameters of FIDRRB(i) can be used to determine the water flow within the containment nodes. If the value of FIDRRB(i) is zero, the i'th compartment water pool will drain normally through junctions to other compartments, and if FIDRRB(i) is a positive number, then the water in the current i'th compartment will drain to the compartment specified by the value of FIDRRB(i). For AP1000, the unevaporated spray water for PCS will be deposited at the bottom of 11# and 12# nodes. The value of FIDRRBs (11) and (12) are all set as 13 and then the water in 11# and 12# nodes will be drained into the environment.
2.7. ADS
The ADS consists of four stages, which are considered to depressurize the RCS to a desired low pressure. The first three stages with two series for each are arranged at the top of the PZR and the steam will discharge into the IRWST. For ADS-1 to ADS-3, the states are controlled by six user-defined events which will set the valves to be open or close separately using the parameter of ISTUCK(3) to ISTUCK(8). When the value of ISTUCK (i) is 0, the ADS valve for that series is close and 1 is open.
There are two series of the fourth stage ADS (ADS-4) connected to the RCS hot legs. Each set of ADS-4 consists of two parallel paths which will directly discharge into the containment. The ADS-4 in this paper is modeled by 1# and 2# general openings (see Fig. 6). Firstly, in the parameter file of AP1000, INGO (1)/INGO (2), JNGO (1)/JNGO (2), ZGO (1)/JNGO (2), ZNGO (1)/JNGO (2), XLVGO (1)/XLVGO (2), IDIRGO (1)/IDIRGO (2) are used to define the physical arrangement. Then, AGO (1) and AGO (2) are used to control the working states of 1# and 2# general openings. At the beginning, the value of AGO (1) and AGO (2) are all set as 0. One user-defined event with certain action is used to modify the value of AGO (i) according to the control logics and the failure assumptions.
Fig. 6. Modeling of ADS-4.
2.8. Other models
In MAAP5, the physical model of each CMT is defined by 27 parameters. For 1# and 2# CMT, the states of the valves to the direct injection line (DVI) are controlled by IEVNT (276) and (278) separately. These event flags will be turned on through the user-defined event flags and the user actions. There are 16 parameters in MAAP5 to determine each accumulator (ACC), and the IEVNT (214) is utilized to control whether it is available or not.
The passive autocatalytic recombiners (PARs) have been modeled in the present study. There are two PARs in the containment (see Fig. 5), and each catalyst surface of the PAR is 15.68 m2. The minimum hydrogen fraction for “cold” starting is 0.5% and the start-up (or warm-up) time is 300s. Thinking that the structure of the PAR used in AP1000 is very similar to the Siemens type, the Siemens PAR is selected to simulate the behavior of hydrogen-oxygen reaction in this study. The Siemens-98 law is an experimental equation of EDF (Électricité de France), which has been introduced as the model to calculate the hydrogen recombination rate for the Siemens type PAR (Fauske and Associates, LLC, 2008). The energy release associated with hydrogen-oxygen reaction will also be calculated based on Siemens-98 law.
The hydrogen ignitions are provided to control the hydrogen risk of an event that results in a rapid production of large amounts of hydrogen such that the rate of production exceeds the capacity of the PARs. The containment hydrogen concentration is limited by the operation of the distributed hydrogen ignitions. There are 64 hydrogen ignitions in different compartments of the containment, which are divided into two groups with 32 igniters for each. In MAAP5 code, the working state of hydrogen ignition is controlled by IEVNT (207). When the value of IEVNT (207) is 1, the igniters will be forced on. The user-defined event is used to control which group will be put into action and the states of IEVNT (207) according to the assumptions and the hydrogen mole fraction in the upper containment.
<Section>3. Results of steady-state and transient conditions</Section>
3.1. Results of steady-state
The steady-state key parameters calculated by MAAP5 in the current meta-analyses have been displayed in Table 1. They are in good alliance with the design data except for the PZR water level. In MAAP5, the PZR is associated with the heat loss to the containment. Hence, it is difficult to maintain the PZR water level without incorporating the control models for PZR heaters, and makeup and letdown flow. The PZR water level relative error between MAAP5 and the design value is slightly larger than other parameters but still within the limit which can be accepted, and will have no great effect on the accident progress.
Table 1. Key parameters of steady-state.
3.2. Transient conditions
For both cases, high and low pressure, the total simulation time is 40000s. At the 2000s, the SBO accident is inserted in the analysis model. The total loss of reactor coolant pumps (RCPs) and feed water will occur because of the SBO accident, which eventually results in a reactor trip. Other systems that require power supply will also lost, like the PZR electrical heater, the control volume system (CVS) and the normal residual heat removal system (RNS). The main steam isolation valves and steam turbine stop valves are automatically closed according to the reactor trip. The states of PZR SRVs and SG SRVs are automatically controlled by the pressures in PZR and main steam line. The failure assumptions of accident mitigation systems for different cases are shown in Table 2, where PRHR-HX denotes the passive residual heat removal heat exchanger, and the success is represented by check mark√ while system failure by × .
Table 2. Failure assumptions of accident mitigation systems.
<Section>4. Results and discussion</Section>
4.1. Thermal-hydraulic in primary and secondary sides
The primary system pressure of the two cases is described in Fig. 7. The primary system pressure suddenly falls at the beginning of the transient, owing to the effective cooling of the secondary side and the loss of PZR electrical heat. Following the isolation of main steam valves, the primary system pressure rises up and then falls smoothly under the continuous heat removal action of the secondary side. During this transient period, the peak pressure of the primary system is lower than the set point of PZR SV.
Fig. 7. Primary system pressure.
After the accident initiation at approximately 4000 s, the secondary side of SG is almost empty (see Fig. 8). The primary side pressure rises to the set point of PZR SV because of the loss of heat sink of the secondary side. CMTs begin to discharge into the primary system at about 4787.4 s after SBO. Cold water injection sharply decreases to approximately 13 MPa. After that, the primary pressure rises to the set point of PZR SV, and the PZR SVs for the second time open and close intermittently.
Fig. 8. Secondary side water level.
With the decline in the level of CMT water, the ADS valves are sequentially open in case 2, of whichADS-1 at 14,559.7 s, ADS-2 at 14,679.8 s, ADS-3 at 14,794.8 s. The ADS-4 of loop 1 is opened at 14,986.6 s, and the one of loop 2 is 60s delay. As the ADS-4 opens, the primary system pressure quickly decreases approximately to the containment pressure. While for case 1, the primary system pressure is maintained at a high level until the RPV failure at 33,793.4s.
The PZR water level is maintained near the normal value because of the cooling action of the secondary side. After the drying of the water in the secondary side of SG, with the intermittent opening of the safety valve and the continuous CMT water injection, a large amount of water-steam mixture swarms into the PZR maintaining the high PZR water level until the CMTs are empty. At the last, the PZR water level drops to zero with a significantly different trend between the two cases (see Fig. 9).
Fig. 9. Water level in PZR.
In MAAP5, the fall of boiled up water level below the top of active fuel (TOAF) initiates the core recovery. Boiled-up water levels of case 1 and case 2 are presented in Fig. 10. Case 2 shows a little earlier time for the core uncovering than that of case 1 because of the ADS-1–4 functions. Even though there is ACC injection in case 2, the high rate of steam discharged from ADS-4 results in an earlier time at which the boiled-up water level falls below the bottom of active fuel (BOAF).
Fig. 10. Core boiled-up water level.
4.2. Core degradation in RPV
If the reactor core remains uncover for a considerable time, the temperature of the fuel rods will rise. The cladding is oxidized by the steam with huge production of heat and hydrogen. The exothermic process of the zirconium-steam reaction exhibits a leading role in aggravating the core degradation (see Fig. 11), as the released oxidation heat can be significantly higher than decay heat. The local temperature of the fuel rods can reach to a level that significantly causes irreversible core degradation with both chemical and mechanical mechanisms.
Fig. 11. Core material mass.
During the transient, the total amount of produced hydrogen is presented in Fig. 12. In both cases, the initial time of zirconium-steam reaction in the core is significantly different, which may be due to the boiled-up water level in the core and the clad temperature. While for case 1, the vessel pressure is greater than the pressure of the gases in the fuel rods gap, and the cladding will push against the fuel pellets. In comparison, the cladding will swell until it bursts. Also, case 2 shows a much faster core melting process than case 1 and results in less participation of zirconium in the zirconium-steam reaction. The total mass of hydrogen produced in the core for case 1 is 83% greater than that for case 2.
Fig. 12. Hydrogen production.
The hydrogen production in the RPV lower head is not significant for cases 1 and 2 with 2.83 kg and 6.35 kg respectively. In case 1 with RPV failure, the total hydrogen production through the outside vessel debris-water interaction, molten core concrete interaction (MCCI), and containment direct heating (DCH) is higher than that in the core, which can significantly increase the hydrogen fraction inside the containment.
4.3. Molten pool behavior
During the severe accident, the corium pool formed in the RPV lower head may stratify in layers. The single oxidic model with a heavy metal layer model is performed by MAAP5.04. Fig. 13 represents the three layers structure configuration of the molten pool which acts as a heavy metal layer at the bottom, the oxidic pool in the middle, and a light metal layer on the top. MAAP5 code assumes that the oxidic pool is surrounded by the crust along the inside wall of the lower head curvature from the bottom to the top.
Fig. 13. Stratified layers in lower headbased on MAAP5.04.
In MAAP5.05, the calculation of the maximum crust thickness is based on the decay heat, thermal conductivity of crust, and interface temperatures. While in MAAP5.04, the maximum crust thickness is defined by using the parameter of XXPSML with 0.1 m as recommended. Fig. 14 shows the maximum crust thickness of MAAP5.04 and 5.05.
Fig. 14. Results of the maximum crust thickness.
Also, the axial heat conduction (2-D heat conduction) model can be used in the RPV lower head wall. Fig. 15 represents the results of the lower head calculation for the stratified layers which are based on the axial layering model of the molten pool and the new models above in MAAP5.05. The molten pool configuration shows the two-layered structure which consists of an oxidic pool at the bottom and a light metal layer on top avoiding the formation of the heavy metal layer. Thus, the height of the light metal layer in MAAP5.05 is slightly larger than that in MAAP5.04.
Fig. 15. Stratified layers in lower head based on MAAP5.05.
Fig. 16 describes the heat flux distribution at the lower head of RPV with different models of molten pools in case 2, and the results revealed that the maximum heat flux is near to 1.1 MW/m2 in Fig. 16 (a) between 78.5° and 90°. According to the experimental results of AP1000 (Theofanouset al., 2002), the ratio of heat flux to CHF reaches about 0.49 at 80°.From Fig. 16 (b), it can be seen that the heat flux distribution is very close to that by MAAP5.04 code with a slightly lower at the peak heat flux.
Fig. 16. Heat flux distribution at RPV lower head.
4.4. Containment parameters
For the cases without RPV failure, the passive containment cooling system can maintain the containment pressure below the design parameter (See Fig. 17). While, for case 1 with RPV failure, the corium present in the lower head will be ejected into the reactor cavity and then into the containment imposing a direct containment heating (DCH) loads on the containment. The peak pressure is still under the level of inelastic deformation, and the high-pressure duration is very short. Although the sudden jump of pressure is more susceptible to induce a sudden shock for the containment, the likelihood of widespread rupture is very low.
Fig. 17. Containment pressure.
Fig. 18 shows the mole fraction of hydrogen in the upper containment, which is the only parameter that can be monitored in SAMG. In the upper containment, the mole fraction of hydrogen in case 1 is lower than that in case 2 due to the hydrogen distributions in RCS and PZR (see Fig. 19). In case 1, the melt will release into the containment at high pressure and temperature, which triggers the auto burn of hydrogen and causes an immediate drop of hydrogen mole fraction in the upper containment. Following the processes of DCH and MCCI, the hydrogen mole fraction rises quickly.
Fig. 18. Hydrogen mole fraction in upper containment.
Fig. 19. Hydrogen distribution in RCS and PZR.
In the present work, the igniters will be automatically turned on at 4% setting point of hydrogen mole fraction in the upper containment and turned off at 2% setting point. Fig. 20 represents the comparison of the hydrogen mole fraction of cases 2 and 3. It can be seen that as the function of hydrogen igniter, the hydrogen mole fraction in the upper containment can be controlled at a low level by only one group of igniters.
Fig. 20. Performance of the hydrogen igniter.
Fig. 21 represents the performances of the PARs in the two cases. It can be found that the amount of combined hydrogen will be significantly affected by the hydrogen mole fraction in the containment. With the continuous PARs action in case 2, the hydrogen mole fraction in upper containment can be controlled below 4% with a relatively longer time than that in case 3.
Fig. 21. Performances of the PARs.
<Section>5. Conclusions</Section>
In this study, three cases of the severe accident induced by SBO with various failure assumptions of the accident mitigation system have been evaluated. Several outstanding differences have been identified in the damage process for these cases.
(1)
For case 1, the RPV rupture will occur due to creep that imparts a sudden shock to the containment, and the peak pressure in the containment is still under the plastic deformation limit.
(2)
For the case of without ADS, the mass of hydrogen produced in the core is 83% more than that with ADS.
(3)
For case 1, the hydrogen mole fraction in the upper containment is lower than that in case 2 before the RPV failure.
(4)
The hydrogen igniters have enough capability to govern the hydrogen mole fraction in the upper containment compartment at a low level.
(5)
The peak heat flux in case 2 is near 1.1 MW/m2 with a ratio of heat flux to CHF at about 0.49.
(6)
By incorporating the function of ADS and the flooding of the reactor cavity, the ERVC system has sufficient capability to maintain the integrity of the RPV lower head.
<Section>Credit author statement</Section>
Meng Wang: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Writing- Original draft preparation. Wenzhen Chen: Supervision, Writing- Reviewing and Editing. Yinyong Tao: Resources.
<Section>Declaration of competing interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
The authors greatly appreciate the resources and technical support from Electric Power Research Institute and Fauske& Associates, LLC.
<Section>References</Section>
Electric Power Research Institute, 2017
Electric Power Research Institute
Modular Accident Analysis Program 5 (MAAP5) Applications Guidance: Desktop Reference for Using MAAP5 Software—phase 3 Report
vol. 2017, EPRI (2017), p. 3002010658
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fauske and Associates, 2008
Fauske, L.L.C. Associates
Code structure and theory
MAAP5 e Modular Accident Analysis Program for LWR Power Plants, User's Manual, vol. 2, Prepared for Electric Power Research Institute (2008)
Google Scholar
Hatamura et al., 2014
Y. Hatamura, S. Abe, M. Fuchigami, N. Kasahara, K. Iino
The 2011 Fukushima Nuclear Power Plant Accident: How and Why it Happened
Woodhead Publishing (2014)
Google Scholar
Lin, 2008
C.G. Lin
Passive Safe Advanced PWR Technology
Chinese Atomic Energy Press, Beijing (2008)
(in Chinese)
Google Scholar
Lin et al., 2016
H.T. Lin, J.R. Wang, K.C. Huang, C. Shih, S.C. Chiang, C.C. Liu
Station blackout mitigation strategies analysis for MaanshanPWR plant using trace
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 89 (2016), pp. 1-18
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Sun, 2016
H.H. Sun
Third Generation Nuclear Power Technology-Ap1000
China Electric Power Press, Beijing (2016)
(in Chinese)
Google Scholar
Theofanous et al., 2002
T.G. Theofanous, J.P. Tu, T. Salmassi, T.N. Dinh
Quantification of Limits to Cool Ability in ULPU-2000 conFig.Uration IV
Center for Risk Studies and Safety, University of California, Santa Barbara (2002)
CRSS-02.05.3
Google Scholar
Westinghouse, 2011a
Westinghouse
Westinghouse AP1000 Design Control Document Rev. 19-Tier 2
(2011)
(Chapter 4)- Reactor- Section 4.3 Nuclear Design.NRC, ML11171A445
Google Scholar
Westinghouse, 2011b
Westinghouse
Westinghouse AP1000 design control document Rev
19-Tier 2 Chapter 5- Reactor Coolant System and Connected Systems-Section 5.4 Component and Subsystem Design (2011)
NRC, ML11171A454
Google Scholar
Westinghouse, 2011c
Westinghouse
Westinghouse AP1000 design control document Rev
19-Tier 2 Chapter 6-Engineered Safety Features-Section 6.2 Containment Systems (2011)
NRC, ML11171A458
Google Scholar
Westinghouse, 2011d
Westinghouse
Westinghouse AP1000 design control document Rev
19- Tier 2 Chapter 6- Engineered Safety Features-Section 6.3 Passive Core Cooling Systems (2011)
NRC, ML11171A459
Google Scholar
Westinghouse, 2011e
Westinghouse
Westinghouse AP1000 design control document Rev
19-Tier 2 Chapter 5- Reactor Coolant System and Connected Systems-Section 5.3 Reactor Vessel (2011)
NRC, ML11171A453
Google Scholar
Wilhelm et al., 2018
P. Wilhelm, M. Jobst, Y. Kozmenkov, F. Schfer, S. Kliem
Severe accident management measures for a generic German PWR. part Ⅰ: station blackout
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 89 (2018), pp. 217-228
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar