<title>Enhancing Tehran research reactor safety using a core differential pressure measuring system</title>
<author>1, EbrahimAbedi, 2, AminDavari,3,SeyedMohammad Mirvakili</author>
<Affiliation>1,Nuclear Science and Technology Research Institute, Tehran, Iran</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan,HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107306</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454920300049</URL>
Enhancing Tehran research reactor safety using a core differential pressure measuring system
EbrahimAbedi,  AminDavari,SeyedMohammad Mirvakili
Nuclear Science and Technology Research Institute, Tehran, Iran
<Section>Highlights</Section>
A core differential pressure measuring system is developed and tested in TRR.
Flapper spurious opening detection capability of the designed system is examined.
Fuel blockage and grid unplugging and their effects on core DP are investigated.
A minimum working window is established for the system safety signal.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Flapper Spurious opening during reactor operation is one of the most perilous accidents for pool-type research reactors. In TRR during such event, if none of SCRAMs could shut-down reactor, partially fuel elements burn-out is occurred. To avoid that, a core cooling condition monitoring system is developed. There are also other PIEs, i.e. fuel element coolant inlet blockage or unintended fuel withdrawal, which can be detected by core DP. In flapper opening scenario, the experiments show core DP response is very tangible. About two other scenarios, results indicate core DP is capable to detect the abnormality in the core flow, but maybe some other supplementary data and signal are required to distinguish the accident. Preliminary data from the system exploitation during reactor operation are analyzed to take into account the uncertainties of various normal operation conditions and determine a minimum allowed working window for the system safety signal.
Keywords：Flapper spurious openingFuel blockageGrid-plate unpluggingCore differential pressureTehran research reactor
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The safety condition and limits of all nuclear reactors i.e. research reactors have been reassessed and revised recent years in light of Fukushima Daiichi accident (IAEA, 2014). Furthermore, the point that the majority of research reactors operating today were put into operation many years ago besides enlarged commercial exploitation of nuclear research reactors have increased the consideration toward their safety issues (Brollo et al., 2014, Hamidouche et al., 2004). Improvement in monitoring and control instruments is a main requirement to ensure safe operation of them and their consistency with modern safety standards. In addition, satisfying the stringent safety conditions laid out by the nuclear regulatory bodies requires the modernization of research reactors I&C systems and integration of additional instrumentation units to the reactor (IAEA, 1997).
One of the most important parameters related to nuclear reactors safety is to maintain adequate heat removal from fuel surface to prevent arising any damage to its clad. This parameter is directly proportional to the effective coolant flow rates that pass through the fuel elements cooling channels. So, the core cooling flow rate should be measured and monitored precisely in all of forced cooled reactors.
Tehran Research Reactor (TRR) is a 5 MW pool type reactor. There are several Postulated Initiating Events (PIEs) that might disturb core coolant flow rate in pool type reactors like TRR that uses downward force cooling (AEOI, 2009). Some of these incidents would be detected by conventional primary cooling safety signals i.e. primary flow and pool level. The most severe case of hypothetical failure in reactor cooling circuit is the spurious opening of the flapper safety valve, while the primary pump is still working (AEOI, 2009). But there is a protective signal known as core coolant Differential Pressure (DP) to realize how much coolant is flowing through the core. The core DP has the advantages of its high sensitivity to small variations in core flow (Brollo et al., 2014). Therefore, if the reactor is equipped to this safety signal, spurious opening of flapper and any other transients that could descend core flow rate can be detected immediately and also there will be an additional monitoring steady state signal for reactor I&C system.
<Section>2. Tehran research reactor description</Section>
TRR is a Material Testing Reactor (MTR) that uses 20% enriched plate type fuel and has been critical first time at 1967. The reactor nominal power is 5 MW, cooled and moderated by light water and its reflector is graphite (Abedi et al, 2016). Reactor core is located about 10 m under water and suspended from the top of the reactor pool. The core is connected to a movable bridge on the pool surface and it could be moved between TRR stall and open pools. The reactor core could be operated in the either stall or open pools. Fig. 1 shows TRR core shape and position inside the reactor pool. Pool water, that be employed as the core coolant, passes through the core assembly and leave the pool via outlet pipe at the bottom of pool. A cubic plenum chamber under core collects the core assemblies’ outlet flows and sends it toward the outlet pipe via a pair of flanges. Core components i.e. Standard Fuel Elements (SFEs), Control Fuel Elements (CFEs), irradiation boxes and graphite blocks are held and fixed together by an aluminum rectangular matrix called grid-plate. Grid-plate has been installed on the top of plenum chamber.
Fig. 1. Main components of TRR core and their location in the bottom of reactor pool.
<Section>3. Postulated initiating events</Section>
In pool type reactors like TRR, which the core coolant direction is downward, there are several postulated initiating events that could lead to Loss of Flow Accident (LOFA). Here, we categorize three various scenarios of PIEs that are rarely possible to take place in TRR core:
3.1. LOFA caused by spurious opening of flapper
Flapper is a hanged swing disk that is installed on a side area of plenum to establish natural convection circulation and remove the decay heat at reactor shutdown mode. Flapper should be closed and force cooling should be established at any reactor power operation more than 100 kW (AEOI, 2010). To ensure the Flapper will remain close properly, some measuring and safety devices are provided as follows:
1.
The flapper system is equipped with two redundant, trip signal actuators.
2.
In case of spurious opening of flapper the primary flow increases slightly, so that the pool-level falls down and pool level SCRAM signal, but it takes long a few minutes.
3.
The flapper safety valve is properly counterbalanced with the ballast weights and adjusting weights against the suction of the coolant, so, spurious opening of this valve is not commonly probable.
However, analysis of the event shows, if none of the scram conditions could shut down the reactor, partially fuel elements burned-out is occurred due to intense degradation of cooling capacity, while the reactor is still at full power state. (AEOI, 2009).
Furthermore, if this initiating event takes place, then it is not detected by primary outlet pipe flow-meter, because the pool outlet flow doesn’t change somehow that can activate the flow SCRAM signal, because a slight flow increase is expected. Also pool surface SCRAM signal could not detect the event at least immediately. So, this scenario is the postulated initiating event for research reactors like TRR and is served as a Beyond Design Basis Accident (BDBA).
3.2. LOFA caused by fuel channel blockage
Partial or total blockage of each fuel element cooling channel in the inlet zone is another postulated initiating event at TRR because of its open pool surface. As the TRR uses an open surface pool, it’s probable that various exterior things are dropped into the pool and lie on core. It can block the fuels coolant inlet channels. Fuel channels blockage reduces the effective section area of core cooling flow and leads to an increase in core differential pressure. There is not any sensor or detector in the reactor I&C system which could detect such transients and their caused changes in core differential pressure value.
3.3. LOFA caused by grid-plate unplugging
Despite of fuel inlet blockage, unplugging of grid-plate holes leads to decrease in core differential pressure values like a bypass way. It would be taken place due to human error or control fuel elements withdrawal by control rod’s mechanisms (El-Messiry, 2000). Another increasing bypass flow reason could be bypass via non-coupling of plenum bottom and pool outlet flange (Fig. 1).
Eventually, any event or malfunction that make a change in core effective flow area or cause to an unusual core bypass flow, affects the core DP value. So, if there be an installed system to monitor this DP value effectively and precisely, then detection and troubleshooting the relevant initiate event immediately or even shutting down of the reactor whenever it is necessary, will be accessible and such configuration enhances the reactor safety significantly.
<Section>4. TRR core pressure drop measuring system</Section>
A long aluminum pipe connects the plenum chamber (core outlet) to the rector hall environment pressure (above the pool surface). Fig. 2 shows the configuration of the device inside the pool. While the reactor rests in shut-down state and primary cooling system is off, there is no force cooling flow in the core and so the water level inside the core plenum Pressure pipe is the same as pool surface level, because there is no core coolant Differential Pressure (core DP). But when the primary cooling flow is established, the plenum pressure changes due to core pressure drop and the water level inside the plenum connected pipe gets lower than pool level. This level reduction is equal to the core pressure drop. This value has been indicated by Δh (dh) in Fig. 2. Two submersible pressure transmitters (level sensors) measure this value. Fig. 3 shows the used transmitters for recording the Δh value. With a maximum measuring range of 250 cmH2O and delivering a proportional 4–20 mA output current, with considering a second decimal rounded value, the sensors provide an intrinsic resolution of 2 mmH2O. The first sensor is placed at a fixed depth inside the pipe. The second sensor also is installed at a fixed depth outside the pipe in the pool. These two sensors actually measure the static pressure based on hydro-static head. As the measured data by inside pipe sensor get associated with significant and intense fluctuations that originated from dynamic pressure changes of core plenum, a drilled plate is put at the bottom of pipe to reduce amplitude of these fluctuations. Fig. 4 shows the installation of core DP system inside TRR core and its position beside other core components.
Fig. 2. Schematic plan of core DP measuring system in TRR core.
Fig. 3. The level measuring sensors applied to TRR core DP system.
Fig. 4. TRR core DP measuring system installation from top of bridge view.
The used core configuration for the current work experiments has been illustrated in Fig. 5. The core DP signal is displayed both locally on the pool bridge and also at TRR control system in main control room. TRR data acquisition system can also record The DP values and shows its trend on the control room monitors.
Fig. 5. TRR core configuration for core DP measuring experiments.
<Section>5. Analysis of experiment results and discussion</Section>
5.1. Measured signal precision
Before proceeding to carry out transients’ experiments, the system accuracy is evaluated via DP measured data at core steady state nominal flow. Fig. 6 presents the measured core pressure drop values for considered core configuration at steady state, for a limit period. The data shows an almost associated oscillating behavior with measured pressure values. It is considered that these fluctuations are associated with the turbulent movement of the fluid within the core outlet plenum chamber (Brollo et al., 2014). This steady state results indicate an uncertainty value of 0.9 cmH2O associated with measuring system because of the mentioned flow fluctuations. The experiment is done in stall pool core position.
Fig. 6. Core DP measured values for steady state nominal cooling flow.
5.2. Flap valve opening experiment
Flap valve opening scenario is simulated manually and the core DP values are recorded simultaneously. As the TRR core is movable and has the capability of operation in either of stall and open pools, so the experiment is accomplished in both stall and open pools. The experiment is repeated in both pools to detect any possible differences in core DP value originated by either core operation positions. Fig. 7 shows the experiment results in stall pool. The experiment is accomplished with four different opening percentages of the flapper. The core DP changes due to flapper opening are measured in all stages, i.e. 10%, 20%, 50% and fully (100%) opening of flap valve. The results show, an average core DP drops of 14, 18, 26 and 28 cmH2O for the each stage respectively. As keeping fix the flapper at lower percentages is associated with some difficulties, the time of opening in lower percentages are shorter than that of higher ones. Between the stages, flapper let to be reclosed for a while to damp the core and plenum flow perturbations induced by flapper displacement. It should be noted that when the 50% opening of the flapper is obtained, flapper will be at its balance point and after that it will be opened to fully open position spontaneously. The relative small difference between 50% and fully open states reveals that flapper opening percentages more than 50% don’t make significant changes in core DP value. A trend line has been added to each measured curve to eliminate fluctuations and obtain more sensible core DP trends.
Fig. 7. Core DP measured values in Flapper opening scenario experiment at stall pool.
At the second section, experiment is repeated in the open pool for two different opening percentages to evaluate system results compatibility and consistency. Fig. 8 shows the measured results for flapper opening experiment at open pool. Here also the experimental results are associated with significant fluctuations originated via flapper movement induced flow perturbation which affects plenum chamber pressures. The experiment is carried out at two stages flapper opening, i.e. 20% and 50%. The core DP decreases by 16 and 28 cmH2O respectively.
Fig. 8. Core DP measured values in Flapper opening scenario experiment at open pool.
5.3. Fuel withdrawal experiment
At present scenario, core DP value is measured while a fuel element is pulled out from its position in the core. From core hydraulic resistance perspective, this scenario is almost similar to unplugging of the grid-plate main holes. To simulate the incident, two diverse fuel elements are proceeded to withdraw for a better evaluation. As seen from Fig. 9, core DP value decreases by about 2.0 cmH2O when a CFE is pulled out from C4 position in the first stage of experiment, and an almost similar decrease is observed in the second step, while a SFE is pulled out from E3 position. So, it could be concluded that fuel withdrawal at any position of the core impress the core DP about 2.0cmH2O.
Fig. 9. Measured data for Fuel withdrawal effect on core DP values.
5.4. Fuel inlet plugging experiment
Fuel plugging scenario is simulated by putting an exterior object as an obstacle on the coolant inlet of fuel element. Three fuel elements in various positions of the core are selected for the experiment. The plugged positions are D5, D8 and B8. B8 has been filled with a CFE while D5 and D8 positions have been filled with SFEs. Despite the two previous scenarios, in this scenario, the core DP increases as a consequence of incident. Fig. 10 depicts the measured core DP values during the experiment. It increases by 6, 3, 2 cmH2O for the mentioned positions of fuel plugging, respectively. It is apparent that fuel plugging at core central zone increases core DP value more, in comparison to the core side fuel plugging. Also SFE plugging influence on the core DP is about 1.0 cmH2O more than CFE plugging effect, in a similar zone of core.
Fig. 10. Measured data for Fuel inlet channelplugging effect on core DP values for 3 different fuel positions.
Table 1 summarizes the results of core DP measuring experiments for the three LOFA scenarios described in section 5.2 to 5.4, percentage of core DP variations for each incident gives a more comparable evaluation.
Table 1. Core DP value and its changes for all LOFA simulated scenarios.
5.5. System uncertainties due reactor operation conditions
There are some variations associated with reactor operation condition that could affect the core DP. So, before connecting the core DP safety channel to the RPS, it’s necessary that system uncertainties via these operational conditions are analyzed and upper and lower range thresholds are justified for SCRAM signal activation and immediately automatic shutdown of the reactor. The operational conditions influencing the core DP include the following items:
1-
Control Rods withdrawal during Reactor start-up: In TRR core, there are 5 control fuel elements where a fork type absorber blade is conducted into the guide channels inside each one. Whenever the reactor is going to start-up, all control rods are withdrawn and this action makes a change in core hydraulic resistance and core DP value as well.
2-
Reactor power: Increasing reactor power to achieve nominal power leads to a heating of the water flowing through the inner fuel channels, which causes a reduction of the core hydraulic resistance and the corresponding decrease of the pressure drop. In TRR, during reactor operation under nominal power, there would be a maximum 8.6˚C increase in coolant temperature along the core (AEOI, 2010)
3-
Reactor pool temperature: various temperatures of reactor pool water cause different inlet core coolant temperatures which induce a change in core hydraulic resistance and core DP value. Reactor pool temperature variations occurs via seasonal various ambient temperatures and also different operation powers of the reactor. However, the maximum allowed core outlet temperature has been limited to 46.1˚C (AEOI, 2010). So to evaluate the coolant temperature changes, considering both coolant temperature increases in the core and pool temperature variation effects, the maximum and minimum probable coolant temperature could be compared.
To evaluate the influences of aforementioned conditions, some core DP data gathered during reactor operation in various states. Fig. 11 shows the core DP evolution in each of three operation conditions i.e. cold state that represents start-up condition, the reactor critical state which includes control rods withdrawal influences, and finally, nominal power state that includes coolant temperature increase through the fuel channels.
Fig. 11. Typical DP signal trend during variation in operation condition: cold state (blue band), Control Rods withdrawal (yellow band) and nominal power operation (red band). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
The results indicate there is a sensible decrease about 2.4 cmH2O in core DP value while reactor goes from cold start-up condition to a nominal power state.
To evaluate the effect of pool temperature changes on the core DP value a long-term data have been gathered that include pool mean temperature variations. The values for three aforementioned operation states have been compared in Fig. 12. The data are presented with their corresponding uncertainties (i.e. mean and standard deviation). As seen in Fig. 12, the pool temperature variation leads to a 2.5 cmH2O decrease in core DP value. The pool temperature has changed about 9˚C in this experiment. According to TRR SAR the permitted pool temperature range for reactor operation is between 20 and 37.8˚C that means 17.8 ˚C allowed pool temperature. However, evaluation of reactor operation experiences throughout a year indicates a narrower range of pool temperature variability, in practice.
Fig. 12. Core DP values vs. pool temperature variation for various operation conditions.
Finally, Table 2 presents all anticipated variations in the core DP value arising from changing in operation conditions.
Table 2. Anticipated core DP variations during normal operation.
<Section>6. Reactor safety system settings</Section>
The set point for protective actions is defined as the safety system settings (Brollo et al., 2014). In order to set a new safety system margins, all the associated uncertainties must be taken into account, i.e. measurement uncertainties, process uncertainties and also instrumentation response. To connect the new safety signal to the RPS, the system working window should be determine so that the system set points have a proper margin to cover the uncertainties and normal operation anticipated variations.
According to the system uncertainties (experiments formerly described in section 5.5) to establish a working window for the TRR core DP system, the following items must be considered:
1-
A decrease in core DP value, equal to the 1.6 cmH2O due to reactor transition from zero power to nominal power
2-
A decrease in core DP, equal to the 0.28 cmH2O/˚C arising from pool temperature variations, while to cover throughout year variation it needs 3.4 cmH2O tolerances.
3-
An oscillation in system data with ±0.45 cmH2O amplitude induced by turbulence in core outlet plenum.
Therefore, in order to cover all probable variations, the core DP safety signal should involve 5.9 cmH2O allowed working window. This working window’s lower and upper set points must be established using primary experiments and operation of system in normal conditions and then it maybe get narrower via fine and tune in long term operation.
<Section>7. Conclusions</Section>
According to the experiments’ results the developed core DP measuring system provides a relatively accurate, sensitive and reliable signal for PIEs leading to LOFA in TRR core. Although the core DP measuring system output includes some fluctuations induced by turbulence perturbations in the core outlet plenum, but their influence on DP value doesn’t make problem with detection of incident, particularly for the flapper spurious opening accident.
The most challenging phenomena that should be tackled to take into account the core DP as a permanent and reliable safety signal, is considering of normal operation uncertainties and variations in core DP system action set points. So a minimum working window of 5.9 cmH2O has been established for TRR core DP system. In the flapper spurious opening LOFA scenario, even with 10% opening, the core DP safety system can detect the PIE immediately, and prevent fuel cladding temperature increasing inadvertently, via activate SCRAM signal
As a main goal, both pools flapper opening experiment’s results show flapper opening at any percentage is detectable by core measuring system with a significant sensitivity.
About two other investigated LOFA scenarios, although the experiments’ data show that the system can detect perceptible changes in core DP value. However, in the case of fuel clogging and fuel withdrawal, the changes in core DP value are probably less than system allowed working window. So, it seems in these PIEs the system maybe limited to send just an abnormality alarm signal to reactor control and monitoring system.
Finally, the installed core DP system in TRR can detect sudden changes in core pressure difference more than 15% caused by any reason and so it can improve the reactor safety significantly.
<Section>Declaration of competing interests</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Ebrahim Abedi: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Data curation, Writing - review & editing. Amin Davari: Validation, Formal analysis, Resources. Seyed Mohammad Mirvakili: Supervision.
<Section>Appendix A. Supplementary data</Section>
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:
Supplementary Data 1.
<Section>Research data for this article</Section>
Data not available / Data will be made available on request
About research data
<Section>References</Section>
Abedi et al., 2016
E. Abedi, M. Ebrahimkhani, A. Davari, S.M. Mirvakili, M. Tabasi, M.G. Maragheh
Neutronic and thermal-hydraulic analysis of fission molybdenum-99 production at Tehran Research Reactor using LEU plate targets
Appl. Radiat. Isot., 118 (2016), pp. 160-166
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
AEOI, 2010
AEOI
Operational Limits and Conditions (OLC's) of Tehran
Research Reactor (2010)
Google Scholar
AEOI, 2009
AEOI
Final Safety Analysis Report of Tehran
Research Reactor (2009)
Google Scholar
El-Messiry, 2000
A.M. El-Messiry
control rod withdrawal accident
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 27 (8) (2000.ETRR-2), pp. 745-755
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Brollo et al., 2014
Brollo, F., Cantero, P., Almonacid, A., 2014. A Core Pressure Drop Monitoring System: design and implementation at the RA6 Research Reactor. In: IGORR Conference, Argentina.
Google Scholar
Hamidouche et al., 2004
T. Hamidouche, A. Bousbia-Salah, M. Adorni, F. D'Auria
Dynamic calculations of the IAEA safety MTR research reactor benchmark problem using RELAP5/3.2 code
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 31 (12) (2004), pp. 1385-1402
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
IAEA, 2014
IAEA, 2014. Safety Reassessment for Research Reactors. In: The Light of the Accident at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant, International Atomic Energy Agency Safety Reports Series No. 80.
Google Scholar
IAEA, 1997
IAEA, 1997. Research Reactor Instrumentation and Control Technology, IAEA-TECDOC-973.
Google Scholar