<title>Experimental study on single droplet impinging on a heated and inclined wall at early impaction stage</title>
<author>1,WenlongTian,2,HuangZhang,3,QianfengLiu</author>
<Affiliation>1,School of Nuclear Science and Engineering, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, China;2,Department of Energy, Environmental and Chemical Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, MO 63130, United States
</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107697</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454920303959</URL>
Experimental study on single droplet impinging on a heated and inclined wall at early impaction stage
WenlongTian,HuangZhang,QianfengLiu
Institute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology, Key Laboratory of Advanced Reactor Engineering and Safety, Tsinghua University, Haidian District, Beijing 100084, China
Department of Energy, Environmental and Chemical Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, MO 63130, United States
<Section>Highlights</Section>
An experiment is carried out to study the droplet-wall impinging phenomenon.
The curve of βmax with changing Wed, Tw and α is analyzed.
A model was used to analyzed the effects of Wed, Tw and α on the spreading behavior.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Droplet-wall impaction exists in many nuclear installations and severe accidents. In this study, we experimentally investigate a single droplet impinging on a heated and inclined wall at the early impaction stage. Especially, the droplet spreading behavior is analyzed by changing the wall temperature (Tw = 40 °C to 262 °C), the droplet Weber number (Wed = 0.66 to 589), the droplet Reynolds number (Red = 189 to 14,046) and the wall inclined angle (α = 0° to 45.6°). The results show that the increase of Wed and Red is beneficial to the droplet spreading, but not to the shrinking. The droplet front and back spread factors are quite different due to the gravity. Further, the maximum spread factor (βmax) with Tw at different Wed is obtained and analyzed. These findings are helpful to fundamentally understand the droplet spreading on the heated and inclined wall at the early impaction stage.
Keywords:Heated wall;Spreading;Shrinking;Spread factor;Flatness factor
<Section>Nomenclature</Section>
A
the constant of Eq. (17)
De
the equivalent diameter of the droplet
Dh
the horizontal diameter of the droplet
Dm
the maximum spreading diameter of the liquid film
Dspr
the spreading diameter of the liquid film
Dv
the vertical diameter of the droplet
E1
the total energy of the droplet before the impaction
E1,b
the initial energy of the backward part of the droplet
E1,f
the initial energy of the forward part of the droplet
EG2,b
the gravitational potential energy of the backward part of the droplet
EG2,f
the gravitational potential energy of the forward part of the droplet
ES2,b
the surface energy of the backward part of the droplet
ES2,f
the surface energy of the forward part of the droplet
EK1
the kinetic energy of the droplet before the impaction
ES1
the surface energy of the droplet before the impaction
ES2
the surface energy of the droplet after the impaction
Hm
the liquid film height when the droplet reach the maximum spread factor
Hspr
the height of the liquid film
Red
the Reynolds number of the droplet
t
the actual time of the impinging process
te
the evaporation time of the droplet
Tb
the boiling point of the droplet
Tspr
the thickness of the liquid film
Tw
the wall temperature
vimp
the impact velocity of the droplet
Wdiss
the viscous dissipation in the spreading process
Wdiss,b
the viscous dissipation in the backward spreading process
Wdiss,f
the viscous dissipation in the forward spreading process
Wed
the Weber number of the droplet
Greeks
α
the inclined angle of the wall
β
the spread factor of the droplet
βb
the back spread factor of the droplet
βf
the front spread factor of the droplet
Βmax
the maximum spread factor of the droplet
ε
the flatness factor of the droplet
εmin
the minimum flatness factor of the droplet
θ
the static contact angle between the wall and the droplet
τimp
the dimensionless time
ρl
the density of the droplet
σl
the surface tension coefficient of the droplet
μl
the dynamic viscosity coefficient of the droplet
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The phenomenon that droplet impacting (or impinging) on the heated wall occurs in some severe nuclear accidents, such as the large break loss-of-coolant accident (LOCA) in light water reactors (Carrillo et al., 2019), the fuel-coolant interaction in the pressure vessel (Zhong et al., 2014, Zhou et al., 2014), the fire in nuclear plants caused by the fuel from the aircraft crash (Sikanen and Hostikka, 2017), etc. In addition, droplet impacting on the heated surface widely exists in some nuclear installations, such as the spray system in the pressurizer (Lan et al., 2014), tubes in the steam generator (Del Nevo et al., 2016), the moisture separator running in the hot operation (Chen et al., 2020a, Liu et al., 2020), etc. Hence, study on this phenomenon is not only helpful to evaluate the consequences of possible severe accidents, but also beneficial to deeply understand the performance of some nuclear installations.
Although the mechanism of droplet-wall impaction is affected by many factors (Yarin, 2006), the change of wall temperature makes the droplet impaction behavior extremely complex (Josserand and Thoroddsen, 2016, Liang and Mudawar, 2017). In order to analyze the fuel-coolant interaction, Zhou et al. (2014) studied the water droplet impinging on the hot molten surface and found two interaction modes between the droplet and wall surface: non-interaction mode and explosive mode. Hamdan et al. (2015) observed the droplet impacting on a hot surface above the Leidenfrost temperature to invesitigate ballooned surface characteristic in LOCA. In their experiment, the spreading and break-up of the impacting droplet were found. Wang et al. (2019) investigated the effect of surface properties on droplet impaction to cool the cladding surfaces. It was found that nucleate and transition boiling is more sensitive on surfaces with large thermal conductivity. To understand the working mechanism of the corrugated plate separator, Chen et al. (2020b) investigated the droplet impacting on a wall surface covered with the horizontal liquid film. Spreading, jetting, partial rebound and complete rebound after the droplet impaction were observed in their experiment.
In fact, most droplets do not directly fall on the wall surface. Namely, the wall surface is usually in a non-horizontal direction (Chen et al., 2007). Šikalo et al. (2005) compared the effects of different wall inclined angles and different Weber numbers on the front and back spread factors of the droplets, but the effect of the wall temperature was not considered. Cui et al. (2009) proposed an experiment of the droplet impinging on an inclined wall at low velocity to measure the maximum spreading diameter of the droplet, and presented an expression to predict the maximum spreading area of the droplet at room temperature. Jin et al. (2016) studied the spreading process of a droplet impinging on an inclined cold surface, and analyzed the influence of wall inclined angle on the spreading diameter as well as the spreading time. Chen et al. (2020a) studied the droplet impacting on the inclined and wetted wall, but the wall temperature was still kept constant.
Since the aforementioned researches emphasize that the surface temperature is the key factor to influence the droplet-wall impaction behavoir, it is worth studying how the process and outcome of the droplet-wall impaction are affected by the wall temperature as well as the wall inclinde angles. Futher, as droplet physical properties (e.g., liquid type, droplet diameter and impact velocity), wall parameters (e.g., wall temperature, roughness and dry or wet wall) and environmental conditions (e.g., environmental medium, temperature and humidity) could all affect the droplet-wall impaction, the droplet Weber number (Wed) is often proposed to describe the impaction regime and mechanism (Li et al., 2019a, Chen et al., 2020a). However, Wed is limited to include the effect of droplet inertia and droplet surface tension, the droplet viscosity was also found to be vital for the impaction behavior (Yarin, 2006, Li et al., 2019b). Therefore, the droplet Reynolds number (Red) that both include the effect of droplet inertia and viscosity needs to be considered in analyzing the droplet-wall impaction mechanism. At present, there are some studies on the influence of Wed and Red on the droplet spreading behavior. Chandra and Avedisian (1991) analyzed the spreading process of the droplet by the energy conservation law, and obtained the correlation between the maximum spread factor and Wed as well as Red. Roisman (2009) analyzed the droplet spreading process through the N-S equation, and obtained the correlation between the maximum spread factor of the droplet and Wed and Red.
In summary, few studies focus on the droplet-wall impaction phenomenon influenced by both inclined wall angles and different wall temperatures. In this work, an experimental system is designed to observe the impaction of the droplets on the inclined and heated wall. Particularly, this work focuses on the spreading characteristics of the droplet which is the main characteristic at the early impaction stage. The temperature range is set from 40 °C to 260 °C. In addition, the effects of the wall temperature, Wed and Red on the spreading characteristics of the falling droplet are quantitatively analyzed. This paper is organized as below. Section 2 introduces the experimental system the definition of some characteristic parameters. Section 3 shows the experimental results and discussion of the effect of Tw, Wed, Red and α (wall inclined angle) on the droplet impaction behavior. The last section comes to the conclusions.
<Section>2. Experimental method</Section>
2.1. Experimental system
The experimental system is shown in Fig. 1. The system consists of three parts: heating system, droplet generation system and high-speed photography system. The heating system uses the electric heating method, and the temperature control accuracy is 0.1 °C. Due to the thermal resistance of the wall, the Platinum thermal resistance whose measurement accuracy is 0.2% is used to measure the actual temperature of the wall. The droplet generator consists of a peristaltic pump, hoses and needles of different diameter. The high-speed photography system consists of light source, high-speed camera, macro lens and computer.
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the experimental system.
In this study, the high-speed camera (phantom v711) employs the sample rate up of 10,000 frames per second, and the image resolution is set as 800 × 600 pixels. The light intensity of the light source is 1900 lm, and the light is uniform by covering the light source with a sulfuric acid paper. The needle and the wall are placed between the light source and the high-speed camera, and the backlight method is used to record the experimental process of the liquid droplet impinging on the heated wall.
The experiment was carried out in atmospheric environment. The ambient temperature, environment relative humidity and ambient pressure are 25 °C, 25% and atmospheric pressure, respectively. The droplet is composed of the deionized water and glycerin with volume fraction of 30% and 60%, respectively. The droplet temperature is same as the ambient temperature, and the basic physical property parameters of the working medium are shown in Table 1. The material of solid wall is 304 stainless steel, the size of stainless steel is 150 × 150 × 10 mm3. The surface roughness is smoothed to 0.8 μm by a grinder.
Table 1. Physical parameters of experimental working medium.
2.2. Definition of characteristic parameters
In this experiment, the geometrical characteristics of the droplet were measured by the pixel analysis. The camera settings are fixed for the droplet with same sizes (settings includes the focal length, aperture opening, etc.) to shoot the calibrator with known length. The corresponding relationship between the pixel and the actual length is obtained, and the corresponding length can be obtained by measuring the pixel of the image.
Since the droplet does not maintain a perfect spherical shape during the falling process, its equivalent diameter  is used to represent the droplet diameter, which is defined as follows:
@(1)
where Dh and Dv are the horizontal diameter and vertical diameter of the droplet respectively, as shown in Fig. 2. In this work, the droplet diameter ranges from 2.00 to 3.75 mm.
Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of characteristic parameters of droplets before and after impact.
The impact velocity of the droplet is determined by the last two images before the impaction. When the sample rate of high-speed camera is set to 10,000 fps, the time interval between the two frames is Δt = 1/10000 s = 0.1 ms. Then the impact velocity vimp can be calculated by determining the displacement Δl of the droplet center in the last two frames before the droplet contacts with the wall. In this study, vimp can be changed by adjusting the height of the needle. Here, the range of the droplet velocity is 0.12–3.39 m/s, and it can be calculated as follows:
@(2)
When the droplet hits the wall, it will spread along the wall to form a liquid film, and the spreading diameter and height of the liquid film will change with time as well. In order to compare the experimental results and improve the universality of the results, the spread factor and the flatness factor can be obtained by dimensionless the spreading diameter Dspr and the liquid film thickness Hspr. The definition is as follows:
@(3)
@(4)
The characteristic time of the impacting process is defined by vimp and De. Then the dimensionless time can be obtained as follows:
@(5)
where t is the actual time.
In addition, the droplet Weber number Wed and Reynolds number Red are needed. Wed is used to describe the relative magnitude of the inertial force and the surface tension of the droplet. Red is used to describe the relative magnitude of the inertial force and the viscous force of the droplet. The definitions are as follows:
@(6)
@(7)
where ρl, σl and ml are the density, surface tension coefficient and dynamic viscosity coefficient of the droplet, respectively. Here, the ranges of Wed and Red are from 0.66 to 589 and from 189 to 14,046, respectively.
Fig. 3 shows the experimental phenomenon of the droplet impinging on the inclined and heated wall. The wall inclined angle α is the angle between the wall and the horizontal plane. In this paper, the wall inclined angles are 0°, 15.6°, 29.4° and 45.6°, respectively. The impact point “O” is the first contact point between the droplet and the wall,  is the forward spreading length of the droplet,  is the backward spreading length of the droplet. So the front spread factor  and the back spread factor  can be defined as follows:
@(8)
@(9)
Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of characteristic parameters of droplet impacting inclined wall.
For the case of droplet impacting the horizontal wall, due to the symmetry of the liquid film, βf and βb are defined as half of the spread factor,
@(10)
<Section>3. Result and discussion</Section>
3.1. Description of the impact process
Fig. 4 shows the droplet deformation when the wall temperature is lower than the liquid boiling point Tb. In this figure, 0 ms is the corresponding time of the last frame before the droplet contacts with the wall. Due to Tw is lower than Tb, there is no obvious phase transition happening. It can be seen from Fig. 4 that when the falling droplet contacts the wall, the bottom of the droplet spreads along the radial direction with the impact point as the center. The shape of the spreading part at the bottom is as a pie, the undeformed part at the upper part of the droplet is a truncated spherical, and the transition between the bottom and the upper part is a curve. The droplet spreads continuously under the action of inertia force. Due to the effect of viscosity force in the spreading process and the surface tension of the droplet, the spreading speed of the droplet decreases continuously until the droplet reaches the maximum spreading diameter Dm. At this time, the kinetic energy of the droplet is converted into its surface energy. Then, the droplet shrinks under the action of surface tension, its spreading diameter decreases, and the thickness of liquid film increases. The surface energy of the droplet converts into its mechanical energy in the shrinking process. The droplet will spread again when its spreading diameter is the smallest. The mechanical energy and surface energy of the droplet are constantly converted, so the droplet repeats the spreading and shrinking process several times. Due to the viscous dissipation, the maximum spreading diameter and the maximum thickness that the droplet can reach each time when it spreads and shrinks will be reduced. The droplet will form a convex shape stably when the excess energy is consumed completely due to the viscous dissipation. At this time, the total energy of the droplet is the lowest.
Fig. 4. The experimental image of the droplet spreading and shrinking.
Fig. 5 shows the boiling process of the droplet when Tw is higher than Tb and lower than 200 °C. As shown in Fig. 5, the droplet will not boil immediately after impacting on the wall when Tw = 117 °C. The spreading process of the droplet is similar to that when Tw is lower than Tb. However, when the droplet shrinks, the droplet changes the phase at the contact with the wall, forming bubbles, and the bubbles grow continuously. It should note that bubbles are mainly produced at the edge of the liquid film. This is because the thickness of the liquid film edge is small and the heat and mass transfer capacity is strong, which is conducive to the growth of bubbles. In addition, there is no obvious boiling phenomenon occurring and no secondary droplet generating in the observation time.
Fig. 5. Experimental image of droplet transformation and boiling.
When Tw = 160 °C and Wed = 12, the phase transformation of the droplet happens in the process of shrinking. The bubble grows rapidly and moves upward away from the wall. It breaks on the surface of the liquid film, which makes the droplet vibrate irregularly. The breaking of bubbles makes the liquid film in a forced oscillation state, strengthens the heat and mass transfer capacity of the liquid film, and makes the phase transformation process more violent. In this process, obvious boiling phenomenon is observed, and a large number of secondary droplets can be seen in the later observation time.
Increasing Wed also affects the boiling process of droplets impinging on the wall. For Tw = 160 °C, Wed = 175, a large number of bubbles will be generated during the spreading process of the droplet. These bubbles will break during the shrinking process, resulting in a large number of visible secondary droplets. This is because the spread factor of the droplet increases and the flatness factor decreases significantly with the increase of Wed. That means the diameter of the liquid film Dspr increases and the height Hspr decreases. The increase of Dspr means that the heat transfer area between the liquid film and the wall increases. The decrease of Hspr is beneficial to the growth of bubbles. Therefore, the increase of Wed is beneficial to the heat transfer between the droplet and the wall, and makes the droplet boiling and secondary droplet be generated earlier.
When Wed = 175, Tw = 181 °C, it is found that the droplet boiling is earlier, and a large number of secondary droplets are generated earlier. It is worth noting that the liquid film will shrink back into a liquid mass and tend to detach away from the wall at the later observation time. This is because the droplet volume decreases rapidly due to the vaporization and the splashing, which makes the surface tension enough to shrink the droplet. During the whole process, the number and diameter of the secondary droplets increase with the increase of the droplet boiling. After that, the volume of the droplet decreases with the droplet vaporization and splashing, and the number and diameter of the secondary droplets decrease gradually until the complete phase transformation of the droplet.
Fig. 6 shows the splashing and rebounding process of the droplet when Tw > 200 °C. When Tw = 202 °C and Wed = 290, it can be found that when the droplets contact the wall, a thin liquid film is formed. Because of the intense heat and mass transfer between the liquid film and the wall, there are obvious ripples at the bottom of the liquid film. At the same time, a small number of secondary droplets with small diameter are produced at the edge of the liquid film to separate from the main droplet. With the spreading of the droplet, the number and diameter of the secondary droplets increases. When the liquid film spreads to the maximum diameter, the liquid on the outer edge of the droplet continues to expand outward, and develops into a coronal protuberance. Finally, a chain is formed like a droplet group, and detaches from the liquid film along the radial direction. A small amount of liquid remains in the middle of the liquid film, which vaporizes rapidly.
Fig. 6. Experimental image of droplet splashing and rebounding.
When Wed = 290 and Tw = 262 °C, it can be found that the chain like a droplet group leave the liquid film earlier, the residual liquid in the middle of the liquid film is less, and the residual liquid evaporates completely earlier.
When Wed = 12 and Tw = 262 °C, after the droplet contacts with the wall, it spreads along the wall and boils. When it reaches the maximum diameter, it forms crown protrusions, but these protrusions cannot be separated from the main droplet. The main droplet shrinks into a spherical shape under the constraint of surface tension. Because of the continuous phase transformation and the splashing of the droplet, the volume of the droplet decreases, and finally it leaves the wall to complete the rebound. When Wed is low enough, as shown in Fig. 6 when Tw = 262 °C and Wed = 0.66, a layer of vapor layer is formed between the droplet and the wall before the droplet impinging on the wall. The existence of vapor layer makes the droplet cannot contact with the wall directly. After the droplet impinging on the wall, it spreads and flattens into a pie shape, and quickly shrinks to complete the rebound, which means the Leidenfrost phenomenon occurs.
Fig. 7 shows the experimental image of droplet impact on the inclined wall. When Tw < Tb, the phenomenon that the droplet colliding with the inclined heated wall is similar to that of the horizontal wall surface. The droplet will spread along the wall surface, shrink after reaching the maximum diameter, and then oscillate until it finally stabilizes. The difference is that when the droplet impacts the inclined wall surface, the liquid droplet is not symmetrical under the action of gravity. The downward spreading tendency of the droplet is more obvious, and the thickness of the liquid film in the lower half is larger. When Tw > Tb, the droplet will also vaporize and produce bubbles when it contacts with the wall. The number and diameter of the secondary droplets increase with the increase of Tw. When Tw > 200 °C, a vapor layer will be formed after the droplet hits the wall, which will change the droplet impact behavior. When Wed is low, the droplet rebounds as shown in the Fig. 7 (when Wed = 12 and Tw = 223 °C). When Wed is high, the droplet will splash and break up (seeing Fig. 7 when Wed = 175 and Tw = 223 °C).
Fig. 7. Experimental image of droplet impact on an inclined heated inclined wall.
The schematics of different droplet behaviors after the droplet-wall impaction are shown in Fig. 8. Fig. 8(a) shows the droplet spreading and shrinking behavior. The droplet spreads under the action of inertial force after it contacts with the wall, and shrinks under the action of surface tension. Fig. 8(b) shows the droplet boiling phenomenon. It can be seen that the phase change occurs and some bubbles form inside the droplet. Then, the generation and breakage of bubbles cause the droplets to deform violently, resulting in the formation of a large number of secondary droplets. Fig. 8(c) shows the droplet splashing phenomenon. It can be seen from the first figure that there is a vapor layer between the droplet and the wall when the droplet hits the wall. Thus there is no direct contact between the droplet and the wall during the spreading process. Then the droplet splashes when it spreads to the maximum diameter, and a large number of secondary droplets are generated. Fig. 8(d) shows the droplet rebounding phenomenon. There is no direct contact between the droplet and the wall, which is similar to the splashing phenomenon. But the droplet shrinks under the action of surface tension when it reaches the maximum spreading diameter, which is different to the splashing phenomenon.
Fig. 8. Schematics of different droplet behaviors after the impaction. (a) is the spreading and shrinking, (b) is the boiling phenomenon, (c) is the splashing phenomenon, and (d) is the rebounding phenomenon.
3.2. Effects of different parameters on the impingement of droplets on the horizontal heated wall
Before the impaction, the kinetic energy EK1 and surface energy ES1 of the droplet are given as:
@(11)
@(12)
Therefore, its total energy E1 is given by
@(13)
After the impaction, the kinetic energy of the droplet is converted to the surface energy, and it is zero at the maximum spreading diameter Dm. The surface energy ES2 is given as:
@(14)
where 0 is the static contact angle between the droplet and the wall.
The energy of the droplet is consumed due to viscous force during the spreading process. The viscous dissipation  when the droplet reach βmax is given as follows:
@(15)
where Hm is the droplet height when the droplet reach βmax.
Thus, the following equation can be obtained by the law of energy conservation as:
@(16)
Fig. 9 shows the evaporation lifetime of the droplet te change with the wall temperature Tw. The evaporation lifetime  is defined as the duration from the droplet contacting with the wall to complete vaporization, which is averaged from the measurements using high-speed photography.
Fig. 9. The evaporation lifetime te of the droplet versus the wall temperature Tw. (De = 2.17 mm, Wed = 3.81 and Red = 917).
According to the evaporation lifetime of the droplet, several characteristic temperatures of the droplet can be defined, which are the boiling point Tb, CHF point and Leidenfrost point. When Tw < Tb, the droplet completely changes the phase in the form of film evaporation. It means that there are few bubbles generating inside the droplet, and the droplet evaporates in the form of film. When Tb < Tw < 181.5 °C, the droplet changes phase completely in the form of nucleate boiling. At this stage, te decreases with the increase of Tw. When Tw = 181.5 °C, the evaporation time reaches a minimum of 0.33 s. It is noted that when Tw = 181.5 °C, the droplet has a tendency of rebounding from the wall during the boiling process. When Tw > 181.5 °C, due to the gradual formation of vapor film between the droplet and the wall, the contact area between the droplet and the wall decreases, and the evaporation time of the droplet gradually increases. The evaporation time of the droplet reaches the maximum when Tw = 253.6 °C, the maximum evaporation time of the droplet is 41.55 s. Since then, te is gradually decreased with the increase of Tw. At this time, it can be seen from Fig. 9 that the droplet rebound after impinging on the wall.
The spreading diameter and the film thickness of the droplet can be obtained by image processing, and the spread factor and the flatness factor can be obtained by the dimensionless analysis as Eqs. (3), (4). Fig. 10 shows the droplet spread factor β and the flatness factor ε change with dimensionless time τ at different Tw. It can be seen from Fig. 10(a) that the droplet spreads along the wall at a high spreading speed in a short time after contacts with the wall when Tw = 95 °C. The droplet reaches the maximum spread factor βmax at τ = 1.2, and then it maintains βmax unchanged in a short time. The droplet shrinks when τ = 1.5. The droplet spread factor oscillates in a small range, and finally tends to be stable. It is found that βmax increases gradually with the increase of . When Tw is 40 °C, 58 °C, 77 °C and 95 °C, βmax is 1.73, 1.75, 1.77 and 1.80, respectively. This is because the heat transfer between the droplets and the wall is strengthened with the increase of Tw. Thus the droplet temperature increases as Tw increases, and the surface tension coefficient  and the dynamic viscosity coefficient  of the droplets decrease. According to the Eqs. (11), (12), (13), (14), (15), (16), it is known that E1 is constant and Wdiss decreases, thus E2 is increased. The increase of E2 and the decrease of  lead to the increase of Dm. Therefore, the maximum spread factor βmax increases. When the droplet shrinks, the droplet at four temperatures shrinks to 0.903, 0.889, 0.848 and 0.852 of the maximum spread factor. It means that with the increase of Tw, the tendency of the droplet shrinking first increases and then decreases. We think that this is mainly because of  and  decrease with the increase of Tw. The viscosity force prevents the droplet from shrinking and the surface tension is the force that causes the droplet to shrink. Thus the decrease of and  has double effects on the droplet shrinking. Further, the mutual competition between viscosity force and surface tension causes the droplet shrinking tendency to increase first and then decrease.
Fig. 10. Droplet spreading parameters versus dimensionless time (τ) at different Tw (a) spread factor vs. τ; (b) flatness factor vs. τ. (The experimental parameters are Wed = 12, Red = 1882, α = 0°, and the experimental working medium is deionized water.)
It can be seen from Fig. 10(b) that the flatness factor  will first decrease at a large speed until it is minimized, which corresponds to the falling process after the droplet contacts the wall. The time when the droplet reaches the minimum flatness factor  is close to the time when the film reaches βmax. After that, the droplet shrinks and  increases. Then the droplet oscillates periodically and the amplitude decreases gradually until the droplet is completely stable. It can be noticed that  decreases with the increase of Tw. When Tw is 40 °C, 58 °C, 77 °C and 95 °C, the minimum flatness factors are 0.291, 0.277, 0.262 and 0.250, respectively. In addition, it can be noticed that the flatness factor that can be achieved after the drop shrinks also decreases with the increase of Tw. Comparing Fig. 10(a) to (b), it can be found that β quickly reaches a stable state, while ε is still in an oscillating state. This is because β is affected by the flow resistance on the wall. When the force applied by the droplet is not enough to overcome the flow resistance, β will not change, while ε is not affected by the flow resistance.
Fig. 11 shows the droplet spread factor β and the flatness factor ε change with dimensionless time τ at different Wed. It can be seen from Fig. 11(a) that when Wed = 12, the droplet will spread along the wall after hitting the wall, and reach the maximum spreading diameter at τ = 1.2. After that, the droplet shrinks at τ = 1.5 and finally stabilized. It can be noted that βmax increases with the increase of Wed at the same Tw, and the dimensionless time to reach βmax increases. When Wed is 14, 84, 290 and 588, βmax is 1.73, 3.01, 4.62 and 5.72 respectively, and the dimensionless time corresponding to the maximum spread factors is 1.2, 2, 3.5 and 4.5 respectively. This is because E1 increases with the increase of Wed. There is more energy to overcome the influence of flow resistance and viscous force. Thus βmax increases with the increase of Wed. And also, the increase of dimensionless time to reach βmax increases means that more dimensionless time is needed to completely convert kinetic energy into surface energy Fig. 12.
Fig. 11. Droplet spreading parameters versus dimensionless time (τ) at different Tw (a) spread factor vs. τ; (b) flatness factor vs. τ. (The experimental parameter is Tw = 40 °C, and the experimental working medium is deionized water.)
Fig. 12. The maximum droplet spread factor (βmax) versus Wed at Tw = 40 °C.
In addition, with the increase of Wed, the dimensionless time for the droplet to reach a stable state after shrinking is also increased. For the droplet with Wed = 14, β keeps stable at τ = 6, and the droplet with Wed = 84 tends to be stable at τ = 13, while β of the droplet with Wed = 290 and Wed = 588 continues to decrease during the observation time. This is because E1 increases with the increase of Wed. Thus more dimensionless time is required to completely dissipate the extra energy. It is also noticed that β when the droplet at steady state increase with the increase of Wed. This is because the effect of surface tension decreases with the increase of Wed, which leads to the shrinking capacity of the droplet decreases. Thus β increases when the droplet is stable.
It can be seen from Fig. 11(b) that the minimum flatness spread  decreases with the increase of Wed, which correspond to the increase of βmax.  of the droplet with Wed of 14, 84, 290 and 588 are 0.291, 0.150, 0.090 and 0.060, respectively, And also, with the increase of Wed, that the droplet can reach after shrinking decreases, which corresponds to the increase of β after the droplet shrinking. In addition, it is worth noticed that for different Wed, the droplet will oscillate after spreading. For lower Wed, the oscillation phenomenon is more obvious. When Wed = 12, the droplet will oscillate 6 times in the range of dimensionless time from 0 to 18, the droplet with Wed = 84 will oscillate once in this time, and the droplet with Wed = 290 will not complete once, while the droplet with Wed = 588 has no tendency of oscillation in the observation time.
To establish the relationship between βmax and Wed, one method is proposed to calculate βmax. In this method, the height of the liquid film is thought to related to the capillary length . Where g is the acceleration of gravity, and g can expressed as  due to the velocity of the droplet is reduced from vimp to 0 under the action of gravity. In addition, the volume conservation of the droplet also needs to be considered. Therefore the following equation is obtained as follows (Clanet et al., 2004):
@(17)
where A is a constant.
Eq. (17) is used to predict βmax and the result is shown in Fig. 12. In this figure, the constant A is 1.0936, and the calculated correlation coefficient R2 is 0.9642. Therefore, the model prediction result is in good agreement with the experimental data.
Fig. 13 shows βmax change with the wall temperature Tw at different Wed. It can be seen from Fig. 13 that, there is no visible phase transition in the spreading process of the droplet when Wed = 12 and Tw is in the range of 40–183 °C. The viscosity coefficient and the surface tension coefficient of the droplet decrease as Tw increases, which leads to βmax increases. When Tw > 202 °C, a part of vapor layer is formed between the droplet and the wall, and the contact area between the droplet and the wall decreases. The flow resistance between the droplet and the vapor film is less than that between the droplet and the wall, resulting in the decrease of Wdiss. Therefore, βmax of the droplet at 202 °C is higher than that at 183 °C. Since then, with the increase of Tw, the vapor film is easier to form between the droplet and the wall. Therefore, Wdiss decreases and βmax increases as Tw increases. It should be noted that when Wed = 12, the droplet does not splash and breakup.
Fig.13. The curve of maximum spread factor of droplets with Tw under different Wed.
When Wed is high and Tw is in the range of 40–117 °C, βmax increases with the increase of Tw. When Tw is in the range of 138–183 °C, the contact area between the droplets and the wall increases and Hspr decreases with the increase of Wed. The increases of the contact area is conducive to the heat transfer between the liquid film and the wall, and the decrease of Hspr is conducive the generation of bubbles. Therefore, the obvious phase transition occurs in the spreading process. The volume of the droplet decrease due to the phase transition. In addition, the generation and rupture of bubbles strengthen the internal disturbance, which increases Wdiss. Therefore, βmax decreases with the increase of Tw. Compared with the droplet with Tw = 183 °C, it can be found that the droplet breaks up and splashes when Tw = 202 °C. This is because Tw s higher than Leidenfrost point (as seen in Fig. 9), and a part of vapor layer is formed between the droplet and the wall. The formation of the vapor layer reduces the flow resistance and makes the droplet reach a larger spread factor. Therefore, when Tw is 202 °C, the maximum spread factor of the droplet increases significantly. When Wed = 588, the maximum spread factor when Tw = 202 °C is still less than that at Tw = 183 °C. This is because the droplet is easier to overcome the resistance of the vapor film to contact the wall directly with the increase of Wed. In other words, the effect of the vapor layer on reducing the flow resistance decreases with the increase of Wed. When Tw ≥ 202 °C and Wed is high enough, the surface tension of the droplet is not enough to bind the droplet, so the droplet is broken up and splashed. At this time, although the vapor layer is easier to form between the droplet and the wall, due to the decrease of the resident time of the droplet and the earlier occurrence of breaking up and splashing of the droplet (Liang et al., 2016), βmax decreases with the increase of Tw.
The variation of βmax with Tw at different Wed is summarized as Table. 2.
Table 2. The variation of βmax with Tw at different Wed.
Comparing the experimental results of Chandra and Avedisian (1991), it can be found from Fig. 13 that although the experimental working medium used by Chandra was n-heptane, their experimental data are similar to the experimental data with large Wed in this work. However, their data is few and they did not complete the experiment under different Wed. In our work, the results showed that Wed has a significant effect on the change of the droplet maximum spread factor with Tw.
The Reynolds number of droplets is used to measure the relative magnitude of inertia force and viscosity force of droplets. In this paper, deionized water and glycerin with volume fraction of 30% and 60% respectively are selected for experiments to observe the effect of Red on the droplet impact behavior. The physical parameters of the three liquids are shown in Table 1. Under the experimental conditions, the Red of the three droplets are 7277, 2752 and 758, respectively. Fig. 14 shows β and ε change with τ at different Red.
Fig. 14. Droplet spreading parameters versus dimensionless time (τ) at different Tw (a) spread factor vs. τ; (b) flatness factor vs. τ. (the experimental parameter is Tw = 40 °C, Wed = 175, α = 0°, and the experimental working medium is deionized water, 30% glycerol and 60% glycerol, respectively.)
It can be seen from Fig. 14(a) that βmax increases with the increase of Red when the Tw and Wed are the same, and the dimensionless time corresponding to βmax is also increased. βmax corresponding to the three Red is 4.08, 3.40 and 2.74, respectively, and the dimensionless time corresponding to them is 2.84, 2.65 and 2.46, respectively. This is because the droplet energy will be lost due to the viscous dissipation during the spreading process. The larger Red means the smaller μl when the Tw and Wed are the same. It can be get from Eq. (11), (12), (13), (14), (15), (16) that Wdiss decreases with the decrease of μl, resulting in there is more energy for the droplet spreading. Therefore, βmax increases as Red increases. In addition, it can be found that the shrinking tendency of the droplet is more obvious with the increase of Red. When 60% glycerol reaches the maximum spread factor, its shrinking is not obvious, while deionized water has the largest shrinking tendency. This is because the fact that μl increases with the decrease of Red, so that the extra energy to be consumed completely in less time. Therefore, the dimensionless time for the droplet to reach stability decreases as Red decreases.
It can be seen from Fig. 14(b) that εmin decreases with the increase of Red, which corresponds to the increase of βmax. When the droplet reach εmin, it will shrink and ε will increase. It can be noticed that for 60% glycerol, ε will continue to increase in the observation time, while the deionized water and 30% glycerol have completed the shrinking in a short time. The oscillation of deionized water and 30% glycerin occurred subsequently, and the oscillation frequency and amplitude of deionized water were higher than that of 30% glycerin.
3.3. Effects of different parameters on the impingement of droplets on the inclined heated wall
In addition to the surface tension and viscous force, the effect of gravity should also be considered when the droplet impacts the inclined wall. In the case of the droplet backward spreading, the initial energy of the droplet E1,b is converted into surface energy ES2,b and gravitational potential energy EG2,b, the equation is as follows,
@(18)
In the case of the droplet forward spreading, the initial energy E1,f and gravitational potential energy EG2,f of the droplet are converted into its surface energy ES2,f, the equation is as follows,
@(19)
Fig. 15 shows the droplet spreading parameters and ε change with τ at different α. It can be seen from Fig. 15(a) that the maximum back spread factor βb,max of the droplet decreases as the wall inclined angle α increases, and the dimensionless time to reach βb,max decreases. This is because the component of gravity along the wall increases with the increase of α, which leads to the increase of EG2,b. According to Eq. (18), the increase of EG2,b causes the decrease of ES2,b. And according to Eq. (14), the decrease of ES2,b means the decrease of βb,max. Thus, βb,max decreases with the increase of α. Subsequently, the droplet shrinks. Due to the gravity component and surface tension are the forces that promote the droplet to shrink, the shrinking tendency is more obvious with the increase of α, which is also reflected in Fig. 15(a). It is noticed that βb continue to decrease when α = 45.6°. This is because the gravity component is always greater than the flow resistance of the droplet on the wall whenα = 45.6°, the droplet will continue to slide along the wall, resulting in the decrease of the βb.
Fig. 15. Droplet spreading parameters versus dimensionless time (τ) at different wall inclined angles α, (a) is the back spread factor vs. τ; (b) the front spread factor vs. τ; (c) the spread factor vs. τ. (the experimental parameters are Wed = 12, Tw = 40 °C, Red = 1882.)
It can be seen from Fig. 15(b) that the maximum front spread factor βf,max of the droplet increases as α increases, and the dimensionless time to reach βf,max increases. This is because EG1,f increases with the increase of α. According to Eq. (19), the increases of EG1,f leads to the increase of ES2,f. Thus βf,max increases as α increases. In the process of shrinking, due to the gravity component and viscous force will counteract the surface tension, the droplet shrinking is not obvious. It can be seen that βf,max keeps increasing because the droplet keeps falling when α = 45.6°. It is noticed that there is a stable period of the droplet around τ = 3 when α = 45.6°. This is because the surface tension of the droplet will counteract part of the effect of gravity, which makes the front spread factor of the droplet does not increase much at this stage. After that, the droplet continues again slide downward.
To sum up, βb,max decreases and βf,max increases as α increases. In general, the maximum spread factor βmax increases as α increases. With the increase of α, the shrinking tendency of βb increases, while the shrinking tendency of βf decreases. In general, the shrinking tendency of the droplet increases with the increase of α. It is noteworthy that β will decay and oscillate periodically rather than be stable when α = 45.6°. This is because the gravity component of the droplet is always greater than the flow resistance of the wall. The above results are shown in Fig. 15(c).
It can be seen from Fig. 16(a) that βb,max increases as Tw increases, and the dimensionless time to reach βb,max has little difference. This is because the surface tension and viscous force of the droplet decrease with the increase of Tw. The decrease of viscous force leads to the decrease of Wdiss,b, and the decreases of surface tension leads to the increase of βb,max. Thus βb,max increases as Tw increases. Subsequently, the droplet shrinks. As shown in Fig. 16(a) that the shrinking tendency of the droplet increases with the increase of Tw. This is because the viscosity dissipation decreases with the decrease of viscosity force, and the gravitational potential energy EG2,b increases with the increase of the maximum back spread factor. It can be seen from Fig. 16(b) that βf,max increases as Tw increases, and the dimensionless time to reach the maximum front spread factor has little difference. This is because the surface tension and viscosity of the droplet decrease with increasing Tw. In the droplet shrinking process, due to the decrease of surface tension and the inhibition of gravity, the shrinking tendency of the droplet is not obvious. Fig. 16(c) show that β increases with the increase of Tw, and βmax does not differ much, and the shrinking tendency increases.
Fig. 16. Droplet spreading parameters versus dimensionless time (τ) at different wall temperature Tw, (a) is the back spread factor vs. τ; (b) the front spread factor vs. τ; (c) the spread factor vs. τ. (the experimental parameters are Wed = 12, α = 15.6°, Red = 1882.)
It can be seen from Fig. 17(a-b) that βb,max and βf,max increase with the increase of Wed, the dimensionless time of reaching βb,max and βf,max is also increased. This is because the inertia force of the droplet is larger and the surface tension plays a smaller role in the process of droplet spreading with the increase of Wed. Later, in the process of shrinking, for the back spread factor, it can be seen that the droplet shrinking speed is reduced as Wed increases. When τ = 3.5, the droplet with Wed = 12 has completed the shrinking, and the droplet with Wed = 175 will continue to shrink, and the shrinking of the droplet with Wed = 552 is not obvious. For the front spread factor, due to the inhibition of gravity component, the shrinking tendency of the droplet is very small. It can be seen from Fig. 17(c) that βmax increases with the increase of Wed, the dimensionless time to reach βmax increases, and the shrinking tendency decreases. That is to say, the increase of Wed is beneficial to the spreading of the droplet, and it will inhibit the shrinking of the droplet, which is similar to the result of horizontal wall.
Fig. 17. Droplet spreading parameters versus dimensionless time (τ) at different Wed, (a) is the back spread factor vs. τ; (b) the front spread factor vs. τ; (c) the spread factor vs. τ. (the experimental parameters are Tw = 40 °C, α = 15°.)
<Section>4. Conclusion</Section>
In this work, the experimental study of the droplet impinging on the heated and inclined wall is investigated. By changing different experimental parameters (i.e., the wall temperature, the Weber number, the Reynolds number of the droplet and the inclined angle), some droplet impaction behaviors, like droplet spreading, shrinking, oscillation, boiling, breaking up and splashing, are observed. The effects of the Weber number (Wed), the Reynolds number (Red), the wall temperature (Tw) and the inclined angle (α) on the spread factor and flatness factor of the droplet are quantitatively analyzed. Main conclusions are as follows:
(1)
When Tw > Tb, the droplet spreads and shrinks after hitting the wall, and then oscillates until stabilization. When Tb < Tw < 202 °C, the droplet is boiling after hitting the wall. The effect of boiling becomes more intense and the evaporation time of the droplet decreases as the wall temperature increases. A large number of secondary droplets will be generated during the boiling process. When Tw > 202 °C, a vapor layer is formed between the droplet and the wall. The droplet with low Wed rebounds, and the droplet with high Wed break up and splash. The phenomenon of droplets impinging on an inclined wall surface is similar to the phenomenon of impinging on a horizontal wall surface, but the asymmetry of droplets caused by gravity should be considered.
(2)
When a droplet impacts a horizontal wall, increasing Tw, Wed and Red is beneficial to the droplet spreading, which means that the maximum spread factor βmax increases and the minimum flatness factor  decreases. Increasing Wed and decreasing Red are not beneficial to the droplet shrinking and oscillation, and lead the droplet to shrink slower with the lower oscillation frequency. Further, the maximum spread factor (βmax) with Tw at different Wed is obtained and analyzed. The results shows that the droplet impaction behavior changes with the changing of Wed and Tw, resulting in the changing of βmax. Especially, due to the physical parameters of the droplet change with Tw, βmax keeps to increase with the increase of Tw when Wed = 12. When Wed ≥ 84, βmax decreases as increases Tw in the range of 138 °C ≤ Tw ≤ 183 °C due to the droplet boiling phenomenon, and βmax decreases when Tw ≥ 202 °C due to the droplet splashing occurs earlier. In addition, βmax is found to be proportional to Wed1/4 by a proposed theoretical model.
(3)
When the droplet impacts on the inclined wall, increasing α is beneficial to the front spreading of the droplet. Hence, the back spreading is suppressed and the maximum spread factor of the droplet increases. Increasing Tw and Wed increases the front and back spread factor of the droplet, and the maximum spread factor increases as well. However, increasing Tw is beneficial to the shrinking of the droplet instead of increasing Wed.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
This work was supported by Natural Science Foundation of Beijing [Grant No. 3194054]. Q.L. was partly supported by Open Fund (PLC20190602) of State Key Laboratory of Oil and Gas Reservoir Geology and Exploitation (Chengdu University of Technology).
<Section>References</Section>
Carrillo et al., 2019
J.P. Carrillo, A. Oliveira, A. Labergue, T. Glantz, M. Gradeck
Experimental thermal hydraulics study of the blockage ratio effect during the cooling of a vertical tube with an internal steam-droplets flow
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 140 (2019), pp. 648-659
Google Scholar
Chandra and Avedisian, 1991
S. Chandra, C.T. Avedisian
On the collision of a droplet with a solid surface
Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A, 432 (1991), pp. 13-41
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chen et al., 2007
R.H. Chen, S.L. Chiu, T.H. Lin
On the collision behaviors of a diesel drop impinging on a hot surface
Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci., 32 (2007), pp. 587-595
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chen et al., 2020a
B. Chen, B. Wang, F. Mao, J. Wen, R. Tian, C. Lu
Experimental study of droplet impacting on inclined wetted wall in corrugated plate separator
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 137 (2020), Article 107155
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Chen et al., 2020b
B. Chen, R. Tian, F. Mao
Analysis of special phenomena of droplet impact on horizontal liquid film at low velocity
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 136 (2020), Article 107038
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Clanet et al., 2004
Clanet, C., BÉGuin, C., Richard, D., QuÉRÉ, D., 2004. Maximal deformation of an impacting drop. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 517, 199-208.
Google Scholar
Cui et al., 2009
J. Cui, X. Chen, F. Wang, X. Gong, Z. Yu
Study of liquid droplets impact on dry inclined surface
Asia-Pac. J. Chem. Eng., 4 (2009), pp. 643-648
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Del Nevo et al., 2016
A. Del Nevo, A. Ciampichetti, M. Tarantino, L. Burgazzi, N. Forgione
Addressing the heavy liquid metal–water interaction issue in LBE system
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 89 (2016), pp. 204-212
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hamdan et al., 2015
K.S. Hamdan, D.-E. Kim, S.-K. Moon
Droplets behavior impacting on a hot surface above the Leidenfrost temperature
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 80 (2015), pp. 338-347
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jin et al., 2016
Z. Jin, H. Zhang, Z. Yang
The impact and freezing processes of a water droplet on a cold surface with different inclined angles
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 103 (2016), pp. 886-893
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Josserand and Thoroddsen, 2016
C. Josserand, S.T. Thoroddsen
Drop impact on a solid surface
Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 48 (2016), pp. 365-391
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lan et al., 2014
Z. Lan, D. Zhu, W. Tian, G. Su, S. Qiu
Experimental study on spray characteristics of pressure-swirl nozzles in pressurizer
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 63 (2014), pp. 215-227
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Li et al., 2019a
J. Li, H. Zhang, Q. Liu
Dynamics of a successive train of monodispersed millimetric-sized droplets impact on solid surfaces at low Weber number
Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci., 102 (2019), pp. 81-93
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Li et al., 2019b
J. Li, H. Zhang, Q. Liu
Characteristics of secondary droplets produced by a single drop impacting on a static liquid film
Int. J. Multiph. Flow, 119 (2019), pp. 42-55
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Liang and Mudawar, 2017
G. Liang, I. Mudawar
Review of drop impact on heated walls
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 106 (2017), pp. 103-126
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Liang et al., 2016
G. Liang, S. Shen, Y. Guo, J. Zhang
Boiling from liquid drops impact on a heated wall
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 100 (2016), pp. 48-57
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Liu et al., 2020
L. Liu, B. Ying, H. Gu, D. Xu, C. Huang, S. Chen
Experimental study on the separation performance of a full-scale SG steam-water separator
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 141 (2020), Article 107330
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Roisman, 2009
I.V. Roisman
Inertia dominated drop collisions. II. An analytical solution of the Navier-Stokes equations for a spreading viscous film
Phys. Fluids, 21 (2009), Article 052104
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Šikalo et al., 2005
Š. Šikalo, C. Tropea, E.N. Ganić
Impact of droplets onto inclined surfaces
J. Colloid Interface Sci., 286 (2005), pp. 661-669
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Sikanen and Hostikka, 2017
T. Sikanen, S. Hostikka
Numerical simulations of liquid spreading and fires following an aircraft impact
Nucl. Eng. Des., 318 (2017), pp. 147-162
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2019
Z. Wang, W. Qu, J. Xiong, M. Zhong, Y. Yang
Investigation on effect of surface properties on droplet impact cooling of cladding surfaces
Nucl. Eng. Technol. (2019)
Google Scholar
Yarin, 2006
A.L. Yarin
Drop impact dynamics: splashing, spreading, receding, bouncing…
Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 38 (2006), pp. 159-192
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhong et al., 2014
M. Zhong, Y. Zhou, M. Lin, M. Yuan, Y. Yang
Numerical simulation of molten droplet deformation and disintegration under sudden accelerations
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 65 (2014), pp. 199-206
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhou et al., 2014
Y. Zhou, M. Lin, M. Zhong, X. Yan, Y. Yang
Molten metal and water direct contact interaction research–I. Photographic experiment study
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 70 (2014), pp. 248-255
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar