<title>Effects of 3D contraction on pebble flow uniformity and stagnation in pebble beds</title>
<author>1,MengqiWu,2,NanGui,3,XingtuanYang,4,JiyuanTu,5,ShengyaoJiang</author>
<Affiliation>1,Institute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology, Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Nuclear Energy Technology, Key Laboratory of Advanced Reactor Engineering and Safety, Ministry of Education, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China;2,School of Engineering, RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC, 3083, Australia</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2020.10.022</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1738573320309190</URL>
Effects of 3D contraction on pebble flow uniformity and stagnation in pebble beds
MengqiWu,NanGui,XingtuanYang,JiyuanTu,5,ShengyaoJiang
Institute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology, Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Nuclear Energy Technology, Key Laboratory of Advanced Reactor Engineering and Safety, Ministry of Education, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
School of Engineering, RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC, 3083, Australia
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Pebble flow characteristics can be significantly affected by the configuration of pebble bed, especially for HTGR pebble beds. How to achieve a desired uniform flow pattern without stagnation is the top priority for reactor design. Pebbles flows inside some specially designed pebble bed with arc-shaped contraction configurations at the bottom, including both concave-inward and convex-outward shapes are explored based on discrete element method. Flow characteristics including pebble retention, residence-time frequency density, flow uniformity as well as axial velocity are investigated. The results show that the traditionally designed pebble bed with cone-shape bottom is not the most preferred structure with respect to flow pattern for reactor design. By improving the contraction configuration, the flow performance can be significantly enhanced. The flow in the convex-shape configuration featured by uniformity, consistency and less stagnation, is much more desirable for pebble bed design. In contrast, when the shape is from convex-forward to concave-inward, the flow shows more nonuniformity and stagnation in the corner although the average cross-section axial velocity is the largest due to the dominant middle pebbles.
Keywords:Pebble flow;Pebble bed configuration;Particle flow uniformity;Reactor design;Discrete element method;HTGR
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
With the concept of “the fourth generation of advanced nuclear power system” proposed, a prospective type of nuclear reactor named high temperature gas-cooled reactor (HTGR) has gradually gained widespread attention due to its excellent safety, high efficiency, miniaturization and proliferation resistance [[1], [2], [3]]. One feature that distinguishes the reactor core of HTGR from traditional reactors is that the fuel is in the form of large amounts of pebbles instead of fuel assemblies [4,5]. The HTGR adopts the non-stop fueling mode, that is, the fuel pebbles near the outlet are discharged at a fixed rate and in the meantime the same amount of new pebbles are reinserted from the top inlet, keeping the number of pebbles constant inside the pebble bed.
The pebble flow inside the HTGR pebble bed which is intimately associated with the core physics and thermohydraulic engineering is vital for reactor design [6], and thus has raised great concern among designers and regulators. However, to go deep into the fundamental mechanism of pebble flow in HTGR, there are many challenges mainly cause by following aspects. First of all, this is a new flow regime of quasi-static pebble flow due to the extremely low flow speed of the fuel pebbles, making it quite different from common rapid dilute flow which could be analyzed by the classical hydrodynamics. By comparison, the complex body interaction and non-thermal fluctuation bring a considerable challenge to the research of dense slow flows inside the pebble bed [7]. Besides, as a great many pebbles are arranged closely in a random manner, the stochastic nature of pebble flow inside the bed, with transformation of the flow regime, potential stagnation and fluctuation of dynamic flow characteristics, also makes it rather difficult to define the location of the individual pebbles and predict the flow pattern precisely [8].
Despite all these challenges, how to achieve a desired flow pattern has always been the top priority for reactor design. The formation of stagnant region should be avoided as much as possible from the perspective of core safety as it is intimately related with the possible hot spots which is extremely dangerous for HTGR. It is one of the critical issues because the stagnant pebbles which spend excess time within the reactor will inevitably increase the risk of breaking up and be detrimental to the integration of the core. In addition, the ideal flow pattern in the pebbled bed needs to be uniform. Besides, the velocity distribution and flow uniformity which determine the distribution of the residence time and the burn up level of pebbles are also important for the integrity and efficiency of HTGR, and thus should be taken seriously in the design work of reactor core.
Many studies have been conducted based on gravity driven granular flows in varieties of industrial applications. For instance, hopper and silo facilities (the structural design of which is quite similar to that of a pebble bed) are used to study the relationships between the structure and flow resistance. The granular flow regimes in flat-bottomed, plane-wedged, space-wedged hoppers were explored by Balevicius et al. [9]. Besides, Zhang and Li [10] have conducted a theoretical research to the curve hopper and explored the structure optimization to make it easier for particles to flow in the hopper. Albaraki and Antony [11] investigated velocity field in 2-dimensional converging hopper geometries with different designed internal angles. These studies can not only play an essential role in avoiding the stagnation inside the hopper, but also give insights into the design for HTGR pebble bed, although most of them focus on the free outflow.
In the design of pebble beds, it is necessary to reduce crystallization and stagnation, and the ideal pebble flow pattern should be featured by smoothness and uniformity. Lee and Gardner [12] explored and predicted the phenomenon of arching and locked flow under certain operating conditions. Gui et al. [13] suggested that pebbles are subjected to less resistance when flowing in the curved outlet structure and the stagnation zone existing in the pebble bed can be reduced by optimizing structural design. In addition, the wall structure effect on the crystallization along the wall has been investigated so as to make the pebbles flow easier and improve dispersion near the wall region by Li et al. [14]. By means of gamma ray computed tomography, AL Falahi et al. [15] studied the packing characteristics under different aspect ratios (cylinder to pebble diameter ratio). Results also show that pebbles’ distribution can be significantly affected by the bed structure. But this research about the effects of bed configurations on flow pattern still needs to be further deepened and improved on a basis of a three-dimensional model.
In the past decades, scientists have been devoted to illustrating underlying mechanism of granular flows, such as clogging arches [16,17], velocity profile [18], porosity distribution [19] as well as mixing and diffusion of particles [20]. All of these reports have certain guiding significance for the optimal design of pebble flow, but few of them are based on circulation flow, that is, the flow conforming to the actual fuel cycle operation of HTGR reactor. Besides, some experiments have also been conducted in 2-dimensional silos where the particles are tracked precisely through transparent walls [[21], [22], [23]], but most of them belong to the free outflow rather than circulation flow, mainly focusing on the prediction of discharging rate.
Although experimental research can bring insight into the flow characteristics, it is still limited and has high requirements of equipment. In contrast, the emergence of numerical approaches, for instance, the Discrete Element Method (DEM), makes the simulation of pebble flows possible within all kinds of geometric structures and operating conditions at little cost. The DEM has been wildly adopted to study granular systems, and it can give detailed information of granular flows, such as packing structure [24], velocities and frictions [25,26]. In our group, Yang et al. [27] has also verified the feasibility of DEM approach in comparison with phenomenological study with regards to the mechanism of pebble flow. These researches have also indirectly proved that DEM is an efficient and reliable method to understand the dynamic characteristics of particles.
In our previous work, many efforts have been made to minimize the stagnant region inside the pebble bed for the optimization of the HTGR pebble bed design. For example, an experimental facility is built at Tsinghua university with the scale of 1:5 to a real HTR pebble bed. It should be noted that it actually is a flat container with a thickness of 150 mm rather than a three-dimensional design. Through experimental research, Jiang et al. [28] not only verified the feasibility of a new-designed HTGR core termed two-region-designed bed but also investigated the effects of cone angles of the base on the flow. In addition, the base cone angle at the bottom of 30°, 45°, 60° were adopted and results show that the stagnant zone would be reduced when the base angle increases. Then, Wu et al. [29] found that the stagnation region for the two-region-designed HTGR core also decreases with the density of the side pebbles increasing. Furthermore, Gui et al. [13] and Jia et al. [30] compared the flow characteristics between different designed pebble bed with some arc-shaped configurations based on numerical and experimental study, respectively. However, these studies are on the basis of two-dimensional model and still not completed. More analyses of flow characteristics are required to better understand the mechanism of pebble flow. And more bed configurations need to be considered to achieve the desired flow pattern for HTGR with better uniformity and less stagnation.
Motivated by these considerations, we decide to investigate the pebble flows in the three-dimensional bed of different configurations by using the DEM method. The accuracy and applicability of DEM simulation of pebble flow have been verified through practical experiments in our previous published papers [27,28]. Our main purpose is to explore the influence of bed configurations including both concave-inward and convex-outward shapes on the pebble flow characteristics, with emphasis on the flow regime, degree of uniformity as well as stagnation. This work can not only help us better understand the flow dynamics inside the core but also benefit the design of HTGR pebble bed.
<Section>2. Numerical description</Section>
2.1. Discrete element method
Cundall [31] first put forward the discrete element method (DEM) in 1971. After decades of development, it has become one of the most acceptable approach to simulate granular flows so far by which the location, speed and external force of each pebble could be precisely tracked. Contrary to the continuum method, the discrete element method directly formulates mathematical expressions for discontinuous medium. Its basic idea is: using Newton’s second law of motion and the interactions between pebbles to analyze the forces acting on each element (for the pebble bed reactor, it is a spherical pebble), to calculate the motion trajectory and angular displacement of the element as well [32]. The deformation of pebbles is typically approximated by a representative overlap in the vicinity of the impact point. Assuming a small overlap, the contact between two pebbles is modeled by a spring and dashpot in both the normal and tangential directions and an additional slider in tangential direction.
In order to improve the computational efficiency, the grid element method is used to judge the contact. When the pebbles are distributed to a certain grid, only the pebbles in the same grid or directly adjacent grids will interact. Because the interactions of pebbles are mutual, only half of the central grid and the neighbour grids need to be tested. The grid size is set as 0.002 m here.
When choosing an adequate contact model, various granular systems can be simulated by DEM [33]. Here, we adopt the Hertz-Mindlin granular contact model and the governing equations of each pebble i with mass@can be described as follows:
@(1)
@(2)
here vector@points from pebble ‘i’ to ‘j’. , and are the equivalent rotating inertia, translational, rotational velocity of pebble ‘i’, and gravity force, respectively.@and@are the normal component and tangential force of the external contact force@on the pebble ‘i’ from pebble ‘j’, and these two components are expressed as follows:
@(3)
@(4)
@(5)
where@and@represents the degree of deformation and relative velocity of particle ‘i’ and particle ‘j’ in contact. is the friction coefficient. The stiffness k and damping coefficients@can be further expressed as follows based on the Hertz contact theory:
@(6)
@(7)
@(8)
@(9)
here@are elastic modulus and Poisson’s ratio,@are separately density, particle radius and restitution coefficient. And the reduced mass is expressed as .
The boundary representing the container can be generated using program code at the beginning, and the mesh is generated. It is worth mentioning that as with the contact between pebbles, the contact between the pebble and boundary is also simulated by the vibration equation of motion, only the radius in the formulas of stiffness and damping parameters is set to infinity. For pebbles in contact with boundary, the contact between them and the wall is judged and the contact force is calculated. Then the contact between the pebbles and other pebbles is also calculated to update the velocity and position of them.
2.2. Bed configuration and simulation setup
Fig. 1 shows the configuration design of the pebble bed. The upper part is a cylinder of 1800 mm and 2000 mm in diameter and height respectively. For a traditional pebble bed, the bottom structure is often designed as a cone type, as presented by “R-line” shape. In order to compare the flow patterns inside different designed pebble bed with focus on the bottom structure, some arc-shaped configurations are adopted. Here, the bottom shapes of both concave inward and convex outward are employed in addition to linear shape, as shown in Fig. 1. The five configurations can be explained as: (1) “R-line”: a straight line connecting the cylinder and outlet with length of Rline; (2) “R1”: a convex-outward arc shape of which the radius is equal to the length of Rline; (3) “R2”: a convex-outward arc shape with radius of R2 = 2 Rline; (4) “R1-sym”: a concave-inward arc shape that is symmetrical to the shape of R1 about the inclined edge; (5) “R2-sym”: a concave-inward arc shape that is symmetrical to the shape of R2 about the inclined edge.
Fig. 1. Sectional view of bed configuration.
As mentioned before, the flow inside HTGR pebble bed features slow circulation with the pebbles in the bottom discharged at a certain rate while the same amount of pebbles reinserted from the top inlet. Therefore, in our simulation an outlet with a diameter of 500 mm is set at the bottom, and an inlet is provided at the top for adding pebbles. More details about the properties and dimension parameters are listed in Table 1. After 27,000 pebbles are randomly distributed inside the bed and a stationary state is achieved with the velocity of each pebble below 104 m/s, the circulation flow phase starts. For each case, the loading and discharging rates are both set as 1000 pebbles per second to keep invariable the number of pebbles staying inside the core.
Table 1. Parameters used in simulation.
<Section>3. Results and discussions</Section>
3.1. Retention of initial loading pebbles
In the pebble bed, the stagnation phenomenon is a long-standing and severe problem. If fuel pebbles are detained inside the bed for a long time, the retention time of them will exceed the burn-up level. Fig. 2 presents the retention of initial loading pebbles, which are marked in red while the rest pebbles are colored by blue to illustrate the process of pebble flow. Before the start of circulating flow, there are 27,000 initial loading pebbles piling up inside the pebble bed. Then they are discharged at a certain speed of 1000 pebbles per second, therefore 27s is a complete cycle ideally. But as is shown in Fig. 2, there are still some stagnant pebbles near the wall at 40s, especially for the R1-sym configuration.
Fig. 2. Retention of initial loading pebbles at 40s for different bed configurations of (a) R1, (b) R2, (c) R-line, (d) R1-sym, (e) R2-sym. (The pebbles in red are the initial loading pebbles). (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
Fig. 3 demonstrates the distributions of retention number for different bed configurations. Since the transition from cylinder wall to the bottom outlet is not smooth, pebbles are more likely to pile up near the corner, which can also be observed in Fig. 5. And that’s why in Fig. 3 there is a quite large value of retention number around the corner for R-line, R1-sym and R2-sym configurations of which the transition is not as smooth as R1 and R2 configurations. For the concave-inside shapes like R1-sym and R2-sym, a large proportion of the initial loading pebbles are still in the cylindrical container. On the contrary, the flows of the convex-outward shapes such as R1 and R2 configurations, are much smoother and all initial loading pebbles are distributed near the outlet.
Fig. 3. Retention number of pebbles at different heights.
As aforementioned, the retention of pebbles should be taken seriously for the HTGR design, although these pebbles may eventually drain out of the bed after a long enough time. As the distribution profile of pebble residence time is closely related to the core safety, we calculate the retention number of initial loading pebbles for each bed configuration after circulation flow starts, as presented in Fig. 4. It can be observed that the retention number of the initial loading pebbles for R1 configuration is always the least. On the contrary, there are most retention pebbles for the concave-inward R1-sym configuration. It can be obtained that the stagnation time and region for the R1 configuration are better than any other cases.
Fig. 4. The variation of retention number with unloading time.
Fig. 5. Pebble distribution at different times for bed configurations of (a) R1, (b)R-line, (c) R1-sym.
3.2. Flow of labelled pebbles
3.2.1. Snapshots of pebble distribution
The snapshots of pebble distribution at t = 6s, 12s and 18s for the R1, R-line and R1-sym configurations are shown in Fig. 5(a–c), respectively (three-dimensional views at 18s are also provided to help better demonstrate the pebble distribution). The pebbles in blue, yellow and red are initial labelled pebbles at the height of 0–0.2 m, 0.5–0.7 m, 1–1.2 m respectively. The flows of R1 and R1-sym actually represent two typical cases of flow regimes in a silo [34,35]: mass flow and funnel flow. During mass flow, all pebbles are in motion and flowing down at the same order of magnitude. As Fig. 5(a) shows, the flow of the colored pebbles at the same initial height where the layer marked by the same color keeps almost horizontal as pebbles moves down the reactor core indicates the radial uniformity. Therefore, the flow pattern of R1 can be called mass flow, which is characterized by “first-in first-out”. Pebbles are forced to move inwards due to the converging shape and consequently interact with their neighboring pebbles. The interactions include forming and breaking of cohesive structures, leading to longer flow times, which is also an explanation for the late residence-time frequency density peak of R1 configuration in section 3.2.2.
On the contrary, in the funnel flow, only the pebbles in the central region above the outlet are moving in a vertical direction. The flow pattern presented by R1-sym is a typical case of funnel flow. Along with the pebble movements, pebbles directly in contact with the wall are easy to crystallize, appearing regular arrangement and static state. For pebble beds, crystallization or caking and stagnant regions need to be minimized. In the transition region, the lattice of pebbles is nearly regular (more rigid than the irregular lattice of piling), so they cannot be discharged as easily as that with irregular lattice of pebble. Adopting reasonably designed wall structures is helpful to avoid large area of near-wall pebble stagnation.
As can be seen in Fig. 5(c), there are more pebbles stuck around the transition corner. The pebbles in R1-sym configuration with more stagnation show a poor uniformity of radial flow. A main reason for that is the larger loss of flow movement in the central region above the outlet. A lot of voids are created, which drives the pebbles nearby to flow down rapidly. Dominant pebbles in the central part move down faster, while the side part has to move slower by overcoming additional friction force against the wall. Consequently, near-wall pebbles move down slowly and form structured packing and stagnation region. To a certain extent, the stagnant region propagates upwards along the wall, forming a typical funnel flow.
Therefore, the mass flow like the flow of R1 configuration, featured by uniformity, consistency and productivity, is probably the preferred flow type in HTGR pebble bed.
3.2.2. Frequency density
To understand the effect of bed configuration on stagnation, we explore the residence time of pebbles discharged from the bed. We compute the distribution of time it takes for pebbles in a certain height to flow through the entire bed. Fig. 6(a) presents the residence-time frequency densities for those pebbles from h = 0.1 m, 0.5 m and 0.9 m respectively to exit the pebble bed for R1 configuration. The long residence times are related to the pebbles which are distributed close to the walls, in particular those near the corner between cylinder section and outlet container. All the curves exhibit a small secondary peak, which is due to a boundary layer of pebbles, sliding down at a speed much slower than the rest. It indicates that boundary effects near the walls can have an appreciable effect on the pebble residence time. To clarify the boundary effect further, Fig. 6(b) is given to show the void fraction of the packing structure, and the results agree well with the work of [36,37], which clearly present the oscillation in the range of about 3 pebble diameters from the wall. Because of the boundary effect, the packing state near the wall is changed and different from that of the central area. In addition, the insufficient smooth structure at the transition region also brings resistance to the flow of pebbles. With the regular and rigid lattice of pebble packing, pebbles near the wall are not easy to be discharged, leading to the small secondary peak of residence-time.
Fig. 6. (a) Residence-time frequency densities of the time required for the pebbles starting from a specific height H to flow out of the bed; (b) the radial distribution of void fraction (the boundary effect).
Fig. 7(a–c) compare the residence time distributions between different configurations of the height of 0.1 m, 0.5 m and 0.9 m respectively. Generally, the residence-time densities of all bed configuration have similar patterns. As the bottom geometry gets narrow and more concave-inward (except R1), the main peak gradually increases, indicating that a large percentage of the pebbles fall in a short time window. However, the main width of the peak distribution is quite narrow, and it takes the longest time to pass through the core for all the labelled pebbles, corresponding to the much slower and nonuniform flow of the boundary layer of pebbles. For R2 and R2-sym cases, the flow characteristics are much near to that of R-line configuration due to the more similar shape, that is, the circumcircles are quite large and thus the arc-shaped curves of them are actually closer to the straight connection of R-line configuration.
Fig. 7. Comparison of the residence time distributions between different configurations of the height (a) H = 0.1 m; (b) H = 0.5 m; (c) H = 0.9 m.
For R1 configuration, although the pebbles at a certain height are the last to reach the outlet, because of the uniform and smooth flow, the pebble retention is the least serious and it is the first to drain all the pebbles. It can be found that the boundary effects near the wall and flow uniformity can have evident influence on the pebble residence time.
3.2.3. Residence time
As can be seen from the previous discussion, there are significant differences between the pebble flow in central area and the area near the wall for different bed structures. Therefore, we divided the pebble bed equally into five regions along the radial direction, as shown in Fig. 8. All initial loading pebbles are labelled by radial position and then the discharge ratio of each region is calculated after the recirculation stage starts. Fig. 9(a) shows the discharge ratio of the five regions in R1 and R1-sym configurations. In general, pebbles in the central region flow considerably faster than those in the region near the wall. After an ideal period (27s), a large number of pebbles in the “E” region still stagnate inside the bed, especially for R1-sym configuration. Fig. 9 (b) compares the discharge ratio of “A” region and “E’ region for different bed configurations. The results show that the order of discharge levels in “A” region is “R1< R2< R-line< R2-sym< R1-sym”, while it is exactly the opposite in the “E” region. Although the central pebbles flow much faster for concave-inward configurations, it takes longer for pebbles near the wall take longer to drain out.
Fig. 8. The pebble bed divided along radial direction.
Fig. 9. (a) The discharge ratio of different regions; (b) the discharge ratio for different bed configurations.
Fig. 10 shows the average residence time of radially labelled pebbles. In the “E” region, the residence time considerably increases when the structure shape changes from convex-forward to concave-inward. In contrast, it declines in the “A” and “B” regions. On the whole, the average residence time of all regions in R1 configuration is the shortest while the stagnation is the most severe for R1-sym configuration.
Fig. 10. Comparison of average residence time.
3.3. Flow uniformity
Apart from visual analysis, a quantitative approach using the deviation of vertical velocity has been proposed to show the flow uniformity, the value of which can be obtained according to following equation:
@(10)
Here,@is the mean axial velocity of all pebbles at a certain height,@is the axial velocity of ith pebble, n means total number of pebbles at that height.
Fig. 11 compares the velocity deviation of different configuration ranging from the height of −0.3 m–1.5 m. In the bottom part, the flow is more nonuniform due to the fact that the bottom structure produces stronger contraction impact on the flow field in the lower part if the shape is more concave-inward. Accordingly, all pebbles compete to flow down, but only pebbles in the central dominate because they are easier to reach the outlet, leaving side pebbles behind, further increasing the nonuniformity. In addition, the barrier of the boundary layers also makes the flow in bottom quite uneven.
Fig. 11. Deviation of vertical velocity for different configurations.
3.4. Flow field
3.4.1. Velocity profile
Fig. 12 shows the velocity profile at some specific heights for different bed configurations. Here the velocity represents the temporal mean velocity calculated after the circulation operation. In general, the velocity profile exhibits relatively well-distributed plug flow in the upper cylinder and a non-uniform convergence flow inside the bottom container.
Fig. 12. Velocity profile at some specific heights for different bed configurations.
On the upper part of the pebble bed, velocity results for all configuration case are very similar, indicating a roughly flow uniformity across the pebble bed. However, a boundary layer of slower velocities, which is about two particle diameters wide and closely related to particle-wall friction, still exists. A significantly different profile is observed in the lower part, as would be expected. In the wider bottom, the overall velocity is much slower and smoother. Also, a much slower flow zone can be observed close to the transition corner of the upper edge of the outlet container. In addition, the velocity profile widens as the height increases.
3.4.2. Average cross section velocity
It is known that the change of the contraction configuration will lead to the variation of flow velocity on the cross section. Consequently, the average axial velocity on the effects of bed configurations is investigated at different heights, as shown in Fig. 13. In the cylinder part, for all kind of configurations the average axial velocity shows no distinct difference. However, it increases significantly when the shape is from convex-forward to concave-inward, due to the fact that the flow pattern in concave-inward configuration is more consistent with funnel flow, in which the middle pebbles near the outlet dominate and move faster in a vertical direction. In spite of this, the flow is not very desirable because the particles on both sides are blocked, which makes the flow extremely uneven.
Fig. 13. Average cross section velocity at different heights.
3.4.3. Vortex structure
In the pebble bed, the large amount of pebbles can be treated as fluid particles. And fluid motions in the flow field are often associated with vortex structures, which can be characterized by vorticity or liutex [[38], [39]]. Since qualitative distribution and quantitative measures of vorticity is of fundamental interest in flow mechanics, we calculated the vorticity field in the pebble bed.
The vorticity is defined mathematically as the scalar product of unit normal with the curl of velocity vector:
@(11)
Here,@and represent the axial velocity and radial velocity. And ,@are the radial position and height.
With 0.01 m as the grid size, we divided the whole bed along the radial and axial direction and calculated the vorticity of all the grids. Fig. 14 compares the computed profiles of vorticity field for R1, R-line and R1-sym bed configurations. It can be seen that there are almost no vorticity around the corner region in R1-sym structure, meaning less pebble movements. And this result also, to some extent, supports the finding of the most serious stagnation at the corner for R1-sym configuration, as discussed earlier. Although the flow near the outlet is faster, the stagnation at the corner makes this structure unsuitable for the core design.
Fig. 14. Comparison of the vorticity field for bed configurations of (a) R1, (b)R-line, (c) R1-sym.
<Section>4. Summary</Section>
The uniformity and stagnation characteristic of pebble flow are extremely essential for the optimal design of HTGR, which are greatly affected by the bed configuration. In this work, in order to achieve a desired uniform flow pattern, apart from traditional cone shape, some specifically designed pebble beds with different contraction configurations including arc shapes of both concave-inward and convex-outward are adopted. Pebble flows inside different bed configurations are simulated with the aid of DEM method. The aims are to study the pebble retention, residence time, flow uniformity and axial velocity.
Issues with respect to the stagnation, including retention number, residence time, as well residence-time frequency density at different heights are investigated. Less stagnation can be found in the flows of the convex-outward configurations such as R1 and R2. However, it is observed there are more pebbles distributed near the corner for the flows in the configurations of concave-inward shape. In that case, the middle pebbles flow at a relatively larger speed, leaving side pebbles behind and increasing nonuniformity, which is a typical feature of funnel flows. Besides, axial velocity deviation also reveals the characteristics of extremely uneven velocity distribution at the same height for concave-inward shape.
The results show that the traditional pebble bed of cone-shape bottom is not the most preferred structure with respect to flow pattern for reactor design. By improving the contraction configuration, the flow performance can be enhanced. The order of flow uniformity levels is “R1> R2> R-line> R2-sym> R1-sym”. In conclusion, from the perspective of pebble flow characteristic, the flow in R1 configuration, featured by uniformity, consistency and less stagnation, is the desirable pattern for pebble bed. In the design work of HTGR core, convex-shaped configuration could be considered. This work can not only help us better understand the flow dynamics inside the core but also benefit the design of HTGR pebble bed.
<Section>Declaration of competing interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
The authors are grateful for the support of this research by the National Science and Technology Major Project (Grant No. 2011ZX06901-003), the National Natural Science Foundations of China (Grant No. 51576211), National High Technology Research and Development Program of China (863) (2014AA052701).
<Section>Appendix A. Supplementary data</Section>
The following is the Supplementary data to this article:
Multimedia component 1.
<Section>Research data for this article</Section>
Data not available / Data will be made available on request
<Section>References</Section>
[1]
J. M Ryskamp, E.A. Harvego, S.T. Khericha, E.J. Gorski, D.J. Harrell
New generation nuclear plant: high level functions and requirements
International Conference on Nuclear Engineering (2004)
Google Scholar
[2]
International Atomic Energy Agency
Current Status and Future Development of Modular High-Temperature Gas Cooled Reactor Technology
IAEA-TEDOC-1198, Vienna (February 2001)
Google Scholar
[3]
S.A. Alameri, J.C. Kingm, A.K. Alkaabi, Y. Addad
Prismatic-core advanced high temperature reactor and thermal energy storage coupled system – a preliminary design
Nucl. Eng. Technol., 52 (2020), pp. 248-257
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[4]
S.Y. Jiang, J.Y. Tu, X.T. Yang, N. Gui
A review of pebble flow study for pebble bed high temperature gas-cooled reactor
Exp Computat. Multiphase Flow, 1 (3) (2019), pp. 159-176
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[5]
M.A. Alzamly, M. Aziz, A.A. Badawi, H.A. Gabal, A.R.A. Gadallah
Burnup analysis for HTR-10 reactor core loaded with uranium and thorium oxide
Nucl. Eng. Technol, 52 (2020), pp. 674-680
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[6]
R. Swart, R.T. Dobson
Thermal-hydraulic simulation and evaluation of a natural circulation thermosyphon loop for a reactor cavity cooling system of a high- temperature reactor
Nucl. Eng. Technol., 52 (2020), pp. 271-278
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[7]
X.M. Sun, Y.J. Dong, P.F. Hao, L. Shi, F. Li, Y.T. Feng
Three-dimensional numerical simulation of quasi-static pebble flow
Adv. Powder Technol., 28 (2017), pp. 499-505
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[8]
G.J. Auwerda, J.L. Kloosterman, D. Lathouwers, T.H.J.J. van der Hagen
Effects of random pebble distribution on the multiplication factor in HTR pebble bed reactors
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 37 (2010), pp. 1056-1066
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[9]
R. Balevicius, R. Kacianauskas, Z. Mroz, I. Sielamowicz
Analysis and DEM simulation of granular material flow patterns in hopper models of different shapes
Adv. Powder Technol., 22 (2011), pp. 226-235
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[10]
X.L. Zhang, Z.F. Li
A new method for calculating curve equation of silo
China Powder Sci. Technol., 19 (2013), pp. 84-86
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[11]
S. Albaraki, S.J. Antony
How does internal angle of hoppers affect granular flow? Experimental studies using digital particle image velocimetry
Powder Technol, 268 (2014), pp. 253-260
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[12]
K.O. Lee, R.P. Gardner
Prediction of pebble motion in pebble-bed reactors using Monte Carlo molecular dynamics simulation
Nucl. Sci. Eng., 174 (3) (2013), pp. 264-285
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[13]
N. Gui, X. Yang, J. Tu, S. Jiang
Effect of bed configuration on pebble flow uniformity and stagnation in the pebble bed reactor
Nucl. Eng. Des, 270 (2014), pp. 295-301
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[14]
Y. Li, N. Gui, X. Yang, J. Tu, S. Jiang
Effect of wall structure on pebble stagnation behavior in pebble bed reactor
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 80 (2015), pp. 195-202
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[15]
F. Al Falahi, G. Mueller, M. Al Dahhan
Pebble bed nuclear reactor structure study: a comparison of the experimental and calculated void fraction distribution
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 106 (2018), pp. 153-161
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[16]
T.S. Majmudar, M. Sperl, S. Luding, R.P. Behringer
Jamming transition in granular systems
Phys. Rev. Lett, 98 (5) (2007), Article 058001
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[17]
F. Vivanco, S. Rica, F. Melo
Dynamical arching in a two-dimensional granular flow
Granul. Matter, 14 (5) (2012), pp. 563-576
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[18]
S.H. Kim, H.C. Kim, J.K. Kim, J.M. Noh
A study on evaluation of pebble flow velocity with modification of the kinematic model for pebble bed reactor
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 55 (2013), pp. 322-330
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[19]
W. Zhang, K. Thompson, A. Reed, L. Beenken
Relationship between packing structure and porosity in fixed beds of equilateral cylindrical particles
Chem. Eng. Sci, 61 (2006), pp. 8060-8074
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[20]
J. Choi, A. Kudrolli, R.R. Rosales, M.Z. Bazant
Diffusion and mixing in gravity-driven dense granular flows
Phys. Rev. Lett., 92 (2004), p. 174301
CrossRefGoogle Scholar
[21]
H. Ahn, Z. Basaranoglu, M. Yilmaz, A. Bugutekin, M. Zafer Gul
Experimental investigation of granular flow through an orifice
Powder Technol, 186 (1) (2008), pp. 65-71
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[22]
S.D. Liu, Z.Y. Zhou, R.P. Zou, D. Pinson, A.B. Yu
Flow characteristics and discharge rate of ellipsoidal particles in a flat bottom hopper
Powder Technol, 253 (2014), pp. 70-79
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[23]
J. Wan, F. Wang, G. Yang, S. Zhang, M. Wang, P. Lin
The influence of orifice shape on the flow rate: a DEM and experimental research in 3D hopper granular flows
Powder Technol, 335 (2018), pp. 147-155
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[24]
D. Choi, S. Park, J. Han, M.Y. Ahn, Y. Lee, Y.H. Park, S. Cho, D. Sohn
A DEM-CFD study of the effects of size distributions and packing fractions of pebbles on purge gas flow through pebble beds
Fusion Eng. Des., 143 (2019), pp. 24-34
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[25]
C.H. Rycroft, G.S. Grest, M.Z. Bazant, J. Landry
Analysis of granular flow in a pebble-bed nuclear reactor
Phys. Rev. E, 74 (2006), Article 021306
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[26]
H. Suikkanen, V. Rintala, J. Hyvärinen
DEM in analyses of nuclear pebble bed reactors
International Conference on Discrete Element Methods, Springer Singapore (2017)
Google Scholar
[27]
X.T. Yang, W.P. Hu, S.Y. Jiang, K.K.L. Wong, J.Y. Tu
Mechanism analysis of quasi-static dense pebble flow in pebble bed reactor using phenomenological approach
Nucl. Eng. Des., 250 (2012), pp. 247-259
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[28]
S.Y. Jiang, X.T. Yang, Z.W. Tang, W.J. Wang, J.Y. Tu, Z.Y. Liu, J. Li
Experimental and numerical validation of a two-region-designed pebble bed reactor with dynamic core
Nucl. Eng. Des., 246 (2012), pp. 277-285
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[29]
M. Wu, N. Gui, H. Wu, X. Yang, J. Tu, S. Jiang
Effects of density difference and loading ratio on pebble flow in a three-dimensional two-region-designed pebble bed
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 133 (2019), pp. 924-936
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[30]
X. Jia, N. Gui, X. Yang, J. Tu, H. Jia, S. Jiang
Experimental study of flow field characteristics on bed configurations in the pebble bed reactor
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 102 (2017), pp. 1-10
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[31]
P.A. Cundall
The Measurement and Analysis of Acceleration in Rock Slopes
Ph. D. Dissertation
University of London, imperial college of science and technology (1971)
Google Scholar
[32]
R. Berger, C. Kloss, A. Kohlmeyer
Hybrid parallelization of the LIGGGHTS open-source DEM code
Powder Technol, 278 (2015), pp. 234-247
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[33]
J. Horabik, M. Molenda
Parameters and contact models for DEM simulations of agricultural granular materials: a review
Biosyst. Eng., 147 (2016), pp. 206-225
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[34]
R.B. Emery
Aeration apparatus converts bin from funnel-flow to mass-flow characteristics
J. Eng. Ind., 95 (1) (1973), p. 37
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[35]
T.V. Nguyen, C.E. Brennen, R.H. Sabersky
Funnel flow in hoppers
J. Appl. Mech., 47 (4) (1980), p. 729
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[36]
G.E. Mueller
A simple method for determining sphere packed bed porosity
Powder Technol, 229 (2012), pp. 90-96
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[37]
Toit Du, G. Charl
Analysing the porous structure of packed beds of spheres using a semi-analytical approach
Powder Technol, 342 (2019), pp. 475-485
Google Scholar
[38]
Wen-qian Xu, Yi-qian Wang, Chaoqun Liu
Liutex similarity in turbulent boundary layer
Journal of Hydrodynamics, 31 (6) (2019), pp. 1259-1262
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[39]
Yi-qian Wang, Chaoqun Liu
Liutex (vorex) cores in transitional boundary layer with spanwise-wall oscillation
Journal of Hydrodynamics, 31 (6) (2019), pp. 1178-1189
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar