<title>Non-linear damping of sodium fast reactor fuel pins: Experimental analysis and numerical modelisation</title>
<author>1,ThomasCatterou,2,VictorBlanc,3,Guillaume,4,StéphaneBourgeois,5,BrunoCochelin</author>
<Affiliation>1,CEA, DEN, DEC, Cadarache, F-13108 Saint-Paul-Lez-Durance, France;2,Aix Marseille Univ., CNRS, Centrale Marseille, LMA, Marseille, France</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nucengdes.2020.110643</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029549320301370</URL>
Non-linear damping of sodium fast reactor fuel pins: Experimental analysis and numerical modelisation
ThomasCatterou,VictorBlanc,Guillaume,StéphaneBourgeois,BrunoCochelin
CEA, DEN, DEC, Cadarache, F-13108 Saint-Paul-Lez-Durance, France
Aix Marseille Univ., CNRS, Centrale Marseille, LMA, Marseille, France
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Non-linear damping identified experimentally on nuclear fuel pins.
Dry and viscous friction explained thanks to an analytical model.
Numerical simulation of the multibody problem with contact and friction.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The fuel pins are the first containment barriers of a sodium fast reactor, and their integrity have to be preserved during dynamical loads, like earthquake events but also during the transport and handling of fuel sub-assemblies. The purpose of this paper is to understand the dynamical behavior of the fuel pins. A dedicated test bed has been used. Three different regimes of damping, dry or viscous depending of the displacement amplitude, are identified during the tests on fuel pins and explained by a simple analytical model. A complex finite element model is proposed and confronted to the experiment and lead to a better comprehension of the fuel pin non linear damping.
Keywords：Structural dynamic；ContactFuel subassembly；Finite elements
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
1.1. Industrial context
Nuclear components are subjected to dynamical loads during their handling, during transport phase and in case of an earthquake. In sodium fast reactor, nuclear fuel pins are the first containment barrier of the reactor. Their integrity has to be preserved.
Nuclear reactor core is composed of hexagonal fuel assemblies. Each subassembly have a spike inserted inside the base of the core and an hexagonal tube (called wrapper tube) constitute the longest part of the subassembly. The fuel pins bundle is inserted inside the wrapper tube. This bundle is composed of 217 fuel pins and arranged with a triangular pitch (Fig. 1).
Fig. 1. SFR fuel assembly.
Each pin is a slim metal tube closed at its extremities by two plugs (Fig. 2). The fuel is placed inside the pin in the form of pellets of plutonium and uranium oxide. Fuel pellets are inserted into the clad of the pins with radial mounting gaps, so at the beginning of the irradiation of the pins, they can slide with respect to each other. In the lower part of the pin, a pressure vessel is necessary to receive fission gases released by nuclear reactions. In the upper part, a spring fixes the column axially.
Fig. 2. SFR fuel pin.
1.2. State of the art
Dynamical behavior of nuclear fuel reactor components is a widely studied topic, in particular the dynamical behavior of the bundle of rods or pins, which is strongly non-linear. Several models deal with the multiple contacts in the bundle (Thenint et al., 2012, Fadaee et al., 2018, Catterou et al., 2018), or the fluid structure interaction (Ricciardi, 2016, Daogang et al., 2013). Friction is often taken into consideration for the contact between rods (Elhelaly et al., 2017, Mohany and Hassan, 2013), but the common feature of these studies is to consider a viscous damping of the nuclear pins or rods whereas it is a simplification of their behavior observed experimentally. The nonlinear aspect due to the presence of pellets has been studied for the fist time by Lee (1975) who computed the displacement of the pellets column introduced inside a clad with clearance. His work has been extended by Choi et al. (2009). Then recently, several papers discussed about nonlinear damping on fuel rod, particularly the increase of damping due to loading magnitude and the effect of the pellets/clad clearance (Delannoy et al., 2015, Delannoy et al., 2016, Ferrari et al., 2018, Amabili, 2019, Ferrari et al., 2020). But, to the best of our knowledge, no article has investigated the physical phenomena involved, which is the main goal of this present paper.
In this work, non linear damping of a fuel SFR pin is experimentally investigated. A phenomenological model is proposed. Numerical simulations with a non-linear finite element model are confronted to experimental results.
<Section>2. Experimental tests</Section>
2.1. Description of the test bed
A test bed called CARNAC has been settled in the CEA of Cadarache (Fig. 3), to study the dynamical behavior of a single fuel pin in an arrangement similar to the one in the bundle (Catterou et al., 2017). It has been designed to handle two kinds of tests: bending and releases tests and forced vibration tests with a shaker. Two rows of contact elements are set on each side of the fuel pin. Piezoelectric sensors inserted inside contact elements provide dynamical force measurements. Laser sensors provide measurements of the velocity on various points of the pin.
Fig. 3. CARNAC test bed and schematic representation of bending release.
Bending release tests have been performed on the test bed CARNAC and are represented on Fig. 3. The beam is maintained with several supports that can be assimilated as hinges along the bottom whereas the upper part is free. The asymmetry of the supports is chosen to reproduce the contact between the spacer wire and the wrapper tube on one side and the contact with another pin on the other side. There are one contact on the wrapper tube for each pitch of the wire and two contacts between two adjacent pins for each pitch of the wire (Fig. 1). The pitch of the wire is 180 mm. The pin is manually bended at an amplitude  at its end. A stop is fixed at the distance of the magnitude desired and the pin is bended until this point. The beam is released and the velocity is measured at a point at a distance  from the free end. A low-pass filter with a cut-off frequency of 500 Hz is applied on experimental velocities to remove measurement error due to a misalignment of the laser sensor.
Several parameters have been analyzed:
•
The material used for fake fuel pellets. Two species of pellets have been tested, made of an alloy of lead-antimony or molybdenum. The size of The distribution of linear density and the clad-pellet gap is the same for each material.
•
The free length of the pin: , 700 or 800 mm with respectively associated mass 316, 376 and 436 g.
•
The amplitude of release
The density of Molybdenum and lead-antimony pellets are respectively  and . Holes with different diameters are made in the center of each pellet to respect the total mass of the pellet of 6,6 g.The lead-antimony pellets has been choosen for economic reasons, bit their young modulus is smaller the young modulus of UO2. Molybdenum pellets seems to reproduce better UO2 pellets, but they are more expensive.
2.2. Experimental results
Fig. 4 presents velocity of the end of two different pins, one containing lead-antimony (PbSb3) and the other containing molybdenum (Mo), function of time during the bend and release test. As shown on this figure, with lead-antimony pellets, the damping during first oscillations is high and the amplitude d1 of oscillations decrease faster than with molybdenum pellets, in the same configuration of experiment. In short, the pellet material has a strong influence on the dynamical behavior of the pin.
Fig. 4. Velocity of two similar experiments () for a lead-antimony pellets pin [PbSb3] and molybdenum pellets pin [Mo].
Three phases have been identified on the Fig. 5. In presence of large oscillations, a high damping is observed. The equivalent reduced damping  can be identified by doing a linear regression on the peaks of the logarithm of velocity. Reduced damping  is linked with the damping coefficient c with the relation:
@(1)
Fig. 5. Logarithm of the velocity for a lead-antimony pin (@).
Considering a viscous damping, the value of  can be determined with the slopes p of the displacement curve and the fundamental period  :
@(2)
This damping @ increases with the amplitude of the oscillation, and takes value between 3 and 6%. Then two other values of damping, @ and @, independent of the amplitude of the release, can be observed hereafter. It suggests that the damping is mostly guided by friction during the first times of the release then the damping seems viscous. A simplified model has been implemented to understand this phenomenon.
<Section>3. Phenomenological interpretation of the non-linear damping</Section>
3.1. Theory about damping
Two kinds of damping are classically considered: dry fiction and viscous damping. An elementary problem mixing this two kind of damping is illustrated on Fig. 6. A mass m is linked to a spring with a stiffness k and is subjected to a viscous damping c and a dry friction which is characterized by a coefficient  and a normal force . The damping c is linked with the reduced damping with the relation 1. For simplicity in this article, a single coefficient of friction  will be considered for the adherence and the sliding phases. The initial displacement of the mass m is noted .
Fig. 6. Mass subjected to a viscous damping and a dry friction.
In presence of viscous damping, the displacement of the mass m for  and  can be written (see Catterou et al., 2018):
@(3)
In presence of dry friction (when @ and @), the equation of the straight line linking the peaks of displacement is given by (see Catterou et al., 2018 and A):
@(4)
The viscous damping cause also an exponential decrease of oscillations amplitude whereas a dry friction leads to a linear decrease of oscillations. This information allows us to detect which kind of damping acts the most in the experimental results.
3.2. 2 DoF model
A simplified model is proposed to take into account the sliding between pellets. The two degrees of freedom model is represented Fig. 7.
Fig. 7. 2 DoF model.
The mass @ represents the clad, @ the one of the pellets. The spring @ represents the bending stiffness of the pin, the springs @ represents the stiffness of the contact clad/pellets. Note that a gap exists initially on each side between the clad and the pellet. Each degree of freedom have a damping  for the clad and  for the pellet. The pellet is subjected to a normal effort  which will induce a dry friction.  is the friction coefficient of the pellet.
The problem is solved with an explicit integration scheme (central differences). For each time step, acceleration is computed:
@(5)
With
@(6)
Three bending release have been realized with different parameter sets, described in the Table 1. Velocity and logarithm of the velocity are showed in the Fig. 8.
•
In the first case (Fig. 8-1), friction is set to 0 () and the damping coefficients are equal (). Even with the gap and the contact non-linearity, the damping is linear and viscous: the shape of the logarithm of the velocity of the clad shows a linear decrease of velocity peaks.
•
In the second case (Fig. 8) small normal force has been added on the pellet which generate a dry friction during a small amount of time (see Table 1). Then, when the oscillations have a smaller amplitude, the pellets stick with its support and the damping of the clad become viscous.
•
In the last case, the normal force has been withdrawn, but we choose a different damping for pellet and clad (). Two viscous damping are clearly identifiable: a strong damping during the first instants of the bending when the amplitude of the oscillations are strong, and a lower one after.
Table 1. Numerical model parameters.
Fig. 8. Velocity and velocity logarithm of bending releases for the parameters given in Table 1.
All these observations confirm the hypothesis made in Section 2.2: three kinds of damping occur in the pin according to the amplitude of the oscillations. When the oscillations are extremely high, pellets slide with each other and we observe a strong dry friction. Then the pellets stick and their viscous damping is predominant. When the amplitude of oscillations are very low, only the damping of the clad affect the global behavior of the pin. But a two degrees of freedom approximation of the pins is not sufficient to reproduce the experimental bending release. A more accurate model using finite elements, unilateral contact and friction model is developed.
<Section>4. FEM beam model of pin with pellets</Section>
4.1. Presentation of the FEM model
A schematic representation of the FEM model is given on Fig. 9. The displacement of the pin is observed in a 2 dimensional longitudinal plane passing trough the central axis of the pin. Two Timoshenko beams (in blue) represent the both sides of the clad. The displacements of each side of the clad are constrained to be the same, so no differential displacements are allowed between the two side of the clad, which means that ovalization of the pin is neglected. Pellets are represented by a series of bar elements (in red) between the two blue beams. Pellets can collide with pin sides through unilateral contact springs without damping. The spring value is equal to , which corresponds approximately to the pellet transverse stiffness. Then, each pellet is connected to the pellets above and below by unilateral contact spring with friction. All the computation has been made on the finite element software Cast3M (Cast3m, 2019), developed by the CEA.
Fig. 9. Schematic view of the FEM model.
4.2. Friction model
Friction is a non-linear effect which is difficult to implement in a numerical model. A lot of work have been done on the contact with friction (Renard, 1998, Johnson, 1985). The analytical formula of the coulomb friction  is given hereafter Eq. (7).
@(7)
where @ is the coefficient of kinetic friction which depends on the parameter of the contact surface, u is the relative displacement to the next pellets below or above.
Eq. (7) cannot be used directly in a finite element software because it will cause instabilities and the tangential force  is difficult to compute. Due to the high number of contact zone with friction, a smoothed friction law is necessary to obtain converged results. Some other formulation of the dry friction suited to a finite element model are presented by Hassan and Rogers (2005). In this study, the spring damper model proposed by Antunes et al. (1990) is used for its simplicity. The fiction force is model by a spring-dashpot model.
@(8)
@ represents the tangential stiffness of the contact surface during adherence and @ the associated damping. The adherence phase is thus considered imperfect and a small displacement  is possible.
4.3. Loadings
In order to reproduce numerically the pin release, two loads have been introduced. The first one is a vertical force on the pellets column which takes into account both gravity and the holding forces of the column by a spring. The second one is an horizontal force applied on the top of the beam representing the clad of the pin until the target amplitude is reached. Then the horizontal force is released and the dynamic computation begin.
<Section>5. Comparisons between experimental and numerical results</Section>
5.1. Parameters identification
In the simulations, the damping of the pellets has been fixed to 0.5%, corresponding to the value observed experimentally. Similarly, the damping of the clad has been fixed to 0.2%. Experimentally, the damping measured when pellets are adherent is very low and seems viscous. Therefore, the tangential damping  has been chosen equal to zero for the following simulations. Then the tangential stiffnesses  have been calibrated to correspond to experimental data from all experiments. The value for molybdenum pellets  is way less than the value of the tangential stiffness for lead-antimony pellets . The roughness of the lead-antimony pellets are way higher than the molybdenum ones which explains this difference. The coefficient of friction has been determined experimentally and are equal to  for molybdenum pellets and  for lead-antimony pellets. These parameters are summarized in the Table 2.
Table 2. System properties.
5.2. Graphical analysis
Comparisons have been made for three free lengths  which have been tested experimentally and for the two kinds of pellets. The Fig. 10 present the velocity of a pin containing molybdenum pellets for a small release amplitude (4 mm). The Fig. 11 gives the velocity of a pin with lead-antimony pellets for a larger release, 15 mm. The results are observed from the release instant, at approximately 7.5 s.
Fig. 10. Molybdenum pellets, free length 800 mm, Amplitude of the release 4 mm. a) Velocity, b) Logarithm of the velocity, c) Fast Fourier Transform of the velocity.
Fig. 11. Lead-antimony pellets, free length 700 mm, Amplitude of the release 15 mm. a) Velocity, b) Logarithm of the velocity, c) Fast Fourier Transform of the velocity.
For the first case with Mo pellets (Fig. 10), the velocity of the pin is reproduced with a very good accuracy. The logarithm of the velocity present clearly two viscous phases, the sliding phase between pellets being not significant for this small release magnitude.
The frequency response of numerical and experimental curves are similar (Fig. 10) and the slope of the decrease is globally well reproduced, but there is a small time discrepancy in the change in slope.
For the larger release with PbSb3 pellets given Fig. 11, first oscillations are heavily damped due to the pellets slides. Numerical model reproduced accurately the decrease of the amplitude of oscillations, which follows a straight line, as provided by Eq. (4). Once more, the frequency distribution is globally the same between experimental results and numerical simulations (Fig. 11c). Nevertheless, the transition time between phases is not well reproduced by the numerical model. This is induced by small offset in oscillation frequency between numerical and experimental responses, which is due to the friction model used. The stiffness  increase slightly the bending stiffness of the beam and generate some discrepancies. Furthermore, at the end of the sliding phase (between 9 and 10 s), there is a small increase of oscillation amplitude in experimental data which are not reproduced in the numerical model. The origin of this phenomena is not explained for now, but we suppose a kinetic energy transfer from the pellets to the clad when the pellets stop sliding.
5.3. Reduced damping coefficients comparison
Reduced damping coefficients  presented 2.2) are identified by using a linear regression of the Hilbert function of the logarithm of the velocity and using Eq. (2). Note that the first damping is not viscous, but the same method is used to compare the coefficients. Experimental damping are obtained by averaging the results of five tests and the standard deviation of the results is less than 5%, so the reproducibility is well. Transition times between the three regime are manually identified.
Firstly, the effect of release magnitude is illustrated on the Fig. 12 for the lead-antimony pellets pin. The magnitude of  seems to be dependent of the release magnitude, the first phase of velocity decrease is also due to a dry friction. The dependence to the release magnitude is non linear in experimental data, whereas it seems to be linear in numerical computation. The magnitude of  is quite larger than  and . Nevertheless, the numerical method is able to reproduce quite accurately experimental results.
Fig. 12. Experimental and numerical damping confronted to the magnitude of the release for the Lead-Antimony pellets pin. Amplitude of the release 8 mm.
Then, we analyse the effect of the pin free length on the damping coefficients for this time a molybdenum pellets pin (Fig. 13). It was not possible to identify clearly  in these tests. Given that friction coefficient is smaller for molybdenum pellets, the viscous and dry friction of the pellets column are in the same order of magnitude and cannot be dissociated,  and  are mixed. We observe experimentally a linear dependence of the damping  with the free length. The smaller the free length, the higher the maximal velocity of the pin. Viscous damping  is fairly constant, especially that measured experimentally. Once again, numerical model gives globally a good approximation of the three damping coefficients  and . More tests could be useful to identify more precisely dependancies between damping coefficients and testing parameters.
Fig. 13. Experimental and numerical damping confronted to value of the free length  for the Molybdenum pellets pin. Free length 0.7 m.
<Section>6. Conclusion</Section>
The non-linear damping of a fuel pin with pellets has been identified experimentally thanks to release experiments. A theoretical simplified model has been proposed to understand this phenomenon and reveal that fuel pin present a high damping for large oscillations, which is due to friction between pellets. Then, for smaller oscillations, two viscous dampings, corresponding to the clad and the pellets viscous dampings, have been identified. A detailed finite element model with unilateral spring and friction condition is able to reproduce the damping of a campaign of experimental release.
This paper leads to a better comprehension of the dynamic of fuel pins or other similar elements. The containing of a tube, even if it does not participate to the bending of the tube, can have a significant influence on its dynamic properties. It leads also to various criteria to elaborate fake pellets in order to conduct dynamical experiment. Fake pellets have to respect the real mass of the pellets, but their roughness and their stiffness will also have significant influence on the dynamical response of the whole system.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Thomas Catterou: Methodology, Software, Investigation, Writing - original draft. Victor Blanc: Conceptualization, Validation, Project administration, Writing - review & editing. Guillaume: Conceptualization, Writing - review & editing. Stéphane Bourgeois: Writing - review & editing. Bruno Cochelin: Supervision, Writing - review & editing.
<Section>Appendix A. Release of a spring-mass oscillator with dry friction</Section>
When a mass m is subjected to dry friction, a force @ counteract the displacement (Eq. (7)). If the viscous coefficient is considered equal to zero, but in presence of dry friction, the static equilibrium is written:
@(9)
The adherence condition is:
@(10)
If the initial position of the mass fall within the interval  or if the velocity is equal to zero when the mass m is in this interval, there is adherence and the mass stop to move. If the mass is released from a position , the mass start to slide. From the release instant, if , velocity is negative so:
@(11)
Velocity became null for @. The displacement is equal to:
@(12)
If the displacement @ is not in the interval , the mass m continue to slide in the opposite direction. The friction force became negative and the velocity positive. The dynamic behavior of the system from the instant  can be written:
@(13)
This process is replicated until the adherence is reach. The peaks of velocity coincide with times , with n the number of the peak. The line connecting positive peaks follows the formula:
@(14)
This formula connects velocity peaks with a downward straight line compared to the time. If the logarithm of the velocity is observed, a logarithm decrease will be observed in presence of dry friction.
<Section>References</Section>
Thenint et al., 2012
T. Thenint, E. Balmes, M. Corus
Definition of A Linear Equivalent Model for a Non-linear System with Impacts
Katholieke Univ Leuven, Dept Werktuigkunde (2012)
Google Scholar
Fadaee et al., 2018
Fadaee, M., Yu, S.D. Modeling large number of rod-to-rod and rod-to-rigid surface frictional contact 330, 87–96.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nucengdes.2017.12.001. URL:http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029549317305733.
Google Scholar
Catterou et al., 2018
Catterou, T., Blanc, V., Ricciardi, G., Bourgeois, S., Cochelin, B. Numerical strategy for dynamic simulation of impacts on SFR fuel pins and experimental validation 340, 73–85.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nucengdes.2018.09.021. URL:http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029549318305971.
Google Scholar
Ricciardi, 2016
Ricciardi, G. Fluid-structure interaction modelling of a PWR fuel assembly subjected to axial flow 62, 156–171.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfluidstructs.2016.01.006.
Google Scholar
Daogang et al., 2013
Daogang, L., Aiguo, L., Chaohao, S., Junjie, D., Yang, H., Qingyu, X. Experimental investigation on fluid-structure-coupled dynamic characteristics of the double fuel assemblies in a fast reactor 255, 180–184.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nucengdes.2012.10.013.
Google Scholar
Elhelaly et al., 2017
Elhelaly, A., Hassan, M., Mohany, A., Moussa, S. An experimental investigation of the dynamics of a loosely supported tube array. Am Soc Mech Eng.
Google Scholar
Mohany and Hassan, 2013
Mohany, A., Hassan, M. Modelling of fuel bundle vibration and the associated fretting wear in a CANDU fuel channel 264, 214–222.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nucengdes.2012.08.039.
Google Scholar
Lee, 1975
Lee, T.H. Nonlinear dynamic analysis of a stacked fuel column subjected to boundary motion 32(3), 337–350.https://doi.org/10.1016/0029-5493(75)90104-1. URL:http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0029549375901041.
Google Scholar
Choi et al., 2009
Choi, W.-S., Kim, D.-O., Park, K.-B., Noh, J.-M., Lee, W.-J. Evaluation on the behavior of stacked blocks subject to a harmonic excitation 75–80https://doi.org/10.1115/ICONE17-75300.
Google Scholar
Delannoy et al., 2015
Delannoy, J., Amabili, M., Matthews, B., Painter, B., Karazis, K. Non-linear damping identification in nuclear systems under external excitation V04AT04A051.https://doi.org/10.1115/IMECE2015-52874.
Google Scholar
Delannoy et al., 2016
Delannoy, J., Amabili, M., Matthews, B., Painter, B., Karazis, K. Identification of non-linear damping of nuclear reactor components in case of one-to-one internal resonance V04AT05A039.https://doi.org/10.1115/IMECE2016-66311.
Google Scholar
Ferrari et al., 2018
Ferrari, G., Balasubramanian, P., Le Guisquet, S., Piccagli, L., Karazis, K., Painter, B., Amabili, M. Non-linear vibrations of nuclear fuel rods 338, 269–283.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nucengdes.2018.08.013. URL:http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S002954931830668X.
Google Scholar
Amabili, 2019
M. Amabili
Derivation of nonlinear damping from viscoelasticity in case of nonlinear vibrations
Nonlinear Dyn., 97 (3) (2019), pp. 1785-1797
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ferrari et al., 2020
G. Ferrari, G. Franchini, P. Balasubramanian, F. Giovanniello, S. Le Guisquet, K. Karazis, M. Amabili
Nonlinear vibrations of a nuclear fuel rod supported by spacer grids
Nucl. Eng. Des., 110503 (2020)
Google Scholar
Catterou et al., 2017
Catterou, T., Blanc, V., Ricciardi, G., Bourgeois, S., Cochelin, B. Assessment tools for numerical resolution of a contact dynamic problem with modal basis reduction 199, 540–545.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2017.09.154.
Google Scholar
Catterou et al., 2018
Catterou, T. Numerical and experimental analysis of the non-linear behavior of a tube bundle with clearances. URL:https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-01960402.
Google Scholar
Cast3m, 2019
C. a l energie atomique, Cast3m, finite element software. URL:www.cast3M.cea.fr.
Google Scholar
Renard, 1998
Renard, Y. Modelization of the instabilities of elastic solids under dry friction, theoretical and numerical aspects.
Google Scholar
Johnson, 1985
Johnson, K. Contact Mechanics. Cambridge University Press.
Google Scholar
Hassan and Rogers, 2005
Hassan, M.A., Rogers, R.J. Friction modelling of preloaded tube contact dynamics 235(22), 2349–2357.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nucengdes.2005.05.004. URL:http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029549305001755.
Google Scholar
Antunes et al., 1990
Antunes, J., Axisa, F., Beaufils, B., Guilbaud, D. Coulomb friction modelling in numericalsimulations of vibration and wear work rate of multispan tube bundles 4(3), 287–304.https://doi.org/10.1016/S0889-9746(05)80016-7. URL:http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0889974605800167.
Google Scholar