<title>Development of multiphysics particle method simulation code PHALSER and its application to various phenomena</title>
<author>1,Kenta Inagaki</author>
<Affiliation>1,Nuclear Technology Research Laboratory,Central Research Institute of Electric Power Industry,Kanagawa,Japan</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Sience and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2020.1862717</DOI>
<URL>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00223131.2020.1862717</URL>
Development of multiphysics particle method simulation code PHALSER and its application to various phenomena
Kenta Inagaki
Nuclear Technology Research Laboratory,Central Research Institute of Electric Power Industry,Kanagawa,Japan
<Section>Abstract</Section>
A new particle method code called PHALSER (PHysics-based particle AnaLyzer for SEveRe accident) was developed to simulate various phenomena involving phase changes, such as the melting and solidification of materials. One of the main functions is to simulate the behavior of molten materials in a severe accident in a nuclear power plant. In PHALSER, four types of particle (fluid, solid, wall, and discrete element method (DEM) particles) are used to model various situations. The melting and solidification of materials can be simulated by transforming solid particles into fluid particles and vice versa when the melting and solidification conditions are met, respectively. A eutectic reaction can be approximately treated by defining the melting temperature as a function of material composition. A background model was also implemented in PHALSER to define the physical properties of the background, which corresponds to the void area where no particles are allocated, so that the effect of the surrounding phase can be evaluated with a low computational cost. Three calculations on melt spreading, B4C/SS annealing, and spray droplet dissipation were conducted as examples to investigate the applicability of the developed code to these phenomena, and the results were compared with experimental ones for validation.
KEYWORDS:  Particle method;multiphysics;simulation;melt spreading;eutectic reaction;spray
<Section>1 Introduction</Section>
To provide a high level of confidence in safety analysis of nuclear power plants, it is necessary to understand the detailed behaviors of the severe accident phenomena in a nuclear power plant, in which the melting, relocation and solidification of materials occur. There have been many experimental tests to study elementary steps in a severe accident. KATS [1], PULiMS [2], and Vulcano [3] tests were conducted to investigate the spread of corium on a floor with and without coolant water. The solidification of corium in subcooled water was investigated in a FARO test [4]. The CAFE test [5] was also developed to study the rheology and corrosion of corium. In Hokkaido University, experiments were conducted to investigate the spreading behavior of a fallen molten metal [6]. For numerical simulations of those phenomena, particle methods such as the moving particle semi-implicit (MPS) method [7] or the smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH) method [8] have been used by many researchers. Simulations of melt-spreading have been conducted using MPS [9–11] and SPH [12]. MPS method was also applied for the simulation of Molten Core-Concrete Interaction (MCCI) [13,14]. In our previous study, the author developed a particle method code [15] in which both fluid and solid particles can be used at the same time, enabling the simulation of the melting and solidification of materials by transforming fluid particles into solid particles and vice versa depending on the temperature. Although the melting and solidification of materials were modelled to depend only on the temperature in those analyses, it is necessary to deal with the eutectic reaction because melting reaction occurs at the interface between different materials in the reactor during a severe accident. Another challenge in using the conventional particle method codes is the void space where no particles are assigned. Except for the case of a vacuum environment, there is gas or fluid phases, such as air, around the material of the simulation target. Although it is possible to also assign particles to the surrounding phase, it leads to a huge computational cost. One solution is to give the material properties of the surrounding phase as inputs to approximately evaluate their effect without allocating any particle for the phase as in reference [16] (hereinafter, referred to as the background model).
Discrete element method (DEM) [17] is also a kind of particle method used to investigate dynamic behavior of systems involving a large number of distinct bodies, such as spray droplets, small debris particles, powders, and so force. Coupling the DEM solver with MPS or SPH enables to evaluate the interaction between distinct bodies and surrounding fluid phase as Cleary [18] combined DEM and SPH models to simulate the spray impingement into a pool of water.
In this study, a new particle method code called PHALSER (PHysics-based particle AnaLyzer for SEveRe accident) is developed on the basis of MPS method, in which a eutectic model is implemented to enable more realistic simulation of severe accident phenomena, a background model is added to consider the effect of surrounding gas phase with low computational costs, and solvers for several types of particles are coupled to simulate wide variety of phenomena. The code developed is used to simulate the spreading of a fallen molten metal, eutectic liquid formation in isothermal annealing, and the dissipation behavior of spray droplets to confirm its applicability to various phenomena.
<Section>2 Multiphysics particle simulation code PHALSER</Section>
The moving particle semi-implicit (MPS) method [7] is a particle method developed for the simulation of fluid dynamics, in which a continuous body of fluid is discretized using fluid particles. The governing equations for the fluid dynamics are discretized and used as a model of the interaction between particles to calculate the motion of each particle. Surrounding walls, ceilings, and floors are modelled with wall particles. The particle method can also be used to simulate movable rigid bodies, in which a rigid body is modelled as a cluster of solid particles [19].
PHALSER is an in-house dynamic particle method code developed in CRIEPI in which solvers for various types of particles and physical models are coupled. Figure 1 shows a simplified example of how simulation targets are modelled in PHALSER. Four types of particle, fluid, solid, wall, and DEM particles, are used to deal with different phases. Fluid particles are used to discretize the continuous body of a gas or liquid phase. Solid particles are used for movable rigid bodies. Wall particles are used for the walls, floor, ceiling, and so forth, the positions of which can be assumed to be fixed in space during the entire process. The dynamics of these particles is calculated by discretizing the governing equations of motion into models of the interaction between particles similarly to that in the moving particle semi-implicit (MPS) method [20] as explained in the following subsections. DEM particles are used to simulate discrete elements, such as powders, droplets, small pieces of debris, and so forth. In addition to the motion, the heat transport and mass diffusion between particles are also calculated to obtain time profiles of the temperature and material composition of each particle. The change of phase induced by the melting or solidification of materials is treated by transforming solid particles into fluid particles or vice versa on the basis of the temperature and composition of the particles.
Figure 1. Illustration of the modelling in PHALSER
In addition to the four types of particle, a background model is used to evaluate the interaction between the particles and the surrounding void space, which is indicated by a shaded area in Figure 1. For example, in dam-break calculations [20], which have been conducted as a benchmark problem for conventional particle method codes, the water and tank were modelled using fluid and wall particles, respectively, but the surrounding air was not considered because modelling the air using fluid particles results in a huge computational cost. In this report, the void space where no particles are assigned is referred to as the background. In PHALSER, the physical properties of the background phase are given to the code as input data to evaluate their effect on the particles. Although the background model can treat only one-way interactions, from the background phase to the particles, it is useful for evaluating the effect of the background phase with a small computational cost.
The calculation steps are illustrated in Figure 2. A detailed explanation of each step is given in the following subsections.
Figure 2. Calculation process in PHALSER
The source code of PHALSER was written in C-language without any parallelization scheme. The forward difference scheme was used to approximate the time derivative in each equation in the following subsections.
<Section>3 Background model<Section>
The background phase is characterized by defining the properties, such as the density ρBG and viscous coefficient μBG, and the spatial distribution of quantities, such as the temperature TBG and velocity uBG, using input data, where the subscript BG represents the value for the background phase. The transport of momentum, heat, and mass between the background phase and particles is evaluated using these background parameters as described in the following subsections. Note here that the interaction is only one way: from the background to the particles. Therefore, this model can only be used when the background phase can be assumed to be constant during the phenomena.
Modelling of motion
Fluid particles
The governing equations of motion for a fluid particle are given by
DρDt=0,
(1)
∂ui∂t=fviscoi+fexti+fsuri+fpresii∈Fluid,
(2)
where DDt and ρ stand for the material differentiation and density, respectively, the subscript i is an index of the particle, and u is the velocity of the particle. Equation (1) is an incompressibility condition and Equation (2) is derived from the Navier–Stokes equation. The right-hand side of Equation (2) consists of viscosity, external force, surface tension, and pressure gradient terms.
The particle interaction model for the viscosity term is given by
fvisco=μ2dρλn0∑(uj−ui)wij+μBC2dρλn0(uBG−ui)(n0−ni)j∈Fluid/Ridig/Wall/DEM,
(3)
where μ is the viscosity coefficient, d is the number of dimensions, n0 is a constant particle number density, and the subscript j is the index of particles that are in the vicinity of particle i. The first term on the right-hand side of Equation (3) corresponds to the viscous force between the neighbor particles and the second term is the viscous force from the background phase. As indicated in Equation (3), all types of neighbor particle (fluid, solid, wall, and DEM particles) are considered in the calculation of the viscosity term. The second term is the viscous resistance caused by the background phase. The weight function wij [7] is introduced so that the interaction between particles i and j becomes stronger when the distance between them, rij, is smaller. The weight function used in PHALSER is defined as
w(rij)=⎧⎩⎨⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪(rerij−1.0)⋅(r0rij)32rij<re 0rij≥re,
(4)
where r0 is the particle diameter and re is the effective radius defined as re = 3.2r0, the coefficient of which was empirically obtained. The sum of the weight functions of all neighboring particles is defined as the particle number density ni.
ni=∑jw(rij)
(5)
The parameter λ in Equation (3) is given by
λ=∑i≠jr2ijw(rij)∑i≠jw(rij).
(6)
The external force term fexti involves the gravity force and the inertia resistance from the background:
fexti=g+ 12δsuriCdρBGπr204|uBG−ui|(uBG−ui).
(7)
The first term on the right-hand side is the gravity and the second term is the inertia resistance caused by the background phase, where Cd is the drag coefficient. The coefficient δsuri is a delta function, which becomes 1 when particle i is a surface particle facing the background phase.
The effect of the surface or interfacial tension force is evaluated using the potential model developed by Kondo et al. [21], which is given by
fsuri=∑jCsurij(rij−r0)(re−rij)rj−ririjj∈Fluid/Rigid/Wall,
(8)
where Csurij is a constant proportional to the surface tension coefficient. For the derivation of the coefficient Csurij, see reference [21]. The surface tension force is active between all types of particle except DEM particles.
Similarly to that in the conventional MPS method [20], the viscous force, external force, and surface tension terms are explicitly calculated first to obtain the temporal velocity u* and temporal position r* as
u∗i(t)=ui(t)+Δt(fviscoi+fexti+fsuri),
(9)
r∗i(t)=ri(t)+Δtui(t).
(10)
After the temporal position r∗ and velocity u∗ are obtained, the pressure p is computed using the Poisson equation (Equation (11)). The temporal particle number density n∗i is obtained using Equation (5) evaluated at the temporal position r*.
dn0∑j[pj−pi(r∗ij)2(r∗j−r∗i)⋅w(r∗ij)]=αρΔt2n0−n∗in0
(11)
Here, r∗ij is the distance between r∗i and r∗j and α is a coefficient introduced to improve the calculation stability, the value of which should be empirically obtained. Equation (11) is a system of linear equations for the pressure, which is solved using the BiCGStab method in PHALSER. After computing the pressure, the pressure gradient force is evaluated using
fpresi=dρn0∑j[pj+pi(r∗ij)2(r∗j−r∗i)⋅w(r∗ij)]j∈Fluid/Rigid/Wall/DEM.
(12)
Finally, the position and velocity in the next time step can be explicitly predicted by substituting Equation (12) into Equations (13) and (14).
ui(t+Δt)=u∗i(t)+Δtfpresi
(13)
ri(t+Δt)=r∗i(t)+Δt2fpresi
(14)
<Section>Solid particles</Section>
As indicated in Figure 3, each movable rigid body is discretized by a cluster of solid particles. Hence, each solid particle is indexed to the rigid body to which it belongs.
Figure 3. Rigid bodies composed of solid particles
The equation of motion for a solid particle is
∂ui∂t=fviscoi+fexti+fsuri+fcoli+fpresii∈Rigid,
(15)
which is the same as Equation (12) except that the collision term fcoli has been added. The same formulations as those for fluid particles (Equations (3), (7), (8), and (12)) can be used for each term.
A collision force exists between the solid or DEM particles when the distance between them is smaller than r0. The collision force is evaluated using
fcoli=∑jCcolij(rij−r0)rj−ririjj∈Rigid/DEM.
(16)
The impulsive force due to collision is defined to be proportional to the overlap length of the particles and its magnitude depends on the coefficient Ccolij, the value of which should be empirically chosen because a too large impulsive force may lead to an unstable calculation.
After evaluating the viscous force, external force, surface tension, and collision force terms for all solid particles, the temporal position r* is evaluated under the constraint that the relative positions of particles inside the same rigid body are preserved. The total force and torque acting on the rigid body can be calculated by adding up the forces acting on the particles belonging to the rigid body. From the total force and torque, the temporal position r* can be evaluated as
r∗i=rg,Π+1MΠdPΠdt+RΠ⋅rig,
(17)
where the subscript Π is an index of the rigid body, rg,Π is the position vector of the center of gravity of the rigid body Π, rig is the relative position of particle i from rg,Π, and M, P, and R are the mass, momentum, and rotation matrix of the rigid body, respectively. The procedure for evaluating these parameters can be found in reference [15].
After the temporal velocity and position are obtained, the pressure and its gradient force are calculated using Equations (11) and (12), respectively. The pressure gradient force should also be converted to the rigid body force as in Equation (17).
<Section>Wall particles</Section>
Since each wall particle is fixed at its initial position, its motion is not calculated, as indicated by Equation (18).
ui=0i∈Wall
(18)
<Section>DEM particles</Section>
The equation of motion for a DEM particle is given by Equation (19), which is almost identical to Equation (15). Although no viscous force fviscoi, surface tension fsuri, or pressure gradient force fpresi acts between DEM particles, these terms should also be included to consider the interactions between DEM particles and fluid, solid, and wall particles.
∂ui∂t=fviscoi+fexti+fsuri+fcoli+fpresii∈DEM
(19)
The temporal velocity and temporal position are evaluated using Equations (20) and (10), respectively.
u∗i(t)=ui(t)+Δt(fviscoi+fexti+fsuri+fcoli)
(20)
To calculate the pressure and its gradient force, the same process as that for fluid particles is applied.
<Section>Modelling of heat transport</Section>
The equation of heat transport is
∂Hi∂t=qconvi+qboui+qradi+qintii∈Fluid/Rigid/Wall/DEM,
(21)
where Hi is the enthalpy per unit volume of particle i and the terms on the right-hand side of Equation (21) are the heat convection, the heat transfer at the phase boundaries, the radiation at the surface, and the internal heat source from left to right.
Heat convection inside a continuous body is modelled as Equation (22) using the Laplacian model of the MPS method.
qconvi=δij2dλn0κ∑j[(Tj−Ti)wij]
(22)
Here, κ is the thermal conductivity and the coefficient δ ij is a delta function, which becomes 1 when the phases of particles i and j are the same. The relationship between the temperature Ti and the enthalpy Hi is given by
Ti=⎧⎩⎨⎪⎪Hi/ρcpTmHi−ρLf/ρcp(Hi<ρcpTm)(ρcpTm≤Hi≤ρcpTm+ρLf)(ρcpTm+ρLf<Hi),
(23)
where Tm, Lf, and cp are the melting temperature, latent heat, and specific heat, respectively.
The heat transfer at the boundary between different phases is evaluated using
qboui=∑j(1−δij)Cbouhij(Ti−Tj)r0wijn0+δsurihBG(TBG−Ti)r0.
(24)
The first term on the right-hand side of Equation (24) corresponds to the heat exchange between the particles of different phases, in which hij is the interfacial heat transfer coefficient. The coefficient Cbou was introduced to make the evaluated heat transport theoretically correct. For the derivation of the coefficient Cbou, see reference [15]. The second term is the heat exchange with the background phase, which occurs between the surface particles and background. The heat loss from the surface to the background phase can be approximately evaluated by using an appropriate value for the heat transfer coefficient hBG. For example, a typical value of hBG is in the range of 2.5–25 W m−2 K−1 when the background is air without forced convection.
The heat radiation is evaluated using
qradi=−δsurir20εiσT4i+(1−εk)∑kδsurkr20εkσT4kFi,k,
(25)
where ε, σ, and Fi,k are the emissivity, Stefan–Boltzmann constant, and view factor, respectively [15]. The subscript k is the index of surface particles facing particle i.
The heat source term qint is used to consider, for example, the effect of the decay heat of a nuclear fuel.
Modelling of mass diffusion
In a eutectic reaction, material diffusion plays an important role because the melting temperature depends on the material composition. The diffusion of the scalar variable φ is calculated using Equation (26), in which φ is any type of scalar such as the concentration of a material, an ion, a void, and so forth.
∂φi∂t=2dλniD∑j[(φj−φi)w(rij)]+δsuri2dλn0D BG(φBG−φi)(n0−ni)i∈Fluid/Rigid/Wall/DEM
(26)
The coefficient D in Equation (26) is a diffusion coefficient. The first and second terms on the right-hand side of Equation (26) correspond to the diffusional transport of φ between particles and that from/to the background, respectively.
<Section>Modelling of melting/solidification</Section>
The melting or solidification of particles and their transformations are detected at the beginning of every time step, which is described as ‘sort fluid/solid/wall/DEM particles’ in Figure 2. The melting and solidification of materials are modelled by transforming the particle type as follows. When the temperature Ti of a solid, wall, or DEM particle is above the melting temperature Tmelt, the particle is transformed into a fluid particle. In contrast, a fluid particle with a temperature below Tmelt is transformed into either a solid or wall particle depending on its surrounding environment. The particle is transformed into a wall particle when it is in contact with other wall particles at the moment of solidification. On the other hand, if other solid particles belonging to a rigid body Π exist in the vicinity of the particle, the particle is transformed into a solid particle and subsequently moves as part of the rigid body Π. Eutectic melting can be approximately modelled by defining the melting temperature Tmelt as a function of the material composition.
<Section>Simulations of various phenomena</Section>
Three different phenomena were simulated using PHALSER. All numerical simulations were performed on a desktop PC with an Intel Core i7-4790 3.6 GHz, 16 GB RAM system.
<Section>Melt spreading</Section>
In an accident at a nuclear power plant, part of the molten corium may penetrate the lower head of the pressure vessel and spread on the ground floor, which is referred to as melt spreading. Understanding the behavior of melt spreading is important for safety analysis. The code PHALSER was used to simulate an experiment conducted by Ogura et al. [6] as a benchmark of melt spreading. In the experiment, molten copper fell onto a cold steel plate and the spreading and solidification of the melt were observed.
<Section>Configuration and conditions</Section>
The simulation was conducted in the three-dimensional configuration shown in Figure 4, where the molten copper and the steel plate were modelled using fluid and wall particles, respectively. The parameters set for the particles are shown in Table 1. The particle diameter was set to 0.8 mm and the total number of particles was 440,000. The time step size dt was set to 4.0 × 10−5 s. The background was assumed to be argon maintained at 373 K. It was also assumed that there is no argon flow in the background, i.e. the velocity throughout the background is zero.
Table 1. Properties in melt spreading simulation
Figure 4. Initial position of particles in melt spreading simulation
In the initial state, all copper particles were defined as fluid particles. Then, the enthalpy of the copper particles decreased upon contact with the cold steel plate. When the temperature of a copper particle became lower than the melting temperature, the copper particle was transformed into a solid or wall particle.
<Section>Results and discussion</Section>
The simulation results of the melt spreading obtained by PHALSER are shown in Figure 5 along with the experimental results [6]. The moment of the initial collision between the steel plate and the tip of the flow of molten copper was set to t = 0. It took 55 h to simulate the phenomenon occurring in 0.7 s.
Figure 5. Comparison of melt spreading simulation and experimental results
The molten copper hit the steel plate and formed a shape like a milk crown at 0.1 s in both the simulation and the experiment. The protrusions that periodically formed around the bulk are referred to as finger-like shapes. The number of finger-like shapes obtained by simulation was in good agreement with that obtained by experiment. The formation of a blank part at the center of the bulk at t = 0.7 s was also reproduced by the simulation with good qualitative agreement. On the other hand, the growth of finger-like shapes observed in the experiment was not accurately reproduced by the simulation. Although the finger-like shapes continued to grow up to 0.5 s in the experiment, they merged with each other after 0.4 s in the simulation. It is considered that this disagreement was observed because particle size was not small enough. In the present model, the timing of particle solidification depends on the particle size because larger particles have more enthalpy to lose before solidification. Therefore, a better simulation result can be expected when using smaller particles. On the other hand, it is also important to prevent the increase in computational cost. One of the solutions is to use a particle method with various particle sizes, in which the surface or the edge of the flow can be simulated with smaller particles. Another is to develop a model to deal with the partial solidification of a particle, which can be applied to the formation of crust, the thickness of which is smaller than the particle diameter. These solutions are left as future works.
To conduct a quantitative comparison, the surface area of the solidified central bulk was investigated as follows. Ogura et al. [6] defined the dimensionless spreading area A∗sp as Equation (27) and an empirical formulation (Equation (28)) was developed for the dimensionless spreading area as a function of several dimensionless numbers.
A∗sp=Asp(M/ρ)2/3
(27)
A∗sp=We−0.37Pe0.68(Ll)−0.078
(28)
Here, Asp is the area of the central bulk projected on the steel plate, M (=0.5 kg) is the total mass of molten copper, l is the nozzle diameter, and L is the distance between the tip of the nozzle and the steel plate. The Weber number We and Peclet number Pe are defined as
We=ρV2lγ,
(29)
Pe=ρCpVlκ.
(30)
Here, V and γ are the representative velocity and interfacial tension coefficient, respectively. Although Equation (28) indicates that the spreading area of the central bulk increases with Pe, this was not confirmed by experiment because it is difficult to change the heat conduction coefficient κ or heat capacity Cp in the experiment. To verify the dependence of the spreading area on Pe, several calculations were conducted using PHALSER while virtually changing the heat capacity of copper. The results are shown in Figure 6. Although many scattered coagulates were formed around the central bulk, the surface area of the central bulk, which is indicated by the broken circle in Figure 6, was measured as Asp. It was found that the surface area of the central bulk increased with the heat capacity of copper or Pe. The evaluated A∗sp was compared with Equation (28) as shown in Figure 7, where error bars represent the measurement uncertainty reported in reference [6]. The surface area evaluated by simulation was found to be within the error range.
Figure 6. Visual comparison of the simulation results for different Pe values
Figure 7. Comparison of the calculated dimensionless spreading area with the empirical formulation [6]
The mechanism of the formation of larger scattered coagulates at smaller Pe values was examined by investigating the movement of particles. Snapshots of simulation results at t = 0.06 s for two different Pe values are shown in Figure 8. After the molten copper flow hit the steel plate, a torus shape was formed by solidified particles, as shown in Figure 8(a), and the inner radius of the torus shape became smaller when Pe was smaller because fluid particles were cooled more rapidly. Then, the following fluid particles jumped into the air upon collision with the solidified particles. As illustrated in Figure 8(b), the chunks of airborne particles were larger when the inner radius of the torus shape was smaller. Consequently, larger coagulates were formed at smaller Pe values.
Figure 8. Snapshots of simulation result at t = 0.06 for Pe = 1780 and Pe = 450 cases
Liquid phase formation by eutectic reaction in B4C/Fe annealing
The reaction between boron carbide (B4C) and stainless steel (SS) is one of the most important phenomena to investigate in a severe accident in a nuclear power plant because control rods used in light-water reactors consist of SS tubes and B4C granules. Nagase et al. conducted experiments [22] in which the reaction couples of these two materials were isothermally annealed in the temperature range from 1073 to 1623 K. In this study, PHALSER was used to simulate the B4C/SS annealing test to confirm its applicability to various phenomena involving eutectic reactions.
<Section>Configuration and conditions</Section>
An isothermal annealing test of a B4C pellet/SS couple at 1623 K was simulated using PHALSER. The simulation was conducted in the two-dimensional configuration shown in Figure 9, where both the B4C pellet and the iron crucible were modelled using solid particles. Although the crucible used in the test was made of type 304 SS, it was simplified to pure iron to eliminate the effect of minor elements in the SS in this simulation. The initial state of the simulation target was modelled using 8089 particles for the iron crucible and 3160 particles for the B4C pellet, where the particle diameter was 1.25 × 10−4 m. The time step size dt was set to 4.0 × 10−5 s.
Figure 9. Initial positions of particles in the simulation of the B4C/Fe reaction
The change in composition due to the diffusion of each element should be considered when examining eutectic reactions. In the simulation of B4C/Fe reactions, only the change in boron concentration is considered because it was revealed by experiment that the eutectic liquid phase was formed on the iron side owing to the diffusion of boron while the diffusion of carbon or iron was negligible. Hence, the boron concentration φ was defined with initial values of 79.6 wt% for B4C particles and 0 for iron particles (Table 2). On the basis of the Fe–B phase diagram (Figure 10), the melting condition of iron particles was modelled as a function of φ as follows. At the initial state, iron particles are solid particles consisting of a single γ-Fe phase. When the boron concentration on an iron particle is increased to 0 < φ < 2.0, the iron particle still remains a solid particle in which the liquid and γ-iron phases coexist, which corresponds to the half-white/half-gray particle in Figure 10. When the boron concentration is in the range of 2.0 ≤ φ ≤ 6.1, the iron particle becomes a fluid particle depicted as a gray particle in Figure 10.
Table 2. Properties for simulation of B4C/Fe reaction
Figure 10. Particle modelling of intermetallic phases of B4C/Fe based on the Fe-B phase diagram
In calculating the diffusion of boron, it was assumed as a basis that all intermetallic phases instantly formed at boundaries with infinitesimal thicknesses. Therefore, if a B4C particle and an iron particle are in contact, infinitesimally thin layers of 2.0 wt%B–Fe liquid, 6.1 wt%B–Fe liquid, Fe2B, and FeB phases are assumed to exist at the boundary as shown in Figure 11. The diffusion of boron through the liquid phase is driven by the gradient of boron concentration between the liquid phases of 2.0 wt%B–Fe and 6.1 wt%B–Fe, which leads to the growth of a liquid layer as illustrated in Figure 11.
Figure 11. Illustration of particles and distribution of boron concentration φ during liquid phase formation
As for the material properties of the eutectic liquid phase, the surface tension and viscosity coefficients (Table 2) were assumed to be constant and their values were determined by referring to the experimental data obtained by Tomut et al. [23]. The diffusion coefficient of boron in the liquid phase, D, was set to 2.8 × 10−9 using a modified Stokes–Einstein equation [24].
D=kBT3πμR
(31)
Here, kB, μ, and R are Boltzmann’s constant, the viscosity coefficient, and the atomic radius of boron, respectively. The diffusion of boron in the solid phase was not considered since it is much slower than that in the liquid phase.
<Section>Results and discussion</Section>
The simulation results are shown in Figure 12, where the B4C/Fe couple is maintained at 1623 K for 90 s. The time consumed for this simulation was 10 days. The black and white particles are solid particles of B4C and iron, respectively. Other particles correspond to the molten iron, the color of which indicates the boron concentration. The shape of the liquified region obtained using PHALSER was in good agreement with the experimental result [22]. The leaning of the B4C pellet, which was a characteristic feature observed in experiments involving annealing at more than 1498 K, was well reproduced by simulation using PHALSER. The mechanism causing the pellet to lean was understood by visualizing the simulation results as shown in Figure 13. In the beginning of the liquid phase formation, claw-like traps are formed on both sides of the upper surface of the pellet, preventing the pellet from being lifted by buoyancy force. As the liquid phase grows, a trap on one side is released by the perturbation of the liquid surface and the pellet is lifted up by the buoyancy force on the same side.
Figure 12. B4C/Fe sample maintained for 90 s at 1623 K
Figure 13. Mechanism of pellet leaning during isothermal annealing test
The average thickness of the liquid layer at the bottom of the crucible was evaluated from the simulation result and it was compared with the results obtained in the experiment [22], in which the liquid layer thickness x and the square root of time were formulated assuming a quadratic law as x=3.0×10−8⋅t−−−−−−−−−−√ (Figure 14). The liquid layer thickness predicted by simulation was quantitatively in good agreement. Although the growth rate in the simulation increased steeply rather than linearly, it can be explained that the flow of the liquid phase promoted the transport of boron to the iron side.
Figure 14. Thickness of liquid phase formed at boundary between B4C pellet and Fe crucible against square root of time
From these comparisons, it was confirmed that PHALSER can be applied for the simulation of dynamics involving eutectic reactions.
Scattering of spray droplets in spent fuel pool
A spray cooling system is installed in a spent fuel pool (SFP) in a nuclear power plant to mitigate the temperature increase of spent fuels under loss-of-coolant-accident (LOCA) conditions. It has been pointed out that the decay heat of spent fuels may create an updraft of air from the fuel assembly, which may prevent some of the spray droplets from entering the fuel assembly. It is expected that the dissipation behavior of spray droplets will depend on various parameters, such as the flow rates of spray water and updraft, the size of droplets, the shape of the spray nozzle, and so forth. Hence, the developed code PHALSER was used to simulate the droplet kinetics to quantitatively clarify these effects, which is important for evaluating the cooling performance of a spray.
Configuration and conditions
The simulation was conducted in three dimensions where each water droplet from the spray was modelled by a DEM particle. The initial state of the simulation is shown in Figure 15, in which a spray nozzle is located above a fuel assembly. The DEM particles are located at the position of the spray nozzle, the shape of which is a 0.135 m × 0.135 m square with 9 × 9 holes evenly allocated on it. DEM particles were supplied to the same positions intermittently to imitate the supply of spray water. The number of particles that reached the head of the fuel assembly was counted to evaluate the ratio of the volume of water entering the fuel assembly to the total volume of water supplied by the spray, which is referred to as the ‘water supply ratio’ in the following. The diameter of each droplet was determined randomly to be between 0.5 and 1.0 mm with an average diameter of 0.75 mm (Table 3). In total, 240,000 particles were used in the simulation, which corresponds to 0.5 L of water. The initial downward velocity of the droplets was set to 4.3 m s−1, which is equivalent to a flow rate of 0.21 m3 h−1. The time step size dt was set to 1.0 × 10−4 m.
Table 3. Properties for SFP spray simulation
Figure 15. Configuration of SFP spray simulation
Different from the other calculations described in the previous sections, the diameter of the DEM particles is a variable. When two droplets collide, they merge to form one larger particle instead of being repulsed, with the total mass and total momentum of the particles being the same before and after the collision. The effects of other factors that may change the diameter, such as the deformation, fragmentation, and vaporization of droplet and the liquefaction of the surrounding steam are not considered in this study.
The updraft of the air was considered using the background model. The target space was discretized using a cubic mesh with a 0.0125 m side and the air velocity was defined for each mesh as
uBG=(0,Umain,0)+(Ux¯¯¯¯¯¯,Uy¯¯¯¯¯¯,Uz¯¯¯¯¯¯).
(32)
The first term on the right-hand side of Equation (32) is the main stream of the updraft and the second term corresponds to the air velocity fluctuation caused by turbulence. The average magnitude of the fluctuation was set to 6% of Umain, which was estimated using the result of turbulence analysis using a commercial CFD code. The inertia resistance from the air was evaluated by substituting Equation (33) into Equation (7), in which the drag coefficient Cd was set to 0.44. Several calculations were conducted with Umain changing from 0.1 to 8.0 m s−1 to evaluate the water supply ratio.
Results and discussion
Snapshots of the simulation results are shown in Figure 16 for different air velocities. Each simulation was finished within 2 hours. The color of the particles corresponds to their size, that is, red particles are larger, having merged with other particles through collision.
Figure 16. Snapshots of the SFP spray simulation with different air velocities
It was observed that the horizontal scattering of droplets was greater at a higher air velocity. The relationship between the water supply ratio and the air velocity is shown in Figure 17 (air, 0.75 mm). When the air velocity was low, the water supply ratio was almost 1.0, indicating that almost all the droplets fell inside the fuel assembly without horizontal scattering. On the other hand, the water supply ratio became smaller as the air velocity increased owing to horizontal scattering. This behavior was in good qualitative agreement with the result of a similar experiment [25]. The water supply ratio became almost zero when the air velocity was more than 6 m s−1. This is theoretically reasonable because the air resistance force becomes larger than the gravity force when the linear air velocity is more than 6.0 m s−1 for a particle of 0.75 mm diameter.
Figure 17. Water supply ratio against air/steam velocity
Another set of calculations were conducted assuming that the background was filled with steam instead of air. All of the parameters used in the calculations were identical to those in Table 3 except the density of the background, ρBG, which was changed to 0.6, the density of steam at 100 °C. The obtained relationship between the water supply ratio and the steam velocity is shown in Figure 17 (steam, 0.75 mm). The water supply ratio when the background was filled with steam was higher than that when it was filled with air. This is also in good agreement with the tendency observed in the experiment. In reference [25], the increase in water supply ratio in a steam environment was considered to be caused by the growth of the droplet due to the liquefaction of steam agglomeration on the droplet surface because the effect of air resistance relative to that of gravity is smaller for larger droplets. On the other hand, it was revealed by the simulation results that a lower steam density is also a significant cause of the increase in water supply ratio.
As a parametric study, the effect of droplet size was also investigated by simulation with different droplet sizes, in which the average diameter was 1.0 mm (0.75–1.25 mm) or 0.5 mm (0.25–0.75 mm) at an initial velocity of 2.4 or 9.6 m s−1, respectively; thus, the rate of water supply was 0.21 m3 h−1 in both cases. These results are also shown in Figure 17, in which the water supply ratio became significantly higher when the droplet size was smaller. This is a result of two different effects of the droplet size that cancelled each other. One is the scale effect, i.e. the air resistance force becomes dominant compared with the gravity force as the droplet size decreases. Hence, smaller droplets experience a high degree of scattering and the water supply ratio decreases. The other effect is the difference in initial velocity. In these calculations, the smaller droplets had a higher initial velocity such that the flow rate was the same in all cases. Hence, the shorter traveling time of smaller droplets resulted in a lower degree of scattering. In these cases, the latter effect was stronger, resulting in the tendency described above. An important finding from this result is that the cooling capability of a spray depends not only on the flow rate but also on the size of spray droplets. It was thus demonstrated that PHALSER can be used to quantitatively evaluate these effects. A very simple assumption was made for the velocity distribution of the gas phase in this study, and the accuracy of the simulation can be improved on the basis of the velocity distribution calculated using other CFD codes as an input. Such a velocity distribution will be used in the future to simulate the actual configuration of a spray cooling system in an SFP in a nuclear power plant.
Conclusion
A multiphysics particle simulation code called PHALSER was developed for modelling various phenomena by using fluid, solid, wall, and DEM particles. A background model was implemented to deal with the interaction from the surrounding phase around the particles with a small computational cost. A new model for eutectic reactions was also developed. Three simulations were conducted to investigate the applicability of PHALSER to different phenomena.
PHALSER was used to simulate melt spreading, and the characteristic behavior of the solidification process was well reproduced. The results of a parametric study revealed that the surface area of the solidified bulk depends on the heat capacity of the melt, and that the surface area evaluated using PHALSER is in quantitatively good agreement with the formulation obtained in past research.
To investigate the applicability of PHALSER to phenomena including eutectic reactions, an isothermal heating test of B4C/Fe was simulated. The obtained results were consistent with the experimental results in terms of both the appearance and rate of liquid layer growth. It was revealed by investigating the simulation results that the leaning of the B4C pellet after annealing was caused by the combination of the buoyancy force acting on the pellet and the trap formed on the pellet by the interfacial tension.
As an example of a simulation using DEM particles and the background model, an SFP spray was simulated to investigate the behavior of spray water being scattered by the updraft from the fuel assembly beneath. Each spray droplet was modelled using a DEM particle and the effect of the surrounding air phase was treated using the background model. The simulation results indicated that the ratio of water falling inside the fuel assembly decreases with increasing updraft velocity, which is in good agreement with experimental results. Some parametric studies were conducted to clarify the effects of the steam environment and droplet size.
On the basis of these results, the applicability of PHALSER to various phenomena was confirmed.
<Section>Acknowledgments</Section>
I would like to thank Mr. Muramoto from Tokyo Institute of Technology, without whom the simulation of the melt spreading would not have been completed. I also thank Dr. Miwa of Hokkaido University for his willingness to share his valuable experience obtained from experiments. Finally, I would like to express my appreciation to Dr. Yuasa for his assistance in the spray calculation.
<Section>Disclosure statement</Section>
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.
<Section>References</Section>
Engel G, Fieg G, Massier H, et al. KATS experiments to simulate corium spreading in the EPR core catcher concept. Proc. OECD Workshop on Ex-vessel Debris Coolability, Germany; 2000;148–155. [Google Scholar]
Konovalenko A, Karbojian A, Kudinov P. 2012. Experimental results on pouring and underwater liquid melt spreading and energetic melt-coolant interaction. Proc. 9th Int. Topical Meeting on Nuclear Thermal-Hydraulics, Operation and Safety (NUTHOS-9); 2012 Sept 9–13; Kaohsiung, Taiwan. [Google Scholar]
Journeeau C, Haquet JF, Spindler B, et al. The vulcano VE-U7 corium spreading benchmark. Prog Nucl Energy. 2006;48(3):215–234. . [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]
Magallon D, Huhtiniemi I. Corium melt quenching tests at low pressure and subcooled water in FARO. Nucl Eng Des. 2001;204(1–3):369–376. [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]
Fukano Y, Kawada K, Sato I, et al. 2009, CAFE experiments on the flow and freezing of metal fuel and cladding melts (1) - Test conditions and overview of the results - (IAEA-CN–176). International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). [Google Scholar]
Ogura T, Matsumoto T, Miwa S, et al. Experimental study on molten metal spreading and deposition behaviors. Ann Nucl Energy. 2018;118:353–362. [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]
Koshizuka S, Oka Y. Moving-particle semi-implicit method for fragmentation of incompressible fluid. J Nucl Sci Eng. 1996;123(3):421–434. [Taylor & Francis Online], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]
Monaghan JJ. Smoothed particle hydrodynamics. Ann Rev Astron Astrophys. 1992;30(1):543–574. [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]
Duan G, Yamaji A, Koshizuka S. A novel multiphase MPS algorithm for modeling crust formation by highly viscous fluid for simulating corium spreading. Nucl Eng Des. 2019;343:218–231. [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]
Kawahara T, Oka Y. Ex-vessel molten core solidification behavior by moving particle semi-implicit method. J Nucl Sci Eng. 2012;49(12):1156–1164. [Google Scholar]
Yamaji A, Li X. 2015. Development of MPS method for analyzing melt spreading behavior and MCCI in severe accidents. J. Phys.: Conference Series, 739, 6th Asian Physics Symposium; 2015 Aug 19–20; Bandung, Indonesia. [Google Scholar]
Fang HS, Bao K, Wei JA, et al. Simulations of droplet spreading and solidification using an improved SPH model. Numer Heat Transfer Part A: Appl. 2009;55(2):124–143. [Taylor & Francis Online], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]
Li X, Yamaji A. Three-dimensional numerical study on the mechanism of anisotropic MCCI by improved MPS method. Nucl Eng Des. 2017;314:207–216. [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]
Chai P, Erkan N, Kondo M, et al. Experimental research and numerical simulation of moving molten metal pool. Mechanical engineering letters, 1, Paper No.15–00367; 2015. [Crossref], [Google Scholar]
Inagaki K. Multi-physics particle method for the simulation of the severe accidents in the nuclear power plants. Nihon Genshiryoku Gakkai Wabun Ronbunshi (Online). 2015;14(4):249–260. in Japanese. [Crossref], [Google Scholar]
Inagaki K. Improved models of surface tension and air resistance for multiphysics particle method. J Nucl Sci Eng. 2018;55(2):169–180. [Google Scholar]
Cundall PA, Strack ODL. Discrete numerical model for granular assemblies. Geotechnique. 1979;29(1):47–65. [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]
Cleary PW, Serizawa Y. A coupled discrete droplet and SPH model for predicting spray impingement onto surfaces and into fluid pools. Appl Math Model. 2019;69:301–329. [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]
Tanaka M, Sakai M, Koshizuka S. Particle-based rigid body simulation and coupling with fluid simulation. Transactions of JSCES, Paper No. 20070007; 2007. in Japanese. [Google Scholar]
Koshizuka S. Particle method simulation. Maruzen; 2005. in Japanese. [Google Scholar]
Kondo M, Koshizuka S, Suzuki K, et al. Surface tension model using inter-particle force in particle method. ASME/JSME 2007 5th Joint Fluids Engineering Conference; 2007 Jul 30–Aug 2; San Diego, USA. [Crossref], [Google Scholar]
Nagase F, Uetsuka H, Otomo T. Chemical interactions between B4C and stainless steel at high temperatures. J Nucl Mater. 1997;245(1):52–59. [Crossref], [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]
Tomut M, Chiriac H, Marinescu M, et al. Viscosity and surface tension measurements on Fe-rich FeB liquid Alloy. J Non-Crys Solids. 1999;250–252(2):655–659. [Crossref], [Google Scholar]
Demmel F, Tani A. Stokes-Einstein relation of the liquid metal rubidium and its relationship to changes in the microscopic dynamics with increasing temperature. Phy Rev 2018;97:6. [Web of Science ®], [Google Scholar]
Tsukamoto N, Kaneko J, Shiba S. Safety research on regulatory issues of spent fuel pools (Phase-1). RREP-201901001; 2019. in Japanese. [Google Scholar]