<title>Numerical investigation of the CHF in a vertical round tube and a single rod channel based on the eulerian two-fluid model</title>
<author>1,WeiLiu,2,ZeminShang,3,LixinYang,4,YuLiu,5,YingHu,6,YangLiu</author>
<Affiliation>1,State Key Laboratory of Reactor System Design Technology, Nuclear Power Institute of China, Chengdu, 610213, China;2,School of Mechanical, Electronic and Control Engineering, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, 100044, China;3,School of Nuclear Science and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710049, China</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2021.103699</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S014919702100069X</URL>
Numerical investigation of the CHF in a vertical round tube and a single rod channel based on the eulerian two-fluid model
WeiLiu,ZeminShang,LixinYang,YuLiu,YingHu,YangLiu
State Key Laboratory of Reactor System Design Technology, Nuclear Power Institute of China, Chengdu, 610213, China
School of Mechanical, Electronic and Control Engineering, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, 100044, China
School of Nuclear Science and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710049, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
We develop node homogenization methods based on 1D and 3D node equivalent problems.
Numerical implementation is based on spherical-harmonics nodal collocation method.
The method is verified on the AECL-7236 PHWR benchmark for P1 and P3 approximations.
Results show the accuracy for coarse spatial mesh and advance homogenization techniques.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The established Eulerian two-fluid model could be used for both water and refrigerant CHF prediction.
There was good agreement between the predicted CHF in a vertical round tube and single rod channel with the experiment.
The influence of mixing vanes on the thermal-hydraulic characteristics was analyzed.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The critical heat flux (CHF) is essential to the operational safety of nuclear power plants (NPP), and it plays a vital role in the thermal-hydraulic and structural design of a fuel assembly. In this study, the commercial computational fluid dynamics package STAR-CCM+ was used to predict the departure from the nucleate boiling (DNB) phenomenon. Based on the Eulerian two-fluid model and the extended Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI) wall boiling model combined with the Weisman-Pei bubble crowding model, the DNB phenomenon was investigated for two coolants (water and R134a) with different geometric structures and working conditions. The results demonstrated that one set of Eulerian two-fluid models could accurately predict the CHF within a certain range of working conditions. The CHF value calculated in this study show good agreement with the experimental measured CHF data, which indicated that the Eulerian two-fluid model had a good application prospect for CHF prediction. The observed mean error was less than 10%. The results of this study may contribute to an advanced boiling model development for CHF prediction in complex geometric structures such as fuel assembly. In addition, these results demonstrated that it was feasible to use the refrigerant R134a, which had a low critical pressure and low latent heat of vaporization, as the modeling fluid to replace water, which had a high latent heat of vaporization and a high critical pressure in the experimental study.
<Section>Graphical abstract</Section>
Keywords:Eulerian two-fluid model;Critical heat flux;Bubble crowding model;Computational fluid dynamics
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
With the development and improvement of nuclear energy technology, nuclear power plants (NPP) are developing rapidly due to their advantage of clean power generation. The reactor core is one of the most important components in an NPP. Its performance is related to the operational safety of the NPP. The heat transfer process on the fuel rod surface will deteriorate when the local heat flux reaches the critical heat flux (CHF). The rapid reduction of the heat transfer coefficient will lead to an extreme increase of the rod temperature, and in severe cases, a meltdown accident will occur (Yang et al., 2019).
During the past few decades, studies of CHF have mainly been conducted through experiments, and empirical or semi-empirical correlations have been developed based on these experiments. For water-cooled tubes, more than 1000 empirical correlations have been developed, which shows the complexity of the CHF mechanism (Groeneveld et al., 2007). However, these empirical correlations can only be used within specific operating ranges and fixed geometries.
In the thermal-hydraulic and structural design of the reactor core, a simplified core structure is generally used to carry out experiments under conventional working conditions. CHF experiments (especially visualization experiments) using water as the coolant often cannot be implemented under high pressures because of the expense involved, the technical limitations, the high critical pressures, and the high latent heat of vaporization of water. Therefore, researchers have used refrigerants with low critical pressures and a low latent heat of vaporization, such as R134a, instead of water for CHF experiments (Chen et al., 2018; Lee et al., 2015; Shin and Chang, 2009). In order to further improve the economy and reliability of a reactor, it is necessary to obtain a more comprehensive and in-depth understanding of the flow and heat transfer characteristics in a fuel assembly with a complex structure.
With the continuous development of computers and computational fluid dynamics (CFD), the CFD method has become widely used in reactor thermal-hydraulic design and safety analysis. In order to predict the location of the departure from the nucleate boiling (DNB), Ikeda et al. (2006) used the fluid analysis software STAR-CD, which could handle unstructured grids, to carry out the numerical simulation of a 5 × 5 fuel rod bundle channel with spacer grids. They established the relationship between the enthalpy and the flow velocity of the fluid in the fuel rod's boundary layer at different axial positions. They predicted the DNB based on the principle that the position of the maximum local enthalpy in the single-phase flow corresponded to the position where the DNB occurred in the two-phase flow. However, their research could not determine the specific value of the CHF, only the possibility of determining the local region where the probability of DNB was higher.
Based on the Eulerian two-fluid model, Zhang et al. (2015) numerically simulated the departure from nucleate boiling phenomenon that occurred in a vertical tube for an extremely high heat flux. The 26 groups of working conditions selected in this study were obtained from the vertical tube flow CHF experiment of Celata et al. (1993). The model used the commercial code Fluent 14.5 to obtain the temperature distribution before and after the DNB and the critical heat flux density at the corresponding DNB point. Li et al. (2018a) used STAR-CCM + to numerically simulate the DNB phenomenon in a vertical heating tube under high pressure. The transition in the boiling curves was the criterion for the occurrence of the DNB under uniform heating conditions. The simulation conditions were selected from the 2006 CHF look-up table, and the calculation results were compared with the look-up table. It was found that within a certain range, the CFD methods could predict the critical heat flux value and the occurrence location better. Pothukuchi et al. (2019) used FLUENT to perform a detailed comparative analysis of the sub-models involved in the Eulerian two-fluid model. By comparing these results with Becker's (Becker et al., 1983) experimental results, the best candidate model among the sub-models was identified. Shin and Chang (2009) used refrigerant R-134a as the working fluid to conduct CHF experiments in a 2 × 3 rod bundle channel with mixing vanes. Under the same working conditions as the experiment, the CFD method was used to study the flow field characteristics within the 2 × 3 rod bundle channel. By comparing the average cross-sectional void fraction obtained from the simulation with the experimentally measured value, the reliability of the prediction of the boiling phenomenon using CFD analysis was confirmed.
As can be seen from the above introduction, research on CHF prediction using the CFD method has received more attention. However, there are still few research studies on the prediction of CHF in complex structures (such as a rod bundle channel with mixing vanes) using the CFD method, and there is no research showing that one set of Eulerian two-fluid models without model parameter modification can be used for both water and refrigerant CHF prediction. Therefore, in this study, the commercial CFD package STAR-CCM+, which was based on the Eulerian two-fluid model and the extended Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI) boiling model combined with the Weisman Pei bubble crowding model, was used to simulate the DNB phenomenon of two working fluids (i.e., water and R134a) for different geometric structures and working conditions.
<Section>2. Numerical models</Section>
Compared with single-phase flow, mass, momentum, and energy transfer phenomena occur at the interface of two-phase flow. It is necessary to introduce constitutive equations describing these transfers between phases to close the equations. By regarding each phase in the two-phase flow field as a continuous medium and filling the entire flow field, the flow variables of each phase are discontinuous at the phase interface. Due to the strong interactions between the bubbles and the liquid during the flow boiling process, such as the drag force and the non-drag force, it is more suitable to use the two-fluid model to describe the phenomena.
2.1. Governing equations
In the two-fluid model, each phase is treated as an interpenetrating continuum. The mass, momentum, and energy conservation equations of the liquid and vapor phases are solved. The conservation equations are written for each phase k as:
Continuity equation:
@(1)
Momentum equation:
@(2)
Energy equation:
@(3)
where @, @, and@are the volume fraction, density, and velocity of phase k, respectively.@and@are the laminar shear stress and the turbulent shear stress, respectively. , , and@are the enthalpy, thermal conductivity, and temperature of phase k, respectively. P and@are the pressure and gravitational acceleration of the system.@represents the mass transfer rates between phases.@is the turbulent viscosity.@is the turbulent Prandtl number, and Q is the interfacial heat transfer.
2.2. Interfacial momentum transfer
As mentioned in the previous section, there is a strong interaction between the vapor and liquid phases during the flow boiling process. In the momentum equation (Eq. (2)), the term@accounts for the interfacial momentum transfer between the liquid and vapor phases. The interaction force is usually divided into the drag force () and the non-drag forces. The non-drag forces include the lift force (), the turbulent dissipation force (), the wall lubrication force (), and the virtual mass force ().
@(4)
The equations for calculating each interaction force are presented in Table 1. The common models of the various interphase forces are also presented in Table 1, and the causes of the different forces are briefly introduced. The study of Colombo and Fairweather (2016) reported that the application of lift and wall lubrication in adiabatic bubbly flow was relatively mature, but there were still large uncertainties in the application of the two-phase boiling flow. The virtual mass force only needs to be considered when the discrete phase has an acceleration relative to the continuous phase, and it is often ignored in steady-state calculations. Therefore, the influences of the lift force, the wall lubrication force, and the virtual mass force were ignored in the calculations, and only the influence of the drag force and the turbulent dissipation force were considered.
Table 1. Models of the interfacial momentum transfers.
The l in the subscript refers to the liquid phase, and g refers to the vapor phase.@is the bubble diameter.@is the drag force coefficient.@is the relative velocity between the liquid and vapor phases.@is the turbulent kinematic viscosity of the liquid phase.@is a constant coefficient and it is equal to 1 by default.@is the turbulent Prandtl number.@is the wall lubrication coefficient.@is the unit normal pointing away from the wall.
2.3. Improved wall boiling model
The current numerical methods for calculating flow boiling are mostly based on the wall boiling model proposed by Kurul and Podowski (1991), which is also called the RPI model. STAR-CCM + extends the RPI model so that it can be used to calculate the CHF conditions. The total wall heat flux () is divided into four components: the liquid phase convection heat flux (), the evaporation heat flux (), the quenching heat flux (), and the vapor phase convection heat flux (). The wall boiling model equation is as follows:
@(5)
where@is the wall contact area fraction of the vapor.@is estimated as
@(6)
where
@(7)
where@is the vapor volume fraction averaged over the bubbly layer thickness and@is the critical void fraction. The four components of the heat flux can be calculated using the following equations:
@(8)
@(9)
@(10)
@(11)
where@and@are the velocities of the liquid and the vapor close to the heating wall, respectively.@and@are the dimensionless parameters of the liquid and the vapor, respectively.@and@are the specific heats of the liquid and the vapor, respectively.@is the latent heat of vaporization.@is the bubble influence wall area fraction, which is calculated using the model proposed by Kurul and Podowski (1991):
@(12)
where@is an area coefficient for scaling between the nucleation site area density and the wall area fraction of the bubble-induced quenching influences. The default value of@is 2, estimated by Bartolomei and Chanturiya (1967). In Equation (10),@and@are the bubble detachment diameter and the bubble detachment frequency, respectively, and@is the nucleation site density. These parameters require additional auxiliary models to close the equation. The auxiliary model is derived using a theoretical derivation or the empirical correlations summarized by the experiments.
The auxiliary models used in this study are presented in Table 2. In the CFD calculation of flow boiling, many researchers have used the Lemmert-Chawla nucleation site density model (Lemmert and Chawla, 1977), which assumes that the nucleation site density is a function of the wall superheat . In this study, the newly developed nucleation site density model of Li et al. (2018a, 2018b) was used. The Li model is similar to the Hibiki-Ishii model (Hibiki and Ishii, 2003), which considers the influences of the pressure and the wall contact angle. The Li model also accounts for the influence of the wall superheat and it is fitted based on a large amount of experimental data. The Kocamustafaogullari bubble departure diameter model (Kocamustafaogullari, 1983) based on the balance between gravity and surface tension is widely used to calculate flow boiling. The frequency of bubble detachment is described by the Cole model (Cole, 1960).
Table 2. Model selection of each auxiliary model.
2.4. Turbulence model and details of CFD model
The turbulence model has an important influence on the calculation results. Based on the research of Vadlamudi and Nayak (2019), the liquid phase is solved for using the@model combined with the high Y+ wall treatment method, and the vapor phase is solved for using the Issa turbulence response model. The detailed settings of the Eulerian two-fluid model used for the CHF prediction in this study are summarized in Table 3.
Table 3. Details of CFD model.
<Section>3. Selected experimental data for the CHF prediction</Section>
3.1. 2006 CHF look-up table
The CHF data was obtained from the 2006 CHF Look-up table (Groeneveld et al., 2007). The look-up table is a standardized database compiled based on an 8 mm vertical tube flow boiling experiment. Hereinafter, it is referred to as the LUT. The LUT expresses the CHF as a function of the pressure (P), mass flux (G), and the critical equilibrium quality (x). Before the CFD calculation, the inlet equilibrium quality needed to be obtained using the following equation, and then, it could be converted to the inlet temperature:
@(13)
where@and@are the inlet equilibrium quality and the exit equilibrium quality, respectively. D = 8 mm.G is the mass flux and its unit is kg/(m2•s).@is the heated length which was set to be 1 m by default.@is the CHF value determined from the experiments conducted under critical conditions, its unit is kW/m2.
The geometric structure used for mesh generation in the fluid domain was a vertical tube with a heating section length of 1 m. Due to the axisymmetric characteristics of the vertical tube used in the experiment, the three-dimensional round tube was simplified to a two-dimensional axisymmetric structure with a diameter of 8 mm and an effective axial heating length of 1 m. To obtain the fully developed flow in the heating section, a 0.2 m adiabatic part was added before and after the heating section, so the total length was 1.4 m. A two-dimensional structured grid was used to divide the fluid domain, and the grid was subdivided into the axial and radial directions in the sensitivity analysis. After checking the grid's independence by setting up six groups of grids, including 15 × 100, 15 × 140, 20 × 100, 20 × 140, 25 × 100, and 25 × 140 grids, the 20 × 140 mesh was used for the calculation. The CHF working conditions selected from the 2006 LUT are presented in Table 4.
Table 4. Cases selected from the 2006 CHF look-up table.
3.2. Single rod channel
The CHF tests were performed using a single rod channel with R-134a as the coolant. Fig. 1 shows the test section used for the experiment. The experimental geometry was selected from the central single rod channel of the 5 × 5 China fuel (CF) assemblies. The outer side of the flow channel was composed of a square channel with a side length of 19 mm. Three spacer grids with mixing vanes were arranged in the flow channel along the flow direction. The spacer grid was composed of strips, mixing vanes, springs, and steel dimples. The diameter of the heating rod was 9.5 mm and the heating length was 1.344 m. The layout and the main dimensions of the grid in the axial direction are shown in Fig. 1 A, B, and C. In the inner section of the fuel rod, six thermocouples were installed at the upstream area of the spacer grid and at the end of the heating rod to monitor the wall temperature and detect the boiling crisis over the test section. The measurements from the experiment included the fluid temperatures and pressures at the inlet and outlet of the experimental section, the wall temperatures of the heated rod, the flow rate, the current, and the voltage. Table 5 lists the uncertainty of these measurements.
Fig. 1. Geometric model of the testing apparatus.
Table 5. Uncertainty of measurements.
Unstructured polyhedral grids were used in regions A, B, and C due to the complex structure of the spacer grid. The fluid domain outside the spacer grid area used a stretch mesh generator to extrude the structured grids. Mesh refinement processing was performed on small faces such as the mixing vanes and strips. The final generated mesh is shown in Fig. 2. The length of the heating section was 1.344 m, and an adiabatic section of 0.2 m was added before and after the heating section. The total length of the fluid domain was 1.744 m. In order to better capture the flow details near the wall, three layers of prism meshes were added to the wall. A total of five sets of grids were set up for independent verification. Fig. 3 shows the maximum void fraction in the fluid domain for five sets of grids. As can be seen, the maximum void fraction decreased gradually with the increase of the mesh number. The change of the maximum void fraction was negligible when the mesh number exceeded 0.72 million. Therefore, the mesh number reached 0.72 million, which was regarded as the gird independent solution. The working conditions used in the CFD calculations are presented in Table 6.
Fig. 2. Mesh generation for the CFD analysis.
Fig. 3. Variations of the maximum void fraction with different mesh numbers.
Table 6. Experimental conditions of the five test cases.
<Section>4. Results and discussion</Section>
4.1. CHF prediction method
At present, there have been many studies of the mechanism of the CHF. Mohitpour et al. (2014) divided the theoretical methods used in CHF research into four categories: liquid film dry out models, bubble crowding models, liquid sublayer dry out models, and interfacial lift-off models. The bubble crowding models were originally proposed by Weisman and Pei (1983). Based on a theoretical derivation, they determined that the critical value of the void fraction was 0.82.
In previous studies, three main methods have been used to judge whether the critical state was reached. The first method is to monitor the heating surface temperature in the calculation. When the wall temperature increases rapidly, the corresponding heat flux is the CHF. This increase in temperature was also used in the experiment to determine whether CHF occurred. The second method is to monitor the maximum void fraction of the heating surface. When the void fraction exceeds the critical value, the corresponding heat flux is the CHF. The third method is to judge whether CHF occurs through the transitions on the boiling curve. When plotting the curve of the wall superheat against the heat flux, two obvious transitions were observed. Case 3 in the LUT and Case 14 in the single rod channel experiment were used as examples to illustrate the calculation process and the judgment criteria of the CHF obtained from the boiling curve.
In the numerical simulation, a method similar to that in the experiment was adopted. A steady simulation was carried out at each wall heat flux, and the changes of the wall superheat and the maximum void fraction of the vapor were monitored. Then the wall heat flux increased after the monitored parameters were stable and the calculation was convergent. For the LUT working conditions, the wall heat flux increased by 100 kW/m2 in a single time frame. For the single rod channel working conditions, the heat flux increased by 25 kW/m2 in a single timeframe. When the void fraction was close to 0.82, the increase in the heat flux had to be appropriately reduced to ensure the stability of the calculation. The typical heat flux loading process is shown in Fig. 4.
Fig. 4. Schematic diagram of the heat flux loading process.
The boiling curves obtained for the above two conditions are shown in Fig. 5. As can be seen, there were two transitions in the boiling curve, i.e., an obvious three-stage characteristic. When the superheat was less than zero, liquid convective heat transfer occurred, and the wall temperature increased linearly with the increasing heat flux. As the heat flux increased, bubbles started to appear when the wall superheat reached a certain value, and the flow entered the subcooled boiling state. The phase change process significantly improved the heat transfer of the wall, and the rate at which the wall temperature increased was considerably reduced. As the heat flux increased, the curve turned for the second time. The wall temperature increased rapidly with the increasing heat flux, resulting in a rapid decrease in the slope of the boiling curve. At that time, the heat flux reached the critical heat flux. Since this study was focused on the determination of the CHF, the subsequent analysis focused on the second half of the boiling curve under each set of working conditions.
Fig. 5. Calculated boiling curves for Case 3 and Case 14.
4.2. Calculation results and analysis of the LUT
The 13 sets of working conditions selected from the LUT covered a pressure range P of 10 MPa–16 MPa, a mass flux range G of 1000 kg/(m2•s) to 3500 kg/(m2•s), and an outlet quality range x of −0.1 to 0.1. The calculation results were classified and analyzed according to the different working conditions.
Fig. 6 shows a schematic diagram of the boiling curve changes for different pressures. As can be seen from the boiling curve, the CHF gradually decreased with the increasing pressure. For the same coolant, the latent heat of vaporization gradually decreases with the increasing pressure, so the heat required for the liquid to vapor phase transition was reduced. Thus, the CHF corresponding to 16 MPa was the smallest, and the increasing trend of the wall temperature was the most obvious.
Fig. 6. Calculated boiling curves at different pressures for Cases 1 to 4.
Fig. 7 shows the boiling curves for the different outlet thermodynamic qualities. As can be seen from the boiling curve, the CHF in the tube gradually decreased with increasing outlet quality. When the heating length of the tube and the outlet pressure were constant, the inlet subcooling increased with the decreasing outlet quality. Therefore, more heat could be transferred during the heating process from a high subcooling state to the occurrence of the CHF. In addition, the higher outlet quality meant that the boiling had a tendency to depart from the nucleate boiling (DNB) to the dry out (DO), so the bubble crowding model proposed by Weisman and Pei (1983) was more suitable for the prediction of the DNB. Therefore, the transition in the boiling curve obtained for the higher outlet thermodynamic quality was less obvious.
Fig. 7. Calculated boiling curves for different@values.
Fig. 8 shows the boiling curves for different mass fluxes. Based on the trend in the boiling curve, the CHF in the tube gradually increased with the increasing mass flux. According to the research of Bruder et al. (2016), the CHF was related to the turbulence intensity. The intensity of the turbulence increased with the increasing mass flux. Therefore, the CHF was the highest when the mass flow was 3500 kg/(m2•s).
Fig. 8. Calculated boiling curves for different mass fluxes.
The mean error in the predicted values of the 13 groups of operating conditions obtained from the LUT and the experimental values are presented in Table 7. The absolute error was calculated using the following equation:
@(14)
Table 7. Predicted CHF vs Experimental CHF.
Fig. 9 shows the comparison of the experimental and calculated CHF values. As can be seen from Fig. 9, the deviation between the predicted value and the experimental value for most of the cases was within 20%. The prediction of the high quality flow conditions in Case 13 had a large deviation, but the absolute error calculated with Equation (14) was still less than 25%. The mean error for all working conditions calculated using Equation (15) was less than 11%.
@(15)
Fig. 9. Predicted CHF vs experimental CHF.
4.3. Calculation results and analysis of single rod channel
Fig. 10 shows the boiling curves calculated for the different conditions. The figure shows that the CHF increased with the increasing inlet subcooling and mass flow. As can be seen from Fig. 11, the deviations between the predicted CHF values and the experimental values for most of the conditions were within 10%, and the prediction of the low inlet subcooling condition of Case 15 had a large deviation, but the absolute error was less than 17%. The mean error for all cases, which was calculated using Equation (15), was less than 8%.
Fig. 10. Calculated boiling curves for Cases 14 to 18.
Fig. 11. Predicted CHF vs experimental CHF.
4.4. The effect of mixing vanes on the flow field
It is well known that the enhancement of the CHF by mixing vanes is due to the generation of swirl and cross flows and the increase in the turbulent intensity. Taking the working conditions of Case 16 as an example, we set the rod heat flux to 80% CHFCFD to illustrate the influence of the mixing vanes using the distribution of the void fraction, the temperature distribution, and the secondary flow distribution (). We assessed five observation sections within the range of 10Dh upstream and downstream of the second grid. The thermal-hydraulic parameter distributions of the sections are shown in Fig. 12.
Fig. 12. Contours of the different sections between +10Dh and −10Dh in the second spacer grid.
As can be seen from Fig. 12, the flow field still had a certain degree of rotation before entering the second spacer grid area. The maximum secondary flow velocity at the cross-section of −Dh from the grid inlet is 0.104 m/s. This demonstrated that the lateral flow generated by the first spacer grid still existed at the entrance to the second spacer grid. After flowing through the second grid, the secondary flow velocity in the transverse section at Dh downstream of the grid reached 1.03 m/s. In addition, as can be seen from the velocity vector distribution, due to the existence of the mixing vanes, eight obvious vortices occurred in the downstream flow field.
To visually assess the influence of the mixing vanes on the downstream flow field, only fuel rods were retained for Case 16, and the mixing vanes, springs, and steel dimples in the fluid domain were removed and then calculated again. The contours in the different sections without spacer grids are shown in Fig. 13. As can be seen from Fig. 13, for two-phase boiling flow with only the fuel rods considering, the thermal-hydraulic parameter distributions at the different cross-sections along the axial direction were completely different from those of the channel with a spacer grid. As the length of the heating section increased, the void fraction on the surface of the fuel rod gradually increased, and the bubbles generated due to the phase change caused the fluid velocity near the wall to gradually increase. Since the axial flow cross sectional area did not change, the velocity vector distribution of each cross-section was approximately the same. The secondary flow was also negligible because there was no lateral flow caused by the mixing vanes. The maximum secondary flow velocity was only 7.29 × 10−3 m/s. The temperature distribution of the different sections was symmetrical, and the temperature gradient was the largest in the narrowest part of the flow channel.
Fig. 13. Contours of the different sections at the same location as in Fig. 12 without a spacer grid.
We established 31 sections at different heights along the axial direction and obtained the sectional mean volume fraction of the vapor phase in the fluid domain as shown in Fig. 14. As can also be seen from Fig. 14, before entering the first grid, the average bubble void fraction in the fluid domain was the same, and it linearly increased with the increasing axial distance. When the fluid flowed through the first grid, due to the existence of the mixing vanes, the lateral flow in the section was significantly enhanced, causing the bubbles near the wall to move away from the heating surface. Thus, more bubbles gradually condensed in the process of moving to the main flow with a lower temperature, which finally reduced the void fraction of the cross-section. In the flow channel without spacer grids, the average void fraction of the cross-section increased linearly. In addition, the second grid had the greatest impact on the void fraction, while the third grid had the least impact. The reason for this was that the temperature of the bulk flow at the third grid is much higher than that at the first two grids, so the bubble condensation rate was significantly reduced.
Fig. 14. Sectional mean volume fraction of the vapor phase at different axial positions.
Fig. 15 (a) shows the contours of the vapor volume fraction on the surface of the rod in the channel without a spacer grid. The void fraction at the smallest distance between the fuel rod and the channel at the exit position reached a maximum value of 0.54, and the wall was covered with a large number of bubbles. Fig. 15 (b) shows the distribution of the void fraction in a single rod channel with a spacer grid. When the fluid passed through the grid, due to the effect of the mixing vanes, the flow field exhibited an obvious spiral upward trend. The largest void fraction was reduced to 0.49, and the bubble coverage area was significantly reduced.
Fig. 15. Vapor volume fraction on the rod surface at 80% CHFCFD.
<Section>5. Conclusions</Section>
Based on the Eulerian two-fluid model and the extended RPI wall boiling model combined with the Weisman-Pei bubble crowding model, the DNB phenomenon was investigated for two coolants (water and R134a) with different geometric structures and working conditions. The main conclusions were achieved as follows:
(1)
Based on the Li nucleation site density model, the CHF values of water and R134a could be predicted accurately with boiling curves. The average error of the CHF prediction for a vertical round tube with water was less than 10% and the average error for a single rod channel with R134a was less than 8%.
(2)
The auxiliary model combination and CHF judgment method used in this study showed a great application prospect for the CHF prediction of complex structures. Based on this practice guideline, further research can try to predict CHF on a larger scale and for more complex geometric structures (such as 5 × 5 or 17 × 17 fuel rod assemblies).
(3)
Although the empirical equations of the numerous sub-models in the Eulerian two-fluid model were derived from experiments that used water as the coolant, the results obtained from the CHF prediction in a single rod channel indicated that it was feasible to use refrigerant R134a, which had a low critical pressure and a low latent heat of vaporization as the modeling fluid to replace water for CHF experiments. This conclusion could to some extent prove the correctness of the fluid modeling method.
(4)
The mixing vanes had a significant influence on the flow and the temperature field downstream of the spacer grid. When the coolant passed through the mixing vanes, it produced a noticeable vortex flow downstream of the grid and significantly enhanced the lateral flow within the channel. The lateral flow caused by mixing vanes could reduce the proportion of the void fraction near the wall of the grid area and it was beneficial for the enhancement of CHF in the rod channel.
<Section>Credit author statement</Section>
Wei Liu: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Data curation, Writing. Zemin Shang: Software, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing. Lixin Yang: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Writing, Supervision. Yu Liu: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation. Ying Hu: Conceptualization, Project administration. Yang Liu: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation.
<Section>Declaration of competing interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>References</Section>
Antal et al., 1991
S.P. Antal, R.T. Lahey Jr., J.E. Flaherty
Analysis of phase distribution in fully developed laminar bubbly two-phase flow
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 17 (1991), pp. 635-652
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Auton et al., 1988
T.R. Auton, J.C.R. Hunt, M. Prud'Homme
The force exerted on a body in inviscid unsteady non-uniform rotational flow
J. Fluid Mech., 197 (1988), pp. 241-257
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bartolomei and Chanturiya, 1967
G.G. Bartolomei, V.M. Chanturiya
Experimental study of true void fraction when boiling subcooled water in vertical tubes
Therm. Eng., 14 (1967), pp. 123-128
Google Scholar
Becker et al., 1983
K.M. Becker, C.H. Ling, S. Hedberg, G. Strand
An Experimental Investigation of Post Dryout Heat Transfer
Royal Inst. of Tech (1983)
Google Scholar
Behzadi et al., 2004
A. Behzadi, R.I. Issa, H. Rusche
Modelling of dispersed bubble and droplet flow at high phase fractions
Chem. Eng. Sci., 59 (2004), pp. 759-770
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bruder et al., 2016
M. Bruder, G. Bloch, T. Sattelmayer
Critical heat flux in flow boiling—review of the current understanding and experimental approaches
Heat Tran. Eng., 38 (2016), pp. 347-360
Google Scholar
Burns et al., 2004
A.D. Burns, T. Frank, I. Hamill, J.-M. Shi
The Favre Averaged Drag Model for Turbulent Dispersion in Eulerian Multi-phase Flows
ICMF (2004), pp. 1-17
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Celata et al., 1993
G.P. Celata, M. Cumo, A. Mariani
Burnout in highly subcooled water flow boiling in small diameter tubes
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 36 (1993), pp. 1269-1285
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chen et al., 2018
J. Chen, H. Gu, Z. Xiong, D. Liu
Experimental investigation on heat transfer behavior in a tight 19 rod bundle cooled with supercritical R134a
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 115 (2018), pp. 393-402
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Cole, 1960
R. Cole
A photographic study of pool boiling in the region of the critical heat flux
AIChE J., 6 (1960), pp. 533-538
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Colombo and Fairweather, 2016
M. Colombo, M. Fairweather
Accuracy of Eulerian–Eulerian, two-fluid CFD boiling models of subcooled boiling flows
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 103 (2016), pp. 28-44
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Groeneveld et al., 2007
D.C. Groeneveld, J. Shan, A.Z. Vasić, L.K.H. Leung, A. Durmayaz, J. Yang, S. Cheng, A. Tanase
The 2006 CHF look-up table
Nucl. Eng. Des., 237 (2007), pp. 1909-1922
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hibiki and Ishii, 2003
T. Hibiki, M. Ishii
Active nucleation site density in boiling systems
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 46 (2003), pp. 2587-2601
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ikeda et al., 2006
K. Ikeda, Y. Makino, M. Hoshi
Single-phase CFD applicability for estimating fluid hot-spot locations in a 5× 5 fuel rod bundle
Nucl. Eng. Des., 236 (2006), pp. 1149-1154
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kocamustafaogullari, 1983
G. Kocamustafaogullari
Pressure dependence of bubble departure diameter for water
Int. Commun. Heat Mass Tran., 10 (1983), pp. 501-509
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kurul and Podowski, 1991
N. Kurul, M.Z. Podowski
On the Modeling of Multidimensional Effects in Boiling Channels
27th National Heat Transfer Conference, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA (1991)
Google Scholar
Lee et al., 2015
H. Lee, C.R. Kharangate, N. Mascarenhas, I. Park, I. Mudawar
Experimental and computational investigation of vertical downflow condensation
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 85 (2015), pp. 865-879
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lemmert and Chawla, 1977
M. Lemmert, J.M. Chawla
Influence of flow velocity on surface boiling heat transfer coefficient
Heat Transf. Boiling, 237 (1977)
Google Scholar
Li et al., 2018a
Q. Li, M. Avramova, Y. Jiao, P. Chen, J. Yu, Z. Pu, J. Chen
CFD prediction of critical heat flux in vertical heated tubes with uniform and non-uniform heat flux
Nucl. Eng. Des., 326 (2018), pp. 403-412
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Li et al., 2018b
Q. Li, Y. Jiao, M. Avramova, P. Chen, J. Yu, J. Chen, J. Hou
Development, verification and application of a new model for active nucleation site density in boiling systems
Nucl. Eng. Des., 328 (2018), pp. 1-9
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Mohitpour et al., 2014
M. Mohitpour, G. Jahanfarnia, M. Shams
Implementation of a phenomenological DNB prediction model based on macroscale boiling flow processes in PWR fuel bundles
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 64 (2014), pp. 176-190
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Pothukuchi et al., 2019
H. Pothukuchi, S. Kelm, B.S.V. Patnaik, B.V.S.S.S. Prasad, H.J. Allelein
CFD modeling of critical heat flux in flow boiling: validation and assessment of closure models
Appl. Therm. Eng., 150 (2019), pp. 651-665
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ranz and Marshall, 1952
W.E. Ranz, W.R. Marshall
Evaporation from drops
Chem. Eng. Prog., 48 (1952), pp. 141-146
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Shin and Chang, 2009
B.S. Shin, S.H. Chang
CHF experiment and CFD analysis in a 2×3 rod bundle with mixing vane
Nucl. Eng. Des., 239 (2009), pp. 899-912
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tomiyama, 1998
A. Tomiyama
Struggle with computational bubble dynamics
Multiphas. Sci. Technol., 10 (1998), pp. 369-405
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tomiyama et al., 1998
A. Tomiyama, I. Kataoka, I. Zun, T. Sakaguchi
Drag coefficients of single bubbles under normal and micro gravity conditions
JSME Int. J., Ser. B, 41 (1998), pp. 472-479
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Vadlamudi and Nayak, 2019
S.R.G. Vadlamudi, A.K. Nayak
CFD simulation of Departure from Nucleate Boiling in vertical tubes under high pressure and high flow conditions
Nucl. Eng. Des., 352 (2019), p. 110150
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Weisman and Pei, 1983
J. Weisman, B.S. Pei
Prediction of critical heat flux in flow boiling at low qualities
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 26 (1983), pp. 1463-1477
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yang et al., 2019
B.-W. Yang, B. Han, A. Liu, S. Wang
Recent challenges in subchannel thermal-hydraulics-CFD modeling, subchannel analysis, CHF experiments, and CHF prediction
Nucl. Eng. Des., 354 (2019), p. 110236
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhang et al., 2015
R. Zhang, T. Cong, W. Tian, S. Qiu, G. Su
Prediction of CHF in vertical heated tubes based on CFD methodology
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 78 (2015), pp. 196-200
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar