<title>Numerical study on the uncertainty reduction for thermal power estimation of an open pool research reactor with natural convection core cooling</title>
<author>1,HyunjongKim, 2, In-GukKim，3，MinkyuJung，4，Kyoung-WooSeo，5，Seong-HoonKim</author>
<Affiliation>1，Research Reactor System Design Division, Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute (KAERI), 989-111, Daedeok-daero, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34057, South Korea</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107587</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454920302851</URL>
Numerical study on the uncertainty reduction for thermal power estimation of an open pool research reactor with natural convection core cooling
HyunjongKim, In-GukKim，MinkyuJung，Kyoung-WooSeo，Seong-HoonKim
Research Reactor System Design Division, Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute (KAERI), 989-111, Daedeok-daero, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34057, South Korea
<Section>Highlights</Section>
The calorimetric method is used to estimate the thermal power and the uncertainty.
The natural convection flow in the reactor pool is calculated by CFD.
Thermal stratification phenomena and time criteria affect to the uncertainty mainly.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
In this study, the calorimetric method is used to study the thermal power estimation in an open pool research reactor during power operation under natural convection core cooling. The pool temperature measuring points are used as a key factor to minimize the uncertainty of the thermal power of the research reactor. The Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) technique is used to analyze the natural convection flow pattern in the reactor pool. The results show how the natural convection flow pattern influences the uncertainty of the thermal power estimation in terms of the flow stabilization and how the optimal temperature measuring point can be chosen. This paper shows that an appropriate thermal power estimation with a low uncertainty can be obtained based on the temperature measurement in the lower section of the reactor pool with the proper time criteria in view of the temperature propagation.
Keywords：Uncertainty reduction；Open pool research reactor；Natural convection；Calorimetric method；Thermal power estimation
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Uncertainty analysis of thermal power estimation is considered as an important task which must be conducted not only during the system design or the safety analysis stages, but also during the operation of the research reactor. During the conceptual design stages, the uncertainty analysis plays an important role in determining crucial design factors – such as ensuring the design margin, optimal design to reduce uncertainty, estimating the thermal power of the reactor core by measurement, target accuracy of the chosen design factors and prioritizing design variables to reduce uncertainty. Hence, the conceptual design and the uncertainty analysis are conducted simultaneously and the importance of the uncertainty analysis of the system design is emphasized in safety documents (IAEA, 2012, IAEA, 2014a, IAEA, 2014b).
Traditionally, the analysis of an open pool nuclear reactor system is conducted by the means of safety system codes such as FLASH, RELAP, TRAC, etc. These computer codes have been widely used in the application of safety analysis. However, it is difficult to get a detailed understanding and insight of the 3-dimensional thermodynamic phenomena from their output. CFD techniques make it possible to make a detailed analysis of the complex geometries involved and CFD has the unique advantage of providing insight into the obtained results where otherwise it may be difficult through experiments (Smith, 2010).
Moreover, 1-dimensional system codes are inadequate for analyzing the pool type nuclear reactor since it often has asymmetric thermodynamic behaviors and also 3-dimensional phenomena appear dominantly (Chen et al. 2015, IAEA, 2003). CFD techniques have been adopted by many researchers for those cases. Mochizuki and Yao (2014) studied the thermal stratification phenomena in the MONJU reactor vessel under natural circulation using a commercial CFD code. Their study showed the transient 3D thermal hydraulic behaviors in the vessel with visualized results and where it had complex geometrical effects. Salama (2011) calculated the flow inversion phenomena due to natural convection when it underwent a fast loss of flow accident in a coolant channel, and numerically showed that the flow reversal phenomenon occurred due to natural convection. Henry et al. (2016) conducted a CFD simulation to analyze the natural and mixed convection in the TRIGA reactor using the commercial code ANSYS CFX. Even though a simplified geometry of the core configuration as a cylindrical column was considered, there was good agreement between the experimental and numerical results. Recently, to investigate a novel system for removing residual heat, Hwang et al. (2019), estimated the capacity to ensure the coolant flow rate of the natural convection during an accident. That study showed a good technical feasibility for the investigation with numerical visualization.
For a research reactor which has a Primary Cooling System (PCS) or a channel for measuring the mass flow rate, the heat balance method must be used since the mass flow rate is not an unknown variable (Agbo et al., 2015, Mesquita et al., 2007, Mesquita et al., 2011). For the case of a 50 kW open pool research reactor, which was used in this study, the reactor is cooled by the natural circulation using the driving force of the water density differences without a dedicated core cooling system like the PCS; the pool water in this small power research reactor is controlled and purified by the Pool Cooling and Purification System (PCPS). However, due to the absence of the PCS or the channels, estimating the thermal power using the heat balance method may increase the uncertainty. Hence, it requires a careful and judicious approach in selecting the temperature measuring points, since the temperature measurement in the pool might be the only viable option and can be easily implemented in this type of research reactor.
For the research reactor with a passive cooling system, many ideas and efforts to reduce the uncertainty of thermal power measurement can be found in the literature. Using computer codes such as the CONVEC and the CAUDVAP, Elmaaty (2012) analyzed the chimney effects for cooling LEU plates under the passive cooling system. The results indicated that a better cooling performance occurs because of the chimney effects. In the report of the MONJU reactor vessel (IAEA, 2014a, IAEA, 2014b), it has an inner barrel with many holes for measuring temperature and velocity. In the studies for the TRIGA research reactors (Mesquita et al., 2007, Mesquita et al., 2011, Štancar and Snoj, 2017), the temperature was measured by thermocouples through the holes on the upper structure to fix the fuel rod bundles.
Since it was measured inside of the core, the temperature values showed fewer oscillations. Štancar and Snoj (2017) studied a more accurate method to calibrate the thermal power of the reactor. The study resulted in a 2% uncertainty when the calorimetric method with the linear and exponential fit curves was applied. Similarly, in case of the thermal power estimation for the NIRR, the temperature was measured in the gap between the upper annular beryllium reflector and the reactor vessel, and the study reported that the uncertainty was reduced by the special instrument.
In these previous studies, it seems that the major causes of the uncertainty increments were the inlet or outlet flows from the PCPS, the thermal plume oscillation caused by density differences, the thermal stratification phenomena (Choi et al., 2013, Mochizuki and Yao, 2014), and the heat losses to the environment. For these reasons, the literature showed that the instrument was positioned at the specified location in order to avoid instabilities such as a point where less fluctuation was expected for the natural circulation flows. For estimating the thermal power, the symmetry of the temperature distribution and heat losses were considered, and that resulted in low uncertainties in these studies. Since the temperature field in the reactor pool is unable to be experimentally visualized easily, it is even more difficult to pinpoint the appropriate positioning of the instrument in view of the conceptual design through these studies.
Therefore, this numerical study focuses on the characteristics of the natural convection and the temperature rising rate in the reactor pool in view of the thermal power estimation with low uncertainty. Furthermore, we propose the optimal measuring position and time criteria, which has a starting time with time ranges, and describe the combined standard uncertainty and its factors.
<Section>2. Conceptual design of a low power research reactor</Section>
2.1. System descriptions and modeling methodology
The open pool research reactor in this study has a 50 kW thermal power core that is immersed in the pool water. The inlet and outlet pipes are connected to the PCPS, and the center of the core has a water channel to regulate the neutron reactivity and for cooling the core. The reactor system has a passive cooling system without the PCS. The reactor core is cooled only by natural convection. The specified configurations of the reactor are shown in Fig. 1 (a). The inlet pipe is located near the bottom wall in the pool and the outlet pipe is positioned at the upper side near the free surface of the pool water to reduce radiation exposure efficiently by removing radioactive impurities. As shown in Fig. 1 (b), the water channel is at the core center. The fuel assembly has an array of four coolant channels and the reflectors are positioned around the fuel assembly. The operating conditions for the simulation are summarized in table 1.
Fig. 1. Conceptual design of a 50 kW open pool research reactor.
Table 1. Operational parameters for CFD analysis of the low power research reactor.
In the initial setup for the low power reactor, only the purification system is operating and the pool water is not cooled by a heat exchanger in the PCPS until the water temperature reaches 30℃. Thus, in the initial stage under this circumstance, the pool water is heated by the exothermic reaction of the reactor core and circulated through the PCPS. In this conceptual design stage, since the heat losses are dependent on the season and room conditions in the reactor building, specifying the conditions for the environment is difficult due to several factors. Thus, to numerically compare the effects of time criteria and measuring points for the uncertainty of the thermal power, this CFD study considers the ideal circumstances in which the temperature differences between the pool water and the environment are negligible. Therefore, we regard the concrete wall and the free-surface of the pool water as adiabatic wall and apply the operating conditions shown in table 1 for the CFD simulation as boundary conditions.
Fig. 2 (a) shows a simplified geometry of the reactor for the CFD simulation, and the cross sections A-A’ and B-B’ are defined to describe the thermodynamic behaviors, namely, the thermal plume, temperature or velocity distributions and thermal stratification phenomenon by the natural convection in the pool. The plotting locations and the mesh field of the pool water are shown in Fig. 2 (b). The pool water temperature is calculated from P1 to P4 and at the outlet point because these points are the positions which are expected to be more stable in terms of thermal plume or the flows from the pipes. Since it seems that the transient flows mainly occur above the core, the points, P5 to P7, are considered to observe flow characteristics. The specific information is described in table 2, the origin of the coordinates is the center of the pool bottom.
Fig. 2. Mesh fields of the open pool research reactor: (a) Cross section A-A’, B-B’; (b) Plotting locations on the section A-A’.
For the mesh fields, the hexagonal mesh was applied for the core assembly part which has narrow coolant channels with 3 mm gaps and the tetra-prism mesh was generated for the pool water part. A total of 4.67 × 106 nodes and 14.38 × 106 elements were generated. The core assembly and its coolant channels are denoted in Fig. 3. Fig. 3 (a) and (b) show that the elements of the fuel bundle and the reflector were simplified as rectangular columns and for the fuel bundles, and it has four small rectangular coolant channels. Fig. 3 (c) shows that different types of mesh fields are combined near the reactor structure.
Fig. 3. Specified mesh fields of the simplified core assembly: (a) Top view; (b) Side view of middle cut plane; (c) Isometric view and a hexagonal mesh field for the coolant channels.
2.2. Numerical model
Since the natural convection developed by heat transfer essentially involves the density changes of the working fluid, the Boussinesq approximation was applied to observe the buoyancy effects. The transient laminar flow was considered in this calculation. The compressible model with a low-Reynolds number turbulence model can be used to calculate the natural convection flow (Wang et al. 2013). However, the results of the NOKO-test facility (Krepper et al. 2002) indicated that thermodynamic instabilities such as the oscillating temperature due to the effects of the thermal plume and thermal stratification phenomena cannot be calculated using the standard k-ε turbulence model. In addition, Henry et al. (2016) used the RANS turbulence model; their results showed the accurate prediction at the aspect of the time–temperature slope, but it does not reflect the instability phenomena in view of the fact that there are fewer temperature fluctuations of the numerical results compared with the experimental results. It seems that the effects of the turbulent eddy viscosity decrease because the magnitude of the turbulence dissipation rate becomes much larger than the turbulent kinetic energy when eddies are generated at a low Reynolds number. Furthermore, due to the characteristics of the RANS model, it is well known that it does not reflect well the laminar separation flows near boundary layer. Thus, the governing equations are expressed as follows.
Conservation equation
@(1)
Momentum equation
@(2)
Here,  is the strain-rate tensor. It is defined as follows:
@(3)
Energy equation
@(4)
where  denotes Cartesian coordinate directions, ρ is the density,  is the velocity vector, and μ is the dynamic viscosity. k is the thermal conductivity of the substance and  is the heat source term. Cp, T, and β are the specific heat, temperature, and thermal expansion coefficient, respectively, t is the time, and is the gravitational acceleration. The 3-D simulation of the natural convection in the large pool is solved by a commercial CFD code, ANSYS CFX. The high resolution and the second order backward Euler schemes are used respectively to discretize advection terms and transient terms with a time step of 1 s.
<Section>3. Results and discussion</Section>
3.1. Heat transfer analysis
For verification of the heat transfer in the simplified core between the coolant channel and the wall which has heat flux (), the empirical correlation was used (Bar-Cohen and Rohsenow, 1984). For the evaluation, the results were contrasted with the results using the empirical correlation for natural convection between the gap of the vertical plates (S) and the vertical direction (L). In a fully developed flow, the local Nusselt number () and the modified Rayleigh number () are given by equations (5), (6), respectively.
@(5)
@(6)
where k, α, and ν are respectively the thermal conductivity, thermal diffusivity, and kinematic viscosity. The correlation used for comparison for local temperature according to length is given by equation (7)
@(7)
The calculated CFD and analytical results are shown in Fig. 4. The calculation point is shown in Fig. 3. The temperature profile data shows good agreement with the correlation at the point, S1, where the flow interference is the lowest and the symmetry of the heat flux can be obtained. To calculate the pool water temperature , the calorimetric approach is used to derive the pool temperature using equation (8).
@(8)
where, @ is the time – 30 min, and @ is the total volume of the pool water.
Fig. 4. Comparison of numerical data and correlation for temperature distribution in the coolant channel at S1.
Since the initial temperature was set at 20℃, the  was calculated to be about 20.8℃ when Qc was 50 kW. The analytical results calculated based on this is shown by the red solid line for the total thermal power in the figure. The red dotted line was included in the figure as a reference because the fuel assembly has 90% of the total thermal power. Furthermore, to observe the temperature profile variations with time increases, time intervals with 10 min are also denoted in the Fig. 4. The results showed a discrepancy of about 5% in the analytical solution range and the heat transfer due to the natural convection in the core seems to be justified by the 50 kW exothermic boundary conditions.
Fig. 5 shows the temperature distribution of the cooling water for the core after 30 min and the maximum temperature is 56.8℃. The maximum temperature is up to 1.1℃ higher than the CFD result, and since this is the median value of 58.5℃ and 54.7℃ in the analytical results of the total heat flux and 90% of the total heat flux, respectively, we can consider that the CFD analysis reflects well the heat transfer due to the core heating.
Fig. 5. Coolant temperature field in the reactor assembly.
3.2. Visualization of the pool water
The effects of water entrainment from the inlet pipe is considered as an important phenomenon because the water entrainment flow from the inlet pipe can affect the natural convection flow such as developing thermal plume or thermal stratification phenomena. In other words, if the thermal plume that is developed from the core is distorted by the inlet flow, the buoyancy flow cannot be dominated in the pool water. Thus, in order to observe the thermal plume behavior from the core side when the research reactor starts initially, the transient thermal plume behaviors for 20, 90 and 180 s are shown in Fig. 6.
Fig. 6. Transient of the thermal plume in the pool under natural convection: (a) 20 s; (b) 90 s; (c) 180 s.
As the buoyancy momentum developed by the temperature difference dissipates from the free surface, it can be observed that the form of the thermal plume disappears near about 3 m from the bottom. To understand the reason for this, the velocity field is visualized as shown in Fig. 7.
Fig. 7. Velocity transient in the pool: (a) 20 s; (b) 90 s; (c) 180 s.
The thermal plume has a velocity of about 0.25 m/s and develops a complex vortex flow near the free surface. This vortex flow seems to form an unstable flow by interfering with the laminar flow of the thermal plume in a chain while triggering the effects. In Fig. 8, an iso-surface with a velocity boundary of 0.1 m/s is created to observe the change in the 3-dimesional plume and the effects of the inlet and outlet. As a result, visual observations reveal that the inlet flow is diffused as it enters a large space, and the inlet flow has little influence on the flow of the thermal plume due to the geometric effect of the core assembly foundation.
Fig. 8. Iso-surface of the velocity at 0.1 s: (a) 20 s; (b) 90 s; (c) 180 s.
The temperature distribution results for section B-B’ of Fig. 1 (a) are shown in Fig. 9. Observations were made in the temperature range of 20 to 21.5 degrees, and Fig. 9 (a) shows the results at 90 s after the initial startup. These results clearly reveal the temperature distribution due to the thermal plume. Fig. 9 (b) confirms that when the thermal plume is dissipated after 180 s, the temperature difference is not clearly observed near the outlet and is relatively homogenous within 0.4℃.
Fig. 9. Temperature distributions on the plane B-B’: (a) 90 s; (b) 180 s.
To observe the temperature changes in the pool with time increases, the range of 20 to 25 degrees was set and it is shown in Fig. 10. Fig. 10 (a) shows the temperature distribution of the pool at 10-minute intervals for a period of 30 to 60 min. Fig. 10 (b) shows the temperature changes from 70 to 100 min. The thermal plume oscillates with time changes and it is almost dissipated at about 5 m from the bottom. These results reveal the thermal stratification phenomena, a temperature boundary, near 2 m from the pool bottom, which was not observed during the initial operation. At an intermediate depth, the boundary of this thermal stratification is instable in the horizontal direction and the vertical direction also fluctuates with changes in time.
Fig. 10. Transients of the thermal plume in the pool with time interval of 10 min: (a) 30 min to 60 min; (b) 70 min to 100 min.
To analyze the velocity oscillations of the thermal plume more quantitatively, the velocity–time changes by the locations, P5, P6, and P7, are shown in Fig. 11. The plotting points show the velocity oscillations. The largest oscillation with a temperature boundary of about ± 0.08 m/s is observed at the central point of P6, the near core location P5 of ± 0.04 m/s, and the near free-surface section P7 of ± 0.02 m/s. The minimum oscillations occur near the free surface; the velocity oscillation seems to decrease because the momentum transfer of the thermal plume was almost dissipated due to the effect of thermal stratification phenomena before the plume reached the free surface. It is also confirmed by the visualization result shown in Fig. 9.
Fig. 11. Velocity fluctuation in the middle of the pool.
Fig. 12 shows the time–temperature results at each temperature calculating point. For P2 and P3, the relatively large temperature oscillations were calculated to be due to effects of the thermal stratification phenomena. In contrast to the results of the previous visualization, the lowest temperature oscillations were obtained at the outlet and the calculation point at the bottom, P4, which could avoid the thermal instability effect.
Fig. 12. Time history of temperature rise in the pool.
3.3. Thermal power calculation using calorimetric method
Since the temperature difference and flow rate in the core assembly side are unknown values due to absent of a PCS, the energy balance method is impossible to apply for calculating the thermal power of the core. Therefore, to calculate thermal power, the calorimetric method is adopted which mentioned previous section 3.1 and Equation (8). The thermal power was calculated using the time–temperature rising rate () of outlet, P3, and P4 results and these discrepancies were compared. P1 and P2 had results similar to the outlet point, but these two points had a large deviation. Thus these two points were ignored for the thermal power calculation. P3 represents the temperature boundary and is positioned in the largest temperature oscillating section and P4 reflects well the lower part of the pool.
In order to solve the term of time–temperature rising rate appropriately, the linear correlation is required to normalize the data. The linear correlation equation for the temperature rising rate () can be derived by regression analysis (Mesquita et al., 2007, Mesquita et al., 2011, Štancar and Snoj, 2017) using these numerical simulation results. According to these previous studies, the thermal power calculated using this method is dependent on the time–temperature gradient, which is directly affected by the time criteria and a measuring point. Therefore, for the data production to be referenced when the time criteria was selected, an interval of 15 min was set to observe the gradient changes because the temperature gradient of P4 was not linear before 30 min in Fig. 12. The gradient changes can be found in Fig. 13 (a), (b), and (c). The regression coefficients (R2) of the gradient correlation calculated by the regression analysis were close to 1, and it is clearly seen that the regression lines well represent the temperature data. Equation (8) represents the thermal power calculation, which was mentioned in a previous section.
Fig. 13. Regression analysis results for calorimetric calculating of the thermal power with various time criteria: (a) initial start-up data included; (b) starts with 0.25 h; (c) starts with 0.5 h.
The calculated thermal power is summarized in table 3. The discrepancies in thermal power were calculated using a reference power of 50 kW, and due to the temperature propagation effects along with the water depth by natural circulation flows, the discrepancies decreased with time criteria changes.
Table 3. Calculated results of thermal power using the calorimetric method and discrepancies.
The differences between the outlet and P4 points decreased with the delay of the starting time for the analysis, but regardless of the time, results of P3 show the increments of discrepancy due to vortex detach causes the temperature oscillation. The outlet and P4 points have large discrepancies due to low thermal power initially, and the discrepancies rapidly decreased because of less instability as time went by. In particular, in the results of P4, the discrepancy decreased rapidly from 24.39% to 1.08%, indicating that that point was the most sensitively affected by the time criteria. For the results calculated from the time criteria 0.25 to 1.5 h, the discrepancy was 4.75% even though it was calculated from 15 min. A possible explanation for this is that it was a result of the phenomenon in which the temperature rise trend was not linear at the beginning; rather it rose like an exponential curve until 30 min. It seems that the outlet and P4 points were appropriate measuring points after 30 min for this discrepancy analysis.
3.4. Uncertainty analysis
The uncertainty of the calorimetric method can be expressed by equation (9). The volume changes by the reactor assembly, pipes, and instruments were about 0.5 m3, but this effect was not considered in the uncertainty analysis because it accounted for only 1.8% of the total pool water volume. In addition, the density and specific heat changes were excluded in the uncertainty analysis because these were constants updated by temperature changes (Štancar and Snoj, 2017).
Since this study did not obtain a result by measurement but by CFD simulation, equation (9) was modified using these assumptions and is summarized as equation (10). Uncertainty analysis was performed using equation (10), where the uncertainty of the CFD was considered ± 5% as calculated in the previous section.
@(9)
@(10)
To consider the effects of the thermal power changes by the temperature oscillation, the gradients of the linear fit curves were derived by the regression analysis, and the standard deviations of these values were calculated and are summarized in table 4. Using this information, the combined standard uncertainty is obtained as shown in table 5 using the uncertainties of the CFD result and the gradient, and thus the thermal power, which includes the uncertainty, can be expressed.
Table 4. Temperature rising rate ( [℃/h]) and its standard deviation.
Table 5. Uncertainty of thermal power.
Overall, the highest uncertainty was obtained in P3 due to the temperature oscillation, and the lowest uncertainty was observed in P4. Unlike the result of the discrepancies, when the thermal power calculation was performed from the initial start-up, the uncertainty was higher than that of the outlet side (6.43%) at P3 (7.01%) where the temperature fluctuation was the largest. Based on these results, the uncertainty was dominant by the temperature fluctuation. We also confirmed that the uncertainty decreases in the outlet and P4, which avoids the influence of the thermal instability because the distortion of the temperature rising rate by the heat transfer time is reduced after 0.5 h.
<Section>4. Conclusions</Section>
In this study, CFD and uncertainty analysis were performed to produce reference data that will directly contribute to the positioning of temperature measurement for reducing thermal power uncertainty when an open pool research reactor is designed. The thermal power was calculated using the calorimetric method without a PCS. The visualization results showed the thermal stratification phenomenon, which was generated 2 m from the pool bottom after the thermal plume was dissipated. The temperature boundary of the thermal stratification did not homogenize horizontally, and the height direction also fluctuated with time variation. It is clear that the highest uncertainty was obtained at the intermediate water depth because the phenomena affected the time–temperature gradient. The lowest uncertainty was observed near the bottom of the pool, which is a measurement point to avoid thermal instability; the outlet point is a good predictor of thermal power with low uncertainty. In addition, when the combined standard uncertainty analysis was conducted using the uncertainties of CFD and the thermal power, the minimum time to avoid a gradient distortion was 15 min and 30 min at the outlet and the bottom section of the pool, respectively, due to the temperature propagation.
The data obtained in this study can be used as reference data in the design of a low power research reactor which is cooled by natural convection and for estimating the thermal power. It will also contribute to positioning the instrument to measure the pool temperature. In the future the visualization results will be helpful to an understanding of the physical design of a cooling system using natural convection.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Hyunjong Kim: Methodology, Resources, Visualization, Writing - original draft. In-Guk Kim: Formal analysis, Resources. Minkyu Jung: Writing - review & editing. Kyoung-Woo Seo: Conceptualization, Supervision. Seong-Hoon Kim: Project administration.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
This work was conducted as part of the Development of Research Reactor Technology Project sponsored by the Ministry of Science and ICT of the Korean Government.
<Section>Appendix A. Supplementary data</Section>
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:
Download : Download XML file (303B)
Supplementary data 1.
<Section>Research data for this article</Section>
Data not available / The data that has been used is confidential
About research data
<Section>References</Section>
Agbo et al., 2015
S.A. Agbo, Y.A. Ahmed, B. Yahaya, U. Iliyasu
The use of heat balance method in the thermal power calibration of Nigeria Research Reactor-1 (NIRR-1)
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 85 (2015), pp. 344-351
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bar-Cohen and Rohsenow, 1984
A. Bar-Cohen, W.M. Rohsenow
Thermally optimum spacing of vertical natural convection cooled parallel plates
ASME J. Heat Transfer, 106 (1984), pp. 116-123
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chen et al., 2015
Z. Chen, X.N. Chen, A. Rineiski, P. Zhao, H. Chen
Coupling a CFD code with neutron kinetics and pin thermal models for nuclear reactor safety analyses
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 83 (2015), pp. 41-49
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Choi et al., 2013
S.K. Choi, T.H. Lee, Y.I. Kim, D. Hahn
Numerical analysis of thermal stratification in the upper plenum of the Monju fast reactor
Nucl. Eng. Technol., 45 (2) (2013), pp. 191-202
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Elmaaty, 2012
T.M.M.A. Elmaaty
Natural convection cooling for LEU irradiated fuel plates
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 40 (2012), pp. 116-121
Google Scholar
Henry et al., 2016
R. Henry, I. Tiselj, M. Matkovicˇ
Natural and mixed convection in the cylindrical pool of TRIGA Reactor
Heat Mass Transfer, 53 (2016), pp. 531-551
Google Scholar
Hwang et al., 2019
W.K. Hwang, D. Choi, K.Y. Lee
Advanced passive residual heat removal system for high power pool-type research reactor
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 128 (2019), pp. 94-101
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
IAEA, 2003
IAEA, 2003 Use of computational fluid dynamics codes for safety analysis of Nuclear reactor systems, IAEA-TECDOC-1379.
Google Scholar
IAEA, 2012
IAEA, 2012. Safety Assessment for Research Reactors and Preparation of the Safety Analysis Report, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSG-20.
Google Scholar
IAEA, 2014a
IAEA, 2014. Application of the Safety Classification of Structures, Systems and Components in Nuclear Power Plants, IAEA-TECDOC-1787.
Google Scholar
IAEA, 2014b
IAEA, 2014. Benchmark Analyses of Sodium Natural Convection in the Upper Plenum of the Monju Reactor Vessel, IAEA-TECDOC-1754.
Google Scholar
Krepper et al., 2002
E. Krepper, E.F. Hicken, H. Jaegers
Investigation of natural convection in large pools
Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow, 23 (3) (2002), pp. 359-365
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Mesquita et al., 2011
Mesquita, A. Z., Rezende, H. C., Do Prado Souza, R. M. G., 2011. Thermal power calibrations of the IPR-R1 TRIGA reactor by the calorimetric and the heat balance methods. Prog. Nucl. Energy, 53(8), 1197-1203.
Google Scholar
Mesquita et al., 2007
A.Z. Mesquita, H.C. Rezende, E.B. Tambourgi
Power calibration of the TRIGA Mark I nuclear research reactor
J. Braz. Soc. Mech. Sci. Eng., 29 (3) (2007), pp. 240-245
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Mochizuki and Yao, 2014
H. Mochizuki, H. Yao
Analysis of thermal stratification in the upper plenum of the “Monju” reactor
Nucl. Eng. Des., 270 (2014), pp. 48-89
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Salama, 2011
A. Salama
CFD investigation of flow inversion in typical MTR research reactor undergoing thermal–hydraulic transients
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 38 (7) (2011), pp. 1578-1592
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Smith, 2010
B.L. Smith
Assessment of CFD codes used in nuclear reactor safety simulations
Nucl. Eng. Technol., 42 (4) (2010), pp. 339-364
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Štancar and Snoj, 2017
Ž. Štancar, L. Snoj
An improved thermal power calibration method at the TRIGA Mark II research reactor
Nucl. Eng. Des., 325 (2017), pp. 78-89
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2013
J.Y. Wang, T.J. Chuang, Y.M. Ferng
CFD investigating flow and heat transfer characteristics in a natural circulation loop
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 58 (2013), pp. 65-71
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
