<title>Droplet impaction in nuclear installations and safety analysis: Phenomena, findings and approaches</title>
<author>1,HuangZhang,2,YueMa,3,GuangHu,4,QianfengLiu</author>
<Affiliation>1,Department of Energy, Environmental and Chemical Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, MO 63130, United States,2,Institute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology, Key Laboratory of Advanced Reactor Engineering and Safety, Tsinghua University, Haidian District, Beijing 100084, China;State Key Laboratory of Hydraulics and Mountain River Engineering, College of Water Resource & Hydropower, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China;4,Institute of Nuclear and Energy Technologies, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 76021 Karlsruhe, Germany</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nucengdes.2020.110757</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S002954932030251</URL>
Droplet impaction in nuclear installations and safety analysis: Phenomena, findings and approaches
HuangZhang,YueMa,GuangHu,QianfengLiu
Department of Energy, Environmental and Chemical Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, MO 63130, United States
Institute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology, Key Laboratory of Advanced Reactor Engineering and Safety, Tsinghua University, Haidian District, Beijing 100084, China
State Key Laboratory of Hydraulics and Mountain River Engineering, College of Water Resource & Hydropower, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China
Institute of Nuclear and Energy Technologies, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 76021 Karlsruhe, Germany
<Section>Highlights</Section>
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Droplet impaction on the wall surface is ubiquitous in natural and industrial applications. Understanding this phenomenon is also significant to nuclear installation design and safety analysis. In this study, we review the phenomena of droplets impaction (or impingement) on the wall surface and approaches to study them in nuclear engineering. Firstly, we examine the droplet impaction phenomenon in four types of nuclear installations: moisture separator, spray system, steel pipes and fuel channel. In moisture separator, the secondary droplets produced by the droplet splashing reduce the separation efficiency. Further, the study of heat transfer between the impaction droplet and the wall is mostly concerned with the spray system and the fuel channel. In addition, the continuous droplet impaction might induce erosion of the steel pipes. Secondly, we discuss four accidents where the droplet impaction happens. A large amount of droplets is generated during LOCA (Large break loss-Of-Coolant Accident) through the liquid leaking in the installations. The consequence is that deposited droplets would be suddenly vaporized to form a high-pressure vapor, leading a high explosion risk. In accident of fuel–coolant interaction, droplets can be either water or metal, both of which will generate lots of heat after impaction. Additionally, the droplet impaction in the SG (steam generator) tube leakage accident is mostly found in the analysis. Furthermore, fuel droplet impaction in nuclear power plants is considered in analysis of aircraft crash aimed at nuclear facilities. Thirdly, two types of simulation methods—mesh-free and mesh-based simulation methods—are reviewed for droplet surface modeling. We find that the Moving-Particle Semi-implicit (MPS) method is a popular mesh-free method used in nuclear engineering. For the mesh-based method, Volume of Fluid (VOF) is often coupled with the level-set method to both keep good conservation property and capture the free surface with high resolution. Finally, we offer some future directions. This review will acquaint readers with the state-of-the-art work on the droplet impaction in nuclear engineering.
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The phenomenon of a droplet impacting a surface is natural in our daily life, like rain droplets falling on the ground or a coffee droplet splashing on a table. Further, the fundamental study of droplet impaction (or impingement) has many applications ranging from agricultural pesticides (Reichard et al., 1998), food engineering (Issa, 2008), crime detection (Comiskey et al., 2019), innovative material design (Bird et al., 2013), 3D printing (Plog et al., 2019), internal combustion engines (Panão and Moreira, 2005) and desalination (Khawaji et al., 2008).
In the 1870 s, Worthington was the first to systematically study the droplet impacting on either a solid surface or a liquid film (Worthington, 1877). He chose Milk and mercury for the droplet’ materials. As the photography was not mature during that time, he captured the droplet splashing by the hand sketch. Even though over 100 years passed we still lack of the fully understanding of the droplet impact phenomena in all subtleties (Prosperetti and Oguz, 1993). The reason is that the scenarios of droplet impaction are tremendously abundant and complex. In general, the impaction phenomenon is controlled by two factors: liquid properties of the droplet and the characteristic of the wall surface (Rein, 1993). Until now, the process that we understand most is a water droplet impacting a non-heated solid wall with the smooth surface. This process includes deposition (or stick), bouncing (or rebound), spreading, break-up and splashing (Bai and Gosman, 1995). When the wall is heated, the droplet falling on the wall surface will experience film evaporation, nucleate boiling and transition boiling as the surface temperature increases (Liang and Mudawar, 2017, Shirota et al., 2016). In addition, the fact that a droplet impacts a liquid film covering the wall surface is significantly different from it impacting a dry surface (Yarin, 2006). To be more specific, the splashing has more opportunity to happen since both the droplet and the liquid film will break up (Cossali et al., 1997). Recently, the problem of the air entrapment in the hitting droplet has attracted many researchers’ attention since the understanding of this problem is beneficial to the development of printing technology (Josserand and Thoroddsen, 2016).
The factors influencing the process and outcomes of droplet impaction are shown in Fig. 1. The factors are divided into three categories: droplet, surface and ambient gas. Obviously, the droplet radius () (or diameter), density (), viscosity (), surface tension (), temperature (), falling velocity (), falling angle (the angle between the velocity direction and the vertical line, () and the frequency () between two falling droplets are counted here. Note that the droplet impaction is degenerated to the problem of single droplet impaction if the frequency is too low (approaching or equal to zero). In addition, the status of the wall usually plays a significant role in the post-process of the droplet-wall impaction. Generally, the wall status can be classified into two types—dry surface and wet surface. For the dry situation, the wall temperature () is the most critical factor, which has a direct connection with the phase change of the falling droplet. Apart from that, the surface morphology including the surface roughness and wettability is equally important since it affects transition points among the spreading, bouncing and splashing. For the wet situation, a liquid film appears on the wall surface. The thickness of the liquid film is the most important parameter to influence the droplet impaction process. Further, the ambient gas has some influence on the contact between the falling droplet and the wall surface. For example, if the ambient gas pressure is high, the fall droplet cannot hit the wall because a gas cushion would be formed to prevent the droplet from approaching to the surface.
Fig. 1. Category of droplet impaction problem.
In contrast to some excellent reviews on the general topics of droplet impaction (Josserand and Thoroddsen, 2016, Moreira et al., 2010, Prosperetti and Oguz, 1993, Rein, 1993, Yarin, 2006), this review focuses on the state-of-the-art works on the droplet impaction study in nuclear engineering. Since most nuclear reactors adopt the liquid as the coolant, the liquid might break up into droplets in many installations, such as the steam generator (SG), moisture separator, spray system and other facilities. In addition, a design basis accident, like LOCA, would generate lots of droplets that might appear in the pressure vessel, pipes, SG, containment, and other equipment. Thus, droplet impaction commonly occurs in the nuclear installations and accidents. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is no review to summarize the phenomenon of the droplet impaction (or impingement) occurring in nuclear engineering and approaches to study the phenomenon. Hence, our goal is to fill this gap. The structure of this review is as follows. Section 1 presents the introduction on the droplet impaction studies. Section 2 describes the droplet impaction phenomena in four major nuclear installations and four major accidents. Section 3 examines approaches to study the droplet impaction with both experiments and numerical simulations. Section 4 provides the summary and future directions.
<Section>2. Specific phenomenon of droplet impaction</Section>
In this section, the phenomenon and consequences of droplet-wall impaction are reviewed in nuclear installations and safety analysis. First, the literature review on the study of impaction scenarios is presented and the impaction mechanism is summarized in four nuclear installations: moisture separator, spray system, pipeline and BWR fuel spacer. The consequences from droplet-wall impaction for the installation performance are emphasized. Second, four accidents related with the droplet-wall impaction, LOCA, fuel–coolant interaction, SG tube leakage and aircraft crash, are discussed. The impaction mechanism and consequences are examined and distinguished in each accident. Fig. 2 shows the overview of this section.
Fig. 2. An overview of droplets impaction events in nuclear installations and accidents.
2.1. Installations
2.1.1. Moisture separator
Moisture separators are used to dry the saturation steam generated from SG (Fang et al., 2020). Droplets within the saturation steam will impact the wall surface of the moisture separator (Nakao et al., 1998) or inside vanes (Lu et al., 2013, Xiong et al., 2014). These droplets might break up into smaller ones, or new droplets called secondary droplets may be generated (Li et al., 2019b). All of these newly generated droplets are difficult to separate because they have much less inertia than that of the impacting droplet (Zhang and Liu, 2020a). The consequence is that the separation efficiency of the moisture separator is reduced heavily (Wang et al., 2019).
Droplet impaction has been observed in the corrugated plate separator (Chen et al., 2020a), the swirl-vane separator (Lu et al., 2013) and the mist separator (Xu et al., 2017), and other separators. Lu et al. (2013) observed that droplets would mostly stick to the swirl-vanes to form a liquid layer. Meanwhile, the droplets that move in the swirl zone would be thrown toward the inner walls, generating a liquid film. This liquid film keeps moving along the direction of the gas phase. Xu et al. (2017) studied the droplet impacts on the screen membranes of the mist separator. The mesh size was around 10 to 100 μm and the droplet diameter was at the scale of 1 mm. The critical impacting velocity—beyond which the secondary droplets would appear—was determined. For the corrugated plate separator, by the high-speed photography technology, Chen et al. (2020a) studied the droplet impacting the inclined wet wall. They found that the spreading crown without splashing as well as the splashing happened as the droplet Weber number (Wed) increased, and the splashing was suppressed as the wall inclined continuously. Furthermore, Chen et al. (2020b) investigated the droplet impacting on the horizontal liquid film at a low velocity. Impingement phenomena including spreading, partial-rebound and complete rebound were observed. The secondary droplets were generated as the result of the splashing when the falling droplet merged into the liquid film after rebounding in several times. They used the Weber number to characterize the spreading and rebounding. Li et al. (2019a, b) characterized two kinds of droplet impaction problems that happen in the nuclear moisture separator: a successive train of droplets impacting a solid surface and a single droplet impinging on a statics liquid film. A high-speed camera was employed to record the impaction process and study the effects of some parameters, such as Wed, droplet Reynolds number (Red), and the surface static contact angle on the droplet spreading factor. Because the falling droplets are a successive droplet train, it was found that the frequency of falling droplets has a minor effect on the maximum spread factor and oscillation of the post-impact droplet. Additionally, if the surface is covered by a liquid film, the dimensionless liquid film thickness is critical in studying the evolution of the secondary droplets.
Since the moisture separator works in the thermal equilibrium situation (Zhang and Liu, 2020b), the heat and mass transfer do not happen during the impaction process. Thus, Wed is the dominant non-dimensional parameter to describe the impaction mechanism in moisture separators (Bai and Gosman, 1995). After determining the droplet density, impaction velocity, droplet size and surface tension in both cold and hot conditions in moisture separators (Appendix I), we find the droplet Weber number (Wed) ranges from about 0 to 1235. Therefore, the regimes of the droplet-wall impaction in the moisture separator lie in the black circle as illustrated in Fig. 3 according to the impaction regime study by Bai and Gosman, 1995, Moreira et al., 2010.
Fig. 3. Schematic of a single droplet impacting the wall surface of moisture separators.
2.1.2. Spray system
The spray system often exists in the pressurizer (Lan et al., 2014), the reactor core (Torres et al., 1999), and the containment (Bian et al., 2019). Sagawa (1968) conducted an experiment to study the spray cooling in a container. The average diameter of spray droplets was about 600 µm and the container was set at ambient pressure and room temperature. A copper cylinder was placed in the container to interact with spray droplets to obtain the thermal data for evaporation rate calculation. It was found that the evaporation rate increases as the container pressure becomes higher. Motoki et al. (1983) studied the heat transfer efficiency of a single spray droplet and the entire spray, and the heat transfer coefficient between the spray droplet and the containment wall (wall heat transfer coefficient) based on a spray test facility in a model containment. The wall heat transfer coefficient increases as the flow rate of spray increases. An abrupt evaporation of the condensed droplet on the wall was observed when the ratio of density of air and steam changed. Torres et al. (1999) installed a spray cooling system at the head of a pool-type research reactor. The experiment of spray droplets impacting a heat plate demonstrated the maximum wall temperature can be limited below 500 °C as the impaction droplets would evaporate too quickly to cool the heated wall effectively. Anglart et al. (2010) studied a spray system that provides streams of subcooled droplets flowing out through nozzles located at a certain distance from the inner walls of the reactor pressure vessel. Two major parameters were discussed: the droplet temperature impinging the vessel wall and the wall cooling time. In addition, it was found that the droplet initial size is the main factor to influence those two major parameters. Lan et al. (2014) studied the mass flow rate, spray flux distribution, spray cone angle and droplet size to characterize the special pressure-swirl nozzle used in the spray system in the pressurizer. They found that the droplet size spectrum is the most important parameter for the spray nozzle. This work has a great potential to optimize the spray system design for stabilizing the pressure in the primary loop.
Porcheron et al., 2007, Porcheron et al., 2010 have developed a facility called TOSQAN to simulate the thermal hydraulic condition in the reactor containment. Fig. 4(a) shows the schematic of TOSQAN. The facility consists of a closed cylindrical vessel (7 m3 volume, 4 m high, 1.5 m internal diameter) whose top side is placed a spray system. Steam, air and aerosols can be injected into the vessel center through the steam injection. The walls of the vessel can be thermostatically controlled by the heated oil circulation for keeping the gas temperature constant. Non-intrusive optical instruments are provided to measure the spray droplets’ properties through fourteen overpressure-resistant windows. The spray system is composed of a single nozzle producing a full cone water spray. This nozzle can be moved along the vertical axis so that measurements can be taken at different distances (Porcheron et al., 2007). Fig. 4(b) presents the behaviors of droplet-air, droplet–droplet, and droplet-wall interaction in the spray system of the TOSQAN facility.
Fig. 4. (a) TOSQAN facility used to study the spray system in containment. Adapted from Fig. 1 of Porcheron et al. (2007). (b) droplets’ behaviors in TOSQAN.
2.1.3. Pipe erosion
Droplet impingement can cause pipe erosion with a long term effect (Choi et al., 2015). The erosion happens when the wall is thinning by the continuous pressure load of the droplet impaction effect (Naitoh et al., 2013, Xiong et al., 2012). Fujisawa et al. (2013) experimentally studied the conical spray impacting the liquid film in the target specimen using a high-speed camera. The droplet size was at the order of 10 μm. Several interesting results were found in this research. Firstly, the erosion depth was found to increase linearly with the local flow volume. Secondly, the erosion rate increased as the specimen diameter decreased, and the standoff distance slightly increased. Thirdly, a theoretical analysis of the liquid film on the specimen was proposed to conclude that the erosion rate increased as the liquid film thickness decreased. Finally, considering the influence of the liquid film, the researchers proposed an erosion model for predicting the erosion rate due to the liquid droplet impingement.
Choi et al. (2015) designed and developed an experimental system to investigate the behavior of long-term liquid impingement erosion of pipelines for three kinds of materials (A106B, SS400, A6061) used in the nuclear power plants with high-speed liquid droplets. The spraying velocity of impaction droplets was higher than 160 m/s and the experiments lasted for 15 days. The results showed that the erosion rates of carbon steel increase linearly with the erosion time, but the erosion rate of aluminum was saturated over time. In carbon steels, many line cracks were initially formed, but in aluminum, localized pores were formed. Further, mechanical hardness changed significantly in carbon steels, but it changed marginally in the aluminum.
2.1.4. Droplet deposition in BWR
Droplet deposition by droplet impingement commonly occurs in the fuel channel of boiling water nuclear reactor (BWR). In the fuel channel, fuel spaces are used to maintain an appropriate rod-to-rod clearance for affecting the fuel bundle critical power by enhancing the coolant droplet deposition onto the liquid film along the fuel rod surface (Kanazawa et al., 1995, Okawa et al., 2007). Kanazawa et al. (1995) analyzed the turbulent intensity of air flow around a plate spacer and considered the droplet deposition around a circular ferrule that covers the fuel rod. The droplet deposition coefficient was calculated, and it was found that droplet deposition characteristics depended on the droplet size and the deposition positions. Yamamoto et al. (1997) analyzed the droplet deposition around the spacer in a fuel channel of BWR. They concluded that droplets impinged against the spacer surface and splashed onto the liquid film on the fuel rod surface. Xie et al. (2004) investigated a single droplet impacting the liquid film to analyze the possibility and effect of droplet splash in the fuel rod bundles in BWR. The mechanisms of floating, bouncing, mergence, splashing and jetting that might occur after the droplet impingement on the liquid film were considered. Fig. 5 shows the schematic of flow and droplets’ movement in the spacers. The liquid film flows upwards along the fuel rod surface. Vapor is entering the space between the fuel rod and the spacers. Droplets that exist in the vapor might impact the spacer, liquid film and fuel rod. The shear force between the vapor and the liquid film can generate some new droplets. Okawa et al. (2007) measured the local deposition rate of droplets at the inlet and downstream of the fuel rod area containing a grid spacer (flow obstacle). It was found that the impaction droplets could bounce on the front surface of the obstacle, which is of importance to determine the droplet deposition rate at the inlet of the obstacle section. Later, Okawa et al. (2011) investigated the deposition rate of droplets in a vertical round tube as a test section of the fuel rod area. The experiment was conducted under different pressure from 0.5 MPa to 1.5 MPa. The deposition rate of droplets at different droplet concentration and the shape of the flow obstacle was carefully measured. Recently, Anglart et al. developed a Lagrangian particle tracking method to predict the droplet deposition in the grid spacers and study the flow obstacle effects (Caraghiaur et al., 2013, Caraghiaur and Anglart, 2013, Li and Anglart, 2017).
Fig. 5. Schematic of the flow and droplets’ movement in the spacers of BWR. Adapted from Fig. 1 of Yamamoto et al. (1997).
2.2. Safety analysis
2.2.1. LOCA
A large-scale of loss-of-coolant accident (LOCA) of light water reactors could generate lots of droplets (Hamdan et al., 2015). These droplets might impact superheated surfaces, like molten metal (Perets et al., 2005), fuel rods (Chatzikyriakou et al., 2010) and the spacer grid (Cho et al., 2011, Jin et al., 2019). When the water droplets fall on the hot surfaces, the droplets would be suddenly transformed into high-pressure vapor as a consequence of the explosion (Board et al., 1974, Meignen et al., 2014). Table 1 examines the research on droplet-wall impaction related with LOCA in the current literature.
Table 1. Summary of droplet-wall impaction in LOCA research.
Film evaporation, nucleate boiling and transition boiling occur sequentially as wall temperature increases.
Perets at al. (2005)	Subcooled water jet into a pool of hot molten tin
▪
No droplet penetration happens when the inject velocity is smaller than a critical value;
▪
Cylindrical-shaped hole occurs on the pool surface when increasing the jet velocity;
▪
Vapor layer is generated to enable the droplet penetration as increasing the jet velocity beyond the critical value.
Chatzikyriakou et al. (2010)	Oblique droplet-hot wall interactions during the reflood phase after a LOCA
▪
Impaction droplet whose size is smaller than 1 mm is important to understand the heat transfer during reflood;
▪
For small angles of impingement, the droplet breaks up at a lower Weber number;
▪
When the wall temperature is well above the Leidenfrost threshold, the maximum spreading radius of impaction droplet is a function of Weber number.
Wang et al. (2020)	Effect of surface properties on the droplet-cladding surface impaction
▪
Cladding surface is composed of FeCrAl or zircaloy-4 (Zr-4);
▪
Five impaction regimes are identified: deposition, rebound with secondary atomization, breakup with secondary atomization, rebound and break-up.
▪
Leidenfrost phenomenon is not observed on the oxidized FeCrAl surface even when the surface temperature reaches to 550 °C as well as Wed > 30.
Hamdan et al. (2015)	Heat transfer of droplet impacting a hot surface with different inclined angles above the Leidenfrost temperature
▪
Droplet first spreads on the surface then breaks up into smaller ones;
▪
When Wed is larger than a critical value, the higher Wed is, the smaller sizes the secondary droplets are.
Jin et al. (2019)	Droplet break-up due to the droplet-spacer impaction
▪
Droplet size distributions across a spacer grid lies in a log-normal distribution;
▪
Impaction droplet breaks up on the surface of the spacer grid as the surface temperature of 230 °C and Wed = 285.
Board et al. (1975) first recognized that the mixing of molten metals and water may occur in liquid-cooled nuclear reactors under accident conditions. They suggested that the vapor explosion after the droplet impaction happens in four stages: mixing, triggering, propagation and expansion (Board et al., 1974). The Leidenfrost point is critical in distinguishing the droplet-wall impaction. As the wall temperature (Tw) is above the Leidenfrost point, the portion of the droplet contacting with the surface is boiling and a vapor layer exists to prevent the droplet from interacting with the surface. As Tw is below the Leidenfrost point, film evaporation, nucleate boiling and transition boiling occur sequentially as Tw increases (Ko and Chung, 1996, Liang and Mudawar, 2017).
Perets et al. (2005) injected a subcooled water jet (which can be considered as a series of droplets) into a pool of hot molten tin under atmospheric conditions. They observed that no penetration happens when the injection velocity is smaller than a critical value. For higher jet velocities, the impact of the water droplet on the tin surface generated a somewhat cylindrical-shaped hole that enabled penetration into the molten tin. The jet is then wrapped by a vapor layer that isolates it from the tin, reduces the friction between the two fluids, and allows further penetration. At a certain time (in the order of a few milliseconds), the bore collapses, and the trapped water (vapor) undergo a mixing process.
Chatzikyriakou et al. (2010) studied the direct cooling of the cladding by the droplets themselves. The wall temperature is well above the Leidenfrost threshold and the perpendicular droplet Weber number Wed is below where droplet break-up is to be expected. The maximum droplet radius was obtained as a function of Wed. They also found that, for small angles of impingement, the droplet disintegrates (breaks up) at a lower Weber number. Wang et al. (2020) experimentally investigated the droplet impact cladding shells that are composed of FeCrAl or zircaloy-4 (Zr-4). Five impact regimes were identified: deposition, rebound with secondary atomization, breakup with secondary atomization, rebound and break-up.
Hamdan et al. (2015) experimentally studied the droplet behaviors impacting a hot surface above the Leidenfrost temperature to prove improvements in the modeling of heat transfer in a ballooned surface characteristic of a LOCA. The spreading and break-up of the impacting droplet were observed by a high-speed camera. When the droplet Weber number Wed was beyond a threshold value, it was found that the size of secondary droplets decreased as Wed increased. The hot surface was also placed at different inclined angles.
Jin et al. (2019) measured and analyzed the individual droplets across a hot spacer grid to simulate the reflood transients of a LOCA for Light Water Reactors. The droplet was observed to be broken up on the surface of the spacer grid as the surface temperature = 230 °C and Wed = 285.
Carrillo et al. (2019) designed an experimental setup to study the thermal hydraulics during the cooling of a vertical tube with an internal steam-droplet when LOCA conditions happen at sub-channel scale. It was illustrated that droplets generated at the liquid–vapor interface would impact the clad rod (Fig. 6).
Fig. 6. Heat and mass transfer phenomena during LOCA with ballooning of fuel claddings. Adapted Fig. 3 from Carrillo et al. (2019).
2.2.2. Fuel-coolant interaction
Fuel-coolant interaction (FCI) occurs during a serious nuclear power plant accident and may threaten the integrity of the pressure vessel or containment (Zhong et al., 2014). Park et al. (1999) used high-frame-rate neutron radiography to observe the penetration behavior of a series of water jet droplets (coolant) in the molten fuel pool at a high temperature (≤713 K). The penetration depth and width was examined in boiling conditions when the pool surface temperature (Tpool) was below and above the homogeneous nucleation temperature (Tnucl). As Tpool was below Tnucl, cavity formation and an intact coherent jet during the penetration process was observed. When Tpool > Tnucl, more vigorous vaporization preventing incoming jet droplets from penetrating further into the fuel pool was observed. Sibamoto et al. (2001) also applied neutron radiography to observe the molten fuel droplets injected into a thin semicircular vessel that contained saturated water (coolant). This experiment demonstrated a melt-accumulating behavior accompanied by a vigorous steam generation at the initial contact of the melt with water.
Since fuel droplets are radioactive and of high temperature, computer simulation is an efficient way to examine the droplet-wall impaction in FCI problem. Koshizuka and Oka (1996) presented a Moving-Particle Semi-implicit (MPS) method to simulate the fragmentation of incompressible fluids for nuclear engineering. Ikeda et al. (2001) used MPS to simulate the water droplet being continuously injected into a pool of a denser fluid under non-boiling and isothermal conditions. The simulation results were compared with the observations from a visualization experiment. Duan et al. (2003) used this method to model the droplet break-up process before it falls on the surface.
Zhou et al. (2014) designed a setup to release a water droplet into the molten tin at high temperature in a vessel to study the interaction behaviors of FCI. Two interaction modes were found: non-interaction mode and explosive mode. In the non-interaction mode, the film boiled and the speed of the vapor generation was too slow to deform the molten tin. When the tin temperature was about 553–573 K, which exceeds the Leidenfrost temperature, the spontaneous nucleating occurred and the vapor was rapidly generated to induce the subsequent deformation of molten tin. For the explosive interaction mode, the water droplet broken up when it impacted the molten tin, forming an unstable vapor film at the bottom of the water droplet.
During the reactor vessel failure, the high-temperature molten fuel falls into the pool as a jet stream. Rapid heat transfer from the molten fuel to refrigerating agent may lead to overpressure (Zhong et al, 2014). High pressure and rapidly expanding steam may result in high loads on the surrounding structures, which may result in damage to cavity wall surfaces. So it is necessary to explore the mechanism of droplet breaking during the steam explosion and conduct numerical analysis of the droplet breaking process under sudden acceleration (Thakre et al., 2015, Perets et al., 2005). If the emergency core cooling system is started, it recharges the core with cold water. When the quenching front propagates upward, water splashing and many droplets of different sizes and velocities will be generated. In order to determine the characteristics of the accident, this physical process also needs in-depth analysis.
2.2.3. SG tube leakage
Because of a great interest in developing a lead-based reactor system as the advanced nuclear power plants of Generation IV, the interaction between lead–bismuth eutectic metal (or pure lead) and water have been investigated to evaluate the consequence of an SG tube leakage (or rupture) (Wang et al., 2008, Ciampichetti et al., 2009, Jeltsov et al., 2018). The leakage releases the highly pressurized water that directly contacts the primary coolant (Lead-Bismuth Eutectic (LBE) or lead) to form a dynamic thermal coolant-coolant interaction, which could trigger various transients and enhance the risk to the structural integrity of SG. The rapid vaporization of the discharged water can lead to the shaking of the lead–bismuth eutectic pool (Del Nevo et al., 2016, Huang et al., 2017, Jeltsov et al., 2018).
Hwang et al. (2005) found that the leaking of the steam generator tubes in a Korean nuclear power plant occurred at 282 °C and 18.6 MPa, and the first stage of the leak was in the form of a water droplet. Novitrian et al. (2008) experimentally investigated the fundamental problem of the boiling heat transfer between Pb-Bi and steam-water by injecting water stream into the high temperature Pb-Bi flow. The volumetric overall heat transfer coefficient was measured in a range from 55 to 345 kW/(m3K), while the local coefficient ranged from 675 to 1280 kW/(m3K). Ciampichetti et al. (2009) injected water droplets at 7 MPa and 235 °C into a test vessel containing molten fuel at 235 °C. It was observed that the ambient pressure in the vessel rose up to 8 MPa at about 2 s after the water-fuel interaction happens. Sa et al. (2011) studied the LBE and lead droplets injection into water pool experimental to simulate an accident by SG tube rupture. The fragmentation of a molten droplet was observed and the onset condition of the droplet fragmentation was determined by the water surface temperature needed to be higher than the nucleation temperature and lower than the film boiling temperature. Further, the peak pressure of the water pool was measured during the molten droplet-water pool interaction.
Huang et al.’s (2017) study of droplets composed of heavy liquid metal impinging on the water proposed to investigate the consequence of coolant-coolant interaction in the SG of the lead-based reactor system. They observed droplet fragmentation after the droplet impingement. Moreover, a violent explosion phenomenon happened more readily at lower water temperatures, and the peak pressure decreased with the water temperature, nozzle diameter and injection velocity increased.
Zhang et al. (2017) used a gas jet to simulate the steam coming from the cracked tube, and injected the gas into a water pool to study the steam penetration depth into LBE. The flow regimes and cavity phenomena during the penetration were observed and a semi-empirical correlation was modified to predict the penetration depth. It was also found that the penetration depth is proportional to the density ratio of the gas jet to the liquid coolant, the gas velocity, and the tube crack size. Later, Zhang et al. (2019) simulated the steam penetration process with the neutronics-thermohydraulics coupled program.
Table 2 summarizes the current research about the SG tube leakage/rupture related with the droplet impaction phenomenon, including the reactor types.
Table 2. Accident of Steam Generator (SG) tube rupture/leakage related with droplet impaction research.
The phenomena of boiling heat transfer between Pb-Bi and steam-water by injecting water stream into the high temperature Pb-Bi flow
▪
The volumetric overall and local heat transfer coefficients between Pb-Bi and steam-water were measured.
Ciampichetti et al. (2009)	Liquid metal cooled fast reactor
▪
Water injection at 7 MPa and 235 oC into a vessel containing Lead-Bismuth eutectic (LBE)
▪
The ambient pressure was investigated before and after the water-LBE interaction.
Sa et al. (2011)	Lead alloy-cooled fast reactor
▪
LBE and lead droplets impacting the water pool
▪
The shape evolution of molten droplet in the water pool
▪
The ambient pressure was measured after the interaction between the LBE (or lead) and the water occurred.
Huang et al. (2017)	Accelerator Driven Systems (ADSs); China Lead-based Reactor
▪
Droplet composed of heavy liquid metal impinging on a water surface
▪
Observation of the fragmentation of the impingement droplet
▪
The relation between the ambient pressure and the factors like water temperature, nozzle diameter and injection velocity
Zhang et al., 2017, Zhang et al., 2019	Lead-based reactor; ADS
▪
The penetration depth of a gas jet into a water pool
▪
The flow regimes and cavity phenomena during the penetration
▪
A semi-empirical correlation to predict the penetration depth
▪
Numerical simulation on the steam impinging into LBE
2.2.4. Aircraft crash
Liquid fuel might spread as a result of an intentional or accidental aircraft crash, causing sudden fire with hazardous effects, which have been included in the safety analysis of the nuclear power plant (Sikanen and Hostikka, 2017, Silde et al., 2011). Silde et al. (2011) used the facility at Technical Research Centre of Finland to study the liquid dispersal phenomenon in the medium-scale impact test. The experimental findings indicated that the liquid release started along the surface perpendicular to the incoming direction of the missile and formed a fairly “flat” and uniform splash pattern. The initial discharge speed of the liquid front emerging from the ruptured missile may be much higher than the impact velocity of the missile, but the propagation speed of the spray front decreased rapidly with increasing distance from the source. Later, Hostikka et al. (2015) investigated the spray resulting from the impacts of water-filled metal projectiles on a hard wall. The results indicated that the liquid left the impact position as a thin sheet of spray in a direction perpendicular to the projectile velocity. The droplet size was found in the range of 12 to 2500 µm.
<Section>3. Approaches</Section>
The approaches studying droplet impingement are classified into experimental and numerical categories. The experimental method is directly to reveal the droplet impact regimes and present the underlying physics in the droplet impaction process. Numerical simulation is good at illustrating the droplet details during the impaction period, such as the droplet shape, distribution of secondary droplets, inner flow and temperature distribution of the droplet and other parameters. The flexible usage of experimental and modeling approaches is important for understanding the existing nuclear power plants and developing advanced reactors (Hassan, 2019).
3.1. Experimental methodology
We will review the experimental setups chronologically. In the 1960 s, Sagawa (1968) designed a set of spray nozzles (Fig. 7) to generate droplets to study the spray cooling in nuclear reactor containers. In order to maintain a fine and widely distributed spray, the nozzles must be supplied with a flow above a certain pressure. Hence, the flow rate of the sprays was controlled by changing the number of nozzles from seven to four or seven to one, and by selecting the diameter of the nozzle opening of 2.1 mm and 1.6 mm. The average diameter of the sprayed droplets was 0.6 mm.
Fig. 7. A set of spray nozzles. Adapted from Fig. 1 of Sagawa (1968).
Ko and Chung (1996) used an experimental setup to study the breakup characteristics of liquid droplets impinging on a hot surface with the wall temperatures in the Leidenfrost temperature ranging from 220 to 330 °C. The setup consisted of three parts: a droplet generation system, a surface heater and a visualization system (Fig. 8). The droplet generation system had a pulse generator, a voltage amplifier, a droplet generator and a fuel reservoir. The surface heater consisted of a mirror polished brass plate (230 mm × 30 mm × 3 mm) and a 750 W nichrome heater with a voltage and a temperature controller. A chromel–alumel thermocouple was used for the monitoring of wall temperature. A stereozoom microscope, a video camera, a video tape recorder and a stroboscope were used for visualization.
Fig. 8. Schematic of experimental setup to study the breakup of impinging droplets on a hot surface by Ko and Chung (1996).
Fujimoto et al. (2010) investigated the collision of single water droplets with a hot Inconel 625 alloy surface by a two-directional flash photography technique using two digital still cameras and three flash units. The experimental system is shown in Fig. 9 Distilled water at room temperature in the airtight tank was sent to the top of a nozzle unit equipped with a nozzle oscillator. Droplets came through the nozzle and fell vertically downward from the flat-head outlet. The droplet flow had a uniform diameter and a uniform interval between the droplets could form below the nozzle unit. The droplet diameter and ejection speed could be adjusted by changing the water flow rate. The droplets then hit the rotating disk and a slit hole. The collision of the droplet with the solid substrate occurred several times per second. An optical sensor captured the position of the slit holes in the rotating disk and provided a signal that triggered the flash photography. Two digital cameras and three micro flash units were used in the monitoring system. Camera A was applied to measure the impact conditions (diameter of droplet before impact, impact velocity of droplet and time after droplet impact) and the following shape of droplet with time. Camera B was placed at an incline to provide the droplet image. The flash was operated twice in a row at a predetermined time interval, so that a backlit double exposure photo of the droplet can be obtained.
Fig. 9. Experimental setup to study single water droplets impacting a hot Inconel alloy surface by Fujimoto et al. (2010).
Zhou et al. (2014) used an experimental device consisting of a test part, a water tank, and a water injection nozzle to study water droplets falling on the molten tin (Fig. 10). The test part was a thin rectangular water tank made of stainless steel, and the inner container had a slice structure. The molten tin was initially packed in an internal container and heated to a preset temperature. The water tank temperature was controlled by a 2 kW immersion heater. After the water reached a certain temperature, the nozzle was inserted into the inner container to be close to the surface of the quartz glass. The nozzle outlet was placed above the surface of the molten tin, and water droplets were released onto the molten tin liquid. A high-speed camera was used to capture the fragmentation of water droplets in opaque liquid through quartz glass. The dense light source and the light source were installed at the front of the viewing window.
Fig. 10. Experimental setup to study the water droplet impacting molten metal liquid. Adapted from Fig. 1 of Zhou et al. (2014).
As can be seen from Fig. 11, the experimental equipment of Lan et al. (2014) consisted of spray tanks, pressure pumps, pipes, nozzles and a series of control valves and equipment for process monitoring (such as pressure sensors, mass meters, and flow meters). The control valve put the circuit into operation and obtained the required flow. Spray tanks were used to store water sources and collect spray droplets. Turbine mass flow meters and pressure sensors were conducted to measure mass flow and the pressure drop of the liquid through the nozzle. The nozzle in the experiment was a series of pressure swirl nozzles for the spraying system in the supercharger of the PWR power plant system, which accelerated the liquid and formed spray droplets.
Fig. 11. Experimental setup of the spray system used in PWR. Adapted from Fig. 1 of Lan et al. (2014).
Wang et al. (2020) investigated the effect of surface properties on droplet impact cooling of cladding surfaces (Fig. 12). In their experiments, water droplets were generated by a hypodermic needle with a tip inner diameter of 0.51 mm. A syringe pump was aimed to supply deionized water to the needle. The droplet impact behavior was recorded by a high-speed camera, which had a frame rate of 20,000 fps and a resolution of 640 × 480 pixel. The tip was located at different heights above the test sample to adjust the impact speed of the droplets.
Fig. 12. Experimental setup to study droplet impacting a hot surface by Wang et al. (2020).
Li et al., 2019a, Li et al., 2019b developed a method to measure the distribution of the secondary droplets produced by a single droplet impacting a static liquid film (Fig. 13). The main components of the system included a droplet generating system, a high-speed camera, a light source and a liquid pool. The droplet generating system consisted of a peristaltic pump, a liquid reservoir, needles, and hoses. Droplets were gravitationally generated. The fluid in the reservoir was pumped up from the reservoir at a low flow rate first through the hose by the peristaltic pump, and then the fluid reached the needle outlet. When the pending volume of liquid reached the state in which the gravity overcomes the capillary force, a single drop was generated. The impaction process of the drop was recorded by a high-speed camera (Phantom v711, 8 G memory, 32–32000 fps, macro lens 100 mm), which was illuminated by an auxiliary light source. A circular glass fluid container with an inner diameter of 200 mm was adopted to form a static liquid film of different thickness.
Fig. 13. Experimental setup to study continuous droplet impacting the dry or wet surface by Li et al. (2019b).
Fig. 14 shows the flowchart to obtain the distribution of secondary droplets. After acquiring all the edge information of droplets, it was possible to calculate the number of the droplets and the diameter velocity of each droplet based on the position of the points on the droplet edge. Further, a mask was created and applied to the image of interest to exclude the edges belonging to the liquid sheet and crown. Therefore, the part of secondary droplets was left which was easy for the following calculation. This process was conducted by setting screening conditions of aspect ratio and number of pixels taken up by the area to exclude the edges of the liquid sheet. Selecting the region of interest manually was also applicable as a backup solution. As for the number of secondary droplets in this image, it can be calculated by counting the numbers of individual edges left in the image.
Fig. 14. Flowchart of image process to obtain the distribution of secondary droplets by Li et al. (2019b).
Chen et al. (2020b) developed an experiment setup including a height-adjustable iron frame, syringe, needle, xenon lamp, astigmatism plate, angle-adjustable stainless steel plane, high-speed camera and computer (Fig. 15). The stainless steel plate was sanded with sandpaper. Before the experiment started, the liquid film covered the stainless steel surface. After the liquid film stabilized, the syringe slowly pushed the fluid to produce droplets at the needle. The droplets fell under the action of gravity and hit the liquid film. The liquid film thickness was measured by a pixel analysis method, and the difference compared to the dry plate was the liquid film thickness. In the experiment, a high-speed camera and a 105 mm fixed-focus lens were used, and a 500 W xenon lamp was applied as the light source to shoot the backlight. In addition, a diffuser plate was added between the light source and the experimental platform to homogenize the light source. The camera and experimental platform were placed horizontally. The experimental images were processed by MATLAB software, and the measurement images were calibrated by a calibration ruler.
Fig. 15. Experimental setup to study the droplet impaction on a wet surface by Chen et al. (2020a).
In general, the aforementioned experimental setups consist of three main parts: a device to generate droplets, the control system to let droplets impact the surface and a measurement system with the data analytics module. Table 3 summarizes the detail information about the three parts according to the studies discussed in this section.
Table 3. Experiment setups to study the droplet-wall impaction in nuclear engineering.
3.2. Numerical simulation
The beautiful part of droplet impingement study is to understand the evolution of the droplet surface during the impaction process. The high-speed camera can capture the surface evolution to some extent, but it is still difficult to depict it in three dimensions, and show the droplet morphology at any given time. Numerical simulation can overcome these limitations to go deep in understanding the surface evolution of the droplet. Simulation approaches can be classified into two categories: mesh-based and mesh-free methods. We will introduce two representative methods—MPS (moving-particle semi-implicit) and VOF (volume of fluid)—to cover these two categories.
3.2.1. Moving-Particle Semi-implicit (MPS) method
MPS was first developed by (Koshizuka and Oka, 1996) to simulate the fragmentation of incompressible fluid. This simulation method was classified as particle method in the CFD (computational fluid dynamics) modeling. MPS was different from the other particle method—SPH (smoothed particle hydrodynamics)—which was mainly used to simulate a compressible and inviscid fluid (Libersky et al., 1993). Since the modified kernel function and incompressibility model were used in MPS, it is faster and more stable than other particle methods.
MPS is designed to solve the Navier-Stokes (NS) equation which is represented in the Eulerian framework. But in MPS, the motion of fluid particle is traced to solve the convection term in NS equation. The internal force terms in the NS equation, such as pressure gradient and viscous force, are replaced by the interaction model of the fluid particle. The external force directly acts on the fluid particle in MPS.
In MPS, the simulation accuracy strongly depends on the kernel function. The kernel function, w(r), is used to present how the fluid particle interacts with others in its vicinity. w(r) is defined as below:
@(1)
where r is the distance between the two particles and @ is a cut-off distance. It should be noted that the kernel function is infinity at r = 0, which is good for numerical stability in the model of incompressibility (Koshizuka and Oka, 1996). The kernel function is shown in Fig. 16.
Fig. 16. Kernel function in MPS. Adapted from Fig. 1 of Koshizuka and Oka (1996).
Particle number density is proportional to the fluid density (Duan et al., 2003). The particle number density at coordinate ri where particle i is located is , which is defined as:
@(2)
Thus, the fluid density (@) of particle i is calculated as:
@(3)
where m is the mass of a single particle and the integration is conducted in the whole space. For the incompressible fluid, the density is a constant as well as the particle number density which is denoted by .
The derivation (or the gradient vector) in the NS equation is calculated by the combination of scalar quantities in MPS. If a scalar quantity of particle i at location  is , then its gradient is calculated as:
@(4)
where D is the number of space dimensions. The Laplacian operator is obtained as follows:
@(5)
where @ is defined as:
@(6)
The remaining question is to obtain the velocity (ui) and pressure (Pi) of the fluid, which are computed according to the algorithm shown in Fig. 17.
Fig. 17. Algorithm flowchart of MPS. ICCG means the incomplete Cholesky conjugate gradient method. Adapted from Fig. 2 of Koshizuka and Oka (1996).
In order to capture the fluid surface, the surface curvature () needs to be calculated. The surface model is shown in Fig. 18, and  is defined based on  and  as shown in Fig. 18:
@(7)
where @ is obtained by the number density of particle 1 (solid sphere) and 2 (open sphere) in Fig. 18. The number density of particle 1 (@) is calculated as:
@(8)
where @ is defined as:
@(9)
where @ is a function of the distance between adjacent particles in the initial arrangement (Duan et al., 2003). The process of calculating the number density of particle 2 () is the same as that in Equation (8). The kernel function is changed to  which is given as:
@(10)
Fig. 18. Surface tension model in MPS (Xie et al., 2004).
Finally,@  is calculated as below:
@(11)
where @ is the particle number density of the particle at the surface which is the half of . MPS has been widely used in modeling the droplet deformation and break-up (Duan et al., 2003), liquid droplet deposition on the liquid film (Xie et al., 2004), and a single droplet impingement on a rigid wall (Xiong et al., 2012).
3.2.2. Volume of Fluid (VOF) method
Volume of Fluid (VOF) method was first invented to track the free fluid surfaces by Hirt and Nichols (Hirt and Nichols, 1981) in the 1980 s. It has been proved that VOF is more flexible and efficient than discrete Lagrangian representation methods. The biggest advantage of the VOF method is that it has a good conservation property.
Assuming the variable F describes the surface property, it should satisfy the following equation:
@(12)
where @ is the fluid velocity. In VOF, F represents the volume fraction () of the liquid phase in a mesh grid (Chen et al., 2019, Zhong et al., 2014). If , it means the grid is fully occupied by the gas. Otherwise, if , it means the grid is full of liquid. Gas and liquid mix in a grid if . Although VOF has a good conservation property, it is hard to depict the detailed surface structure as only the volume fraction is solved. Thus, a distance function () is used to reconstruct the surface geometry (Sethian and Smereka, 2003). As  is a property of surface, it also satisfies Equation (12). Therefore, the normal vector () and curvature () of a surface is calculated as:
@(13)
Fig. 19 shows the simulation results of a jet being injected into a liquid pool by MPS and VOF, respectively. Fig. 19(a) presents the simulation results of water jet interaction with a denser fluid at different moments. Since MPS is a mesh-free method, it can simulate the large deformation of liquids without concerning about the mesh refining (Ikeda et al., 2001). Fig. 19(b) shows the simulated morphology of a molten jet into a water pool using VOF (Thakre et al., 2015). Although VOF method has a natural conservation property of mass/volume, it has to adapt the mesh to capture the liquid surface where the large deformation occurs (as shown in the right hand subplot in Fig. 19(b)). Since the mesh-free method, like MPS, does not have the limitation on the computational mesh as well as the concern about the numerical convergence problem, it is more promising in the future as the computational ability is growing rapidly.
Fig. 19. (a) Simulation result of a jet into a denser fluid pool by MPS at different moments. Adapted from Fig. 3 of Ikeda et al. (2001). (b) Simulation result of a molten jet into a water pool. Adapted from Fig. 1 of Thakre et al. (2015).
3.2.3. Other simulation methods
For the simulation method described in this section, droplet is regarded as a point instead of modeling the evolution of the fluid surface. This method is efficient to study the deposition behavior of lots of droplets which occur in the moisture separator (Zhang and Liu, 2020a), pipe erosion (Li et al., 2012), spray cooling (Xiao et al., 2016) and aircraft impact (Sikanen and Hostikka, 2017).
<Section>4. Summary and remarks on future work</Section>
In this review, we examine the phenomena of droplets impacting the wall surface and the approaches to study them in nuclear engineering.
Firstly, the experimental phenomena of the droplet impaction observed in the installations of nuclear reactor are presented. We discuss several installations, such as moisture separator, spray system, steel pipes and fuel channel. The droplet impaction has different effects on these installations. For the moisture separator, the secondary droplets produced by the droplet splashing after impaction would reduce the separation efficiency. For the spray system, the heat transfer between the impaction droplet and the wall is most concerned because it is highly related with the cooling efficiency of reactor core. In addition, continuous droplet impaction might induce the erosion of steel pipes to lead potential threatens in reactor. Furthermore, it is found that the motivation of studies on the droplet impaction in the fuel channel are to prevent the vaporization explosion in BWR.
Secondly, four incidents where droplets impaction happens are discussed. Majority researches focus on LOCA because a large amount of droplets can be generated through the liquid leakage in installations. The consequence is that droplet impacts hot surfaces would be suddenly vaporized as a high pressure vapor with an explosion risk. In addition, fuel–coolant interaction occurs in pressure vessel or containment is a typical accident related to droplet impaction. Water droplets impacting the metal surface or metal droplets impinging on the water surface are both research issues. Splashing following droplet explosion is commonly observed as the high temperature of the wall surface. The research on droplet impaction in the SG tube leakage accident is mostly found in the analysis of the lead-based reactor safety. In this assumed accident, highly pressurized water would directly contact the primary metal coolant to form a dynamic thermal coolant-coolant interaction, which could trigger various transients and enhance the risk of structural integrity of SG. Meanwhile, fuel droplet impaction in nuclear power plant has been considered in the evaluation of the aircraft crash aimed at nuclear facilities. The spreading of droplets on the surface would cause sudden fire with hazardous effects.
Thirdly, experimental setups since 1960 s are also examined in this review. These setups have common features: a droplet generator, a control system to let droplets impact the surface, and a measurement system with the data analytics module. The droplet generator can be a needle, a spray nozzle, or a jet controlled by an oscillator. Moreover, light sources are critical to increase the light intensity entering the high-speed camera to obtain a qualified resolution. In addition, an image process technique based on PTV is presented.
Finally, two types of simulation methods—mesh-free and mesh-based simulation methods—are reviewed for free surface modeling. The popular mesh-free method used in nuclear engineering is the Moving-Particle Semi-implicit (MPS) method. This method tracks the fluid particles to present the droplet surface. For the mesh-based method, VOF has a good quality of variables’ conservation. However, since the volume fraction is applied to represent the fluid surface, VOF is vague to capture the surface. Thus, a combined method to couple VOF and Level-set method is more accurate than VOF method only.
For future study, a technology to reconstruct the droplet impaction image in three dimensions is urgent since most current research prefers using a single camera to record the impaction phenome in two dimensions. The image in three dimensions will be more accurate to perform the size and velocity distribution of secondary droplets. In addition, the droplet impaction on the wall surface with complex properties needs to be addressed. These properties include: the surface roughness, liquid film on the surface, wall surface with different inclined angles and others.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Beijing [Grant No. 3194054]. Q.L. was partly supported by the Open Fund (PLC20190602) of the State Key Laboratory of Oil and Gas Reservoir Geology and Exploitation (Chengdu University of Technology).
<Section>Appendix I.</Section>
The steam pressures of the moisture separator that runs at cold and hot conditions are 0.1 MPa and 6.89 MPa, respectively (Zhang et al., 2016). As the moisture separator is at the saturation state, the droplet density () and surface tension () are 998 kg/m3 and 73 × 10−3N/m at the cold condition, and  and  are 741 kg/m3 and 18 × 10−3N/m at the hot condition, respectively. In the moisture separator, the size of the droplets is approximately 1 µm to 100 µm, and the droplet velocity (vd) ranges about from 1 m/s to 30 m/s (Zhang and Liu, 2020b). Thus, the droplet Weber number () is about 0 to 1235. According to the droplet impaction regime proposed by Bai and Gosman, 1995, Moreira et al., 2010, we can determine the impaction regimes of a single droplet in the moisture separator lie in the black circle as shown in Fig. 3.
<Section>References</Section>
Anglart et al., 2010
H. Anglart, F. Alavyoon, R. Novarini
Study of spray cooling of a pressure vessel head of a boiling water reactor
Nucl. Eng. Des., 240 (2010), pp. 252-257
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bai and Gosman, 1995
C. Bai, A. Gosman
Development of methodology for spray impingement simulation
SAE Trans. (1995), pp. 550-568
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bian et al., 2019
J. Bian, D. Zhang, R. Sun, Y. Wu, W. Tian, G. Su, S. Qiu
Experimental study on spray characteristics of pressure-swirl nozzle in China advanced PWR containment
Nucl. Eng. Des., 350 (2019), pp. 158-175
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bird et al., 2013
J.C. Bird, R. Dhiman, H.-M. Kwon, K.K. Varanasi
Reducing the contact time of a bouncing drop
Nature, 503 (2013), p. 385
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Board et al., 1974
S. Board, C. Farmer, D. Poole
Fragmentation in thermal explosions
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 17 (1974), pp. 331-339
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Board et al., 1975
S. Board, R. Hall, R. Hall
Detonation of fuel coolant explosions
Nature, 254 (1975), p. 319
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Caraghiaur et al., 2013
D. Caraghiaur, C. Adamsson, H. Anglart
A model for inertial drop deposition suitable to predict obstacle effect
Nucl. Eng. Des., 260 (2013), pp. 121-133
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Caraghiaur and Anglart, 2013
D. Caraghiaur, H. Anglart
Drop deposition in annular two-phase flow calculated with Lagrangian Particle Tracking
Nucl. Eng. Des., 265 (2013), pp. 856-866
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Carrillo et al., 2019
J.P. Carrillo, A. Oliveira, A. Labergue, T. Glantz, M. Gradeck
Experimental thermal hydraulics study of the blockage ratio effect during the cooling of a vertical tube with an internal steam-droplets flow
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 140 (2019), pp. 648-659
Google Scholar
Chatzikyriakou et al., 2010
D. Chatzikyriakou, S. Walker, B. Belhouachi, C. Narayanan, D. Lakehal, G. Hewitt
Three dimensional modeling of the hydrodynamics of oblique droplet-hot wall interactions during the reflood phase after a LOCA
J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 132 (2010), Article 102914
Google Scholar
Chen et al., 2019
B. Chen, J. Li, F. Mao, R. Tian
Numerical study on the characteristics of single wetted flat wire with single droplet impact under the disturbance of airflow
Nucl. Eng. Des., 345 (2019), pp. 74-84
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chen et al., 2020a
B. Chen, B. Wang, F. Mao, J. Wen, R. Tian, C. Lu
Experimental study of droplet impacting on inclined wetted wall in corrugated plate separator
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 137 (2020), Article 107155
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Chen et al., 2020b
B. Chen, R. Tian, F. Mao
Analysis of special phenomena of droplet impact on horizontal liquid film at low velocity
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 136 (2020), Article 107038
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Cho et al., 2011
H.K. Cho, K.Y. Choi, S. Cho, C.-H. Song
Experimental observation of the droplet size change across a wet grid spacer in a 6× 6 rod bundle
Nucl. Eng. Des., 241 (2011), pp. 4649-4656
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Choi et al., 2015
D.H. Choi, K.H. Kim, H.J. Kim
Long-term investigation of erosion behaviors on metal surfaces by impingement of liquid droplet with high-speed
J. Mech. Sci. Technol., 29 (2015), pp. 1085-1091
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ciampichetti et al., 2009
A. Ciampichetti, D. Pellini, P. Agostini, G. Benamati, N. Forgione, F. Oriolo
Experimental and computational investigation of LBE–water interaction in LIFUS 5 facility
Nucl. Eng. Des., 239 (2009), pp. 2468-2478
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Comiskey et al., 2019
P. Comiskey, A. Yarin, D. Attinger
Implications of two backward blood spatter models based on fluid dynamics for bloodstain pattern analysis
Forensic Sci. (2019)
international
Google Scholar
Cossali et al., 1997
G. Cossali, A. Coghe, M. Marengo
The impact of a single drop on a wetted solid surface
Exp. Fluids, 22 (1997), pp. 463-472
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Del Nevo et al., 2016
A. Del Nevo, A. Ciampichetti, M. Tarantino, L. Burgazzi, N. Forgione
Addressing the heavy liquid metal–Water interaction issue in LBE system
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 89 (2016), pp. 204-212
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Duan et al., 2003
R.-Q. Duan, S. Koshizuka, Y. Oka
Two-dimensional simulation of drop deformation and breakup at around the critical Weber number
Nucl. Eng. Des., 225 (2003), pp. 37-48
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fang et al., 2020
D. Fang, L. Li, J. Li, M. Wang, H. Yu, J. Zhang, S. Qiu, W. Tian, G. Su
Full-scale numerical study on the thermal-hydraulic characteristics of steam-water separation system in an advanced PWR UTSG. Part two: Droplets separation process
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 118 (2020), Article 103139
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Fujimoto et al., 2010
H. Fujimoto, Y. Oku, T. Ogihara, H. Takuda
Hydrodynamics and boiling phenomena of water droplets impinging on hot solid
Int. J. Multiph. Flow, 36 (2010), pp. 620-642
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fujisawa et al., 2013
N. Fujisawa, T. Yamagata, K. Saito, K. Hayashi
The effect of liquid film on liquid droplet impingement erosion
Nucl. Eng. Des., 265 (2013), pp. 909-917
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hamdan et al., 2015
K.S. Hamdan, D.-E. Kim, S.-K. Moon
Droplets behavior impacting on a hot surface above the Leidenfrost temperature
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 80 (2015), pp. 338-347
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hassan, 2019
Y. Hassan
High-fidelity experimental measurements for modeling and simulation of nuclear engineering applications
Nucl. Eng. Des., 354 (2019), Article 110181
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Hirt and Nichols, 1981
C.W. Hirt, B.D. Nichols
Volume of fluid (VOF) method for the dynamics of free boundaries
J. Comput. Phys., 39 (1981), pp. 201-225
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hostikka et al., 2015
S. Hostikka, A. Silde, T. Sikanen, A. Vepsä, A. Paajanen, M. Honkanen
Experimental characterisation of sprays resulting from impacts of liquid-containing projectiles
Nucl. Eng. Des., 295 (2015), pp. 388-402
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Huang et al., 2017
W. Huang, D. Zhou, R. Sa, H. Jiang
Experimental study on thermal-hydraulic behaviour of LBE and water interface
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 99 (2017), pp. 1-10
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hwang et al., 2005
S.S. Hwang, H.P. Kim, J.S. Kim, K.E. Kasza, J. Park, W.J. Shack
Leak behavior of SCC degraded steam generator tubings of nuclear power plant
Nucl. Eng. Des., 235 (2005), pp. 2477-2484
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ikeda et al., 2001
H. Ikeda, S. Koshizuka, Y. Oka, H.S. Park, J. Sugimoto
Numerical analysis of jet injection behavior for fuel-coolant interaction using particle method
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 38 (2001), pp. 174-182
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Issa, 2008
Issa, R.J., 2008. Numerical investigation of the chilling of food products by air-mist spray, Proceed. World Acad. Sci., Eng. Technol. 981-990.
Google Scholar
Jeltsov et al., 2018
M. Jeltsov, W. Villanueva, P. Kudinov
Steam generator leakage in lead cooled fast reactors: Modeling of void transport to the core
Nucl. Eng. Des., 328 (2018), pp. 255-265
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jin et al., 2019
Y. Jin, F.-B. Cheung, K. Shirvan, S.M. Bajorek, K. Tien, C.L. Hoxie
Development of a droplet breakup model for dry spacer grid in the dispersed flow film boiling regime during reflood transients
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 143 (2019), Article 118544
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Josserand and Thoroddsen, 2016
C. Josserand, S.T. Thoroddsen
Drop impact on a solid surface
Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 48 (2016), pp. 365-391
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kanazawa et al., 1995
T. Kanazawa, T. Nagayoshi, T. Kawasaki, K. Amano
Analysis of turbulence intensity and coolant droplet behavior around BWR fuel spacers
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 32 (1995), pp. 1061-1063
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Khawaji et al., 2008
A.D. Khawaji, I.K. Kutubkhanah, J.-M. Wie
Advances in seawater desalination technologies
Desalination, 221 (2008), pp. 47-69
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ko and Chung, 1996
Y. Ko, S. Chung
An experiment on the breakup of impinging droplets on a hot surface
Exp. Fluids, 21 (1996), pp. 118-123
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Koshizuka and Oka, 1996
S. Koshizuka, Y. Oka
Moving-particle semi-implicit method for fragmentation of incompressible fluid
Nucl. Sci. Eng., 123 (1996), pp. 421-434
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lan et al., 2014
Z. Lan, D. Zhu, W. Tian, G. Su, S. Qiu
Experimental study on spray characteristics of pressure-swirl nozzles in pressurizer
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 63 (2014), pp. 215-227
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Li and Anglart, 2017
H. Li, H. Anglart
CFD prediction of droplet deposition in steam-water annular flow with flow obstacle effects
Nucl. Eng. Des., 321 (2017), pp. 173-179
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Li et al., 2019a
J. Li, H. Zhang, Q. Liu
Dynamics of a successive train of monodispersed millimetric-sized droplets impact on solid surfaces at low Weber number
Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci., 102 (2019), pp. 81-93
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Li et al., 2019b
J. Li, H. Zhang, Q. Liu
Characteristics of secondary droplets produced by a single drop impacting on a static liquid film
Int. J. Multiph. Flow, 119 (2019), pp. 42-55
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Li et al., 2012
R. Li, M. Mori, H. Ninokata
A calculation methodology proposed for liquid droplet impingement erosion
Nucl. Eng. Des., 242 (2012), pp. 157-163
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Liang and Mudawar, 2017
G. Liang, I. Mudawar
Review of drop impact on heated walls
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 106 (2017), pp. 103-126
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Libersky et al., 1993
L.D. Libersky, A.G. Petschek, T.C. Carney, J.R. Hipp, F.A. Allahdadi
High strain Lagrangian hydrodynamics: a three-dimensional SPH code for dynamic material response
J. Comput. Phys., 109 (1993), pp. 67-75
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lu et al., 2013
M.-C. Lu, Y.-Z. Li, Z.-Q. Xiong
Experimental study on performance of moisture separators. Dongli Gongcheng Xuebao
J. Chin. Soc. Power Eng., 33 (2013), pp. 76-80
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Meignen et al., 2014
R. Meignen, S. Picchi, J. Lamome, B. Raverdy, S.C. Escobar, G. Nicaise
The challenge of modeling fuel–coolant interaction: Part I-Premixing
Nucl. Eng. Des., 280 (2014), pp. 511-527
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhong et al., 2014
M. Zhong, Y. Zhou, M. Lin, M. Yuan, Y. Yang
Numerical simulation of molten droplet deformation and disintegration under sudden accelerations
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 65 (2014), pp. 199-206
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Moreira et al., 2010
A. Moreira, A. Moita, M. Panao
Advances and challenges in explaining fuel spray impingement: How much of single droplet impact research is useful?
Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 36 (2010), pp. 554-580
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Naitoh et al., 2013
M. Naitoh, H. Okada, S. Uchida, H. Yugo, S. Koshizuka
Evaluation method for pipe wall thinning due to liquid droplet impingement
Nucl. Eng. Des., 264 (2013), pp. 195-202
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Nakao et al., 1998
T. Nakao, Y. Saito, H. Souma, T. Kawasaki, G. Aoyama
Droplet behavior analyses in the BWR dryer and separator
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 35 (1998), pp. 286-293
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Novitrian et al., 2008
Novitrian, V. Dostal, M. Takahashi
Boiling heat transfer behavior of leadebismuthesteamewater direct contact two-phase flow
Prog. Nucl. Energ., 50 (2008), pp. 625-630
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Okawa et al., 2007
T. Okawa, T. Fujita, J. Minamitani, I. Kataoka
On the deposition rate of droplets in annular flow around a flow obstacle
MultScienTechn, 19 (4) (2007), pp. 305-321
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Okawa et al., 2011
T. Okawa, T. Murakami, R. Takei
Rate of droplet deposition in steam–water annular flow and effect of a flow obstacle
Nucl. Eng. Des., 241 (11) (2011), pp. 4497-4503
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Park et al., 1999
H.S. Park, Y. Shibamoto, Y. Maruyama, K. Moriyama, H. Nakamura, Y. Yang, J. Sugimoto
Visualization of plunging jet behavior in molten alloy, Proceedings of 7th International Conference on Nuclear Engineering (ICONE 7)
Tokyo, Japan (1999)
Google Scholar
Panão and Moreira, 2005
M.O. Panão, A.L.N. Moreira
Flow characteristics of spray impingement in PFI injection systems
Exp. Fluids, 39 (2005), pp. 364-374
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Perets et al., 2005
Y. Perets, R. Harari, E. Sher
Vapor explosion of coolant jet when penetrating a hot molten metal
Nucl. Sci. Eng., 150 (2005), pp. 237-244
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Plog et al., 2019
J. Plog, J.-M. Löwe, Y. Jiang, Y. Pan, A.L. Yarin
Control of Direct Written Ink Droplets Using Electrowetting
Langmuir, 35 (2019), pp. 11023-11036
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Porcheron et al., 2010
E. Porcheron, P. Lemaitre, D. Marchand, W. Plumecocq, A. Nuboer, J. Vendel
Experimental and numerical approaches of aerosol removal in spray conditions for containment application
Nucl. Eng. Des., 240 (2010), pp. 336-343
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Porcheron et al., 2007
E. Porcheron, P. Lemaitre, A. Nuboer, V. Rochas, J. Vendel
Experimental investigation in the TOSQAN facility of heat and mass transfers in a spray for containment application
Nucl. Eng. Des., 237 (2007), pp. 1862-1871
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Prosperetti and Oguz, 1993
A. Prosperetti, H.N. Oguz
The impact of drops on liquid surfaces and the underwater noise of rain
Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 25 (1993), pp. 577-602
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Reichard et al., 1998
D.L. Reichard, J.A. Cooper, M.J. Bukovac, R.D. Fox
Using a videographic system to assess spray droplet impaction and reflection from leaf and artificial surfaces
Pestic. Sci., 53 (1998), pp. 291-299
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Rein, 1993
M. Rein
Phenomena of liquid drop impact on solid and liquid surfaces
Fluid Dyn. Res., 12 (1993), p. 61
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Sa et al., 2011
R. Sa, M. Takahashi, K. Moriyama
Study on fragmentation behavior of liquid lead alloy droplet in water
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 53 (2011), pp. 895-901
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Sagawa, 1968
N. Sagawa
An experimental study of spray cooling in nuclear reactor containers
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 5 (1968), pp. 419-426
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Sethian and Smereka, 2003
J.A. Sethian, P. Smereka
Level set methods for fluid interfaces
Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 35 (2003), pp. 341-372
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Shirota et al., 2016
M. Shirota, M.A. van Limbeek, C. Sun, A. Prosperetti, D. Lohse
Dynamic Leidenfrost effect: relevant time and length scales
Phys. Rev. Lett., 116 (2016), Article 064501
CrossRefGoogle Scholar
Sibamoto et al., 2001
Y. Sibamoto, H. Nakamura, Y. Anoda
Neutron radiography flow visualization of liquid metal injected into an empty vessel and a vessel containing saturated water
Nucl. Technol., 133 (2001), pp. 119-132
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Sikanen and Hostikka, 2017
T. Sikanen, S. Hostikka
Numerical simulations of liquid spreading and fires following an aircraft impact
Nucl. Eng. Des., 318 (2017), pp. 147-162
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Silde et al., 2011
A. Silde, S. Hostikka, A. Kankkunen
Experimental and numerical studies of liquid dispersal from a soft projectile impacting a wall
Nucl. Eng. Des., 241 (2011), pp. 617-624
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Thakre et al., 2015
S. Thakre, L. Manickam, W. Ma
A numerical simulation of jet breakup in melt coolant interactions
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 80 (2015), pp. 467-475
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Torres et al., 1999
W.M. Torres, B.D. Baptista Filho, D.K.S. Ting
The design and experimental validation of an emergency core cooling system for a pool type research reactor
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 26 (1999), pp. 709-728
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2008
S. Wang, M. Flad, W. Maschek, P. Agostini, D. Pellini, G. Bandini, T. Suzuki, K. Morita
Evaluation of a steam generator tube rupture accident in an accelerator driven system with lead cooling
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 50 (2008), pp. 363-369
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2019
B. Wang, B. Chen, R. Tian
Review of research progress on flow and rupture characteristics of liquid film on corrugated plate wall
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 132 (2019), pp. 741-751
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2020
Z. Wang, W. Qu, J. Xiong, M. Zhong, Y. Yang
Investigation on effect of surface properties on droplet impact cooling of cladding surfaces
Nucl. Eng. Technol., 52 (3) (2020), pp. 508-519, 10.1016/j.net.2019.08.022
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Worthington, 1877
A.M. Worthington
XXVIII. On the forms assumed by drops of liquids falling vertically on a horizontal plate
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, 25 (1877), pp. 261-272
Google Scholar
Xiao et al., 2016
Xiao, J., Travis, J.R., Bottoni, M., 2016. Thermal-hydraulic analysis of a passive containment cooling system using dynamic liquid film model in CFD code GASFLOW-MPI, 2016 24th International Conference on Nuclear Engineering. American Society of Mechanical Engineers Digital Collection.
Google Scholar
Xie et al., 2004
H. Xie, S. Koshizuka, Y. Oka
Numerical simulation of liquid drop deposition in annular-mist flow regime of boiling water reactor
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 41 (2004), pp. 569-578
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Xiong et al., 2012
J. Xiong, S. Koshizuka, M. Sakai, H. Ohshima
Investigation on droplet impingement erosion during steam generator tube failure accident
Nucl. Eng. Des., 249 (2012), pp. 132-139
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Xiong et al., 2014
Z. Xiong, M. Lu, M. Wang, H. Gu, X. Cheng
Study on flow pattern and separation performance of air–water swirl-vane separator
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 63 (2014), pp. 138-145
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Xu et al., 2017
J. Xu, J. Xie, X. He, Y. Cheng, Q. Liu
Water drop impacts on a single-layer of mesh screen membrane: Effect of water hammer pressure and advancing contact angles
Exp. Therm Fluid Sci., 82 (2017), pp. 83-93
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yamamoto et al., 1997
Y. Yamamoto, A. Hoshide, T. Mitsutake, S. Morooka
Analytical study on effects of BWR fuel spacer on droplet deposition
Nucl. Eng. Des., 175 (1997), pp. 119-129
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yarin, 2006
A.L. Yarin
Drop impact dynamics: splashing, spreading, receding, bouncing…
Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 38 (2006), pp. 159-192
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhang et al., 2017
C. Zhang, R. Sa, D. Zhou, H. Jiang
Effects of gas velocity and break size on steam penetration depth using gas jet into water similarity experiments
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 98 (2017), pp. 38-44
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhang et al., 2019
C. Zhang, R. Sa, D. Zhou, G. Zhang, L. Wang
Effects of failure location and pressure on the core voiding under SGTR accident in a LBE-cooled fast reactor
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 141 (2019), pp. 940-948
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhang et al., 2016
H. Zhang, Q. Liu, B. Qin, H. Bo, F. Chen
Study on working mechanism of AP1000 moisture separator by numerical modeling
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 92 (2016), pp. 345-354
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhang and Liu, 2020a
H. Zhang, Q. Liu
Numerical investigation on performance of moisture separator by Lagrangian-Eulerian strategy: Physical mechanisms, theoretical models, and advanced algorithms
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 137 (2020), Article 107081
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Zhang and Liu, 2020b
H. Zhang, Q. Liu
Numerical investigation on performance of moisture separator: Experimental validation, applications and new findings
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 142 (2020), Article 107362
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Zhou et al., 2014
Y. Zhou, M. Lin, M. Zhong, X. Yan, Y. Yang
Molten metal and water direct contact interaction research–I. Photographic experiment study
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 70 (2014), pp. 248-255
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar