<title>An engineering stability technique for unsteady, two-phase flows with heat and mass transfer</title>
<author>1,Faith R.Beck,2,LokanathMohanta,3,Diane M.Henderson,4,Fan-BillCheung,5,GitaTalmage</author>
<Affiliation>1,Work performed at the Department of Mechanical Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA;2,Carrier Corporation, Syracuse, NY 13221, USA;3,Department of Mathematics, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA;4,Department of Mechanical Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA;5,Department of Nuclear Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>International Journal of Multiphase Flow</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.ijmultiphaseflow.2021.103709</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301932221001579</URL>
An engineering stability technique for unsteady, two-phase flows with heat and mass transfer
Faith R.Beck,LokanathMohanta,Diane M.Henderson,Fan-BillCheung,GitaTalmage
Work performed at the Department of Mechanical Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
Carrier Corporation, Syracuse, NY 13221, USA
Department of Mathematics, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
Department of Mechanical Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
Department of Nuclear Engineering, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Stability of an unsteady, two-phase flow with heat and mass transfer considered.
Work motivated by loss of coolant accidents in nuclear power plants.
Flow is mathematically unstable, regions of ǣengineering stabilityǥ identified.
Engineering stability quantified using solution growth behavior and doubling time.
Framework provided for application to other types of problems.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
This paper considers the stability of an unsteady, two-phase flow with heat and mass transfer. The model problem is motivated by loss of coolant accidents in nuclear power plants. For the example problem, two flow geometries are considered: inverted annular flow boiling and an annular mist flow. The model is comprised of coupled Mathieu equations so that stability can be determined using a Floquet analysis. The flow is found to be mathematically unstable to all perturbative wavenumbers, but for practical purposes there are regions of stability. Using the solution's growth behavior and doubling-time, the notion of practical stability, which is termed herein as "engineering stability," is quantified and a method is provided for application to other engineering stability problems.
Keywords:Two-phase flow;Stability;Oscillations;Heat and mass transfer
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
This paper proposes a technique to determine the engineering stability for unsteady, or oscillatory flows. Oscillating flows present unique effects on turbulent intensities (Sleath, 1987) and diffusion (Watson, 1983), which have application to both the man-made and natural world. Flow oscillations and their impacts are of interest for oceanic studies (Lowe et al., 2005), power generation (Bestion, 2004), and chemical processes (Harvey et al., 2001).
Time varying, and in particular, oscillating flows are often unstable, but with small growth rates as compared to some time period of interest (Razavi, Gupta, Adams, Bloch, 2016, Kelly, 1965). Their mathematical stability can be determined using Floquet theory, which is one method for solving linear ordinary differential equations whose coefficients and/or boundary conditions are periodic (Coddington and Levinson, 1955). For example, Benjamin and Ursell (1954) studied the stability of the free surface of an inviscid fluid in a circular cylinder undergoing periodic vertical motion, such that the system is parametrically forced due to a time-varying acceleration of gravity. From Benjamin and Ursell (1954), a stability analysis at the free surface leads to a Mathieu equation, so that there are regions of instability to perturbations whose resonance frequencies are harmonics of the parametric forcing frequency. In these regions of instability, the free surface exhibits standing waves that oscillate at the resonant frequency, with amplitudes that will grow until nonlinear effects become significant (Drazin and Reid, 2004). This system is often referred to as “Faraday waves” @ (Faraday, 1837) and has been the subject of many analytic, numerical, and experimental studies.
There have been generalizations by, for example, Kumar (1996), who allowed for viscous effects, and @ Kumar and Tuckerman (1994), who considered the stability of an interface between two fluids undergoing vertical oscillations. Such parametric excitations occur in other systems, for example, vibrated, wetting liquid drops supported by a solid plate (Maksymov and Pototsky, 2019), floating drops with deformable domains (Pucci, 2015), and multi-frequency parametric forcing in smallest chemical reactions (Zhou et al., 2020).
In particular, Kelly (1965) investigated the stability of an unsteady Kelvin–Helmholtz flow with surface tension. The effect of viscous stresses not included, Kelly found that the interface between two inviscid fluids became unstable due to periodic perturbations. More recently, Razavi et al. (2016) studied the stability of a system modeled by coupled Hill’s equations using Floquet theory. They identified regions of stability, even though perturbations in these regions had positive growth rates. Floquet theory defines stability in terms of eigenvalues, , which provide the growth rates of the perturbations, such that if ), are all less than one, then the system is mathematically stable. In the system studied by Razavi et al. (2016), the largest @ was close to one, but greater than one, so the perturbations would grow, but slowly. The idea that @ may be considered stable for engineering purposes, is the focus of this paper.
Here, we pursue this idea further, and quantify it using a model unsteady flow problem motivated by a loss of coolant accident (LOCA). To this end, we define “engineering stability.” Engineering stability is determined by the amount of growth of perturbations during the operational period, whereas mathematical stability is determined by non-positive growth rates. Instead of focusing on whether , engineering stability is concerned with the rate of perturbation growth over a time period that is of physical relevance, and what the consequences of that amount of growth are on the physical system. For a particular physical system, one can determine the tolerance for perturbation growth during the time that the system is operational. Then the question of engineering stability becomes: how large can the eigenvalues be such that the perturbation growth is bounded by the desired tolerance?
In this paper, we show that the value for @ is determined such that the tolerance for perturbation growth is a factor of two, and the time for the perturbation to double in size (i.e. the doubling-time) is within the operational period of the system. If it is, then we consider the system to be unstable from an engineering perspective. In particular, a system of equations with time-varying, periodic coefficients, whose solution is , can be represented at a later time (), for example by Nayfeh and Mook (2008) as
@(1.1)
where @ is time, @ is the number of oscillation periods, and @ is the oscillation period. Herein, we consider the system to have engineering stability if all values of @ are such that , where @ is the time period over which the system is operational.
A growth factor of @, rather than two, and its corresponding e-folding time, is another common choice. For example, an e-folding time is used in oceanography, biology, and cosmology to understand the propagation of instabilities with time (Stone, 1972, Rumfeldt, Galvagnion, Vassall, Meiering, 2008, Pitari, Di Genova, Mancini, Visioni, Gandolfi, Cionni, 2016). While e-folding time has been used to measure perturbation growth for other applications, this is the first time, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, that such parameters have been used as a stability criterion. We note that a factor of two is the more conservative choice than a factor of , and has relevance for the system considered (see discussion in Section 4). The physical example used herein includes heat and mass transfer, viscous effects at the interface, and a time-varying flow velocity. This applied method for stability provides an additional, simple metric with which to analyze a complex, two-phase system.
<Section>2. Example problem<Section/>
The model problem is motivated by applications to nuclear power plants in which there is oscillatory flooding of a heated tube. Perturbations that have large enough growth rates could worsen nuclear power accidents, more specifically during a LOCA. We define the flow in Section 2.1, establish the initial and boundary conditions, and determine the coupled Mathieu equations that will be used for the stability analyses in Section 2.2.
2.1. Flow description
The flows in the example are oscillatory, or time-varying, which have been studied experimentally. However, few theoretical studies have been performed, especially on the flow stability. During oscillatory flooding of a heated tube, Oh et al. (1986) found that the void fraction, or fraction of the flow channel volume that is occupied by gas, and hence the flow regimes, oscillate between Inverted Annular Flow Boiling (IAFB) and Annular Mist Flow (AMF), as illustrated in Fig. 1. Here, the IAFB geometry is depicted during an upstroke. Slugs and droplets of liquid are sheared from the incoming jet by fast moving vapor downstream. In contrast, during a downstroke, AMF is present with dispersed flow film boiling (DFFB) occurring further downstream. Together, Fig. 1 shows the downstream effects of different flow regimes present in an oscillating flow.
Fig. 1. Prominent flow regimes during an up- and downstroke (Beck, 2019).
During an upstroke, the high velocity liquid jet cannot come in direct contact with the heated wall due to high temperature vaporization there, and resembles IAFB. The IAFB geometry can be approximated as an annulus with liquid in the center and gas on the walls, shown in Fig. 2. By contrast, for low flooding rates or during a downstroke, AMF occurs, with gas in the center and liquid along the walls. The AMF geometry is simply the inverse of Fig. 2. Since both flow geometries are required to characterize oscillatory flow, stability analyses are performed on both the IAFB and AMF geometries in the following sections. However, for brevity, the IAFB geometry will be used as an example for the majority of the provided equations. Identical assumptions and approximations are made for both flow geometries. Both fluids (liquid and gas) are assumed to be incompressible, inviscid, irrotational, and axisymmetric @ for the annulus geometry. The gas phase is assumed incompressible due to its low velocity, which for this example has a Mach number < 0.3. Specific to this problem, nuclei production is not a dominant mechanism for interfacial instabilities. Since the bulk liquid is significantly subcooled (between 22 to 55 K), when vapor bubbles are generated on the heated surface for the AMF geometry, they will instantaneously collapse as they depart. Additionally, for the IAFB geometry, since the gas phase, rather than the liquid, is in direct contact with the heated surface, there will be no nucleation for this flow type. Therefore, for the two flow geometries, nuclei production is not considered a dominant mechanism for instability.
Fig. 2. Approximating IAFB geometry during an upstroke as an annulus with liquid at the center and gas on the walls (Beck, 2019).
Additionally, since the gas and liquid layers are so thin along the wall (see Fig. 2) variations in @ will be insignificant, so @ in the film. From Fig. 2, @ is the wall heat flux, @ is the dimensional, radial distance from the center of the annulus to the wall, @ is the dimensional, radial distance from the center of the annulus to the edge of the liquid core, @ is the dimensional height of the interfacial wave, and @ represents the oscillating velocity of the liquid and gas phases.
We note that since the flows are incompressible and irrotational, viscous-potential flow theory (Funada and Joseph, 2001) is used, which assumes that the viscosity is only significant at the interface between the two fluids. Therefore, viscous forces do enter the analysis through the normal stress balance at the interface between the liquid and gas. This approximation is reasonable in wave motions where the viscous resistance to these waves is not negligible, or when the gas phase shear stress is sufficiently small. While gas phase turbulence and the consequential liquid entrainment that occurs would be present in a real flow, to keep the analysis linear, these effects are neglected herein. The following analysis is provided in full detail in @ Beck (2019) and @ Mohanta et al. (2016). However, for the work by @ Mohanta et al. (2016), the flow is steady, as opposed to the unsteady flows presented here.
In the following equations, @ denotes dimensional quantities and terms without an asterisk are non-dimensional. Additionally, because the method of normal modes will be used, terms with a @ refer to the base (or unperturbed) state of the oscillatory flow for either the liquid or gas phase, and @ refers to the oscillation frequency of the base flow. The flow will be considered in terms of an undisturbed base flow and a small perturbation to the base flow. The base states of the liquid () and gas () are oscillating, with velocity potentials (), where @ as
@(2.1)
The velocity of each phase @ is defined as
@(2.2)
In (2.1) and (2.2), @ is the base flow oscillation frequency, @ is the base flow velocity, @ is the density, @ is the flow area, @ is the average mass flow rate, and @ is time. Since the base flow is irrotational, velocity potentials are found by solving Laplace’s equation in the liquid and gas so that
@(2.3)
With the axisymmetric flow assumption, the Laplacian operator is
@(2.4)
The Bernoulli equation is used to determine the pressures in both the liquid and gas phases. For irrotational flows, the unsteady Bernoulli equations for the liquid and gas phases respectively are
@(2.5)
@(2.6)
where @ and @ represent time-dependent coefficients that are determined using the velocity potentials and the Young–Laplace equation (Panton, 2013). The Young–Laplace equation relates the pressures of both phases, the surface tension (), and surface curvature of the undisturbed liquid at the interface () as
@(2.7)
Eqs. (2.1) - (2.7) represent the base states for flows in both geometries, IAFB and AMF. The scales used to non-dimensionalize variables for the IAFB geometry are
@(2.8)
The quantity @ is selected as the length scale for the IAFB geometry because it simplifies the non-dimensionalization of the interface. The resulting non-dimensional lengths, time, and pressure for the IAFB geometry are
@(2.9)
The AMF geometry uses the same non-dimensionalizations except for the length scale, which is chosen as , the radius of the gas phase.
The ratios of base flow velocity, density, and dynamic viscosity are
@(2.10a)
@(2.10b)
@(2.10c)
In this problem, four dimensionless parameters arise: gas Reynolds (), gas Weber (), Froude (), and Strouhal () numbers that are defined as
@(2.11a)
@(2.11b)
@(2.11c)
and
@(2.11d)
To evaluate the stability of the system, perturbations are applied to the total velocity, pressure, and velocity potentials as
@(2.12)
@(2.13)
@(2.14)
Here,@ , where @ represents the total flow, @ the base flow, and @ the disturbance.
2.2. Boundary conditions and governing equations
A total of five conditions are needed to evaluate the two-fluid, coupled system in two-dimensions. Conditions include one no-flow boundary condition at the wall (), one finite solution condition along the centerline (), and three interfacial conditions derived from conservation of mass, momentum, and energy. The three interfacial conditions will be defined in this section.
The two conditions at @ and @ are functions of the flow geometry and are listed in Table 1. The dimensional perturbed interface equation for the IAFB geometry is
@(2.15)
and for the AMF geometry, the dimensional perturbed interface is
@(2.16)
where @ represents the location of the liquid-gas interface, @ a radial position, and @ and @ the dimensional radii of the liquid and gas phases, respectively. The relationship for the non-dimensional interface between the two fluids for the IAFB and AMF geometries is the same. The simplified, non-dimensional Eq. (2.17) for the free surface is the reason for choosing the scales provided in (2.8) and (2.9):
@(2.17)
Table 1. Boundary conditions for both flow geometries.
The method of normal modes is applied to the velocity potentials at the interface location, of the form
@(2.18)
Performing mass, momentum, and energy balances at the two-phase interface between the liquid and gas yields the final governing equations in terms of the unknowns , , , and their derivatives, where @ and @ are two unknowns originating from the independent eigenfunctions of (2.3). The mass, momentum, and energy balances at the linearized interface, , respectively are
@(2.19)
@(2.20)
and,
@(2.21)
where @ is a modified Bessel function of the first kind.
The system of Eqs. (2.19)–(2.21) will lead to a singular matrix. To avoid this, we manipulate (2.19) and (2.21) by solving for @ in (2.19), substituting into (2.21), and then taking the derivative with respect to time, yielding
@(2.22)
Here, Eq. (2.22) is a modified form of conservation of energy that leads to a diagonalizable system of equations to be analyzed using Floquet theory.
Only the final governing equations for the IAFB geometry are provided here. We choose to use Eqs. (2.19), (2.20), and (2.22); however, if (2.20), (2.21), and (2.22) were used instead, the results would be the same. For a complete derivation of the governing equations for both flow geometries, see Beck (2019). These equations are used to determine the fundamental set of solutions required for the method of normal modes to analyze the stability.
For (2.19)–(2.22), coefficients , where @ (0,1,2,3) are given as
@(2.23a)
@(2.23b)
@(2.23c)
@(2.23d)
where @ is a modified Bessel function of the second kind.
<Section>3. Determination of mathematical stability for an unsteady flow</Section>
3.1. Numerical analysis
Since the coefficients of the ordinary differential equations are periodic functions of time, Floquet theory can be used to solve the governing equations with oscillating velocities. The three equations for the three unknowns are conservation of mass (2.19), momentum (2.20), and modified conservation of energy (2.22), which are assembled as
@(3.1)
where @ and @ are both 33 matrices, and , , are time-dependant, periodic coefficients.
To solve this system of equations, (3.1) is rewritten as
@(3.2)
Our choice of the modified conservation of energy Eq. (2.22) guarantees that @ exists in (3.2). To determine the eigenvalues, the system of equations is integrated from @ to @ using a fourth-order Runge-Kutta method, where @ is the range for the period of integration over a single oscillation.
The eigenvalues of the solution vector, , determine the stability of the system (Nayfeh and Mook, 2008). The eigenvalues are established by solving
@(3.3)
Because of the periodicity of the coefficients, the solution vector, @, at any time ,@ , will be proportional to . Thus, one can show that if the three moduli of eigenvalues [] are all less than one, then the system is considered stable. The following method is used to evaluate the stability of the system of equations:
(i)
A range of wavenumbers () and Strouhal numbers () is chosen to evaluate the temporal stability and swept in two loops. Values of , ranging from @ to , are selected based on experiments by Beck (2019), which have oscillation frequencies varying from two to 10 s.
(ii)
An initial condition vector is specified, , which includes the initial values for , , and , respectively, at .
(iii)
The system of equations is integrated from 0 to , where () is the vector that contains the range of @ values. The range for the period of integration is chosen to ensure that one full oscillation period is evaluated, where . Each coefficient is checked to confirm that the largest full period is used.
(iv)
The relative and absolute tolerances to perform the integrations are set to . Smaller tolerances were tested with no significant effect on the results.
(v)
For every combination of @ and , the eigenvalues are calculated.
Based on the eigenvalues, stability is determined using
(3.4)
If (3.4) is satisfied, then the base flow is mathematically stable.
(vi)
If (3.4) is not satisfied, then we consider the possibility of engineering stability (see Section 4).
3.2. Parametric study
The combined effects of void fraction (), temperature of the heated wall (), , and @ on the stability of both flow geometries are discussed here. For individual parameter effects, see Beck (2019). Table 2 shows the parameters used to determine the mathematical stability provided in Figs. 3 and 4. The conditions listed in Table 2 are based on experimental data from Beck (2019), with approximate values:
(i)
15 m/s,
(ii)
between 0.0254 to 0.1524 m/s,
(iii)
oscillation period between two and 10 s,
(iv)
system pressure between 138 to 414 kPa,
(v)
liquid temperature between 22 to 55 K subcooled,
(vi)
and a vapor temperature above saturation.
Table 2. Parameters for stability analyses.
Fig. 3. Maximum eigenvalues for the IAFB geometry resulting from (3.4).
Fig. 4. Maximum eigenvalues for the AMF geometry resulting from (3.4).
Figs. 3 and 4 show maximum eigenvalues for the IAFB and AMF geometries, respectively. Here, the abscissa is the wavenumber @ and the ordinate axis is the Strouhal number . The colored regions denoted in the figures represent “stability”, and the color-bar signifies the associated maximum eigenvalues, . Regions without color, represented with white, include eigenvalues that are larger than the maximum color-bar value.
In Fig. 3, the IAFB geometry with combined effects of , , , and heat transfer effects, has a minimum eigenvalue , which is greater than one. Additionally, Fig. 4 shows the AMF geometry with the same combined effects and has a minimum eigenvalue . While dimensionless parameters @ and @ have little effect on the stable regions, the addition of heat transfer significantly reduces the stability of the system. In a full parametric study by Beck (2019), it was determined that the addition of heat transfer at the interface primarily reduces the stability of the system.
Heat transfer promotes instabilities, as reported in the literature, specifically for the AMF configuration (Nayak, Chakraborty, 1984, Beck, 2019). For the AMF geometry, the thin liquid film between the heated wall and the gas will be close to, or near, its saturation temperature. In this state, the liquid requires minimal additional heat to initiate vaporization there, and this leads to an instability. This result is similar to what is observed by Nayak and Chakraborty (1984), where the addition of heat transfer to a fluid annulus decreased the stability of the system. Note that the color-bar scales are different for Figs. 3 and 4 because the AMF geometry is more unstable. Similar to findings in Section 3.2, experiments from Beck (2019) show that oscillatory flow increases the amount of liquid carryover compared to constant flow. The amount of liquid carryover, or entrained liquid in the carrier gas phase, can be used to physically quantify the effects of the interfacial instability, for when the interface becomes unstable, liquid break-up will occur.
Since both flows (IAFB and AMF) are mathematically unstable () in the range of Strouhal number and wavenumbers of interest, this suggests that the flows are unstable given realistic conditions in an experiment or nuclear reactor undergoing flow boiling. However, we make the case that these flows can be described as “engineering stable,” for eigenvalues that are , where .
In Section 4, we describe how flow oscillations observed during a finite time period can be used to predict solution growth during that time. The example problem will be used to define an engineering stability criterion for this flow and demonstrate how engineering stability may be determined for other flows.
<Section>4. Determining engineering stability</Section>
Engineering stability is unique for each application, since the limits for @ are problem-specific. To determine engineering stability, perturbation growth rate and doubling-time are evaluated. Together, this information will be used to characterize the engineering stability criterion for the example problem.
Fig. 5 depicts three different eigenvalues with predicted perturbation growth in time, using (1.1). It shows that when , the perturbation amplitude does not double before the time of interest, shown as 75 oscillations in the figure. The time of interest is chosen as 75 oscillations, or 150 s with a two second oscillation period, because flow oscillations during a LOCA are most prominent within this time-frame (Beck, 2019, Beck, Jin, Mohanta, Qiao, Rau, Miller, Cheung, Lowery, Bajorek, Tien, Hoxie, 2016, Beck et al., 2018, Bestion, 2004, Cheung, Mohanta, Riley, 2014). In contrast, for those eigenvalues greater than 1.001, the perturbation growth tends to increase by orders of magnitude within the first 10 oscillations.
Fig. 5. Different @ solutions as functions of number of oscillations. The green vertical line at n = 75 oscillations denotes the duration of oscillations for the example problem.
The solution’s doubling-time can provide an additional metric for defining engineering stability. The doubling-time refers to the time it takes for a solution to double in magnitude, or
@(4.1)
where @ is the oscillation period in seconds. From weakly nonlinear theory (Rainey, 2007, Stokes), the initial perturbation slope is small, for example, on the order of 0.1. Hence, at the doubling-time, , the perturbation slope will increase to 0.2.
Perturbation growth for this example is allowed as long as the perturbation amplitude does not approach the radius, , which can either be defined as @ for the IAFB geometry or ) for the AMF geometry. To use @ as a representative timescale for solution growth, we can write this criterion in terms of the wavelength, , and the radius , such that
@(4.2)
If (4.2) is satisfied, then the doubling-time can be used as a representative timescale for the example problem’s solution growth. As an example, the IAFB geometry’s oscillation velocity and frequency determine @ to be 50.8 mm. Together, the wavelength with @ mm, satisfies (4.2) since .
A large doubling-time, compared to the operational time, suggests that the perturbation amplitude will not significantly increase within the operational time of interest, which for this example is 150 s. Fig. 6 shows that for , the doubling-time of the solution is sufficiently small compared to the operational time. Both Figs. 5 and 6 suggest that the system with eigenvalues @ can be considered “stable” for engineering purposes in this example. For this application, we can extend the stability criterion from @ to .
Fig. 6. Doubling-time depicted for each @ solution.
Fig. 7 shows engineering stability for the IAFB geometry, whose mathematical stability is shown in Fig. 3. The color-bar is modified in Fig. 7 to indicate stability based on the extended range of eigenvalues, . The AMF geometry, however, does not have any , which is not considered stable, even in an engineering sense. Therefore, with engineering stability, it is shown that the IAFB geometry can be considered stable for particular @ and experimental conditions, whereas the AMF geometry is unstable for the same conditions with , and , and heat transfer effects. Since the AMF geometry is not continuously present during a LOCA, the flow system is capable of reaching stable conditions.
Fig. 7. Extended maximum eigenvalues for the IAFB geometry based on engineering stability criteria, .
<Section>5. Summary and conclusions</Section>
In this paper, mathematical and engineering stability are compared using an unsteady two-phase flow with heat and mass transfer. Determining the engineering stability is particularly useful when the given problem is mathematically unstable, but with “slow enough” growth rates, as in the presented example. For this problem, engineering stability is used to extend the limits on stability for practical purposes. Although the application and analyses presented here are specific to this flow, the method for determining engineering stability can be extended to other types of problems. To do so, the following should be considered:
(i)
an operational time period for which the system is running,
(ii)
a tolerance for perturbation growth, and
(iii)
values of @ over ranges of physical parameters of interest, for which the doubling-times are less than the operational times.
After evaluating the growth rates and doubling-times, a cut-off for @ can be established, beyond which the perturbation will increase above the allowed tolerance within the operational time period and be considered unstable in an engineering sense.
For the example problem described in the text, the following conclusions were made after determining the engineering stability criterion particular to this problem.
(i)
For the AMF geometry, the addition of heat and mass transfer significantly decreased the stability of the system.
(ii)
Using a problem-specific time-scale for solution growth, @ can be extended to .
(iii)
For the IAFB geometry, engineering stability extended the range of meaningful solutions for applied stability.
While both the tolerance for perturbation growth and the operational time period will be unique for each problem, computing the engineering stability can extend the range of meaningful solutions for a better physical understanding of the flow.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Faith R. Beck: Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing, Conceptualization, Methodology. Lokanath Mohanta: Formal analysis, Writing - review & editing. Diane M. Henderson: Formal analysis, Writing - review & editing, Conceptualization, Methodology. Fan-Bill Cheung: Supervision, Writing - review & editing. Gita Talmage: Formal analysis, Writing - review & editing, Methodology.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgments</Section>
Henderson is grateful for support from the National Science Foundation, NSF-DMS-1716159. Beck wishes to acknowledge Partha Pratim Mishra for his suggestions with the numerical simulations in this paper.
<Section>References</Section>
Beck, 2019
F.R. Beck
Experimental and Theoretical Study of Oscillatory Two-Phase Flows with Heat and Mass Transfer (2019)
Ph.D. thesis
Google Scholar
Beck et al., 2018
F.R. Beck, Y. Jin, F.B. Cheung, S.M. Bajorek, K. Tien, C.L. Hoxie
A study of liquid entrainment in oscillatory flows
Embedded Topical International Meeting on Advances in Thermal Hydraulics (ATH 2018), Nov. 11–15, Orlando, FL, U.S., ANS (2018)
Google Scholar
Beck, Jin, Mohanta, Qiao, Rau, Miller, Cheung, Lowery, Bajorek, Tien, Hoxie, 2016
F.R. Beck, Y. Jin, L. Mohanta, S. Qiao, A. Rau, D.J. Miller, F.B. Cheung, B.R. Lowery, S.M. Bajorek, K. Tien, C.L. Hoxie
Effects of period and flow rate on liquid entrainment and the droplet field under forced oscillatory reflood conditions
17th International Topical Meeting on Nuclear Reactor Thermal Hydraulics, NURETH 2017 (2016)
Google Scholar
Benjamin, Ursell, 1954
T.B. Benjamin, F. Ursell
The stability of the plane free surface of a liquid in vertical periodic motion
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 225, The Royal Society (1954), pp. 505-515
Google Scholar
Bestion, 2004
D. Bestion
Recent Advances in Thermal Hydraulics Modeling for the CATHARE code
Technical Report (2004)
Google Scholar
Cheung, Mohanta, Riley, 2014
F.-B. Cheung, L. Mohanta, M.P. Riley
RBHT Reflood Data Evaluation Report: Internal Report
USNRC (2014)
Google Scholar
Coddington, Levinson, 1955
E.A. Coddington, N. Levinson
Theory of Ordinary Differential Equations
Tata McGraw-Hill Education (1955)
Google Scholar
Drazin, Reid, 2004
P.G. Drazin, W.H. Reid
Hydrodynamic Stability
Cambridge University Press (2004)
Google Scholar
Faraday, 1837
M. Faraday
On a peculiar class of acoustical figures; and on certain forms assumed by groups of particles upon vibrating elastic surfaces
Abstracts of the Papers Printed in the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, The Royal Society London (1837), pp. 49-51
Google Scholar
Funada, Joseph, 2001
T. Funada, D. Joseph
Viscous potential flow analysis of Kelvin–Helmholtz instability in a channel
J. Fluid Mech., 445 (2001), pp. 263-283
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Harvey, Mackley, Stonestreet, 2001
A. Harvey, M. Mackley, P. Stonestreet
Operation and optimization of an oscillatory flow continuous reactor
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 40 (23) (2001), pp. 5371-5377
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kelly, 1965
R. Kelly
The stability of an unsteady Kelvin–Helmholtz flow
J. Fluid Mech., 22 (3) (1965), pp. 547-560
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kumar, 1996
K. Kumar
Linear theory of faraday instability in viscous liquids
Proc. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. A, 452 (1948) (1996), pp. 1113-1126
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kumar, Tuckerman, 1994
K. Kumar, L.S. Tuckerman
Parametric instability of the interface between two fluids
J. Fluid Mech., 279 (1994), pp. 49-68
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lowe et al., 2005
R.J. Lowe, J.R. Koseff, S.G. Monismith
Oscillatory flow through submerged canopies: 1. Velocity structure
J. of Geophys. Res., 110 (C10) (2005), pp. 1-17
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Maksymov, Pototsky, 2019
I.S. Maksymov, A. Pototsky
Harmonic and subharmonic waves on the surface of a vibrated liquid drop
Phys. Rev. E, 100 (5) (2019), p. 053106
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Mohanta, Cheung, Bajorek, 2016
L. Mohanta, F.-B. Cheung, S.M. Bajorek
Stability of coaxial jets confined in a tube with heat and mass transfer
Phys. A, 443 (2016), pp. 333-346
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Nayak, Chakraborty, 1984
A. Nayak, B. Chakraborty
Kelvin–Helmholtz stability with mass and heat transfer
Phys. Fluids (1958–1988), 27 (8) (1984), pp. 1937-1941
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Nayfeh, Mook, 2008
A.H. Nayfeh, D.T. Mook
Nonlinear Oscillations
John Wiley & Sons (2008)
Google Scholar
Oh, Banerjee, Yadigaroglu, 1986
S. Oh, S. Banerjee, G. Yadigaroglu
Reflooding with steady and oscillatory injection: part II: quench front and liquid carryover behavior
J. Heat Transf., 108 (3) (1986), pp. 448-456
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Panton, 2013
R.L. Panton
Incompressible Flow
John Wiley & Sons (2013)
Google Scholar
Pitari, Di Genova, Mancini, Visioni, Gandolfi, Cionni, 2016
G. Pitari, G. Di Genova, E. Mancini, D. Visioni, I. Gandolfi, I. Cionni
Stratospheric aerosols from major volcanic eruptions: a composition-climate model study of the aerosol cloud dispersal and e-folding time
Atmosphere, 7 (6) (2016), p. 75
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Pucci, 2015
G. Pucci
Faraday instability in floating drops out of equilibrium: motion and self-propulsion from wave radiation stress
Int. J. Nonlinear Mech., 75 (2015), pp. 107-114
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Rainey, 2007
R. Rainey
Weak or strong nonlinearity: the vital issue
J. Eng. Math., 58 (1-4) (2007), pp. 229-249
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Razavi, Gupta, Adams, Bloch, 2016
H. Razavi, R. Gupta, F.C. Adams, A.M. Bloch
Stability of a class of coupled Hill’s equations and the Lorentz oscillator model
SIAM J. Appl. Dyn. Syst., 15 (2) (2016), pp. 1104-1123
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Rumfeldt, Galvagnion, Vassall, Meiering, 2008
J.A. Rumfeldt, C. Galvagnion, K.A. Vassall, E.M. Meiering
Conformational stability and folding mechanisms of dimeric proteins
Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol., 98 (1) (2008), pp. 61-84
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Sleath, 1987
J. Sleath
Turbulent oscillatory flow over rough beds
J. Fluid Mech., 182 (1987), pp. 369-409
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Stokes
Stokes, G. G., 1880. On the theory of oscillatory waves. Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society.
Google Scholar
Stone, 1972
P.H. Stone
A simplified radiative-dynamical model for the static stability of rotating atmospheres
J. Atmos. Sci., 29 (3) (1972), pp. 405-418
CrossRefGoogle Scholar
Watson, 1983
E. Watson
Diffusion in oscillatory pipe flow
J. Fluid Mech., 133 (1983), pp. 233-244
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhou, Xie, Li, 2020
C. Zhou, F. Xie, Z. Li
Complex bursting patterns and fast-slow analysis in a smallest chemical reaction system with two slow parametric excitations
Chaos Solitons Fractals, 137 (2020), p. 109859
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar