<title>Adaptive backstepping controller with extended state observer for load following of nuclear power plant</title>
<author>1,JiuwuHui,2,JunLing,3,KaiGu,4,JingqiYuan</author>
<Affiliation>1,State Key Laboratory of Nuclear Power Safety Monitoring Technology and Equipment, Shenzhen, 518172, Guangdong, China;2,Department of Automation, and the Key Laboratory of System Control and Information Processing/Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, 200240, Shanghai, China</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2021.103745</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0149197021001128</URL>
Adaptive backstepping controller with extended state observer for load following of nuclear power plant
JiuwuHui,JunLing,KaiGu,JingqiYuan
State Key Laboratory of Nuclear Power Safety Monitoring Technology and Equipment, Shenzhen, 518172, Guangdong, China
Department of Automation, and the Key Laboratory of System Control and Information Processing/Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Road, 200240, Shanghai, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
An extended state observer is designed to estimate unmeasured states and output disturbances online.
An adaptive backstepping load following control approach is proposed.
The system uncertainties are approximated by using radial basis function neural network.
It is demonstrated though Lyapunov stability theory that the overall control system is ultimately uniformly bounded.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Load following is one of the most important subjects for nuclear power plants. In this paper, an adaptive backstepping control strategy with extended state observer is proposed for load following of nuclear power plant. The model of nuclear reactor based on point-reactor kinetics equations with one delayed neutron groups is described firstly. Subsequently, considering the unmeasurable limitation of densities of delayed neutron precursor and average fuel temperature, an extended state observer (ESO) is designed to estimate unmeasured states of system and output disturbances online, and the stability of the observer error dynamic is analyzed. Then, an adaptive backstepping load following control approach is proposed, based on radial basis function neural network (RBFNN) for nuclear reactor in the presence of reactivity disturbances, where the system uncertainties including unknown reactivity disturbances caused by xenon and samarium poisoning, power defect etc. are approximated by using RBFNN. In addition, it is demonstrated though Lyapunov stability theory that the overall control system is ultimately uniformly bounded (UUB). Finally, simulation results are given to verify the effectiveness of the proposed controller compared with conventional sliding mode controller in terms of load following performance, namely, better following accuracy and stronger ability against disturbances.
<Section>Graphical abstract<Section>
Keywords:Load following;Point-reactor kinetics equations;Extended state observer (ESO);Adaptive backstepping control;Radial basis function neural network (RBFNN);Disturbances rejection
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Energy lays the foundation of the development of human civilization. With the rapid growth of world population and the economic development in developed countries, the consumption of limited fossil fuels is accelerating, and the environmental pollution poses a common challenge for human society. In order to solve energy crisis and reduce environmental pollution, renewable and nuclear energy has been vigorously developed. After the development of a half of a century, nuclear energy has become clean and highly effective, which is expected to be one of the primary energies in the future. In addition, although nuclear radiation contamination caused by nuclear accidents such as Chernobyl and Fukushima has attracted increasing attention, some countries, including China and Russia, are still promoting the construction of nuclear power plants(Zeng et al., 2016).
Load following of nuclear power plants aims to coordinate electricity power generation and consumption by adopting thermal energy output of nuclear reactors under safe operation conditions. In recent years, researchers have paid attention to controller design for load following of nuclear power plant and proposed various control methods, e.g. linear and adaptive PID controls (Mousakazemi and Hossein, 2019; Dong, 2014), high order and adaptive sliding mode controls (ZareDavijani et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2004; Ansarifar and Rafiei, 2015), model predictive control (Eliasi et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2014; YunHou and ChongZhao, 2010), fuzzy control (Das et al., 2013; Coban, 2011), adaptive control (Arab-Alibeik and Setayeshi, 2005; Ansarifaret al., 2017) and neural network control (Khajavi et al., 2002). However, due to model nonlinearities and uncertainties of nuclear reactors, the controller design is challenging. Mousakazemi and Mohammad (Mousakazemi and Hossein, 2019) proposed a PID control scheme based on real-coded genetic algorithm method. According to the scheme, the PID controller gain can be tuned and scheduled to reject unwanted disturbances. Ansarifar and Rafiei (2015) presented a higher order sliding mode controller and noticed the effect of xenon concentration. The effectiveness of designed controller is demonstrated in accordance to avoid chattering phenomenon and against disturbance of simulations robustly. Eliasi et al. (2012) applied robust nonlinear model predictive control to improve dynamic performance during load following process with parameter uncertainties and external disturbances, meanwhile to ensure control rod speed and states of nuclear reactor model to be bounded within acceptable ranges. Khajavi et al. (2002) developed a neural network controller for a wide range of power regulation as well as to improve the response speed.
On the other hand, due to the limitations of measurement technology, it is difficult to get the measured values about the density of delayed neutron precursor, average fuel temperature, and poisons concentration etc. in nuclear reactor, which limits the application of numerous control methods aforementioned in practical engineering. In (Ansarifar et al., (2015)), a sliding mode observer is developed to estimate the unmeasured xenon concentration and the density of delayed neutron precursor, and the stability of the observer system dynamic is guaranteed within a large power level range. Hassanvand et al. (2016) designed a nonlinear state observer to recover the densities of delayed neutron precursors with model uncertainties and external disturbances. Dong et al. (2010) presented a dissipation-based high gain filter, which can be applied to monitor states for nuclear heating reactors, and numerical simulations in the case of large power lift and power rejection are given to show that the filter can provide asymptotic states estimation. Humberto et al. (Perez-CruzAlexander, 2007) applied a neural observer to estimate the reactivity and neutron precursor power, so as to further illustrate a better performance of the observer compared with Luenberger observer by simulations.
In this paper, an extended state observer (ESO) is developed firstly, which only depends on output signal of systems. Compared with the states estimation method described in the aforementioned works (Ansarifar et al., 2015; Hassanvand et al., 2016; Dong et al., 2010; Perez-CruzAlexander, 2007), the main features of the proposed ESO are not only to recover unmeasured states including densities of delayed neutron precursor and average fuel temperature, but also to estimate the output disturbances in real time. As we all know that model uncertainties and external disturbances pose great challenges to power level controller design of nuclear reactors, accurate disturbances estimation aid in enhancing robustness and maintaining stability of controllers. Furthermore, ESO-based adaptive backstepping load following controller is proposed. The controller takes into account reactivity disturbances not existing in the nominal point-reactor kinetics equations, such as xenon and samarium oscillation, power defect etc. These disturbances are approximated by using radial basis function neural network (RBFNN). In the end, satisfactory following performance and strong robustness against disturbances are presented by simulations.
The structure of this paper is organized as follows. Point-reactor kinetics equations with one delayed neutron groups is described in Section 2. Section 3 gives design procedure of the extended state observer (ESO). In Section 4, an adaptive backstepping control strategy is proposed for load following of nuclear power plant. In Section 5, the simulation results are presented and analyzed. Finally, conclusions are reached in Section 6.
<Section>2. Nuclear reactor model</Section>
In this section, the nuclear reactor model with respect to an initial equilibrium condition is established, which consists of the point-reactor kinetics equations with one delayed neutron group, reactivity equation, fuel and coolant energy conservation equations. Assuming that reactivity equations are presented based on control rod position, fuel and coolant temperature feedback. It is worthwhile to mention that the point-reactor kinetics equations are widely used in controller design for load following of nuclear power plant, e.g. in (Wang et al., (2016); Coban, 2014; Ablay, 2013).
The point-reactor kinetics equations with one delayed neutron group are described as follows(Ansarifar and Rafiei, 2015; Hassanvand et al., 2016):
@(1)
@(2)
where@and@are relative neutron and delayed neutron precursor density, respectively,@and λ are neutron generation time and decay constant of the delayed neutron precursor, respectively, ρ is total reactivity, β is delayed neutron fraction.
The reactor power is given as
@(3)
where@is nominal reactor power, P is reactor output power. The energy conservation equations of fuel and coolant are displayed as
@(4)
@(5)
where ,@and@are average fuel, coolant outlet and inlet temperature, respectively,@and@are fuel and coolant total heat capacity, respectively, M is mass flow rate times heat capacity of the coolant,@is heat transfer coefficient between coolant and fuel,@is fraction of reactor power deposited in the fuel.
Finally, the reactivity equations are given as
@(6)
@(7)
where ,@and@are average fuel, coolant outlet and inlet temperature with respect to initial equilibrium condition, respectively,@and@are fuel and coolant temperature coefficient, respectively,@is reactivity due to control rod position movement,@and@are reactivity worth and speed of control rod, respectively.
Substituting (6) into (1), the nuclear reactor model can be expressed in the form of nonlinear state-space model as follows:
@(8)
<Section>3. Design of extended state observer</Section>
Here an extended state observer is developed to estimate both unmeasured states and output disturbances online. Assuming that there are output disturbances in coolant energy conservation equation (5) due to external disturbances and measurement error. Before the design of the extended state observer, the following assumption is needed:
Assumption 1
The output disturbances@and their first-order derivative@are bounded, i.e.,@and , where@and@are unknown upper bound.
Furthermore, if the measurable relative neutron density@is regarded as virtual input, the nuclear reactor model can be transformed into the linear state-space form as follows:
@(9)
where@denote the output disturbances. As a result, in order to recover densities of delayed neutron precursors@and average fuel temperature , meanwhile estimate the output disturbances@in real time, the following extended state observer is constructed as (Hui and Yuan, 2020):
@(10)
where@ ,@ ,@ ,@are the estimation of @,@ ,@ ,@ ,@ respectively@,@ ,@ ,and@all are constant to be designed,@and@are measured values of relative neutron density and coolant temperature, respectively.
Then, defining the following observer error as:
@(11)
It follows that the error dynamic model of the ESO can be obtained by combining (8) and (10) as follows:
@(12)
Defining a new vector , the error dynamic model (12) can be expressed as
@(13)
where
It is difficult to get eigenvalue expression of the matrix@including , but we may obtain appropriate value of@by trial and error to ensure that the matrix@is Hurwitz. Thus, there is a positive definite matrix W such that the following equality is satisfied when@are suitably chosen:
@(14)
Consider the following Lyapunov function candidate:
@(15)
Differentiating (15) with respect to time along the error dynamic model (13), and substituting (14) yields
@(16)
where@denotes the Euclidean norm. It is obvious from (16) that@is negative when . Consequently, the error dynamic model (13) of the ESO is ultimately uniformly bounded (UUB) (Alberto, 2013).
4. Adaptive backstepping controller design
Based on the estimation information from the designed ESO, the systematic design procedure of the adaptive backstepping control approach is addressed in this section. Supposing that reactivity disturbances exists due to xenon and samarium oscillation, power defect etc. in the reactivity equation (6). Thus, Eq. (6) can be rewritten as
@(17)
where@denote reactivity disturbances. From (8), (17), the point-reactor kinetics equation can be rewritten as
@(18)
Before the design of control system, the following assumptions are introduced:
Assumption 2
The reactivity disturbances@and their first-order derivative@are bounded, i.e.,@and , where@and@are unknown upper bound.
Assumption 3
The desired power@is continuous and smooth.
The control task is to design control rod speed@so that the reactor output power P accurately follows a desired power , and the load following error is given as
@(19)
Next, defining the following Lyapunov function as
@(20)
From (16), (17), (18), (19), the derivative of the Lyapunov function (20) is
@(21)
where@denotes uncertain term including reactivity disturbances and estimation errors, and needs to be approximated by using the RBFNN subsequently.
It is well known that the RBFNN possesses universal approximation capability. As shown in Fig. 1, the structure of RBFNN is a three-layer feedforward neural network with a single hidden layer. By using the RBFNN, it is easy to approximate any nonlinear function. Thus, the unknown continuous function F can be accurately described as follows:
@(22)
where@is the input vector of network,@denotes the constant weight vector, ε denotes the approximation error, ξ is Gaussian function and defined as follows:
@(23)
where@denotes the ith center vector of hidden layer, and@denotes the ith width of Gaussian function.
Fig. 1. The structure of RBFNN.
In this paper, the input vector of the RBFNN is designed as , and the estimation of the continuous function F is given as follows:
@(24)
where@and@denote the estimation of the weight vector and the approximation error, respectively. The corresponding estimation errors are defined as
@(25)
From (21), the reactivity@due to control rod position movement is considered as virtual control input, and its desired value is designed as
@(26)
where@is a positive constant to be designed later. Hence, the reactivity error@is obtained as
@(27)
From (21), (25), (27), the following Lyapunov function is defined as
@(28)
where@and@are positive constants to be designed later. Differentiating the Lyapunov function (28) with respect to time and substituting (21), (25), and (26) into@yields
@(29)
To this end, in order to make , the following adaptive laws and control law are designed as
@(30)
where@is a designed positive constant. Substituting (30) into (29) yields
@(31)
Therefore,@implies that . In view of equation (16), the estimation error vector e is UUB, it can be obtained that the power error@is also UUB. By choosing@big enough, the power error@would converge to zero asymptotically.
<Section>5. Simulation studies</Section>
In this section, some computer simulation and comparison results are presented to verify the feasibility of the designed control strategy. The simulation calculation is carried out based on MATLAB/Simulink platform and the simulation duration is chosen as a whole day. As shown in Fig. 2, it is supposed that the initial condition of the nuclear reactor is chosen as in@nominal power and the change rule of the demand power from@power with the rate of . The parameters of the nuclear reactor model are listed in Table 1.
Fig. 2. The desired power change of the nuclear reactor.
Table 1. Parameters of the nuclear reactor model.
In order to present the effectiveness of the designed ESO and load following performance of the proposed control scheme, two simulation cases are studied. The first case is studied with the assumption that the disturbances@and@are equal to zero and the nuclear reactor model is accurate under the initial conditions, but the output disturbances@are added in the nuclear reactor model at . The second case is studied with the assumption that both the disturbances@and@always exist in the nuclear reactor model.
The design parameters of the proposed control system are chosen as follows: @. It is easy to calculate the eigenvalues of matrix@as:, , . For the RBFNN, the width ,@and center b is selected as
In addition, the disturbances@are assumed as follows:
The reactivity disturbances@are assumed to be random disturbances and are plotted in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3. The reactivity disturbances.
Considering the physical limitation in practical applications, the saturation constraint of control rod speed is set to . The above parameters and disturbances of simulation studies are chosen by trial and error, meanwhile in accordance to nuclear power plant operational experience. It is worth noticing that the conventional sliding mode controller is taken from(Jing et al., 2015). We proceed as follows.
5.1. Simulation studies in the absence of reactivity disturbances
In this case, the estimation performance of the designed ESO and the load following performance of the proposed control strategy are studied in the absence of reactivity disturbances. The obtained simulation results are shown in Fig. 4, Fig. 5, Fig. 6, Fig. 7, Fig. 8, Fig. 9, Fig. 10, Fig. 11, Fig. 12, Fig. 13.
Fig. 4. Load following error for the proposed adaptive backstepping control strategy.
Fig. 5. Load following error for the conventional sliding mode controller.
Fig. 6. Fuel temperature recovery by using ESO.
Fig. 7. Estimation error of fuel temperature.
Fig. 8. Relative delayed neutron precursor density estimation by using ESO.
Fig. 9. Estimation error of relative delayed neutron precursor density.
Fig. 10. Output disturbances@estimation by using ESO.
Fig. 11. Estimation error of output disturbances.
Fig. 12. Speed of control rod for the proposed adaptive backstepping control strategy.
Fig. 13. Speed of control rod for the conventional sliding mode controller.
Fig. 4, Fig. 5 illustrate the load following performance of the nuclear power plant under the action of the adaptive backstepping control strategy with the extend state observer and the conventional sliding mode controller. Fig. 6, Fig. 7, Fig. 8, Fig. 9, Fig. 10, Fig. 11 present the estimation performance including unmeasured states and disturbances of the ESO. Fig. 12, Fig. 13 present the control rod behavior with the proposed controller and the conventional sliding mode controller. From Fig. 4, it can be seen that the proposed control method provides precise load following performance for the nuclear power plant regardless of adding the output disturbances . Comparing Fig. 4with Fig. 5, it is clearly observed that the conventional sliding mode controller gives worse load following accuracy in the first case. Specifically, there is obvious power error for the conventional sliding mode controller under variable desired power condition. Fig. 6, Fig. 7, Fig. 8, Fig. 9 reveal that the ESO is able to recover unmeasured fuel temperature and relative precursor density effectively. Furthermore, Fig. 10, Fig. 11 demonstrate the disturbances@can be estimated by using the ESO swiftly with acceptable error. Fig. 12, Fig. 13 show the response curve of the control rod with the proposed control strategy and the conventional sliding mode controller, the speed of control rod is within constraint consistently. Nevertheless, as observed in Fig. 13, chattering phenomenon is produced by the conventional sliding mode controller, which has harmful effects on the actuator.
5.2. Simulation studies in the presence of reactivity disturbances
In order to present the strong disturbances rejection ability, the load following performance of the proposed control strategy is studied with output disturbances@and reactivity disturbances@in this case. The simulation results are given in Fig. 14, Fig. 15, Fig. 16, Fig. 17, Fig. 18, Fig. 19, Fig. 20, Fig. 21, Fig. 22, Fig. 23.
Fig. 14. Load following error for the proposed adaptive backstepping control strategy.
Fig. 15. Load following error for the conventional sliding mode controller.
Fig. 16. Fuel temperature recovery by using ESO.
Fig. 17. Estimation error of fuel temperature.
Fig. 18. Relative delayed neutron precursor density recovery by using ESO.
Fig. 19. Estimation error of relative delayed neutron precursor density.
Fig. 20. Output disturbances@estimation by using ESO.
Fig. 21. Estimation error of output disturbances.
Fig. 22. Speed of control rod for the proposed adaptive backstepping control strategy.
Fig. 23. Speed of control rod for the conventional sliding mode controller.
From Fig. 14, it is obviously seen that the proposed control strategy is rarely affected by both output disturbances@and reactivity disturbances@and shows exact load following performance. In contrast to the results in Fig. 14, it can be observed from Fig. 15 that the conventional sliding mode controller still has worse load following accuracy in the second case. As with the first case, the ESO can recover unmeasured states and estimate disturbances accurately as shown in Fig. 16, Fig. 17, Fig. 18, Fig. 19, Fig. 20, Fig. 21. The control rod behavior is presented in Fig. 22, Fig. 23, where the speed of control rod for the proposed adaptive backstepping control strategy is relatively low compared with the first case. Besides, the chattering phenomenon still exists for the sliding mode controller as shown in Fig. 23.
In summary, the overall proposed control scheme can provide precise load following performance of nuclear power plant together with recovering unmeasured states and estimating disturbances accurately regardless of existing reactivity disturbances.
<Section>6. Conclusions</Section>
For the load following control problem of nuclear power plant with output and reactivity disturbances, an adaptive backstepping control approach with extended state observer is proposed in this paper. The point-reactor kinetics equations with one delayed neutron group of nuclear reactor are firstly described. Considering the limitations of measurement technology, a linear extended state observer is developed for unmeasured states including fuel temperature and relative delayed neutron precursor density recovery as well as output disturbances estimation by using measured information. On the basis of the nuclear reactor model and the unmeasured states recovery information, an adaptive backstepping control scheme is designed to regulate output power and deal with reactivity disturbances. Simulation results are given to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed control strategy compared to conventional sliding mode controller in accordance to precise load following performance, accurate unmeasured states recovery and strong robustness with respect to disturbances.
<Section>Credit author statement</Section>
Jiuwu Hui and Jingqi Yuan conceived and designed the study. Jiuwu Hui and Jingqi Yuan performed the simulations and wrote the paper. Jingqi Yuan reviewed and edited the manuscript. All authors read and approved the manuscript.
<Section>Declaration of competing interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
This study is supported by the Open Project Program of the State Key Laboratory of Nuclear Power Safety Monitoring Technology and Equipment of China (Grant No. K-A2020.403).
<Section>References</Section>
Ablay, 2013
Günyaz Ablay
A modeling and control approach to advanced nuclear power plants with gas turbines
Energy Convers. Manag., 76 (2013), pp. 899-909
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Alberto, 2013
Isidori Alberto
Nonlinear Control Systems
Springer Science & Business Media (2013)
Google Scholar
Ansarifar and Rafiei, 2015
G.R. Ansarifar, M. Rafiei
Higher order sliding mode controller design for a research nuclear reactor considering the effect of xenon concentration during load following operation
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 75 (2015), pp. 728-735
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ansarifar et al., 2015
G.R. Ansarifar, M.H. Esteki, M. Arghand
Sliding mode observer design for a PWR to estimate the xenon concentration & delayed neutrons precursor density based on the two point nuclear reactor model
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 79 (2015), pp. 104-114
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ansarifaret al., 2017
G.R. Ansarifar, et al.
Adaptive robust control for axial offset in the PWR nuclear reactors based on the multipoint reactor model during load-following operation
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 103 (2017), pp. 251-264
Google Scholar
Arab-Alibeik and Setayeshi, 2005
H. Arab-Alibeik, S. Setayeshi
Adaptive control of a PWR core power using neural networks
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 32 (6) (2005), pp. 588-605
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Coban, 2011
Ramazan Coban
A fuzzy controller design for nuclear research reactors using the particle swarm optimization algorithm
Nucl. Eng. Des., 241 (5) (2011), p. 1899
1908
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Coban, 2014
Ramazan Coban
Power level control of the TRIGA Mark-II research reactor using the multifeedback layer neural network and the particle swarm optimization
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 69 (2014), pp. 260-266
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Das et al., 2013
Saptarshi Das, Indranil Pan, Shantanu Das
Fractional order fuzzy control of nuclear reactor power with thermal-hydraulic effects in the presence of random network induced delay and sensor noise having long range dependence
Energy Convers. Manag., 68 (2013), pp. 200-218
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Dong, 2014
Zhe Dong
Adaptive proportional-differential power-level control for pressurized water reactors
IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 61 (2) (2014), pp. 912-920
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Dong et al., 2010
Zhe Dong, Junting Feng, Xiaojin Huang, Liangju Zhang
Dissipation-based high gain filter for monitoring nuclear reactors
IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 57 (1) (2010), pp. 328-339
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Eliasi et al., 2012
H. Eliasi, M.B. Menhaj, H. Davilu
Robust nonlinear model predictive control for a PWR nuclear power plant
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 54 (1) (2012), pp. 177-185
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hassanvand et al., 2016
R. Hassanvand, G.R. Ansarifar, M.N. Nasrabadi
Nonlinear observer based control for travelling wave nuclear reactors based on the Lyapunov approach during load following operation
J. Process Contr., 46 (2016), pp. 84-91
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Huang et al., 2004
Zhengyu Huang, Robert M. Edwards, Kwang Y Lee
Fuzzy-adapted recursive sliding-mode controller design for a nuclear power plant control
IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 51 (1) (2004), pp. 256-266
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hui and Yuan, 2020
Jiuwu Hui, Jingqi Yuan
RBF-based adaptive sliding mode controller with extended state observer for load following of nuclear power plant
Nucl. Eng. Des., 360 (2020), p. 110465
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jing et al., 2015
Hua Jing, An Li-Xia, Yi-Min Li
Bionic fuzzy sliding mode control and robustness analysis
Appl. Math. Model., 39 (15) (2015), pp. 4482-4493
Google Scholar
Khajavi et al., 2002
Mehrdad N. Khajavi, Mohammad B. Menhaj, Amir A. Suratgar
A neural network controller for load following operation of nuclear reactors
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 29 (6) (2002), pp. 751-760
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kim et al., 2014
Jae Hwan Kim, Soon Ho Park, Man Gyun Na
Design of a model predictive load-following controller by discrete optimization of control rod speed for PWRs
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 71 (2014), pp. 343-351
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Mousakazemi and Hossein, 2019
Seyed Mousakazemi, Mohammad Hossein
Control of a PWR nuclear reactor core power using scheduled PID controller with GA, based on two-point kinetics model and adaptive disturbance rejection system
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 129 (2019), pp. 487-502
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Perez-CruzAlexander, 2007
J Humberto Perez-Cruz, Poznyak Alexander
Estimation of the precursor power and internal reactivity in a nuclear reactor by a neural observer
2007 4th International Conference on Electrical and Electronics Engineering, IEEE (2007), pp. 310-313
CrossRefGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2016
Guoxu Wang, Jie Wu, Bifan Zeng, Zhibin Xu, Wanqiang Wu, Xiaoqian Ma
State-space model predictive control method for core power control in pressurized water reactor nuclear power stations
Nuclear Engineering and Technology, 49 (2) (2016), pp. 1-7
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
YunHou and ChongZhao, 2010
Tai Yun, Suxia Hou, Li Chong, Fuyu Zhao
An improved implicit multiple model predictive control used for movable nuclear power plant
Nucl. Eng. Des., 240 (10) (2010), pp. 3582-3585
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
ZareDavijani et al., 2016
Nafiseh Zare Davijani, Gholamreza Jahanfarnia, Amir Esmaeili Abharian
Nonlinear fractional sliding mode controller based on reduced order FNPK model for output power control of nuclear research reactors
IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 64 (1) (2016), pp. 713-723
Google Scholar
Zeng et al., 2016
Ming Zeng, Yingxin Liu, Shaojie Ouyang, Hui Shi, Chunxue Li
Nuclear energy in the post-fukushima era: research on the developments of the Chinese and worldwide nuclear power industries
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 58 (2016), pp. 147-156
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar