<title>Studies on the criterion for choking process in two-phase flow</title>
<author>1,HongXu,2,Aurelian FlorinBadea,3,XuCheng</author>
<Affiliation>1,Institute for Applied Thermofluidics (IATF), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT) Kaiserstrasse 12, 76131, Karlsruhe, Germany</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2021.103640</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0149197021000123</URL>
Studies on the criterion for choking process in two-phase flow
HongXu,Aurelian FlorinBadea,XuCheng
Institute for Applied Thermofluidics (IATF), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT) Kaiserstrasse 12, 76131, Karlsruhe, Germany
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The critical flow (also named choked flow) is a phenomenon occurring at the break during a typical loss-of-coolant accident (LOCA) in nuclear power plant (NPP); it has high impact on the LOCA scenario and its magnitude has to be reproduced accurately. This work is focused on the choking process and especially on the choking criteria, as mathematical ways to establish the choking point. The process of critical flow is analyzed quantitatively. The convergence analysis of the critical flow calculation ─ stiff ordinary differential equations (ODEs) ─ was also focused on. Two kinds of choking criteria (determinant and pressure gradient criteria) are discussed and their strict derivations for single-phase flow are recalled in this paper. The criteria may be also extended for two-phase flow. In order to confirm that, the two criteria were numerically investigated for long pipe, short pipe and orifice discharge tests. The results obtained by using the two different criteria are consistent as long as the chosen pressure gradient value remains large enough. Anyhow, according to our results, this value is larger for the case of orifice and short pipe discharges (compared with the long pipe discharge). In addition, for the determinant criterion (regardless of single- or two-phase flow), a compatibility condition should be considered for the system of ODEs at the critical point. An introspection of the compatibility condition is offered in this paper from algebraic considerations.
Keywords:Two-phase flow;Non-equilibrium;Critical flow model;Choking criterion;Compatibility equation
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
During a typical loss-of-coolant accident (LOCA), the flow at the break is choked (or critical) until the system pressure approaches the containment pressure. The transient plant parameters such as reactor water level, the amount of coolant (i.e. inventory), pressure, cladding temperature and others have to be evaluated accurately for safety issues (Kim, 2015). The accuracy of these parameters is strongly related to the discharge mass flow through the break. Normally a two-phase flow occurs because of the high coolant enthalpy in the primary system and evaporation of the discharged coolant. Therefore, it is very important to derive an accurate equation (or equations) for the two-phase mass flow rate. The prediction of the mass flow rate plays a major role in determining the core cooling requirements associated with the safety analyses of nuclear power plants (Feburie et al., 1993).
1.1. Background of critical flow
Due to the huge pressure difference between the primary system and the reactor containment, the mass flow rate is choked at the break, resulting in the mixture velocity of the coolant through the breach equaling the local sound velocity (Kestin and Zaremba, 1953). In such conditions, the flow is referred as being critical flow or choked flow. Furthermore, the flow is also referred as being critical flow when the mass flow rate becomes independent of the downstream pressure (Wein, 2012; Wäng, 2015), as shown in (1):
(1)(∂G∂P)t=0
Here G is the mass flow flux and P the pressure. The subscript t means at the “throat”; Eq. (1) underlines that the pressure dependence of the mass flux vanishes as long as the downstream pressure remains below a certain critical pressure. This location (t) is called the critical cross section. For a straight duct, the critical cross section is usually located at the exit whereas for diverging or converging nozzles the critical cross section may be located both upstream or downstream of the exit (Ghiaasiaan, 2014). In reactor blowdown transients, choked or critical flow will exist at the location of the break. Furthermore, under certain circumstances, choked flow may exist at an internal point of the system or at multiple locations within the system (Tesinsky et al., 2016).
1.2. Sound speed
As introduced above, the critical flow velocity equals the local sound speed. Therefore, the speed of sound will be introduced firstly, followed by the discussion of the critical flow issue.
By definition, a sound wave is an oscillatory motion with small amplitude in a compressible fluid. The speed of the sound wave is an important thermodynamic quantity. At each point in the fluid, a sound wave causes alternate compression and rarefaction (Landau and Lifshitz, 1987). The speed of sound is related to the change in pressure and density of the substance during a discharge process (Dumond, 2012; Nguyen et al., 1981).
Based on the 1st-order infinitesimal oscillations study for pressure and density, the sound speed may be derived from continuity and momentum equations (Landau and Lifshitz, 1987):
(2)a2=dPdρ
wherea is the sound speed and ρ the density.
For single phase flow, the link between the critical flow and the velocity of sound is easily established. However, for the two-phase flow conditions, on which our work is focused, the velocity of sound becomes more difficult to evaluate, especially if the two phases present wide differences in velocity and temperature (Michaelides and Zissis 1983). Not only the interphase interaction (transfer of mass and energy, interfacial force) but also wall frictions are not easy to calculate accurately in the situation of critical discharge flow, due to the lack of experiment data or correlations. Nevertheless, single phase and two-phase flows should be consistent with respect to the choking criterion based on the acoustic propagation of fluid.
The critical flow has been extensively studied due to its important role in a variety of industrial implementations. There are two choking criteria in literature: the determinant criterion and the pressure gradient criterion (Bouré, 1974; Wolfert, 1977; Ardron, 1978). But so far, the relationships between them, their convergence processes and the thresholds values for the pressure gradient are not very well understood.
This work was focused on choking criteria for both single phase and two-phase flows, seldom studied before especially in the case of the two-phase flow. The analysis of the choking criteria for the two-phase flow is based on a two-phase non-equilibrium critical flow model, to be briefly introduced in section 2. The mathematical derivation of the two choking criteria for single phase will be also recalled in section 3. Furthermore, the determinant criterion includes a compatibility condition; an important proposition ─ not yet proven in literature ─ of the compatibility condition will be also mentioned and a proof of it will be offered in section 3. Afterwards, the choking process was studied in detail with respect to different parameters (calculation step size, determinant of ODEs, pressure and its gradient, temperature, void fraction etc.) in section 4. Finally, the results obtained with the two different choking criteria will be discussed in detail in section 4.
<Section>2. Two-phase non-equilibrium critical flow model</Section>
An accurate prediction of the flow rate for critical two phase flow through complex geometries is difficult to achieve and therefore not yet available (Paulsen et al., 1996). Accordingly, some simplified models were developed in the past. The critical flow models may be divided into four classes, depending on the thermal (equilibrium or non-equilibrium) and fluid-dynamic (homogeneous or non-homogeneous) behaviors assumed for the liquid and vapor phases (Elias and Lelluche, 1994). The present study was focused on the two-phase model which allows for the hydrodynamic non-homogeneity (caused by velocity differences) and thermodynamic non-equilibrium (caused by temperature difference between the two phases). In order to simplify the model, some assumptions were considered (Xu, 2020; Xu et al., 2021):
(1)
the critical flow through a tube can be modeled by one-dimensional conservation equations for the two-phase flow;
(2)
for time independent boundary conditions, the two-phase critical flow is stationary;
(3)
the vapor phase is in thermal equilibrium at local saturation pressure;
(4)
each phase is at the same pressure at any cross section of the tube (but the pressures in both phases are different);
(5)
the wall friction of vapor (FWG) has not to be considered because vapor does not contact the wall directly in the considered flow regimes;
(6)
the two-phase flow is assumed to be adiabatic to the wall during the process of choking.
The conservation equations are given in detail in the next sub-section, since all of the non-equilibrium critical flow models are based on them. In order to solve the unknown parameters of the conservation equations, several constitutive correlations are also needed. The constitutive correlations (relationships) will not be discussed in detail here, since they are chosen differently in various models in literature (Dobran, 1987; Schwellnus and Shoukri, 1991; Dagan et al., 1993; Wein, 2012). More details about the constitutive correlations used in this study may be found in the references (Xu, 2020; Xu et al., 2021).
2.1. Mathematical formulation
The conservation equations are given here and for constitutive correlations one could resort to literatures. For more information about the non-equilibrium critical flow models, some works may be referred (Schwellnus and Shoukri, 1991; Wein, 2012). A simplified sketch with the main parameters for the two-phase non-equilibrium critical flow model in a pipe is shown in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. Two-phase non-equilibrium critical flow model in a pipe.
Based on the conservation of total mass, the liquid and vapor mass changes are complementary:
(3)ddz[ρL(1−α)uLA]+GAdxdz=0
(4)ddz[ρGαuGA]−GAdxdz=0
After expanding the terms between brackets, mass conservation may then be written as:
(5)−ρLuLdαdz+ρL(1−α)duLdz+ρL(1−α)uL1AdAdz+uL(1−α)(∂ρL∂P)satdPdz+Gdxdz=0
(6)ρGuGdαdz+ρGαduGdz+ρGαuG1AdAdz+uGα(∂ρG∂P)satdPdz−Gdxdz=0
In the process of derivation, it was assumed that the density change of each phase is only related to the saturation pressure.
(2)
Conservation of momentum
Different forces, i.e. gravitation force, wall friction of liquid FWL, interfacial force FLG and forces for interfacial momentum transport FLi, FGi were considered in the two phase momentum conservation equations. The pipe angle θ represents the angle of inclination from the horizontal line (see Fig. 1).
(7)ρLuL(1−α)duLdz+(1−α)dPdz=−FWL+FLG−FLi−(1−α)ρLgsin(θ)
(8)ρGuGαduGdz+αdPdz=−FLG−FGi−αρGgsin(θ)
The forces on the right side of the above momentum equations are given with their magnitudes only, their directions being indicated by the front signs. The concrete form of these forces will be provided by constitutive correlations.
(3)
Conservation of energy
Since the two-phase flow is assumed to be adiabatic, there is no external heat source for the choking flow. A control volume energy balance on each phase may be written as
(9)−Gdxdz[hL+uL22]+GL[CpdTLdz+uLduLdz]+Ggsin(θ)+qi=0
(10)GG(∂hG∂P)satdPdz+GGuGduGdz+Gdxdz(hG+uG22)−qi=0
The parameter qi is the interfacial heat transfer rate per unit volume.
2.2. Solution methodology
The conservation equations (5), (6), (7), (8), (9), (10)) may be written in the matrix form of the system of ordinary differential equations (ODEs):
(11)[A]ddz[X]=[b]
where [X] is the vector of unknown parameters as shown in Eq. (12) for six-equation form in slug/churn and annular flows, and (13) for seven-equation form in bubbly flow, respectively.
(12)[X]T=[P,x,α,TL,uL,uG]
(13)[X]T=[P,x,α,TL,uL,uG,db]
It should be noted that in seven-equation form the bubble diameter for bubbly flow is also considered as an unknown parameter. Therefore, one more equation - coming out from the relationship among void fraction, quality and mass flow of the vapor - is needed for solving the ODEs:
(14)xρG(∂ρG∂P)satdPdz−dxdz+xuGduGdz+3xdbddbdz=0
Since the ODEs of the critical flow problems are stiff because of the orders of magnitude difference between the unknown parameters (P>105Pa,db~10−5m), the implicit scheme Runge-Kutta method (Dekker and Verwer, 1984; Dobran, 1987) should be used as solver. Furthermore, the shooting method (Wolfert, 1977) was used in this study for solving the ODEs, trading the boundary value problem (BVP) for several initial value problems (IVPs), since the initial velocities of liquid and vapor are among the solutions of Eq. (11).
After the ODEs and solution methodology were introduced, we come to the choking criteria to judge whether the flow is choked or not and, consequently, to employ them as exit triggers of the solver.
It has to be noted that since different constitutive correlations are used in bubbly, slug/churn and annular flow, the flow regime transition points from bubbly to slug/churn and from slug/churn to annular should be set. According to phenomena in experiments (Wallis, 1969; Collier, 1981), the void fraction values for these two points were generally assumed 0.3 and 0.8 respectively, and adopted like that in our study.
2.3. Model validation against experimental data
The two-phase non-equilibrium critical flow model has been already validated in several literature. Since the codes for critical flow model are normally in-house used, in this section validation was pursued by the authors to validate the effectiveness of our in-house code. Therefore, four experimental data sets (the same as the study of Schwellnus and Shoukri (1991)) were chosen for our validation. The information of these experiments is provided in Table 1.
Table 1. Information of the additionally chosen critical flow tests.
As examples, this section only shows the validation results using the first two data sets. Dobran obtained his data for critical discharge for long straight pipe (L/D = 97 or 288, respectively) with saturated inlet liquid in the pressure range of 2.23–3.49 MPa. The chosen short pipe geometry of Sozzi - Wutherland critical discharge experiment was a rounded entrance with length to exit diameter ratio of 3.5 (Sozzi and Wutherland, 1975; Richter, 1983).
For the validation aim, the pressure gradient criterion (to be introduced in the next section) was employed. The critical mass flux is the crucial result to be delivered by calculation. Although the other primary variables are of interest, only the critical mass flux would be considered for a subsequent computation, being used as source term for safety calculation and risk assessment in most applications (Lv et al., 2018). The present model was compared with the test data on critical mass flow provided by the Dobran and Sozzi – Wutherland tests, with prediction capabilities as summarized by Table 2. According to Table 2, the error of our model lies between −3% and +4%, excepting one of Dobran runs, with an overestimation of +15.66%. Anyhow, this overestimation is smaller compared with other similar model in literature (Schwellnus, 1988), with a corresponding overestimation around 20%.
Table 2. Comparison of critical mass flow test data with calculations of the present model.
Additionally, the iteration process of shooting method is presented in detail here. Firstly, maximum and minimum values of fluid velocity at the pipe entrance are guessed as for initial values starting the shooting method iterations. Then, the length to the critical point and the critical mass flow rate will be calculated by each iteration. If the length to the critical point does not equal the pipe length, the fluid velocity at the pipe entrance will be modified based on the old iterations results and a new “shooting” iteration starts. When the length is nearly the same as the pipe length (relative error is less than 0.1%), the iteration procedure ends. As an example, the iteration process of shooting method for Dobran test 1 is shown by Fig. 2. Fig. 2a presents the iterated length to the critical point during “shooting” and Fig. 2b shows the critical mass flow rate during “shooting”.
Fig. 2. The iteration process for the shooting method in Dobran test 1.
<Section>3. Choking criterion</Section>
After the introduction and the additional validation of the two-phase non-equilibrium critical flow model, this section will focus on its choking criteria. As introduced above, the choking criteria for single and two-phase flows are similar. We will introduce the derivation of choking criteria for single phase flow firstly and then discuss the choking criteria for the case of two-phase flow.
3.1. Derivation in single phase
It is assumed that the critical single-phase flow through a pipe/nozzle can be modeled by a one-dimensional conservation equation:
(15)ρFuFA=const.
where u is the fluid velocity and A is the cross-section of discharge line (subscript F means fluid). After derivation on both sides of Eq. (15), the differential form of the mass conservation may be written:
(16)ρFduFdz+ρFuF1AdAdz+uF(∂ρF∂P)sdPdz=0
The discharge process was assumed isentropic (subscripts s in the above equation) up to the critical section; this is a common hypothesis for critical flow studies (Relap5 Code Development Team, 1995; De Lorenzo, 2017).
The momentum conservation equation could be expressed as:
(17)ρFuFduFdz+dPdz=−FWF−ρFgsin(θ)
In the above equation FWFis the wall to fluid friction force per unit volume and the parameter θ is the angle of inclination of the tube from horizontal.
Based on the Bernoulli's principle, the energy conservation equation could be written as following:
(18)CPdTFdz+uFduFdz+gsin(θ)=0
In the above equation TFis the temperature of fluid, and CP is the specific heat at constant pressure.
As already mentioned, there are two methods for the judgment of critical flow appearance: one makes use of the determinant of the conservation equations and the other is based on the pressure gradient. They will be denoted next as “determinant criterion” and “pressure gradient criterion”, respectively.
3.1.1. Determinant criterion
Eqs. (15), (16), (17)) may be combined and written in matrix form as (analog to Eq. (11)):
(19)[A]ddz[X]=[b]
The vector [X] means[P,TF,uF]T, which represents the unknown parameters during discharge line. The matrix [A] and vector [b] have the following expressions:
(20)[A]=[[uF(∂ρF/∂P)s10][00CP][ρFρFuFuF]]
(21)[b]=[−ρFuF/A⋅dA/dz−FWF−ρFgsin(θ)−gsin(θ)]
Based on Eq. (2) from the introduction on the critical flow and assuming an isentropic process, a=(∂P/∂ρF)s; it may be easily obtained that for critical flow:
(22)|A|=0
This means that the determinant choking criterion given by Eq. (22) is equivalent to the definition of the critical flow/sound speed.
3.1.2. Pressure gradient criterion
Since the mass flux G=ρFuF keeps constant along the discharge line, the first item on the left side of the momentum conservation Eq. (17) may be expressed as following:
(23)ρFuFduFdz=Gddz(GρF)=ddz(G2ρF)
Consequently, the momentum conservation Eq. (17) may be rewritten as:
(24)ddz(G2ρF)+dPdz=−FWF−ρFgsin(θ)
Since the first item on the left side of Eq. (24) is a differential related withρF, it may be written:
(25)ddz(G2ρF)=−G2ρF2dρFdPdPdz=−uF2ρF2a2ρF2dPdz=−uF2a2dPdz
Here the definition of sound speed, i.e. Eq. (2), was used.
Based on Eqs. (23), (24)), the following relation is obtained:
(26)dPdz=−FWF+ρFgsin(θ)1−uF2a2
Normally, no external force is considered in the critical flow theory (physically, the systems behind the critical flow are considered loosing pressure). And, without external force, the maximum velocity of the fluid will be the speed of sound, i.e. the fluid velocity is smaller than or equals the sound speed. When the single-phase fluid velocity uFincreases along discharge pipe and approaches the sound speed a, the denominator of the right side of Eq. (26) approaches 0 and, consequently, the pressure gradient dP/dzon the left side approaches negative infinity. In other words, the pressure gradient criterion may be written as:
(27)limuF→adPdz=−∞
Since infinity does not exist in numerical calculation, a large value (e.g. 1012 Pa/m) is chosen for the pressure gradient criterion.
3.2. Discussion on ODEs solution
Sound velocity as a material property of single-phase fluids has been studied for a long time and as such been applied to two-phase flows, resulting in a multitude of computational models for the determination of the sound propagation. For single phase flow, the choking criteria (22) and (27) were derived from the sound speed. But for two-phase flow, liquid and vapor have different sound speeds which make the task more complex. Even though the two-phase flow choking criteria could not be derived easily, the choking criteria (22) and (27) are thought to be still valid choking criteria in two-phase flow (Wolfert, 1977; Ardron, 1978).
Actually, the two choking criteria may be derived from each other. According to the matrix form of ODEs in Eq. (11) for two-phase flow and Eq. (19) for single phase flow, the solution may be obtained using the Cramer's rule (Werner, 1984):
(28)ddz[Xi]=[A]−1[b]=|Ai||A|
where [Xi] is the ith entry of solution vector [X], [Ai]is the matrix where the vector [b] replaces the ith column of matrix [A]. The existence of solutions needs to be discussed for different situations.
i
) As long as |A|<0 for z until its end L (which means discharge duct length), a singularity occurs in the process and the outlet conditions are uniquely determined as (27) by the prescribed inlet conditions (Cheng et al., 1983). For this situation the flow is subcritical.
ii)
In the situation of|A|=0, the formulas of Cramer's rule Eq. (28) are undefined. In this case, the system could be either dependent or inconsistent depending on the values of |Ai|.
ii.
1) If |A|=0and also all of |Ai|=0the system is dependent which means the solution is in indeterminate form0/0 (Gustafson, 1996). Normally, there are infinitely many solutions (if it is over an infinite field) for an indeterminate linear equations system, since the solutions can be expressed in terms of one or more parameters that can take arbitrary values, except for some special examples (e.g. the 3 × 3 incompatible system: x+y+z = 1, x+y+z = 2, x+y+z = 3). Since the conservation equations are based on different mechanisms and the critical flow exists authentically, one may think that the system of ODEs for critical flow is compatible. Furthermore, the existence and uniqueness of the solution for the upstream of the critical point makes the critical flow rate existing and unique. We call the equation |Ai|=0 as the compatibility condition for the choking criterion|A|=0, which has to be satisfied simultaneously along the discharge line.
ii
.2) When |A|=0and either |Ai| is nonzero, then the system is inconsistent (B. Ed Programme, 2019) or incompatible. In other words, the flow is impossible. This means the given inlet conditions are unrealistic (e.g. the assumed flow rate is too high).
According to Eq. (28), the pressure gradient could be written as in Eq. (29) below. The two choking criteria |A|=0 and dP/dz→−∞ mean that |AP| is an infinitesimal of lower order than |A|.
(29)dPdz=|AP||A|
3.3. Compatibility condition
The compatibility condition for choked (critical) flow may be expressed: the determinant |A| and all of |Ai| should equal 0. Many researchers have pointed out the compatibility condition during their critical flow studies (Katto, 1968; Ogasawara, 1969; Bouré, 1974; Bouré et al., 1976; Ghiaasiaan and Geng, 1997; Bartosiewicz and Seynhaeve, 2013; Yin et al., 2020). It is also thought that the proposition:
(30)|A|=0,|Ai|=0⇒|Aj|=0,(j≠i)
is tenable.
But there is no proof in the literature for the proposition Eq. (30). Therefore, we introduced a proof of it. The proof is based on the hypothesis that the system of linear equations (LEs)
(31)Ax=b
has solution, no matter the Cramer's rule can be used or not. Otherwise, one may find counter-examples easily. For example, A=(1000), b=(01), then it is easy to verify that |A|=0, |A1|=0, |A2|=1≠0.
The proof makes use of the dependence analysis of the column vectors of matrixA, Ai andAj.
In order to simplify the proof process, we let i=1 and j=2 without affecting generality, i.e. the proof above stands also for proposition (30).
Without losing generality, we will show that:
(32)|A|=0,|A1|=0⇒|A2|=0
The matrices may be referred as forms of column vectors: A=(a1,a2,a3,⋯,an), A1=(b,a2,a3,⋯,an), A2=(a1,b,a3,⋯,an), where ai(i=1,2,⋯,n) are column vector, n is the order of the matrix and b is the vector on the right side of the linear equations.
|A|=0 means and the column vectors (a1,a2,⋯,an) are linearly dependent. Then different situations are considered as follows.
a)
If m≤n−2, Rank(A2)=Rank(a1,b,a3,⋯,an)≤n−1, then obviousely |A2|=0.
b)
If m=n−1, n-1 vectors of A=(a1,a2,a3,⋯,an) form the base vectors. And the remained one is a linear combination of the base vectors.
1)
If a1,a2 are both base vectors, this means Rank(a3,⋯,an)=n−3. Consequently, Rank(A2)=Rank(a1,b,a3,⋯,an)≤n−1, then |A2|=0.
2)
If a1 is not base vector but a2 is base vector, then Rank(a1,a3,⋯,an)=n−2. Therefore, Rank(A2)=Rank(a1,b,a3,⋯,an)≤n−1 and |A2|=0.
3)
If a1 is base vector but a2 is not base vector, then a2 could be a linear combination of the base vectors (a1,a3,⋯,an). Consequently, Rank(A1)=Rank(b,a2,a3,⋯,an)=Rank(b,(a1,a3,⋯,an),a3,⋯,an)=Rank(a1,b,a3,⋯,an)=Rank(A2). Since the ranks of A1 and A2are equal and |A1|=0, then |A2|=0
<Section>4. Numerical analysis of the choking criterion</Section>
In this section the authors were concentrated on the choking criterion related issues.
4.1. Choking process study
The process of critical flow, especially how the flow gets choked and how the pressure remains independent of the ambient pressure, has been described qualitatively in almost any literature on critical flow. But less attention has been paid on other parameters than pressure. Therefore, the process will be analyzed here quantitatively, not only on pressure but also on other key parameters, e.g. temperature, void fraction and two phase velocities separately etc.; the convergence analysis of the critical flow calculation (stiff ODEs) will be also referred.
As already introduced above, our two-phase critical flow model has been validated on four different tests: Dobran (long pipe discharge) and Sozzi – Wutherland (short pipe discharge), Al-Sahan (long pipe discharge) and Celata (nozzle discharge). Since the choking processes for different geometries (long pipes, short pipes or nozzles) are quite similar (scalable), the choking process study in this section will only focused on the two extreme L/D cases: a test of Al-Sahan (1988) and a test of Celata (Celata et al., 1983) with the initial upstream pressures of 1 MPa and 0.95 MPa, respectively. The lengths of the discharge pipes are 0.635 m and 0.001 m, respectively. The diameter in Al-Sahan test was 0.003175 m, which makes a large length-to-diameter ratio (L/D = 200), and 0.00125 m in Celata test (L/D = 0.8). The inlets of the discharge pipes are considered with a converging geometry. The results displayed in this sub-section were obtained with a pressure gradient criterion at −2 × 1012 Pa/m. By using this criterion, the calculated critical mass flow rates are 5352 kg/m2s and 29,600 kg/m2s, respectively. Compared with the measured data (5175 kg/m2s and 28,485 kg/m2s) the relative deviations are 3.43% and 3.92%, respectively. Both of them are less than 5% which shows high degree of computational prediction accuracy.
Fig. 3 shows the convergence trends of the calculations corresponding to the tests of Al-Sahan and Celata. The horizontal axis represents the calculating point number (which means the number of the bin along the discharge pipe) and the vertical axis represents the iteration calculating step length at each discrete step (bin) along the discharge pipe. Both of them were automatically generated using the implicit Runge-Kutta scheme. The total step numbers are very large compared to the non-critical flow, 1343 and 600 steps for Al-Sahan and Celata tests, respectively. Since Al-Sahan test corresponds to a long pipe geometry, it requires more steps to converge. Both curves are serration-shapes because of the algorithm of the Runge-Kutta method. Each step of the Runge-Kutta method will try the old step size as long as it may converge, otherwise a smaller step size will be tried. The step sizes are overall decreasing along the discharge pipe. As mentioned earlier, the ODEs for two-phase non-equilibrium critical model are stiff, which make both of the step sizes at the critical points less than 10−10 m.
Fig. 3. Calculation step size during choking process.
Fig. 4 shows the pressure gradient changes along the pipeline during the discharge for both Al-Sahan and Celata tests. Compared with the near inlet upstream range, the pressure gradient variation becomes then much sharper. At the pipe end the flow becomes choked, satisfying the pressure gradient choking criterion (−2 × 1012 Pa/m). This gradient value is continuous for Celata test. But it is not continuous for Al-Sahan test due to the calculation instability caused by the different used constitutive relationships (Xu, 2020; Xu et al., 2021), owing to the flow regime transformation during the discharge process. In order to show the variation of determinant|A|, we use the relative value (|A|/|A0|, where |A0|is the determinant for initial condition). Fig. 5 shows changes of relative value |A|/|A0|along the discharge pipeline during the choking process. The step sizes of ODEs around the choking point, when determinant criterion was used, were smaller than 10−15 m (which approaches the minimum value of ODEs allowed step size). It could be noticed that|A|/|A0| (also|A|) is approaching 0.0 when the flow becomes choked. The discontinuous values in Al-Sahan test are caused by the flow regime transformation, making use of different constitutive relationships.
Fig. 4. Pressure gradient changes during choking process.
Fig. 5. Relative determinant value changes during choking process.
In order to analysis the gradual choking process in discharge pipe and the transformation process of choking owing to the decrease in ambient pressure, the variations of some key parameters along the pipe using different ambient pressures are shown by Fig. 6. Here Al-Sahan test scenario was chosen as basic calculation of the choking process since it goes through different flow regimes, from subcooled (boiling) bubbly flow to annular flow. We assumed the ambient pressures of 0.9 MPa, 0.8 MPa, 0.6 MPa and so on until the two-phase flow becomes choked at the end of the discharge pipeline.
Fig. 6. The key parameters along the pipe.
According to Fig. 6a, if the ambient pressure is 0.9 MPa - which is just a little bit smaller than initial pressure (1.0 MPa) - the pressure gradient value does not change much. But with the decrease of ambient pressure, the absolute values of pressure gradients become larger and larger until the ambient pressure is 0.24 MPa. This means that for a lower ambient pressure the flow will be choked around 0.24 MPa and the mass flow rate will not increase any more. From Table 3, this phenomenon could also be observed since the mass flow approaches the value of 5352 kg/m2s as the ambient pressure decreases towards the choking ambient pressure of 0.24 MPa. The temperature shown in Fig. 6b decreases along the pipe since the fluid is thought to be saturated.
Table 3. Choking mass flow rate influenced by the decrease in ambient pressure.
Fig. 6c and d show the void fraction and mass quality along the discharge pipeline, respectively. The curves are not so smooth around the flow regime transition points from bubbly to slug/churn as the different constitutive relationships are accessed by the different flow regimes. The void fractions and mass qualities increase with the ambient pressure decrease. For the choking test scenario, the choking point at the end of the pipeline is subject to annular flow.
Fig. 6e and f show the liquid and vapor velocities along the discharge pipeline, respectively. The sharp increase of the two-phase velocities at the beginning is caused by the converging inlet shape. At the initial condition - in subcooled boiling flow regime - the two phases are considered to have the same velocity. But during the discharge, the vapor accelerates stronger than the liquid reaching more than 400 m/s at the end of the pipeline during the choking scenario.
4.2. Choking criteria comparison
Some authors used the determinant criterion (Dobran, 1987). Most of the authors used the pressure gradient criterion for the judgment of choked flow and as termination criterion of the ODEs calculation. But they had different understanding on the critical pressure gradient, by using different threshold values. Ardron, Ewan and Dagan chose −5 × 109 Pa/m as the threshold value (Ardron, 1978; Ewan et al., 1988; Dagan et al., 1993). Richter and Javidmand chose −1010 Pa/m (Javidmand and Hoffmann, 2015). Schwellnus chose −2 × 1010 Pa/m (Schwellnus and Shoukri, 1991). We found no motivation in literature for the choice of these particular values. To provide additional support for future investigations of critical flow, we focused ourselves on the impact of different thresholds values (of the pressure gradient criterion) on the results of critical flow rate obtained from the ODEs calculation.
The impact was explored on all of the above-mentioned test facilities: Al-Sahan test with L/D = 200 at 1.0 MPa, Dobran test with L/D = 97 at 2.33 MPa, Sozzi - Wutherland test with L/D = 3.5 at 6.34 MPa and Celata test L/D = 0.8 at 0.95 MPa, covering a large range for the L/D ratio, from orifice to long discharge pipe. As shown in Fig. 7, different threshold values were used in the pressure gradient criterion: from −4 × 104 to −2 × 1010 Pa/m for Al-Sahan test, from −8 × 105 to −2 × 1010 Pa/m for Dobran test, from −2 × 107 to −2 × 1010 Pa/m for Sozzi - Wutherland test and from −2 × 108 to −2 × 1010 Pa/m for Celata test; the threshold values on the x-axis have been considered as absolute values (in reality, they are negative). The relative deviations (relative errors) of the calculations (made using the pressure gradient criterion PGC or the determinant criterion DC) with respect to the test (experimental) ones are represented on the y-axis. It is obvious that if the pressure gradient threshold (absolute) value is too small, the relative error is strongly negative as the calculated critical mass flows are much smaller than the experimental ones. With the increase in the pressure gradient threshold (absolute) value, the calculated critical mass flow will increase. But if the threshold absolute value of the pressure gradient is larger than 2 × 107 for Al-Sahan and Dobran tests (long pipes), 1 × 109 for Sozzi - Wutherland test (short pipe) or 2 × 109 for Celata test (orifice), the relative error nearly keeps constant. It is because of the large pressure gradient around the choking point. Even if the pressure gradient changes, the mass flow remains insensitive to it. Furthermore, we may come to the conclusion that a larger pressure gradient threshold (absolute) value has to be introduced for the calculations of short pipes or orifices by comparison with the case of long pipes. In other words, if the two-phase flow remains closer to homogeneous equilibrium flow, a smaller (absolute) pressure gradient threshold is allowed, but for the two-phase flow where strong non-homogeneity and non-equilibrium arise, a larger (absolute) pressure gradient threshold have to be considered. According to Fig. 7, one may conclude that all the values above-mentioned, chosen as thresholds for the critical pressure gradient criterion, were particularly suitable.
Fig. 7. Comparison of the two choking criteria.
PGC: Pressure gradient criterion; DC: Determinant criterion.
At its upper-right corner, Fig. 7 shows the relative errors by using the determinant criterion for the calculations corresponding to the in two test cases. The results are consistent with the results using pressure gradient criterion. The difference between these two criteria is as small as 0.1%. Additional to the rigorous theoretical equivalence in single-phase flow, our numerical results proved the consistency of the two criteria also for the two-phase critical flow.
<Section>5. Conclusions</Section>
This study was focused on the choking process and especially on the choking criteria as mathematical formulations to catch the choking point. The process of critical flow, especially how the flow gets choked and how the pressure at the chocked point becomes independent of the ambient pressure, was quantitatively analyzed. Some other key parameters were also analyzed: temperature, void fraction, two phase velocities etc. Additionally, the convergence of the critical flow calculation (stiff ODEs) - seldom discussed in former literature – was also a subject of study.
There are two kinds of choking criteria: determinant criterion and pressure gradient criterion. Their strict derivations for single-phase flow were recalled in this paper. In the case of the determinant criterion, a compatibility condition has to be introduced so that the system of ODEs describing the two-phase flow has a solution at the choking point. There is also a proposition inside the compatibility condition, not yet proven in the literature. We offered a method of proof in this paper. The two choking criteria may also be extended for two-phase flow. In order to confirm the choking criteria in two-phase flow, the pressure gradient and determinant changes during a long pipe discharge test and an orifice discharge test have been considered. Finally, the comparison of these two criteria has shown that the results obtained by using the different criteria are consistent as long as the pressure gradient threshold (absolute) value is large enough. For an orifice, this value is larger than that for a long pipe. According to our results, the threshold (absolute) value of the pressure gradient criterion should be larger than 2 × 107, 1 × 109 and 2 × 109 for the long pipe, short pipe and orifice, respectively.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Nomenclature</Section>
Latin Symbols
a
sound speed, m/s
A
discharge pipe cross-sectional area, m2
A
ODEs matrix
Ai
ODEs matrix using vector [b] instead the ith column of matrix [A]
AP
ODEs matrix Ai related with pressure solution
b
ODEs vector
c
element of the adjoint matrix
Cp
specific heat at constant pressure, J/(kg∙K)
db
average diameter of bubble, m
D
pipe diameter, m
FGi
interfacial momentum force due to mass tramfer for vapor, N/m3
FLG
interfacial force, N/m3
FLi
interfacial momentum force due to mass tramfer for liquid, N/m3
FWL
force from wall to liquid, N/m3
g
gravitational acceleration, m/s2
G
mass flux, kg/(m∙s2)
h
enthalpy, J.
L
length of discharge pipeline, m.
P
Pressure, Pa
qi
interfacial heat transfer rate per unit volume, J/m3
T
temperature, K
u
fluid velocity, m/s
x
quality,
X
vector for ODEs unknown parameters
Xi
ODEs ith solution
z
coordinate along the discharge pipe, m
Greek symbols
α
void fraction
θ
angle of inclination with the horizontal
ρ
density, kg/m3
Subscripts
F
fluid
G
vapor phase
i
interfacial
ij
element of matrix at ith row and jth column
L
liquid phase
s
isentropic transformation
sat
saturation
t
throat
W
wall
<Section>References</Section>
Al-Sahan, 1988
Al-Sahan
On the Development of the Flow Regimes and the Formulation of a Mechanistic Non-equilibrium Model for Critical Two-phase Flow
Dissertation, University of Toronto (1988)
Google Scholar
Ardron, 1978
K.H. Ardron
A two-fluid model for critical vapor-liquid flow
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 4 (1978), pp. 323-337
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bartosiewicz and Seynhaeve, 2013
Y. Bartosiewicz, J.M. Seynhaeve
Delayed equilibrium model (DEM) of flashing flows relevant to LOCA
Multiphas. Sci. Technol., 25 (2–4) (2013), pp. 117-131
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
B. Ed Programme, 2019
B. Ed Programme
Mathematics-II
Department of science education faculty of education Allama Iqbal Open University, Islamabad (2019)
Google Scholar
Bouré, 1974
J.A. Bouré
Critical Two-phase Flows
Lecture Series, von Karman Institute for Fluid Dynamics, December (1974), pp. 9-13
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bouré et al., 1976
J.A. Bouré, A.A. Fritte, M.M. Giot, M.L. Réocreux
Highlights of two-phase critical flow: on the links between maximum flow rates, sonic velocities, propagation and transfer phenomena in single and two-phase flows
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 3 (1976), pp. 1-22
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Celata et al., 1983
G.P. Celata, M. Cumo, G.E. Farello, G.C. Incalterra, A. Naviglio
Thermodynamic disequilibrium in the critical flow of subcooled liquids
Nucl. Technol., 60 (1983), pp. 137-142
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Cheng et al., 1983
L. Cheng, R.T. Lahey Jr., D.A. Drew
The Effect of Virtual Masson the Prediction of Critical Flow
Transient Two-Phase Flow, Springer (1983), pp. 323-340
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Collier, 1981
J.G. Collier
Convective Boiling and Condensations
McGraw-Hill, New York (1981)
Google Scholar
Dagan et al., 1993
R. Dagan, E. Elias, E. Wacholder, S. Olek
A two-fluid model for critical flashing flows in pipes
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 19 (1) (1993), pp. 15-25
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
De Lorenzo et al., 2017
M. De Lorenzo, Ph Lafon, J.M. Seynhaeve, Y. Bartosiewicz
Benchmark of delayed equilibrium model (DEM) and classic two-phase critical flow models against experimental data
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 92 (2017), pp. 112-130
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Dekker and Verwer, 1984
K. Dekker, M.P. Verwer
Stability of Runge–Kutta Methods for Stiff Nonlinear Differential Equations
North-Holland, Amsterdam (1984)
Google Scholar
Dobran, 1987
F. Dobran
Nonequilibrium modeling of two-phase critical flows in tubes
Transactions - ASME Journal of Heat Transfer, 109 (1987), pp. 731-738
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Dumond, 2012
J. Dumond
Fluidic Diode for Critical Two-phase Flows
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Dissertation (2012)
Google Scholar
Elias and Lelluche, 1994
E. Elias, G.S. Lelluche
Two-phase critical flow
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 20 (Suppl) (1994), pp. 91-168
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ewan et al., 1988
B.C.R. Ewan, K. Moodie, P.J. Harper
A study of two phase critical pipe flow models for superheated liquid releases
J. Hazard Mater., 20 (1988), pp. 273-286
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Feburie et al., 1993
V. Feburie, M. Giot, S. Granger, J.M. Seynhaeve
A model for choked flow through cracks with inlet subcooling
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 19 (1993), pp. 541-562
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ghiaasiaan and Geng, 1997
S.M. Ghiaasiaan, H. Geng
Mechanistic non-equilibrium modeling of critical flashing flow of subcooled liquids containing dissolved noncondensables
Numer. Heat Tran., 32 (1997), p. 435
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ghiaasiaan, 2014
S.M. Ghiaasiaan
Two-Phase Flow
9781107431638, Boiling and Condensation (2014)
Google Scholar
Gustafson, 1996
D. Gustafson
Intermediate Algebra
Brooks/Cole Pub, Pacific Grove, CA (1996)
Google Scholar
Javidmand and Hoffmann, 2015
P. Javidmand, K.A. Hoffmann
Comprehensive two fluid model simulation of critical two-phase flow through short tube orifices
Proceedings of the ASME 2015 International Technical Conference and Exhibition on Packaging and Integration of Electronic and Photonic Microsystems and ASME 2015 12th International Conference on Nanochannels, Microchannels, and Minichannels (InterPACKICNMM2015) (2015)
(San Francisco, California, USA)
Google Scholar
Katto, 1968
Y. Katto
Dynamics of compressible saturated two-phase flow (critical flow)
Bull. Jpn. Soc. Mech. Eng., 11 (48) (1968), pp. 1135-1144
CrossRefGoogle Scholar
Kestin and Zaremba, 1953
J. Kestin, S.K. Zaremba
One-dimensional high-speed flows
Aircraft Eng. Aero. Technol., 25 (6) (1953), pp. 1-5
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kim, 2015
Y.S. Kim
A proposed correlation for critical flow rate of water flow
Nuclear Engineering and Technology, 47 (2015), pp. 135-138
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Landau and Lifshitz, 1987
L.D. Landau, E.M. Lifshitz
(second ed.), Fluid Mechanics. Course of Theoretical Physics, vol. 6, Butterworth-Heinemann (1987)
Lv et al., 2018
Y. Lv, F. Zhao, W. Li
A choking model with thermal non-equilibrium for initially subcooled water
The 26th International Conference on Nuclear Engineering (ICONE26), London, England, July 22-26 (2018)
Google Scholar
Michaelides and Zissis, 1983
E.E. Michaelides, K.L. Zissis
Velocity of sound in two-phase mixtures
Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow, 4 (2) (1983), pp. 79-84
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Nguyen et al., 1981
D. Nguyen, M. Greiner, E. Winter
Sonic velocity in two-phase flow
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 7 (1981), pp. 311-320
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ogasawara, 1969
H. Ogasawara
A theoretical approach to two-phase critical flow (3rd Report, the critical condition including interphase slip)
Bull. Jpn. Soc. Mech. Eng., 12 (52) (1969), pp. 827-836
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Paulsen et al., 1996
M.P. Paulsen, et al.
RETRAN-3D – A Program for Transient Thermal-Hydraulic Analysis of Complex Fluid Flow Systems
Electric Power Research Institute, NP-7450 (1996)
Google Scholar
Relap5 Code Development Team, 1995
Relap5 Code Development Team
RELAP5/MOD3 Code Manual: Vol. 4, Models and Correlations
Idaho National Engineering Laboratory, NUREG0CR-5535 (1995)
INEL-9500174
Google Scholar
Richter, 1983
H.J. Richter
Separated two-phase flow model: application to critical two-phase flow
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 9 (5) (1983), pp. 511-530
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Schwellnus, 1988
C.F. Schwellnus
A Study of a General One-Dimensional Two-Fluid Critical Flow Model
Master’s Thesis
McMaster University (1988)
Google Scholar
Schwellnus and Shoukri, 1991
C.F. Schwellnus, M. Shoukri
A two-fluid model for non-equilibrium two-phase critical discharge
Can. J. Chem. Eng., 69 (1991), pp. 188-197
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Sozzi and Wutherland, 1975
G.L. Sozzi, W.A. Wutherland
Critical Flow of Saturated and Subcooled Water at High Pressure
GE Report NEDO (1975), p. 13418
Google Scholar
Tesinsky et al., 2016
M. Tesinsky, J. Wäng, U. Bredolt
Validation of the HEM and moody critical flow models in POLCA-T
Proceeding in Physics of Reactors 2016, PHYSOR 2016: Unifying Theory and Experiments in the 21st Century (2016), pp. 2724-2732
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wallis, 1969
G.B. Wallis
One-Dimensional Two-phase Flow
McGraw Hill, New York (1969)
Google Scholar
Wäng, 2015
J. Wäng
Valdiation of the critical flow models
Master’s Thesis
POLCA-T, KTH Royal Institute of Technology (2015)
report
Google Scholar
Werner, 1984
H.J. Werner
On extension of Cramer's rule for solution of restricted linear systems
Linear Multilinear Algebra, 15 (1984), pp. 319-330
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wein, 2012
M. Wein
Simulation von kritischen und nahkritischen Zweiphasenströmungen mit thermischen und fluiddynamischen Nichtgleichgewichtseffekten
(Technischen Universität Dresden, dissertation)
(2012)
Google Scholar
Wolfert, 1977
K. Wolfert
A New Method to Evaluate Critical Discharge Rates in Blowdown Codes that Are Based on the Lumped‐Parameter Technique
Thermal Reactor Safety Meeting, Sun Valley (1977)
Google Scholar
Xu, 2020
H. Xu
Improvement of PWR (LOCA) Safety Analysis Based on PKL Experimental Data
(PhD dissertation)
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (2020)
Google Scholar
Xu et al., 2021
H. Xu, A.F. Badea, X. Cheng
Analysis of Two Phase Critical Flow with a Non-equilibrium Model
Nuclear Engineering and Design, 372 (2021), Article 107732
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yin et al., 2020
S. Yin, H. Wang, B. Xu, C. Yang, H. Gu
Critical flow leakage of a vapour-liquid mixture from sub-cooled water: nucleation boiling study
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 146 (2020), Article 118807
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
View Abstract