<title>Applicability of 100 TBq cesium 137 release into environment as a safety criterion for consequence assessment at reactor design approval stage</title>
<author>Kampanart Silva & Koji Okamoto</author>
<Affiliation>aNuclear Research and Development Division, Thailand Institute of Nuclear Technology, 9/9 Moo 7, Sai Moon, Ongkarak, Nakorn Nayok 26120, Thailand; bDepartment of Nuclear Engineering and Management, School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan</Affiliation>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2015.1018363</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2015.1018363</URL>
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) fundamental safety objective is to protect people and the environment from harmful effects of ionizing radiation. Therefore, a severe accident consequence assess- ment has to be able to include all quantifiable consequences on people and the environment. Our previous studies on estimation of cost per severe accident succeeded in quantifying aforementioned consequences. However, the estimation requires enormous quantity of data, time and human resources, thus it may be inappropriate at the reactor design approval stage. Finnish government uses “100 TBq cesium 137 release into environment”, which was proved to generate limited health effects, as one of the reactor design crite- ria for accident consequences. In this study, we perform an evaluation of annual dose from the 100 TBq cesium 137 release and confirm limited health effects. We form the environmental impact index based on insights from our previous studies and used it to assess consequences to the environment. The estimated environmental impact index is very small, which confirms the limitedness of the environmental impacts of the release. These findings ensure the applicability of 100 TBq cesium 137 release into environment as a safety criterion for consequence assessment at reactor design approval stage.
Keywords: cesium 137; 100 TBq; release; safety criterion; consequence assessment; severe accident; reactor safety
1.Introduction
IAEA clearly stated in its Fundamental Safety Prin- ciples that the fundamental safety objective is to pro- tect people and the environment from harmful effects  of ionizing radiation [1]. The validity of this state- ment was demonstrated by the accident  occurred  at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Station (here- inafter referred to as the Fukushima accident) which brought down various consequences on both people and the environment. Therefore, if we are to assess the con- sequences of a severe accident, the assessment scheme should be able to include all quantifiable consequences on people and the environment. In this study, a “se- vere accident” is defined as an accident which is be- yond the scope of design basis accidents. However, in actual assessments presented in following sections, the anticipated severe accident sequences are selected from existing reports. As per the definition of “people”, we adopted the definition of the IAEA which includes not only local populations but also populations remote from
the power station. “The environment” is defined as the surroundings of the “people” which can directly affect their lives, thus are normally given importance to during the decision-making process, e.g. functionalities of resi- dential area, agricultural area, offices and roads. Ecosys- tems of creatures living in those areas are excluded from the scope of this study since they do not directly affect people’s lives.
Figure 1 shows the conceptual scheme that is prefer- able for a severe accident consequence assessment. It can be assumed that consequences on people would be a subset of consequences on the environment, as the environment is the aggregate of the things surrounding the people.
There are a number of earlier studies [2–11] on consequence assessment using well-known calculation codes, e.g., MACCS, Cosyma and OSCAAR. However, those studies concentrate on assessment of acute and chronic doses, thus they can evaluate only consequences on people. Recognizing the current situation that the
Figure 1. Consequences of a severe accident on people and environment.
consequences on environment were not usually included into the consequence assessment scheme, our previous study on estimation of cost per severe accident [12] attempted  to  quantify  the  overall  consequences  of   a severe accident, i.e., both consequences on people and the environment. We listed all anticipated conse- quences that can be quantified, and converted  them into monetary values in order to form an index – cost per severe accident – that can be used to evaluate the extent of overall consequences and compare the size of respective consequences. It is important to distinguish this study from other studies on nuclear accident cost estimation [13–18], since those studies aim to estimate the economic losses due to a severe accident, while  the cost per severe accident in our previous study is     a quantitative parameter that is used to represent the consequences of a severe accident.
Figure 2 shows the consequences of a severe accident on people and environment that are taken into account in the estimation of cost per severe accident. All circles in the figure represent the quantifiable consequences of a severe accident on people and environment identified by the authors. Direct health effects due to radiation expo- sure and psychological burden caused by radiation ex- posure belong to the consequences to people, since they have direct impacts on people. Relocation, evacuation
Figure 2. Consequences of a severe accident on people and environment that are taken into account in the estimation of cost per severe accident.
and sheltering are the ways that people use to change their living environment, thus they belong to both conse- quences to people and to the environment. Food intake restriction, alternative source cost and harmful rumor deal with the interactions between the people and the en- vironment, thus they also belong to both types of conse- quences. Decontamination and decommissioning of the scrapped power plant are subsets of consequences to the environment, as they deal directly with the contamina- tion of the environment including the site of the power plant. Though we are aware of tacit impacts of a severe accident that cannot be easily accurately quantified, e.g., psychological burdens that are not directly attributed to the radiation exposure, or impacts on tourism, we de- cided to deal with only quantifiable impacts and left others as qualitative information. We finally identified three dominant components of the cost per severe ac- cident: radiation effect cost, decontamination cost and relocation cost, which totally cover more than 90% of the cost per severe accident. We, therefore, believe that these three components are the quantifiable parameters that can represent the consequences of a severe accident to people and the environment.
Though the radiation effect cost, decontamination cost and relocation cost can estimate the consequences of a severe accident in a relatively comprehensive man- ner, their estimations require enormous quantity of data, time and human resources, thus such estimations may not be appropriate at the reactor design approval stage. Finnish Government uses “100 TBq cesium 137 release into environment” as one of the reactor design criteria for accident consequences [19]. This index seems to be more appropriate for the assessment at reactor design approval stage since it can be evaluated using solely the data of the nuclear power plant which is owned or can be obtained easily by the licensee. Also, it does not require a lot of resources to perform the assessment. A Finnish study proved the applicability of the index by showing that both acute and chronic health effects resulted from 100 TBq cesium 137 release into environment are lim- ited [20,21]. However, there was unfortunately no dis- cussion on the impacts to the environment. Therefore, the objective of this study is to estimate overall conse- quences, including consequences to people and to the environment of the “100 TBq cesium 137 release into en- vironment”, in order to justify its applicability as a safety criteria for reactor design approval. As described above that health effects, relocation and decontamination are the three quantifiable consequences that dominate the overall consequences resulted from a severe accident, we simplify our assessment by ignoring other components, and evaluate only these three dominant components. In Section 2, we confirm whether the health effects are re- ally limited as described in the Finnish study, taking into account variations of the input parameters. Then, we estimate the environmental impact index which is esti- mated by adding up the decontamination index and the relocation index, and consider whether they are limited
under various anticipated scenarios of 100 TBq cesium 137 release in Section 3. Finally, we conclude the study in Section 4.
2.Confirmation of limitedness of health effects
2.1.Calculation conditions
The calculation code HotSpot Version 2.07.2 [22]  is used to estimate the health effects that may occur from 100 TBq cesium 137 release into environment. Conditions employed in the calculation are shown in Table 1. Realistic conditions are adopted whenever pos- sible. Conservativeness is maintained for other condi- tions in order to avoid any underestimations. Regard- ing the parameter related to release characteristics, the amount of cesium 137 being release is set to 50, 100 and 200 TBq to cover the uncertainty of the evaluation of the amount of source term. As for the release period, a longer release period seems to be more appropriate since the release of 100 TBq cesium 137 can be classified to a relatively small release which tends not to have very short release period. Therefore, the release period is set to 6, 12 and 24 hrs. In the case of consideration of other nuclides, we add the consideration of release of iodine 131 (half-life 8 days) in order to take into account short-term consequences, as cesium 137 (half-life
30 years) represents consequences in a longer term. The value of iodine 131 is set to 1 PBq, based on the estima- tion of the ratio of iodine to cesium in the actual release after the Fukushima accident by Tokyo Electric Power Company (TEPCO) which was 10:1 [23]. The effective
Table 1. Calculation conditions for assessment of health effects.
release height is 10, 40 and 100 m, which represent the leakage near the ground, at the top of the power plant and from the ventilation system, respectively. Airborne and respirable fractions are fixed to 1 to maintain the conservatism. In regard to the meteorological character- istics, we can only select one value at a time for respective parameters in the calculation in HotSpot. As we can- not change the wind speed with time, we set the wind speed to 1, 2, 3, 5 and 10 m/s in order to see its influence to the results. The wind direction is fixed to a single di- rection since it will give a higher individual dose which would lead to a larger health effect. As for stability class, we determine six cases with stability classes A–F, to see whether it will affect the results. For the conditions of re- ceptors, four pathways: cloudshine, inhalation, ground- shine and resuspension are used to estimate the expo- sure dose. The exposure duration is set to a year in order to estimate the annual dose. We used the values recom- mended in the manual of HotSpot [22] for the receptor height and breathing rate. Only dry deposition is used to estimate the deposition of the radionuclides, since we cannot change the deposition type from dry deposition to wet deposition with time in HotSpot, and all radionu- clides will deposit near by the site if we assume wet depo- sition, which may lead to underestimation of the health effects from the release. No radiation protection coun- termeasures are taken into account in this assessment in order to be conservative.
2.2.Results and discussion
The total effective doses (TEDs) of 100 TBq ce- sium 137 release accidents under different conditions are shown in Figures 3–8. We assume that area of the nuclear power station is a circle of 0.5 km radius from the source, which is excluded from the target of radiation effect cal- culation. A solid black line is used to represent the result of the base case in all figures. It is mentioned in The 2007 Recommendations of the International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) [24] that it is not likely for deterministic effects to be observed from an exposure to radiation up to 100 mSv. Therefore, releases under most of these conditions will not lead to deterministic ef- fects, except for the case that the effective release height is 10 m (Figure 6), and the case that the wind speed is 1 m/s (Figure 7). For these two cases, the distances from the source of which the TOD are more than 100 mSv are less than 2 km. As the release of 100 TBq cesium 137 can be classified to a relatively small release which tend not to occur in an early stage , it is relatively easy for the government to plan to evacuate the people who live in this area before the release starts, and there will be no deterministic effects if the evacuation is successful. However, it is likely that decontamination is needed to be implemented in order to let the evacuees return home after the evacuation period (seven days), otherwise peo- ple may need to relocate for at least a year to be able to totally avoid the deterministic effects.
Figure 3. Total effective dose for cesium 137 release accidents with different amounts of cesium 137 being released.
Figure 4. Total effective dose for 100 TBq cesium 137 release accidents with different release periods.Figure 5. Total effective dose for an accident with release of 100 TBq cesium 137 and 1 PBq iodine 131.
Regarding stochastic effects from radiation ex- posure, the same publication of ICRP [24] suggests    us to assume that the incidence of cancer or heritable effects will rise in direct proportion to an increase in the equivalent dose in the relevant organs and tissues, i.e., the stochastic effects follow linear non threshold model.Figure 6. Total effective dose for 100 TBq cesium 137 release accidents with different effective release heights.Figure 7. Total effective dose for 100 TBq cesium 137 release accidents with different wind speeds.Figure 8. Total effective dose for 100 TBq cesium 137 release accidents with different weather stability classes.
Therefore, the collective doses of respective cases in Figures 3–8 are represented by the total areas under the respective line graphs. It can be observed from all graphs that, the annual dose at the distance  further than 5 km from the source are lower than 10 mSv, and more than 90% of collective doses of all cases will be
obtained within 5 km distance. Therefore, the stochastic effects from radiation exposure can be avoided easily by relocating the people and/or decontaminating the area within 5 km radius from the source. However,  as  it is recommended in the publication 101b of ICRP
[25] that the magnitude of individual doses and the number of people exposed must be kept as low as reasonably achievable, the overall consequences to people and the environment before relocating people or decontaminating the area must be adequately discussed. Finally, it can be concluded that the health effects due to radiation exposure resulted from the release of 100 TBq cesium 137 are limited even in extreme con- ditions if appropriate radiation protection scenarios  are
selected.
3.Estimation of major environmental impacts
As mentioned in the introduction, our previous study [12] showed that radiation effect cost, decontami- nation cost and relocation cost totally cover more than 90% of the cost per severe accident, which means the health effects due to radiation exposure, the impacts from decontamination and the impacts from relocation can represent the overall consequence resulted from a se- vere accident. Health effects due to radiation exposure were discussed in previous section, thus this section is dedicated to discussion on impacts from decontamina- tion and relocation which represent the environmental impacts resulted from 100 TBq cesium 137 release into environment.
3.1.Accident cost unit (ACU)
Decontamination cost and relocation cost, which are the two important components of the cost per severe ac- cident, can be used to estimate the impacts from decon- tamination and relocation. However, since the cost per severe accident is shown in a currency unit, it can be eas- ily mistaken for estimation of economic losses resulted from a severe accident, which cannot represent the im- pacts of a severe accident to people and the environment. In order to avoid confusion between the cost per severe accident and other economic losses evaluations, the au- thors use the “accident cost unit (ACU)” instead of a currency unit in this study. The sum of the decontami- nation cost and the relocation cost resulted from a 100 TBq cesium 137 release into environment (base case) is set to one accident cost unit (1 ACU)1. The ACU will be used as a unit for all monetary values in the estimations of the environmental impact index discussed below.
3.2.Estimation of environmental impact index
The environmental impact index (ACU), which can be used to evaluate the impacts resulted from 100 TBq cesium 137 release into environment, is simply the sum of the decontamination index and the relocation index.
The calculation methods of both indices are discussed below.
3.2.1.Decontamination index
Decontamination index is estimated by adding up the decontamination implementation indices and the waste management indices of selected decontamination techniques for all land use types. The decontamination implementation index of the tth decontamination tech- nique for the lth land use type DIl,t (ACU) is calculated by@1
Fl,t, Al and UDI,t represent the fraction for applica- tion of the tth decontamination technique for the lth land use type (dimensionless), the total area of the lth land use type [m2] and the unit decontamination imple- mentation index of the tth decontamination technique (ACU/m2), respectively. The waste management index of the tth decontamination technique for the lth land use type WMl,t (ACU) is estimated by@2
Subscripts TS, TR, WT, IS, WD and CWD stand for respective steps of waste management: temporary waste storage, waste transportation, waste treatment (volume reduction), waste interim storage, high level radioactive waste disposal and disposal of controlled type waste, re- spectively. WSt and WLt are solid and liquid wastes gen- erated by the tth decontamination technique per unit area (m3/m2) and VRt (dimensionless) is volume reduc- tion rate for the tth decontamination technique. U rep- resents the unit waste management index of respective waste management steps (ACU/m3). The decontamina- tion index DC (ACU) can finally be calculated by@3
3.2.2.Relocation index
Relocation index is composed of income losses, transportation and accommodation of relocated people, and also the capital utility losses of their properties. The income losses of relocated people IL (ACU) is estimated by@4
where P, T and GDP stand for the number of relocated people (person), relocation period (year) and average
gross domestic product (GDP) of the relocated people (ACU/person-year), respectively.@5
is used to calculate the contribution from transporta- tion of relocated people TR (ACU), where D is the travel distance (km), and UTR is the unit transportation index (ACU/person-km). Accommodation index AC (ACU) is calculated by@6
where UAC represents the unit accommodation index (ACU/person-year). The capital utility losses include the total losses of land capital utility LLC (ACU) and the to- tal losses of other capital utilities LOC (ACU) where@7
calculates the former, and@8
calculates the latter. CPL stands for the unit land capi- tal index (ACU/km2), CPO for index for capitals other than land capital (ACU/person), IR for the investment recovery rate (dimensionless), DR for the depreciation rate (dimensionless) and I for the interest rate (dimen- sionless). The relocation index RC (ACU) can finally be calculated by@9
3.3.Calculation conditions
The authors made a number of assumptions to keep the calculation simple. In order to calculate the decon- tamination and the relocation target areas, HotSpot Ver- sion 2.07.2 is first used to estimate the annual radiation dose to people. Conditions shown in Table 1 are em- ployed in the calculation, same as in Section 2. The area where the annual dose is larger than 20 mSv is set to the decontamination target area, and the area where the an- nual dose is larger than 100 mSv is set to the relocation target area. These dose levels correspond to the upper threshold of the reference dose levels recommended by the ICRP [24] for emergency exposure (between 20 and 100 mSv/year), and for existing exposure (between 1 and 20 mSv/year), respectively. In the calculation of decon- tamination index, the decontamination of five land use types: houses and buildings, gardens and playgrounds, agricultural and farming lands, forests and roads are taken into account. The fractions of respective land use types out of the entire decontamination area refer to the fractions of land use types of Ibaraki Prefecture, Japan [27], in which the target plant was located in the previous
Table 2. Suitable decontamination techniques for different land use types.
study [12]2. Suitable decontamination techniques for dif- ferent land use types are shown in Table 2. This informa- tion is obtained from the decontamination demonstra- tion project of Japan Atomic Energy Agency (JAEA), which was performed after the Fukushima accident [28]. When there is more than one suitable decontamination techniques for a single land use type, the Fl,t of respec- tive decontamination techniques is assumed to be equal to each other, e.g., FH,B FH,HPW 0.5, where H stands for houses, B and HPW stands for brushing and high pressure water, respectively. The unit decontamination implementation indices and the unit waste management indices are the average values of the respective unit costs taken from several reports and papers published after the Chernobyl accident and the Fukushima accident [28–34], of which the units are converted to the ACU. In regard to the relocation index, the number of relocated people is calculated by multiplying the number of popu- lation per square kilometer of the Ibaraki Prefecture to the relocation target area. All other values refer to the values used in the previous study [12].
3.4.Results and discussions
The results of the estimation of environmental impact index are summarized in Table 3. The relocation and decontamination boundaries, which indicate the boundaries of the areas from which people relocated and of which was decontaminated in the form of dis- tance from the center of the target plant, are also shown in Table 3. First, in order to observe the trend of the en- vironmental index when the amount of release increases, the environmental impact index of 100 TBq release     is compared with those of 1 PBq release and 10 PBq release. The upper limit (10 PBq) corresponds to the order of the total cesium 137 release at the Fukushima accident estimated by TEPCO [35]. It can be seen from Table 3 that, while the amounts of release are increased by 1 and 2 orders of magnitude, the environmental
Table 3. Environmental impact index, relocation boundary and decontamination boundary estimated with differ- ent conditions.impact indices rise by approximately 1.4 and 3 orders of magnitude, respectively. This implies that the environ- mental impacts resulted from a severe accident increase in an exponential manner, thus it is better to keep the release as small as reasonably achievable. In the case of 100 TBq release, there was no relocated people and the decontamination boundary is 2 km, which implies that the consequences of the release are limited. Judging  from these results, it seems reasonable to use 100 TBq cesium 137 release as a safety criterion for an accidental
release to environment. Furthermore, the environmental impact index is evaluated under conditions in Table 1. Under all conditions, the environmental impact index does not rise above 5 ACU, which means the impacts  of the 100 TBq cesium release can still be considered as limited. Even in the case that wind speed is set to
1 m/s which gives the largest environmental impact index (4.26 ACU), the relocation and decontamination boundaries are 1 and 4 km, respectively.
Table  4. Environmental impact index, relocation boundary and decontamination boundary when the changes  in wind direction and wind speed are taken into account.Table 5. Environmental impact index, relocation boundary and decontamination boundary with different dose levels for starting relocation and for determination of decontamination target area.
Next, the environmental impact index, when the changes of the wind direction and the wind speed with the time are taken into account, is estimated. The ex- ample wind direction and wind speed data provided in HotSpot Version 2.07.2 was used in the calculation. This condition is less conservative for the health effect evalu- ation, since the change of the wind direction reduces the amount of cesium in the plume that pass through and those deposited on a specific location, comparing to the case of single wind direction and wind speed. However, it can be observed from Table 4 that this condition seems to give larger environmental impact indices than the case of single wind direction and wind speed. This is because, although the consideration of the changes in the wind direction and wind speed can reduce the cesium concen- tration at a specific location, it enlarges the area being contaminated by cesium. If the annual dose of the en- larged contaminated area exceeds the dose levels for re- location of people and for decontamination of the area (100 and 20 mSv/year, respectively), the relocation target area and the decontamination target area will be larger than the case of single wind direction and wind speed even though the relocation or decontamination bound- aries are closer to the center of the target plant. This   is because there will be contamination in many direc- tions within the boundary. As a result, the environmen- tal impact index will be consequently larger than the case of single wind direction and wind speed. On the other hand, if the annual dose of most area does not reach those dose levels, the environmental impact index will be zero, as observed in the case of 50 TBq release and the case that the effective release height is set to 100 m.
Finally, the influences of the dose rates selected as the dose levels for starting relocation and for the de- termination of decontamination target area are investi- gated. As the reference dose levels recommended by the ICRP [24] for emergency exposure and for existing expo- sure are between 100 and 20 mSv/year and between 20 and 1 mSv/year, respectively, the dose level for starting relocation is set to 100 and 20 mSv/year, and the dose level for determination of decontamination target area is set to 20, 53 and 1 mSv/year. The results are shown in Table 5. It is obvious from the table that the dose level for the determination of decontamination target area has a
very large influence on the decontamination boundary and consequently, the environmental impact index. Es- pecially, when it is set to 1 mSv/year, the environmental impact index is even larger than that of 1 PBq cesium 137 release with basic conditions.
4.Conclusion
The conceptual scheme of a severe accident con- sequence assessment that can fulfill the fundamental safety objective stated in the IAEA Fundamental Safety Principles, i.e., a consequence assessment that can take into account both consequences to people and to the environment, was introduced. In order to prove the ap- plicability of the “release of 100 TBq cesium 137” as a safety criterion for consequence assessment at reactor design approval stage: (1) the health effects due to ra- diation exposure resulted from the release, i.e., the con- sequence to people, were reevaluated, and (2) the envi- ronmental impact index was formed and used to evalu- ate the limitedness of the environmental impacts caused by the release, i.e., the consequences to the environment. Health effects due to the release of 100 TBq cesium 137 were limited even in extreme conditions when appropri- ate radiation protection scenarios are selected. Since the environmental impact index of 100 TBq cesium 137 re- lease was small under all conditions, the impact of the 100 TBq cesium 137 release to the environment could be also considered as limited. From all findings above, we could conclude that the overall consequences of the 100 TBq cesium 137 release into environment were small enough for it to be used as a safety criterion for an acci- dent with source term release at reactor design approval stage.
There are two points to keep in mind when perform- ing the assessments of the impacts to the environment. One is that, though the assumption of single wind direc- tion and wind speed is conservative for the assessment of health effects, it can be less conservative in the as- sessment of impacts to the environment. This is because although the consideration of the changes in the wind direction and wind speed can reduce the cesium concen- tration at a specific location, it enlarges the area being contaminated by cesium. The other is that, the dose level
for determination of decontamination target area has a very large influence on the environmental impact index. Therefore, it is important to be careful in the process of determination of this dose level.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to acknowledge: (1) Japan Society for the Promotion of Science for providing the scholarship under JSPS RONPAKU Program and (2) National Research Council of Thailand for the majority of the fund for this research.
