<title>Study on multi-unit level 3 PSA to understand a characteristics of risk in a multi-unit context</title>
<author>Kyemin Oh a, *, Sung-yeop Kim b, Hojun Jeon a, Jeong Seon Park a</author>
<Affiliation>a KHNP Central Research Institute, Daejeon, 34101, Republic of Korea
b Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, Daejeon, 34057, Republic of Korea</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>NUCLEAR ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2019.11.005</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2019.11.005</URL>
ABSTRACT
Since the Fukushima Daiichi accident in 2011, concerns for the safety of multi-unit Nuclear Power Plant (NPP) sites have risen. This is because more than 70% of NPP sites are multi-unit sites that have two or more NPP units and a multi-unit accident occurred for the ﬁrst time. After this accident, Probability Safety Assessment (PSA) has been considered in many countries as one of the tools to quantitatively assess the safety for multi-unit NPP sites. One of the biggest concerns for a multi-unit accident such as Fukushima is that the consequences (health and economic) will be signiﬁcantly higher than in the case of a single-unit accident. However, many studies on multi-unit PSA have focused on Level 1 & 2 PSA, and there are many challenges in terms of public acceptance due to various speculations without an engi- neering background. In this study, two kinds of multi-unit Level 3 PSA for multi-unit site have been carried out. The ﬁrst case was the estimation of multi-unit risk with conservative assumptions to investigate the margin between multi-unit risk and QHO, and the other was to identify the effect of time delays in releases between NPP units on the same site. Through these two kinds of assessments, we aimed at investigating the level of multi-unit risk and understanding the characteristics of risk in a multi- unit context.Keywords:
Multi-unit level 3 PSA Multi-unit risk
Multi-unit accident
1.Introduction
Since the Fukushima Daiichi accident in 2011, concerns for the safety of multi-unit Nuclear Power Plant (NPP) sites has risen. This is because more than 70% of NPP sites are multi-unit sites that have two or more NPP units, and a multi-unit accident occurred for the ﬁrst time. After this accident, Probability Safety Assessment (PSA) was considered in many countries as one of the tools to quantita- tively assess the safety for multi-unit NPP sites. However, there is no systematic methodology for multi-unit NPP sites, as the tech- nical improvements in the PSA area have been carried out on single units. Accordingly, many research projects are being carried out in the IAEA and OECD/NEA as well as many countries operating NPPs. In South Korea, in particular, public concerns for the safety of NPP sites is relatively high. This is because Korea has four NPP sites, and each site has more than six units that are operating or under con- struction. Also, one of the fundamental reasons for this concern is that the population density around the NPP site is higher than thatof other countries by Korea's geographical characteristics. Upon this background, Korean utilities, government, and research institutes, as in other countries, are considering PSA as one of the tools to address safety-related issues on NPP sites, and are carrying out research projects to develop a methodology for a multi-unit PSA.
The biggest concern regarding a multi-unit accident, such as Fukushima, is that the consequences (health or economic) caused by such an accident will be signiﬁcantly higher than in the case of a single-unit accident. However, in terms of the risk expressed by multiplication of frequency and consequences as given by the following equation, it is not appropriate to judge safety only by its consequences.
Risk ¼ Probabilityðor FreqeuncyÞ× Consequence
Currently, there are many challenges in terms of public accep- tance due to various speculations without an engineering back- ground despite that safety-related research for multi-unit sites is being carried out. For this reason, we performed two kinds of multi- unit Level 3 PSA for a multi-unit site. The ﬁrst case was the esti- mation of multi-unit risk to investigate the margin between multi- unit risk and QHO. For this, we evaluated the consequences of a
reference site that has nine NPP units and ultimately estimated multi-unit risk using the results of a Level 3 PSA. The other case was to identify the effect of time delays in releases between NPP units on the same site. If the amount of release to the environment in- creases, risk also increases due to the increase of exposure. More- over, if it is released simultaneously from all units, the situation is expected to be more serious. On the other hand, if there is a delay time between the releases of each unit, the consequences may be lower than that of simultaneous release because there is potential to decrease the total exposure to the public. We therefore per- formed a multi-unit Level 3 PSA considering the release time delays between two NPP units. Through these two kinds of assessments, we aimed at investigating the level of multi-unit risk and under- standing characteristics of risk in a multi-unit context.
1.1. Multi-unit PSA in South Korea
The Fukushima accident has caused many changes in the safety assessment area for NPPs. In the PSA area, there are also many discussions on the methodology, scope, and so on. The existing PSA (or single-unit PSA) identiﬁes initiating events that may occur, and performs an assessment for identiﬁed initiating events for a single- unit NPP. This is carried out based on the assumption that other units around the target unit are safe. Through the Fukushima ac- cident, however, it was shown that multi-units on the same site can be affected by a single hazard, and the need to develop a meth- odology considering multi-unit accidents was highlighted. PSA for a multi-unit accident (or multi-unit NPP site) has been carried out on a limited basis before the Fukushima accident. However, it did not receive much attention because of its low frequency and lack of realism. For this reason, the maturity of the technique for a multi- unit PSA is lower than that of the existing PSA for single units and many research projects are actively being carried out in the world. In the case of Korea, more than six units have been operated on the same site due to the geographical characteristics. Table 1 shows the status of operation and construction units of each site. In the case of the Kori site, a maximum of nine units will be operated on the same site after the completion of the construction  for  new units. Since the number of units on a single site is higher than that of other countries, concerns about multi-unit accidents are rising
steadily.
The ﬁrst research project related with a multi-unit PSA in Korea was performed by KAERI from 2012 to 2017. This project included the development of a multi-unit PSA methodology and application to a pilot site that has six identical units [1e3]. Currently, KAERI has carried out a follow-up project to improve the methodology. In 2016, KHNP has launched a multi-unit PSA project aimed at the development of a methodology and applied it to a pilot site that has nine NPP units because the safety of the NPP site was raised as one of the important issues during the license process for newly built units. KHNP project consists of two phases, ﬁrst phase so called preliminary phase was done in June 2018 [4e6]. The ﬁnal phase will be ﬁnished by June 2020. A preliminary phase focused on devel- oping an overall framework for a multi-unit PSA and a model
Table 1
Status of NPP sites in Korea.integrating nine units on the pilot site, and Table 2 shows the scope of the KHNP project.
2.Development of multi-unit level 3 PSA models
In this chapter, we describe considerations and assumptions used in the development of multi-unit Level 3 PSA models. For performing the Level 3 PSA, we used MACCS 2 code developed by
U.S. NRC [7], and developed two multi-unit Level 3 PSA models. The ﬁrst model (Case 1) is for estimating multi-unit risk, and the other (Case 2) is for evaluating the effect of release time delay between NPP units. In addition, each model has a sub-model for sensitivity study to investigate the effect of the radiological emergency  response plan such as evacuation. To use multi-unit core damage frequencies of the KHNP project for estimating multi-unit risk, we assumed a reference site that has nine NPP units. As for the base input of MACCS2, we used Appendix C of NUREG/CR-6613[7]. In addition, site-speciﬁc data such as population and weather was developed based on the reference site.
2.1.Source term category for generating multi-unit STC
One of the important technical issues for performing a multi- unit PSA is the exponential increase in the number of combina- tions of accidents as the number of units rises. This is the same for source term evaluation. Even if the same type of nuclear power plants are located at the same site, there are various combinations of source terms. Furthermore, in the case of actual sites considered in the KHNP project, the number of combinations will increase further because there are three types of NPP. For this reason, a multi-unit Level 3 PSA considering all these combinations is ex- pected to have many limitations at the current technology level. In this study, we assumed the same Source Term Category (STC) in all of the units. In other words, the same inventory and release to the environment were assumed regardless of the reactor types and actual core inventories. In MACCS2 code, we modeled the multiple STC by modifying the total core inventory and release fraction of radioactive materials to the environment. If there are n units on the same site, the total inventory of n units will be modiﬁed by a scaling factor of MACC2 code and the release fraction will be expressed by multiplying the release fraction of a single unit by the number of damaged units divided by the total number of units in the site. In the case of the NPP site considered in this study, nine times the inventory of APR-1400 was modeled as the total inventory, and releases of multiple units were modeled by multiplying 2/9, 3/9, …, 9/9 by the release fraction of STC that was assumed as the repre- sentative STC. For conservative assessment, we used early containment failure sequence as representative STC.
2.2.Modeling of radiation emergency plan in multi-unit level 3 PSA
2.2.1.Radiological emergency response plan of reference site
The Radiological Emergency Planning Zone (EPZ) can be deﬁned as an area that establishes the proactive actions such as sheltering and evacuation for the public in the event of a NPP accident. Generally, the EPZ is classiﬁed into the Precautionary Action Zone (PAZ) and the Urgent Protective action planning Zone (UPZ). IAEA deﬁnes the PAZ as 3 ~ 5 km and UPZ as 20e30 km, and recommends that they be ﬂexibly scoped according to the state of each country such as the characteristics of the facilities and geographical con- ditions. Table 3 shows the status of the PAZ and UPZ. In the case of Korea, the PAZ is within 3~5 km, and the UPZ is within 20e30 km. The PAZ is the area within which arrangements should be made to implement precautionary urgent protective actions before or shortly after a major release with the aim of preventing or reducing
Table 2
Scope of KHNP multi-unit PSA research project.Table 3
Status of radiological emergency planning zone.
the occurrence of severe deterministic effects. The UPZ is area where preparations are made to promptly shelter or evacuate in place, and urgent protective actions are implemented based on the basis of the results of monitoring within a few hours following a release [8].
Radiological emergency alarm of Korea is divided into three levels: facility (white), site area (blue), and general (red). Protective actions for the public are actively started with a general alarm. When a general alarm goes off, local governments implement ac- tions to protect the public. These activities are differently carried out in the PAZ and UPZ. In case of the PAZ, all public inside the PAZ evacuate to the outside of the EPZ (20e30 km) with a  general alarm. On the other hand, the protective actions from the outside of the PAZ to the inside of the UPZ are differently implemented depending on the expected dose in each sector of the UPZ. In the initial phase of a general alarm, the expected dose of each sector inside the UPZ is estimated using computer code. Using these re- sults, protective actions such as sheltering or evacuation for the public are decided according to the basis shown in Table 4. That is, if
the expected dose of a certain sector is estimated from 10 mSv to
50 mSv, sheltering will be recommended to the public in that sector. If the dose in sectors is expected to exceed 50 mSv, the public in those sectors will evacuate to the outside of the UPZ. Fig. 1 brieﬂy summarizes the radiological emergency response plan of the reference site.
2.2.2.Modeling approaches of radiological emergency response plan
It is difﬁcult to model the radiological emergency response plan of the reference site using the modeling functions for the radio- logical emergency response in MACCS2 code because MACCS2 code was developed based on the characteristics of U.S. NPPs. In response, we modeled protective actions at the level applicable to MACCS2 code. As mentioned above, when a general alarm goes off, people living within the PAZ immediately evacuate to the outside of the EPZ and people who live within the UPZ conditionally evacuate
Table 4
Protection actions by dose in Korea.
Fig. 1.  Radioactive emergency response plan by  dose.
- Evacuation preparation time: this means the time required to initiate actual movement to the outside of the EPZ after the evacuation recommendation. An ETE report published by KHNP Central Research Institute (CRI) [10] estimated the evacuation preparation time from 15 min to 2 h. In this study, we assumed 2 h conservatively.
Fig. 2 shows the main time point of the accident sequence and radiological emergency plan applied to the sub-model.
In the sub-model, we assumed two public categories within the PAZ based on Appendix C of [7]. The ﬁrst is the group who is evacuating outside the EPZ according to the evacuation recom- mendation from local government and they are assumed as 95% of the total population. The other is the group who does not respond to the evacuation recommendation and they are assumed as 5% of the total population inside the PAZ. Fig. 3 shows the pattern of protective actions within the PAZ and UPZ in the sub-model for the sensitivity study.
2.2.3.Multi-unit level 3 PSA model considering release time delay
Health effects (or consequences) increase depending on expo- sure of an individual by the release of radioactive materials. In a multi-unit accident, there is a possibility to have signiﬁcant dif- ferences in exposure of individuals depending on the simultaneous release or delayed release. For a simple example, assuming releases
from two units, if the second unit releases radioactive materials to the environment 6 h later after the ﬁrst release, exposure may vary due to changes in wind direction between the ﬁrst and second release. However, it is difﬁcult to consider such delay time due to the characteristics of the PSA producing an annual average as a result. That is, core damage and release in multiple units are assessed to occur at the same time if a failure of the same equip- ment or operator actions occur by the same multi-unit initiating events. In an actual situation, however, there are differences in the accident progression time although the accident sequence in the PSA is the same with the failure of safety systems and operator actions. In particular, failure to run is one of the main elements to cause a time interval of accident sequences between multiple units. For example, there is a cooling pump that must be operated for 24 h to mitigate core damage in the PSA model. If a multi-unit initiating event occurs at two identical units (unit A and B), cooling pumps of both units can fail after 10 h and 5 h operation, respectively. In this case, if it is assumed that accident progressions to containment failure are the same in both units, there is a 5 h difference between the release time points of both units. In addition, the phenomena of a severe accident after core damage have many uncertainties. Even if the same severe accident phenomena such as hydrogen explosion occur at multiple units, the time and progression duration of the phenomena may not be the same. Given all of these considerations, there may be differences in the release timing of each unit to the
Fig. 2. Time point of accident sequence with radiological emergency response plan.Fig. 3. Protective actions within PAZ and UPZ in sub-model for sensitivity study.
environment. As mentioned above, it is difﬁcult to determine the time interval between units in the current PSA practice. We therefore assumed two identical units and considered the release time interval between the ﬁrst release and the next release as 2, 4,  6, 12, and 24 h. Fig. 4 shows the time table of the sub-model for assessing the effect of the release time interval.
3.Results
3.1.Results of multi-unit risk assessment
In this assessment, we considered nine NPP units and assessed two models, as mentioned in chapter 3. Individual early fatality risk within 1 mile of the NPP site boundary and individual latent cancer fatality risk within 10 miles were estimated. Assuming that all units had the same source term category regardless of reactor types, as mentioned in section 3.1, we do not perform an additional multi- unit Level 2 PSA to produce multi-unit  STC and its frequencies.  We thus conservatively assumed that containment failure occurs if core damage occurs. That is, the release frequency of a multi-unit STC is the same as the core damage frequency. We used the pre- liminary results of the KHNP multi-unit project for multi-unit LOOP as the frequency of the multi-unit STC, and detailed information
such as methodology and assumptions used in the KHNP project can be found in our previous studies [4e6]. Figs. 5 and 6 show the results of the multi-unit risk assessment. The red line in each ﬁgure denotes Quantitative Health Objectives (QHO) requirements established by NRC [11]. Despite conservative assumptions that the frequency of the multi-unit STC was equal to that of multi-unit core damage, the results were assessed to meet QHO requirements. Latent cancer fatality risk has a sufﬁcient margin for the QHO requirement, while early fatality risk has a relatively small margin. Considering that many core damage sequences progress to No
Containment Failure (NOCF) sequence in the actual Level 2 PSA, margins between multi-unit risk and QHO will increase signiﬁ- cantly if the release frequencies of the multi-unit STC are properly evaluated by the multi-unit Level 2 PSA.
3.2.Results of multi-unit level 3 PSA considering the release time delay
Figs. 7 and 8 show results of population weighted individual early fatality risk within 1 mile of the NPP site boundary and latent cancer fatality risk within 10 miles of the NPP site boundary. Early fatality risk decreased by about 50% even if the time delay was only 2 h. At 2 h delay, latent cancer fatality was equal to or increased
Fig. 4. Time point of accident sequence with release time interval.
Fig. 5.  Multi-unit individual early fatality  risk (1 mile).
Fig. 6. Multi-unit individual latent cancer fatality risk (10 miles).
Fig. 7. Consequences of individual early fatality considering release time delay.
Fig. 8. Consequences of individual latent cancer fatality considering release time delay.Fig. 9. Results of sensitivity study e multi-unit individual early fatality risk (1 mile).
compared to concurrent release. This is because cancer fatality increased due to the change of wind direction and the decrease of exposure by conducting relocation. As mentioned in section 3.2, we used dose-dependent relocation to model the evacuation. In this study, the delay time (delay time here means that the public in a region where a radiological plume has arrived is not exposed to radioactive materials after this duration) for evacuation after the arrival of the radioactive plume was assumed to be 3 h. This reduced the exposure from the second release compared to that of concurrent release and ultimately reduced exposure to below the threshold dose resulting in early fatality. This is the reason that the result was equal to or increased at 2 h delay. All consequences of both early and latent cancer fatality were the same from 4 h delay. The reason for this is similar to the explanation of the result of 2 h delay. As mentioned above, in code calculation, it is assumed that all the public exposed to ﬁrst release have completed relocation to the outside EPZ after 3 h. This means that the second release after 4 h does not affect the public in terms of risk. It is noted that results can be different depending on the delay time for evacuation.
3.3.
Results of sensitivity study
A sensitivity study was performed to investigate the effects of protective actions for the public. We developed two kinds of models for the sensitivity study. The ﬁrst (Sensitivity 1) considers immediate evacuation within the PAZ, as mentioned in 3.2.2, and the other (Sensitivity 2) considers no protective actions. Figs. 9 and
10 show a comparison of Case 1 between the base model and sensitivity models. Insights from the sensitivity study for Case 1 are as follows.
Early fatality risk in Sensitivity 1 model was reduced more than one order compared to that of the base model. This is because the exposure of the public from the radioactive plume decreased signiﬁcantly in the early stages of the accident by conducting immediate evacuation.
In the Sensitivity 1 model, we applied immediate evacuation to the public who lives within 0 kme5 km, and this led to a reduction in the result for latent cancer fatality risk. However, the population within PAZ was relatively small compared to the
Fig. 10. Results of sensitivity study e multi-unit individual latent cancer fatality risk (10 miles).
total population considered in the calculation for latent cancer fatality risk. Therefore, immediate evacuation within the PAZ did not have a signiﬁcant impact on the results of latent cancer fatality risk for the public who live within 10 miles (approxi- mately 16 km).
In the case of the Sensitivity 2 model, the results of both early and latent cancer fatality risk increase slightly compared to that of the base model. This means that the protective action modeled in the base model was conservative.
Figs. 11 and 12 show a comparison of Case 2 between the base model and sensitivity models. Insights from the sensitivity study for Case 2 are as follows.
Similar with Case 1, the results of the sensitivity 1 model for both early fatality and latent cancer fatality decreased compared with that of the base model. In particular, consequences of early fatality were greatly reduced.
In the case of the sensitivity 2 model, results of several delay times increased compared to that of concurrent release. This
resulted from a change in wind direction between the ﬁrst and second release. Because the sensitivity 2 model does not consider protective actions such as evacuation, the public around the NPP site remains in their homes or companies even if an accident occurs. As such, changes in wind direction could result in an increase in the population exposed to the radioac- tive plume in areas larger than that of concurrent release.
However, delayed release of the sensitivity 2 model does not cause an increase in consequences in some cases. This is dependent on the population in the area affected by the second release.
4.Conclusions and discussions
4.1.Conclusions
In this study, we performed a multi-unit Level 3 PSA for a reference site that has nine NPP units and ultimately estimated multi-unit risk. In addition, the effect of the release time interval between NPP units on the same site was also investigated. It is
Fig. 11. Results of sensitivity study e multi-unit individual early fatality risk (1 mile) for two units.
Fig. 12. Results of sensitivity study e multi-unit individual latent cancer fatality risk (10 miles) for two units.
noted that this study was carried out to identify the characteristics of the Level 3 PSA in terms of a multi-unit context and is not an assessment of an actual site in Korea.
The insights from this study are summarized as follows:
Although many conservative assumptions have been used to estimate multi-unit risk, there is a sufﬁcient margin between multi-unit risk and QHO. This is because the consequences of a multi-unit accident are larger than those of a single unit acci- dent but their frequencies are relatively low.
If a delay time between releases of radioactive materials to the environment of damaged units exists, there is a possibility that the consequences will be reduced compared to that of concur- rent release. This is dependent on the radiological emergency response plan.
If protective actions such as evacuation of the public near the NPP are properly carried out in the early stage of the accident, consequences can be signiﬁcantly reduced, particularly the consequence of early fatality.
4.2.Limitations and further study
The multi-unit Level 3 PSA in this study was carried out with limited information such as multi-unit STCs and its frequencies as studies on multi-unit PSA are currently being conducted. A number of conservative assumptions were hence used as mentioned above. The limitations that should be addressed in further studies are as follows.
In this study, the results do not cover all STC combinations of accident sequences because we did not perform a multi-unit Level 2 PSA. This may overestimate or underestimate the consequences.
Frequency of multi-unit STC was assumed to be the same with multi-unit core damage frequency. Generally, the portion of early release sequences has less than 10% of a core damage sequence, and most core damage sequences progress to a no containment sequence. If the frequencies of a multi-unit STC are properly evaluated, multi-unit risk will be decreased because
the representative STC used in this study is one of the early release sequences.
The release point of multi-unit STC was assumed to be in a single point. In the case of the reference site, the distance between the ﬁrst unit and last unit is more 2 km. If multiple release points are modeled, the consequences will be changed.
Many assumptions to model protective actions for the public, including evacuation pathway, time point of alarm, and so on, were used
In addition to the limitations mentioned above, there are many others. To resolve these limitations, many studies should be carried out in the future.
Declaration of competing interest
All authors declare there is no conﬂicts of interest.
