<title>Biological shielding test of hot cells with high active source 60Co (300 TBq)</title>
<author>P. Švrčula, D. Zoul, M. Zimina, A. Petříčková, T. Adamíková, M. Schulc, O. Srba</author>
<Affiliation>Research Centre Rez Ltd., Hlavní 130, 25068 Husinec-Řež, Czech Republic</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radphyschem.2017.03.019</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2017.03.019</URL>
ABSTRACT
This article describes a method for testing of the eﬃciency of the biological shielding of the hot cell facility, which were constructed as a part of the project SUSEN. Ten hot cells and one semi-hot cell are present in the facility Radiochemistry II. The shielding is made from steel plates. In order to demonstrate suﬃcient eﬃciency of the biological shielding of the hot cells and a correspondence between measured and contractual values at selected points. The test was done using sealed high activity 60Co sources. The results are also used as a proof of the optimization of radiation protection for the workplace of this type. The results conﬁrm signiﬁcant optimization of radiation protection at the workplace. The dose received by a staﬀ do not exceed one tens of annual limit during active service. Obtained results fulﬁll general requirements of radiation protection and will be used for further active service of hot cells facility.
Keywords:
Radiation protection   Hot cells    Shielding    Dosimetry    Material testing
1.Introduction
Testing of the eﬃciency of the biological shielding of hot cells (HCs) was launched by the Research Centre Rez Ltd. on the 23rd of November 2015 in a cooperation with Chemcomex Inc. (coordinators), ÚJP, Inc. (transportation of sources) and VF Inc. (radiation protection supervisor). Testing of the eﬀectiveness of the biological shielding lasted for four days. Eleven cells were successfully trialed in order to demonstrate a desired eﬃciency of the shielding of the HCs, a correspondence between measured values and contractual values as well as to prove the safety of the operation at the workplace of such a category.
Object Radiochemistry II is located at the Research Centre Rez Ltd. and is planned as a workplace of III. category with a presence of ionizing radiation sources. The facility is equipped with ten HCs, one semi-HC and one „dry pool”. HCs and the dry pool are designed for maximum activity up to 300 TBq 60Co. Semi-HC is designed for maximum activity up to 250 GBq 60Co. The cells are equipped with experimental devices for diagnostics and testing allowing irradiated samples to enter the HCs, technologies for a complex samples proces- sing (cutting, welding machining etc.) and a set of machines for mechanical testing (sample preparation area, tensile testing machine, fatigue machine, etc.). Moreover, the study of the local mechanical properties and microstructure of materials can be conducted using microhardness and nanohardness testers and scanning electron micro- scopy (SEM), respectively (Fig. 1). The workplace includes operator rooms as well as a technical support for the HCs.
All shielding parts are made of steel, an outer wall shielding is
500 mm thick, an internal wall between HCs is of 300 mm with the possibility of extension up to 500 mm (Fig. 2). The ceiling shielding is 400 mm thick and a ﬂoor shielding of HCs is 300 mm wide. The detail design of the shielding has been designed by a supplier. All blocks are made of steel plates (100 mm wide), every wall has 5 steps to prevent the penetration of gamma ray shots through the shielding.
The biological shielding is made of steel modules. Size of a single module is 2×4 m2, the weight is about 25 t. Free spaces of about 20 mm wide were identiﬁed during the construction as is shown in Fig. 3. This spaces were ﬁlled up with steel pellets in order to increase the eﬃciency of the biological shielding.
The calculation of the shielding thickness is based on a predicted workplace time t0, which is the time of an operator's presence at the workplace relative to his total working time. Controlled area is divided into 3 groups according to Table 1.
During the dosimetry test it was not allowed to operate with irradiated samples due to incomplete shielding. However, it will be equipped with the complete biological shielding, shielding windows, manipulators and one removable hermetic box as soon as an active service starts. Moreover, it has functional electric and data systems as well as a radiation protection system. The shielding test was done using sealed ionizing radiation source, thus, an active ventilation was not needed. Testing of the biological shielding is ensured by CHEMCOMEX Prague, Inc. VF, Inc. which arranges the necessary permission from The State Oﬃce for Nuclear Safety and provides a temporary workplace for work with sealed highly radioactive sources with deﬁned controlled area. ÚJP Prague, Inc. ensures transportation of the sources. Research Centre Rez (RCR) provides a technical and support personnel, carries
Fig. 1. Equipment of the HCs facility.
Fig. 2. Spaces in the joints of the biological shielding ﬁlled up with steel pellets.
Fig. 3. Detailed design of the biological shielding.
Table 1 Categories of workplaces in controlled area depending on the working time.
out necessary permissions, handling, and dosimetry measurements and documentation of the process, in a cooperation with employees of VF, Inc. VF, Inc. assigned a person responsible for the proper training of the staﬀ involved in the test, for their introduction to the current state of workplace and every day planned activities.
All personnel involved in the test was equipped with personal dosimeters according to the Atomic Act (The State Oﬃce for Nuclear Safety, 1997) and was trained on health, safety, ﬁre and radiation protection before the start of any operation. The protective equipment for each activity (gloves, protective clothing, helmets, etc.) was used during the whole testing. RCR provided RADOS −60 electronic dosimeters for everyone involved in the test. Oﬃcial recordings of the training, movement of persons, times and received doses were stated in a special dosimetry diary. The maximum dose received by the person did not exceed 10 μSv for the whole duration of the test.
2.Measured values and measuring instruments used for their measurement
Radiation level monitoring was done by personal ﬁlm dosimeters, electronic dosimeters, handheld dose equivalent rate (DER) meters and object radiation system. All values were measured at certain dosimetry points and were used for subsequent evaluation of the exposure of the personnel involved in the test. Certiﬁed handheld instruments GEORADIS RT 30 for measurement of the DER Hp (10) were used. The measurement was conducted in two ranges: 10 nSv / h −100 μSv / h with an uncertainty of 20%, and 100 μSv / h −10 mSv / h with an uncertainty of 30%. The results were simultaneously validated by handheld instruments THERMO FH40 with telescopic probe FHZ 612-10 with a range of 10 Sv/h. In order to monitor a technical hall under HC (dosimetric point 27 - in Fig. 4) a certiﬁed instrument UNIDOS with ionization chamber with of 1 dm 3 volume, respectively 1 cm3 for higher dose rate, was used. A high DER is expected in this area due to the incomplete cable shielding. Ionization chamber was placed on the tripod allowing the height setting in a range from 1 to 3 m above the ﬂoor. The chamber was connected to the UNIDOS instrument using 10 m cable. It is allowed to read data in a safe area with low DERs.
DER in HC was measured by stationary MDG – 04 probe. All adjacent cells were also equipped with MDG-04 probe. These probes are installed in the building radiation protection system. The results were converted to the sum of DER from adjacent cells and after that were recorded.
3.Hermetic box
Hermetic box (HB) is a ﬁrst and only barrier for radioactive aerosols. The box is independent on a shielding cell. Each HB is pressurized to about −150 Pa during a normal service. In case of emergency it is possible to increase the value up to −3500 Pa. HBs are made of stainless steel. Each box is 3000 mm high, 2550 mm wide and 2712 mm deep. The weight of a single box is 4 t and a carrying capacity is 4 t. Each box has removable feature, thus, it is possible to disconnect and remove it from the shielding cell. Box has a removable ceiling, which allows straightforward operation with the machines inside of the HB from the top using the crane, which is also used for the manipula- tion with the whole HB. All electrical and data cables, tubes supplying liquid and gaseous media and manipulators can be unmounted and the
HB can be extract from the HC. Several types of boxes distinguished by color are available. Green HB is used for the transfer device, blue HBs are for the operation with gamma nuclides and red HBs are designated for operation with alfa nuclides (Fig. 5). Each HB is equipped with the second ﬂoor, which is designed 800 mm above the primary one.
4.Methods and monitoring range
The source of 60Co with activity 300 TBq was used for the HCs test (Fig. 6). For semi-HC test 60Co with activity 60 GBq was used as a source. DER values were measured directly, e.g. detector and source were in one plane. Dosimetry points were selected with regard to the weakest points in the biological shielding (holes, joints and bushings),
Fig. 4. Dosimetry points of the hot cells.
as well as to the residence factor of employees in diﬀerent parts of the workplace.
The following actions were performed after source 60Co was extracted from the container inside the HC:
•Rapid screening was performed with FH 40 instrument in order to prove that the DER is in a safe range at critical points (manipulators,
edge of the shielding window, spaces ﬁlled with steel pellets)
•DER measurement at selected points according to workspace plans was made (Fig. 4)
The staﬀ performing the tests was divided into six operational groups:
Group K – coordinators
Group D – personnel of dosimetry control Group M – technicians
Group J – crane operators Group O – operators of HCs Group F – camera operators
Fig. 5. Types of HB distinguished by colors: green HB is used for the transfer device, blue HBs are for the operation with gamma nuclides and red HBs are for operation with alfa nuclides.
Each group was equipped with walkie-talkie device for internal communication.
Oﬃcial video documentation of the test was acquired due to its uniqueness.
Oﬃcial movie with English subtitles can be found online: https://youtu.be/18dV2umRoZ8.
Single point measurements were performed directly, so that the detector was pointed to a source and the acquiring time was 30 s. Collected data were organized into oﬃcial measurement protocols.
Fig. 6. Radioactive source A64 with activity of 300 TBq used for the test.
Recalculation of the measured values is required in order to render the results to the higher irradiation level expected during active HCs service. Thus, results acquired during the described test were recalcu- lated for 300 TBq 60Co source in each of the ten HCs and for 250 GBq source in semi-HC using simple direct proportion law. It was done in regard to the personal dose equivalent in areas outside the predicted controlled area.
The sum of DER from adjacent cells was logged into the protocol for these measurement points.
Fig. 7. Empty casks with a dummy source for training purposes.
5.Work plan for the test of the biological shielding
Risk analysis was performed before the start of the test. It showed potentially dangerous operations during the test. All risky operations were then carefully planned with a backup solution. Several prototype instruments were designed and constructed for this purpose. Parameters and conditions of the procedure were veriﬁed during
„fresh” test with dummy sources.
Generally, jaws of manipulators had to be adjusted due to high surface temperature of a 300 TBq source before the test is started. Therefore, rubber pads were replaced by custom made stainless steel pads. The surface temperature of the source was calculated to the 300 °C.
Fresh test with a dummy source was performed 2 weeks before an active one. The feasibility of this shielding test was veriﬁed during fresh test ﬂow. Moreover, during the test all hazardous operations and their backup solutions were practiced. The natural background was mea- sured and recorded in the building where the HCs are located. Both fresh test and active shielding tests were conducted by the same trained staﬀ. Two empty casks UK 20 and UK 120, shown in Fig. 7, with the dummy source with the same size and weight as a radioactive one were used for the fresh test.
Based on the results of the fresh test precise estimation of time needed for a successful test of the shielding with a highly radioactive source was made. Timetable and a plan for the active tests were prepared according to these estimations.
Furthermore, preparation of a HB consisted of an installation of the second ﬂoor, cameras and support instruments inside the HB was an important part of the test. It was necessary to balance the HB in order to eliminate risks connected with the high weight of the uranium cask inserted inside the HB. The reason is that the unbalanced box can be hardly housed inside the HC. Thus, four steel blocks, 250 kg each, were used for balancing the HB. They were placed under the second ﬂoor.
Moreover, Monte-Carlo N-particle code (MCNP) calculations (Pelowitz et al., 2011) were made for DRE determination as is shown in Fig. 8. The calculations were made in MCNP version 5.0 with ENDF/ B-VII.0 library (Chadwick et al., 2006). Photon ﬂuency is measured by Tally F4 detector. Dose rate is determined using point photon ﬂuency and conversion factor from ICRP-74 publication. Dose rate is con- verted to mSv/h. 60Co source with activity 300 TBq is used as a reference source of gamma ray during calculations. Isotropic source emits two photons with energies 1,173 MeV and 1,332 MeV in one decay. The point source model is used in calculations.
Handling with the source of ionizing radiation within HCs was proceeded in two HBs, one of them was designed for eight gamma (γ) HCs and the other one designed for one alfa (α) HC. Both boxes were equipped with moveable radiation-hardened camera, ceiling camera,
Fig. 8. Monte-Carlo N-particle code DER results in layout of HCs.
mirror made of stainless steel (for precise navigation of operator) and dosimetry MDG 04 probe for dose rate measurement. Data from each of HCs were collected gradually one by one. Whole box with shielding cask was shifted between individual cells. It was possible thanks to a removable feature of the HBs and the same dimension of the boxes, as was mentioned above. The test was done in the controlled area of the workplace (Fig. 9).
As is shown in Fig. 10 four grommets for cables and media (each 600 mm in diameter) are located in the ﬂoor of HC. The grommets are blinded with steel shielding plugs ﬁlled with lead pellets with a density of 6600 kg/m3. These plugs were gradually transported between measured cells. One of the plugs contains a narrow hole, through which necessary electrical and data cables are connected to the devices inside the box. A lead brick was used as a shielding for the hole.
Before the experiment started, the shielding container with 300 TBq 60Co radiation source was inserted into the hermetic box in ﬁrst tested HC. The container was put on a custom-made stand with the upper edge of the container 10 cm above the second ﬂoor. For security reasons, a security annular collar made of stainless steel sheet was mounted on the top of the container as is shown in Fig. 11.
The following steps were performed after the entrance of at trained employee of RCR inside the HB for manipulations. A cap of the container was released. The cap was attached to a steel wire of an electric winch. The dosimetrist were measuring and controlling the dose inside the box during the whole experiment. After the employee left the box, the cell was closed and all manipulations were made remotely starting at that point. The cap of the container was lifted using electric winch. The cap was hanging on the wire during the testing. Then the source was taken out of the container by the HC operator. The source was reloaded from tungsten nest to the stainless steel capsule. The capsule is designed the way the control over the source cannot be lost, besides the capsule was secured with a steel wire in case of a drop. The measurement of the shielding was carried out in that step (Fig. 12). After the test was ﬁnished the source was returned to its tungsten nest and put back into the container. The cap was returned to the proper position on the container. The cell was opened after the dose rate reached safe level, which was veriﬁed by the MDG-04 probe inside the box. After that, the cap of the container was manually tightened. When the source was safely secured in the container, the manipulators were removed from the cell and the box was disconnected from the electric and data cables. Then the whole box was removed and moved to another cell. The whole process was then repeated for all nine chambers. However, measurement of one alfa cell was not performed
due to incomplete shielding, where a transfer device was missing.
Semi-HC was tested independently. Shielding of the semi HC is thinner, thus a weaker source of ionizing radiation could be used. Semi HC is designed for 250 GBq activity of 60Co. Since this source was not available during described process due to a signiﬁcant lack of such
Fig. 9. Layout of the facility with a designated border of the controlled area.
Fig. 10. Image of blinded grommets for electrical and data cables inside the HB.
Fig. 11. View inside the HC through the window - container with security annular collar placed in the middle.
sources, 60Co source with activity 60 GBq was chosen as a substitute source. Nevertheless, the testing procedure was identical compared to the one for HCs.
Fig. 12. Measurement of the shielding.
6.Results
6.1.Semi hot cells
Each dosimetry point is calculated as a sum of DER acquired from tested cell and adjacent cell. Results obtained during the testing of semi HC are presented in Table 2. Type of the radioactive source is sealed radionuclides source 332, 60Co, 60 GBq.
6.2.Hot cells
Each dosimetry point is calculated as a sum of DER acquired from tested cell and adjacent cell. Type of the radioactive source sealed radionuclides source A64, 60Co, 300 TBq.
The values measured in each HC at individual measuring points according to Fig. 4 are presented in Table 3.
Table 2
Results obtained for the semi HC, DER values in [μSv/h].
Table 4
Results from the testing of the inner space of the adjacent cells.
6.3.Adjacent cells
Results presented in Table 4 are a sum of DER acquired from tested cell and adjacent cell. Type of the ionizing irradiation source used in this study is sealed radionuclides source A64, 60Co, 300 TBq.
7.Discussion
Current study shows that results obtained using described dosime-
Note 1:
The average gain to the DER value in the adjacent cells is about 0,3 mSv/h. The sum of the gains from all adjacent cells represents collective gain, which is about 1 mSv/h. The collective gain is insignificant in the cell with a presence of 300 TBq source due to the DER values. Average DER in the cell with 300 TBq source is about 10 Sv/h.
Note 2:
HC 10 was equipped with additional 100 mm thick shielding due to uncomplete HC 5. Therefore, the values for HC 10 are lower than for other HCs.
try techniques correspond to the values predicted before the start of tests as is shown in Table 5. Moreover, even better results were obtained in areas with high predicted operational time for trained staﬀ.
Table 3
Results of measuring of HCs, DER values in [μSv/h].
Table 5
The comparison of acquired and predicted values of DER in HCs and semi HC.
Table 6
Maximal predicted annual personal dose for staff of HCs facility.
Lower values of DER for area under HCs during active service are expected due to the fact, that an incomplete temporary shielding of grommets was present during the dosimetry test. Table 6 shows the predicted annual personal dose for staﬀ of the facility depending on the area and the residence factor.
8.Conclusion
The shielding test of HCs and semi HC proves the great eﬃciency of the biological shielding. More than 250 dosimetry points were mea- sured during the test. No gamma ray shot is detected. The suﬃcient propriety of steel pellets in the shielding joints is proved by this study. Nevertheless, few hot spots, where DER reached 2.8 μSv/h, are detected. These values occur directly on the surface of the shielding and are in the allowed range. Thus, the test is evaluated as successful.
The doses obtained by the staﬀ during the test are low, in allowed range from 2 to 6 μSv. The collective dose of all involved workers is 58 μSv. This study shows that the shielding ability of the complex object of HCs fully complies with the requirements of radiation protection at the workplace of III. category according to the Decree of The State Oﬃce for Nuclear Safety No. 307/2002 Coll., on Radiation Protection (The
State Oﬃce for Nuclear Safety, 2002) .
Moreover, the results show, that the doses of operators and staﬀ included during the HCs service do not exceed one tens of annual dose limit.
Acknowledgements
The presented work was ﬁnancially supported by the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport Czech Republic Project LQ1603 (Research for SUSEN). This work has been realized within the SUSEN Project (established in the framework of the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) in project CZ.1.05/2.1.00/03.0108).
