<title>Dose and dose-rate dependence of mutation frequency under long-term exposure – a new look at DDREF from WAM model</title>
<author>Takahiro Wada, Yuichiro Manabe, Issei Nakamura, Yuichi Tsunoyama, Hiroo Nakajima & Masako Bando</author>
<Affiliation>aDepartment of Pure and Applied Physics, Kansai University, Suita, Osaka, Japan; bDivision of Sustainable Energy and Environmental Engineering, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan; cState Key Laboratory of Polymer Physics and Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun, P. R. China; dDivision of Biology, Radioisotope Research Center, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan; eDepartment of Radiation Biology and Medical Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan; fYukawa Institute for Theoretical Physics, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan; gResearch Center for Nuclear Physics (RCNP), Osaka University, Ibaraki, Osaka, Japan
</Affiliation>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2016.1164635</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2016.1164635</URL>
ABSTRACT
We have investigated the dependence of the mutation frequency on the dose and dose rate of artificial radiation using the Whack-A-Mole (WAM) model that we recently proposed. In particular, we pay special attention to the case of long-term and low-dose-rate exposure. Our results indi- cate that the WAM model successfully describes the dose-rate dependence, and it can replace the so-called dose and dose-rate effectiveness factor (DDREF), which has been used for long, to account for the differences between high-dose-rate and low-dose-rate data. The basic properties of the WAM model are discussed with special emphasis on the dose-rate dependence in order to demonstrate how the dose-rate dependence, which is built into the model explicitly, plays a key role. Biological effects of long-term exposure to extremely low-dose-rate radiation are discussed in light of analysis of mega-mouse experiments using the WAM model. In the WAM model, the effects of long-term exposure show a saturation property, thus making it distinctly different from the ‘linear no threshold (LNT)’ hypothesis that predicts a linear increase of the effects with time.
KEYWORDS
Dose rate; mutation; LNT hypothesis; DDREF; mathematical model; long-term exposure; radiation protection; radiation damage
1.Introduction
The ability to estimate the biological effects of artifi- cial irradiation correctly is an issue of prime impor- tance and a matter of debate within the scientific com- munity. Historically, this problem can be traced back to the beginning of radiation genetics. In 1927, Muller discovered mutations induced by artificial radiation in mature spermatozoa of Drosophila [1]. Since then, the ‘linear no threshold (LNT)’ hypothesis has been used as a scientific basis to estimate the extent of biological damage caused by artificial irradiation. This hypothe- sis states that the mutation caused by ionizing radia- tion increases purely proportional to the total dose, irre- spective of the dose rate. This suggests that individual ionizations within the irradiated material are respon- sible for the mutations, and the hit theory explaining the linear dependence of the mutation frequency on the total dose in the low-dose region was formulated by Lea [2]. This model has been used as a basic formula in radiobiology. Note that the LNT hypothesis gives only an approximate estimation for the region where the stimulus (total dose) is weak enough to neglect higher order terms in the hit theory. Apart from the scientific community, the LNT hypothesis was also accepted by society and the government through the 1956 BEAR I report on the risks of low doses of ionizing radiation
[3]. It was summarized by the US National Academy of Sciences (NAS) Biological Effects of Atomic Radi- ation Committee, which stated that radiation-induced risks of cancer were also expected to follow the linear hypothesis.
However, in 1958, Russell, Russell, and Kelly [4] reported that low-dose-rate irradiation was less muta- genic than high-dose-rate irradiation in spermatogo- nia and oocytes of mice. They continued large-scale experiments using millions of mice to examine the genetic effects of radiation, the so-called mega-mouse project [5]. This finding could have changed the exist- ing view proposed by the LNT hypothesis, because it indicated that there are other mechanisms operating in living organisms that are not accounted for in the LNT hypothesis.
According to the concept of molecular and cellular responses, the general behavior of the dose–response process occurring in biological entities can be described in terms of the stimulus-response process. Since this  is a purely physical process, it is reasonable to expect that the effect of a stimulus will be proportional to its strength, i.e. to the total dose. This is quite natural if one understands Lea’s target hit theory.
More importantly, one should note that the above formulation works only for purely physical processes
without any defense system. In living organisms, how- ever, it is commonly observed that the number of mutated cells is reduced due to competition from defense mechanisms. Models that do not take into account biological processes like defense mechanisms cannot be applied to phenomena such as mutation. They may work only in limited cases of very high dose rates where the defense system is futile. Indeed, the results of the mega-mouse project clearly indicate that the mutation frequency varies with the dose rate; the higher the dose rate, the larger the mutation frequency [5]. In order to derive estimates of risks to humans  based on animal experiments, it is critically important to understand the mechanism of the dose-rate effects correctly.
As the importance of the dose-rate dependence gained recognition, scientists started applying the linear-quadratic (LQ) model to estimate the difference between the high- and low-dose-rate data in terms of the so-called dose and dose-rate effectiveness factor (DDREF) [6,7]. An explicit form of the LQ model is given in the BEIR VII report. Here the excess effects
(E) caused by artificial radiation with total dose D is expressed as a modified version of the LNT:
@1
This is called the ‘linear-quadratic dose–response rela- tionship’. The quadratic term represents the contribu- tion from two-hit processes in the hit theory. Accord- ing to the BEIR VII report, Equation (1) should be used when the total dose is high. When the total dose is low, the first term dominates. Thus, for low dose rates, a lin- ear dependence is obtained:@2
The DDREF is used to estimate the effects of low- dose-rate radiation based on high-dose-rate data. In the BEIR VII report, the DDREF is obtained by dividing Equation (1) by Equation (2):@3
The above definition of the DDREF makes it obviously dependent on the total dose D. There is no consensus as to the numerical value as well as the range of dose and dose rate to which the DDREF should be applied.1 Different expert groups have proposed different values for the DDREF such as 1, 2 or even 10. Moreover, this formula does not explain the fact that in experiments we obtain different results with different dose rates even for the same total dose.
2.The WAM model
2.1.Quick review of the WAM model
In previous publications, we developed a new model to study biological effects caused by artificial radia- tion exposure, accounting for DNA damage and repair simultaneously [9–12]. We call this model the Whack- A-Mole (WAM) model. It is critically important to introduce the dose-rate dependence to account for the defense mechanisms that protect living organisms from mutation, such as DNA repair and apoptosis. Impor- tantly, the WAM model predicts the saturation of the mutation frequencies, thus making it substantially dif- ferent from existing theories that are based purely on the total dose.
First, we make a quick review of our model. We denote the total effect of the environment including the artificial radiation as F(t). Note that F(t) is the total effect, while E(D) counts only the excess part of the effect due to artificial radiation. For simplicity, in this paper, we take the case of a constant dose rate, d. Then, in the WAM model, F(t) is given as a solution of the fol- lowing differential equation:@4
Here A is the source term and B represents the ‘decay’ constant. In this study, F denotes the fraction of mutated cells, A is the creation rate of mutated cells, and B is the decay rate. We consider the cells that remain mutated after repair processes, i.e. the effect of DNA repair is implicitly included in the source term A. The decay term B represents the processes that reduce the num- ber of mutated cells such as cell death. Both A and B are expressed in terms of two components, one that is inde- pendent of the dose rate, and another, which has a linear dependence on the dose rate. The former arises from natural effects that exist even when there is no artificial irradiation (this is often referred to as the ‘spontaneous’ term), and the latter represents the effects caused by artificial irradiation. Next, we define the effective dose rate deff as the irradiation strength (dose rate) that has the equivalent effect to the ‘spontaneous’ term, i.e. the dose rate that corresponds to the stimulus of natural
surroundings. Thus,
@5
In Section 2.3, we will demonstrate that the value of
deff can be determined from experimental data. Apart from the effect of natural radiation, the ‘spontaneous’ term includes other factors such as miscopy of DNA during the duplication process. In fact, Muller showed that natural mutation frequency is almost 103–104 times larger than the one caused by natural radioactivity [13].
2.2.Solution of the WAM equation
The solution of Equation (4) is easily obtained:@6
This has the same form as the ‘growth function’, which is commonly used for the empirical fitting of plant or ani- mal growth data [14]. Characteristically, it approaches a certain value asymptotically when B is positive. The asymptotic value is given by A/B and the time scale above which the WAM solution deviates considerably from linear behavior is determined by the parameter B. The explicit forms of the dose-rate dependence of the above time scale, tc, and the asymptotic value, F(œ), are as follows:
@7
Equation (6) shows that the WAM model describes not only the increase of the effect but also the decrease of it. The latter occurs when the initial value F(0) is much larger than the asymptotic value A/B, as in the case of radiotherapy. It should be noted that in the  WAM model, the parameters A and B that determine the behavior of F(t) vary with the dose rate. Even in the absence of artificial radiation, DNA damage still occurs from natural environment. This is the so-called ‘spon-
taneous effect’, and it is expressed as:@8
Next,  we consider F(0)	Fs and define the excess effects of artificial radiation E(t@9
When the irradiation time t is short, i.e. t « tc, the WAM
model predicts a linear dependence on the total dose D without a threshold:@10
Importantly, the slope does not depend on the dose rate, which is in agreement with the LNT hypothesis. When the irradiation time t is long, the WAM model begins to exhibit dose-rate dependence. The time t that is nec- essary to achieve a total dose D depends on the dose rate d as t  D/d; the smaller the dose rate, the larger   is the time needed. The WAM model predicts a ten- dency towards saturation, i.e. E(t) in Equation (9) starts to deviate from linear dependence at approximately t
tc and approaches the asymptotic value@11
Figure . An example of WAM model prediction for the excess mutation frequency. Abscissa denotes the total dose. Lines are for diﬀerent dose rates:  mGy/h (thin solid line),  mGy/h (dashed line),  mGy/h (dot-dashed line), . Gy/h (dotted line), and  Gy/h (thick solid line).
It is useful to express the excess effect as a function of D. The excess effect of the radiation of total dose D with a constant dose rate d, E(D, d) is written as@12
In Figure 1, we show an example of results obtained from the WAM model, E(D, d), as functions of total dose  D  for  several  dose  rates.  We   use  the  values
of  the  parameters  (a0,  a1,  b0,  b1)  obtained  by  fit-ting the mega-mouse experiments, which are given  in
Table  1  [10 –12].  It  is  clearly  seen that, as  dose rate becomes smaller, the results of the WAM model devi-ate from linear dependence at smaller dose D and the asymptotic value decreases. Thus, the WAM model
reproduces the linear behavior seen in high-dose-rate experiments. It also predicts a significant deviation from linear behavior for chronic low-dose-rate irradia-tion. This remarkable character should be stressed espe-
cially for low dose rates where deviation from linear
behavior has been observed, as in the low-dose-rate
data of the mega-mouse experiments [4,5].
Next, we focus on the DDREF. The WAM model pre- dicts that the DDREF should not be a constant; rather it should vary with the dose rate as well as the total dose. To define an effectiveness factor that corresponds to the
Table1 . Parameters determined from mouse experiments.
Table 2. Dose and dose-rate dependence of the eﬀectiveness factor η at four total doses: D =  mGy,  mGy, . Gy, and  Gy for seven dose rates: d = . Gy/h,  mGy/h,  mGy/h, mGy/h, . mGy/h,  μGy/h, and  μGy/h. The reference dose rate is  Gy/h.
DDREF in the WAM model, we use the excess effect of the radiation of total dose D with a constant dose rate d, E(D, d). The effectiveness factor η in the WAM model is now defined as@13
where B has been defined in Equation (4) as B	b0
b1d, dref is the reference dose rate, and Bref is given Bref	b0	b1dref. Equation (13) clearly shows that the effectiveness factor η depends on the dose rate d as well as on the total dose D. It is to be noted here that the effectiveness factor η is essentially independent of the production of mutation, which is proportional to A defined in Equation (4). Rather, η should be regarded as a measure of the defense mechanisms that are repre-
sented by B. In Table 2, we show the effectiveness fac-
tor η derived from the calculation of Figure 1. The ref- erence dose rate (dref) is set as 1 Gy/h. From Table  2,  it is seen how the effectiveness factor derived from the WAM model changes with the total dose D and the dose rate d. It would be impractical to use a single value to represent the effect of the dose rate. In particular, when the dose rate is extremely low, such as 1 μGy/h, the con-(13) shows that η also depends on the reference dose rate dref. When the total dose is low, so that BrefD « dref,the dependence on dref can be eliminated, which gives@14
2.3.Universality of the WAM model and realistic parameters
In our previous publications [10–12], we have shown that the WAM model reproduces the experimentally observed relations between mutation frequency and  artificial irradiation for five species: mouse, fruit fly,
chrysanthemum,  maize,  and  Tradescantia [5,15–20].
and the scaled effect function 8(τ ),
@15
we demonstrated that the WAM model indeed repro- duces the experimental data of various species as well as various dose rates in a unified way [12]. Based on this universality, here we intend to treat the effects of artificial radiation on human beings. For this, we use the values of the parameters obtained by fitting Russell’s mega-mouse experiments [10–12].  The  results  of  the mega-mouse experiments have been successfully applied to estimate the genetic hazards of radiation in human beings [21]. In such cases, it is more reliable to estimate a sort of ratio of the observable values, such as the doubling dose, the dose of radiation that induces
a mutation frequency equal to the spontaneous fre-quency,  rather than the values directly obtained  from
the  data.  Such  ratios  have  been  frequently  used  in reports of radiation protection committees [7]. It is
expected that the doubling dose in human beings is sim- ilar to that in mice [5].
The parameters obtained from fitting the data of the mega-mouse experiments using the WAM model are listed in Table 1. From Table 1, the effective dose rate deff is calculated as
@16
and the ‘spontaneous’ effect Fs is
It should be noted here that the effective dose rate deff is much higher than the dose rate of natural radiation, the latter being of the order of 0.1 μGy/h, in agreement with the findings of Muller [13]. As we have already seen, both the critical time tc and the asymptotic value F(œ) depend on the dose rate. We can rewrite Equation
(7) in terms of the ratio d/deff as follows:
@17
For the present case, for low-dose-rate data, the above equations can be approximately expressed a
@18
@19
2.4.The WAM model and the LNT hypothesis
In light of our discussion of how low dose cases dif- fer from high dose cases, it would be quite interesting to see how the predictions of the WAM model deviate from those of a simple linear model based on the LNT hypothesis. For this purpose, we show the predictions of the excess effects induced by exposure to a low dose rate, taking into account realistic situations that we have encountered in the Fukushima area.
While estimating the long-term effect of artificial radiation at a low dose rate, the key quantity to consider is the ratio F(œ)/Fs or its deviation from 1, which is an estimate of the additional effect compared to the spon- taneous one. From Equation (18), we obtain,
@20
Equation (20) shows that when the dose rate of the artificial radiation d is lower than the effective dose rate deff, the excess effect of the artificial radiation is of the order of d/deff. In a realistic case of d 20 mGy/y
2.3 μGy/h which is under discussion in Fukushima, d/deff is estimated to be 0.21%. In such cases, the effect of the artificial radiation will be too small to differenti- ate it from the uncertainty of the ‘spontaneous’ effect. In this sense, the effective dose rate deff is an essen-  tial quantity for estimating the effect of the artificial radiation. Here we should remember that the value of deff that we used was derived from results of the mega- mouse experiments. However, we expect the variations in the effective dose rate among mammals to be rela- tively insignificant [22]. As we mentioned earlier, it is known that the value of the ratio of the observed data, such as the DDREF or the doubling dose, is likely to be similar between human beings and mice [5]. The crit- ical time, which represents the time scale in the WAM
Table 2. Eﬀect of the artiﬁcial radiation estimated for ﬁve dose rates: . μGy/h,  μGy/h,  μGy/h,  μGy/h, and  mGy/h.
model, is given by the following equation
@21
It varies from species to species, even within mam- malian species. The difference may arise due to a variety of reasons, such as the life span being different in differ- ent species. One relevant question is if the critical time tc plays an important role in the estimation of the effect of the radiation. To answer this question, we note that, on the one hand, the asymptotic value F(œ) is propor- tional to tc, (see Equation (7)). However, on the other hand, the spontaneous effect Fs is proportional to 1/b0, which, fora small dose rate, is essentially equal to tc (see Equation (21)). Thus, tc cancels out in the ratio F(œ)/Fs. Hence, the difference in critical time does not play an important role in the estimation of the long-term effects of low-dose-rate radiation.
The estimated relative effect of artificial radiation is listed in Table 3 together with the asymptotic val-ues for five dose rates: 0.1 μGy/h, 1 μGy/h, 10 μGy/h,100 μGy/h, and 1 mGy/h. In Figure 2, we show the time dependence of the predicted values of the mutation frequency for three dose rates: 10 μGy/h, 100 μGy/h, and 1 mGy/h. For  the two cases, d   0.1 μGy/h and     1 μGy/h, the graphs are not shown in the figure, since
Figure . WAM model prediction of mutation frequencies plot- ted as functions of time for several dose rates:  μGy/h (dotted line),  μGy/h (dashed line), and  mGy/h (solid line).
Figure . LNT prediction of mutation frequencies plotted as functions of time for two dose rates: d  μGy/h (dotted line) and  μGy/h (dot-dashed line). WAM model predictions are also shown in dashed line ( μGy/h) and solid line ( Gy/h) for com- parison. The shaded area denotes the uncertainty of the back- ground level.
the excess effects are too small to be clearly visible in the presented scale. For the cases of low dose rate shown in Figure 2, the critical time does not change much from the natural value (333 h 14 d), and the WAM model predicts a saturation of the mutation frequency after a period of approximately one month.
On the other hand, when we estimate the same quan- tity using a simple linear model based on the LNT hypothesis, the predictions are completely different. In Figure 3, we show a comparison of the results pre- dicted by the linear model with those predicted by   the WAM model. The spontaneous value Fs is 1.08 10−5, which we consider the background level. The uncertainty range of the background is assumed to be approximately 20%, and is shown as a shaded area in Figure 3. For the linear model, we use the following expression:
@22
We use Equation (10) to obtain the value of α, which is 2.79    10−5  (1/Gy). Next, we compare the results    of the two models in terms of the relative effect. From Table 2, we obtain E(œ)/Fs 8.62  10−4 for d
1 μGy/h, while the linear model gives ELNT(D)/Fs
2.27	10−2 after a period of 1 year and 2.27	10−1 after a period of 10 years. For d	10 μGy/h, the linear model predicts ELNT(D)/Fs	2.27 after a period of 10 years, while, according to the WAM model, E(œ)/Fs	8.62 10−3. The difference between the predictions of the two models is clearly shown in Figure 3. While the pre-  dicted values of the WAM model are of the same order as the background, the predictions of the linear model increase monotonically with time, leading to a differ- ence of two orders of magnitude after 10 years. Thus,
the two models predict completely different future sce- narios.
As demonstrated in the previous sections, theoreti- cal modeling of the DNA mutation based on a single parameter (i.e. the total dose) is unlikely to achieve an in-depth insight into the mutation frequencies. Indeed, experimental data clearly exhibit a dose-rate depen- dence of the mutation frequencies. Hence, we suggest that one should not apply the simple linear model to cases of low dose radiation while analyzing the effects of long-term exposure.
3.Conclusions
The WAM model proposes a novel way to estimate the biological effects of artificial radiation. It reproduces experimental results reasonably well irrespective of the diversity of species, ranging from animals to plants. The important conclusion of our study is that the dose rate is a fundamental quantity to consider while estimating the effects of irradiation. The universality of the WAM model makes it applicable to a variety of species rang- ing from viruses to human beings. One such immediate application is the prediction of the effects of long-term exposure to extremely low-dose-rate radiation, which we have encountered in Fukushima.
Although the idea behind the LNT hypothesis is mathematically natural for small dose exposure, its pre- diction of the linear dependence on the total dose even- tually does not hold for large total doses. The most  important finding for the WAM model is that the extent to which the linear behavior persists depends on the dose rate. For a high dose rate, the linear behavior per- sists up to a large total dose. On the other hand, for low dose rates, the critical total dose Dc above which we achieve saturation of the excess of mutation frequency decreases with a decrease in the dose rate. Therefore, one should be very careful while estimating the effects of radiation for a low dose rate. Simply extrapolating a straight line from a high dose rate with large total dose data in order to make a prediction for a case with a low dose rate cannot be justified.
By comparing the WAM model and a linear model based on the LNT hypothesis, we have demonstrated that the predictions based on a simple linear depen- dence on the total dose (LNT) are completely dif- ferent from the ones based on the WAM model,  which takes the dose-rate dependence into account. Our study clearly indicates that it is imperative to consider the dose-rate dependence while discussing the effects of long-term exposure to low-dose-rate radiation.
Note, however, that the above discussions are based on the analyses of the mutation frequency. The applica- bility of the WAM model to cases such as carcinogene- sis is still an open problem that should be studied in the near future.
Note
1. In its latest basic recommendations, ICRP defines low dose as 0.2 Gy or below and low dose rate as 0.1 Gy/h or below [8].
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Chubei Ito funds and JSPS KAK- ENHI [grant numbers 15K12204 and 15K14291].
