<title>Radon and thoron progeny integrated measurement based on high-voltage sampling</title>
<author>Lu Guo, Volkmar Schmidt, Oliver Meisenberg, Qiuju Guo & Jochen Tschiersch</author>
<Affiliation>aState Key Laboratory of Nuclear Physics and Technology, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing, China; bInstitute of Radiation Protection, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health (HMGU), Neuherberg, Germany; cRadon Calibration Laboratory, Federal Oﬃce for Radiation Protection, Bundesamt für Strahlenschutz (BfS), Berlin, Germany</Affiliation>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2016.1179137</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2016.1179137</URL>
ABSTRACT
For the purpose of directly measuring radon and thoron progeny concentrations simultaneously,
an unattended battery-operated progeny measurement (UBPM) device, which samples aerosol
particles in an electric field, was improved by adopting two different thickness aluminum foils
for alpha particles discriminating. The equations for the calculation of the results were derived,
and a series of calibration experiments and comparison tests were carried out in the potential
alpha energy concentration calibration chamber in BfS Berlin and the HMGU experimental thoron
house, respectively. Results show that the calibration coefficients are stable in different levels of
radon and thoron progeny. The lower level detection limits of the device for radon and thoron
progeny concentration are 1.22 and 0.14 Bq m−3
, respectively, for three months exposure. The
instrument proved to be independent from environmental conditions in ordinary living room
conditions (humidity <65% RH, aerosol particle concentration >1500 cm−1
). Comparison results
show that the measurement results of the UBPM device are comparable with the reference instrument and suitable for long-term radon and thoron survey in dwellings.KEYWORDS
Radon; thoron progeny;
integrated measurement;
high-voltage sampling; CR- Introduction
Radon (222Rn) is an inert radioactive gas coming from
the decay of 226Ra which exist almost everywhere.
Radon decays into a series of short-lived decay products, which can be inhaled into the human lung and
cause internal exposure. Radon and radon progeny contribute almost half of the exposure dose to human
beings from natural sources [1].
Thoron (220Rn), an isotope of radon, is a decay
product of thorium series and an inert radioactive gas
also. Due to its short half-life (55.6 s) and the lack
of field survey methods, its exposure dose was usually
ignored. However, recently several field investigation
data showed that in some areas radiation exposure contributed by thoron and its progeny is comparable to that
of radon and its progeny [2–8].
Because exposure dose mainly comes from radon
and thoron progenies instead of radon or thoron gas,
the direct measurement of radon and thoron progeny is
more preferred for the purpose of dose evaluation [8,9].
Traditional radon and thoron progeny measurement methods could be divided into two kinds, “active
method” and “passive method”. Active methods generally sample radon and thoron progeny by pumps, and
use electronic detectors for radioactive particle measuring. It is commonly used in commercial devices,
like BWLM-PLUS-2S (TracerLab, Germany), and WLx(Pylon, Canada) for continuous measurement. But
active devices are noisy and power supply dependent.
The passive sampling and measurement method, without the usage of electrical power, having the advantage of long measurement times, used to be favored
by researchers. Zhuo et al. developed the low-cost,
time-integrating thoron progeny measurement method
based on the track-etching technique and passive deposition [10]. Mishra et al. developed the direct thoron
progeny sensor for estimating equilibrium equivalent
thoron concentration (EECTn) which also could be
used for radon progeny measurement, and studied its
response to various aerosol concentrations and ventilation rates [11–14]. Li et al. analyzed the influence of
environmental factors on thoron progeny deposition
velocity and carried out a series of validation measurements using a new developed device [15]. Among those
measurement devices, solid-state nuclear track detectors, such as CR-39 or LR115, are usually adopted as
detectors, and the integrating measurement time is usually as long as three months, which is suitable for field
survey of indoor environment.
However, the deposition velocity varies a lot in different environment, which limited the use of those devices.
To improve this problem, Gierl et al. and Bi et al.
developed an unattended battery-operated progeny
measurement (UBPM) device for integrating thoron
progeny measurement, which collected charged thoronprogeny by electric field and alpha particles emitted
from 212Po was registered by CR-39s [16,17]. The precipitation velocity of thoron progeny was proved to be
independent from the relevant environmental parameters under a high-voltage electric field [17].
The aim of this work is to improve the UBPM device
to measure radon and thoron progeny directly and
simultaneously as well. Details of changes on the device
and its theoretical algorithm derivation were studied.
Besides, calibration of this device in a radon chamber
and a thoron experimental house, comparison test and
environmental sensitivity tests were also performed.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. The UBPM device
The photograph and sketch map of the improved unattended battery-operated thoron progeny measurement
device (UBPM) are shown in Figure 1.
The UBPM device has two parts, the high-voltage
generator part and the hemisphere detector part. First,
in the bottom of the device, the 3.6 V from a lithium ion
battery is transferred to 7 kV high voltages by a highvoltage converter. Second, in the upper part, a hemisphere wire-mesh of stainless steel with a diameter of
9 cm covers the detector assembly. Four square CR-
39s (Radosys, Ltd, Hungary) with the size of 1 cm ×
1 cm lie in the middle of hemisphere, while two different Al foils are tightened immediately over the CR-39
detectors with a circular plastic ring, just as shown in
Figure 1 . The 7 kV high voltage is connected to the Al
foils, whereas the wire-mesh is on ground potential. The
high-voltage electric field inside the hemisphere chamber makes the negatively charged and neutral radon and
thoron decay products collected on the surface of the
Al foils. The alpha particles emitted from the radon and
thoron progeny are recorded by the CR-39s if they penetrate the Al foils.
In order to measure radon and thoron progeny concentrations simultaneously, two kinds of aluminum
foils with thicknesses of 25 and 35 µm (AL000392
and AL000370, Goodfellow GmbH, Germany; purity:
99.0%) are used to discriminate those alpha particles
emitted from radon and thoron decay products. Two
CR-39s covered by 25 µm Al foil are named “the 1st
Part”, while the other two CR-39s covered by 35 µm Al
foil are named “the 2nd Part”.
Table 1 shows properties of all the relevant alpha
particle-emitting isotopes in both radon and thoron
series. The ranges of different alpha particle in pure Al
materials were calculated using the Monte Carlo particle track software TRIM [18]. Because of its short halflife, 216Po (from the thoron series, emitting alpha particles of 6.8 MeV) is sampled only to negligible activity on the Al foils. The range of 6.00 MeV alpha particle from 218Po and 6.05 MeV alpha particles from
212Bi in aluminum are 27.9 and 28.2 µm, respectively Considering more energy lose due to large incident
angle and the minimum detectable energy of CR-39s,
0.75 MeV [19], it can be assumed that the 6.00 and 6.05
MeV alpha particles cannot be recorded by the CR-39s.
The range of 7.69 MeV alpha particle from 214Po and
8.78 MeV alpha particles from 212Po in aluminum is
40.5 and 49.6 µm, so they could be recorded by the four
CR-39s, with a lower sensitivity in the second part.
2.2. The calculation of radon and thoron progeny
concentration
The parts of radon and thoron progeny which are sampled in the electric field accumulate to steady-state
activities on the substrates according to their half-lives.
Thus, after enough time of decay, they finally contribute
to the activity of 214Po and 212Po and their alpha particle emissions, respectively, which can be measured in
the CR-39 detectors. According to the study of Bi et al.
[17], it could be assumed that the collection efficiency ηc
is the same for all the progenies and will not be affected
by environmental factors.
In the first part, alpha particle from 214Po (7.69MeV)
and 212Po (8.78MeV) could be recorded by CR-
39s. We assume that the detection efficiency of 7.69
MeV alpha in the first part is ηdPo−214, while the
detection efficiency of 8.78 MeV alpha is ηdPo−212,
respectively. The relationship of the track densities of
CR-39s in the first part and the concentrations of
radon and thoron decay products could be expressed as
follows:@1
A list of explanation of all the parameters is shown in
Table 2.
r refers to the percentage of originating 214Pb which
remain on the Al foil, as part of the 214Pb decay from
218Po will leave the Al foil due to recoil and possible positive charge.
As for “the 2nd part”, the relationship between the
track densities and radon and thoron decay products
concentrations could be expressed as follows:@2
Because of the thicker thickness of Al foils, the detection efficiencies are smaller than those in the first part.
On the other side, the equilibrium equivalent concentrations of radon and thoron decay products could
be expressed as [1]
@3
Figure . Photograph and sketch map of the improved UBPM device.@4
From Equation (4), we can easily find that CPb−212
λPb−212 + CBi−212
λBi−212 is proportional to EECTn. Taking the proportional
coefficient as B (= 6.0 × 104s), CPb−212
λPb−212 + CBi−212
λBi−212 = B ·
EECTn can be derived.
In the following, it is assumed that the ratio of the
activity concentrations of the three radon progenies is
constant. Then, cPo-218 is proportional to the activity
concentration of the other two radon progenies. Consequently, from Equation (3), we can find that r · CPo−218
λPo−218 + CPb−214
λPb−214 + CBi−214
λBi−214 is proportional to EECRn. Making A to
be the proportional coefficient, that makes r · CPo−218
λPo−218 + CPb−214
λPb−214 + CBi−214
λBi−214 = A · EECRn.
Taking those linear relationships into Equations (1)
and (2), it could be rewritten as follows:@5
@6
where e1R = ηc · veff · ηdPo−214 · A/S, e1T = ηc · veff · ηdPo−212 · B/S, e2R = ηc · veff · ηdPo−214 · A/S, e2T = ηc · veff · ηdPo−212 · B/S. Those four coefficients
are constant with unit of tracks mm−2/(Bq m−3 s).
Being rewritten in matrix form, the relation between
the track densities recorded by CR-39s of the two parts
and the EECRn and EECTn can be expressed as equation
below@7
The matrix coefficients e1R, e2R, e1T , e1T could be
derived through calibration.
2.3. Determination of the coefficients
In order to determine the four coefficients, calibration measurements were performed in the potential
alpha energy concentration calibration chamber (PAEC
chamber) in the federal office for radiation protection
Table 1. Properties of alpha-emitting isotopes in radon and thoron series.
Table 2. Symbol and unit of parameters in the equations.
Table 3. Radon progeny calibration results in the PAEC chamber
(BfS) in Berlin [20] and thoron experimental house in
HMGU [21].
The PAEC chamber was used for the calibration for
short-lived 222Rn progeny with a volume of 30 m3. Stable radon progeny and aerosol concentration could be
realized in the chamber by controlling the radon gas and
aerosol source automatically. The radon decay products concentration could be measured using the quality assured reference measurement of the calibration
laboratory accredited by the German accreditation service (DAkkS). The reference value is traced back to the
German national normal at the Physikalisch Technische
Bundesanstalt (PTB), Braunschweig.
The HMGU thoron experimental house was constructed in a laboratory room of Helmholtz Zentrum
München. The single room house (7.1 m3) was built
from unfired clay stones and clay plaster, with 232Th
enriched granite powder mixed clay for the inner side,
so it could provide conditions with relative high concentration of not only radon but also thoron. A working
level monitor BWLM-PLUS-2S (TracerLab, Germany)
was used as a secondary reference instrument traceable
to the German national standard.
Radon progeny coefficients (e1R,e2R) calibration
experiments were performed in the PAEC chamber.
During calibration experiments, the aerosol concentration was changing between 1800 and 4680 cm−3, the
humidity was 33.6∼39.0% RH. The EECRn was controlled from 4.5 to 19.7 kBq m−3. The exposure time
is 7 hours for each experiment.
Thoron progeny coefficients (e1T ,e2T ) calibration
experiments were performed in the HMGU thoron
experimental house. During calibration experiments,
the relative humidity was between 50% and 60% and
the aerosol concentration was around 3000 cm−3. The
radon progeny concentration changed between 17 and
24 Bq m−3, while the concentration of thoron progeny
was 4∼7 Bq m−3. The exposure time is from 70 to
120 hours each.
3. Results and discussions
3.1. Radon progeny calibration coefficients
Three calibration experiments were performed in the
pure radon environment in the PAEC chamber with different radon progeny concentrations. The calibration
results are shown in Table 3. D1 and D2 are the net
tracks densities on CR-39s of the first part and the second part separately, which were read under RadoMeter
Microscope (Radosys, Ltd, Hungary) after been etched
in NaOH solution (860 g NaOH, 3400 g water, 94 ◦C, 4
hour). The EECRn is the reference radon progeny concentration which is given by the PAEC chamber.
The radon progeny calibration coefficients in the first
part and the second part are shown in the fifth and sixth
column. From the experiment results, we find that the
radon progeny coefficients (e1R,e2R) are rather stable.
Because the thickness of the Al foil in the second part
is 35 µm which is thicker than that in the first part (25
µm), the e2R is quite smaller than e1R.
The average value of e1R and e2R is 0.0293 and
0.00442 tracks mm−2 /(Bq m−3 d) with the uncertainty
shown in Table 3.
3.2. Thoron progeny calibration coefficients
Three calibration experiments were performed in the
thoron experimental house in HMGU. Using the radon
progeny coefficients in Table 3 and the EECRn measured
by BWLM-PLUS-2S, the radon progeny’s contribution
to D1 and D2 could be easily deduced. Then, the thoron
progeny coefficients could be calculated using the net
Table 4. Thoron progeny calibration results in the HMGU house.
Table 5. Comparison test results in the thoron experimental house.
track densities and EECTn. The calibration results are
shown in Table 4.
It could be found that the thoron progeny coefficients
(e1T ,e2T ) seem to be stable under different radon and
thoron mixed progeny conditions. Because the thickness of the Al foil in the second part is 35 µm, which is
thicker than that in the first part (25 µm) and the range
of 8.78 MeV alpha particle is 49.6 µm, the e2T is smaller
than e1T , but the difference is not so obvious as e1R and
e2R.
The average value of e1T and e2T are 0.222 and 0.129
tracks mm−2/(Bq m−3 d), respectively, with the uncertainty smaller than 10%.
3.3. The low level detection limits of radon and
thoron progeny concentration
Taking the radon and thoron progeny calibration coefficients e1R, e2R, e1T, e2T into Equation (7), the EECRn,
EECTn could be calculated as follows for field indoor
environment survey:@8
Considering impurities of the aluminum foils with
alpha particle-emitting radionuclides cause additional
background tracks over the exposure time, the background density of CR-39 is 0.942 + 0.064 tracks/mm2 [16]. At a confidence interval of 95%, the lower level
detection limits of radon progeny and thoron progeny
concentration are 1.22 and 0.14 Bqm−3, respectively, for
a measurement during three months.
Comparison experiments in the thoron
experimental house
To test the new instrument, another three experiments
were performed in the thoron experimental house, with
the exposure time of nearly one week. The results of the
comparison experiments are showed in Table 5.
The measurement results of the UBPM device
are compared with the reference instrument BWLMPLUS-2S which gives the average radon and thoron
progeny concentrations over the test period. The results
show that the EECRn and EECTn are comparable within
a deviation of 30%, except measurement no. 2. The deviation of the radon progeny concentration is larger than
that of thoron progeny concentration. The main reason is considered that the assumption of the constant
radon progenies activity concentration ratio might not
be accurate in all environments. The instability of CR-
39 detectors could also be the reason. But the deviation
is acceptable in long-term field measurement.
3.5. Sensitivity tests under different
environmental conditions
During the calibration measurements in the PAEC
chamber, the radon progeny coefficient (e1R,e2R) proved
to be stable in conditions with different radon progeny
concentrations, humidity ranged from 33.6% to 39%
RH and aerosol concentrations from 1800/cm3 to
4600/cm3. As aerosol particle concentrations, humidity, and turbulent states are important environmental
factors which may strongly influence the efficiency of
passive device, five more tests were also performed in
the PAEC chamber to test the sensitivity of the UBPM
device towards environmental factors. Environmental
parameters during the tests are listed in Table 6.
Table 6. Environmental parameters in the PAEC chamber
Figure . Coefficients of radon progeny in six environmental sensitivity tests. (A) Coefficients on “the st Part”, eR, (B) coefficients on“the nd Part”, eR.
Test 1 is one of the calibration measurements representing the normal living environment as reference
condition, while the other five tests are changed conditions.
The coefficients of radon decay products on “the
1st Part” and “the 2nd Part” are showed respectively in
Figure 2. Comparing the high humidity condition (test, 72% RH) with the reference condition (test 1, 35%
RH), a slight increase of sensitivity was observed. Larger
influence was caused by the very low aerosol concentrations connected with a very high fraction of unattached
progeny (test 5, 6). Increased turbulence in test 2 had no
influence on the performance of the instrument.
4. Conclusion
The UBPM device was improved to measure radon and
thoron progeny concentrations simultaneously. The
principle and algorithm derivation are given. Calibration experiments were performed in the PAEC chamber
and the HMGU thoron experimental house and a series
of comparison experiments were carried out.
Results show that both the radon and thoron progeny
coefficients are stable in different levels of radon and
thoron progeny concentration and the device is comparable with the reference instrument. The lower level
detection limits of radon and thoron progeny concentration are 1.22 and 0.14 Bq m−3, respectively, for three
months exposure.
The sensitivity of the UBPM device in several
extreme environmental conditions was tested. Results
show that humidity higher than 70% RH and aerosol
concentration lower than 400/cm3 will influence the
sampling efficiency of the instrument, while turbulent
state of indoor air have no effect on it.
Because of its soundless operation, it is suggested
the device is suitable for long-term indoor survey, in
dwellings in which humidity will not exceed 65% RH
and particle concentration is higher than 1500/cm3,
especially on the purpose of radon and thoron progeny
dose evaluation.
For a further improvement, allowing faster and
more accurate evaluation, alpha spectrometry is recommended to be used for alpha particle detection in this
assembly.
Acknowledgments
The support of Lu Guo by the China Scholarship Council is
gratefully acknowledged.