<title>Gamma radiation-induced crosslinked composite membranes  based on polyvinyl alcohol/chitosan/AgNO3/vitamin E for biomedical applications</title>
<author>Shaimaa M. Nasef a, Ehab E. Khozemy a,⁎, Elbadawy A. Kamoun b,c, H. El-Gendi d</author>
<Affiliation>a Polymer Chemistry Dep., National Center for Radiation Research and Technology, Atomic Energy Authority, P.O. Box 29, Nasr City, Cairo, Egypt
b Polymeric Materials Research Dep., Advanced Technology and New Materials Research Institute (ATNMRI), City of Scientiﬁc Research and Technological Applications (SRTA-City), New Borg Al-
Arab City 21934, Alexandria, Egypt
c Nanotechnology Research Center (NTRC), The British University in Egypt (BUE), El-Sherouk City, Cairo 11837, Egypt
d Bioprocess Development Dep., Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology Research Institute (GEBRI), City of Scientiﬁc Research and Technological Applications (SRTA-City), New Borg Al-Arab City 21934, Alexandria, Egypt</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.07.033  </DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.07.033 </URL>
ABSTRACT
Crosslinked hydrogel composite membranes based on polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and chitosan-loaded AgNO3 and vitamin E were prepared using gamma irradiation. Chitosan has been used as antimicrobial blend materials to provide further biocompatibility for the prepared composite hydrogel membranes. The crosslinking reaction be- tween PVA and chitosan owing to gamma irradiation was veriﬁed and characterized by FTIR analysis, while the morphology of hydrogel composite membranes was investigated by SEM. Important parameters affecting on hy- drogel membranes formation, such as copolymer concentration, irradiation dose, AgNO3 concentration, plasti- cizer, and vitamin E of PVA/chitosan membranes were evaluated and discussed in details. In addition, the mechanical and thermal properties of hydrogel composite membranes were examined to evaluate the possibility of its application for wound dressings. The results revealed that the gelation (%) of hydrogel membranes in- creased dramatically with PVA composition, irradiation dose and glycerol content up to 20%; however, it de- creased with AgNP incorporation due to the viscosity of copolymer composition is hyper-increased. The swelling ratio of composed hydrogel membranes decreased notably with increasing the radiation dose and incor- poration of AgNP, due to reducing of the crosslinking degree of formed hydrogel membranes. PVA-Cs-Ag com- posed hydrogel membranes showed signiﬁcant antimicrobial activity in particular against Streptococcus mutans due to the presence of AgNP in membranes, compared to other bacteria and fungi microbes. Thus, the PVA/chi- tosan/AgNO3-Vit.E hydrogel composite membranes showed satisfactory properties for use as wound dressing materials.
Keywords:
PVA/chitosan
Hydrogel composite membrane Gamma irradiation
Wound dressing
1.Introduction
Skin is the largest organ of the human body serving as a barrier against infection and moisture lost. Thousands of people worldwide die every year from wounds and burns, and millions of them need med- ical care until these wounds heal. In case of minor injuries and burns, re- covery is quick even without great medical attention but in case of deep burns or injuries, the regeneration of cells take place along a period of time and need a convenient environment free of bacteria. Natural poly- mers due to their biocompatibility, biodegradability, biological charac- teristics and similarity to macromolecules recognized by cells have been widely used in biomedical applications [1]. Preparation of strong and cohesive crosslinked hydrogel that is biodegradable with the ability to resist microbes and able to absorb water and organic ﬂuids without destruction, has developed for use as a wound dressing. Polyvinyl alco- hol (PVA) is the most common kind of biodegradable synthetic poly- mers, due to their adjustable properties, mechanical strength, processability and their non-toxic degradation products have been ex- tensively used in biomedical applications [2]. PVA is a synthetic hydro- philic linear polymer generally exists in commercially as a copolymer of vinyl alcohol and vinyl acetate. PVA was previously crosslinked with chitosan for testing the mechanical and thermal stability of pro- duced membranes due to the blending process [3], or monomer to form hydrogel for speciﬁc desire material and to target the use of PVA for speciﬁc applications e.g. drug delivery, wound dressing, and tissue engineering [4]. The main advantage of artiﬁcial biopolymers is their ability to be designed for speciﬁc functions and properties by changing their chemical composition such as functional groups, crystallization, molecular weight, polymerization and their ability to combine with other materials of different compositions. Chitosan is a partially deacetylated derivative of chitin biopolymer, mainly found in
exoskeletons and shells of crustaceans. It is a linear polysaccharide consisting of β (1–4) linked D-glucosamine residues with a variable number of randomly located N-acetyl-D-glucosamine groups [5]. Chito- san has found wide applications in the wound and burn treatments be- cause of its ability to the healing of the wound and antimicrobial capability and as a haemostatic agent. It activates platelets and acceler- ates natural blood clotting and decrease scar formation [6,7]. The reac- tion or crosslinking between chitosan and PVA was discussed in details in the previous studies [6–9], since chitosan has a very unique bi- ological activities, while PVA has good mechanical and thermal stability compared to chitosan, so the interaction between PVA and chitosan has been widely studied as a means of improving the entire textural proper- ties of produced membrane composition [8,9]. On the other hand, chito- san was rarely added to membrane composition as a reducing agent [10]. Silver nanoparticles have been found to be highly resistant to mi- crobes by inactivation the vital enzymes in the bacterial cell and damage their DNA; resulting in the skin can be easily grown, and risk reduction. Many techniques have been used for the preparation of silver nanopar- ticles, chemically, green synthesis of silver nano-materials using organic green sources and/or gamma irradiation. Gamma irradiation technique is favored owing to it is a safer and easy technique for preparation of membranes for medical applications [11–13]. This has been used exten- sively in the preparation of biopharmaceuticals for wound and burns treatment [14,15]. Major mechanisms have been suggested describing antimicrobial properties of Ag NPs: (1) adhesion of nanoparticles to the cell surface and interact with membrane proteins affecting their cor- rect functions and altering the membrane properties; thus Ag NPs can also degrade lipopolysaccharide molecules; (2) accumulation in the cell membrane by forming pits which cause large increases in mem- brane permeability; and (3) silver ions released from nanoparticles can inactive vital enzymes in bacterial cell and damage DNA. Indeed, Ag NPs can simply be oxidized, so its effectiveness could be reduced [16–19]. Therefore, the incorporation of silver ions (Ag NPs) through polymer matrices is necessary to prevent the oxidation process and thus prolong the life of silver ions activity, resulting in prevention the activity of microbes and increasing the permeability and thus give the opportunity to renew cells and save them in a healthy environment [20–23]. Vitamin E (α-tocopherol) is a group of eight fats soluble com- pounds that includes four tocopherols. Tocopherols are a class of organic chemical compounds of various methylated phenols. Vitamin E is an an- tioxidant and has non-cytotoxic towards ﬁbroblast, which can affect on the production of a cytokine by skin cells and promotes skin recovery when applied topically. The effect of vitamin E has generally been attrib- uted to its antioxidant activity and the antioxidant protection of low- density lipoprotein (LDL) [24–26]. Distinct from its effect on LDL, vita- min E is also known to inhibit platelet aggregation and adhesion   in vitro, but the mechanism responsible for these observations is not known yet [27]. The crosslinking methods for preparation of hydrogels for biomedical applications have been preferred to be a solvent-free and less harmful in terms of less toxic chemical residues methods e.g. UV ra- diation, electron beam or gamma irradiation crosslinking methods [28–32]. Herein, we developed for the ﬁrst attempt the optimization of PVA/chitosan loaded AgNO3-vit.E composite hydrogel membranes for wound dressing with enhanced mechanical and antimicrobial prop- erties. The gamma irradiation has been chosen as a safe method for hy- drogel preparation, in addition, considerable parameters affecting on hydrogel formation have been discussed in details. Antimicrobial activ- ity of synthesized composite hydrogel membranes have been assessed in order to use as biomaterials for wound dressing applications.
2.ExperiThental
2.1.Materials
Chitosan (Cs), average molecular weight 100,000–300,000 with the degree of deacetylation N85% was purchased from (Acros Organics,
USA). Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) (Mwt ~ 17–18 kDa) was purchased from (Qualikems Fine Chemicals Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi). Silver nitrate (AgNO3) was obtained from (Qualikems Fine Chem., India). Vitamin E (D-L-α-tocopheryl acetate) was purchased from (Pharco Pharmaceuti- cal, Egypt). Tween 20 was used as an emulsiﬁer and supplied from (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany). Glycerol (purity 99.5%, Mwt ~ 92) was ob- tained from Al-Gomhoria pharmaceutical Co., Egypt. Glacial acetic acid was provided by El-Nasr Pharmaceutical chemicals, Egypt. 2-propanol was provided from (BDH laboratory supplies, England, UK).
2.2.Preparation of PVA-chitosan hydrogel membrane
PVA-chitosan hydrogel membranes were prepared by solution cast- ing method [33]. In brief, 1 wt% of Cs was dissolved in acetic acid solu- tion (1%) at 80 °C under gentle stirring for 2 h for avoiding air bubbles formation. 4 wt% of PVA was dissolved in bi-distilled water at 70 °C with stirring for 2 h. Then PVA solution was added to the Cs solution and mixed well with continuous stirring until complete miscibility. The ratios of Cs and PVA in the mixtures were (0/100), (20/80), (40/ 60), (50/50), (60/40), (80/20), and (100/0) wt%. The different amounts of glycerol as a plasticizer were added from 5 to 50 wt% (based on total dry weight of polymers). Vitamin E was dissolved well in tween 20 as emulsiﬁer and different ratios of vitamin E and glycerol were added as (0/100), (5/95), (10/90), (15/85), (20/80), (25/75), (30/70), (40/60),
(80/20), and (100/0) wt%. Finally, the mixture was exposed to γ-rays from 60Co γ-cell irradiator at different irradiation doses (5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30 kGy), then 20 mL of the irradiated mixture was poured into a glass petri dish (15 cm) and left to dry overnight at 60 °C in vacuum oven. The ﬁlms were removed from the glass disc and stored in polyeth- ylene bags to avoid contamination until use.
2.3.Preparation of PVA-chitosan/Ag nanocomposite hydrogel membrane
After preparation the polymer solution of PVA/Cs as above men- tioned, different amounts of AgNO3 were added, varied from 0.1 to
1.0 wt% followed by addition of 2-propanol (0.18 mL/10 mL of the solu- tion). The mixture was exposed to γ-radiation at different irradiation doses for the formation of the hydrogel membrane.
2.4.γ- Irradiation process
The required irradiation doses were carried out using 60Co γ-cell irradiator, at a dose rate of 1.3 kGy/h at ambient conditions. The irradiation facility is controlled at the National Centre of Radiation Research and Technology (NCRRT), Atomic Energy Authority, Egypt.
2.5.Calculation of gelation percent
The gelation percent of PVA/Cs/Ag/Vit.E nanocomposite hydrogel membrane were calculated by measuring the insoluble part of mem- branes after extraction. The dried membranes were weighed and im- mersed in distilled water at 60 °C for 24 h in order to remove the soluble components. The remaining gel was then dried at 25 °C to con- stant weight. The gelation percent was calculated using the given equa- tion:-.@1
where, Wg is the weight of dried membrane after extraction and Wo is the initial weight of the dried membrane.
2.6.Swelling study
PVA/Cs/Ag/Vit.E nanocomposite hydrogel membranes of known weights were soaked in distilled water at room temperature for speciﬁc
time intervals until the steady state of swelling was reached. The extra surface water was removed instantly with a ﬁlter paper. Then the swol- len samples were re-weighed and swelling (%) was estimated from the following equation:
@2
where, Md and Ms. are the masses of dried and swelled samples, respectively.
2.7.Instrumental characterizations
The crosslinking reaction between PVA and chitosan was ana- lyzed by FTIR (Bruker, Unicom Infra-red spectrophotometer, Germany). The IR ﬁngerprints were recorded between 4000 and 400 cm−1. The morphology of nanocomposite hydrogel membranes was characterized by scanning electron microscope (SEM, JSM- 5400, JOEL, Japan) attached with EDX Unit (Energy Dispersive X- ray Analyses), with accelerating voltage 30 K.V., (with original mag- niﬁcation ×500). ISIS Company, Oxford (England). The size of silver nanoparticles was measured by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL-JEM 100CX ELECTRON MICROSCOPE, Japan) at 80 kV.
The tensile strength of hydrogel membranes was tested by a univer- sal test machine (AG-I/50-10KN, Japan). Measurements were taken for at least six specimens of each composition to obtain average values and standard deviations. The thermal decomposition of hy- drogel nanocomposite membranes was performed by thermogravi- metric analysis (TGA) (TGA-50, Shimadzu, Japan). The samples were operated under nitrogen at heating rate 10 °C/min at tempera- ture range 25–550 °C.
2.8.Antimicrobial activity of nanocomposite hydrogel membranes
The antimicrobial activity of PVA-Cs-Ag nanocomposite hydrogel membranes (loaded-with/without vitamin E) was assessed through disc diffusion methods on LB agar against groups of bacterial and fungal human pathogens. In brief, discs from nanocomposite hydro- gel membranes (diameter 0.6 cm) loaded with three different AgNP concentrations (3, 5, 10 wt%) were introduced into surface of LB plates previously swapped with overnight culture of one of the fol- lowing organisms: Salmonella typhimurium (ATCC14028), E.coli (ATCC25922), Klebsiella pneumonia (ATCC13883), Streptococcus mutans, Staphylococcus aureus (ATCC 6538), Candida albicans (ATCC10231). The plates were kept at 4 °C for 1 h, and then incubated at 37 °C overnight for 18 h; the resulting growth inhibition zone (clear zone) around the discs indicated the antimicrobial activity of membranes.
3.Results and discussion
When an aqueous solution of PVA was exposed to ionizing gamma radiation, the free radicals are formed along the polymer chains as a re- sult of hydrogen abstraction that achieved by radiolysis of water [34]. On the other hand, Cs has –OH and –NH2 groups which are prospective sites for the reaction that required large quantities of energy to break the O– H and N\\H bonds. Thus, radical sites at oxygen and nitrogen atoms were created [35]. Therefore, the copolymerization of PVA and Cs radicals could lead to crosslink forming of (PVA/Cs) hydrogel membrane.
For (PVA/Cs/Ag+), gamma radiation included radiolysis reduction of Ag ions to Ag particles. The radiolytic reduction was a strong tool to pro- duce mono-sized and highly dispersed metallic clusters. In aqueous so- lution, gamma rays include water radiolysis to form a large number of hydroxyl radicals (OH•), hydrogen atoms (H•), and hydrogen gas (H2), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and hydrated electrons (e−). The free radical (H•) and solvated electrons (e− ) are powerful reducing agents and
easily reduce (Ag+) to zero valence (Ago) as shown in the following re- actions [36]:-@
On the other hand, hydroxyl radical (OH•), included in the radiolysis of water, are also powerful reducing agents that able to oxidize the ions or atoms into a higher oxidation state. Therefore an (OH•) radical scav- enger, such as primary or secondary alcohols or format ions, is added into the precursor solutions before irradiation. For example, 2- propanol can scavenge (OH•) and (H•) radicals and at the same time changes into the secondary radicals, which ﬁnally also reduce metal ions (Ag+) into zero-valent atoms (Ago) as shown in the following reac- tions [37]:-.@
Fig. 1. Gelation percentage of PVA/Cs/Ag/Vit.E composite hydrogel membranes as function of (a) copolymer composition (PVA & Cs), and (b) glycerol contents as plasticizer, (copolymer concentration 5 wt%, and PVA:Cs ~80:20, and irradiation dose 20 kGy.
Fig. 2. Gelation percentage of PVA/Cs hydrogel membrane as a function of vitamin E and glycerol composition as plasticizer at (copolymer concentration 5 wt%, and PVA:Cs
~80:20, and irradiation dose 20 kGy.
Fig. 3. Gelation percentage of PVA/Cs/Ag/Vit.E composite hydrogel membranes as function of (a) gamma irradiation dose, and (b) AgNO3 nanoﬁller contents (copolymer concentration 5 wt%, and PVA: Cs ~ 80:20 and irradiation dose 20 kGy.
3.1.
Effect of copolymer and plasticizer contents on the gelation percent of (PVA/Cs) hydrogel membranes
The gelation percent of (Cs/PVA) membrane as a function of copoly- mer (PVA/Cs) composition is shown in Fig. 1. It is obvious that, the gela- tion percent of the prepared (PVA/Cs) hydrogel membranes increases by increasing the PVA content in the feed copolymer solution, where ge- lation percent ranged 58–96% as PVA content is increased (Fig. 1a). On the contrast, by increasing the Cs content, the gelation percent de- creased dramatically. These results indicated that, the presence of PVA with Cs enhanced the gelation process of the copolymers. This might be attributed to the distinction in the diffusion coefﬁcient of both copol- ymers are completely different. Also, PVA is clearly a crosslinked, while chitosan as a natural polysaccharide is more likely to degrade when both of them are exposed to gamma radiation. This is because under ionizing radiation, simultaneous crosslinking of PVA, while the degrada- tion of chitosan with considerable grafting could occur, leading to the formation of hydrogel [38].
Basically, the addition of a plasticizer agent to the biodegradable membrane is required to overcome membrane brittleness, caused by high intermolecular forces [39]. The primary role of plasticizers is to im- prove the ﬂexibility, water vapor, gas permeability and processability of polymers. Also, these plasticizers might reduce the tension of deforma- tion, hardness, density, viscosity and electrostatic charge of a polymer, at the same time as increasing its chain ﬂexibility, resistance and dielec- tric constant [40]. Glycerol is the most used plasticizer of chitosan mem- branes due to its good plasticization efﬁciency, large availability and low exudation [41]. Fig. 1b shows the gelation percent of PVA/Cs membrane as a function of glycerol content. It can be noticed that, the gelation per- cent increases (up to 90%) by increasing the glycerol content in the feed
Fig. 4. Swelling  degree  of  PVA/Cs/Ag/Vit.E  hydrogel  membranes  as  function of
(a) irradiation dose (5, 10 and 20 kGy) and (b) incorporated amounts of AgNO3 (0.2, 0.5, 0.7, and 1.0 wt%).
Fig. 5. FTIR spectra of (a) PVA, (b) chitosan, (c) PVA/Cs, and (d) PVA/Cs/VE/Ag hydrogel composite membrane.
solution to reach a maximum value at (glycerol content 20 wt%), then, the gelation percent decreases again. This phenomenon could be attrib- uted to the glycerol content ≥20 wt% might change the polymer free vol- ume and thus the high molecular mobility of the polymeric matrix hinder the crosslinking process [40]. Similarly, Khairunnisa et al. have reported that, glycerol and chitosan might dissolve each molecule thereby reducing the movement of polymer molecules so that the hy- drogel formed becomes soft [42].
3.2.
Effect of vitamin E/glycerol composition on the gelation percent of (Cs/ PVA) hydrogel membrane
Vitamin E is also called the “protecting vitamin” and is used in the cosmetic industry as a natural skin-conditioning agent. It also softens the skin and alleviates dry skin conditions. Esteriﬁed forms such as vita- min E acetate (the ester of acetic acid and tocopherol in which at least one hydroxyl group (-OH) is replaced by an alkoxy group) are used as an alternative to pure tocopherol because the phenolic hydroxyl group is blocked, providing a less acidic product with a high superior stability [43]. Fig. 2 shows the gelation percent of (Cs/PVA) membrane as a func- tion of vitamin E/glycerol composition. It can be noted that the gelation percent decreases by increasing vitamin E content in the feed solution. This is due to the reason that the addition of effective free radical scav- enger like vitamin E is recognized to decrease cross-linking of the branches of polymer, leading to a slight decrease in the gelation percent [44]. Vitamin E may have various roles. In this role Vitamin E act as rad- ical scavenger and act as good plasticizer, since the preparation of the ﬁlms was done by adding glycerol to the ideal proportions, the addition of vitamin E to the reaction will cause side damage is to reduce the crosslinking and hence the gelation because of the adding of vitamin E in this way reduces the intermolecular vander-Waals forces between PVA and Cs which retard the crosslinking [45,46].
3.3.Effect of irradiation dose and incorporation of AgNO3 nanoparticles on the gelation percent of PVA/Cs hydrogel membranes
The gelation percent of PVA/Cs hydrogel membrane as a function of absorbed irradiation dose of gamma rays is shown in Fig. 3a. It is clear that, the gelation percent of the prepared PVA/Cs hydrogel membrane increases with increasing the irradiation dose up to 20 kGy. It was
Fig. 6. SEM images of (a) PVA/Cs, (b) PVA/Cs/Ag, (c) PVA/Cs/Ag/VitE hydrogel membranes, (d) TEM image of PVA/Cs/Ag/VitE nanocomposite membrane and (e) EDX pattern of PVA/Cs/Ag/ VitE nanocomposite membrane.
Fig. 6. SEM images of (a) PVA/Cs, (b) PVA/Cs/Ag, (c) PVA/Cs/Ag/VitE hydrogel membranes, (d) TEM image of PVA/Cs/Ag/VitE nanocomposite membrane and (e) EDX pattern of PVA/Cs/Ag/ VitE nanocomposite membrane.
Table 2
Mechanical properties of PVA/Cs/Ag/Vit.E composite hydrogel membranes have been crosslinked with different gamma irradiation doses (5, 10, and 20 kGy).distributed in the image conﬁrms the formation of the Ag nanoparticles within the prepared PVA/Cs hydrogel membrane. The size of the formed Ag nanoparticles ranged from 22 to 43 nm with the average particle size of 30.8 nm.
Fig. 6(e) shows the EDX analysis of Ag nanoparticles in the (PVA/Cs/ Ag/Vit.E) nanocomposite. EDX results clearly show the presence of Ag nanoparticles in the studied thin nanocomposite membranes. This is ev- ident from spot EDX on the presence of Ag nanoparticles in the mem- brane samples.
3.5.Thermal stability of PVA/Cs/Ag/Vit.E hydrogel membranes
TGA was used to investigate the thermal stability of the synthesized hydrogel membrane and compared them with each other crosslinked with different irradiation dose. The thermal stability of PVA/Cs/Ag/Vit. E hydrogel membranes as a function of absorbed gamma irradiation dose (5, 10, and 20 kGy) have been tested by TGA and displayed in Fig. 7, while the TGA data were summarized in Table 1. TGA curves of membranes show a small weight loss in the ﬁrst decomposition stage (~ 5%) which can be attributed by the evaporation of adsorbed water in these membranes. Inspection in Table 1, it is obvious that absorbed gamma irradiation dose has sharply inﬂuenced on the thermal stability of hydrogel membranes, where both Tonset has improved progressively from (234, 240, and 267 °C), when synthesized membranes were expo- sure to gamma irradiation dose from 5, 10, and 20 kGy, respectively. In- terestingly, the second decomposition stage of membranes has thus thermally improved from 125 to 276 °C and also the decomposition temperature of half weight loss of each sample (T50) has been improved (from 389-, 410, to- 418 °C), due to increasing the dose of gamma irra- diation (Table 1). Thus, the absorbed gamma irradiation dose has signif- icantly enhanced the thermal stability of hydrogel membranes.
3.6.Mechanical stability of PVA/Cs/Ag/Vit.E nanocomposite hydrogel membranes
The tensile strength and elongation at break of PVA/Cs/Ag/Vit.E nanocomposite hydrogel membranes were measured as a function of different absorbed gamma-irradiation dose (5, 10, and 20 kGy). Theresults are summarized and listed in Table 2. It was found that the ten- sile strength and elongation to break increase signiﬁcantly with increas- ing the absorbed gamma irradiation dose. The increases of the tensile strength as a function of increase of irradiation dose; is afﬁliated with the radiation induced crosslinking degree of PVA. As expected, the max-imum stress of hydrogel membranes has encountered a somewhat delay and systematic stability with increasing the irradiation dose for the same blend composition. Hence, the mechanical properties of syn- thesized hydrogel membranes in the current investigation seem to ful- ﬁll the requirements for wound dressings.
3.7.Antimicrobial activity of nanocomposite hydrogel membranes
As the relation between the antimicrobial effect and AgNP concen- tration varies according to organisms type [50], the group of multi- drug resistance Gram positive (2 strains) and negative (3 strains) bacte- ria, with one fungal cell were tested during this work. Herein, the AgNP composite hydrogel membranes showed a high potency for antimicro- bial activity against Gram positive bacterium in particular Streptococcus mutans with all concentrations of AgNP in membranes (Fig. 8), while Staphylococcus aureus was affected with the increase in nano silver con- centration. In case of Gram negative bacteria Klebsiella pneumonia showed high suitability to all nano silver loaded membranes, contrary to Salmonella typhimurium, Vibrio and E.coli which were unaffected en- tirely. The yeast strain Candida albicans only revealed an inhibition zone with the only membrane contains the highest concentration of AgNP. Many mechanisms were proposed for the microbicidal effect of AgNP against different microorganisms, as deactivation of some en- zymes and essential proteins for ATP synthesis [51], rupture of the cell membrane [52]. These results are in accordance with reports indicated the potency of AgNP as antimicrobial agent especially against the multi-drug resistance human pathogen [53,54]. In addition, the effect of AgNPs as antimicrobial agent depends on the shape of nanoparticles as encountered from the work monitoring the effect of different shapes of AgNPs (spherical, rod-like and triangular) on E. coli and found that triangular-shaped nanoparticles are the most effective shape.
4.Conclusions
In this work, wound dressing materials based on PVA-Cs-Ag-Vit.E composed hydrogel membranes were prepared and crosslinked using a gamma ray radiation technique. PVA-Cs copolymer composition and irradiation dose were found to have a greater inﬂuence on gelation  (%) and swelling ration of composite hydrogel membranes. The physical properties of composite hydrogel membranes e.g. gelation (%) were higher when PVA composition and radiation ray dose increased, unlike the AgNP incorporation increased or higher glycerol content plasticized were used. The prepared composite hydrogel membranes possessed
Fig. 8. Antimicrobial activity of PVA/Cs/Ag/Vit.E composite hydrogel membranes versus Streptococcus mutans strain.
featured properties which meet the requirements of proper wound dressings. For example; the membranes give a wet and swollen envi- ronment to a wound which accelerates the wound healing, while the mechanical properties of membranes were satisfactory as elastic bioma- terials for artiﬁcial skin. The prepared nanocomposite hydrogel mem- branes could be regarded as a good barrier against microbes.
Declaration of CoThpeting Interest
The authors report that no conﬂicts of interest in this work.
