<title>Development of the high-energy neutron fluence rate standard field in Japan with a peak energy of
45 MeV using the 7Li(p,n)7Be reaction at TIARA</title>
<author>Tetsuro Matsumoto, Akihiko Masuda, Hideki Harano, Yoshiaki Shikaze, Yoshihiko Tanimura, Hajime Seito, Satoshi Kurashima, Sho Nishino, Hiroshi Yoshitomi, Jun Nishiyama, Masayuki Hagiwara, Yasuhiro Unno & Michio Yoshizawa</author>
<Affiliation>aNational Metrology Institute of Japan, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Tsukuba, Japan; bNuclear Science Research Institute, Japan Atomic Energy Agency, Tokai, Naka-gun, Ibaraki, Japan; cTakasaki Advanced Radiation Research Institute, National Institutes for Quantum and Radiological Science and Technology, Takasaki-shi, Japan; dLaboratory for Advanced Nuclear Energy, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, Japan; eRadiation Science Center, High Energy Accelerator Research Organization, Tsukuba, Japan</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2017.1291374</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2017.1291374</URL>
ABSTRACT
In this study, we developed a 45 MeV neutron fluence rate standard of Japan. Quasi- monoenergetic neutrons with a peak energy of 45 MeV in the neutron standard field were produced by the 7Li(p,n)7Be reaction using a 50-MeV proton beam from an azimuthally vary- ing field (AVF) cyclotron of the Takasaki Ion  Accelerators  for  Advanced  Radiation  Applica- tion (TIARA). The neutron energy spectrum was measured using an organic  liquid  scin-  tillation detector and a 6Li-glass scintillation detector  by  the  time-of-flight  method,  and  using a Bonner sphere spectrometer by the unfolding method. The  absolute  neutron  flu-  ence was determined using a proton recoil telescope (PRT) composed of the liquid scintil- lation detector and a Si(Li) detector that was newly developed in the present study. The detection efficiency of the PRT was obtained using the MCNPX code. The peak neutron production cross section for the 7Li(p,n)7Be reaction was also derived from the neutron fluence in order to confirm the neutron fluence of the TIARA high-energy neutron field. The peak neutron production cross section obtained in the present study was in good agreement with those of pre- vious studies. The characteristics of the 45-MeV neutron field in TIARA were successfully evaluated in order to calibrate high-energy neutron detectors and high-energy neutron dosimeters.KEYWORDS
Neutrons; neutron standard;
-MeV
quasi-monoenergetic neutrons; calibration; neutron spectrum; neutron ﬂuence1.Introduction
Radiation protection for high-energy neutrons above 20 MeV is important in and around large accelera-  tor facilities such as J-PARC, proton therapy facilities, and heavy-ion therapy facilities, as well as neutrons  up to 20 MeV [1,2]. Moreover, high-energy neutrons are focused on neutron-induced soft errors in semi- conductor devices [3]. Recently, a number of studies on radiation protection and nuclear data have been car- ried out using quasi-monoenergetic neutron reference fields above 20 MeV with the 7Li(p,n)7Be reaction such as those at the iThemba LABS in South Africa [4] and the Cyclotron and Radioisotope Center of the Tohoku University in Japan [5,6].
A high-energy neutron source with the 7Li(p,n)7Be reaction at the Takasaki Ion Accelerators for Advanced Radiation Application (TIARA) of the National Insti- tutes for Quantum and Radiological Science and Technology (QST) has also  been  used  for  shield-  ing experiments, measurements of nuclear data, and the characterization of neutron detectors using the time-of-flight (TOF) method [7–9]. The 7Li(p,n)7Be neutron source consists of a high-energy peak neutron
spectrum and a low-energy continuum spectrum due to break up reactions [7]. Therefore, evaluating the  characteristics of both neutron fluence and the neutron energy spectrum is very important in order to perform experiments using the 7Li(p,n)7Be neutron source. In previous studies, neutron energy spectra were mea- sured using an organic liquid scintillator, and the peak neutron fluence was determined using a proton recoil telescope (PRT) [7,10]. In the TOF method, the neu- tron energy is obtained from the neutron flight path length and the neutron flight time between a neutron production target and a neutron detector. However, the lower limit of precisely measurable neutron energy in the TOF method is determined by the following  equation:@1
where L (m) is the distance between the neutron pro- duction target and the neutron detector, T (ns) is the time of the pulse interval at the neutron production tar- get, c (m/ns) is the speed of light, and M0c2 (MeV) is the
neutron rest energy. In the case of TIARA facility, the lower limit is several MeV at the position of 10 m from the neutron production target for conventional meth- ods [7], because the time of pulse interval is around 300 ns. In the TIARA facility, the interval of the proton beam pulse produced by the cyclotron is flexibly con- trollable by a recently developed beam chopper system [11]. Therefore, the lower limit of measurable neutron energy is removed, and it is possible to measure the neu- tron energy spectrum of the 7Li(p,n)7Be neutron source in the entire energy region using the TOF method [12]. Moreover, thermal and epi-thermal neutrons are added at the neutron detector position because of the neutron moderation caused by neutron scattering pro- cesses in the experimental room. In previous studies, low energy neutrons have not been precisely observed in the high-energy reference field. On the other hand, high-energy neutron detectors and high-energy neu- tron dosimeters used in radiation protection are also sensitive to thermal neutrons because, in most case, they have neutron moderators such as polyethylene (PE) or heavy metal [13,14]. Therefore, the precise neu- tron spectral fluence over the entire energy region of the neutron field is required for calibration using the
7Li(p,n)7Be neutron source.
In the present study, neutron spectral fluences over the entire energy region at detection positions are pre- cisely measured in the high-energy neutron field with a peak energy of 45 MeV using the 7Li(p,n)7Be neutron source at TIARA. Finally, the 45-MeV high-energy neu- tron field enables the calibrations of high-energy neu- tron detectors and high-energy neutron dosimeters as a national standard of Japan.
The energy spectrum of neutrons produced by the
7Li(p,n)7Be reaction was measured using an organic
liquid scintillator and a 6Li-glass scintillator by the TOF method. In addition, the neutron energy spectrum including thermal and epi-thermal neutrons was mea- sured using a Bonner sphere spectrometer (BSS) by the unfolding method. The reliability of the unfolding tech- nique was improved by obtaining the initial guess spec- trum using the neutron energy spectrum obtained by the TOF measurement in the present study. A PRT was newly developed in order to determine the precise neu- tron fluence. The peak neutron production cross sec- tion of 0° with respect to the proton beam direction for the 7Li(p,n)7Be reaction was also derived from the neutron fluence in order to confirm the neutron fluence obtained by the PRT.
2.Experiments
2.1.Neutron field
Quasi-monoenergetic neutrons with a peak energy of 45 MeV were produced by the 7Li(p,n)7Be reaction  using  a  50-MeV  proton   beam  with  a  frequency  of
16.234 MHz from the azimuthally varying field (AVF) cyclotron at TIARA. An enriched 7Li metal target (7Li:
>95%) was used as a neutron production target. The target was formed to have a thickness of approximately
3.8 mm. A water cooling system was affixed to a target holder. Figure 1 shows a schematic diagram of the beam line used for the high-energy neutron field at TIARA. The quasi-monoenergetic neutrons produced by the target reach an experimental room from the target room through a collimator made of iron and concrete with a diameter of 10.9 cm and a length of 3.07 m. The distance between the target and the collimator exit is 4.835 m. The proton beam through the target is directed to a
Figure1. Schematic diagram of the beam line used for the high-energy neutron ﬁeld at TIARA.
Table 1. Summary of the detector settings and measurement conditions. 
beam dump outside the beam line using a bending  magnet. The proton beam current at the beam dump is measured using a Faraday cup. A transmission-type neutron monitor composed of a plastic scintillator (BC400, 15 cm × 15 cm × 0.05 cm) and two photo- multiplier tubes (PMTs) is placed at the collimator exit [15]. The neutron beam loss due to setting the neutron monitor is less than 0.5% over the whole energy spec- trum of 45 MeV quasi-monoenergetic neutrons. The dimensions of the experimental room are 11 m (W) × 19 m (D) × 6 m (H).
2.2.Neutron energy spectrum
Neutron energy spectra were measured using an organic liquid scintillator and a 6Li-glass scintillator by the TOF method, and using a BSS by the unfolding method. Table 1 summarizes the detector setting and measurement conditions.
... Liquid scintillation detector
An organic liquid scintillation detector (BC501A, PMT: H6559) with a diameter of 7.62 cm and a length of
7.62 cm was used to measure neutrons above 1.6 MeV. The TOF measurements using the liquid scintillation detector were performed at 6.5 and 13 m from the Li target. In the TOF measurements, the adequate pulse interval for the proton beam was obtained using both S and P chopper systems of the cyclotron, which are described in detail elsewhere [13]. The proton beam repetition rate was reduced to 202.9 kHz using the S and P chopper systems. The pulse interval was 4.93
µs, because it is inverse of the proton beam repeti- tion rate. Figure 2 shows a simplified block diagram  of the electronics of the liquid scintillation detector.  A
conventional charge-integration pulse-shape discrim- ination method for neutrons and gamma rays was used in the signal processing of the liquid scintilla-  tor as shown in Figure 2. In  the  signal processing, the difference between total and slow components for pulses from an anode output of the liquid scintillation detector was observed using a charge-to-digital con- verter (QDC: Daiei Musen D-501). The signals from the anode output were also used as timing signals using a constant-fraction discriminator (ORTEC584) and a time-to-amplitude converter (TAC: ORTEC567). The stop signal for the TOF analysis with the TAC was taken
Figure . Block diagram of electronics for the liquid scintillation detector used in the TOF measurements.
from the chopper systems. All events from the analog- to-digital converter (ADC: FastComtec7072) and the QDC were stored in a  personal  computer  as  a  list file using a multi-parameter data acquisition system (FastComtec MPA3). Compton edges of gamma rays from 137Cs, 60Co, 22Na, and 241Am-Be radioactive sources were measured to convert the pulse height (PH) channel to the electron equivalent energy of light out- put from the liquid scintillator. The measured results were used to determine the energy threshold of PH   of the liquid scintillation detector. The detection effi- ciency of the liquid scintillation detector was deter- mined by calculation with the SCINFUL-QMD code
[16] and was calibrated using monoenergetic neutrons with energies of 5.0 and 14.8 MeV in the National Insti- tute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST) neutron standard field [2,17].
... Li-glass scintillation detector
A 6Li-glass scintillation detector (GS20, PMT: H7195) having a thickness of 5 mm and a diameter of 50 mm was used to measure neutrons below 1.6 MeV. The pro- ton beam repetition rate was 202.9 kHz in the measure- ments using the 6Li-glass scintillation detector as well as the liquid scintillation detector. The distance between the 6Li-glass scintillation detector and the target was
Figure2 . Block diagram of electronics for the Li-glass scintilla- tion detector used in the TOF measurements.
6.5 m. Figure 3 shows a simplified block diagram of the electronics of the 6Li-glass scintillation detector. Anode outputs from the detector were used as start timing sig- nals of a TAC for the TOF analysis. Dynode outputs from the detector were used to measure the PH spec- trum using a pre-amplifier (PA: ORTEC113) and a main amplifier (MA: ORTEC570). The 6Li-glass scintillation detector was calibrated in the 144 and 565 keV monoen- ergetic neutron standard fields of AIST. The detection efficiency curve [12] of the detector was evaluated using the calibrated results and the MCNPX calculations [18].
... Bonner sphere spectrometer (BSS)
A BSS was used to evaluate the neutron energy spec- trum due to moderated neutrons by scattering reactions in the experimental room and beam line structures. The chopper systems were not used in the BSS mea- surements. The BSS was placed approximately 6.5 m
from the target. The BSS consists of 3He spherical pro- portional counters (CENTRONIC LTD: SP9) and PE (0.95 g/cm3) moderators with diameters of 7.62, 10.16,
11.43, 12.7, and 15.24 cm. The 3He proportional coun- ters with gas pressures of 47 and 207 kPa were used for measurements with and without the moderator, respec- tively. The response functions of the BSS were evaluated by MCNPX calculations [18] using the JENDL High Energy file 2007 (JENDL/HE-2007) [19]. The responses were calibrated in the neutron standard fields using 252Cf and 241Am-Be neutron sources in AIST. The cali- brated and calculated results were found to be in good agreement within measurement uncertainties.
2.3.Absolute neutron fluence
The PRT was newly developed to measure the abso- lute neutron fluence in the experimental room. Figure 4 shows a schematic diagram of a typical setting of the PRT. PE radiator (H: 7.97 × 10−2 atoms/b/cm) having a diameter of 10 cm and a thickness of 2 mm was used to produce recoil protons. The radiator was located 6.5 m from the target. A OE–E-type recoil proton detector was placed outside the collimated neutron beam cone in order to reduce the background due to direct neutrons from the target. The distance between the surface of the detector and the radiator was 1 m. The angle between the neutron beam direction and the detector axis was adjusted to 10°. Figure 5 shows the OE–E-type recoil proton detector. The PRT measurement was performed for the neutron beam without the chopper systems. The proton beam current was 3 µA. The detector was com- posed of a Si(Li) surface barrier detector (Raytech: 90- 3000-500SL) with a sensitive area having a diameter of 60 mm and a depth of 0.5 mm as a OE detector and the organic liquid scintillation detector having a diam- eter of 7.62 cm and a length of 7.62 cm as an E detector that was used in the TOF measurements. An aluminum collimator having a length of 15 mm and a diameter of 58 mm was placed between the Si(Li) and the liq- uid scintillation detectors. The collimator was used to determine the precise detection efficiency because the boundary of sensitive area of the Si(Li) detector was not
Figure 3. Schematic diagram of the typical PRT setting used in the neutron ﬂuence measurements.
Figure 4. Schematic diagram of the OE–E-type recoil proton detector.
clear. Charged particles including recoil protons pro- duced on the detector axis are basically observed by coincidence measurement of OE and E detectors. Sig- nals from directly incident neutrons on the liquid scin- tillator are also rejected. In addition to the measurement using the PE radiator (PE run), measurements using a carbon radiator of 9.15 × 10−2 atoms/b/cm (C run) and without the radiators (blank run) were also performed in order to investigate the background due to proton production reactions, e.g. the 12C(n,p)12N reaction.
Figure 6 shows a simplified block diagram of the electronics of the PRT. The signal processing for the liquid scintillation detector is the same as that for the TOF measurements. The PH spectrum of the Si(Li) detector was obtained using a PA (ORTEC142A) and a MA (ORTEC570). Only coincidence events for the Si(Li) detector and the liquid scintillation detector were extracted in the MPA3. The coincidence events were stored in the personal computer as a list file using the MPA3.
The detection efficiency of the PRT was determined by simulating the coincidence measurement of the Si(Li) and the liquid scintillation detectors with the cell flagging card of the MCNPX code. The detection effi- ciency ε(En) (cm2) for the neutron energy En (MeV) is defined by the following equation:@2
where NPRT is the counts obtained with the PRT, and φ(En) (cm−2) is the neutron fluence for the neutron energy En (MeV). The cross section data of the LA150 library [20] were used in the MCNPX code. Figure 7 shows the detection efficiency of the PRT as a function of neutron energy.
Figure . Detection eﬃciency of the PRT calculated using the MCNPX code.
Figure . Block diagram of electronics for the PRT in the neutron ﬂuence measurements.
Figure . Neutron energy spectra measured using the liquid scintillation detector at . m (dashed line) and  m (solid line) from the target.
3.Results and discussion
3.1.Neutron energy spectrum
The neutron energy spectrum produced by the 7Li(p,n)7Be reaction was obtained from the TOF spectra observed using the liquid scintillation detector and the 6Li-glass scintillation detector.
Figure 8 shows the neutron energy spectra measured using the liquid scintillation detector at 6.5 and 13 m from the target. The vertical axis of the results obtained at 13 m was converted to the neutron fluence at 6.5 m from the target for the purpose of comparison with the measured results at 6.5 m. The full width at half maxi- mum (FWHM) of the peak in the neutron energy spec- trum measured at 13 m from the target is smaller than that at 6.5 m in Figure 8. Since the energy resolution in the TOF measurements depends on the neutron TOF [21], the longer the neutron flight path length, the bet- ter the energy resolution. The FWHM of the peak in the energy spectrum at 13 m agrees with the proton energy loss in the target, i.e. 2.2 MeV, calculated by the MCNPX code. The results for the neutron peak fluence measured at 13 and 6.5 m are also in good agreement within 1%. Figure 9 shows the neutron energy spectrum mea- sured using the 6Li-glass scintillation detector. The neu- tron energy spectrum measured using the liquid scin- tillation detector at 13 m is also shown in the figure. The error bar shows only the statistical uncertainty. The room-scattered neutrons are background that is inde- pendent of the neutron TOF in the measurement of the 6Li-glass scintillation detector. In the data processing,the time-independent background of the TOF spec- trum was subtracted. The signal-to-noise ratio was 2 in the energy region from 100 keV to 1.6 MeV in the TOF spectrum. The neutron fluence below 1.6 MeV fluctu- ated from 10% to 20% as a result of the difference in the background region of the TOF spectrum because of the poor statistics in the present experiment. The gap at 1.6 Figure . Neutron energy spectrum measured using the Li- glass scintillation detector at . m. The data above . MeV is the neutron energy spectrum measured using the liquid scintil- lation detector at  m, as shown in Figure .
MeV between the neutron fluences measured using the 6Li-glass scintillation and the liquid scintillation detec- tors is caused by ambiguity of the method used to set the background region.
The MAXED code [22] was used in the data analy- sis of unfolding for the BSS measurements. The initial guess spectrum was first prepared using the MCNPX code. The beam line including the collimator, the walls, and floor in the experimental room and the plastic  scintillator used as the neutron monitor were mod- eled in the MCNPX calculations. The neutron energy spectrum measured by the TOF method, as shown in Figure 8, was used as the SDEF card in the MCNPX code. Second, the counts of the 3He proportional counter per monitor count were prepared for each moderator. The BSS used in the present experiment has low sensitivity to high-energy neutrons. Therefore, it is undesirable to derive the neutron energy spec-  trum including the high-energy region by the unfold- ing method. The counts per monitor count, N, were extracted by subtracting counts per monitor count, N>10, for the energy range above 10 MeV from the mea- sured counts per monitor count, Nm, as follows:@3
where N>10 was derived from the response function, R(E), the neutron energy spectrum, S(E), above 10 MeV measured with the liquid scintillation detector and the peak neutron fluence, φpeak, measured with the PRT as shown in the following equation:@4
The neutron energy spectrum used in Equation (4) was normalized so that the integral of S(E) over the neutron peak region was unity. Here, Nm was extracted from the measured PH spectrum for each moderator.
Figure . Neutron energy spectrum (solid line) measured using the BSS by the unfolding method. The dashed line shows the initial guess spectrum used in the MAXED code and the solid cir- cles indicate the neutron energy spectrum obtained by the TOF method.
Figure 10 shows the neutron energy spectrum obtained by the unfolding method. In Figure 10, the background caused by the thermal neutrons is extremely small.  The figure indicates that neutrons produced at the beam dump and the neutrons filling in the target room are sufficiently shielded. Therefore, the TIARA high- energy neutron field is suitable for calibrating neutron detectors or neutron dosimeters. A peak at 24 keV in Figure 10 is due to the iron resonance [23]. A peak    at 24 keV always appears in neutron energy spectra behind a thick iron shield [24]. On the other hand,  the unfolding result is slightly smaller than the initial guess spectrum in the thermal neutron region. In the present state, the MCNPX calculations do not suffi- ciently reproduce the TIARA high-energy neutron field. The neutron energy spectrum in Figure 9 is also shown in Figure 10. The neutron fluence above 70 keV mea- sured using the BSS is in good agreement with that  obtained by the TOF measurements.
3.2.Absolute neutron fluence
In the analysis of the PRT, the data were processed for each event from the list data file. Figure 11 shows a two- dimensional plot of the PH spectra of the Si(Li) and liq- uid scintillation detectors obtained in the measurement using the PE radiator. Proton data are distinguished from deuteron data in Figure 11. The deuterons are pro- duced by nuclear reactions between the high-energy neutrons and the carbon nuclei in the PE radiator. The PH spectrum of the protons was obtained by setting the polygonal region of interest in the two-dimensional plot. The PH spectrum for the blank run is background in the PRT measurement. The two-dimensional plots of the TOF channel and the PH channel of the protons measured using the liquid scintillation detector were obtained from the list file in order to investigate the
Figure . Two-dimensional plots of PH spectra measured coin- cidentally with the Si(Li) detector and the liquid scintillator in the measurement using the PE radiator. The solid line shows the polygonal region of interest for the protons used in the data analysis and the dashed line shows the data due to the deuterons.
Figure . Two-dimensional plot of the TOF channel and the PH channel of the liquid scintillation detector for the (a) PE, (b) C, and (c) blank measurements.
cause of the PH spectrum of the blank run. Figure 12 shows the two-dimensional plots of the TOF channel and the PH channel of the protons measured using the liquid scintillation detector in the PE, C, and blank runs. In Figure 12(a), the two-dimensional plot is divided into three regions. RegionA is due to the recoil proton pro- duced by the n–p scattering reaction in the PE radi- ator and region B is due to the protons produced by
reactions between the neutrons and the carbon nuclei in the PE radiator. Data due to proton production reac- tions in an aluminum case of the neutron monitor and air for the peak neutrons are also included in region B Region C is due to protons produced by the reactionin the aluminum case of the neutron monitor and air
for the neutrons below the peak region. On the other hand, region A scarcely appears in Figure 12(b,c). There is not much of a difference in the appearance between Figure 12(b,c). As the reason, the signal-to-noise ratio in the C run was derived as 1.12 using the results in the blank run. Namely, net counts due to the reactions between the neutrons and the carbon nuclei are scarce. The PH spectrum normalized with the monitor counts for the blank run was subtracted from the PH spectra for the PE run and the C run. By the subtraction, only region A in Figure 12(a) was extracted. Figure 13 shows the proton PH spectra for the PE run and theC run. The ADC channel of the proton PH spectra was calibrated for using information obtained from the data process- ing in the TOF measurements because the liquid scin- tillator used in the TOF measurements was also used in the PRT. The detection efficiency for the peak neutrons under the present experimental conditions was calcu- lated again using the neutron energy spectrum mea- sured using the liquid scintillation detector at 13 m by the TOF method shown in Figure 8. In the calculation, the relative humidity in the experimental room was also considered. The detection efficiency was 2.34 10−4 cm2 for the 45-MeV peak neutrons.
Finally, the peak neutron fluence was derived from the counts and the detection efficiency for the peak neu- trons. The average neutron fluence rate was obtained by dividing the neutron fluence by the measurement time. Table 2 gives the uncertainty budget for the peak neutron fluence per monitor count measured using the PRT. The  following  uncertainties were  taken into account: the uncertainties due to the detection efficiency of the PRT  (5.6%),  the  uncertainties due to the analysis of the measurements using the PRT
Figure . Proton PH spectra measured using the PE and carbon radiators.
Table . Uncertainty budget for the neutron ﬂuence per mon- itor count measured using the PRT.(2.1%), and the uncertainties due to the neutron mon- itor (2.0%). The uncertainty due to the cross sections of the n–p scattering used in the MCNPX calculations is dominant in the detection efficiency of the PRT. In order to investigate the uncertainty of the cross-section data, the detection efficiency was also calculated using JENDL/HE-2007 [19]. The detection efficiency calcu- lated with the JENDL/HE-2007 was 5% smaller than that calculated using the LA150 library. This difference is caused by the angular differential cross sections of n–p scattering stored in LA150 and JENDL/HE-2007. The angular differential cross sections of n–p scatter- ing stored in the JENDL-4.0 High Energy file released in 2015 [25] is same as those in the JENDL/HE-2007. The difference is considered to be the uncertainty due to the cross sections of the n–p scattering used in the MCNPX calculations. The uncertainty due to the geom- etry of the PRT, such as the sensitive area of the Si(Li) detector, the angle between the neutron direction and the detector axis, and the distance between the Si(Li) detector and the PE radiator, was also evaluated by MCNPX simulations. The uncertainty due to the neu- tron energy spectrum used in the MCNPX simulations was also taken into account. The uncertainties due to statistics, the determination of the peak region, the cor- rection for neutron attenuation in air, and dead time were considered for the data analysis of the measure- ments with the PRT. The uncertainty due to the lin- earity of the monitor counts vs. the peak neutron flu- ence was evaluated by relative measurements between the neutron monitor and a 232Th fission chamber (CEN- TRONIC FC400/1000) located 75 cm from the colli-
mator exit in the proton beam current from 100 nA to 3 µA.
In order to discuss the reliability of the neutron flu- ence, the results obtained from the PRT were com- pared with those obtained from the TOF measurement using the liquid scintillation detector. Table 3 gives the neutron fluence per the monitor count measured using the PRT and the liquid scintillation detector.
Table . Neutron ﬂuences per monitor count measured using the PRT and the liquid scintillation detector at . and
 m. The neutron ﬂuence measured using the liquid scintil- lation detector at  m is converted to that at . m.The uncertainty for the  liquid  scintillation  detector is mainly caused by the detection efficiency obtained using the SCINFUL-QMD code. The neutron fluences measured using the PRT and the liquid scintillation detector are in agreement within the uncertainty for the PRT measurement.
Moreover, the cross section of the peak neutron pro- duction reaction, σ (mb/sr), of 0° with respect to the proton beam direction for the 7Li(p,n)7Be reaction at 50 MeV was derived from the neutron fluence, φPRT (cm−2), measured at 6.5 m with the PRT using the fol- lowing equation:@5
where N (atoms/b) is the thickness of the lithium tar- get, Ip is the number of incident protons, Ld (cm) is the distance between the target and the PE radiator,  and  α is the correction factor for the neutron attenuation due to air and the neutron monitor between the target and the PE radiator that is obtained from the MCNPX calculations. α was 1.039 for the 45-MeV neutrons. The number of the incident protons was derived from the proton beam current measured at the beam dump and the proton transmission rate for the lithium tar- get. The dark current caused by the cooling water in the beam dump was also subtracted. The cross section was
30.7 2.1 (mb/sr). Figure 14 shows the peak neutron production cross section at 50 MeV for the 7Li(p,n)7Be
Figure . Peak neutron production cross section of ° with respect to the proton beam direction for the Li(p,n)Be reaction at a proton energy of  MeV. The solid circle indicates the result of the present study.
reaction. Other measurements [7,26–28] are also shown in Figure 14. The results of the previous studies, other than Batty et al. [28], agree with the present result within the uncertainty. The reliability of the neutron fluence at the TIARA high-energy neutron field is supported by the comparison between the measured results obtained using the PRT and the liquid scintillation  detector and the results of the peak neutron production cross section.
4.Conclusion
Quasi-monoenergetic neutrons with peak energy of 45 MeV in the neutron standard field were produced by the 7Li(p,n)7Be reaction using a proton beam from an AVF cyclotron of TIARA. The neutron energy spec- trum was measured using an organic liquid scintilla- tion detector and a 6Li-glass scintillation detector by the TOF method, as well as a BSS by means of the unfolding method. A recoil proton telescope was devel- oped in order to determine the absolute neutron flu- ence. The detection efficiency was obtained using the MCNPX code with the LA150 library. The reliability of the neutron fluence in the TIARA high-energy neutron field was confirmed by comparison of the neutron flu- ence measured using the PRT and the liquid scintilla- tion detector and by comparison of the peak neutron production cross section of 0° with respect to the pro- ton beam direction for the 7Li(p,n)7Be reaction at pro- ton energy of 50 MeV between the present study and previous studies. The characteristics of the 45 MeV neu- tron field in TIARA were successfully evaluated in order to calibrate high-energy neutron detectors and high- energy neutron dosimeters. Finally, we established the TIARA high-energy neutron field as the 45 MeV neu- tron fluence rate standard of Japan.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Mr Y. Haruyama and Mr
H. Takizawa of QST and Mr T. Ohishi of the Japan Atomic Energy Agency (JAEA) for their cooperation in preparing the experiments, and the operating staff of the cyclotron at TIARA for their cooperation regarding the beam transport. The authors would also like to thank Dr D. Satoh and Dr Y. Iwamoto of JAEA for their cooperation during the experi- ments.
The present study was supported by the strategic pro- motion program for basic nuclear research by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan, ‘Study on a progressive calibration method for neutron dosimeters using white neutrons [grant number 210103];’ Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (KAKENHI) [grant number JP25871197].
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
