<title>Proposing a Simple Radiation Scale for the Public: Radiation Index</title>
<author>Gyuseong Cho a,*, Jong Hyun Kim a, Tae Soon Park b, and Kunwoo Cho c</author>
<Affiliation>a  Department of Nuclear and Quantum Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), 291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea
b  Center for Ionizing Radiation, Korea Research Institute of Standards and Science (KRISS), 267 Gajeong-ro, Yuseong-
gu, Daejeon 31443, Republic of Korea
c  Department of Natural Radiation Safety, Korea Institute of Nuclear Safety (KINS), 62 Gwahak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34142, Republic of Korea</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>NUCLEAR ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2016.10.005</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2016.10.005</URL>
ABSTRACT
A new radiation scale is proposed. With empathy toward the vast majority of people who are  not  well  versed  in  radiation  and  related  matters,  and  thus  suffering  from  misun- derstanding  that  breeds  unnecessary  fear  of  radiation,  the  aim  of  proposing  a  new  ra- diation scale, radiation index (RAIN), is to put the general public at ease with the concept of radiation.  RAIN  is  defined  in  dimensionless  numbers  that  relate  any  specific  radiation dose to a properly defined reference level. As RAIN is expressed in plain numbers without an attached scientific unit, the public will feel comfortable with its friendly look, which in turn should help them understand radiation dose levels easily and allay their anxieties about  radiation.  The  expanded  awareness  and  proper  understanding  of  radiation  will empower  the  public  to  feel  that  they  are  not  hopeless  victims  of  radiation.  The  corre- spondence  between  RAIN  and  the  specific  accumulated  dose  is  established.  The  equiv- alence will allow RAIN to serve as a common language of communication for the general public with which they can converse with radiation experts to discuss matters related to radiation  safety,  radiation  diagnosis  and  therapy,  nuclear  accidents,  and  other  related matters.  Such  fruitful  dialogues  will  ultimately  enhance  public  acceptance  of  radiation and associated technologies.
Keywords:
Annual Background Dose Exemption and Clearance Dose Medical Exposure
Nuclear Accidents Radiation Units
1.Introduction
Radiation remains a mysterious concept to  a vast  majority of people except for a tiny minority of experts who either specialize in it or work with it in their occupation. This
misunderstanding breeds unnecessary fear of radiation. Muller [1] attempts to put radiation in proper perspective by giving some interesting examples of radioactive materials: books are radioactive; our body is radioactive (unless long dead); the United States Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and
Firearms requires that wine, gin, whiskey, and vodka should not be legally sold in the USA unless these products contain sufficient radioactivity; biofuels are radioactive, etc. Radiation is ubiquitous and needs to be understood properly by the public in friendly and familiar terms to help alleviate un- founded fear.
The public's fear of radiation is unnecessarily heightened because the terms and units that are used to measure the level of radiation are diverse and formidably complicated for the general public to understand [2,3]. The public and even many scientists and engineers are genuinely intimidated by the terms and units of radiation that seem to be monopolized by the experts. Efforts to explain radiation terms and units to the public are almost invariably met with blank stares, embarrassment, or even disdain, as ignorance can breed distrust. Radiation scientists and nuclear engineers have  long since ignored the fact that their customers are not accustomed to the scientific terms and units  of  radiation. The absence of a common language between the public and the nuclear and radiation community has greatly hampered communication between these two groups, and as a result, public acceptance for nuclear power and radiation technol- ogy has been marginalized. The public's misunderstanding is amplified by the scientific jargon used by radiation experts and nuclear engineers when they communicate with the public. Many popular articles have been written that lament the public's ignorance about radiation and address the importance of and the need for public's correct understand- ing of radiation. Yet, there has not been a sincere attempt by the nuclear and radiation community to alleviate the public's fear by developing a common tool of communication that can facilitate the public's understanding. We attempt to improve this situation by introducing a new radiation scale in this study.
Communicating the matters related to radiation safety, nuclear accidents, and medical radiation in terms of scientific units such as Becquerel (Bq), Gray (Gy), Sievert (Sv), and their variations using micro and milli units has confounded and alienated the public, contributing enormously to elevating the public's anxieties about radiation due to mistrust rooted in discomfort with scientific verbiage.
Table 1 shows “SI derived units” defined by the Bureau International des Poids et Mesures (International Bureau of Weights and Measures) in the field of ionizing radiation. All radiation-related quantities or concepts in specific fields such as radiation science and radiation protection are based on these three SI derived units that are foreign to most people. To further complicate the situation, SI prefixes such as milli, micro, or kilo are used with any of these special names and symbols.
Table 2 lists various radiation dose concepts, all of which are basically a certain amount of energy imparted to a mass of target, but each describes a different concept, as defined in the table.
Additionally, previously other units, such as Roentgen, rem, rad, etc., were used to describe radiation doses [5,6].
To further complicate the matter, the kinetic energy of individual radiation particles is expressed by the units of eV, keV, or MeV, and the intensity of a radiation beam is often expressed by fluence (number of particles per unit area) or flux (number of particles per unit time to a given area) in radiation metrology.
These units are largely monopolized by radiation experts, and the public has extremely  little  interest in  using  them, let alone interest in learning the significance of all these units and conversions between them that are often necessary.
We propose a new radiation index that is friendly and simple for laymen to understand and use as a common tool of communication between them and the radiation community. In analogy with familiar units popularized in other areas, notably the seismic magnitude scale, acoustic intensity level, and hydrogen ion concentration in liquid (pH), all of which are dimensionless and simple, the new radiation unit proposed in this study should be friendly enough for the public to embrace it in their daily conversations when discussing radiation- related matters such as radiation safety, nuclear accidents, radiological medical diagnosis, radiation therapy, etc. The scale we propose will, therefore, be necessarily dimensionless and bear no scientific terminology. We will decide a reference point in the most proper manner and define any other level of radiation dose relative to this reference point as radiation index (RAIN), our new scale. That is, the new index will explicitly relate specific radiation levels to a commonly accepted reference radiation level via RAIN. In the following sections, the concept of RAIN will be developed, its relation to the scientific terms will be established, and applications in some practical areas will be exemplified.
2.Definition of the new concept, RAIN
We set some guiding principles in defining RAIN, which are as follows: (1) The new radiation index should be an interna- tional number, and easy to use in daily conversations and discussions among average people requiring little or no sci- entific knowledge of radiation and related subjects. (2) It should allow the general public to “feel” the meaning of the numbers expressed in the new scale in a similar manner to the popular seismic magnitude scale, acoustic intensity level (dB), and hydrogen ion concentration in liquid (acidity, pH);
Table 1 e	SI derived units in the field of ionizing radiation [4]
Table 2 e Various concepts of radiation dose in radiation science and protection.
that is, the new radiation scale shall be a dimensionless number. (3) The difference between the ordinary background radiation dose level and the danger level can range from a hundred-fold to over a million-fold; the logarithmic transform thus shall be not only useful, but also necessary to express such a wide range of applications. (4) The new concept shall be a comprehensive one that can express the accumulated dose (mSv) over a finite duration. (5) The new concept must be based on the effective dose among various dose concepts given in Table 2, because it can be related to the detrimental effects and the probability of biological radiation hazard such as cancer induction and genetic effects of ionizing radiation.
(6) To maximize the simplicity for the general public, the nu- merical value of RAIN shall retain no more than a single sig- nificant digit after the decimal point.
Following the above guidelines, we express the public ra- diation scale in terms of the newly defined measure of radi- ation level, RAIN, as follows:@1
Here, RAIN represents the logarithmic scale of radiation
dose relative to a reference dose D0. We will set D0 value at 10 mSv in a year in this study, based on the exemption and clearance levels suggested by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) [7] and widely accepted and applied by the in- ternational regulation groups. Doses below the exemption and clearance levels shall not be considered at all in terms of its risk of biological  hazards.  In this  context, a  RAIN value of  0 does not mean zero exposure but signifies a negligible bio- logical risk.
D1 refers to the radiation dose level of interest. The subscript 1 refers to either an exposure situation involving a year-long chronic exposure from background radiation sour- ces or a one-time single event associated with accidental, medical, or occupational exposure of various durationsdetermined by the nature of the event in a given circumstance. For example, taking a chest X-ray takes less than a second, whereas evacuating from a city due to a nuclear power plant (NPP) accident may take a few days or months. Another example is a situation of a radiation worker who may need to work in a radiation environment for 2,000 hours in a year.
D0  and  D1  defined  loosely  in  this  easy  manner  will  serve well to facilitate and enhance much-needed communication between  the  nuclear/radiation  community  and  the  general public, as well as stimulate conversations among lay people. Thus  defined,  RAIN  is  easily  interpreted  as  a  measure  of increment of radiation dose for any exposure case of interest above and beyond the reference radiation dose level for exemption. Using this  simple  concept,  the  public  can  begin  to  “feel”  and  un- derstand  the  meaning  of  the  numbers  and  associate  RAIN values with the events, measures, or experiences they may be more  familiar  with,  such  as  medical  computed  tomography (CT) examination.
Some typical cases for which we need to estimate D1 in order to compute the corresponding values of RAIN are shown in Table 3. The International Commission on Radio-logical Protection (ICRP) recommends 100 mSv as the maximum value for a reference level, incurred either acutely or in a year. This would mean that there is no difference in the biological effectiveness below 100 mSv regardless of temporal exposure conditions, i.e., either acute or chronic exposure. Readers interested in the technical basis for the above recommendation and details on other related issues such as dose and dose rate effectiveness factor are encour- aged to refer to ICRP 103 [8].
3.Interpretation of RAIN
The simple concept of RAIN is easy to use in daily conversa- tions between experts and laypersons, and the numbers are
Table 3 e Exposure types and representative cases to be considered in order to estimate D1.friendly and nonintimidating to the general public. With repeated uses of the RAIN concept in casual conversations, the public will begin to appreciate the connection between the numbers and certain events or episodes in medical and other applications they may have experienced. Government au- thorities, when they must announce and inform the public of events or situations involving radiation, can use RAIN values to refer to the level of incremental radiation of such events. This will facilitate public understanding of the significance of situations involving radioactive exposure without resorting to scientific units such as mSv, mSv, etc. that can easily perplex the public. Until now, public announcements on radiation tended to be riddled with scientific jargon for which the public generally has no understanding of the physical meaning of the terms and units, thus unnecessarily heightening the fear and mistrust of radiation. Now, people can have a better understanding of the situation by interpreting the RAIN values in terms of their own personal episodes drawn from medical, environmental, accidental, or other circumstances they may be familiar with.
4.Applications of RAIN
4.1.Natural background exposure
In our daily life, we are continuously exposed to various levels of natural background radiation depending on our location on earth. Table 4 shows the radiation sources and average annual radiation exposure levels of the world and a few selected countries. The world average annual human dose due to natural background radiation sources is shown to be 2.4 mSv, and by coincidence the calculated RAIN value is 2.4. Hence, this value of 2.4 can serve as another convenient reference point in the RAIN system, as it is easy for the general public and radiation experts to remember.
For instance, when the public is told that a certain event resulted in a RAIN value of 2, they will know that the incre- mental radiation from the event is less than 2.4, which is the world average annual human dose level due to natural back- ground radiation sources. If another event resulted in a RAIN value of 3.4, they can understand that the radiation level has increased by a factor of 10 above the natural background ra- diation exposure level.
Table 5 shows the average annual environmental radiation doses from terrestrial and cosmic radiation only. In the table, background environmental radiation dose for an hour due to terrestrial radiation from the ground and the cosmic radiation from space to the general public are also listed.
Table 6 shows the accumulated doses received from cos- mic radiation due to a 10-hour flight at different altitudes and their corresponding RAIN values [14].
Table 4 e Average annual human exposure to natural ionizing radiation.
Table 5 e Average environmental radiation dose (only from terrestrial radiation from ground and cosmic radiation from space).
Table 6 e Cosmic radiation exposure level depending on flight altitude.
4.2.Intake of radionuclide-contaminated food
Radiation contamination in food has become a social issue ever since the Chernobyl and Fukushima accidents have greatly contributed to reviving and intensifying the debates. After the Fukushima accident, governments of Japan and Korea have tightened the safety regulation for radiation- contaminated food by lowering the allowable level of 137Cs from 370 Bq/kg to 100 Bq/kg. Codex [15] issued guidelines on radiation-contaminated food imported from contaminated areas. The guidelines limit the acceptable radiation dose from food intake to the same level as the dose received by the general public over 1 year. This parameter, referred to as the intervention exemption level of dose), is set at 1 mSv, which is equivalent to the annual dose limit for the public recom- mended by ICRP.
The mean internal dose of the public due to annual con- sumption of imported contaminated food can be calculated by the following equation, and D should be smaller than the intervention exemption level of dose:@2
where D ¼ mean internal dose in the 1st year (mSv); GL ¼ gui- deline level of contamination concentration in foods (Bq/kg); M ¼ mass of food consumed in a year (kg); eing ¼ ingestion dose coefficient (dose per unit intake, mSv/Bq); and IPF ¼ import/ production factor (dimensionless).
M is based on the assumption of an average adult's annual food intake of 550 kg and an average infant's annual food intake of 200 kg. IPF is the ratio of import to production factor set at 0.1 (from Codex); eing depends on the dose conversion coefficient for each specific radionuclide, which is related to radiation type, energy, radioactive half-life, and biological half-life, and depends on age.
For example, the mean doses for adults and infants consuming imported food contaminated with 137Cs at 1,000 Bq/kg for a year are as follows:
For adults: E ¼ 1,000 Bq/kg × 550 kg × 1.3$10—5 mSv/Bq × 0.1
¼ 0.7 mSv
For infants: E ¼ 1,000 Bq/kg × 200 kg × 2.1$10—5 mSv/Bq × 0.1
¼ 0.4 mSv
We can also calculate the Codex GL level for 137Cs in an adult's food intake from Eq. (2) by replacing D with the inter- vention exemption level of dose, which is 1 mSv, as follows:
GL ¼ 1 mSv/(550 kg × 1.3$10—5 mSv/Bq × 0.1) ¼ 1,400 Bq/kg Table 7 shows four radionuclide types categorized by their
toxicity and the guide levels of contamination concentration by Codex. Also listed are the mean internal doses in the 1st year of consumption and their estimated corresponding RAIN values.
In the background environment, the two most plentiful ra- dioisotopes emitting gamma radiation are 40K and 137Cs, and their concentrations in food materials vary depending on re- gions and countries. The measured average 40K and 137Cs con- centrations in about 300 fresh food materials in Korea are in the range of 21.5e681 Bq/kg and in the range from the undetected
Table 7 e Examples of radiation dose for adults due to ingestion of imported food contaminated by major radionuclides at the guide level of concentration [15].	Table 8 e Measured average concentrations of 40K and 137Cs in common food materials of Korea [16]	level to 289 mBq/kg, respectively, and those of some represen- tative food materials are listed in Table 8 [16]. Half-lives of 40K and 137Cs are 1.28 × 109 years and 30 years, respectively. The radioisotope 40K is primordial, and 137Cs has been produced artificially via atmospheric nuclear bomb tests in the 1940s to 1950s. As we see in Table 8, 40K is much more abundant in food than 137Cs. According to the US Environmental Protection Agency report [17], the conversion factor for 50 years committed effective dose equivalent due to ingested foods containing 40K is 5.02 × 10—9 Sv/Bq. If a Korean consumes all the common food materials listed in Table 8, then the total radia- tion dose becomes 37 mSv/y, which is in the order of clearance and exemption level of IAEA, and its RAIN value becomes 0.6.
4.3.Medical exposure
In medical applications of radiation, the newly introduced radiation index will enhance the quality and quantity of di- alogues between physicians and patients.
Applying the RAIN concept to medical diagnosis or treat- ment requires a careful interpretation of RAIN values, as the radiation doses in medical applications are not evenly distributed around some mean values over a prolonged period, but they represent concentrated peak values over a short duration. The contrast is better understood by referring to Table 4, which includes the RAIN values for the events assumed to be observed over sustained long periods (mostly 1 year in Table 4), whereas the RAIN values shown in Tables 9e11 represent narrowly concentrated peaks and therefore appear to be relatively high. The RAIN values for medical one- time exposures should be interpreted in this context to avoid any unnecessary alarm.
Table 10 e Average effective dose per nuclear medicine diagnostic examination in healthcare level I countries (1997e2007) [19].
Tables 9 and 10 show the average effective doses con- verted into RAIN values for one-time medical exposures due to various medical diagnoses when typical patients are subjected to X-ray or nuclear medicine diagnostic examina- tions. These data are excerpted from the 2008 United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation (UNSCEAR) report. In these tables, healthcare level I country means that it belongs to the group of countries having the best healthcare system. Less than a quarter of the world population lives in these countries. It is worthwhile to notice that the difference of RAIN values between chest X-ray and CT is about 2, which means that the difference in terms of dose is 100 times.
The radiation exposure data shown in Table 11 refer to the radiotherapy dose received by a typical patient at healthcare
Table 11 e Average radiotherapy dose to a patient in healthcare level I countries (1997e2007) [20].
level I. These data are based on the value averaged over 14 countries belonging to the healthcare level I countries.
4.4.Industrial radiation exposure
RAIN can also be applied to food and agricultural industries. In addressing the effect of radionuclide-contaminated foods and agricultural products, health authorities can use RAIN to communicate with the public and help alleviate possible over- reaction by the public. Sterilization by radiation is very useful in many fields of industries such as long-term storage or transport of food, sterilization of surgical equipment, sterili- zation of male insects, etc. In 1981, the World Health Organi- zation reported that “the irradiation of any food commodity up to an overall average dose of 10 kGy presents no toxico- logical hazard” [21], which corresponds to the RAIN value of
9.0. In 1999, the Study Group of the World Health Organization concluded that no upper limit of dose is required to be imposed. This means that “irradiated foods are deemed wholesome throughout the technologically useful dose range from below 10 kGy to envisioned doses above 10 kGy” [22].
4.5.Accidental exposure
Most governments set radiation levels to alert or warn the public when a radiation leak accident occurs from a nuclear facility, following the IAEA guidelines. These warning levels are determined based on hourly dose or dose rate because of the need for a quick decision on sheltering or evacuation. Table 12 shows the general criteria for protection actions in an emergency to reduce the risk of stochastic effects for the general public and fetus.
The most significant nuclear accidents are the Three-mile Island NPP accident in 1979, Chernobyl NPP accident in 1986, and Fukushima NPP accident in 2011.
Following the Chernobyl NPP accident on April 26, 1986, residents of Pripiyat and Yanov were forced to evacuate the next day by the Soviet government because it was projected that the environmental dose level might exceed 100 mSv/h. On May 3, the evacuation zone was set to a region within a 30 km radius from the accident site rather arbitrarily, but later in 1987 this 30 km zone was based on the revised dose level of 100 mSv. The three zones defined within 30 km are listed in Table 13. A total of 116,000 residents from 187 villages were finally evacuated by September 1986.
Evacuation of people from the vicinity of the Fukushima Daiichi NPP began in the evening of March 11, 2011, with the
evacuation zone gradually extended from a radius of 2 km of the plant to 3 km and then to 10 km. By the evening of March 12, 2011 it had been extended to 20 km. Similarly, the area in which people were ordered to shelter was extended from within 3e10 km of the plant shortly after the accident to within 20e30 km by March 15, 2011. In the area within a 20e30 km radius of the NPP, the public was ordered to shelter until March 25, 2011 when the national government recom- mended voluntary evacuation. As a result of nuclear power plant facility conditions, difficulties in coordination, and insufficient preplanning, orders for evacuation and sheltering were modified several times within 24 hours, and eventually about 78,000 people living within a zone with a radius of 20 km were ordered to be evacuated. In some locations beyond the 20 km evacuation zone, dose rates of the order of a few hun- dred micro-Sievert per hour (mSv/h) were measured from March 15, 2011 onward [25].
In 2013, the evacuation areas were subdivided based on the more carefully estimated annual total dose to people inhab- iting the area, if any. These areas are defined and illustrated in Table 14.
4.6.Recommended limit of radiation for occupational and public exposure
ICRP has continuously suggested and updated recommenda- tions necessary for protection of people from radiation since 1928. Under ICRP Publication 60 in 1991 [27], the system of radiological protection is based on three principles: justifica- tion of practice, optimization of protection, and individual dose limits. The recommended individual dose limits, which are identical to those of ICRP 60, are given in Table 15, and newly added dose constraints in ICRP Publication 103 in 2007 [8], which will apply to a person in one of three exposure sit- uations, are listed in Table 16. From Table 15, the 5-year average annual effective dose for occupational exposure  is 20 mSv. Therefore, assuming 2,000 hours of working time, the average hourly dose will be 10 mSv/h, which can be a guide level to define the radiation work area in nuclear and radiation facilities in general.
4.7.Biological effects of radiation exposure
Radiation exposure to humans or living organs can cause short- or long-term biological effects, which are generally categorized into chronic effects and acute or deterministic effects. The former is also called a stochastic effect because its
Table 12 e General criteria for protection actions in an emergency to reduce the risk of stochastic effects [23]
Table 14 e Three areas of 30 km evacuation zone in Fukushima in 2013 [26]
Table 15 e Recommended dose limits from ICRP Publication 103 [8].
occurrence is very probabilistic, and it is a dominant effect at low dose rates and long-term exposure. A representative example is cancer occurrence and genetic effect. Radiation exposure may approximately increase additional cancer risk by a factor of 5%/Sv, but below the 100 mSv level, it is uncer- tain whether the cancer was induced by radiation or by other causes. The latter effect is called acute radiation syndrome, which normally occurs in a few minutes or weeks at most depending on the exposure levels. The important dose levels for acute radiation syndrome due to whole-body exposure are summarized in Table 17. Although the lethality after total- body irradiation is dependent on the dose and dose rate, the dose level for 50% lethality in 60 days (LD50/60) can be defined based on the cumulative data on human radiation exposure. ICRP has reported that LD50/60 is approximately 3.3e4.5 Gy without medical management and 6e7 Gy with medical management such as transfusion of antibiotics and/or blood [29].
4.8.RAIN values for multiple-exposure events: addition and multiplication
RAIN is a logarithmic scale similar to other scales such as seismic, acoustic, and acidity scales that are not additive. For
example, earthquakes of magnitude 4 and 6 do not add up to give a magnitude of 10. However, RAIN can be calculated to describe the cumulative effect of multiple exposure events as follows:@3
Let us consider some limited cases, starting with a two- event case. In this case, if we define R as the ratio of the smaller RAIN value to the larger RAIN value, that is,@
then the total RAIN value will be:
RAIN ¼ log10.10RAIN1 þ 10RAIN2 Σ ¼ log10Σð1 þ RÞ× 10RAIN1 Σ
@4
If two RAIN values are equal, then R ¼ 1, and hence the incremental part of Eq. (4), i.e., D ¼ log10 (1 þ 1) ¼ 0.3. For example, the RAIN value for a single CT scan is 2.9, as shown in Table 9. Therefore, if the CT examination is taken twice, the Table 16 e Dose constraints and reference levels recommended for individuals from single dominant sources for all types   of exposure situations that can be controlled [8,28].
Table 17 e Acute radiation syndrome by gamma irradiation to whole body [30].dose will be doubled  and  the  total  RAIN  value  will  be 2.9 þ 0.3 ¼ 3.2.
Clearly, the total RAIN value will be slightly larger than the bigger RAIN value (by 0.3 maximum), and it can be estimated quickly and easily using Table 18. As another example, let us consider the case that an ordinary man will receive an extra exposure of 1 mSv (RAIN value 2.0) in addition to the world average background dose of 2.4 mSv (RAIN value 2.4) in a particular year. Since the RAIN ratio R is 2/(2.4) ¼ 83%, so, from Table 18, the incremental RAIN is then 0.3. Therefore, the total RAIN value will be 2.4 þ 0.3 ¼ 2.7.
Since we suggest that the numerical value of RAIN shall retain no more than a single significant digit after the decimal point, the following tables may be helpful for quick conversion of mSv into RAIN values. For example, 1 mSv is equivalent to a RAIN value of 2, as shown in Table 19, and thus 5 mSv is easily converted to a RAIN value of 2.7 by Table 20.
Table 18 e Increment of RAIN values (R is the ratio of two RAIN values).
4.9.Summary of representative RAIN values
Table 21 shows a summary of RAIN values representing some familiar events or cases exemplified in Sections 4.1e4.6. As a quick aid for the general public, the last column of Table 21 provides the three zones of RAIN values (green, yellow, and red zones), which are characterized by the degree of severity of radiation exposure.
The boundary between the green and yellow zones is determined to be a RAIN value of 3 (equivalent to 10 mSv) because this value corresponds to the  boundary  between  the high level of annual natural radiation exposure at some residential area requiring active monitoring and regulation  of radiation exposure and its risk. In the green zone, bio- logical effect due to radiation exposure can be negligible in comparison with other natural hazards. However, in the yellow zone, cancer risk should be taken into account and   a   prudent   approach   for   radiological   protection   is
recommended.
The boundary between the yellow and red zones is deter- mined to be a RAIN value of 5 (equivalent to 1,000 mSv), which can be considered as the threshold of acute radiation syn- drome, such as vomiting, nausea, and hematopoietic changes. As the radiation exposure increases, the probability of lethality will increase in the red zone.
Table 19 e Table for conversion of dose in mSv into RAIN value.
Table 20 e Increment of RAIN values for multiplication of a dose.
5.Conclusion
The general public is least familiar with the scientific units currently used to define the level or amount of radiation. It is fair to say that the public has largely been kept in the dark as far as radiation is concerned. Public ignorance about the meaning of radiation units greatly contributed to the public's distrust and fear of radiation even when radiation levels are negligibly small, as the scientific units typically have a range of many orders of magnitude and often the numbers tend to be large if expressed in terms of the smallest units (mSv, for instance). Spurred by the need to create a common language
that can bridge the gap between the general public and the nuclear/radiation community, this study proposes a new scale for radiation level. This will strengthen the link be- tween these two groups, which has thus far remained weak due to the misunderstanding and fear of radiation elevated by the difficult physical units the experts have preferred to use at the exclusion of the public.
The new scale is a dimensionless number, RAIN, based on a logarithmic scale analogous to the well-known concept of seismic scale. This study established the correspondence be- tween RAIN and scientific units. Events resulting in a negative RAIN value do not have to be considered because they are below the exemption and clearance levels. The world average annual human exposure due to natural background radiation sources is
2.4 mSv and, by coincidence, the corresponding RAIN value has the same numerical value of 2.4, making it a convenient second reference radiation level. To further facilitate public under- standing of the significance of RAIN values, we provide a simple reference guide by introducing three zones (green, yellow, and red zones) the boundaries of which are demarcated by RAIN values of 3 (equivalent to 10 mSv) and 5 (equivalent to 1,000 mSv or 1 Sv). Also shown are the radiation levels expressed in RAIN for a number of well-known episodes that happen in medicine, health physics, nuclear facilities, and other fields.
We hope that this new scale of radiation will serve as a common tool of communication to facilitate constructive dis- cussions between lay people and nuclear and radiation experts without breeding misunderstanding about radiation that has led to unnecessary and exaggerated fear of radiation for so long. The new radiation scale is expected to familiarize the public
Table 21 e Scale of RAIN values for representative events in three zones.
with radiation and educate them on radiation properly without prejudice. When popularized, the new index will become as familiar as the seismic scale, and nonexperts will be able to use it comfortably in their daily conversations involving radiation, radiation safety, nuclear accidents, and radiation applications.
Conflicts of interest
There is no conflict of interest with KUSTAR-KAIST Institute.
Acknowledgments
G.C. and J.H.K. were supported by KUSTAR-KAIST Institute (grant number N11160010(00)) for this work.
