<title>Experiment – calculated investigation of composite materials for protection against radiation</title>
<author>Natalya Cherkashina, Vladimir Gavrish, Tatyana Chayka</author>
<Affiliation>a.Department of Chemical technology and new materials, Sevastopol State University, 33 Universitetskaya str., 299053, Sevastopol,Russian Federation;b.Scientific-educational center “Advanced technologies and materials”, Sevastopol State University, 33 Universitetskaya str., 299053, Sevastopol, Russian Federation</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.matpr.2019.01.028</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2019.01.028</URL>
Abstract
The potential of optimal composition designing of fillers for heterogeneous radiation-protective materials for a given isotope composition of radioactive contamination is shown. The results of experiment-calculated investigation of the reducing capacity  of heterogeneous radiation-protective materials with different fillers related to gamma radiation are presented. Effectiveness both for γ - radiation attenuation due to thickness of the absorber and the γ - radiation attenuation dependence related to energy for the proposed modifications are determined. The universal table of dependence of the protection thickness (in cm) for modification for various attenuation multiplicities of γ - radiation reduction on the basis of theoretical values of the dose factors of accumulation for infinite extent protection configuration is presented.
Keywords:optimization of radiation protection; attenuation multiplicity; heterogeneous radiation-protective material
1.Introduction
The main regulations of the recommendations of the International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) of 2007 [1] include an application of the principles of substantiation and optimization of the protection against all controlled radiation situations, which are characterized as situations of planned radiation, emergency and existing
radiation. The publication [1] emphasizes the reinforcement of the principle of optimization of radiation protection, which should be applied to all situations of exposure equally, under condition of limitations of individual doses and radiation risks such are: the implementation of boundary doses and risks for the situations of planned exposure and reference levels for emergency and existing exposure situations [2-4].
For effective protection against γ - radiation, materials with a high-Z and high density are used, for example: lead, concrete, steel, etc. [3]. In number of these materials, the best absorption rate of γ - rays has lead, the application of which, as a protection against exposure to γ-radiation is limited by its low melting temperature (327 0C), so the metals using in hot zones are: tungsten (atomic number Z=74; density ρ=19.3 g / cm3), tantalum (atomic number Z=73; density ρ=16.6 g / cm3) [5], titanium (atomic number Z=22; density ρ=4.54 g/cm3), etc. Its high atomic number and high specific gravity make it possible to use the materials to create a space-saving protection.
An important means of ensuring individual radiation safety of employees working in the area of radiation sources or radioactive contamination is protective clothing, which, depending on the application should provide a high level of biological protection of personnel. At present day, many modern materials used for protective suits are high-filled composite materials based on a polymer (rubber, rubber resin, plastic, etc.) with special filler of absorber compounds [6-8]. In the capacity of fillers such metals as lead, barium, cadmium, molybdenum, tungsten [9], their carbides [10,11], lanthanides, and various other compounds are used.
However, most materials have a complex composition with expensive and rare raw material ingredients, which widely effects on their cost.
2.Experimental part
In this paper, a protective composite material is proposed based on polyvinyl acetate glue, GOST (State Standard) 30535-97. As a filler of the composite material of radiation protection, submicron powders were used, obtained as result of the TTC type hard-alloyed waste recycling (tungsten carbide TC – titanium carbide TiC – tantalum carbide TaC) by a unique technology [12]. As a result of processing of hard-alloyed waste the matrix destruction occurs, and with it the high-melting metals and (or) their carbides mechanical properties change, conduced to the acceleration of grinding of raw materials, up to nano-dimension and its transition to the fine-dispersed phase.
The powders following used as the filler of the protective composite were investigated by scanning electron microscope PHENOM proX Company: Phenom-World B. V. (Netherlands) with an integrated system of energy- dispersive analysis. The maximum magnification is 150 000, with a resolution of 10 nm, accelerating voltage of 5, 10, 15 kV.
Ultimate analysis results (Fig. 1, table 1)the powder under study was obtained using the program Element Identification of Phenom Company, which allows using the electron microscope Phenom ProX for the analysis of samples by energy-dispersive spectroscopy.
Fig. 1. Spectra composition of the powder under study
Table 1. The powder – modifier’s elemental composition.
The results of elemental analysis demonstrated the powder under study is a mixture of high-melting metals. The presence of carbon indicates that some of the metals are in the form of carbides.
To analyze the size, shape and morphology of fractions the Particle Metric software was used that allow you to analyze images of the fractions (fig. 2, 3).
Fig.2. Electron micrograph of the powder under study
Fig. 3. Histogram of powder fraction size distribution
According to the data of electron microscopic study, the powder obtained from the products of the TTC alloy, in general, consists of fractions with sizes smaller than 1 µm, the shape is closer to the spherical. Along with the nano- sized fine-fraction there are fractions with sizes larger than 1 µm, which corresponds, being a population of large number of small fractions.
To obtain experimental and empirical data, composite materials with different filler content (mass) were investigated (mass concentration %):1 – 10 %; 2 – 15%; 3 – 20 %; 4 – 25 %; 5 -30 %
During the tests, the dosimeter-radiometer MKG-01. (serial number № 1122672, the validity date of the Certificate of Verification until 11.09.2018) was used, which is designed to monitor the main characteristics of continuous photon (x-ray and gamma) and beta radiation, the professional portable universal and multifunctional device with individual and stationary power supply. The specification of MKG-01 is given in the table 2.
Table 2. Performance specification of MKG-01.
Test methodology based on attenuation of radiation relation from the concentration of modifier used similar to [13]. The attenuation multiplicity was estimated as the ratio of the exposure rate on the surface of protection (the tested sample) to the exposure rate behind protection [14]. The exposure rate in the "no protection" geometry was recorded at a distance (d) away from the gamma radiation source equal to the sample thickness (Fig. 4a). In the geometry "behind the protection" the exposure rate was recorded at closest point to the surface of the testing sample on the same axis as the source of gamma radiation (Fig.4b).
Based on the condition of electronic equilibrium (Air Kerma (Kinetic Energy Releazed in Material or per unit Mass)) measured by the dosimeter-radiometer MKG-01, the equivalent dose rate was expressed in µZv/h. The attenuation multiplicity was determined as a ratio of values of exposure dose rate, measured in "no protection" geometry to the value of exposure dose rate, measured in geometry "behind the protection". To reduce the systematic inaccuracy the measurements were carried out 10 times. Exposure dose rate values were calculated as the arithmetical mean. The standard deviation of the estimation of the attenuation multiplicity for the experimental method does not exceed 20%.
Fig. 4. Measurement schemes: (a) "no protection" geometry measurement; (b) "behind the protection" geometry measurement [11].
During the research five sources of gamma radiation with different energies of gamma-ray photons were used. To obtain experimental data, radioisotopes Со60, Сs137, Sr90 with an activity of 1000 – 10000 Bq were used.
3.Analysis of the experiment results
The obtained relations of the radiation attenuation on the energies for composites with different filler content are shown in Fig. 5-7.
Fig. 5. The relation of β - radiation attenuation to energy for composite materials with different filler content: 1 - 10 %; 2 - 15 %; 3 - 20 %; 4 - 25 %; 5 -30 %).
Fig. 6. The relation of β - radiation attenuation to energy for composite materials with different filler content: 1 - 10 %; 2 - 15 %; 3 – 20 %; 4 - 25 %; 5 -30 %).
The relation of the attenuation multiplicity on the thickness of the absorber obtained according to the methodologies [15-16].
Fig. 7. The attenuation efficiency of γ-radiation for E=2.0 MeV on the absorber thickness with different filler content: 3 - 20 %; 4 - 25 %; 5 -30 %).
To determine the protection against γ - radiation of radioisotopes, the Universal Table 3 is used, calculated for a composite material with a filler content of 30 %, based on the theoretical values of the dose factors accumulation for infinite extent protection geometry.
Table 3. Protection Thickness (cm) of composite material with 30% of the filler for different attenuation multiplicities γ-rays (broad beam)
With this table, a number of practical problems in the design of personal protective equipment and installations containing ionizing radiation could be solved. The initial arguments of the Table are the energy of γ-radiation from 0.1 to 2.2 MeV and the attenuation multiplicity from 1.5 to 50. When determining the required thickness of the barrier geometry protection, the calculations give some overstatement of the thickness, because the Table is calculated for infinite extent protection geometry. This overestimation causes a decrease of 5-10% of the given exposure dose rate behind the protection.
4.Conclusion
A comparative analysis of submicron powders obtained as a result TTC type hard-alloyed waste recycling (tungsten carbide TC – titanium carbide TiC – tantalum carbide TaC) with different concentrations of titanium, tantalum and tungsten compounds is done. The reducing capacity of composite materials with different fillers in relation to gamma radiation is researched. The effectiveness of γ - radiation attenuation due to thickness of the absorber and γ - radiation attenuation dependence related to energy for the proposed modifications are determined.
The data of attenuation multiplicity in the form of a Universal Table of dependence of the thickness of protection (in cm) for modification at different attenuation multiplicities of γ - radiation on the basis of theoretical values of the dose factors of accumulation for infinite extent protection configuration are obtained.
