<title>Determination of some useful radiation interaction parameters for waste foods</title>
<author>F. Akman a, *, I.H. Geçibesler b, M.I. Sayyed c, S.A. Tijani d, e, A.R. Tufekci f, I. Demirtas f</author>
<Affiliation>a  Bingo€l  University,  Vocational  School  of  Technical  Sciences,  Department  of  Electronic  Communication Technology, 12000  Bingo€l,  Turkey
b  Bingo€l  University,  Health  Faculty,  Laboratory  of  Natural  Product  Research, 12000  Bingo€l,  Turkey
c Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, University of Tabuk, Tabuk, Saudi Arabia
d Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia
e National Institute of Radiation Protection and Research, Ibadan, Nigeria
f Cankiri Karatekin University, Faculty of Science, Department of Chemistry, 18000 Cankiri, Turkey
</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>NUCLEAR ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2018.05.007</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2018.05.007</URL>
ABSTRACT
The mass attenuation coefﬁcients (m/r) of food waste samples (pomegranate peel, acorn cap, lemon peel, mandarin peel, pumpkin peel, grape peel, orange peel, pineapple peel, acorn peel and grape stalk) have been measured employing a Si(Li) detector at 13.92, 17.75, 20.78, 26.34 and 59.54 keV. Also, the theo- retical  values  of  the  mass  attenuation  coefﬁcients  have  been  evaluated  utilizing  mixture  rule from
WinXCOM program. The results showed that the lemon peel has the highest values of m/r among the
selected samples. From the obtained mass attenuation coefﬁcients, we determined some absorption parameters such as effective atomic number (Zeff), electron density (NE) and molar extinction coefﬁcient (ε). It was found that the Zeff values of all food wastes lie within the range of 4.034e7.595, whereas the NE of the studied food wastes was found to be in the range of 0.301e1.720 × 1025 (electrons/g) for present energy region.
Keywords:
Food waste Photon
Mass attenuation coefﬁcient Effective atomic number Molar extinction coefﬁcient
1.Introduction
Food waste consists of the food system from the farm, post- harvest, cultivating, retailing and the consumers. Food wastes are the single largest type of waste entering the landﬁlls. Each wasted food means wasted money for businesses and housing. These waste foods are part of the hazards such as methane and greenhouse gases. One of the studies to provide for the recycling of these wastes may be a radiation shielding work area. In addition, food is exposed to radiation for preservation, control of insects, prevention of food- borne illness, extend the shelf life, delay of sprouting and ripening, and sterilization. It is very important to know the radiation atten- uation characteristics of food at the applied radiation.
Food waste has been identiﬁed as one of the factors that has overburdened the global environment in recent years. A lot of wastes are being discarded in large amounts [1,2] considering the location and method of harvest. In recent times, compositional studies of food wastes suggest the presence of bioactive compounds, which are generally primary and secondary plants' metabolites. Some of the metabolites include phenolics, alkaloids, glycosides, volatile oils, mucilage, gums [3]. In addition, fruit peels' bioactive compounds contain a higher percentage of antioxidant activities [4] and can be used in the production of nutraceuticals and other products with a good fraction of ﬁbers [5]. Because of the potential importance of the chemical composition of medicinal plants, many studies have been conducted [6e10].
Mass attenuation coefﬁcient of different materials is very important for x-ray ﬂuorescent (XRF) analysis because it helps in selecting the optimum reference sample during elemental analysis [11]. Different researchers have carried out works on determination of the mass attenuation coefﬁcients of medicinal plants. Morabad and Kerur [12] experimentally determined the mass attenuation coefﬁcients of some fruits, leaves, stem and seeds, which are known to  be  medicinal  using  a  NaI(Tl)  detector  at  8.136,  13.596, 17.781,
22.581 and 32.891 keV. Their result showed a linear correlation in relation to the energies. Teerthe and Kerur [13] also worked on the x-ray mass attenuation coefﬁcient of medicinal plants at low en- ergies, their result is useful for XRF analysis and their experimental result compared well with the theoretical. Trunova et al. [11] worked on the measurement of the mass attenuation coefﬁcient of some biological samples from 7 to 12 keV. Their result showed a signiﬁcant variation among the biological samples. Variation be- tween plant and animal tissue reached 47% and about 22% with different animal tissues. Tousi et al. [14] measured the mass attenuation coefﬁcients of Eremunus e Rhizophora spp. particle boards using x-rays in the energy range 16.63e25.3 keV. The result from this work showed that Eremunus e Rhizophora spp. particle boards could be used as phantoms in diagnostic radiology.
Mass attenuation coefﬁcients of food wastes like pomegranate peel, lemon peel, mandarin peel, pumpkin peel, grape peel, orange peel, pineapple peel, acorn peel, grape stalk and acorn cap are not available in the literature. So, this work has produced the mass attenuation coefﬁcients, molar extinction coefﬁcients, effective atomic numbers and electron densities of these wastes to help in the XRF analysis of any other similar wastes because of the potential usage of these wastes in medicine.
In the present work, mass attenuation coefﬁcients (m/r) of ten
food waste samples were measured by using gamma-ray trans- mission method at 13.92, 17.75, 20.78, 26.34 and 59.54 keV photon energies. The gamma-ray attenuation measurements were measured using 241Am point sources. The molar extinction co- efﬁcients (ε), effective atomic numbers (Zeff) and electron densities (NE) for the present food wastes samples were derived from  the
measured m/r values. The experimental values of m/r, ε, Zeff and NE
were compared with those obtained theoretically using WinXCOM program. To best of our knowledge none of the studies have eval- uated the photon attenuation characterizations of food waste samples and this encourages us to investigate the radiation atten- uation parameters for the present samples. Therefore, under- standing the physical interaction properties of food wastes with X- or gamma-rays has become essential for many industrial applica- tions. Besides, the results obtained from this work can be useful in the design of new industrial radiation shielding products using waste foods and in the development of non-toxic shielding materials.
2.Materials and method
2.1.Sample preparation
The food wastes used in the study were obtained from local markets in Bingo€l city in Turkey. After the food wastes were sepa- rated from their edible parts, the wastes were placed on unprinted papers and allowed to dry in airless, sunless laboratory conditions at 25 ○C. After the drying process, the wastes were pulverized by grinding the laboratory type mill. Powdered food wastes were pelleted to 13 mm in diameter with the aid of a laboratory-type hydraulic pellet press. Perkin-Elmer brand elemental analysis in- strument 2400 CHNS/O series II system was used to determine the chemical composition of food wastes. Total carbon, hydrogen and nitrogen in food wastes were determined by minor revisions
according to European standard EN15104: 2011. The oxygen con- tent in the samples was calculated by the following formula.
Oxygen (%) ¼ 100-[carbon%þhydrogen%þnitrogen%](Lighest moist basis).
The chemical compositions and physical densities of the food
wastes are shown Table 1.
2.2.Experimental details
The mass attenuation coefﬁcients (m/r) of the food wastes were determined at 13.92, 17.75, 20.78, 26.34 and 59.54 keV using the transmission geometry as shown in Fig. 1. The measurements were conducted using the Si(Li) semiconductor detector system com- bined with multichannel analyzer (MCA), a radioactive point source, food waste (as the absorber) and collimators. The Si(Li) detector (Ortec SLP-04160P-OPT-0.3 model) has 12.5 mm2 active area, Be window thickness 0.8 mm and 160 eV FWHM at 5.9 keV. The preampliﬁer (239-POF model) is mounted on the head of the detector. Also, the Si(Li) detector is combined with 4096 channels MCA (DSPEC-LF model) and high voltage source 1000 V with negative polarity. The detector system energy calibration was conducted  using the test radioactive  sources. 13.92, 17.75, 20.78,
26.34 and 59.54 keV photon energies from the 241Am point source (370 kBq activity) were used in the experiments. A narrow beam was desired for this experiment, so the radioactive point source was shielded by the pin hole lead collimators. The collimation was necessary to minimize the scattered radiation reaching the detector crystal and the measurements were taken in a narrow beam ge- ometry setup with suitable collimators. The radioactive point source was ﬁxed at a distance of 9 cm from the Be window of the detector. In minimizing the statistical uncertainty, the counting time with and without the food waste samples was selected be- tween 15200 s and 61200 s. The life time which equals to real time was used in the MCA. The ﬁnal intensity (I) and initial intensity (I0) of the food waste samples were measured experimentally under the same timing and experimental conditions. The corresponding energy peak positions were checked before and after the experi- ments; and no shift was observed. Hence, we can conclude that the all detector systems are stable throughout the experiments. The corresponding peak areas were obtained with the help of the Origin
7.5 (demo) program. Using this program, the peak area corrections were performed by subtracting the background counts. A typical spectrum of 241Am with and without attenuation by pomegranate peel sample is shown in Fig. 2.
2.3.Theoretical background
When a beam of photons with an initial intensity (I0) passing through a certain medium, the beam is attenuated exponentially according to the BeereLambert law given by the following relation:
Table 1
Chemical composition of food wastes.
Fig. 1. Transmission geometry.
Fig. 2. A typical spectrum of 241Am with and without attenuation by pomegranate peel sample.@1
where I, I0, x and m represent the transmitted intensity, initial in- tensity from the source, the thickness of the medium and the linear attenuation coefﬁcient of the medium, respectively. One  important
parameter related  to m is  the mass  attenuation  coefﬁcients  (m/r)
which measures the probability of the interaction that occurs be- tween the gamma photon and the medium.
The theoretical values for the m/r for all elements as well as for
different mixtures and compounds are available in different stan- dard tables [15]. The theoretical values of the present samples can be calculated from the sum of weighted contributions from the constituent elements (H, C, N and O). This method is known as mixture rule and can be written as [16]:@2
where wi represents the weight fraction, (m/r)i the mass attenua- tion coefﬁcient of the ith (H, C, N and O) elements. Theoretical (m/r)i values of the present samples were predicted from WinXCOM [17].
The effective atomic number (Zeff) can be obtained from the knowledge of m/r by using the following equation:
@3
where fi is the fractional abundance of the element i relative to the number of atoms, Zi is the atomic number and Ai is the atomic weight. The more detailed knowledge of determination of effective atomic number is given in Refs. [18e20].
The effective electron density (NE) is another important quantity that characterizes the number of electrons per unit mass of the interacting materials. The NE is related to the Zeff according to the following relation [21]:
@4
where ntot is the total number of atoms, ni is the atom number of ith element, Ai is the atomic weight of ith element and NA is the Avogadro constant.
The molar extinction coefﬁcient (ε) is the attenuation produced by one mole of the substance. Singh and Gerward [22] showed that the molar extinction coefﬁcient can be calculated from the m/r
values by using the following relation:
@5
where M is the molecular weight.
3.Results and discussion
Table 1 presents the main abundant elements of the food wastes. These values helped us to calculate the theoretical m/r values using WinXCOM program for the selected samples at different energies. Mass attenuation coefﬁcients (m/r) of pome- granate peel, acorn cap, lemon peel, mandarin peel, pumpkin peel, grape peel, orange peel, pineapple peel, acorn peel and grape stalk
were measured at photon energies - 13.92, 17.75, 20.78, 26.34 and 59.54 keV - together with the theoretical values evaluated utilizing mixture  rule  from  WinXCOM  program  have  been  illustrated in
Table 2. The mass attenuation coefﬁcients of lemon, mandarin, and pineapple peels as a function of photon energy are given in Fig. 3 to better observe changes in experimental and theoretical mass attenuation coefﬁcient results. The mass attenuation coefﬁcients of other food waste samples are also in the same trend. It is apparent
from Table 2 and Fig. 3 that the experimentally measured m/r values
Table 2
Experimental and theoretical values of mass attenuation coefﬁcient (cm2/g) for food wastes.
Fig. 3. The mass attenuation coefﬁcients of lemon, mandarin, and pineapple peels as a function of photon energy.
were in good agreement with those calculated theoretically. This agreement between the experimental and theoretical m/r values supports the validity of the transmission geometry used for determining m/r for the present food waste samples.
Inspection of  the data in Table 2 and  Fig. 3  shows that the m/r
values of the food waste samples decreases exponentially with the increase of photon energy. Besides, lemon peel has higher values of
m/r among the selected food waste samples, due to higher amount of oxygen in this sample. Also, Table 2 shows that m/r values for the
lowest photon energy (13.92 keV) present higher difference be- tween the food waste samples in relation to m/r values for the highest  photon  energy  (59.54  keV),  where  the  m/r values  at
59.54 keV for all samples are almost the same. This is because at
where x, r are the thickness and density of the sample, DI0 and DI represent the uncertainties of I0 and I, and rx represents the un- certainty in the mass per unit area.
Using Eq. (6), the uncertainty in the experimental
Fig. 4. A typical graph of effective atomic numbers for lemon, mandarin and pineapple peels as a function of photon energy.
Table 3
Experimental and theoretical values of effective atomic number for food wastes.
Table 4
Experimental and theoretical values of effective electron density (x1025) (electrons/g) for food wastes.measurements was found to be less than 7%. This uncertainty is mostly due to the scattered photons reaching the detector, the thickness and density measurements, and statistical uncertainties in I and I0.
Experimental as well as theoretical Zeff values were summarized in Table 3. Also, in this table we presented the experimental un- certainties in Zeff values. A typical graph of effective atomic numbers for lemon, mandarin and pineapple peels as a function of photon energy is exhibited in Fig. 4. Satisfactory agreement has been reported between experimentally measured as well as theo- retically calculated values. Besides, it is clear from Table 3 that the Zeff values of all food wastes lie within range of 4.034e7.595 for
Fig. 5. The effective electron densities of lemon, mandarin and pineapple peels versus photon energy.
studied energy region. This means that the Zeff for the present food waste samples remain in the range of the atomic number (Z) of the constituent elements of  these  samples,  namely  H,  C,  N  and  O  (1 < Zeff < 8). Furthermore, from Table 3 it can be obviously noticed that the Zeff values for all samples under investigation change very little since all these samples consist of low Z constituent elements. Again, we found that the lemon peel has the highest values of Zeff among the selected samples, due to its relatively high value of mass attenuation coefﬁcients in comparison with other samples. Also, from Table 3 and Fig. 4, it is found that the Zeff values decrease with
the increase of photon energy. The trend of Zeff with photon en- ergies is nearly identical to that of m/r. The experimental and theoretical  Zeff  values then were  used  to calculate  the electron
density (NE) for the present food waste samples and the results have been depicted in Table 4. To observe the change, the effective electron densities of lemon, mandarin and pineapple peels were plotted versus photon energy as seen Fig. 5. The NE of the studied food wastes is found to be in the range of 0.301e1.720 × 1025 (electrons/g) for studied energy region. Additionally, the trend of NE with photon energy is almost similar to that of Zeff.
The molar extinction coefﬁcient is a common parameter when dealing with the attenuation of a photon through certain medium. The experimental and theoretical values of ε for the present food waste samples are enlisted in Table 5. Also, the typical plot of molar extinction coefﬁcients versus photon energy for lemon, mandarin and pineapple peels is shown in Fig. 6. There is an agreement be- tween the experimentally measured ε values with those obtained theoretically using WinXCOM program. It is clearly seen from the values in Table 5 and Fig. 6 that the values of ε for all samples depend inversely upon the energy of the photon. In other words,
the behavior of ε with photon energies is similar to that of m/r and this is logical since ε depends on m/r according to Eq. (5).
Table 5
Experimental and theoretical values of molar extinction coefﬁcients for food wastes.
Fig. 6. The typical plot of molar extinction coefﬁcients versus photon energy for lemon, mandarin and pineapple peels.
4.Conclusion
The experimental work in this study was aimed to get some information on the m/r for ten food waste samples at 13.92, 17.75, 20.78, 26.34 and 59.54 keV. The results revealed that the m/r is a
useful quantity to compute some other quantities such as Zeff, NE and ε for the selected food wastes. All the measured parameters were compared with the theoretical values calculated by WinXCOM program and good agreement between the measured and calcu-
lated values was reported. The lemon peel sample has the highest values of m/r as well as Zeff. For all selected samples the variation of NE with photon energy is almost identical to Zeff. The obtained
results in this investigation can stimulate the experimental and theoretical research for other types of food waste samples. The results obtained from the present investigation aimed to discover the potential of food wastes as a candidate radiation shielding materials and guide a different area for their recycling. Also, this work can be useful in the design of new industrial radiation shielding products using waste foods and in the development of non-toxic shielding materials.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data related to this article can be found at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2018.05.007.
