<title>Review of the environmental oversight framework in Kenya, in light of a nuclear power programme</title>
<author>Diana Musyoka∗, Robert M. Field</author>
<Affiliation>KEPCO  International  Nuclear  Graduate  School,  Ulsan,  Republic  of  Korea
</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2018.05.005</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2018.05.005</URL>
ABSTRACT
By means of an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), environmental impacts associated with Nuclear Power Plants (NPPs) can be identiﬁed and evaluated. International approaches and guidelines indicate that nuclear newcomer countries such as Kenya need to ensure that the national legal and regulatory framework for en- vironmental protection accounts for the unique safety and environmental aspects of such an endeavor. In par- ticular, existing laws may require amendment and/or supplement. Moreover, the responsibilities of the en- vironmental agency and nuclear regulatory body, in environmental oversight of NPPs will need to be legally deﬁned in order to prevent overlapping of responsibilities and to minimize the potential for project delay. Case histories of countries with advanced nuclear power programmes were performed to identify strategies which  align with best environmental management practices, as relevant to newcomer countries such as Kenya. A re- view of the environmental assessment framework for United States and Canada indicates similar approaches whereby the nuclear regulatory body has the sole responsibility in EIA. However, in Sweden, NPPs are required to receive authorisation from the Radiation Safety Authority as well as from an environmental court. Kenya has  an existing environmental protection framework, and as a standard requirement, a nuclear regulatory body will be designated to regulate NPPs in order to ensure protection of people and the environment. In light of a nuclear power programme, a review of the national legal framework in Kenya should be done in order to ascertain if amendment and/or supplement of the environmental law and supporting regulations is required. Moreover, in order to ensure eﬀective environmental regulation of NPPs, the responsibilities of the environmental agency and nuclear regulatory body need to be legally deﬁned in order to prevent overlapping of responsibilities. This paper also suggests two alternative structures for the EIA process and authorisation for NPPs in Kenya.
Keywords:
Nuclear power plant Environmental impact assessment Environmental law Environmental agency Environmental regulations Nuclear regulatory body
1.Introduction
“Sustainable  development”  has  been  a  global  and  national  focus over  the  past  four  decades.  A  1987  United  Nations  report,  describes sustainable  development  as  “development  that  meets  the  needs  of  the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own   needs”   (United  Nations,  1987).  Commensurate  with  this  goal, programmes  and  projects  should  be  implemented  and  executed  with consideration of environmental protection.
The concept of sustainable development includes the economic, environmental, and social aspects of the programme or project. According to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), in the environmental pillar, the sustainability issues of nuclear energy include climate change, impacts on ecosystems, waste generation, and impacts on water and land use (International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), 2016). In terms of climate change, nuclear energy is viewed as playing a key role in mitigating greenhouse gas emissions. The Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) states that: “the life cycle greenhouse gas emissions  per  kWh  from  nuclear  power  plants  are  two  orders  of  magnitude lower  than  those  of  fossil-fueled  electricity  generation  and  comparable  to most  renewables.  Hence  it is  an  eﬀective  GHG  mitigation  option,  especially by   way   of   investments   in   the   lifetime   extension   of   existing   plants” (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 2001).
However, the impacts on ecosystems, land and water use, and waste generation remain a key challenge for nuclear energy requiring careful assessment of the environmental stresses associated with proposed projects. Such issues are recognized with concerns that construction and operation of Nuclear Power Plants (NPPs) must be investigated to reduce, minimize, or eliminate potential impacts. Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) is crucial in the initial stages of a nuclear power programme. Development of the EIA ﬁrst requires determination of the criteria and monitoring requirements for the plant lifecycle (i.e., construction, operations, and decommissioning) (Susanto Eko, 2013).
The need for energy suﬃciency especially in developing countries
Table 1
Emerging and prospective nuclear energy countries.
has led to widespread consideration of nuclear electricity generation. Table 1 identiﬁes more than ﬁfty (50) countries that have recently expressed an interest in nuclear power development (i.e., as outlined by the World Nuclear Association (WNA)). Table 1 lists these countries, which include front runners such as the United Arab Emirates (UAE), Turkey, Belarus, and Poland (World Nuclear Association (WNA), 2017).
2.Background of Kenya nuclear power programme
The Kenya national development plan, termed ‘Vision 2030’ for the period from 2008 to 2030, outlines the long-term policy aims to transform Kenya into a newly industrialized and middle-income country, one which can provide a high quality of life to Kenyan citizens. The outlined strategy includes recommended development projects to address increased national energy demand. In particular it examines diversiﬁcation of the nation's energy mix (Government of Kenya, 2008). Nuclear electricity generation has been proposed for inclusion in the national energy mix in a decision based on projected long-term energy demand in Kenya. In order to implement a nuclear power programme, the Kenya Nuclear Electricity Board (KNEB) was established as a gov- ernment agency within the Ministry of Energy and Petroleum. KNEB serves the role of a Nuclear Energy Programme Implementing Organization (NEPIO) as deﬁned by the IAEA. In order to execute the nuclear energy programme, KNEB has adopted the Milestones Ap- proach recommended by the IAEA whereby there are three (3) phases of development in the nuclear power programme as well as  three milestones to achieve. In this approach, nineteen infrastructure areas are recommended which are necessary for successful implementation of a new nuclear power programme (IAEA, 2015). These areas are listed in
Table 2.
The IAEA recommends that a newcomer country should develop a comprehensive plan to address the nineteen infrastructure areas in order to support a new nuclear power programme.
As part of implementing the nuclear power programme in Kenya, a prefeasibility study was performed by KNEB. In this study, the gov- ernment agencies responsible for the nineteen infrastructure areas listed above were involved. This study evaluated the status of devel- opment of the areas in Kenya, identiﬁed gaps, and recommended strategies for improvement. Additionally, in August 2015, international experts from the nuclear industry conducted the Integrated Nuclear
Table 2
Nineteen infrastructure areas.
Infrastructure Review (INIR) mission organized by the IAEA. This re- view provided a number of expert recommendations for improving each of the infrastructure areas in readiness for a nuclear power programme. Relevant government agencies involved in the prefeasibility study also participated as correspondents to the INIR mission. These agencies included: The Ministry of Environment, the National Environment Management Authority, the Ministry of Energy, the Radiation Protection Board, the Kenya Electricity Generating Company, the Energy Regulatory Commission, the National Commission for Science
Technology and Innovation, amongst others (IAEA).
According to the IAEA Milestone Approach to implementing a nu- clear  power  programme,  a  newcomer  country  achieves  the  ﬁrst  mile- stone, ‘Milestone One’, upon evaluation of the considerations needed in order  to  make  a  knowledgeable  decision  to  introduce  nuclear  power (IAEA,  2015).  The  prefeasibility  study  and  the INIR  mission  in Kenya were the principal Phase I activities whose major outcome was identi- ﬁcation of infrastructure  areas in need of development  to the level of supporting NPP construction and operation. Subsequent activities have revolved   around   addressing   the   recommendations   from   the   pre- feasibility study and the INIR mission. As a result, Kenya can be termed as being in Phase 2 of nuclear power programme implementation per the IAEA Milestones Approach. This is termed as, ‘Preparatory work for the  contracting  and  construction  of  a  nuclear  power  plant  after  a  policy decision  has  been  taken’. In this phase KNEB is collaborating with state and international organisations in activities to enable the country to be technically  ready  to  procure,  construct,  and  operate  a  nuclear  power plant.
In order ensure successful implementation of the nuclear power
programme, Kenya continues to cooperate with the IAEA in developing the nineteen infrastructure areas. Additionally, Kenya has entered into formal agreements with countries with advanced nuclear power pro- grammes as a way of enhancing its capabilities. Kenya has collaborated with the Republic of Korea to build capacity building through training of Kenya nationals in the area of nuclear engineering since 2012. Other countries that have entered into formal agreements with Kenya are China and Russia.
3.Current environmental protection framework of Kenya
In Kenya, environmental protection is governed by the Environmental Management and Coordination Act (EMCA). The EMCA codiﬁes requirements for protecting various aspects of the environment and also delineates responsibilities for fulﬁlling these requirements. In addition, environmental regulations and guidelines have been devel- oped. These include: i) Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) reg- ulations, ii) water quality regulations, iii) air quality regulations, iv) wetland regulations, v) controlled substances regulations, vi) EIA guidelines, and vi) Strategic Environmental Assessments (SEA) guide- lines.
In terms of environmental agencies, the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) is the principal governmental agency responsible for regulating environmental protection. It is established within the Ministry of Environment, Water and Natural Resources.NEMA has a mandate to implement EMCA and to coordinate overall matters relating to environmental protection with other government agencies.
Another environmental oversight body is the National Environment Tribunal (NET). NET is headed by a chairman appointed by the national Judicial Service Commission, and who is also qualiﬁed for appointment as a judge of the High Court of Kenya. Other members include an ad- vocate of the High Court, a lawyer qualiﬁed in environmental law, and two members who have academic competence in the ﬁeld of environ- mental management. By mandate, the NET reviews administrative de- cisions of NEMA relating to licensing, and also provides legal opinions to NEMA on complex matters (Government of Kenya, 2012).
Another body, the National Environment Council (NEC) is chaired by the Cabinet Secretary (equivalent to Minister) of Environment. This body also includes the Permanent Secretaries responsible for matters such as agriculture, economic planning and development, education, energy, environment, ﬁnance, ﬁsheries, foreign aﬀairs, health, industry, law or law enforcement, local government, natural resources, public administration, public works, research and technology, tourism, and water resources. The Council also has representation from public uni- versities, specialized research institutions, the business community, and non-governmental organisations. The key functions of the NEC are: (i) formulation of policy and direction for the purposes of EMCA, (ii) set- ting national goals and objectives for environmental protection, and
(iii) promotion of collaboration among government agencies and non- governmental organisations involved in environmental protection (Government of Kenya, 2012).
3.1.Environmental Impact Assessment Process
In conducting environmental assessments, EIA regulations, guide- lines, and procedures speciﬁed under the EMCA are used. NEMA co- ordinates the EIA process and grants licenses to projects that can de- monstrate that EIA requirements have been met. The project ‘proponent’ prepares an Environmental Impact Assessment Study Report (EIASR) outlining characteristics of the project such as project activities, project design, potential environmental impacts, and pro- posed mitigation measures. On completion, the EIASR, is submitted to NEMA. Thereafter, NEMA provides copies to appropriate lead agencies for comments within thirty days. As part of decision making on the EIA, EMCA requires public involvement with NEMA being responsible to organise public hearings.
The speciﬁed period for NEMA render a decision on the submitted EIASR is three months from the time of receipt. The decision is formally issued incorporating comments of the lead agencies and results of public hearings. If NEMA approves the EIA, it will issue a license to the proponent. Fig. 1 illustrates the EIA process in Kenya (NEMA, 2002).
3.2.Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA)
Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) can be termed as the documentation of the signiﬁcant environmental issues likely to be of interest in a particular project. This is conducted at the level of policy, plan, or programme development. In Kenya it is a statutory requirement for new policies, plans, and programmes to undergo the SEA process. This approach helps ensure that environmental protection is integrated throughout the adoption of a plan, policy, or programme. Therefore, the proposed nuclear power programme is required to undergo SEA and this is being conducted by KNEB in collaboration with NEMA so as to meet the requirements of the EMCA. This approach will also assist in developing analysis of the environmental issues and concerns of the nuclear power programme, and ultimately contribute to the decision- making process.
4.
Environmental protection framework for nuclear energy programme
The IAEA considers environmental conservation to be of prime importance in the use of nuclear technology for electricity generation. As mentioned in Section 2, one of the nineteen infrastructure areas for a nuclear power programme is ‘Environmental Protection’. The purpose of this infrastructure is to ensure the readiness of environmental pro- tection measures to be considered by a nuclear newcomer country. This area addresses impacts on people and the environment from releases of radioactive eﬄuents during nuclear power plant operation, as well as conventional environmental impacts.
4.1.Systematic development of ‘environmental protection’ infrastructure
The IAEA has developed guidelines for systematic development of all infrastructure areas throughout the three phases of a nuclear power programme. Activities related to environmental protection which should be addressed in Phase I include: i) consideration of radioactive release on land, water, and impacts on people and the environment, ii) review of suitability of the country's current framework for environ- mental protection, iii) collection and analysis of baseline environmental information on the sites selected, and iv) development of re- commendations related to augmentation of existing environmental laws, regulations and responsibilities (IAEA, 2015).
In Phase II, the organisations responsible for the nuclear power programme complete activities that lead up to contracting with a vendor to construct the nuclear power plant. The following activities are essential for ‘Environmental Protection’ infrastructure in this phase:
(i) enhancements of existing environmental laws and regulations based on recommendations identiﬁed in Phase I, (ii) building the capability of the environmental agency for the nuclear power programme, (iii) clarifying the interface between the environmental agency and nuclear regulatory body in environmental oversight of the nuclear power pro- gramme, and (iv) study of the potential environmental impacts as needed in the selection of preferred candidate sites to ensure com- pliance with the national laws and regulations on environment. In Phase III, the owner/operator is expected to meet all licensing and approval conditions established by the environmental oversight agen- cies and an environmental monitoring programme should be im- plemented before the NPP is commissioned (IAEA, 2015).
Fig. 2 indicates a summary of the phased approach to address en- vironmental issues in new nuclear power programmes as outlined by the IAEA (IAEA, 2014). As shown in the diagram, towards the end of Phase II, the owner/operator should conduct an environmental impact assessment of the preferred NPP candidate site. The EIA report is an important document to be included in the NPP bid invitation package.
4.2.Environmental and nuclear law
Nuclear law and environmental law make up the legal framework for environmental protection as related to NPP operation. Nuclear law covers radiological impacts while environmental law covers non-radi- ological and parts of radiological impacts of NPP construction and operation. In a newcomer country, existing environmental law will likely need to be supplemented, or new regulations developed, in order to adequately address NPP projects. According to the IAEA, additional environmental laws are required even though nuclear laws are expected to cover radiological impacts of a nuclear power plant. This must be reﬂected in EIA laws, noting that while most countries have EIA laws and regulations, they may lack the detail to assess impacts of large scale (major) projects. In this case, separate laws are used to fully implement EIA requirements. These laws should be in place or under development before making a decision to embark on a nuclear power programme (IAEA, 2014).
Once legislation is established, regulations and associated
Fig. 1. Environmental impact assessment process in Kenya.
guidelines follow. Regulations set requirements on how to comply with the laws while guidelines are used to identify acceptable means for the proponent to meet established requirements. EIA regulations address issues such as the EIA process and methodology, and interface with other laws. In order to minimize the potential for regulatory delay of the NPP, ambiguities between nuclear and non-nuclear related en- vironmental laws should be explicitly identiﬁed and clariﬁed (i.e., to prevent conﬂicting or duplicate legal requirements). This will also provide NPP investors with a clear understanding of expectations (IAEA, 2014).
4.3.Uniqueness in environmental assessment
The process of environmental assessment of the impacts of NPPs is similar to that for other industries. However, nuclear power technology is characterized by unique aspects that may aﬀect the environment. According to the IAEA, routine and accidental radiological releases to air and water is one part of these aspects, as is radioactive waste and
spent fuel management.
Thermal pollution of waterways is also an impact of speciﬁc concern of nuclear power plants due to the large thermal discharge. The IAEA states  “depending  on  the  type  of  plant  cooling  system,  thermal  discharge limits  set  to  protect  the  environment  typically  have  an  impact  on  the  cost eﬃciency  of  the  plant,  and  therefore  they  are  subject  to  intense  interest”. Depending on the design of the cooling system, large intake ﬂows may result in signiﬁcant entrainment and impingement of aquatic organisms and may constitute major concerns related to NPP operation.
Nuclear power plant environmental impact assessments are also unique due to international and public interest and concerns. Owing to this, newcomer countries should expect to spend signiﬁcant resources in assessment of impacts of NPPs on the environment (IAEA, 2014).
4.4.Interfaces in environmental oversight
The IAEA recommends that in the initial stages of implementing the nuclear power programme, the capability of organisations should beFig. 2. Phased approach to address environmental issues in new nuclear power programmes.
assessed,  and an  Action Plan developed  to resolve  deﬁciencies. In the case  of  the  EIA,  the  NEPIO,  the  nuclear  regulatory  body,  and  the  en- vironmental  agency  should  be  involved  in  this  review  and  planning. The Action Plan should delineate the responsibilities in developing and implementing the overall environmental requirements and also address issues  of  independence  and  procedural  organizational  relations.  In particular,  the  IAEA  states  that:  “a   fully   implemented   organizational structure   to  address  the  nuclear   power  facility  EIA   is  likely   to   require modiﬁcations  to  the  environmental  protection  authority  structure,  capacity and   implementing   procedures   to   provide   appropriate   coverage   for   radi- ological  environmental  protection.  However,  clear  distinctions  should  be made with the nuclear regulatory body to avoid duplication of authority and eﬀort” (IAEA, 2014).
In order to counter any conﬂicts in the conduct of NPP environ-
mental assessment, the IAEA recommends formal agreements be made (e.g., using Memoranda of Understanding (MoU)), between the orga- nisations involved. These should clearly deﬁne the structure and re- sponsibilities in conducting the EIA. In particular, delineation of roles and responsibilities are critical in situations where the nuclear reg- ulatory body and environmental agency are assigned duties related to nuclear law and environmental law, respectively.
The need to have a well-deﬁned and functional process of EIA is also key to NPP project execution since submittal of the EIA report is an early step. Therefore, timely initiation of the EIA plays a crucial role in progress of other project activities (e.g., construction and equipment procurement). These activities typically require signiﬁcant lead time and are contingent upon regulatory approval (e.g., site permits) to proceed (IAEA, 2014).
A well-deﬁned environmental oversight structure for NPPs will also play a key role in countering challenges faced in the midst of project execution such as the potential for public opposition due to environ- mental concerns. For example, such opposition was experienced at Kaminoseki, Japan, a biodiversity hotspot. Although the national
Japanese government approved the project in July 2001, and the  permit for reclamation of the sea was given to in 2008, the construction works have been at a standstill owing to many obstacles, including local landowners who have not agreed to sell their land and a ﬁshing co- operative that has refused to accept compensation for the possible loss of their ﬁshing rights (Ankei).
5.NPP environmental  oversight  case studies
In order to develop structural approaches to environmental review and oversight in Kenya, a brief overview of the environmental impact assessment framework was completed for selected countries with well- established programmes, both nuclear and environmental protection (speciﬁcally Sweden, the United States, and Canada).
5.1.Sweden
In Sweden, the Nuclear Activities Act requires an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) as part of NPP licensing. The purpose of the EIS is to assess the eﬀects of the planned NPP operation on human health and the environment. In addition, an ordinance, ‘Ordinance on Environmental Impact Assessments’ directs that nuclear reactors and installations for the storage of nuclear waste and spent fuel must always be considered to have signiﬁcant impact on the environment. Another law, Ordinance on Environmentally Hazardous Activities and Health Protection, states that a nuclear activity should not be carried without a permit issued under the Environmental Code. These two ordinances require that nuclear related operations require two permits, one under the Environmental Code, and the other under the Nuclear Activities Act (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), 2008).
In the EIA structure, an EIA report is submitted to the Radiation Safety Authority as part of application for a permit to conduct nuclear Fig. 3. Licensing process for a new nuclear facility in Sweden.
activities. A similar copy is submitted to an environmental court for consideration under the Environmental Code. Thereafter the applica- tion is handed over to the government which assesses its permissibility under Chapter 17 of the Environmental Code (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), 2008). Fig. 3 sum- marises the NPP licensing process in Sweden (IAEA, 2017).
5.2.United States of America
The United States (US) National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) of  1969,  as  amended,  expresses  the  US  national  environmental  goals. This act requires the Federal Government to develop plans, functions, and   programs   aimed   at   protecting   the   environment.   Speciﬁcally, Section  102  (2)(a)  directs  that,  “all  agencies  of  the  Federal  Government shall  utilize  a  systematic,  interdisciplinary  approach  which  will  ensure  the integrated  use  of  the  natural  and  social  sciences  and  the  environmental  de- sign arts in planning and in decision-making which may have an impact on man's  environment”  (Department  of  Energy,  2017).  The  United  States Nuclear  Regulatory  Commission  (US  NRC)  implements  the  require- ments of NEPA Section 102 (2) through the environmental regulations for  NPP  licensing,  Part  51  of  10  CFR  (code  of  federal  regulations). Therefore, in order to ensure that the issuance of a construction permit or  operating  license  for an  NPP is  consistent  with  NEPA,  the  US  NRC assesses the potential environmental eﬀects of the facility by requiring each licensee to submit an EIA report (Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), 1976).
In some cases, the US NRC has overlapping responsibilities with other Federal Government agencies regarding licensing of NPPs and related facilities. Therefore, to coordinate and eﬀectively implement certain requirements in NPP projects, and to avoid conﬂict and dupli- cation of eﬀorts related to environmental protection, the NRC has en- tered into formal agreements with other federal agencies. For example, the mandate of the US NRC under the NEPA is aﬀected by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (FWPCA) Amendments of 1972. The FWPCA gives the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) the authority to regulate discharge of pollutants to waters from NPPs. Therefore, the US NRC may require license applicants to submit information needed by the US EPA for enforcing the FWPCA. However, the information needs imposed by the two organisations may be similar
in the area of impacts on water quality and biota. In light of this, the responsibilities of US EPA and the US NRC as aﬀected by the FWPCA are subject to a “Memorandum of Understanding and Policy Statement Regarding Implementation of Certain NRC and EPA Responsibilities”. This Policy Statement serves as the legal basis for the US NRC to make decisions on licensing matters under NEPA and the FWPCA (Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), 1976).
In another area of overlapping responsibilities, both the US NRC and the United States Army Corps of Engineers have responsibilities in en- vironmental impact regulation of NPPs on coastal and inland navigable waters. The two organisations have a duty to ensure that the facilities are built and operated safely and with minimum environmental impact. In order to avoid conﬂicting direction and duplication of eﬀort in en- vironmental protection, the two agencies have entered into an MoU (40 FR 37110; August 25, 1975). Under this MoU, the US NRC has the primary role in environmental reviews and preparation of environ- mental statements for NPPs. On the other hand, the United States Army Corps of Engineers will contribute in preparing the environmental im- pact statements by drafting material for evaluating coastal erosion and other shoreline modiﬁcations, siltation and sedimentation, dredging activities, and the location of structures in or aﬀecting navigable waters (Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), 1976).
5.3.Canada
In Canada, in accordance with paragraph 15(a) of the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act (CEAA) 2012, the Canada Nuclear Safety Commission (CNSC) is the sole federal authority responsible for conducting an environmental assessment for designated projects regu- lated under the Nuclear Safety and Control Act (NSCA). The environ- mental assessment is carried out under the NSCA, or under the CEAA. Environmental assessments under CEAA are used as planning tool to minimize or avoid adverse environmental eﬀects before they occur, while environmental assessment under NSCA is a technical assessment on the licensee's intention to protect the environment. This serves as a continuous improvement tool that CNSC uses to assess environmental protection measures of the licensee (Canada Nuclear Safety Commission (CNSC), 2016).
The CNSC also cooperates with other government agencies in environmental protection activities through formal agreements in order to increase the eﬀectiveness of environmental protection activities and eliminate overlapping of responsibilities. CNSC has entered into MoUs with Federal agencies such as Fisheries and Oceans Canada (DFO) and Environment Canada (EC). The DFO and the CNSC MoU outlines areas for cooperation regarding administration of the Fisheries Act. In this agreement, the CNSC reviews impacts to the environment, ﬁsh and their habitat, and makes recommendations to the DFO. However, the Minister of Fisheries and Oceans remains accountable for decisions under the habitat provisions of the Fisheries Act (CNSC, 2017a).
In the MoU between the EC and the CNSC, areas of mutual interest in which the two organisations will cooperate are outlined. While the mandate of the CNSC is derived from the NSCA, and that of EC from the Canadian Environmental Protection Act, both organisations are ob- ligated to protect the environment by ensuring compliance with a number of Federal Acts and regulations in relation to NPPs. The MoU outlines cooperation between the two entities with an aim to avoid duplication of eﬀort (CNSC, 2017b).
6.Discussion
Nuclear power is one of the most rigorously regulated industrial activities in the world as safety is fundamental in NPP operations. In addition, there is signiﬁcant public interest in NPPs due to pre-existing perceptions of NPP risks as conditioned by past accidents at Three Mile Island, Chernobyl, and Fukushima Daiichi. As a result, regulatory power and public interest is signiﬁcant, and concerns can delay or halt nuclear plant construction or operations. Environmental protection for NPP projects should therefore be pursued through a regulatory en- vironment that provides rigor, transparency, and predictability (World Nuclear Association (WNA), 2012).
As mentioned in Section 2, the IAEA conducted an INIR mission for Kenya in August 2015. As related to environmental protection, the INIR mission report indicates that the national environmental agency, NEMA is assigned environmental oversight for the planned NPP in accordance with the current national framework for environmental protection (IAEA). In this case, NEMA would have the central role in conducting the EIA as coordinated with the nuclear regulatory body as the lead agency in evaluating radiological impact of NPPs.
However, following internationally accepted procedures, the nu- clear regulatory body has a signiﬁcant role in regulating the NPP to ensure protection of people and environment. Consequently, this body has responsibility in framing and enforcing environmental regulations on NPPs. Therefore, absent a clearly deﬁned statutory interface, there is the likelihood of conﬂicting responsibilities in relation to the nuclear power programme between NEMA and the nuclear regulatory body.
Regulations set requirements on how to comply with the established law while guidelines are used to provide acceptable approaches to meet set requirements. In Kenya, the Environmental (Impact Assessment and Audit) Regulations, address EIA scope, process and methodology and interfaces with other laws. Other regulations include water quality regulations, air quality regulations, wetland regulations, and controlled substances regulations. As there are no published plans for modiﬁcation of the environmental law, or creation of nuclear speciﬁc environmental oversight regulations, it is presupposed that the environmental assess- ment of NPPs will be conducted in accordance with the current EIA regulations. However, the reality is that the current environmental laws and regulations lack the level of detail needed to assess the full range of NPP impacts to the environment.
Case reviews were completed for three countries with advanced nuclear power programmes, speciﬁcally for Sweden, the United States, and Canada. Of these, the United States and Canada share a similar process for environmental assessment whereby, the nuclear regulatory body has the sole responsibility for coordinating the process. This is done in conjunction with the environmental agency through formal agreements intended to eliminate overlapping of responsibilities. The
advantage of this approach is that the burden on the NPP owner of duplicate requirements from the two agencies is eliminated.
This approach also acts to mitigate the risk of project delay due to inconsistent or conﬂicting licensing requirements. A newcomer country that would choose this approach must however ensure there is a syn- chronization of the existing environmental requirements and nuclear safety requirements.
On the other hand, the approach in Sweden exhibits a diﬀerent procedure of licensing new nuclear projects whereby, new nuclear projects require an independent review of the requirements of en- vironmental protection and nuclear safety by both the environmental court and nuclear regulatory body. The challenge of this system is the burden of NPP owner in meeting the requirements of the two institu- tions of authority on information which may be similar, and which may result in project delay. The approach is intended to ensure that the environmental agency and nuclear regulatory body carry out their statutory duties without interference from the other.
7.Conclusion recommendations
As mentioned in Section 3.1, the EIA report is one of the funda- mental documents used in preparation of the NPP bid invitation spe- ciﬁcation. In addition, it is also linked to other permits for the NPP project such as siting and construction. Therefore, a delay in EIA per- mitting may result in signiﬁcant project schedule delays. On the other hand, historically NPPs have faced controversy and major challenges in implementation.
In consideration of these factors, it is important to ensure that the NPP environmental assessment process and structure for Kenya is de- signed to consider this past history and to ensure rigor, transparency, and predictability in authorisation of the project.
At the same time, the environmental assessment process for the NPP must not compromise environmental integrity. Therefore, new systems and regulations developed speciﬁcally for NPP environmental assess- ment should reﬂect best practices to ensure that the environment is adequately protected. Such practices are as recommended by the IAEA standards, guidelines and, technical documents as well as the countries with advanced nuclear power programmes. This will serve to ensure that the goal of sustainable development is achieved.
There are a number of actions that are needed in order to ensure a robust environmental assessment framework for NPP projects in Kenya. The responsibilities of NEMA and the nuclear regulatory body should be clearly deﬁned well in advance. This will ensure a robust yet pre- dictable licensing process that avoids duplication of eﬀorts or bureau- cracy which may inordinately aﬀect project cost and schedule. The areas of regulatory overlap should be identiﬁed and working arrange- ments agreed upon through a legal mechanism such as MoU.
The nuclear regulatory body and NEMA should collaborate in re- viewing the current environmental laws and making amendments that are needed to address signiﬁcant environmental impacts associated with NPPs. The amendment of the environmental law should include relevant government policy bodies such as National Environment Council which has representation from various government sectors as described in Section 2.1. Stakeholder forums to collect views, and ap- proval by the relevant committees in parliament will also be crucial in this process.
Based on global precedent, it is recommended that the mandate of the nuclear regulatory body be expanded from that of lead agency in radiological impacts during EIA, to responsibility for review of com- pliance with environmental regulations at the licensing stage. To best serve this role, it is then expected that the nuclear regulatory body will ﬁnalize national regulations and guidelines on environment protection based on international guidelines such as published by the IAEA, and the International Commission on Radiological Protection.
The environmental agency has a signiﬁcant role to play in Kenya's nuclear power programme. Therefore, NEMA should be actively
involved where applicable in nuclear programme capacity building activities in order to establish the technical capability of the staﬀ in NPP regulation. In particular, NEMA staﬀ responsible for compliance and enforcement should be trained in general NPP engineering areas in relation to environmental protection. In this way, there will be a clear understanding by the agency of the standard requirements in NPP regulation which will translate into development of appropriate reg- ulatory procedures.
As described in Section 3.1, the EIASR review involves lead agencies which are required to give expert input in respective aspects of the environment. However, in this type of working arrangement, it may be diﬃcult to control the timeliness of delivering the comments by these lead agencies. As a result, a centralized team should be formed com- prised of representatives from the lead agencies with a legal obligation to give input in the EIA.
In this study, case reviews were done on the environmental reg- ulation framework for nuclear power plant projects in Sweden, the United States, and Canada. The EIA process and structure in these countries provides valuable insights on diﬀerent models that could be considered for adoption in Kenya case. Compliance with nuclear safety regulations is a responsibility of the nuclear regulatory authority, with the natural alignment for environment protection related to radi- ological eﬀect also rests with the nuclear regulatory body. Conventional environmental protection, such as related to air and water quality, more naturally aligns with NEMA expertise and responsibilities. Therefore, a decision on assignment of environmental regulation responsibilities for the case of NPPs is required. In the case of the United States, the nuclear regulatory body has the central responsibility in environmental as- sessment of NPPs. A similar approach is used in Canada whereby the environmental law clearly delegates the NPP EIA to the nuclear reg- ulatory body.
In Kenya a similar approach can be adopted by delegating en- vironmental protection regulation and oversight to the nuclear reg- ulatory body. In this case, the regulatory body would adopt the current national EIA regulations as well as develop environmental regulations and guidelines speciﬁc to NPP projects. This will eliminate any dupli- cation of eﬀort since the principles of environmental protection in a nuclear power plant is closely related to those related to nuclear safety. Table 3 summarises a suggested action plan for enhancing the na- tional environmental framework to ensure it is eﬀective and suﬃcient
to regulate NPPs.
7.1.Proposed structure for NPP environmental assessment review and oversight in Kenya case
In consideration of the ﬁndings of this study, the structure for en- vironmental permitting for NPP siting, construction, and operation was developed. Two models are suggested.
7.1.1.Model 1
In this model, the current EIA process is assumed whereby the en- vironmental agency, NEMA, has the sole responsibility for coordinating the EIA and authorising the NPP project. The NPP project owner
conducts  the  EIA  and  submits  the  EIASR  to  NEMA  for  review.  As mentioned  in  Section  2.2,  in  the  current  EIA  review  process,  NEMA submits  the  EIASR  to  relevant  lead  agencies  for  comments.  However, the NPP project is multidisciplinary in nature and there is a probability that  multiple  lead  agencies  will  be  involved  in EIASR  review.  As  pre- scribed in Section 61 of EMCA, ‘NEMA  can  set  up  a  Technical  Advisory Committee  to  advise  it  on  environmental  impact  assessment  related  report’. Therefore, in this model it is proposed that in order to minimize the risk of project delay due to lead agency feedback, a NPP EIA review com- mittee should be established.  In this model this is termed as NPP EIA Technical  Advisory  Committee  and  is  comprised  of  lead  agency  re- presentatives  which  will  include  the  nuclear  regulatory  body.  This committee  will  perform  its  duty  within  an  established  schedule  and reporting format. Fig. 4 summarises the Model 1 NPP EIA structure.
The major assumption in this model is that the current EIA reg- ulations will be amended as necessary and nuclear speciﬁc regulations developed. This structure of environmental impact assessment over- sight will clearly delineate responsibilities between NEMA and nuclear regulatory body and eliminate the need for the NPP project Owner to report and respond in parallel to separate agencies.
7.1.2.Model 2
In this model, the nuclear regulatory body has sole legal authority over the review of the environmental assessment report for the NPP project. The nuclear regulatory body receives the EIASR from the NPP project Owner (a.k.a., proponent) and has lead and ﬁnal review re- sponsibility for the EIASR. The nuclear regulatory body also issues environmental impact authorisation amongst other authorizations such as site preparation and construction, dependent on the NPP licensing requirements. Fig. 5 provides a summary of the proposed structure of Model 2.
In this structure, the EIA is conducted in accordance with NPP speciﬁc EIA regulations that integrate the principles of nuclear safety and environmental law. In addition, it is assumed that the nuclear regulatory body and NEMA will have entered into formal agreements whereby, the nuclear regulatory body commits to implement the EIA requirements stipulated in the EMCA. Additionally, mutual agreements are also entered by all statuary agencies that regulate various aspects of the environment and whose responsibilities may overlap with those of the nuclear regulatory body. These include the Kenya Wildlife Service, Kenya Forest Service, and Kenya Fisheries Service which are govern- ment organisations in charge of wildlife, forestry, and ﬁsheries, re- spectively. In the agreement, the various sector regulations on en- vironmental protection are also integrated into nuclear safety laws and regulations.
In  order  to  ensure  public  conﬁdence  in  the  robustness  of  the  NPP environmental  assessment,  an  independent  appraisal  committee  is  re- commended.   In  India,   a   similar   body   known   as   Expert   Appraisal Committee (EAC) is in place to review the rigor of an EIA, and also to recommend  clearance  of  the  EIA  against  requirements.  According  to Ramana and Rao, “Having a mixed and balanced EAC composition would ideally  promote  a  more  methodical  process  of  scrutinizing  the  EIA  and  re- ports  of  the  public  consultation  to  decide  about  the  project's  clearance”Fig. 4. Model 1 of Structure for NPP environmental impact oversight.
(Ramana and Rao, 2010).
A similar body is also included in the US NRC decision making process on NPP authorisation. The United States Advisory Committee on Reactor Safeguards is a government body structured to provide an avenue for various technical experts to oﬀer independent advice that is factored into the NRC decision-making process (NRC, 2017). The composition of the independent appraisal committee should therefore be diverse and not be solely comprised of members from nuclear related
industries. In order to ensure the independence of the appraisal com- mittee, it should report directly to the Director General of the nuclear regulatory body.
8.Conclusions
As mentioned in Section 3.1, the EIA report is one of the funda- mental documents used in the preparation of the NPP bid invitation
Table 3
Action plan for enhancing the environmental protection framework for NPPs in Kenya.
Fig. 5. Model 2 of Structure for NPP environmental impact oversight.
speciﬁcation. In addition, it is also interconnected with other permits for the NPP project such as for siting and construction. Therefore, a delay in EIA permitting may result in signiﬁcant project schedule de- lays. On the other hand, NPPs are considered as controversial due to public opposition and may face major challenges during initial im- plementation. In consideration of these factors, it is important to ensure that the NPP environmental assessment process and structure is robust, transparent, and predictable in order to help minimize controversies and to ensure the timeliness in authorisation of the project. Of equal importance in ensuring a robust environmental assessment process, is environmental protection from the impacts of NPPs. Therefore, new regulations and systems developed should ensure that the goal of en- vironmental protection is not compromised.
The independence of the nuclear regulatory body is a fundamental requirement. In regards to regulatory independence, in the ‘Handbook on Nuclear Law’, Stoiber C et al. (2010) states that:
“an  essential  ﬁrst  step  in  determining  the  best  approach  is  a  careful  as- sessment  of  the  regulatory  body's  independence  of  judgement  and  decision making  in  the  safety  area.  A  sound  regulatory  structure  presupposes  legis- lation  covering both the powers and capabilities of the regulatory body and also its relationships with other governmental bodies, the regulated industry and  the  public” (Stoiber et al., 2010).
Therefore, as in all other regulatory functions of the nuclear reg- ulatory body, the agency should also conduct the NPP environmental assessment independent of the inappropriate inﬂuence from other government agencies. Thus, the formal agreements with aﬃliated agencies should be established prior to the start of any such reviews (see Section 7.1).
In selecting the appropriate reactor technology, a newcomer country should select criteria for reactor design evaluation. These cri- teria include environmental impacts of the reactor design. Therefore, as part of developing the environmental assessment framework for NPP projects in Kenya, robust environmental impact requirements should be developed which are applicable to proven reactor designs as well as up to date with advances in the reactor technologies (e.g., First-of-a-Kind, or ‘FOAK’).
This study has primarily focused on the appropriate environmental assessment process for Kenya's ﬁrst nuclear power project. However, certain unique aspects of a NPP environmental assessment should be considered. These are the predictability of the environmental assess- ment process and public involvement. In Canada it takes approximately thirty-six months (3 years) for environmental assessment and licensing to prepare a site CNSC, 2008. This is a period longer than what the current EIA regulations in Kenya have stipulated and also what con- ventional projects take.
The other unique environmental assessment aspect is public in- volvement through public hearings. According to Section 17 (2) (c) of the Kenya EIA regulations the proponent shall:
“hold  at  least  three  public  meetings  with  the  aﬀected  parties  and  com- munities to explain the project and its eﬀects, and to receive their oral or written  comments” NEMA, 2003.
However, for the case of a NPP project a number of public meetings may be needed because of the increased public interest. This aspect should be considered in the decision making in developing an eﬀective environmental assessment framework for Kenya's NPP project.
9.Follow-on
As a follow-on to the ideas presented here, two areas are suggested:
1)Review the suggested regulatory structures with the identiﬁed par- ties in a series of ‘round table’ sessions. Solicit input and identify actions to proceed to consensus for recommendations to present to
legislative committees.
2)Identify whether environmental regulation can follow the path of the concept of ITAAC, or ‘Inspections, Testing, Analysis, and Acceptance Criteria’ used in nuclear regulation in the United States. While not a model which can be directly incorporated into en- vironmental permitting, the concept of ‘Owner’ commitments to veriﬁable criteria may remove uncertainty from both sides of the process (i.e., regulator and proponent). This approach to regulation can reduce uncertainty in the permitting process.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the 2017 Research Fund of the KEPCO International Nuclear Graduate School (KINGS), Republic of Korea. We would also like to thank Ali Mwanzei, John Kweku Avor, and William Nyaga Kanyange, for input to this paper.
