<title>Reducing Xerostomia by Comprehensive Protection of Salivary Glands in Intensity-Modulated Radiation Therapy with Helical Tomotherapy Technique for Head-and-Neck Cancer Patients: A Prospective Observational Study</title>
<author>Feng Teng,1,2 Wenjun Fan,1,3 Yanrong Luo,1 Zhongjian Ju,1 Hanshun Gong,1 Ruigang Ge,1 Fang Tong,1 Xinxin Zhang  ,1 and Lin Ma  1</author>
<Affiliation>1 Medical School of Chinese PLA, 28 Fuxing Road, Beijing 100853, China
2Department of Radiation Oncology, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, 2 Yinghuayuan Dongjie, Beijing 100029, China 3Armed Police Corps Hospital of Henan Province, Zhengzhou 450052, China</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral> Science and Technology of Nuclear Installation</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Hindawi</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1155/2019/2401743</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/2401743</URL>
Objective. Tis study aimed to analyze the efects of comprehensive protection of bilateral parotid glands (PG-T), contralateral submandibular gland (cSMG), and accessory salivary glands in the oral cavity (OC) by helical tomotherapy for head-and-neck cancer patients. Methods. Totally 175 patientswith histologically confrmed head-and-neck cancertreated with helical tomotherapy were recruited. Te doses delivered to PG-T, cSMG, and OC were constrained to be as low as possible in treatment planning. Te saliva fow rates and xerostomia questionnaire were evaluated. Correlation between xerostomia and other clinical factors were assessed using univariate and multivariate models. Te impact of salivary gland dose on locoregional (LR) recurrencewas assessed by Cox analysis. ROC curve was used to determine the threshold of mean dose for each gland. Results. Te median follow-up was 25 (19–36) months. Te OC mean dose, PG-T mean dose, cSMG mean dose, age, clinical stage (II and III versus IV), and both unstimulated and stimulated saliva fow rates were signifcantly correlated with xerostomia. Te OC mean dose, cSMG mean dose, age, and clinical stage were predictors of xerostomia afer adjusting PG-T mean dose, and unstimulated and stimulated saliva fow rates. Xerostomia was signifcantly decreased when the mean doses of PG-T, cSMG, and OC were kept below 29.12Gy, 29.29Gy, and 31.44Gy, respectively. At 18 months afer radiation therapy, early LR recurrence rate was only 4%. Conclusion. Comprehensive protection of salivary glands minimized xerostomia in head-and-neck cancer patients treated by helical tomotherapy, without increasing early LR recurrence risk.
1. Background
Te overall incidence of head-and-neck cancer accounted for
5%∼10% of the total body malignant tumors  [1]. Intensity- modulated  radiation  therapy  (IMRT)  is  one  of the  main methods  for  the  treatment  of head-and-neck  cancer,  but radiation-induced xerostomia caused due to decreased sali- vary gland function is one of the most common and serious adverse efects. Xerostomia seriously impacts the quality of life of the patient, causing difculties in chewing, swallowing, speaking,  sleeping,  secondary  oral  infection,   radioactive
caries,andotherdiseases[2 ,3].Terefore,inordertoalleviate xerostomia and improve the quality of life, it is necessary to protect the salivary glands during radiotherapy of head-and- neck cancer.
Te parotid gland (PG) is the largest salivary gland and is the main source of stimulated saliva [4]. In order to relieve from dry mouth, some researchers reduced the volume and dose  of radiation  to  the  parotid  glands  by  IMRT  [5–10]. Although IMRT protects the parotid glands, the symptoms of dry mouth are still obvious in some patients. Te reason for this is that the other salivary glands present beside the
parotids are also exposed to high doses of radiation,  such as submandibular glands, sublingual glands, and many small salivary glands. Te submandibular gland (SMG) produces
about  70%  of unstimulated  saliva  that  accounted  for  over
90% of saliva secretion at night. Many authors reported that xerostomia could be alleviated afer SMG-sparing IMRT [11– 14].  However,  the  submandibular  gland  is  adjacent  to  IB and II lymph nodes. Currently, there is no clinical trial with large sample size to determine whether the protection of the submandibular gland leads to increased recurrence rate of adjacent lymph nodes. In addition, with the sublingual gland, small salivary glands are widely distributed throughout the
oral  mucosa  and  secrete  more  than  70%  of the  mucin  in
saliva.  Tis plays an important  role in the maintenance of lubrication comfort of the oral mucosa [15–17]. Chajon et al. [18] reported that the locoregional (LR) recurrence risk was not increased when using IMRT with a whole salivary gland- sparing strategy, including PG, SMG, and oral cavity (OC). At present, it is unclear whether comprehensive protection of  salivary  glands  during  IMRT  by  helical  tomotherapy techniqueforhead-and-neckcancerpatientscansignifcantly reduce xerostomia without increasing the LR recurrence risk. Hence, this prospective observational study was conducted. Objective  measurement  of saliva  fow  rate  and  subjective xerostomia questionnaire evaluation are used to evaluate the improvement of oral dryness.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1.  Patients.  Between  February  2016  and  July  2017,  176 patients  with  histologically  confrmed  squamous  cell  car- cinoma  of head  and  neck,  treated  by helical  tomotherapy technique, were collected at Radiotherapy Department of the General Hospital of the Chinese People’s Liberation Army. One patient who had Sjogren’s syndrome was excluded from analysis.  Te  clinical  characteristics  of the  remaining  175 patients  are  shown in  Table 1. All patients  were  evaluated by  MRI  or  PET-CT  for  clinical  staging  according  to  the International  Union  Against  Cancer  (UICC,  2010).  Tese patients  had  no  history  of other  rheumatic  immune  sys- tem  diseases  such  as  Sjogren’s  syndrome,  head-and-neck surgery  trauma,  or  radiotherapy.  All  the  patients  signed a  written  informed  consent.   Tis  study  was  conducted in  our  center  and  approved  (approved  no.  S2016-122-01) by the  Ethics  Committee  of Te  General  Hospital  of the Chinese People’s Liberation Army, registered with number ChiCTR-ONN-17010597in Chinese Clinical Trial Registry.
2.2. Radiation erapy.  Te patients were placed in supine position  and fxed with thermoplastic  flm for head-neck-
shoulder.  Simulated  CT  enhanced  scan  with  3.0mm  slice
thickness was acquired. Imaging must clearly show the extent of tumor lesion  invasion,  lymph  node metastasis,  and the structure of parotid glands, submandibular glands, and oral cavity.  Te  multimode  image  fusion  technology  was  used as  a  reference  to  delineate  the  target  area  and  the  organs at risk. Te delineation standards were described according to the ICRU report 83 and combined with the department’s
BioMed Research International
treatment  specifcations.  Te delineation  of the target  area was accurate, and the target area was not compromised with the relevant salivary gland protection. Irradiation with daily image  guidance  was  performed  using  6MV  photon  beam obtained from TomoTerapy (Accuray, USA).
2.3.  IMRT,  Dose  Prescription,   and  Plan  Evaluation.  Te radiotherapy  plan  was  optimized  on  the  Pinnacle  3  8.0 workstation by reverse intensity-modulated planning system and was evaluated by dose volume histograms (DVHs). Te physiologists  and  clinicians  participated  in the  evaluation, and the relevant parameters were as follows: the prescribed dose  was  required  to  include  at  least  95%  of  the  target volume. Te prescribed doses were as follows: gross target volume of the primary tumor (GTVnx) = metastatic lymph node lesions (GTVnd) = 67.5-70Gy/30-33f, high-risk clinical target volume  (CTV1)=  60Gy,  and low-risk clinical target volume (CTV2) = 54Gy. Gland dose limitation should be as low as possible for PG, SMG, and OC (with small salivary glands). RTOG standard was adopted for evaluating adverse reactions.
2.4. Xerostomia and the Salivary Gland Function Assessment.
Xerostomia  was  evaluated  by  a  questionnaire  at  0,  1,  3, 6,  12,  and  18  months  afer  the  end  of  radiotherapy.  Te xerostomia questionnaire (XQ) (Table 2) was modifed based on the questionnaire tested and validated by Amosson et al. [19]. Tis consisted  of 10 questions  in this scale, involving the patient’s diet, chewing, swallowing,  speaking, sleeping, drinking, and other aspects. Each question was divided into four  grades  according  to  the  degree  of patient’s  reported mouth dryness, with “no,” “mild,” “moderate,” and “severe.” Each grade was assigned a score of 0, 1, 2, and 3. According to the investigation in patients, the total score was calculated andthedegreeofmouthdrynesswasclassifed;i.e.,thehigher
the value, the more serious the xerostomia. Te xerostomia
classifcation was as follows: mild dry mouth: total score of ≤10 points; moderate dry mouth: 10 points≤ total points < 20 points; and severe dry mouth: total ≥20 points.
Te total salivary secretion was measured before the start of radiotherapy and at 0, 1, 3, 6, 12, and 18 months afer the end  of radiotherapy.  Te patients  were  advised  not  to  eat and drink for 1 hour and then sit on a chair by supporting both  the  elbows  on  both  the  knees,  with  holding  funnel (connected to the centrifugal tube) in the hands, head as low aspossible,eyesopened,funnelbackedgeagainstthepatient’s lip and cheek angle, and the tip of the tongue  against the upper jaw. Te unstimulated saliva fow rates were measured simultaneously for 5min with the patient spitting all saliva into the funnel and followed by the collection of stimulated saliva fow for further 5min with stimulation by applying 2% citric acid solution to the tongue [20].
2.5.   Statistical   Methods.  Te   continuous   variables   were
expressed  as  mean   ± standard   deviation   or  as  median with interquartile range according to the normal or skewed distribution.   Statistical   comparisons   of  continuous  vari- ables were performed using independent samples  t test or
Table 1: Patients’ characteristics.
Mann–Whitney U test for the two groups. Categorical vari- ables were expressed as percentages. Statistical comparisons between  the  two  groups were performed  using  2 test  or Fisher’s exact test. An  ROC  curve  analysis  was  applied to detect the cut-of point related to the salivary glands mean dose by utilizing  the  maximal  Youden  index  method. We also performed a multivariable linear regression analysis to detect the factors of patient-reported xerostomia scores. All
statistical tests were performed by IBM SPSS 25.0 statistical sofware, and a two-sided p< 0.05 was deemed to be statisti- cally signifcant.
3. Results
3.1. Patients.  Between  February 2016 and July 2017, a total of 175 patients were enrolled in this study. Patient baseline
Table 2: Xerostomia questionnaire.
characteristics  are presented  in Table 1. Patients  were pre- dominantly  male  (73.7%), with  a  median  age  of 49  years (range  from  11  to  83  years).  Te  patients  had  nasopha- ryngeal  cancer  (73.14%),  hypopharyngeal  cancer  (11.43%), oropharyngeal  cancer  (2.86%),  oral  cavity  cancer  (5.14%), laryngeal cancer (4.0%), nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses cancer  (2.29%),  and  other  cancers  (1.14%),  with  stages  II (13.14%), III (34.29%), and IV (52.57%). One hundred and sixteen  patients  (66.3%)  received  induction  chemotherapy combined  with  concurrent  chemoradiotherapy.  Fify-four patients (30.9%)received induction chemotherapy combined with concurrent chemoradiotherapy and molecular targeted therapy. Te median time from therapy to last follow-up visit was 25 months (19–36 months).
3.2.  Salivary  Gland  Function  following  IMRT  by  Helical Tomotherapy  Technique.  Te doses were constrained to be as low as possible following  IMRT by helical tomotherapy technique for bilateral PG (PG-T, with the average doses of both glands), contralateral SMG (cSMG), and OC, with an average of the mean dose of these glands of 29.50Gy (range from11.19to46.53Gy),31.03Gy(rangefrom10.29to49.26Gy), and31.53Gy(rangefrom13.55to54.10Gy),respectively.Saliva fow rate and xerostomia questionnaire  (XQ) were used to evaluate the improvement of mouth dryness.
3.3.  Saliva  Flow  Rates.  A  signifcant  interaction  between stimulated saliva fow rate and mean dose of the PG-T was
observed,  with  an  interaction  between  unstimulated  saliva
fow rate and  mean  dose of the  cSMG.  Plots for  stimulated
and unstimulated  fow rates at each postradiotherapy time
point are provided in Figures 1 and 2. Tese fgures showed that the mean dose of PG-T or cSMG for most of the patients was more or less than 30Gy. In addition, the saliva fow rates were decreased gradually with increased mean dose. Figure 3 showed  that  the  unstimulated  and  stimulated  fow  rates decreased initially and then increased with prolonged follow- up. Te stimulated/unstimulated saliva fow rates restored to
69.5%/77.4% of the baseline at 12 months and 81.5%/91.7% at 18 months, respectively.
3.4. Xerostomia Questionnaire.  Te XQ scores were available for 100%, 97.1%, 97.1%, 94.9%, 94.9%, and 94.9% of patients at 0th, 1st, 3rd, 6th, 12th, and 18th month, respectively. Te factors correlated with patient-reported xerostomia (at 18th month) detected by univariate  analysis  are summarized in
Table 3. Te OC mean dose, PG-T mean dose, cSMG mean
dose,  age,  clinical  stage  (II  and  III  versus  IV),  and  both stimulated  and  unstimulated  saliva  fow  rates  were  each statistically  signifcant  correlates in the univariate  analysis, while  the  gender  was  not  signifcant.  Univariate  analyses of  signifcant  variables  (P  < 0.05)  were  included  in  the multivariate analysis. Based on the uncertain efect of gender on patients’ reported xerostomia and the unbalanced gender ratio  in  the  enrolled  patients  (73.7%  male  versus  26.3% female), gender was also included in the multivariate analysis in this study. Te OC mean dose, cSMG mean dose, age, and clinical stage were predictors of patient-reported xerostomia afer adjusting forPG-Tmean dose,as well as both stimulated and unstimulated saliva fow rates (Table 3). Te fndings of multivariate analysis showed that the OC mean dose, cSMG meandose,age,andtumorstagewereimportantpredictorsof
Table 3: Predictors of patient-reported xerostomia scores.
Figure 1: Plots of unstimulated saliva fow rates versus cSMG mean dose at diferent postradiotherapy time points (0, 1, 3, 6, 12, and 18 months).
patient-reported xerostomia even afer considering the efect of PG mean dose. Mouth dryness restored more slowly with increasing age. In young patients with age ≤35 years (23.67% of patients), xerostomia has been restored nearly to normal level within one year afer radiotherapy.
In  addition,  ROC  curves  were  used  to  estimate  the
threshold  D50  at  which  the  dry  symptoms  were  relieved above 50% at 1 year compared to the end of radiotherapy. Te D50ofthe mean doses ofPG-T, cSMG, and OC were 29.12Gy, 29.29Gy,and 31.44Gy, respectively, and an increased efect on xerostomia restoration over time was observed (Figure 4). As shown in Figure 4lower D50 of mean dose for each salivary structure was  associated  with  lower  (better)  XQ  scores  at each time point during the follow-up period. Te XQ score variation showed no statistical diference in patients within
3 months afer receiving PG-T mean doses higher or lower than  29.12Gy; however  it varied  signifcantly  at  6, 12, and
18 months afer radiotherapy (p = 0.011, 0.001, and  <0.001, respectively). Similarly, the XQ score varied signifcantly at 6,  12,  and  18  months  afer  radiotherapy  in  patients  with the cSMG mean doses higher or lower than 29.29Gy (p = 0.016, 0.003, and 0.001, respectively). XQ score also showed a signifcant  diference in patients with the OC mean dose higher or lower than 29.12Gy at 18 months (p = 0.002).
3.5.  Comprehensive  Protection  of  Salivary  Glands  and  LR Recurrence Risk.  We observed that the comprehensive pro- tection  of salivary  glands  signifcantly  reduced the  risk of developing  of severe  xerostomia,  without  a  compromised locoregional control, as the locoregional recurrence rate was
Figure 2: Plots of stimulated saliva fow rate versus PG-T mean dose at diferent postradiotherapy time points (0, 1, 3, 6, 12, and 18 months).
Figure 3: Unstimulated saliva fow rates versus stimulated saliva fow ratesat diferent postradiotherapy time points (0, 1, 3, 6, 12, and 18 months). (Vertical bars represent standard deviation.)
only 4%, with 6 recurrences at the primary tumor site and only 1 recurrence at level II of nodes. In this study, 61.3% of patients with xerostomia restored to normal level at 1 year, and  69.6% at  18 months  afer  radiotherapy.  Te  18-month locoregional relapse-free survival was 86.3%.
4. Discussion
As known  to  all,  multiple  studies  showed  that  IMRT  can decrease the radiation-related xerostomia by sparing the sali- vary glands without increasing the locoregional recurrence risk. Helical tomotherapy, computed tomography-based plat- form for IMRT, provides superior homogeneous covering of the target volume, while delivering the lowest doses to the salivary glands. Tis study was the frst in sparing all the sali- vary glands during IMRT by helical tomotherapy technique forhead-and-neck cancer, demonstrating that whendose was constrained to the parotid gland, submandibular gland, and oral cavity, 61.3% and 69.6% of xerostomia patients restored to  normal  level  at  12  and  18  months  afer  radiotherapy, respectively, with an early locoregional recurrence rate of 4%. Te major glands  (PG,  SMG,  and  OC) produce above 90% of saliva  [17]. Te PG is the main source of stimulated
saliva,  while  the  SMG  is  the  main  source  of unstimulated
saliva. Te PG is radiation-sensitive. For example, a dose of 15∼20Gy can signifcantly reduce the amount of saliva and cause dry mouth symptoms, while 40∼50Gy dose can cause permanent functional damage of PG. So, higher irradiation doses can cause irreversible damage to the glands, and then dry mouth  symptoms  are  more  severe  and  persistent  and even  permanent  [5].  Lin  et  al.  [6]  found  that  xerostomia and quality of life were signifcantly improved by IMRT by protection of PG in 36 patients afer radiotherapy at 1 year by following xerostomia questionnaire  (XQ) and quality of life survey (QOL). Tribius et al.  [21] suggested that sparing both PGs compared with one PG (lef or right) can reduce
Figure 4: Xerostomia questionnaire (XQ) score variation in patients with mean dose higher or lower than D50. (Vertical bars represent standard deviation.)
xerostomia  without  compromising  survival.  In  this  study, there was no signifcant diference in the mean dose received by lef (29.59Gy, 17.68-58.74Gy) versus right (29.41Gy, 4.69- 62.86Gy) PG. For healthy PG, it is generally assumed that a homogenous distribution of saliva production takes place
over  the  entire  volume,  and  the  mean  of  both  PGs  was
used to assess the exposed  dose in  PG  [22, 23]. Saarilahti et  al.  [14]  concluded  that  sparing  of cSMG  resulted  in  a substantially better reduction of xerostomia as compared to patients with only one parotid gland spared. In our study,
xerostomia was not associated with LR recurrence within the
spared cSMG area. SMG-sparing  IMRT realized by helical tomotherapy technique is an efective method to reduce the riskofxerostomiainhead-and-neckcancerpatients.Also,the
OC mean doses showed signifcant efects on mouth dryness afer adjusting for PG-T and cSMG mean doses. Te results justifed eforts to spare all the salivary glands, beyond the
PGs alone.
Te  D50  doses  of  all  the  glands  (PG-T,  cSMG,  and OC) were 29.12Gy, 29.29Gy, and 31.44Gy, respectively. Te D50  dose  is  the  gland  dose  at  which  the  dry  symptoms were  relieved  by  above  50%  at  1  year  compared  to  the end of radiotherapy. Te use of a D50 dose as a threshold for the control  of gland dose remained helpful to evaluate the xerostomia.  Kwong  et  al.  [7]  studied  33 cases  of early nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) and found that the mean parotid threshold dose (median dose (Dmean)) was 38.8gy (32-46.1Gy)  with  a  relatively  good  recovery  afer  2  years
of  radiotherapy  in  both  saliva  fow  rate  and  dry  mouth symptoms. Lee et al. [8] studied 67 cases of locally advanced NPC. Te parotid  D50 acuities  in these were found to be 33.2Gy  (lef)  or  34.2Gy  (right)  2 years  afer treatment  in patientswithdrymouthsymptomswasmorethangradeII.In thisstudy,weshowedthatmostoftheglandsreceivedmoreor lessthan29 Gy,andthestimulatedorunstimulatedsalivafow rates were decreased gradually with increased mean dose for PG-T or cSMG. It becomes clear that there is an exponential relation between salivary gland function and mean dose for each gland, suggesting that it is essential to have a certain threshold for mean dose to preserve the gland function. We
used ROC curves to determine the threshold mean dose for each gland. Te D50 of the mean doses of PG-T, cSMG, and OC were 29.12Gy, 29.29Gy, and 31.44Gy, respectively. With lower mean dose than the threshold of D50, the xerostomia
score  reduced  with  prolonged  follow-up time  and  showed marked diferences at 12 and 18 months afer radiotherapy.
Univariate  analysis  identifed  some  independent  infu- ential factors of xerostomia, including salivary glands mean dose  (OC,  cSMG,  and  PG-T), age,  clinical  stage,  and both
stimulated   and   unstimulated   saliva   fow   rates.   However
multivariate  analysis  implied that,  once  adjusted for PG-T doses, gender, and both stimulated and unstimulated saliva fow  rates,  only the  OC  and  cSMG  mean  doses,  age,  and clinical stage were important predictors of patient-reported
xerostomia.  As  showed  in  other  studies  on  the  correlation
between the salivary glands does and xerostomia, the lack of statisticalsignifcanceinthemultivariatemodelshouldnotbe interpreted to mean a lack of a causal relationship; the reason may be the difculties in interpreting such results in a regres- sion model with intercorrelating predictors [24, 25]. Te XQ couldassessthedegreeofmouthdrynessremissionparalleled to  the  saliva  fow  rates.  In  addition,  usually,  the  saliva  is collected selectively from each major gland. Collection can be either unstimulated or stimulated. Saliva production by all of the glands was collectively measured by spitting into the
mouth. Te PG is the main source of stimulated saliva, while
the submandibular is the main source of unstimulated saliva. However, the results are not always comparable between the salivary fow rates and gland contribution, probably due to the variation in normal salivary fow rates and discrepancies among each gland. Tis seriously impeded the defnition of a threshold of saliva fow rates to evaluate xerostomia.
Tis  study  showed  that  comprehensive  protection  of salivary glands signifcantly reduced the risk of developing severe xerostomia. However, our study has some limitations that need to be acknowledged. Te follow-up time was too short to allow an accurate assessment of long-term follow-up of dry mouth improvement and locoregional recurrence. Te analysis of long-term consequences of glands sparing in these patients is ongoing.
5. Conclusions
Te   comprehensive   protection   of  salivary   glands   mini- mized radiation-related xerostomia in head-and-neck cancer patients  treated by helical tomotherapy without  increasing
BioMed Research International
the  locoregional  recurrence  risk.  Xerostomia  was  signif- cantly decreased when the threshold of mean dose of each gland (PG-T, cSMG, and OC) was maintained below 29.12Gy, 29.29Gy, and 31.44Gy, respectively.
Data Availability
Te  datasets  used  and  analysed  during  the  current  study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
Conflicts of Interest
Te authors declare that they have no conficts of interest.
Authors’ Contributions
Feng Teng and Wenjun Fan contributed equally to this work.