<title>Age-dependent dose conversion coefficients for external exposure to radioactive cesium in soil</title>
<author>Daiki Satoha, Takuya Furutaa, Fumiaki Takahashia, Akira Endoa, Choonsik Leeb & Wesley Emmett Bolchc</author>
<Affiliation>Emmett Bolchc
a Nuclear Science and Engineering Center, Japan Atomic Energy Agency, Tokai-mura,
Naka-gun, Ibaraki 319-1195, Japan
b Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD 20850, USA
c Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611, USA</Affiliation>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2015.1021286</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2015.1021286</URL>
To estimate effective doses for members of the public exposed to external radiation from radioactive cesium (134Cs and 137Cs) deposited on the ground by the Fukushima nuclear accident, we calculate the conversion coefficients for converting activity concentration to effective dose rate by using the Particle and Heavy Ion Transport Code System. The data were produced from different age groups within the public (newborns; 1-, 5-, 10-, and 15-year-old children; and adults) for the situations in which radioactive cesium is distributed uniformly in the soil over a planar area and at specific depths of 0.0, 0.5, 2.5, 5.0, 10.0, and 50.0 g/cm2. On the basis of the results, we also derive the conversion coefficients for exponentially distributed volumetric sources. In addition, we obtain the conversion coefficients that give the effective dose accumulated over the first and second months, the first year, and over a lifetime (50 years) because of the contamination re- maining on the ground. These calculations indicate that the conversion coefficients to obtain the effective dose rate are higher for the younger ages compared with adults, but do not exceed the ambient dose equiv- alent rate. Furthermore, we find that the difference between the calculated effective dose rates according to the International Commission on Radiological Protection 1990 and 2007 Recommendations is small (7% maximum) for a ground contamination of radioactive cesium.
Keywords: cesium; Monte Carlo calculation; radiation dose; conversion coefficient; external exposure; Fukushima nuclear accident
1.Introduction
A significant amount of radioactive material was dis- charged into the environment by the accident at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Station (hereafter re- ferred to as the Fukushima I NPS) of the Tokyo Elec- tric Power Co., which was caused by the Great East Japan Earthquake and subsequent tsunami that struck Japan on 11 March 2011. The radioactive materials were widely deposited on the ground around the Fukushima I NPS, where they elevated the radiation dose [1,2]. To protect the public from radiation exposure, the effec- tive doses obtained in an environment contaminated with radionuclides need to be determined. In particular, because of the relatively long half-lives of cesium and high energies of radiated photons, radioactive cesium deposited on the ground after the accident is one of the most important nuclides for estimating medium-term to long-term doses resulting from external exposure near the Fukushima I NPS.
Effective doses are usually estimated on the basis of measureable quantities by using conversion coeffi- cients that are calculated for a particular situation of each exposure. The International Commission on Ra- diological Protection (ICRP) established a database of conversion coefficients to convert particle fluence or air kerma to effective dose under idealized irradiation sit- uations; namely parallel beam in anteroposterior (AP), posteroanterior (PA), left lateral (LLAT), right lateral (RLAT), rotational (ROT), and isotropic (ISO) geome- tries [3]. However, for estimating the dose around the Fukushima I NPS, directly applying the ICRP data that were prepared for the idealized irradiation situations is difficult because the radionuclides are distributed in the soil and isotropically emit radiation. In addition, the effective dose conversion coefficients need to be calcu- lated to convert the activity concentration or ambient dose equivalent H∗(10) that have been measured near the Fukushima I NPS.
Noteworthy prior research exists for applying con- version coefficients to exposure situations that involve a contaminated environment. In the 1990s, after the nu- clear accidents at Three Mile Island and Chernobyl, the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) assessed conversion coefficients to convert the activity concentration to effective dose rate for external expo- sure to radionuclides in soil, air, and water [4]. Although the data could be applied to various exposure situa- tions in a contaminated environment [5], the dose def- initions and the physical data used to derive the conver- sion coefficients were old to be updated. The German Research Center for Environmental Health (HMGU) is also working to evaluate conversion coefficients [6–8]. In a recent study [8], the conversion coefficients were calcu- lated for people of different ages, ranging from newborns to adults and based on the definitions in the ICRP 2007 Recommendations [9]. However, the data for a contam- inated ground were assessed for only the source depth of 0.5 g/cm2. Applying the dose estimation around the Fukushima I NPS, where various source distributions in the soil have been observed [10], is insufficient. In an- other study, Saito et al. assumed that radionuclides are distributed exponentially in the soil, and calculated the conversion coefficients to obtain the effective dose rate based on voxel phantoms of an eight-week-old baby and of adults [11], and the conversion coefficients to obtain the ambient dose equivalent rate in the air at a height  of 100 cm above the ground [12]. Hirayama et al. also calculated the energy spectra of photons for volumet- ric sources with an exponential distribution, and derived the conversion coefficients of the effective dose rate for adults and the ambient dose equivalent rate [13]. Al- though the data for the volumetric sources are valuable, the conversion coefficients not only for babies and adults but also for intermediate-aged children are still required to assess the dose received by the public.
With this background in mind, our study aims to
construct a database of conversion coefficients to con- vert the activity concentration and ambient dose equiv- alent rate to the effective dose rate for the various ages that represent general population. In addition, the database should be constructed by using the latest avail- able knowledge of radiation protection and computer simulation. The relationship between the ambient dose equivalent rate, which is monitored by survey meters and which indicate the radiation level around the Fukushima
and 15-year-old children; and adults for planar sources of radioactive cesium at source depths of 0.0, 0.5, 2.5, 5.0, 10.0, and 50.0 g/cm2 in the soil using the Particle and Heavy Ion Transport Code System (PHITS), which is a Monte Carlo simulation package [14]. The conver- sion coefficients of the effective dose rate are derived ac- cording to the definition of the ICRP 1990 Recommen- dations [15], which has been adopted in the current na- tional regulations to control radiation hazards in many countries, and the definition of the ICRP 2007 Recom- mendations [9], which will supersede the 1990 Recom- mendations in the near future. Using a series of data cal- culated for planar sources, we propose herein a method to obtain dose conversion coefficients corresponding to volumetric sources with arbitrary depth profiles for ra- dioactive cesium because calculating the conversion co- efficients for each depth profile is not practical. The method is verified for sources with exponential distribu- tions by comparing with the results calculated directly using PHITS. We also develop a method to derive con- version coefficients of the cumulative effective dose by considering the physical and environmental decays of radioactive cesium and provide numerical data accumu- lated during the first and second months, the first year, and over a lifetime (50 years) since the accident.
2.Materials and methods
2.1.Computational conditions, tools, and data
Table 1 summarizes the computational conditions, tools, and physical data used in the present work. The source nuclides are the isotopes 134Cs and 137Cs of ra- dioactive cesium. Their physical characteristics are given in Table 2; the numerical values were obtained from ICRP Publication 107 [16] and the Evaluated Nuclear Structure Data File [17]. Note that the data for 137Cs in- clude the contribution of photons emitted from 137mBa, which is a daughter nuclide with a half-life of 2.552 min
Table 1. Summary of computational conditions, code, and data used in the present study.
Table 2. Physical characteristics of radioactive cesium (134Cs and 137Cs) considered in the present calculations.and is in radioactive equilibrium with 137Cs. The sources of the radioactive cesium were defined to occupy a uni- form plane located at the specific depths of 0.0, 0.5, 2.5, 5.0, 10.0, and 50.0 g/cm2 in the soil. The photons listed in Table 2 are thus assumed to be emitted isotropically from a planar source.
Radiation transport in the environment was simu- lated using PHITS (version 2.66) [14]. The accuracy of the transport simulations relies on atomic data libraries to determine the particle behavior. We used the atomic data libraries MCPLIB04 [18] and EL03 [19] for simu- lating photon and electron transport, respectively. These modern libraries provide precise cross-section data and can treat various physical processes of photons and elec- trons.
Computational phantoms representing a human body, including internal organs, are required to derive an effective dose. The ICRP reference phantoms of an adult male and female [20] and the University of Florida and National Cancer Institute (UF-NCI) hybrid phan- toms of male and female newborns, and 1-, 5-, 10-, and 15-year-old children [21,22] were used to compute the age-dependent conversion coefficients of effective dose, which was averaged over both sexes. Note that the defini- tion of the effective dose given in the ICRP 2007 Recom- mendations was applied to the dose estimation not only for adults but also for children and babies. Through-  out this study, these results are referred to as the ef- fective dose at each age. Because in many countries it takes some time to adopt the ICRP 2007 Recommen- dations against radiation hazards within national reg- ulations instead of the ICRP 1990 Recommendations, we estimate the effective doses on the basis of the 1990 Recommendations using a Medical Internal Radiation Dose (MIRD) type androgynous phantom [23,24] and compare the results with those from the 2007 Recom- mendations.
2.2.Procedure to calculate conversion coefficients
For radioactive cesium that is distributed in the soil, the conversion coefficients of the effective dose rate were
Figure 1. Schematic of geometry used to simulate environ- mental radiation field.
calculated in two steps: (1) calculation of environmen- tal radiation field and (2) calculation of absorbed doses of organs and tissues inside a human body and deriva- tion of the effective dose rate. The calculation efficiency is significantly improved by using the environmental ra- diation field obtained in the first step in common to the second-step calculation for the various ages. Details of each step are given in the subsections as follows.
2.2.1.Environmental radiation field
As the first step of the calculation, using PHITS, ra- diation fields on the ground were calculated based on  a semi-infinite geometry for photons emitted from ra- dioactive cesium in the soil. Although previous stud- ies [4,6] determined the radiation fields using a deter- ministic method or a mathematical approximation, the present study determines them using three-dimensional (3D) particle transport simulation based on a Monte  Carlo technique. Figure 1 depicts a schematic of the sim- ulation geometry, which consists of a right circular cylin- der constructed from a layer of air and soil with a thick- ness of 500 and 1 m, respectively. Table 3 lists the density and elemental composition of air and the soil. The val- ues were obtained from the data for soil (Type 1) and dry air provided by the International Commission on Radiation Units & Measurements (ICRU) [25] and the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) [26], respectively. The 500 m radius of the cylinder cor- responds to about five times the mean free path of the relevant photons in air with a weighted average of the emission rates for photons from 134Cs and 137Cs. A pre- vious study [27] reports that the size of simulation geom- etry is sufficient to treat photon transport in the environ- ment. The photons traveling through the environment were scored at the surface of a cylinder called the “cou- pling cylinder”; it is positioned on the ground concentric with the simulation geometry, as depicted in Figure 2. The radius of the cylinder is 100 cm, and its height is 250 cm. The phase-space coordinate is recorded for photons that reach the surface of the cylinder and consists of the spatial coordinates (x, y, z), momentum ( px, py, pz), ki- netic energy (e), and Monte Carlo weight (w). The data
Table 3. Density and elemental composition of air and soil.
were written out to an external file in ASCII format to use them in the second-step calculation. The space in- side the coupling cylinder is treated as an ideal absorber to avoid the double counting of photons traversing the cylinder.
Photons are emitted isotropically according to the energy and emission rate listed in Table 2 from a uniform planar source of 134Cs or 137Cs set at a specific depth in the soil. To reduce the variance of the Monte Carlo sim- ulation, the uniform source is reproduced by increasing the number of radioactive decays per unit area and de- creasing the Monte Carlo weight of photons released by radioactive decay as the emission point of the photon approaches the coupling cylinder.
In these calculations, only photons are transported through the medium. Secondary electrons generated by photon interactions are neglected because of their short range in the environment. However, bremsstrahlung photons generated by the secondary electrons have suf- ficient energy to penetrate the environment  because the photons’ maximum energy  is  equivalent  to  that of the secondary electrons. Based on the thick-target bremsstrahlung approximation [28], bremsstrahlung photons are therefore transported without transporting the secondary electrons.
The method employed in the present work requires a large computer resource. The computation time of en- vironmental radiation field is approximately 20 h for one case using 256 processor cores of 2.93 GHz Intel Xeon CPUs in a parallel computing environment. New approaches to simulate radiation transport in a semi- infinite geometry have been investigated [29,30], and they would improve the computation time.
2.2.2.Organ-absorbed doses and effective dose rate
The dose absorbed by organs and tissues is calcu- lated by exposing the computational phantoms to the radiation fields obtained in the first step. Figure 3 il- lustrates the geometry of the second-step calculation. The phantom is placed inside the coupling cylinder, and the remaining space is filled with air. Photon transport is restarted based on the information on the photons written in the external file during the first step. Because the simulation geometry is cylindrically symmetric, the transport calculation is repeated 36 times by rotating the source position in 10◦ steps at the surface of the cylinder around the central axis to avoid any undesirable direc- tion bias.
Not only photons  but  also  secondary  electrons  are transported according to these calculations. The
Figure 2. Schematic of coupling cylinder used to score infor- mation on photons reaching the surface of the cylinder.
Figure 3. Schematic of geometry used to calculate absorbed doses of organs and tissues in computational phantom.
absorbed dose is calculated from the energies imparted to the organs and tissues by the secondary electrons. The
relative error (i.e., one standard deviation) is set to less
than 10% for most organs and tissues. The effective dose rates (mSv/h) are derived from the results of the  calcu-lation of the absorbed dose and by using the definitions of the ICRP 1990 and 2007 Recommendations [9,15].
From these computations, we obtain the age- dependent conversion coefficient C1 (mSv/h per kBq/m2) to convert the activity concentration to the effective dose rate for planar sources of radioactive cesium at source depths of 0.0, 0.5, 2.5, 5.0, 10.0, and
50.0 g/cm2.
2.3.Air-kerma rate and ambient dose equivalent rate
The air-kerma rate (mGy/h) and ambient dose equiv- alent rate (mSv/h) were calculated using the environmen- tal radiation fields. On the basis of these results, we also derive the conversion coefficient C2 (mSv/h per kBq/m2) to convert the activity concentration to the ambient dose equivalent rate.
A 30-cm-diameter sphere is positioned in air for use as a scorer. The transport simulation is then restarted and uses the data in the external file created in the first step of the calculation. The photon fluence scored at the air sphere is converted to an air-kerma rate and ambi- ent dose equivalent rate using the conversion coefficients given in ICRP Publication 74 [31]. The relative errors of those quantities were reduced to less than 1%.
2.4.Conversion coefficients for volumetric source
The dose conversion coefficient C3 (mSv/h per kBq/m2) to convert the activity concentration at the ground surface to the effective dose rate for a volumet- ric source is derived from the conversion coefficient C1 using the equation as follows:@1
where A(ζ ) (kBq/m2) is the activity concentration at ζ (g/cm2), which translates into the soil depth, and ζ1 and ζ2 (g/cm2) are the minimum and maximum depths in the present analysis of the volumetric source in the ground(0.0 and 50.0 g/cm2), respectively. The quantity C1(ζ ) is determined by a logarithmic interpolation among data for the six depths (0.0, 0.5, 2.5, 5.0, 10.0, and 50.0 g/cm2). The weighted integral shown in Equation (1) is solved numerically using trapezoidal rule.
Similarly, the conversion coefficient C4 (mSv/h per kBq/m2) of the ambient dose equivalent rate at a height of 100 cm above the ground for a volumetric source isobtained using the equation as follows:
@2
where C2(ζ ) (mSv/h per kBq/m2) is the dose conversion coefficient at ζ obtained from C2 for the specific source depths.
As an example of a volumetric source, consider a dis- tribution that exponentially decreases with depth, which is expressed as follows:23
where the factor α indicates the activity concentration at the surface of the ground, and the parameter β (g/cm2) is the relaxation mass per unit area, which determines the rate at which the exponential variation increases with de- creasing β. In the present analysis, α was set to 1.0, and β 0.0 implies that the planar source is on the surface of the ground.
To examine the validity of the above-described method that involves the weighted integral, we incorpo- rated an exponentially distributed volumetric source of 137Cs with β 1.0 into the PHITS code and directly cal- culated the energy spectrum and the effective dose rate. The results are compared with those reconstructed from the data for planar sources.
2.5.Conversion coefficients of cumulative effective dose
The conversion coefficient C5 (mSv per kBq/m2) to convert the activity concentration to the effective dose that results from the remaining contamination on the ground over a period of concern is deduced on the ba- sis of the results of the age-dependent dose conversion coefficient C1
at 0.0 g/cm2. This deduction considers the
growth of the subjects, radioactive decay, and environ- mental migration of the radionuclides in the equation as follows:
@4
where t (years) is the elapsed time since the activity con- centration was measured, t1 and t2 (years) are the start and end points of the period of concern, C1(t) (mSv/h per kBq/m2) is the conversion coefficient to convert the activity concentration to the effective dose rate for the age of the subject at time t, T1/2 (years) is the half-life of the radionuclide, and W(t) is a weathering function that expresses the movement of the radionuclides as a
function of time in terrestrial ecosystems. Note that one year is considered to be 365.25 days in Equation (4).
The conversion coefficient C1 varies depending on the age of the subject who is exposed to radiation. If the subject is a baby or child at t 0, then C1(t) must be esti- mated by considering the growth of the subject over time
t. On the basis of the data for C1 for the six ages (new- borns; 1-, 5-, 10-, and 15-year-old children; and adults) for radioactive cesium on the ground at a depth of 0.0 g/cm2, C1(t) at intermediate ages is obtained by linear in- terpolation based on inverse total body mass; this is the same manner in which we compute the age-dependent committed effective dose on internal exposure [32]. Note
that C1(t) for the ages ≥20 years is assumed to be con-stant; thus, we use the data of adults.
On the basis of data obtained mainly around Cher- nobyl, the vertical migration of radioactive cesium into the soil was investigated by Anspaugh et al. [33]. The present study uses the below-mentioned equation pro- posed by Anspaugh et al. as the weathering function W(t) in Equation (4):@5
where the factor 0.82 reflects the shielding effect due to the surface roughness of the ground, and the two constants 1.5 and 50 correspond to the half-lives of ra- dioactive cesium due to physical movement in terres- trial ecosystems. The equation assumes that 40% of ra- dioactive cesium attenuates with an ecological half-life of 1.5 years and the 60% decreases with a half-life of 50 years.
3.Results and discussion
3.1.Results for environmental radiation field
Table 4 shows the results of the calculation of the air- kerma rate for a height of 100 cm above the ground and for a uniform planar source of 137Cs at a depth of 0.0 and 0.5 g/cm2 together with the data provided by the ICRU, EPA, and HMGU. The ICRU data were derived from data for 137mBa [25] by multiplying with a branch- ing fraction to obtain 137mBa from 137Cs, and the EPA
[4] and HMGU [8] data were obtained from the data for
Table 4. Air-kerma rate (mGy/h per kBq/m2) at a height of 100 cm above the ground for a planar source of 137Cs at depths of 0.0 and 0.5 g/cm2.
Figure 4. Air-kerma rates above ground for 137Cs distributed at depths of 0.0, 0.5, 2.5, 5.0, 10.0, and 50.0 g/cm2.
mono-energetic photons by considering the energy and emission rate from 137Cs 137mBa. The results of the present calculations are consistent with those of the pre- vious studies [4,8,25]; this means that the method used in the present study is appropriate for calculating envi-
ronmental radiation fields.
Figure 4 shows the air-kerma rates at heights rang- ing from 0 to 200 cm above the ground surface for 137Cs
distributed at depths of 0.0, 0.5, 2.5, 5.0, 10.0, and 50.0 g/cm2. The air-kerma rate increases with the decreasing height because the scorer approaches the source in the soil. The data for 0.0 g/cm2 (i.e. source is on the surface of the ground) exhibit a marked increase on approaching the ground. However, when the source is covered with soil, the data gradually increase as the scorer approaches the source. This is because photons emitted at small an- gles with respect to the ground surface and at a point distant from the scorer travel a relatively long distance in the soil before reaching the scorer. Thus, they are at- tenuated along their path by the soil’s shielding effect.
3.2.Conversion coefficients of effective dose rate and ambient dose equivalent rate
As an example of a calculation of organ-absorbed doses, Figure 5 shows the results calculated for an adult male and female exposed to environmental radiation from 134Cs and 137Cs distributed in the soil at a depth of 0.5 g/cm2. The absorbed dose of an adult female is higher than that of an adult male in most organs and tissues. A layer of soft tissue and muscle near the body surface shields internal organs from radiation. Because such a layer for the ICRP adult female phantom is thin- ner than that for the male phantom, the energies deliv- ered deep within the body are higher for the female than for the male. The same tendency is observed in the results of calculations by the ICRP [3] for situations involving idealized irradiation.
Figures 6 and 7 present the conversion coefficients
C1 and C2 to convert the activity concentration to the
Figure 5. Absorbed doses for active marrow (R-marrow), colon, lungs, stomach wall (St-wall), breast, ovaries, testes, urinary bladder wall (UB-wall), oesophagus wall (Oesoph- agus), liver, thyroid, 50-μm endosteal region (Endost-BS), brain, salivary glands (S-glands), skin, adrenals, ET region (ET), gall bladder wall (GB-wall), heart wall (Ht-wall), kid- neys, lymph nodes (Lymph), muscle, oral mucosa (O-mucosa), pancreas, prostate, small intestine wall (SI-wall), spleen, thy- mus, uterus/cervix (Uterus), and remainder tissues (Remain- der) for adult male and female exposed to environmental radi- ation field of 134Cs and 137Cs at a depth of 0.5 g/cm2.
Figure 6. Conversion coefficients to convert from activity concentration of 134Cs to effective dose rate and ambient dose equivalent rate as a function of source depth in soil.
Figure 7.   Same as Figure 6, except for the use of 137Cs source.
effective dose rate at each age and to  the  ambient  dose equivalent rate, respectively, for 134Cs and 137Cs at depths of 0.0, 0.5, 2.5, 5.0, 10.0, and 50.0 g/cm2. The re- sults for C1 and C2 are summarized in Tables 5 and 6 for 134Cs and 137Cs, respectively. In the sections below, we discuss the age dependence and the relationship among these coefficients.3.2.1.Age dependence of effective dose rate
As observed in Tables 5 and 6, the conversion co- efficients of the effective dose rate for the various ages increase for younger subjects. The result for a newborn is 70% greater than that for  adults at maximum. In  the present calculations, the phantoms, including new- borns, were placed on the ground in an upright stance. As shown in Figure 4, the air-kerma rate becomes high on approaching the ground surface; this means that a shorter phantom is exposed to more radiation. In ad- dition, a smaller body means a thinner outer layer of soft tissue and muscle, as mentioned above in comparing adult males and females. For younger subjects, external photons penetrate deeper through the layer of soft tis- sue and muscle, thereby transferring their energy to the organs that are deeper within the body.
3.2.2.Effective dose rate compared with ambient dose equivalent rate
A comparison of the conversion coefficient of the ef- fective dose rate C1 with that of the ambient dose equiv- alent rate C2 listed in Table 5 and 6 shows that C1 is al- ways smaller, regardless of age, than C2. The validity of these results is supported by the results of a study pub- lished by Saito et al., in which they analyze exponen-
tial sources in soil [11,12]. The important point to retain from these results is that the radiation dose to the pub- lic on a contaminated ground is determined to a great extent by the ambient dose equivalent, which is moni- tored by survey meters. In other words, the ambient dose
Table 5. Conversion coefficients C1 (mSv/h per kBq/m2) and C2 (mSv/h per kBq/m2) to convert from activity concentration of
134Cs to effective dose rate and to ambient dose equivalent rate H˙ ∗(10), respectively.
Table 6. Conversion coefficients C1 (mSv/h per kBq/m2) and C2 (mSv/h per kBq/m2) to convert from activity concentration of
137Cs to effective dose rate and to ambient dose equivalent rate H˙ ∗(10), respectively.
equivalent gives a conservative estimation for all ages of the dose limits defined by the effective dose.
3.2.3.Effective dose rates based on ICRP 2007 Recommendations compared with those based on 1990 Recommendations
The effective dose rates for adults calculated ac- cording to the ICRP 1990 and 2007 Recommenda- tions agreed to within 7%. Because the simulation tools and physical data were identical for both calculations, the difference is attributed mainly from the difference between the computational phantoms and the tissue- weighting factors defined in each recommendation. Ex- ternal exposure to radioactive cesium distributed in the soil results in photons of several hundred keV impinging on the body from all azimuthal angles. In this situation, energy is deposited uniformly inside the body making it difficult to detect a difference in the effective dose caused by the different organ configurations of the phantoms and by the different tissue-weighting factors of both rec- ommendations. On the basis of the results, we conclude that the 2007 update of the dosimetry system, if adopted, would only slightly impact the estimates of the effective dose to people on a ground contaminated with radioac- tive cesium.
3.3.
Dose conversion coefficients for volumetric source
Figure 8 shows the energy spectrum for environmen- tal photons from a volumetric source of 137Cs with an exponential distribution with β 1.0. The stars and line indicate the results of the direct calculation using PHITS
Figure 8. Energy spectra for environmental photons from volumetric source of 137Cs with exponential distribution with β 1.0.
Note: Stars represent the results calculated directly by PHITS from the volumetric source, and line indicates the results re- constructed by using data for planar sources.
Table 7. Conversion coefficients C3 (mSv/h per kBq/m2) to convert from activity concentration to effective dose rate for volumetric sources with exponential distribution.
Table 8. Conversion coefficients C4 (mSv/h per kBq/m2) to convert from activity concentration to ambient dose equivalent rate at a height of 100 cm above ground for volumetric sources with exponential distribution.and the reconstruction by the weighted-integral method described in Section 2.4, respectively. The error bars of the stars represent statistical uncertainty in the Monte Carlo simulation, and they are expressed in the form  of one standard deviation. The spectrum reconstructed from the data for planar sources reproduces the spec- trum calculated for a volumetric source. Table 7 lists the conversion coefficient C3 (mSv/h per kBq/m2) to convert the activity concentration to the effective dose rate at each age for 134Cs and 137Cs distributed expo- nentially from the ground surface to a depth of 50.0 g/cm2 with the relaxation mass per unit area β of 0.0, 0.5, 1.0, and 5.0 g/cm2. The result for  adults with the  β 1.0 distribution of 137Cs is 1.23 10−6 mSv/h per kBq/m2 and agrees very well with the result obtained from the direct calculation of 1.24 10−6 mSv/h per kBq/m2.
The conversion coefficient C4  (mSv/h per kBq/m2)
of the ambient dose equivalent rate for volumetric sources with an exponential distribution is summarized in Table 8 together with the results calculated by Saito et al. [12] and Hirayama et al. [13]. The results are consistent within a maximum deviation of 5%. The re- ports regarding the measured depth profile of radioac- tive cesium in soil near the Fukushima I NPS for 2011
and 2012 [10] indicate that radioactive cesium remained within 5 cm of the ground surface, with β lying be- tween 1.0 and 2.0 g/cm2 at most study sites. The present method has been verified for volumetric sources with an exponential distribution, which represent the actual dis- tribution observed during the initial stage of migration into the soil by radioactive cesium.
Although we demonstrate herein the validity of the method for an exponential distribution, the proposed method applies equally for determining the dose con- version coefficients for a volumetric source with an ar- bitrary depth profile by simply changing the weighting
function Aj(ζ ) in Equations (1) and (2).
3.4.Conversion coefficients of cumulative effective dose
We now summarize in Table 9 the conversion coeffi- cient C5 (mSv per kBq/m2) to convert the activity con- centration to the cumulative effective dose for newborns; 1-, 5-, 10-, and 15-year-old children; and for adults re- maining on a contaminated ground for the first month, second month, first year, and for a lifetime (50 years) after the contamination by radioactive cesium. The conversion coefficients of the cumulative effective dose
Table 9. Conversion coefficients C5 (mSv per kBq/m2) to convert from activity concentration of 134Cs and 137Cs to effective doses accumulated for first and second months, first year, and for 50 years from the time of the contamination.increase for the subject who is exposed to radiation at younger ages. We also derived the cumulative effective dose for newborns accumulated over 70 years since the accident. The result increases by 8.25% compared with that for 50 years listed in Table 9.
Using the conversion coefficients, the cumulative ef- fective dose Eext (mSv) for external exposure on a con- taminated ground is estimated by the equation as follows [5]:26
where A134 and A137 (kBq/m2) are the activity concen- trations measured for 134Cs and 137Cs, respectively. In addition, the cumulative effective dose Epo (mSv) re- flecting the residents’ lifestyle is estimated by the below- mentioned equation that considers the dose reduction and partial occupancy in houses and buildings [5]:27
where RF is the dose-reduction factor defined by the ra- tio of dose rate inside the houses and buildings to that outside them, and OF indicates the fraction of time dur- ing which the reduction factor RF is applicable (i.e., the occupancy factor). In the previous studies [34,35], we have calculated the RF values using PHITS for typi-  cal wooden homes and concrete building found around Fukushima, whose 3D models are constructed includ- ing the inner structure under the supervision of archi- tectural experts. In addition, the variation of the RF val- ues was analyzed by changing the sizes and materials of houses and buildings. From these results, we concluded that the houses and buildings found around Fukushima can be categorized into three groups; namely wooden homes, concrete buildings with inner structure, and con- crete buildings without inner structure, in terms of the dose-reduction factor [34]. In the present work, to ded-Table 10. Summary of dose-reduction factor RF evaluated for wooden homes and concrete buildings against photons emitted from radioactive cesium [34,35].
icate to the calculations of the cumulative effective dose using Equation (7), we evaluated the range of the RF values for general wooden homes and concrete buildings with and without inner structure. The numerical data are summarized in Table 10.
3.5.Conversion coefficients applied to estimate dose from the Fukushima I NPS accident
In this section, we discuss how to apply the conver- sion coefficients to estimate the dose received from the environment contaminated by the Fukushima I NPS ac- cident. Using the conversion coefficients presented in
this study, the effective dose rate E˙ (mSv/h) is estimated as follows:@8where C134 and C137 (mSv/h per kBq/m2) are the conver-
the ground was investigated around the Fukushima I NPS [39,40]. Using Equation (11) to analyze those data quickly leads to a map of the distribution of the effec- tive dose rate. Note that the application of Equation
(11) should be restricted to estimating the dose  for thesion coefficients to convert the activity concentrations of
134Cs and 137Cs, respectively, to the effective dose rate listed in Tables 5 and 6, and A134  and A137  (kBq/m2)
M	M
represent the activity concentrations measured for 134Cs
and 137Cs, respectively. The ambient dose equivalent rate
H˙ ∗(10) (mSv/h) is also estimated in the same manner:29
where C134 and C137 (mSv/h per kBq/m2) are the conver- sion coefficients to convert the activity concentrations of 134Cs and 137Cs, respectively, to the ambient dose equiv- alent rate.
In  addition,  the  effective  dose  rate  E˙  is  obtained
from the measured ambient dose equivalent rate H˙M∗ (10) (mSv/h) using the below-mentioned equation derived from Equations (8) and (9):@10
where A134 and A137 are the activity concentrations of
134Cs and 137Cs, respectively.
Equation (10) contains three unknown variables: H˙M∗ (10), A134, and A137. A yield of radionuclides in a re- actor core depends on fuel burnup, and the activity levels of the radionuclides are determined uniquely for each re- actor. From the results of calculations [36] and measure- ments [37,38], the ratio of the activity of 134Cs to that of
137Cs is about 1.0 for the reactor cores of the Fukushima I NPS during the accident [2]. Assuming that 134Cs and
137Cs were released from the NPS and deposited on the ground in the same manner with the same level of activ- ity, the below-mentioned equation may be obtained by simplifying Equation (10):
@11
where  E˙   (mSv/h)  is  the  effective  dose  rate;  H˙M∗ (10) (mSv/h) is the measured ambient dose equivalent rate; C134, C137, C134, and C137 (mSv/h per kBq/m2) are the
conversion coefficients from Tables 5 and 6; t is the time elapsed between the accident and the measurement of H˙M∗ (10); and λ134  and λ137  are the decay constants de-
rived from the half-lives of 134Cs and 137Cs (T134  and
T137), respectively. The only unknown variable appear- ing in Equation (11) is H˙M∗ (10). The distribution of the ambient dose equivalent rate at a height of 100 cm abovethe ground was investigated around the Fukushima I NPS [39,40]. Using Equation (11) to analyze those data quickly leads to a map of the distribution of the effec- tive dose rate. Note that the application of Equation
(11) should be restricted to estimating the dose  for the
Fukushima I NPS accident for which the initial radioac-tivity of 134Cs and 137Cs was almost equal.
4.Conclusions
We calculate herein the age-dependent dose conver- sion coefficients for external exposure to ground con- tamination with radioactive cesium using Monte Carlo simulation to estimate the dose received by public com- prising babies, children, and adults. The present results are consistent with those of the previous studies and fill in the missing data. Although the effective dose rates for younger people are higher than those for adults, they are less than the ambient dose equivalent rate that is contin- uously monitored to know the radiation level on a con- taminated ground around the Fukushima I NPS. Radi- ation control based on the ambient dose equivalent rate (as opposed to the effective dose rate) gives a conser- vative estimate of the dose that is received. The effec-tive dose rate calculated as per the ICRP 1990 and 2007Recommendations does not differ significantly for expo-sure due to ground contamination, which indicates that the update of the dosimetry system should not cause an undesirable confusion for estimating doses on a ground contaminated with radioactive cesium. We also propose herein a method to derive the dose conversion coeffi- cients for a volumetric source by using the conversion coefficients for planar sources. This is used to estimate the dose received from radioactive cesium distributed with an arbitrary depth profile in the soil. For a volu- metric source with an exponential distribution, the re- sults reconstructed from the data of planar sources re- produce well the results of the direct calculation based on the volumetric source. Because the depth profile of radioactive cesium follows various patterns in the soil around the Fukushima I NPS and will change with time owing to the dynamics of the terrestrial ecosystem, this imate the dose in contaminated areas. We also derivethe conversion coefficients for the effective dose accumu-over a lifetime (50 years) since deposition of the radioac-tive cesium. These data are helpful to estimate doses re-
ceived by people remaining in contaminated areas after the nuclear accident or for those returning and staying in decontaminated areas.
Acknowledgements
We would like to express our gratitude to Dr K.F. Ecker- man and Dr M.B. Bellamy of the Oak Ridge National Lab- oratory for fruitful discussions related to the Monte Carlo simulation in a contaminated environment. We are also grate-ful to Mr N. Matsuda and Dr K. Saito of the Japan Atomic Energy Agency (JAEA) for furnishing information on actual distributions of radioactive cesium under the ground around the Fukushima I NPS. We also thank the operation team of the Center for Computational Science and E-systems (CCSE) at the JAEA. The large-scale parallel Monte Carlo simulations reported in this study were executed on a mainframe computer maintained by the CCSE.
