<title>Evaluation of Cloud Computing Copyright Protection Based on AHP</title>
<author>Wenquan Li    and Xindong Peng   </author>
<Affiliation>College of Information Engineering, Shaoguan  University, Shaoguan 512005, China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral> Science and Technology of Nuclear Installation</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Hindawi</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1155/2020/6671331</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/6671331</URL>
To increase the protection level of copyright in cloud computing environment, aiming at the problems that the indicators in the copyright protection evaluation system are diﬃcult to accurately deﬁne and cannot be quantiﬁed, a comprehensive evaluation model of copyright protection based on the combination of analytic hierarchy process and fuzzy comprehensive evaluation is proposed. First, using the analytic hierarchy process (AHP), the copyright protection evaluation system is constructed and the weight of each evaluation index is determined through the judgment matrix. .en the quantitative evaluation result is fuzzy operated through index weight and evaluated data. Finally, the simulation evaluation results on speciﬁc example show that this model  is  reasonable  and  eﬀective,  and  it  can  provide  the  evaluation  basis  and  practical  reference  for  copyright  protection evaluation in cloud computing environment.
1. Introduction
Cloud computing is a computing model that uses the in- ternet to realize access to a shared resource pool anytime, anywhere, on demand, and conveniently. It has features such as  on-demand  self-service,  extensive  network  access,  re- source pool, being fast and ﬂexible, and metered and paid services [1–3]. As a new information technology, it not only provides great convenience for people’s live, but also brings severe challenges to traditional copyright protection, which is  manifested  in  the  continuous  disputes  over  copyright protection  in  the  cloud  computing  environment  such  as Cablevision  case  in  USA,  EMI  suing  MP3tunes  case,  and infringement reprint of headline today case. .e problem of copyright  protection  in  cloud  computing  environment  is becoming more and more prominent. .e main reason is the lack  of  eﬀective  copyright  protection  measures  of  cloud platform,   copyright   protection   awareness   and   perfect copyright  protection  evaluation  index  system.  And  it  is impossible to evaluate the current status and development trend    of   copyright    protection    on    cloud    computing platforms.
Copyright protection in cloud computing environment is an important part of intellectual property protection. Its protection  evaluation  index  system  has  not  been  system- atically studied.  However, some  scholars have  studied the protection  and  evaluation  of  intellectual  property  rights. Wang [4] analyzed copyright infringement of SAAS model, PAAS   model,   and   IAAS   model   of   cloud   computing, established evaluation system of intellectual property pro- tection,  and  veriﬁed  the  eﬀectiveness  through  the  fuzzy comprehensive  evaluation  method, providing  a  new  eval- uation  method  for  intellectual  property  protection  under cloud  computing  mode.  Yuan  and  Zhang  [5]  established copyright  risk  assessment  system  of network  information resources  on  WBS-RBS  in  copyright  risk  of  acquisition, processing, storage, transmission, and management, which provided an evaluation basis for the copyright protection of network information  resources.  Zhang  and  Liu  [6]  estab- lished index system of intellectual property risk evaluation of digital  library  on  resources,  environment,  and  personnel according to the characteristics of digital library, providing an  evaluation  method  for  the  protection  of library  intel- lectual property rights.  Li  et  al.  [7]  established  evaluation index system of copyright infringement of network infor- mation  resources  and  constructed  comprehensive  evalua- tion  model  of extension  AHP  on  deﬁning  the  subject  of infringement,  providing  eﬀective  assessment  tools  for  the copyright    infringement    risk    of   network    information resources.
.e above research results provide an important basis for infringement  risk  decision  and  copyright protection  eval- uation.  However,  it  does  not  combine  the  environmental characteristics  and  management  methods  of  cloud  com- puting. .ere are some problems, such as diﬃculty in de- ﬁning evaluation index and unquantiﬁable evaluation result. As  a  result,  they  cannot  be  directly  applied  to  copyright protection evaluation in the cloud computing environment. .erefore, based on the in-depth analysis of the inﬂuencing factors and evaluation process of copyright protection, this paper  aims  at  copyright  protection  issues  in  the  cloud computing  environment  and  constructs  a  comprehensive evaluation  model  of copyright  protection  on  information factors,  environmental  factors,  and  management  factors. First, this paper uses the AHP to layer each evaluation index and calculates the weight of each level of evaluation index. .en, the ﬁnal quantitative evaluation result is obtained by fuzzy calculation of index weight and membership degree. Finally,  the  validity  and  practicability  of  the  evaluation model are veriﬁed by a concrete example.
To process our discussion, the remainder of this article is listed as follows: Section 2 reviews the content of copyright protection evaluation under cloud computing environment. Section 3 presents the fuzzy evaluation model based on AHP. In Section 4, a case study is presented and a comparison is given. In last section, some conclusions are derived.
2. Content of Copyright Protection Evaluation under Cloud              Computing Environment
Copyright protection in the cloud computing environment refers to information technology such  as data encryption, identity authentication, license authorization, and protect- ing data work’s legal and reasonable usage, and when in- fringement   occurs,   technical   means   are   used   to   track infringements,  the  source  and  attribution  of  works  are identiﬁed,   and   evidence   for   court   rulings   is  provided, thereby   eﬀectively  maintaining   the  legitimate   rights   of copyright owners [8]. Under cloud computing environment, after copyright owner uploads digital works to cloud server, in order to improve the reliability and availability of data, cloud service provider uses distributed redundancy mode to save works on diﬀerent nodes of the same data center and even save works on diﬀerent nodes of diﬀerent data centers [9–11].  With  authorization,  the  user  gets  works  related services by the client. .erefore, it is either uploading digital works  or  distributing  cloud  servers,  which  are  realized through the Internet. While the virtuality and looseness of the network will greatly increase the diﬃculty in protecting the right of reproduction, the right of information network dissemination, and the right of works lease, evaluating the level  of  copyright  protection  is  mainly  to  evaluate  the protection level of reproduction right, information network dissemination right, and works lease right. Protection  of  Reproduction  Right.  In  the  cloud  com- puting environment, the reproduction right refers to a right of a digital work owned by the owner, which is copied by oneself or by authorizing others. It is the fundamental core right of copyright  [12]. Enforcing the protection of repro- duction right is to safeguard the right holders to more ef- fectively control the distribution, dissemination, and use of their works. Main factors of impacting protection evaluation of reproduction rights are as follows. (1) Direct copy: it is a simple  and  direct  reproduction  of the  original  work.  (2) Temporary copy: it is the instantaneous replication behavior of some pieces of works in the cloud virtual storage area. Although the object of temporary copy is partial segment, it is still possible to reproduce some or even all of the works through data restoration and data splicing techniques, which is truly perceived by the public. (3) Data cache: when the user is browsing the work, the server will download the work to the cloud cache. When browsing again, the server will read it directly  from  the  cache.  Works  in  buﬀer  will  be  reused, which reduces the copyright owner’s ability to control his work. (4) Data distribution: in order to ensure the stability of the cloud platform, cloud server will distribute copies of the work and store them on diﬀerent nodes in the data center. Once a node fails, services continue to be provided through nodes that store copies of works adjacent to each other [13]. In the process of data distribution, there is obvious copying behavior.
2.2. Protection of Information Network Dissemination Right.
.e information network dissemination right refers to using the Internet to provide work services to the public, which makes the public have the right of obtaining and using works at  a  particular  time  and  place  [14].  .e  deﬁnition  of in- formation   network  communication  behavior  is  for  the purpose  of providing  products  for  public  access  or  use. Enforcing protection of information network dissemination right through the internet is to prevent the occurrence of speciﬁc infringement and protect the legitimate rights and interests  of copyright  owners.  Ensuring  information  net- work dissemination right mainly depends on whether the works are authorized and whether the dissemination is safe. .e main factors that impact protection evaluation of in- formation network dissemination right are the following. (1) Access control: the purpose of access control is limiting the user’s access and scope to the work to ensure the legal use of the works by authorized users, which is preventing unau- thorized  users  from   accessing  the  protected  work  and preventing  authorized  users  from  unauthorized  access  to protected works.  (2) Authorization mechanism: the copy- right holder grants or assigns the exclusive right to use the work to the licensor. Only fully authorized, the obligee can publish   and   use   the  work   in   the   cloud   platform.   (3) Copyright  tracking  mechanism:  after  rights  are  violated, using  data  encryption,  digital  watermarking,  and  other
technologies can track infringements, identify ownership of the work, and, through copyright tracking, eﬀectively curb the indiscriminate spread of illegal works.
2.3. Protection of Works Lease Right.  Works lease right refers to copyright owner’s right to license or forbid others to lease the  original  and  copy  of  digital  works  under  the  cloud platform  [15]. Strengthening the protection of the right of lease can eﬀectively promote the creation and dissemination of excellent  works.  Main  factors  of impacting  protection evaluation of lease rights are as follows. (1) Rent mechanism: after the  cloud  service provider  signs  a  contract with  the copyright owner to rent the works, it will store the works in the data center for consumers to use, and pay the rent to the copyright holder regularly.  (2) Paid use: in the process of works  lease,  copyright holder  obtains  a  direct  or  indirect beneﬁt by renting. Cloud service providers make money by providing  services,  and the  users pay for the  service.  .e principle of paid use, on the one hand, can ensure that the intellectual achievements of copyright holders are rewarded; on  the  other  hand,  it  can  prevent  the  work  from  being abused in the network.
3. The Fuzzy Evaluation Model Based on AHP
3.1. )e Evaluation Process of Copyright Protection.  Under cloud   computing   environment,   the   index   of  copyright protection  has  the  characteristics  of hierarchy,  qualitative and quantitative combination, and fuzziness. .erefore, it is in  combination  with  traditional  qualitative  analysis  and quantitative analysis of their respective advantages and uses hierarchical  analysis  and  fuzzy  comprehensive  evaluation method to evaluate copyright protection. First, according to national copyright protection standards and regulations, it establishes  a multilevel  evaluation  index  system for  copy- right protection, and through the analytic hierarchy process (AHP)  calculates the weights  of each  index. After that,  it needs to collect evaluation data of copyright protection of cloud  platform,  establish  fuzzy  evaluation  factor  set  and comment  set,  construct  fuzzy  evaluation  matrix,  and  cal- culate membership degree. Finally, according to the index weight and membership degree, the ﬁnal evaluation result is calculated and analyzed. .e speciﬁc evaluation process is shown in Figure 1.
3.2.  Construction of  Copyright Protection Evaluation Index System.  .e quality of evaluation index selection is directly related to the objectivity and impartiality of the evaluation results. .erefore, selecting evaluation indexes of copyright protection  should  consider  not  only  the  information  re- sources  factor,  but  also  the  human  factor  and  the  envi-
ronmental  factor  which  aﬀect  each  other.  On  the  basis  of
following  the  scientiﬁc,  systematic,  and  operational  prin- ciples, it needs to analyze information resource factor, en- vironment  factor,  and  management  factor  under  cloud computing   environment,   particularly   summarizing   the protection   of  reproduction   right,   information   network dissemination right, and works lease right. Meanwhile, with
3
advice from experts and scholars, it uses Delphi method and correlation  analysis  to  reﬁne  evaluation  index  system  of copyright protection under cloud computing environment. Speciﬁc details are shown in Table 1.
3.3. )e Determination of Index Weight.  In order to evaluate the  real  level  of copyright  protection  scientiﬁcally,  compre- hensively, and objectively, distinguishing between primary and secondary indicators in the evaluation process and highlighting the status of each indicator in copyright protection, it needs to make indicators empowered following the importance of the indicators. Because the related factors of copyright protection’s decision level have hierarchy and uncertainty and are diﬃcult to deﬁne and quantify precisely, hence, the AHP was used to determine the weight of each index. AHP is a combination of qualitative and quantitative system analysis method  [16–20], which is applied to deal with a condition of uncertainty and subjective judgment. .e steps include constructing judgment matrix, hierarchical ordering, and consistency testing.
(1) Construct judgment matrix of each layer: in order to reduce the inﬂuence of randomness caused by hu- man   subjective   factors,   expert   consultation   and multiple  rounds  of anonymous  questionnaires  are used. Pairwise comparison is used, which compares the importance of the two factors at the lower level with those at the higher level. And the grading is on a nine-point scale. Meanwhile, the domain experts give the  importance  comparison  relationship  of  each indicator, which is to construct the judgment matrix A  of each  layer.  Judging  each  scale’s  meaning  of matrix is shown in Table 2.@1
(2) Calculate weights of each level. Hierarchy weighting refers  to  the  quantitative value  of each  indicator’s importance at this level, which is relative to an in- dicator  of the  previous  level  [21–24].  .e  feature vector of judgment matrix is relevant weight of in- dex. .e speciﬁc calculation steps are as follows:
Step  1:  normalize each column of the judgment matrix.@2
Step 2:   add the normalized judgment matrix by row.@3
Step 3:    normalize  the  added  vector  Wi   and  get  the eigenvector.
Figure 1: .e process of copyright protection evaluation.
@4
Step 4:  calculate the maximum characteristic root λmax of the judgment matrix.@5
Step 5:   in  order  to  reduce  the  deviation  of experts’ subjective judgment, judgment matrix should be examined for consistency. .e formula for CR is given by (6) and the formula for CI is given by (7):@6
@7
RI is the average random consistency index. RI can be obtained as shown in Table 3. When the CR is less than 0.1, the judgment matrix has passed the consistency test, and the result  is  considered to be within  an  acceptable margin  of error and can therefore be adopted. Otherwise, it is regarded as  that  the judgment  matrix  is  not  objective  enough  and needs further modiﬁcation  [25–28].
(3) Determine the index weight. .e judgment matrix of each level will be obtained by means of anonymous questionnaire. If there is a big diﬀerence of opinion on expert feedback, multiple rounds of consultation will  be  adopted  till  the  judgment  matrix  data  is basically consistent. Meanwhile, the consistency test is  carried  out  to  obtain  the  weight  value  of each
index. .e weights of primary and secondary indexes are  shown  in  Tables 4–7,  and the total weights  of indexes are shown in Table 1.
As  shown  in Table 4,  in terms  of the  impact  of envi- ronmental factor on copyright protection, technical level is the  most  important  and  inﬂuential  (0.669),  followed  by maintenance level (0.243) and operational level (0.088).
As shown in Table 5, in terms of the impact of infor- mation resource factor on copyright protection, reproduc- tion  right  is  the  most  important  and  inﬂuential  (0.648), followed by information network propagating right (0.230) and works lease right (0.122).
As shown in Table 6, in terms of the impact of infor- mation resource factor on copyright protection, rules and regulations  is  the  most  important  and  inﬂuential  (0.557), followed by management institutions  (0.320) and external constraints (0.123).
As shown in Table 7, in the copyright protection eval- uation, information resource factors is the most important and inﬂuential  (0.589), followed by environmental factors (0.252) and management factors (0.159), indicating that the protection  of  information  resources  is  a  key  factor  for copyright protection in the cloud computing environment.
In addition, it can be seen from Table 1 that relative eval- uation target weights (weighted multiply at all levels) with the three levels of indicators, direct copy (0.1714), quality of cloud services   (0.0993),   temporary   copy   (0.0992),   authorization mechanism   (0.0742),   data   distribution   (0.0653),   and   rent mechanism (0.0539), are the 6 largest and the most important weight evaluation indexes. And the result is consistent with the reality.  .is  is  because,  in  practical  applications,  protecting copyright of information works is mainly to protect the right to copy the works, prevent illegal direct copying, and ensure that temporary replication in the cloud server is not used illegally. At the same time, it is necessary to restrict users’ access rights and
Table 1: Index system of copyright protection evaluation.
Table 2: Scale and meaning of judgment matrix.
scope of works information through authorization mechanism, data distribution mechanism, and rental mechanism, which is to ensure the use of information resources in a legal and compliant manner. Cultural level (0.0021), business nature (0.0024), local economy (0.0051), market share (0.0058), customer satisfaction (0.0086), and institutional setting (0.0101) are the six evaluation indicators with the least weight, which shows that they have little impact on the level of copyright protection, but they are also factors that cannot be completely ignored.
3.4.  Fuzzy  Comprehensive  Evaluation  Model.  Fuzzy  com- prehensive   evaluation   uses   the   principle   of  fuzzy   linear transformation  and the principle  of maximum membership degree, for indicators to be evaluated, which evaluates com- prehensively from each index of the lowest layer, and it goes up till the highest target level in turn. Finally, the ﬁnal evaluation result is obtained  [29–31]. .e main  steps include determi- nation of evaluation index and evaluation set, calculation of membership degree, and comprehensive evaluation.
Table 3: Determination of the random index.
Table 4: .e index layer of environmental factor (A1-B).
Table 5: .e index layer of information resource factor (A2-C).
Table 6: .e index layer of management factor (A3-D).
Table 7: .e criterion layer judgment matrix (U-A).
Determine the factor set of evaluation indicators at all levels U   U1 , U2 , . . . , Um  .
(2) Determine                the                comment                set V1      V1 , V2 , V3 , V4 , V5   {high,    above,    normal, below,  low};  the  measurement  scale  vector  corre- sponding to each evaluation grade is G  {5, 4, 3, 2, 1}.
(3) Determine  the  membership  matrix.  Membership refers  to  the  degree  of  membership  relationship between each evaluation index corresponding to the comment set and each grade  [32, 33]. rij  is used to indicate the degree to which the ith index is rated as the jth grade. And the rij  is determined by rij  nij/m calculation, where nij  is the number of experts rated as the jth grade of the current index and m is the total number of experts. Construct membership matrix R according to the membership degree of the index as follows:@8
(4) Comprehensive evaluation. .e index weight vector W and membership matrix R determined by AHP are fuzzy calculated, and the comprehensive evalu- ation result is obtained. .e formula is given by@9(5) Quantitative results: the ﬁnal quantitative results are obtained by multiplying the  comprehensive  evalu- ation  result  obtained  by  fuzzy  operation  with  the scale value. .e formula is given by210 Among them, Bi  is the fuzzy comprehensive evaluation result  of  evaluation  index,  GT   is  the  scale  value  corre- sponding to each comment set, and Si is the ﬁnal evaluation score.
4. Case Study
4.1.  Evaluation  and  Implementation.  Taking  D  company operating cloud computing platform in Guangzhou as the evaluation  object,  10  industry  experts  and  scholars  were invited to evaluate their copyright protection level through on-site viewing and questionnaire survey. On the basis of sorting  out  the  evaluation  results  and  statistics,  the  fuzzy membership degree of each evaluation index is obtained, as shown in Table 8.
According to the comprehensive fuzzy evaluation for- mula B  WR, the fuzzy evaluation set of each second-level index  is  calculated,  in which the weight value  W of each index can be obtained from Table 1. Fuzzy evaluation vectors of second-level index operation level, maintenance level, and technical   level   are   obtained   through   calculation,   and membership matrix RA1  of ﬁrst-level index environmental factors is constructed as follows:
Table 8: .e table of index membership.
@11
Similarly,  the  membership  matrix  RA2   of information resource factors and RA3  of management factors  are con- structed as follows:
@12
According  to  the  fuzzy  evaluation  matrix  R  and  the weight of corresponding indexes, the evaluation results of environmental factors of ﬁrst-level index are calculated as follows:@13
Similarly, the evaluation results of information resource factors and management factor indicators of ﬁrst-level in- dicators can be obtained as follows:
@14
Finally, the membership degree R of the target layer is combined with the fuzzy evaluation results of the ﬁrst-level indicators  to  calculate the  evaluation  results  of the  target layer as follows:@15
.e evaluation results of the target layer are defuzziﬁed to obtain the comprehensive evaluation score of copyright protection as follows:@16
According  to  the  same  method,  the  comprehensive evaluation score of the ﬁrst-level index can be obtained by the operation of fuzzy evaluation set and evaluation scale vector of each index as follows:@
4.2. )e Evaluation Results Analysis
(1) Result  analysis  of the  index  layer:  in  the  environ- mental factor index, the score of the secondary index
(3.758, 3.967, 3.522)T  can be obtained according to S  B ∗ GT , which shows that the maintenance level of the  current  evaluation  object  is  high,  basically reaching a higher level, while the technical level is relatively  weak,  and  there  is  much  room  for  im- provement. In the information resource factor index, the  score  of the  secondary  index  is  (3.080,  3.866, 3.525)T,  which  shows  that  the  current  evaluation object  has  the  highest  protection  level  of network communication right, the weakest protection level of reproduction  right,  and  the  largest  proportion  of copyright indicators. .erefore, the company needs to   focus   on   the   technologies   and   measures   of copyright  protection,  especially  the  protection  ca- pabilities of direct copy and temporary copy. In the management factor index, the score of the secondary index is (4.000, 3.940, 4.410)T, which shows that the current  evaluation  object  has  a  high  level  of  re- strictive  factors  and  regulatory protection,  various policies are more standardized, the economy is more developed, the cultural level is higher, and the rules and regulations are relatively complete, so that the overall protection level has reached a higher level.
(2) Result analysis of the target layer: ﬁrst of all, the fuzzy comprehensive  evaluation  score  of the  ﬁnal  target layer is 3.791, which is bounded between the normal level and the above level. Meanwhile, the probability of rating “high, above, normal, below, low” is 0.296, 0.384,    0.180,    0.094,    and    0.045,    respectively. According to the principle  of maximum  member- ship, the maximum value corresponds to an above evaluation set, and the evaluation value is concen- trated in normal or above accounts for 0.860 of the total evaluation. .erefore, the copyright protection level of this platform is at an above level, but there is still room for improvement. Secondly, the evaluation scores   of  environmental   factor,   information   re- sources factor, and management factor that directly aﬀect  the  target  layer  are  3.651,  3.786,  and  4.031, respectively, indicating that the protection of man- agement  factor has  reached  a high level.  .e pro- tection     level     of     environmental     factor     and information resource factor is between the normal level and the above level. Finally, if the protection level of copyright needs to be further improved, the protection intensity should be improved from three aspects.  Among  them,  the   information  resource factor has a high weight, but the protection evalu- ation  score  is  low.  So  the  protection  capability  of information resource factor can be enhanced in the improvement scheme.
4.3. Comparison and Analysis.  In order to better explain the rationality and feasibility of the fuzzy AHP comprehensive evaluation method, the fuzzy AHP comprehensive evalua- tion  method  is  compared  with  the  fuzzy  complementary judgment  matrix  method  [34]  and  multivariate  statistical analysis method  [35, 36].
Mathematical Problems in Engineering
4.3.1.   Comparison   with  Multivariate   Statistical  Analysis Method.  Multivariate  statistical  analysis is  a theory and method that  uses  mathematical  statistics to  study mul- tivariate (multiple indicators) problems. It is widely used for  comprehensive  evaluation  and  analysis  of  various problems  [35, 36]. .is paper ﬁrst designed a question- naire   on  the   factors   aﬀecting  the  level   of  copyright protection  and  then  carried  out  cluster  analysis,  factor analysis, correlation analysis, and regression analysis on the collected data to ﬁnd out the evaluation index system aﬀecting  the  level  of copyright  protection.  Finally,  the above  companies were  analyzed  and evaluated,  and the results are as follows:
(1) In  the  multivariate  statistical  analysis  method,  the independent  variable  environmental  factor  (stan- dardized regression coeﬃcient β  0.249), informa- tion    resource    factor     (standardized    regression coeﬃcient    β  0.594),    and    management    factor (standardized regression coeﬃcient β  0.148) are all shown  as  positive  numbers,  which  shows  that  all have a positive impact on copyright protection. And the three indicators have  a positive impact  on the evaluation   results    (information   resource   factor >environmental  factor  >management  factor).  .is result is basically the same as the result in the fuzzy AHP comprehensive evaluation.
(2) Using  a  multivariate  statistical  analysis  method  to evaluate  the  copyright  protection  of the  above  D company’s  cloud  platform,  the  evaluation  results show environmental factor (mean  3.712, standard deviation  0.213,  and  credibility  0.904),  informa- tion     resource     factor     (mean  3.825,     standard deviation  0.416,     and     credibility  0.896),     and management      factor      (mean  4.018,      standard deviation  0.303, and credibility  0.913). .is result is basically consistent with the result of fuzzy AHP comprehensive evaluation.
4.3.2.  Comparison  with  Fuzzy  Complementary  Judgment Matrix Method.  .e fuzzy complementary judgment matrix method is a typical method of using fuzzy judgment matrix to solve the weight and ranking. It converts the nine-level scales  (extremely strong, extremely strong, strong, slightly stronger, same, slightly weaker, weak, extremely weak, and absolutely weak) into corresponding scales (0.9, 0.8, 0.7, 0.6, 0.5, 0.4, 0.3, 0.2, and 0.1)  [34], using fuzzy complementary judgment matrix to calculate the weight, which is shown in Table 9.
It can be seen from Table 9 that the weight discrimination obtained by the fuzzy complementary judgment matrix [34] sorting algorithm is small, and the comparability is poor. In the same sublevel indicators, the largest diﬀerence between the largest weight and the smallest weight is 0.133, and the smallest  is  0.033.  .e  weights  between  the  indicators  lack comparability, and it is diﬃcult to ﬁnd the true indicators that determine  the  level  of  copyright  protection.  .e  method proposed in this article has a larger weight for the index that
Table 9: Weight comparison table.
has a large impact on copyright protection and a small weight for the index that has a small impact on copyright protection. .ere is a clear diﬀerence between the weights. .e largest diﬀerence between the largest weight and the smallest weight is 0.581. .e smallest is 0.292, and the weights between the indicators  are  highly  comparable,  which  can  better  distin- guish the importance of the indicators  and facilitate users’ objective evaluation and decision-making.
.e severity of illegal copying, illegal dissemination, and illegal use of information resources in the cloud environment directly aﬀects the level of copyright protection. .erefore, information resources are an important factor in copyright protection  [34]. Compared with environmental factors and management factors, it belongs to a strongly important level, and the weight of information resource factors should also be signiﬁcantly  greater  than  other  factors.  Using  the  fuzzy complementary  judgment   matrix   sorting   algorithm,   the weight of information resource factors is 0.367, the weight of environmental factors is 0.325, and the weight of manage- ment factors is 0.308. It does not reﬂect the strong importance of  information  resource  factors.  Using  this  method,  the weight of information resource factors is 0.589, the weight of environmental factors is 0.252, and the weight of manage- ment  factors  is  0.159.  .e  weight  of information  resource factors is much higher than other factors. .is phenomenon is very  consistent  with  the  reality.  .is  also  shows  that  the method proposed in this paper is suitable for the evaluation of copyright protection level under cloud computing.
4.3.3. Analysis
(1) Compared with other evaluation methods, the fuzzy AHP  comprehensive  evaluation  method  uses  the AHP to determine the weight of each impact index, decomposes  multilevel  and  complex  targets  into several  levels  of  multiple  indexes,  quantiﬁes  the importance   of  qualitative   indicators   with   fuzzy concepts, reduces the inﬂuence of subjective factors, solves  the  problem  of the  diﬃculty  in  accurately deﬁning   evaluation   indicators,   and   ensures   the objectivity of evaluation results. At the same time, fuzzy  mathematical  theory  is  used  to  comprehen- sively and quantitatively evaluate fuzzy and uncer- tain   information,   which   reduces   the   subjective arbitrariness   of   decision-makers   and   eﬀectively improves  the  reliability  and  accuracy  of judgment and evaluation.
(2) When  evaluating  the  level  of copyright  protection between   diﬀerent   cloud   computing   platforms,   a single   technical   indicator   cannot   satisfy  the   re- quirements   of   analysis.   Using   the   fuzzy   AHP method, the cloud platform is regarded as a system. According  to  the  thinking  mode  of  hierarchical decomposition, comparative judgment, and system synthesis, the fuzzy evaluation objects are processed by precise digital means. Not only can the evaluation object be evaluated and  sorted  on the basis of the
comprehensive score, but also the grade of the object can   be   evaluated   according   to   the   maximum membership principle in the light of the value on the fuzzy evaluation set. It overcomes the defect of the single  result  of traditional  mathematical  methods and provides a certain basis for objectively evaluating the copyright protection level of cloud platforms.
5. Conclusion
.e  evaluation  of copyright  protection  in  the  cloud  com- puting  environment helps to better  understand the  risk of infringement, prevent the occurrence of infringement inci- dents, and reduce the losses caused thereby. First, it analyzes the  copyright  protection  evaluation  process,  establishes  a copyright  protection  evaluation  index  system  in  the  cloud computing environment, and uses the AHP to determine the weight that can reﬂect the importance of each index. Finally, the fuzzy evaluation method is used to target each index that aﬀects  the  level  of copyright  protection  to  perform  fuzzy evaluation, analyzes the quantitative results of the target layer, and  calculates  the  comprehensive  score  of  the  copyright protection   level   in   the   cloud   computing   environment. Established in this study, the copyright protection evaluation model eliminates the inﬂuence of evaluators’ subjective fac- tors on the evaluation results, making the evaluation results more open, fair, and accurate, and has stronger convincing power. It provides new idea and method for scientiﬁc eval- uation of copyright protection in the cloud computing en- vironment and has certain practical value. In the future, we will take the AHP with the evaluation of copyright protection into other fuzzy environment  [37–51].
Data Availability
.e  data  used  to  support  the  ﬁndings  of this  study  are available from the corresponding author upon request.
Conflicts of Interest
.e authors declare that they have no conﬂicts of interest.
Acknowledgments
Our work was sponsored by the National Natural Science Foundation  of China  (no.  62006155)  and  Philosophy and Social Science Planning Project of Guangdong Province in China (nos. GD18CFX06 and GD18XFX11).
