<title>Assessment of radiation protection and awareness level among radiation workers and members of the public in Afghanistan – A pilot study</title>
<author>Mohammad R Tanha, Fazal Rahman Khalid and Christoph Hoeschen</author>
<Affiliation>1.Institut für Medizintechnik (IMT), Otto-von-Guericke Universität Magdeburg, Universitätsplatz 2, 39106 Magdeburg, Germany.2.Afghan Atomic Energy High Commission, Near Silo-e-Markaz, 1001 Kabul, Afghanistan.</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Radiological Protection</Journal>
<Publishing_house>IOP Publishing</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1088/1742-10.1088/1361- 6498/ab2204</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1088/1361- 6498/ab2204</URL>
Highlights
Radiation facilities in Afghanistan suffer from the lack of well-trained personal The radiation workers awareness level of radiation protection is below the expectation The public awareness level of radiation protection is considerably low Radiation facilities are poorly licensed and regulated Advanced and extensive radiation protection awareness programs are required for the safe operation of radiation facilities
Abstract
In this study, the level of radiation protection and awareness among radiation workers and members of the public in Afghanistan is assessed using two different survey mechanisms. The onsite survey conducted by the regulatory authorities covered 472 facilities while the online survey covering 1200 responses was conducted via the Survey Monkey online survey platform. Both the onsite and the online surveys show that more than 70% of radiation workers have insufficient knowledge of radiation safety and protection rules and regulations while more than 70% of the public just heard about radiation from one source or another. More than 50% of those members of the public, who have been through some sort of medical imaging using radiation were not given any instruction about the radiation hazards. The study is concluded  with recommendations to the authorities for raising the knowledge  of the  radiation workers  and general public awareness through launching regular radiation safety and protection training, TV spots and other means of mass media.
Keywords: Radiation protection; Public awareness; Regulatory control; Radiation in medicine; AAEHC
Introduction
Human beings are continuously exposed to radiation throughout their life on earth. This radiation comprises charged and uncharged particles as well as gamma radiation and X-rays.  There are two sources for these radiations namely natural sources and man-made or artificial sources. As these radiations are ionizing, excessive exposure to them can pose a harmful threat to the human body (Tanha 2017). As shown in Figure 1, globally 85% of the ionizing radiation comes from natural sources in the environment and 15% from artificial sources. Medical applications account for about14% of the artificial sources, which are mostly from x-ray machines (WNA 2018).
Fig.1 Sources of natural and artificial radiation in the global environment
As one of the dynamic and fast-growing specialities in recent years, hospitals and clinics use ionizing radiation for diagnostic and treatment purposes (Bresell 1996). Using ionizing radiation for any purposes including its therapeutic and diagnostic properties can have considerable side effects. Based on their level of interaction with radiation, it is necessary for radiation workers, patients as well as the general public to have a sufficient level of knowledge about handling sources of radiation and radiation protection.
In recent years, Afghanistan became one of the countries, which imported a number of technologies from the developed world. Brand new  and used CT scanners and X-ray machines are among those imported technologies, which require professional knowledge for safe operation as well as maintenance. Reports claim that more than 50% of medical supplies are smuggled to Afghanistan. This includes machinery and technologies for diagnostic and treatment purposes (Paterson and Karimi 2005; Ghubar 2017). The Afghan government recently established a new organization called the 3Afghan Atomic Energy High Commission (AAEHC), which is responsible for controlling the nuclear technology
applications and promoting their peaceful use. The organization recently drafted the national nuclear energy law which is ratified and currently enforced in the country (MoJ 2015).The law assigns the AAEHC to draft regulations and guidelines for proper handling of radiation sources in all applications,  control  the  radiation  sources  and  support  the  law  enforcement  agencies  to  combat  illicit nuclear trafficking, offer dosimetry services, offer radiation protection and awareness training and issue or revoke licences to the radiation facilities. According to personal communications and internal reports of AAEHC, in Afghanistan,radiation sources are mainly used by medical imaging facilities, mining companies for well-logging and beverage production companies for gauging. Under the organizational chart of the ministry of public health of Afghanistan, a department  of radiation protection is responsible  for  looking  after  the  proper  procedures  of  radiation technology applications within all the state-owned hospitals and health facilities. This department also offers dosimetry services to these facilities (AAEHC 2013). At the moment there is only one internationally qualified Afghan radiologist and only one ISO-certified hospital for radiology in the country (Bayer 2015). With financial and technical support of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Afghanistan struggles to raise the service quality and standards in radiation facilities as well as public awareness about radiation protection in the country (IAEA 2009-2015). This study aims to estimate the level of professional and general knowledge of radiation workers and members of the public.
In this study, we used two sets of data; the AAEHC authorities collected one set of data from radiation facilities onsite and the other set of data was collected online from members of the public to assess the level of knowledge and awareness of the radiation workers as well as members of the public about radiation hazards.
Materials and methods
Information collected on site by the authorities
Data of about 472 medical radiation devices were collected from different medical radiation facilities all over the country by the department of radiation protection of the AAEHC. They used a questionnaire containing 20 questions in the national language, in order to get a more realistic picture of the situation the control and surveys were unannounced. The data was collected from 18 out of the 34 provinces covering 394 regular X-ray imaging systems,40 CT scanners, 21 dental X-ray machines, 15 mammography systems and two fluoroscopy systems. Data were collected between March 2014 and March 2018 on a weekly routine control basis.
3Out of 472 systems surveyed in this study, 133 of them are owned by the government and 339 of them are owned by
4the private sector. As shown in table.1 Kabul counts for 253 of these systems where 6 of the machines are reported to be out of order.
Table.1 Type and number of the systems in different provinces
Information collected from the online survey
To assess the level of public awareness of radiation hazards, an online questionnaire consisting of 10 questions was designed using an online platform (SurveyMonkey. Powerful survey tool. Version 2018. USA). The questionnaire was used to gather information on the demographic background, the level of general and professional understanding of ionizing radiation and the needs for further public awareness programmes by the government. All questions were in multiple-choice formats. The target group was the Afghan society and the questionnaire was shared on social media,namely Facebook and Twitter. The survey was open for responses between 21 and 24 June 2018. During this period,1200 responses were collected.
Results and discussion
Onsite collected data
According to AAEHC internal reports that were drafted based on the survey performed during the three years’ routine control; despite launching monthly, quarter and annual training and information sessions, none of the medical radiation facilities holds a licence in line with international and even at some cases national standards. In their estimation, up to 70% of the operators, radiographers and radiation officers at the facilities had little to no technical knowledge of radiation hazards and radiation protection. Their knowledge of radiation protection laws, regulations and guidance were evaluated as poor. None of the facilities had regular dosimetry procedure in line with the international and modern national standards. No system of dosimetry data reporting to the authorities exists. Most of the facilities did not have a stable high power system for a stable and smooth operation of the imaging machines (SIGAR 2016). Furthermore,at some facilities, the only technical knowledge the operators had was to take an image by switching the machine on and off. Extremely poor safety and protection measures are reported for operators as well as patients (Bayer 2015).
Online collected data
Out of the 1200 online submissions, 24 were female and 1176 were male, with 80% of them being members of 18-35 age group. About 30% of the participants were high school graduates, 49% bachelor, 16% master, 2% PhD and 6% medical  doctors.  About  63%  of  the  responders  were  government  and  public  sector  employees  and  37% were unemployed. Some 73% of the responders had heard about radiation and its hazards from one or another source  (see Figure 2). About 68% of the responders have had an X-Ray, CT scan or other forms of radiodiagnosis in their lifetime where 51% of them were not given any introduction to radiation hazards. An overwhelming majority of responders (97 %) thought that the authorities and educators ought to increase public awareness about radiation hazards and radiation protection. A significant number of participants have never heard about radiation hazards at all.
Fig.2 Participants level of knowledge about radiation
Fig.3 Participants experience with medical radiation tests
There is clear evidence through Google analytics that Afghanistan users of the internet made searches on the term“Radiation” specifically during the on-line survey between 21st  and 24th  of June 2018. In total there were  nearly 200 searches made on 2 days, the other days being public holidays when few people have internet access  through private connections. This may have contributed up to 23% of the “yes” responses in Figure 2.
Discussion and conclusion
Comparing the data collected on site by the relevant authorities and the data collected online, one can conclude that the radiation protection knowledge and awareness among radiation workers and  members of the public do not differ significantly.  As  far  as radiation  workers are concerned, this problem could be tackled  by providing the  radiation workers  with proper radiation protection training on an annual  refreshing  mechanism basis, implementing a proper licensing regime, providing dosimetry services and routine control of the facilities. For the general public, even though a lack of awareness is not uncommon around the globe (World Nuclear News 2014), authorities have the responsibility to inform the public well enough and in time so that they can be better prepared to undergo any radiation diagnosis or treatment  without  hesitation  or  fear.  This  can  be  achieved  by  using  mass  media  namely  launching  TV spots,advertisements, organizing public debates and conferences and even using social media platforms (Oto et al. 2011).
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful of the AAEHC for their collaboration in data collection and Fraidoon Noorzai for his support in data analysis tools.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
