<title>Development of a stochastic biokinetic method and its application to internal dose estimation for insoluble cesium-bearing particles</title>
<author>Kentaro Manabe & Masaki Matsumoto</author>
<Affiliation>aJapan Atomic Energy Agency, Naka-gun, Japan; bNational Institutes for Quantum and Radiological Science and Technology, Inage-ku, Chiba-shi, Japan</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2018.1523756</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2018.1523756</URL>
ABSTRACT
Spherical cesium-bearing particles were found around the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant after its accident. These particles are insoluble with high speciﬁc activities. If such a particle is incorporated into the body, it is expected that the radioactive cesium contained in the particle will move as a single particulate material without being distributed throughout  the body. Consequently, internal doses vary depending on the pathway of the particle in the body. Therefore, general deterministic methods for dose estimation are not applicable to the intake of small number of cesium-bearing particles. In this study, a Monte Carlo method was developed to evaluate a probability density function of internal doses for inhalation of a particulate material. In addition, a biokinetic model was constructed to consider the insolu- bility of the particles. Probability density functions of committed equivalent and eﬀective doses were estimated using the constructed biokinetic model with the developed computa- tion method. As a result, the uncertainty of the doses was very large for single particle inhalation. However, it was observed that this uncertainty decreased with increasing number of simultaneously inhaled particles. On the other hand, the consideration about the insolu- bility made the doses somewhat higher than those based on the general cesium model.
KEYWORDS
Cesium; insoluble particles; internal doses; Monte Carlo method; radiation protection; insolubilityuncertainty of doses; inhalation; biokinetic models
1.Introduction
A signiﬁcant amount of radioactive material was released into the environment by the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Station (FDNPS) accident fol- lowing the tsunami associated with the Great East Japan Earthquake in March 2011 [1–3]. Health risks and eﬀects for the members of the public associated with ionizing radiations from the radioactive material have been assessed by WHO and UNSCEAR based   on a number of scientiﬁc papers and reports for dose estimations [4,5]. However, the estimated doses, in particular for internal exposure, include large uncer- tainties derived from the lack of direct measurements and information regarding the chemical and physical properties of released radionuclides.
Committed eﬀective doses, E(τ) (Sv), for an  inhaled or ingested radionuclide vary depending on the intake pathway of the radionuclides and their chemical form, both of which impact the organ dis- tribution of activity in the body. For intakes of 137Cs by workers, for example, the highest E(τ) per unit activity, e(τ) (Sv Bq−1), which is for inhalation Type S material, is approximately 30 times the lowest e(τ), which is for ingestion of relatively insoluble  forms [6]. Cesium particles or aerosols are almost treated as soluble material because cesium is an alkaline metal- lic element [6,7]. However, completely insoluble
particles bearing radioactive cesium were discovered during the early stage after the accident in Tsukuba city, which is located 170 km southwest of FDNPS  [8]. The activity in the particles did not dissolve even in nitric acid. In addition, the particles exhibited very high speciﬁc activities; a few micrometer-sized parti- cles contained several Bq of activity [8]. Although the amount of cesium discharged in the insoluble form from FDNPS has not been clariﬁed, there are some reports about detections of similar insoluble particles [9–16]. It is expected that the radioactive cesium nuclei contained within these particles will move in the body as a single intact particulate material with- out being distributed throughout the body via blood dissolution and transfer to tissue ﬂuids.  Consequently, organ doses will vary depending  on  the stochastic movement of these particles when the number of incorporated particles is small. Owing to the characteristics of these particles, the internal  doses from cesium-bearing particles should be expressed, not as a single mean value, but as a prob- ability density function (PDF).
A dose estimated by the dosimetric methodology
of the International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) (ICRP method) is a single value because the ICRP method is based upon determi- nistic     mechanisms     of     systemic  biodistribution,
which evaluates the average kinetics of countless objects [17]. For this reason, the  ICRP  method  is  not applicable to dose estimation for intakes of cesium-bearing particles. Several previous studies have assessed dose PDFs for lungs using the com- puter code LUDUC (LUng Dose Uncertainty Code) [18–20]. However, the purpose of LUDUC is to  assess the eﬀects of parameter uncertainties  within the deposition and the clearance of inhaled particles on lung doses. Therefore, LUDUC is not appropri-  ate for single particle dosimetry. In order to esti-  mate the PDF of the dose from a single cesium- bearing particle, it is essential to develop a new method  considering  the  stochastic  movement  of the single particle in the body.
In addition, it is necessary to consider the behavior of cesium-bearing particles in the body because the existing biokinetic model for cesium assumes element speciﬁc solubility into blood [6,21,22]. Insoluble par- ticulate matter inhaled into the respiratory tract is generally cleared to the alimentary tract via ciliary movement. However, it is known that some part of matter can be engulfed by pulmonary macrophages and then transported to several other organs and tissues, such as the brain, liver, and spleen via  the hilar lymph nodes, and can be retained in those organs and tissues [23].  Experimental  data  using  rats [23] can be used to  construct  a  biokinetic  model for cesium-bearing particles with explicit con- sideration of its insolubility in the lung ﬂuids.
This study describes a Monte Carlo approach to simulate the stochastic biokinetics of cesium-bearing particles and to construct a biokinetic model for these particles. The assessment of a PDF of values  of E(τ) for inhalation of a single cesium-bearing particle is performed by combining the stochastic simulation method and the biokinetic model for insoluble  cesium particles. In addition, the proposed method assesses the eﬀects of increasing number of simulta- neously inhaled particles on the resulting PDFs. The impact of the insolubility and the highness of the speciﬁc activity of cesium-bearing particles on the dose estimation is also discussed.
2.Materials and methods
2.1.Methods to simulate the stochastic movement of a single particle in the body
A compartment model is used to construct a set of migration pathways of a single particle in the body in the same manner as that in the ICRP method. Next, the ﬁrst deposited compartment of the inhaled parti- cle (the initial compartment), the retention time of  the particle in that compartment, and the target compartment of the migration are determined using   a Monte Carlo random-sampling approach.
In the inhalation situation, the initial compartment can be determined from all the possible compart- ments. The revised Human Respiratory Tract Model (HRTM) provided by ICRP [17] comprises eight pos- sible initial compartments: the anterior nasal passage (ET1), the posterior nasal passage, the pharynx and larynx (ET2), the sequestered regions of ET2 (ET2- seq), the bronchi (BB), the sequestered regions of BB (BB-seq), the bronchiole (bb), the sequestered regions of bb (bb-seq), and the alveoli (ALV). The initial compartment is determined by a random number between zero and one with the assumption that the probabilities of deposition to these compartments can be substituted with deposition fractions evaluated by the particle deposition model of HRTM [17,24]. Figure 1 shows the procedure for determining the initial compartment. If the sampled random number is more than the sum of the deposition probabilities  of the eight compartments, it is presumed that the inhaled particle is not deposited in the respiratory tract but is exhaled into the environment.
The retention time, tr (d), of the particle in the
existing compartment is determined using the biolo- gical half-life, Tbio (d), of the compartment and a random number between zero and one with the assumption that the particle moves stochastically to the next compartment. Figure 2 shows the correlation between the elapsed time, t, and the probability, p,  that the particle remains in the compartment at the time. The equation of the curve is@1
Next, by sampling a random number, r, and substi- tuting r for p of Equation (1), the value of tr can be  determined as:@2
A target compartment of migration needs to be selected if the number of pathways from the current compartment is more than one. The target compart- ment is determined by a random number assuming that the probability ratios of migration to the respec- tive compartments were equal to the ratios of the respective transfer coeﬃcients assigned to the path- ways in the compartment model because a transfer coeﬃcient is a parameter indicating the degree of transportability. Figure 3 shows the determination scheme for the target compartment.
The procedure to determine a retention time and a target compartment is repeated until the particle arrives at the end of the compartment model or the sum of the retention times reaches a predetermined period. This stochastic biokinetic method (SB method) evaluates the number of disintegrations of radionuclides contained in the particle in each source region while considering its random movement.
Figure 1. Flowchart to determine the initial compartment using a random number. The value of di is the deposition probability of the i-th compartment.Figure 2. Correlation between the elapsed time, t, and the probability, p, that the particle  remains in the compartment  at  the time. The value of p is 0.5 after the biological half-life, Tbio, has elapsed.
Subsequently, committed equivalent doses,  HT(τ) (Sv), can be evaluated by summing the products of  the number of disintegrations in the source regions and the corresponding radiation-weighted S coeﬃ- cients, which are the equivalent doses per single dis- integration in the source regions. The repeated execution of this procedure makes it possible to eval- uate a PDF of the HT(τ) and E(τ). Hereinafter, one time execution of the SB method is called a history.
2.2.Veriﬁcation of the SB method
The average number of disintegrations in organs and tissues based on inﬁnite histories generated by the SB method should be equal to the results generated by the deterministic method of ICRP. In order to verify the SB method and the composed program, we
investigated whether the program reproduced the results generated by DCAL code version 8.4 devel- oped at Oak Ridge National Laboratory [25]. DCAL code is a suitable code for veriﬁcation because DCAL can output not only doses but also numbers of disin- tegrations in source regions. A test calculation was thus performed for inhalation of 134Cs in Type S biokinetics by an adult member of the public.
2.3.Construction of the biokinetic model for insoluble particles
The revised HRTM [17] was applied to the move- ment pathways in the respiratory tract. However, the pathways from the compartments in the extra-thor- acic (ET) and thoracic regions to the blood were omitted because the absorption into blood from
Figure 3. Flowchart to determine the target compartment of migration using a random number. The value of n is the number of pathways from the existing compartment, and λi is the transfer coeﬃcient of the i-th pathway.
each region is important only for particles smaller than a few nanometers [24], and the size of a cesium-bearing particle is larger than one micrometer [8–16]. The Human Alimentary Tract Model  [26] was applied to the particle that cleared to the larynx via ciliary movement, and absorption from the small intestine to blood was also omitted considering the insolubility of these particles. The pathways for par- ticles engulfed by macrophages were designed based on the information regarding the biokinetics of par- ticulate materials based on a previous rat study [23]. The brain, kidneys, liver, spleen, testes, and lymphatic nodes of the ET region (LN-ET) and those of the thoracic region (LN-Th) were set as bound state compartments where the particle moves to via lym- phatic nodes; ‘bound state’ means that the particles reaching the compartment will remain there
physiologically and decrease only through radioactive decay. Figure 4 shows the overall structure of the constructed biokinetic model for insoluble particles.
The default transfer coeﬃcients provided by ICRP
[17] were applied to the pathways in the respiratory and alimentary tracts. The biological half-lives in the LN-Th and LN-ET were set to 25 min, which is equivalent to 40 d−1 in the units of transfer coeﬃ- cients, because the majority of inhaled particulate materials, except for those remaining in the lympha- tic nodes, move to the organs and tissues within a period of 1 hour [23]. The ratio of the amount of material remaining in LN-Th to that which moves to the organs and tissues is approximately 1.5 [27]. Therefore, the transfer coeﬃcients from the compart- ments of LN-Th and LN-ET to their bound state compartments  were  set  to  60  d−1,  and  the  sum  ofFigure 4. Biokinetic model for insoluble particles constructed in this study. Each ﬁgure indicates the transfer coeﬃcient (d−1) of the pathway.
the transfer coeﬃcients from the LN-Th and LN-ET to the organs  and  tissues  in  the  bound  state  was  40 d−1. The distribution ratios to the brain, kidneys, liver, spleen, and testes were determined to be 0.063, 0.087, 0.648, 0.037, and 0.165, respectively [23]. The transfer coeﬃcients of the compartment model used in this study for the insoluble particles are also shown in Figure 4.
2.4.Calculation of the PDF of HT(τ) and E(τ) for inhalation of a single particle
Deposition probabilities in the regions of the respiratory tract vary depending  on  the  properties  of the particle and the  state  and  habits  of  the human subject [24]. Based on the ﬁrst observations   of these particles [8], the diameter, density,  and  shape factor  of  cesium-bearing  particles  were  set  to 2.0 μm, 2.0  g  cm−3,  and  1.0,  respectively.  A  shape factor of 1.0 indicates a sphere. Values for a  reference adult male under light exercise with nasal breathing were used for the anatomical and phy- siological parameters such as the functional  resi-  dual   capacity,   tidal   volume,   and   ventilation    rate [24].
The ratio of 134Cs to 137Cs was set to one by referring to the actual particles [8–16], and the radio- activity  per  particle  was  set  to  1  Bq  (i.e.,  0.5  Bq of
134Cs  and  0.5  Bq  of  137Cs).  The  nuclide  of  137mBa,
which is the decay product of 137Cs, was also assumed to be in radioactive equilibrium with its parent at the time of intake. The radiation weighted S coeﬃcients for 134Cs, 137Cs, and 137mBa were evaluated using the speciﬁc absorbed fractions for the reference adult male phantom of ICRP [28] and the current nuclear decay data [29].
The particle movement was tracked up to 50 years. One million histories were performed to obtain PDFs of both HT(τ) and E(τ) for single particle inhalation.
2.5.Calculation of the PDFs of E(τ) for simultaneous inhalation of multiple particles
Conditions for the particles and the human subject considered herein were the same as  those  in  the  case of single particle inhalation. A scenario of simultaneous inhalation of multiple particles was simulated through repeating particle inhalation his- tories, with the fate of each inhaled particle being considered in an independent fashion. A group of histories was thus deﬁned as an  inhalation  event.  The dose for an inhalation  event  was  the  sum  of  the doses for the individual particle histories con- stituting that inhalation event.
Calculations were performed wherein the num- bers of histories per inhalation event  were  2,  4,  8, 16, 32, 64, 102, 103, and 104. Events were repeated
until the product of the number of events and the number of histories per event  reached  106.  When  the number of histories per event was either 103 or  104, the number of events was  set  to  104  to  make the PDF suﬃciently reliable.
3.Results
3.1.Comparison between the SB method and DCAL
The average numbers of disintegrations  in  the  source regions and  the  average  values  for  HT(τ)  and E(τ) for the inhalation of 134Cs Type S for  an adult member of the public  were  evaluated  using  the SB method for 104, 105, 106 and 107 histories, respectively. Table 1 shows the ratios  of  the  num- ber of disintegrations, and Table 2 shows the ratios   of doses generated stochastically by the SB method   to those generated deterministically by DCAL. Note that the original HRTM [24] was applied in this veriﬁcation in the same manner  as  that  in  the DCAL calculation; therefore, the source regions in this comparison were a little diﬀerent from those written in the materials and methods section. Large discrepancies in the number of disintegrations were found in the bronchiole-sequestered,  ET2-seques- terd and lymphatic nodes-ET region when the number of histories was 104. The ratios were closer    to one with increasing number of  histories,  and  good agreement was achieved in all source regions with 107 histories. For the doses, good agreement between them was observed for 104 histories except for the values of HT(τ)  for  the  ET  region.  The  HT (τ) for the ET region was in good agreement when   the  number  of  histories  per  inhalation  event  was
106   and  higher.  As  a  result,  the  SB  method  was
considered to be veriﬁed.
Table 1. Ratios of the average numbers of disintegrations generated by the SB method to those generated by DCAL.    Table 2. Ratios of the arithmetic means of the doses gener- ated by the SB method to the doses generated by DCAL.	Table 3. Statistics of the PDFs of the doses for inhalation of a single cesium-bearing particle with 106 histories  and  the doses for Type S inhalation by an adult male worker based    on  the current  ICRP model.PDF of the HT(τ) and E(τ)
Table 3 shows the 99th percentile values, medians and arithmetic means of the E(τ) and HT(τ) for the lungs and organs, which are assigned bound state compartments in the constructed biokinetic model for the inhalation of a single cesium-bearing particle including both 134Cs and 137Cs for 106 histories. Table 3 also shows the doses for inhalation of 0.5 Bq of 134Cs and 0.5 Bq of 137Cs in Type S by an adult male worker based on the current ICRP models [6,17,28,29]. The arithmetic means for  the  HT (τ) and E(τ) were larger than the values for TypeS ICRP models. In contrast, the medians for the HT(τ) and E(τ) were smaller than the Type S values. Figure 5 shows the PDF of the E(τ) for single inhalation of the cesium- bearing particle for 106 histories.  The  doses  ranged from zero to an order of 10−5  Sv, and the function  of  the doses exhibited four peaks.
Figure 6 shows the change in the 99th percentile values, medians, and arithmetic  means of the PDFs  of the values of E(τ) with increment of the number
of simultaneously inhaled particles. The horizontal axis shows the inhaled activities. The  activity  is  equal to the number of simultaneously inhaled particles  because  the  activity  per  particle  was  set  as 1 Bq (0.5 Bq of 134Cs and 0.5 Bq of 137Cs). The arithmetic means increased proportionally to the number of inhaled particles and thus  activity.  On  the other hand, the 99th percentile values and medians were closer to the arithmetic  means  with  the increment of inhaled activities.
4.Discussion
4.1.Required number of histories to obtain a reliable PDF of E(τ)
Under the conditions of the veriﬁcation calculation, values of HT(τ)  except  for  the  ET  region,  and values of E(τ) generated by DCAL were reproduced with 104 histories.  However,  the  reproduction  of  the HT(τ) for the ET region required 106  histories. The majority of the dose to the ET region is energy emitted by disintegrations in the ET2-seq, however, the deposition probability of the ET2-seq was quite small at 9.5 × 10−5. Therefore, the expectation value
of the number of histories occurring ET2-seq deposition  was  approximately  one  when  the   num-ber of histories was 104. As a result, 106 histories were needed for the HT(τ) in the ET region to converge to the results generated by  DCAL.  From the above, the required number of histories to obtain a reliable PDF of HT(τ) was estimated to be approximately 100 times the inverse of the mini- mum deposition probability. In  addition,  one  10th of the required number of histories for the PDF of HT(τ) will be suﬃcient to obtain a  reliable  PDF  of the E(τ).
The initial compartment providing the minimum deposition probability was the bb-seq region in the inha- lation model for cesium-bearing particles, and its value was approximately 3 × 10−5 based on the calculation conditions. Therefore, 106 histories were suﬃcient to obtain a reliable PDF of E(τ) for the inhalation of a cesium-bearing particle.4.2.Eﬀect of implementation of the biokinetic model for insoluble particles
The arithmetic means of the values of HT(τ) and E (τ) per activity for inhalation of cesium-bearing particles were independent of the number of simultaneously inhaled particles. Therefore, the eﬀect  of  implementation  of  the  constructed model should be discussed using the arithmetic mean values.
Table  3  shows  that  all  arithmetic  means  of  the
HT(τ)  and  E(τ)  based  on  the  biokinetic  model   for
Figure 5. Probability density function of the E(τ) for inhalation of a single cesium-bearing particle with 106 histories.
Figure 6. Correlation between the statistics of the PDFs of the E(τ) and the number of simultaneously inhaled particles.
insoluble particles were larger than those based  on the current ICRP biokinetic model for cesium  [6]. The ratio of the E(τ) considering insolubility of the particles to that for Type S cesium was 3.6. The current model for inhalation Type S considers long-term retention in the lung region [17]. The constructed model for insoluble particles considers the bound state in some organs and tissues  in addition to the lung region. Moreover, the assump- tion that the particle in the bound state does not  move any further is conservative for the purpose of dose estimation. Therefore, the implementation of  the biokinetic model for insoluble cesium-bearing particles resulted in larger doses  than  those  based  on the existing ICRP models.
4.3.Correlation between the deposited region and the band of E(τ)
Four peaks were observed in the PDF of E(τ) for single particle inhalation, as shown in Figure 5. The
peak at the left end indicates the cases wherein the inhaled particle was not deposited to the respiratory tract and was exhaled into the environment. Consequently, the E(τ) were zero. The band  from 10−12 to 10−8 Sv includes the median and comprises  the cases wherein the inhaled particle was deposited  to the BB, bb, ET2, or ET1 regions and was quickly cleared to the alimentary tract or to the environment. The band from 10−8 to 10−6 Sv includes the arith- metic mean and originates from cases wherein the inhaled particle was deposited to the alveoli and was cleared to the alimentary tract following relatively long lung retention. In this case, the determining factor of E(τ) is the retention time  in  the  alveoli.  The biological half-life of the alveoli  is  230  days [17], which is relatively long. Therefore, the retention time in the alveoli was widely distributed owing to which the peak of this band was broad.  The  band over 10−6 Sv comprises the case wherein the particle was retained in the interstitium or in organs or tis- sues in the bound state over the commitment period
(τ = 50 years). From the above, it was found that the E(τ) varies depending on the deposited region of the inhaled particle.
4.4.Inﬂuence of the characteristic of cesium- bearing particles on internal doses
For single particle inhalation, the uncertainty of the E(τ) was large; the 99th percentile value was approximately 5000 times more than the median. For the values of HT(τ) for the testes, the arithmetic mean was larger than the 99th percentile value, as shown in Table 3. If an inhaled particle was retained in the testes, its HT(τ) was more than 10−4 Sv. However, the probability of retention in the testes was only four ten-thousandths. This was the reason why the 99th percentile value was smaller than the arithmetic mean for the testes. From the above, it was found that the uncertainty of exposure doses was very large for single particle inhalation.
However,  the uncertainty decreased with  increment-
ing the number of simultaneously inhaled particles, as shown in Figure 6. When the number was 103, the 99th percentile     value    and    the    arithmetic     mean   were
2.0 × 10−4 Sv and 1.2 × 10−4 Sv, respectively, and their ratio was 1.7. An uncertainty of this degree will be buried in the uncertainty in the estimation of the intake amount. It is expected that the number of inhaled particles will not be less than 103 when the exposure level is 10−3 Sv in E(τ). Therefore, the uncertainty originating in the insolubility of cesium-bearing particles will be negligible at the expo- sure level.
In contrast, it has been suggested that the diﬀerence in the biokinetics originating in the insolubility of cesium-bearing particles increases the exposure dose. The dose based on the biokinetic model constructed in this study was approximately four times greater than that of Type S cesium inhalation. The model was con- structed with the conservative assumptions that the particle once bound in either an organ or tissue via a lymphatic node remains there until the end of the com- mitment period, and that the absorption into blood does not occur in the alimentary tract because the size of the particle is an order of micro-meters. Further research into the biokinetics of particulate materials will result in somewhat smaller doses from cesium-bearing particles.
5.Conclusions
This study presents a stochastic biokinetic method (SB method), which computes the number of disin- tegrations and internal doses for one radioactive particle moving stochastically in the body via a  Monte Carlo random sampling approach. In addi- tion, a biokinetic model considering  the insolubility of the cesium-bearing particles is described. Subsequently, PDFs of the HT(τ) and E(τ) were evaluated by unifying the SB method and the
biokinetic model for insoluble  particles.  The  E(τ)  for single particle inhalation were widely distributed around the dose range of between 0 to 10−5 Sv according to the  variations  in  the  movements  of  the inhaled particles. However, the  uncertainty  in  the E(τ) decreased with increment of the number of simultaneously inhaled particles. Therefore, it is not necessary to consider the uncertainty arising  from  the insolubility  of  cesium-bearing  particles  when the exposure level is  expected  to  be  10−3  Sv  or more.
However, there is a possibility that the character- istics in the biokinetics of cesium-bearing particles increase the exposure dose because of the insolubility. Additional research into the biokinetics of particulate materials is required for more precise dose estima-  tions of cesium-bearing particles.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to express their gratitude to Dr. T. Ichinose of Oita University of Nursing and Health Sciences for his valuable advice on the biokinetics of insoluble particulate materials. The authors also wish to thank Dr.
Y. Moriguchi of the University of Tokyo and the members of the ad-hoc committee of Japan Health Physics Society: Dr. T. Ishikawa, Dr. M. Kai, Dr. T. Sato, Dr. A. Sorimachi, and Dr. I. Yamaguchi for fruitful discussion and advices. This research was supported by the Environment Research and Technology Development Fund (5-1501) of Environmental Restoration and Conservation Agency.
