<title>Evaluation of Vegetation Responses to Climatic Factors and Global Vegetation Trends using GLASS LAI from 1982 to 2010</title>
<author>Xijia Li & Ying Qu</author>
<Affiliation>School of Geographical Sciences, Northeast Normal University, Changchun 130024, China</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Radiological Protection</Journal>
<Publishing_house>IOP Publishing</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/07038992.2018.1526064</DOI>
<URL> https://doi.org/10.1080/07038992.2018.1526064</URL>
ABSTRACT
Vegetation growth has been profoundly affected by global climate change. It is important to investigate vegetation responses to climatic factors and vegetation trends with remote sensing data. In this study, we explored the responses of global vegetation to 3 climatic fac- tors (temperature, precipitation, and solar radiation) and global vegetation trends based on the Global Land Surface Satellite (GLASS) Leaf Area Index (LAI) dataset from 1982 to 2010. The main findings are: (i) the vegetation responses to temperature and precipitation have no apparent time-lag and the vegetation response to the solar radiation has a time-lag of 1 month in most places in the northern hemisphere; (ii) the driving factor of the growth of vegetation was air temperature, followed by precipitation and solar radiation; (iii) the closest relationships between vegetation and climatic factors were observed in mixed forest, deciduous needleleaf forest, and shrublands at northern mid- and high-latitude; (iv) a map of global vegetation trends from 1982 to 2010 was derived, and showed that the proportion of vegetated pixels with significant increasing and decreasing trends was 34.73% and 6.59% (p < 0.05), respectively; (v) more reasonable vegetation trends can be obtained from the GLASS LAI dataset in the perennial cloud-covered regions.
RE´SUME´
La  croissance  de  la  ve´g´etation  a  ´et´e  fortement  impact´ee  par  le  changement  climatique mondial.  Il  est  important  d’´etudier  les  r´eponses  de  la  v´eg´etation  aux  facteurs  climatiques  et les tendances en mati`ere de ve´g´etation par des  donn´ees de t´el´ed´etection. Dans  cette ´etude, nous  avons  explor´e   les  r´eponses   de  la  v´eg´etation  mondiale  `a   trois  facteurs  climatiques (temp´erature,  pr´ecipitation  et  rayonnement  solaire),  et  les  tendances  de  la  v´eg´etation  mon- diale    d’apr`es    les    fichiers    de    donn´ees    sur    l’Indice    de    Surface    Foliaire    (ISF)    issues d’observations  satellitaires  (Global  Land  Surface Satellite (GLASS))  de  1982 `a  2010.  Les  princi- pales   conclusions   sont   que:   (i)   les   r´eponses   de   la   v´eg´etation   aux   temp´eratures   et   aux pr´ecipitations  ne  montrent  aucun  d´ecalage  temporel  apparent,  tandis  que  la  r´eponse  de  la v´eg´etation  au  rayonnement  solaire  montre  un  d´ecalage  d’un  mois  dans  la  majorit´e  des endroits  dans  l’h´emisph`ere  nord;  (ii)  le  principal  facteur  d´eclenchant  la  croissance  v´eg´etale
´etait  la  tempe´rature  de  l’air,  suivi  par  les  pr´ecipitations  et  le  rayonnement  solaire;  (iii)  les relations  les  plus  ´etroites  entre  v´eg´etation  et  facteurs  climatiques  ont  ´et´e  observ´ees  dans les  for^ets  mixtes,  les  for^ets  de  conif`eres `a  feuilles  caduques  et  les  zones  arbustives  des  moy- ennes  et  hautes  latitudes  du  nord;  (iv)  une  cartographie  de  l’´evolution  de  la  v´eg´etation mondiale  de  1982  `a  2010  a  ´ete´ d´erive´e  et  a  montr´e  que  la  proportion  de  pixels  ve´g´etalise´s pr´esentant  les  plus  fortes  tendances  de  croissance  et  de  d´ecroissance  ´etaient  de  34,73%  et 6,59%  (p < 0.05),  respectivement;  (v)  des  tendances  plus  raisonnables  de  la  v´eg´etation  peu- vent  ^etre  obtenues  `a  partir  des  fichiers  de  donn´ees  sur  l’ISF  par  observations  satellitaires (GLASS)  dans  les r´egions  ou` la  couverture nuageuse est  permanente.
Introduction
Earth’s vegetation links soil, atmosphere, and water,  and is considered as an integral part of the terrestrial  biosphere (Sellers and Schimel 1993). It also regulates carbon cycles through the processes of photosynthesis and respiration (Kucharik et al. 2000; Schimel et al. 2000; Tans et al. 1990), which are vital to the global
natural ecological balance. The growth of vegetation primarily depends on 3  critical  climatic  factors  (Beer et  al.  2010;  Bonan  2008;  Craine  et  al.  2012;  Wang  et al. 2011): temperature, precipitation, and solar radi- ation. In recent decades, vegetation growth has been profoundly affected by global climate change (Menzel and Fabian 1999; Schwartz and Reiter 2000). Thus, it is very important to investigate the  vegetation responses to climatic factors and vegetation trends in the perspective of global climate change.
Long-term satellite-sensed vegetation indices (VIs) datasets make it possible to evaluate global vegetation trends (Piao et al. 2006; White et al. 1997; White et al. 2005). In the last 3  decades,  the  Normalized  Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) has been  employed to analyze the temporal trends and spatial patterns of vegetation (Fensholt et al. 2012; Jeyaseelan  et al. 2007; Jong et al. 2012; Julien et al. 2006), as well   as the relationships between vegetation and climatic factors at global, continental, and regional scales (Jong et al. 2012; Liu et al. 2013; Liu and Lei 2015; Liu et al. 2015; Wu et al. 2015; Zhang et al. 2013).  However,  there are also some  inherent  shortcomings  with  NDVI. First, NDVI is easily affected by the soil reflectance in sparsely vegetated regions (Gamon et al. 1995; Pettorelli et al. 2005). Second, NDVI does not work well for dense vegetation, for example, dense shrub and forest, due to the spectral  saturation  (Gamon et al. 1995; Pettorelli et al. 2005). Third, although sensor degradation and orbital  drift  have been corrected in the NDVI dataset, several confound- ing factors have not been completely eliminated, including the presence of cloud, cloud shadow, and extreme viewing angles (Verbyla 2008). These short- comings will limit the application of NDVI and other spectral VIs in evaluating global vegetation trends or relationships between vegetation and climatic factors.
In contrast, Leaf Area Index (LAI), defined as one- half of the green leaf area per unit horizontal surface area (Chen and Black 1992), is considered  to  be  a  more robust physical variable for representing the dynamics of vegetation. It can be estimated by empir- ical or physical methods from satellite data (Liang 2007). In the empirical method, LAI is directly esti- mated from spectral VIs (e.g. NDVI) using statistical  regression models. However, the empirical method cannot make full use of spectral directional informa- tion (Bacour et al. 2006). In the physical method, LAI   is retrieved using radiative transfer models. The phys- ical method can obtain more reliable LAI estimates (Bacour et al. 2006), and is suitable for a wide variety    of vegetation types (Kimes et al.  2000).  Recently,  a  new long-term global LAI dataset, named Global Land Surface Satellite (GLASS) LAI, was derived based on radiative transfer information with spatial and tem- poral continuity (Xiao et al. 2014). Therefore, the GLASS LAI is considered as an  accurate  long-term  LAI dataset and is more appropriate  for  climate  change studies (Liang et al. 2013).
In this study, we aim to explore the vegetation responses to climatic factors and global vegetation trends (from 1982 to 2010) using the long-term satel- lite-sensed GLASS LAI dataset. Firstly, the time-lag effects of vegetation responses to climatic factors were analyzed. Then, the relationships between LAI and cli- matic factors were also examined based on partial cor- relation and regression analyses. Finally, the global vegetation trends, pixel by pixel, from 1982 to 2010  were evaluated based on the Theil–Sen median slope estimator and Mann–Kendall methods.
Data and methods
GLASS LAI dataset
In this study, the GLASS LAI dataset was used as an indicator for representing the dynamics of vegetation.  It was generated from the surface reflectance data of Advanced Very High  Resolution  Radiometer (AVHRR) and Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) using a  General Regression Neural Networks algorithm (Xiao et  al. 2014; Xiao et al. 2016).  From  1981  to  2000,  the GLASS LAI dataset was derived from the Long-Term Data Record (LTDR) AVHRR data with a spatial reso- lution of 0.05○. Since 2001,  the  GLASS  LAI  dataset  has been generated from the MODIS reflectance data with spatial resolutions of 1 km and 0.05○ (Zhao et al. 2013). The temporal resolution of the GLASS LAI dataset is 8 days.
It has been reported that the GLASS LAI dataset is    a much more temporally continuous, spatially com- plete, and long-term LAI dataset  than  other  global  LAI datasets (Xiao et al. 2014). Three main advantages of the GLASS LAI dataset are as follows: (i)  The  GLASS LAI is derived from the radiative transfer information of canopy rather than from empirical or semi-empirical statistics. This means that it can pro- vide more accurate information on vegetation than spectral VIs or LAI datasets which were derived based on VIs. (ii) The time-series reflectance data used for deriving the GLASS LAI dataset is pre-processed using  a Time Series Cloud Detection method (Tang et al. 2013). This means that the final data are more tem- porally continuous and less contaminated by clouds than the original reflectance dataset. (iii) The temporal variation of GLASS LAI dataset is derived using a machine learning method, which produces a more temporally continuous and robust dataset.  In  this study, we extracted the GLASS LAI  data  spanning  1982 to 2010 with a spatial resolution of 0.05○, and Figure 1. Global land cover type map of MCD12C1 from 2001 to 2010.
calculated the annual and monthly LAI time-series by averaging of the original dataset.
Climate datasets
The Climate Research Unit (CRU) (Harris et al. 2014) temperature, CRU precipitation, and CRU-National Centres for Environmental Prediction (CRU-NCEP) solar radiation datasets were used to represent the climatic  change  in  the  past  3  decades.  These  globally covered datasets were interpolated from meteorological observations (Mitchell and Jones 2005; New  et   al.   2000),   with   a   temporal   resolution   of  1 month and a spatial resolution of 0.5○. The temporal coverage of CRU temperature and CRU precipitation datasets (the latest version TS3.23) were from 1901 to 2014 (Harris et al. 2014),  and  the  temporal  coverage of CRU-NCEP solar radiation datasets was from 1901 to 2010. These climatic datasets have been widely evaluated and  used  in  climate  change  studies  (Jong et al. 2013; Peng et al. 2013; Xiao and Moody 2004),  and fully covered our study period (1982–2010),  making them ideal for our study.
Land-cover dataset
In this study, the MODIS land-cover climate modeling grid product (MCD12C1) was employed as a land-
cover/vegetation types dataset, with a temporal reso- lution of 1 year, and a spatial resolution  of  0.05○  (Friedl et al. 2002; Friedl et al. 2010). To minimize the effects of human  activities  and  natural  disturbances on land-cover types, a changed pixel was defined as a pixel that did not have the same  land-cover  type  for the entire period of 2001 to 2010. The International Geosphere Biosphere Programme  land-cover  types  and changed areas were derived from the MCD12C1  during the period of 2001–2010 (Figure 1). We  div- ided the open shrublands into 2 classes: N (high lati- tudes of the northern hemisphere) and S (middle and low latitudes) (Wu et al. 2015), due to their different  climatic environments for vegetation growth.
Methods for evaluating vegetation responses to climate factors
Time-lag effect analysis method
The growth of vegetation depends on the climatic fac- tors of temperature, precipitation, and solar radiation.  It has been noticed that the vegetation responses to  these climate factors have a certain time-lag effect. Previous studies (Anderson et al. 2010; Chen et al. 2014) show that the time-lag  of  vegetation  responses to climatic factors varies from 0 to 3 months. In this study, quadratic regressions have been used for exploring the time-lag effects of  vegetation  responses to climatic factors,@1
@2
@3
where LAI  denotes the GLASS LAI dataset employed  in this study, TMP, PRE, and SWD stand for the CRU/CRU-NCEP temperature, precipitation, and solar radiation datasets used in this study. m indicates the number of months of climate factors,  and  i  varies  from 0 to 3, which represents the time-lag of vegeta-
tion responses to climate factors in months. ki and wi are regression coefficients, and bi is  the  intercept  of the regressions when the time-lag is  i  months.  For  each equation, when the coefficient of determination (R2) is the highest, the optimal time-lag (i) of vegeta-  tion responses to the  corresponding  climatic  factor  can be obtained.
Partial correlation analysis method
Partial correlation analysis can measure the effect of 1 independent variable to a dependent variable, while con- trolling the effect of other independent variables, while Pearson’s correlation coefficient only measures the linear relationship between 2 variables, without taking into consideration the fact that both these variables may be influenced by other variables. To acquire a much more accurate estimation of the vegetation responses to cli- mate factors, a partial correlation analysis (Wu et  al.  2015) was used for exploring the responses of  GLASS  LAI to each individual climatic variable, excluding the effects of other climatic variables. The partial correlation coefficient is calculated as follows:@4
where  PYXi     represents  the  partial  correlation  coefficient between Y and Xi, R2
YðX1;:::;XnÞ is the coefficient of deter-mination of the regression model between variable Y and variables X1; :::; Xn, R2—1;Xiþ1;:::;XnÞ is the coef-ficient of determination  of  the  regression  model between Y and X1; :::; Xi—1; Xiþ1; :::; Xn. In this study,temperature, CRU precipitation, and CRU-NCEP solar
radiation, respectively.
A dominant driving factor map for results  of  the  partial  correlation  analysis.  To  make
the  spatial  resolutions  of  these  datasets  uniform,  the GLASS LAI data and MCD12C1 data were resampled to a spatial resolution of 0.5○ using average and majority values, respectively, of the pixels correspond- ing to cell of climate data.
Multiple regression analysis method
To analyze how vegetation responded to these 3 cli- matic factors, a multiple regression analysis between GLASS LAI and the 3 climatic factors as well as their interactions was conducted as follows:@5
where LAI is the GLASS LAI dataset (1982–2010);  TMP, PRE, and SWD correspond to the long-term cli- mate datasets: temperature, precipitation, and solar radiation; a0, a1, a2, a3, a4, a5, a6, and a7 are the regression coefficients; e stands for the error term.Methods for evaluation of  global  vegetation  trends To account for the trends in global vegetation from  1982 to 2010, we calculated the annual pixel-by-pixel trends in LAI using the Theil–Sen median slope esti- mator, which has been demonstrated to be both resist- ant to outliers and effective with small sample  sizes  (Sen 1968; Theil 1950). The Theil–Sen median slope estimator is calculated as follows:@6
where n is the total number of data, N   n     n   1  =2.     If N is odd, the Theil–Sen median slope Smedian         S½ðnþ1Þ=2], else Smedian	Sn=2        S½ðnþ2Þ=2]  =2.
The significance of the global vegetation trends was calculated using Mann–Kendall statistics (Jaagus 2006;Mann   1945).   The   benefits   of   the   Mann–Kendall
method are that it does not restrict the distribution of original data, and is insensitive to abrupt breaks (Jaagus 2006). The significance can be calculated as follows:
@7
@8
@9
Figure 2. Time-lag effect of vegetation responses to climatic factors (a) temperature, (b) precipitation, and (c) solar radiation.@10
where the value of Z is used to assess the vegetation trends significance. When jZj > Z1—a=2 (a represents
significance levels), it means that trends are significant at a level of a. In this study, the significance  level a  is  set to 0.05.
Results and discussion
Vegetation responses to climatic factors
Time-lag effect of vegetation responses to climatic factors
The time-lag effect of vegetation responses to climatic factors was investigated with the  long-term  GLASS  LAI and climate factors (CRU temperature, precipita- tion, and CRU-NCEP solar radiation) datasets. Figure 2a shows that the vegetation response to temperature has no apparent time-lag (within 1 month) in most places in the northern hemisphere (e.g. Canada, America, Russia, Europe and China), Amazon, and central Africa. In contrast, the vegetation response to temperature has a time-lag of 3 months in most places in Mongolia, Kazakhstan, and India, and shows a time-lag of 1–2 months in Mexico, southern South America, and Australia. The results for the time-lag effect of vegetation responses to  temperature  derived by this study are similar to those of Wu et al. (2015).
The growth of vegetation response to precipitation
has no profound time-lag in most places in the north- ern hemisphere (Figure 2b), which has a similar pat- tern with the time-lag effect of vegetation response to temperature (Figure 2a). The  main  differences  are:  The growth of  vegetation  response  to  precipitation has a time-lag of 1–2 months in southeast China, and central and eastern North America. The vegetation growth has the strongest correlation with the precipi- tation of last month in most of Africa (excluding cen- tral Africa). The vegetation  of  southern  South  America also exhibits a time-lag of 1 month. Australia shows a 1–2 month time-lag to precipitation. These results are consistent with those of Wu et al. (2015), except that the results of this study show no time-lag  effect in part of the  Amazon  region,  different  from the results of Wu et al. (2015).
Figure 2c shows that the vegetation response to
solar radiation has a time-lag of 1 month in most regions of the northern hemisphere. The vegetation response to solar radiation does not show an apparent time-lag effect in Amazon, central Africa, Kazakhstan, and south India. The growth of vegetation response to solar radiation shows time-lags of 2–3 months in southern  South   America,   Australia,   and   south-   ern Africa.
The main differences between the results of this study and those of Wu et al. (2015) primarily appear    in Amazon region. Wu et al. (2015) reported that the
vegetation responses to precipitation and solar radi- ation have time-lags of 3  and 2 months,  respectively,  in the Amazon region. In contrast, the results derived  by this study show no apparent time-lag  in  the  Amazon region. These differences can be mostly attributed to the perennial cloud obscuration and con- tamination  in   the   Amazon   region   (Wilson   and Jetz 2016).
Spatial distribution of vegetation responses to climatic factors
The spatial distribution of vegetation responses to cli- matic factors was explored by partial correlation ana- lysis. The influences of each individual climatic factor on GLASS LAI are shown in Figure 3. Figures 3a, 3b, and 3c show the partial  correlation  coefficients  between LAI and 3 climatic factors: temperature, pre- cipitation, and solar radiation. A Red-Green-Blue (RGB) synthesis map (Figure 3d)  was  derived  based  on the values of Figures 3a, 3b, and 3c in ENVI soft- ware, from which the dominant  climatic  factors  to  LAI for per pixel can be observed.
Temperature is a leading climatic factor influencing vegetation dynamics in the northern hemisphere. This is also the case in high latitudes, where the second  factor influencing vegetation is precipitation. South- eastern China and the south-eastern region of the United States are affected primarily by temperature; western Europe, central Asia, and India are mainly affected by solar radiation; northern Africa is domi- nated by precipitation; eastern South America and southern Africa are mainly affected by solar radiation and precipitation. However, there is no clear  regular- ity in the Amazon or in most of Oceania.
The partial correlation  coefficients  between  LAI and climatic factors for different vegetated land-cover types are shown in Figure 4. The following patterns of dominant climatic factors can be observed:
(i)The major climatic factor for open shrublands
(N) is temperature, which is consistent with pre- vious findings that the growth of shrublands strongly correlated with temperature in northern high latitudes (Myers-Smith et al. 2011).  However, none of these 3 factors  is  dominant  for open shrublands (S).
(ii)The growths of woody savannas are primarily controlled by precipitation and temperature, and those for savannas by precipitation and solar radiation. This is also consistent with previous observations (Willis et al. 2013).
Figure 3. Influences of each individual climatic variable on GLASS LAI. (a) Partial correlation coefficients between temperature and LAI; (b) partial correlation coefficients between precipitation and LAI; (c) partial correlation coefficients between solar radiation and LAI; (d) dominant climatic factors for global vegetation. Red is temperature, blue is precipitation, green is solar radiation.(iii)The main dominant climatic factor for evergreen needleleaf forest, deciduous broadleaf forest, and mixed forest is temperature, followed by precipita- tion and radiation. Deciduous needleleaf forest is predominantly controlled by precipitation and tem- perature. None of these 3 factors is dominant for evergreen broadleaf forest, due to their ideal cli- matic environment (sufficient precipitation, solar radiation,  and  warm  temperatures)   for   vegeta- tion growth.
(iv)Precipitation is the dominant  climactic  factor  for the growth of grasslands in addition to tem- perature, because grass mainly grows in regions with low precipitation.
(v)All 3 factors have equal influences on croplands. The croplands are also profoundly affected by
Figure 4. Partial correlation coefficients of climatic factors for different vegetated land-cover types.
human agriculture (Nayak et al. 2013; Xiao and Moody 2004).
Explanation of global vegetation variations based on climatic factors
We established a relationship between climatic fac-  tors and LAI using multiple linear regression  ana- lysis, and the  coefficients  of  determination  are  shown in Figure 5. It can be inferred that the coeffi- cient of determination of each pixel  is  larger  than  60% in most regions of northern middle- and high- latitude; that is, in most regions of northern  middle and high latitudes more than 60% of the LAI varia- tions can be explained by temperature, precipitation, and solar radiation.
The coefficients of determination of different vege- tated land-cover types are summarized (Figure 6); 63.16–87.25% of vegetation LAI variations in the
different vegetated land-cover types.
human agriculture (Nayak et al. 2013; Xiao and Moody 2004).
Explanation of global vegetation variations based on climatic factors
We established a relationship between climatic fac-  tors and LAI using multiple linear regression  ana- lysis, and the  coefficients  of  determination  are  shown in Figure 5. It can be inferred that the coeffi- cient of determination of each pixel  is  larger  than  60% in most regions of northern middle- and high- latitude; that is, in most regions of northern  middle and high latitudes more than 60% of the LAI varia- tions can be explained by temperature, precipitation, and solar radiation.
The coefficients of determination of different vege- tated land-cover types are summarized (Figure 6); 63.16–87.25% of vegetation LAI variations in the
Figure  5.  The coefficients of determination (R2)  of multiple linear regressions between  monthly  GLASS LAI and climatic factors   from 1982 to 2010.
Figure 6. The coefficient of determination (R2) of different vegetated land-cover types.
northern hemisphere can be explained by climate fac- tors. Mixed forest, open shrublands (N), and decidu- ous needleleaf forest have the highest mean determination coefficients and are all distributed in northern middle and high latitudes. By contrast, ever- green broadleaf forest and open shrublands  (S)  have the lowest mean coefficients of determination. These results suggest that climatic factors have the greatest effect   on   vegetation   in   northern   middle   and   high latitudes.
The relationships between LAI and climatic factors  at different months were also examined by the  mul- tiple linear regressions. Figure 7 depicts the box plots showing determine coefficients at different months. It shows that the determine coefficients are relative low
Figure 7. The coefficients of determination (R2) of multiple lin- ear regressions at different months.
CANADIAN  JOURNAL  OF  REMOTE  SENSING
in June to August (~0.4) and relative high in other months (~0.6).
Trends of global vegetation and climatic factors
Trends of global vegetation
A global vegetation trends map from 1982 to 2010 (Figure 8) was derived. Excluding the pixels with slow change (—0.001 < slope <0.001), 41.32% of vegetated pixels (excluding barren land, permanent snow and ice) represent significant trends (p < 0.05 level), with 34.73% of pixels exhibiting increasing trends and 6.59% showing decreasing trends. The most evident increasing trends are observed in Europe, followed by south-eastern China, India, western Russia, eastern Russia, Indonesia, the south-eastern United States, eastern Canada, eastern and northern South America, south-eastern and central Africa, and northern and eastern shores of Australia. The most evident decreas- ing trends are found in northern Mongolia, north- eastern China, Alaska and eastern Great Plains of the United States, southern Amazon forest, central and eastern La Plata plain in southern South America, southern Central African Republic, and Uganda.
According   to  recent  studies   (Xiao   et  al.   2014;  Xiao
et al. 2016), the GLASS LAI product is considered as  a more suitable dataset for evaluating the global vegetation trends because the GLASS LAI is much more physically explicit, and less contaminated by clouds than VIs.  In  most regions, the vegetation trends derived from the GLASS LAI dataset are consistent with previous studies  (Liu et al. 2015; Wu et al. 2014; Wu  et  al.  2015).  The most  apparent  differences  of  the  global  vegetation trends
Figure 8. Theil–Sen median slope of GLASS LAI from 1982 to 2010 (p < 0.05).
Table 1.  Statistics of the GLASS LAI trends from 1982 to 2010 (p < 0.05) for different continents. Values for total pixels are abso-   lute numbers; other values are percentages of the total for each column.
derived from GLASS LAI  dataset  and  spectral  VIs  (Liu  et al. 2015; Wu et al. 2014, 2015) are: (i) Significant increasing trends were observed in eastern Canada in this study, while decreasing trends were reported  in the stud- ies of Liu et al. and Wu et al. The result of this study is supported by Hicke et al.’s finding of increased net pri- mary production in eastern Canada, which can be explained by vegetation recovery after serious insect dam- age and increased precipitation (Hicke et al. 2002). The vegetation trends estimated by VIs are inaccurate because of cloud obscuration and contamination (precipitation increased in this area), which leads to negative trends  in  Liu et al. and Wu et al.’s studies; (ii)  Significant  decreas- ing trends were observed in the southern Amazon forest, which can be explained by the drought  and deforestation of recent decades (Malhi et al. 2008; Salazar et al. 2007);
(iii) Significant decreasing trends were observed in south- ern Central African Republic and Uganda, while increas- ing trends were  reported  by  Liu  et  al.  (2015)  and  Wu  et al. (2015). In the  wood  savanna-covered  Central  African Republic and Uganda, the decreasing vegetation trends were caused by the expansion of industrial  logging in recent decades (Laporte et al. 2007), forest conversion, and deforestation in Uganda (Avitabile et al. 2012). The inconsistency of our results and other studies  are  mainly  as a result of the perennial cloud obscuration and con- tamination in the Central African Republic and Uganda (Wilson and Jetz 2016).
The vegetation trends for different continents are shown in Table 1. In all of these continents, excluding the pixels with slow change (—0.001 < slope < 0.001), the proportion of pixels with increasing trends is larger than that with decreasing trends. The continent with the highest proportion of significant increasing trends is Europe (49.71%), followed by South America (40.73%). The continent with the highest proportion of significant decreasing trends in North America (7.63%), followed by South America (7.31%).
Figure 9. Proportions of trends for different vegetation types (p < 0.05, decreasing:  slope < 0.001; stable:	0.001 < slope
< 0.001; increasing: slope > 0.001).
Proportions of trends (p < 0.05) for different vegeta- tion types are summarized in Figure 9. All types of for-  est show a higher  percentage  of  increasing  trends,  which are distributed mainly in northern mid- and high-latitude and in the Amazon forest. Woody savan- nas and savannas also exhibit increasing trends, with 73.83% and 84.97% of the pixels representing significant trends, respectively. Meanwhile, woody savannas exhibit decreasing trends in southern Central African Republic and Uganda. Open shrublands (N) show significant increasing trends, with 64.93% of the pixels in northern Canada and north-eastern Russia. While the open shrublands in Alaska show decreasing trends, the open shrublands (S) exhibit a larger proportion of  stable trends. The closed shrublands show a larger proportion (73.2%) of decreasing trends pixels. Grasslands pixels with decreasing trends (35.17%) are mainly observed in northern Mongolia and north-eastern China, which is consistent with previous research (Peng et al. 2011). Besides the unchanged natural vegetation, the other 3 vegetation types, including croplands, cropland/natural vegetation, and changed area, all have a large  propor-  tion of pixels with increasing trends.
Figure 10. Annual climatic factors trends from 1982 to 2010 with a significance level of 0.05. (a) Trends of temperature; (b) trends of precipitation; (c) trends of solar radiation; (d) regions that experienced significant changes in both of the climatic factors and LAI.
Trends of climatic factors
Climatic factors trends from 1982 to 2010 are shown    in Figure 10. Figures 10a, 10b, and  10c  show  the annual trends of climatic factors with a significance  level of 0.05. Significant increasing trends in tempera- ture are observed in parts of  northern  middle  and  high latitudes, South America, and Africa. Increasing trends in precipitation are observed  in  high  latitudes in Asia, in middle Europe, and in  parts  of  Africa,  while south-western  United  States,  northern Mongolia, and north-eastern China show decreasing trends. Increasing trends in solar  radiation  are observed in northern middle and high latitudes, in Oceania, and in parts of South America. Decreasing trends for solar radiation can be observed in the west- ern United States and parts of north-eastern China.
Figure 10(d) shows the regions in which both the climatic factors and  the  LAI  change  significantly. Most of the significant LAI trends correspond to the changes of 1 or more climatic factors; for example, significant increasing trends of temperature can be observed in central Canada, India,  south-eastern  China, and Africa, and significant increasing trends of temperature and solar radiation can be observed in Amazon, which supports the idea that climate  change  is a key driving factor of vegetation change (Nemani     et al. 2003; Pearson et al. 2013; Peng et al. 2013). Temperature change is a major contributor to the change of vegetation in northern high latitudes, which  is similar to Jeong et al.’s conclusion that climate warming leads to an increase in vegetation in north-  ern high latitudes (Jeong et al. 2011). The trends of decreasing vegetation in northern Mongolia and north-eastern China can be attributed to reduced pre- cipitation (Lotsch et al. 2005; Park and  Sohn  2010).  We also find that some regions undergo significant changes in LAI despite no significant changes in cli- matic factors. For example,  the  south-eastern  region  of the United States shows an increase in vegetation without significant variability in climate; this is  linked to continuous and effective forest management, including afforestation and protection of young trees (Hicke et al. 2002).
Discussion
Remote sensing data provide an opportunity for obtaining insight into vegetation responses to major climatic factors (temperature, precipitation, and solar radiation) and vegetation trends at the global scale. In this study, the spatial and temporal variations of the relationships between vegetation and climatic factors
as well as global vegetation trends  were  evaluated  using GLASS LAI dataset. However, there are still sev- eral limitations and potential shortages which need to  be improved in the future. The main issues are  listed    as follows:
(i)The results of multiple regression show that vege- tation growth can be largely explained by the var- iations of climatic factors and their interactions. However, due to the lack of reliable datasets for evaluating long-term human activities and dis- turbance effects on vegetation from 1982 to 2010, other factors (e.g. fires, wind storms, harvesting, and insects) have not been accounted for in the multiple linear regression analysis.
(ii)Several studies (Xiao et al. 2014, 2016) have
shown that the GLASS global LAI datasets are temporally continuous and less contaminated by clouds. In this study, we have found the global trends derived from GLASS LAI dataset were more convincing than those derived from VIs in the perennial cloud-covered regions. However, a direct comparison of vegetation trends derived from GLASS LAI, VIs, and other LAI  products still needs to be carried out.
(iii)The results of trends analysis show that the glo-
bal vegetation trends are highly correlated with climatic factors. However, we also found some regions where LAI trends are significant despite climatic factors showing non-significant trends, which implies that variations in vegetation can- not be explained solely by climatic  factors. Several studies (Piao et al.  2015;  Zhu  et  al.  2016) have shown that CO2 and some other factors, such as nitrogen deposition, natural dis- turbances and human activity, have  influences  on the trends in vegetation growth in some regions. Thus, the impacts of other factors on vegetation growth need to  be  further  explored  in future studies.
Conclusions
In this study, we investigated vegetation responses to climatic factors and global vegetation trends using the long-term GLASS LAI dataset. The key findings and main conclusions are as follows:
(i)The time-lag effect of the vegetation response to climatic factors has been explored based on the GLASS LAI datasets. From the time-lag effect ana- lysis results (Figure 2), we found that growth of
vegetation responses to temperature and precipita- tion have no apparent time-lag effect (less than 1 month), and the vegetation responses to solar radiation have a 1-month time-lag in most places in the northern hemisphere. The vegetation responses to climatic factors have no apparent time-lag effect in the Amazon region. In other pla- ces in the south hemisphere, the time-lag varies from 1 to 3 months for different climatic factors.
(ii)The growth of global vegetation is strongly cor- related with climatic factors (Figures 3–7). The high coefficient of determination for the majority of vegetation types suggests that climatic factors greatly affect vegetation growth. The dominant climatic factors vary for different  vegetation  types. For example, the dominant climatic factors for mixed forest, evergreen needleleaf forest, and deciduous broadleaf forest are temperature; grasslands are affected by precipitation and tem- perature, and savannas are influenced by precipi- tation and solar radiation.
(iii)A global vegetation trends map from 1982 to 2010 has been derived based on the GLASS LAI datasets. At the global scale, 41.32% of the total land vegetated pixels (excluding the barren, per- manent snow and ice regions) exhibit significant (p < 0.05) trends from 1982 to 2010 (Figure 8). There are increasing vegetation trends in 34.73% of the land vegetated pixels, whereas there are decreasing trends in 6.59% of the land vegetated pixels. The most evident increasing vegetation trends occur in Europe, south-eastern China, India, western Russia, eastern Russia, Indonesia, the south-eastern United States, eastern Canada, eastern and northern South America, and south- eastern and central Africa. The most evident decreasing trends occur in northern Mongolia, north-eastern China, Alaska and eastern Great Plains of the United States, southern Amazon forest, central and eastern La Plata plain, south- ern Central African Republic, and Uganda.
(iv)According to recent studies (Xiao et al. 2014, 2016), the GLASS LAI product is much more physically explicit, and less contaminated by clouds than  VIs. Thus, the GLASS LAI  product  is considered as a more suitable dataset for eval- uating the global vegetation  trends.  The  results of this study show that more reasonable vegeta- tion trends can be obtained  from  the  GLASS  LAI dataset in the perennial  cloud-covered regions (e.g. eastern Canada, southern Central African Republic, and southern Amazon forest).
(v)
There are different vegetation trends for different vegetated land-cover types (Figure 9). The LAI of all forest land-cover types exhibit a large propor- tion of increasing trends, followed by woody sav- annas, savannas, open shrublands in  high  latitudes in the northern hemisphere, croplands, cropland/natural vegetation, and changed area. Open shrublands in middle and low latitudes  show little change over the study period. On the contrary, closed shrublands and grassland show a larger proportion of decreasing trends.
(vi)Climate change is a key driving factor of global  vegetation variations (Figure 10). Temperature change is the leading climatic factor of vegetation trends for most regions of the world, followed by the changes in precipitation and solar radiation.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the group of GLASS data- sets for generating and sharing the GLASS LAI dataset, and CRU group for providing the climatic factors datasets.
Funding
This research was financially supported by the National Key Research and Development Project (2016YFA0602301), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (41601349), and the Jilin Province’s Science and Technology  Development Program (20180520220JH).
