<title>A model-based approach of scatter dose contributions and efficiency
of apron shielding for radiation protection in CT</title>
<author>N. Weber , P. Monnin , C. Elandoy , S. Ding </author>
<Affiliation>a.University of Applied Sciences, Haute Ecole de Santé Vaud, Av. Beaumont 21, 1011 Lausanne, Switzerland;b.University Hospital of Lausanne (CHUV), Rue du Bugnon 46, 1011 Lausanne, Switzerland
</Affiliation>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Physica Medica</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.ejmp.2015.06.0071120-1797</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmp.2015.06.0071120-1797</URL>
ABSTRACT
Given the contribution of scattered radiations to patient dose in CT, apron shielding is often used for ra- diation protection. In this study the eﬃciency of apron was assessed with a model-based approach of the contributions of the four scatter sources in CT, i.e. external scattered radiations from the tube and table, internal scatter from the patient and backscatter from the shielding. For this purpose, CTDI phan- toms ﬁlled with thermoluminescent dosimeters were scanned without apron, and then with an apron  at 0, 2.5 and 5 cm from the primary ﬁeld. Scatter from the tube was measured separately in air. The scatter contributions were separated and mathematically modelled. The protective eﬃciency of the apron was low, only 1.5% in scatter dose reduction on average. The apron at 0 cm from the beam lowered the dose by 7.5% at the phantom bottom but increased the dose by 2% at the top (backscatter) and did not affect the centre. When the apron was placed at 2.5 or 5 cm, the results were intermediate to the one ob- tained with the shielding at 0 cm and without shielding. The apron effectiveness is ﬁnally limited to the small fraction of external scattered radiation.
Keywords:
Computed tomography Radiation protection Scattered radiation Apron shielding
Introduction
The advent of computed tomography (CT) has revolutionized medical imaging due to the possibility to obtain slices and 3D re- construction of high diagnostic value. Consequently the use of CT has quickly expanded worldwide [1–4]. The drawback of this trend is the increase in radiation dose to the population [5]. Different ways to reduce patient dose in CT have therefore been proposed. Low dose protocols using automatic kV- or mA-modulation spread [6–8] and recently the development of iterative reconstruction algorithms con- stitutes a promising way to further reduce dose [9]. Moreover, protective shielding in lead or in other materials (e.g. copper, gado- linium, zinc) have been longer used to reduce the exposure to scattered radiation [10]. The use of shielding in CT clinical prac- tice is however very variable [11]. Respectively half and 95% of CT radiographers, from Europe and North America, use apron shield- ing for the radioprotection of pregnant patients [12]. This practice variability is not surprising considering the fact that studies pub- lished on this topic may present divergent results [13–17].
During the most frequent chest and abdominal CT examina- tions, radiosensitive organs are exposed to scattered radiations. In this context, the aim of this work is to evaluate the effectiveness of apron shielding for scattered radiation dose reduction to the patient during chest or abdominal CT examinations. Since scat- tered radiations originate from different sources, namely the tube and its accessories, the table, the patient body (internal scattered radiation) and the backscattered radiation from the apron, we de- termined the contribution of each of these sources to the patient dose and developed mathematical models to evaluate their distri- bution inside a geometrical phantom. This allowed us to analyse the effectiveness of the apron against the different sources of scat- tered radiation. If the contributions of scattered radiation sources have been previously investigated through an anthropomorphic phantom [10], only three sources were considered in the phantom and their distribution within a slice was not studied. A further dis- tinction of external scatter from the tube and the CT table, as we propose here, is of importance because their contributions are ge- ometrically different. Finally, our work investigated the inﬂuence of the gap between the apron and the edge of the primary ﬁeld on the shielding eﬃciency.
Materials and methods
Acquisitions
All measurements were performed with a General Electric Lightspeed Ultra VCT scanner. Acquisitions were performed with the following parameters: 120 kV, 400 mA, 1 s rotation time, 20 mm beam collimation (8 × 2.5 mm), a scan ﬁeld of view (SFOV) of 36 cm and a scan length of 280 mm. The corresponding CTDIw and DLP were respectively 34.83 mGy and 975.24 mGy·cm. Axial scan pro- tocols were chosen in order to know precisely the edges of the primary ﬁeld and to allow a precise positioning of the apron. Doses were measured using thermoluminescent dosimeters (TLD) LiF TLD100 (3.2 × 3.2 × 0.9 mm). Estimated with 6 TLDs kept in the TLD calibration room and 6 in the CT console room, the background dose was removed for the dose measurements. Every acquisition was re- peated 15 times in order to increase the cumulated dose in scatter and improve the accuracy of dose measurements.
Experiments were performed: 1) in air (without table) to de- termine speciﬁcally the external scattered radiation originating from the tube at the entrance of the phantom, and 2) with CTDI phan- toms with and without apron to measure scattered radiations distribution within the phantom and the effect of the apron.
Measurements of external scatter originating from the tube and its accessories
To estimate scattered radiation coming from the tube and its ac- cessories, TLDs were placed on three polystyrene boards exceeding the length of the CT table and positioned at the isocenter of the CT scanner (Fig. 1). The ﬁrst board (1180 × 340 × 9 mm) was put along the longitudinal z-axis and the two others (372 × 140 × 14 mm) along the radial x-axis. In the z-axis, 10 TLDs were positioned in the primary radiation beam at 5 mm from the beam edge, every 15 mm over a length of 135 mm. In the secondary ﬁeld, 21 TLDs were placed from 5 to 145 mm from the beam edge every 5 mm in the ﬁrst     60 mm, then every 10 mm. Two strips of 37 TLDs, equally spaced by 10 mm, were placed in the x-axis, the ﬁrst strip was in primary ﬁeld at 140 mm from the ﬁeld edge, the second in scatter at 20 mm from the ﬁeld.
Measurements of the other scatter contributions
Three cylindrical Polymethyl Methacrylate (PMMA) CTDI phan- toms of 15 cm long and 32 cm in diameter were appended to form a 45 cm long phantom, and aligned at the gantry isocentre. The ge- ometry of the three phantoms was according to IEC 60601-2-44, 61223-2-6 and 61223-3-5 standards with ﬁve through holes, one at the centre and four at 10 mm from the surface at the top and
bottom, in the left and right. The phantoms holes were ﬁlled with PMMA lugs drilled of  small cavities for TLDs. Phantoms were scanned
(1) without apron and then with the apron placed at (2) 0 cm, (3)
2.5 cm and (4) 5 cm from the primary ﬁeld edge. Dose estima- tions were similarly made for the four experiments. The shielding (SIRAD, Le Locle, Switzerland) was of 0.25 mm lead equivalent, cor- responding to the thickness classically used in clinical practice in Switzerland. Custom made with a dimension of 102 × 52 cm, it totally and perfectly surrounded the phantoms. The axial position of the shielding and the geometrical alignment of the phantoms were veri- ﬁed on scout views before dose measurements. The phantoms holes were then ﬁlled with lugs containing TLDs. The acquisition ﬁeld of 280 mm long began at 20 mm from the edge of  phantom 1 (side   of the gantry) and ended at the junction of phantoms 2 and 3.
Dose distribution along the longitudinal z-axis was estimated at four radial positions, along three plugs, at the central, top and bottom holes of the phantom, and in the surface of the phantom (Fig. 2). For the four radial positions, 10 TLDs were in the primary ﬁeld, every 15 mm starting at 5 mm from the beam edge. In secondary radi- ation, 21 TLDs were inserted at the same four radial positions, every 5 mm in the ﬁrst 60 mm starting at 5 mm from the beam edge, then every 10 mm. Another strip of 57 TLDs was rolled at the surface of the phantom in the secondary ﬁeld, at 20 mm from the beam edge. TLDs were placed every 10 mm around the phantom on 200° (grey squares in Fig. 2).
Scatter dose distribution along the radial axis was measured with a strip of 32 TLDs spaced every 10 mm (grey squares in Fig. 2) pasted along the radius of the phantom (y-axis) on the gantry side of phantom 1. This band was in scattered radiation at 20 mm from the edge of the X-ray beam, and this measurement, not affected by the shielding, was made only without shielding.
Mathematical modelling of the different sources of scattered radiations
The scatter created inside the patient (internal scatter) was noted A (Fig. 2). External scattered radiations mainly generated by the X-ray tube itself and its accessories in the gantry, and by the radiologi- cal table were noted B1 and B2, respectively. Backscatter radiation from the protective shielding was named C. The notations and deﬁ- nitions used for dose distribution modelling in this study are given below.
Figure 1. Experimental design and TLDs (grey squares) position to measure the external radiation (Top view). PB: Polystyrene board.
Figure 2. Apron (shaded rectangle) and TLDs (grey squares) position in and on the phantom. The letters a, b and c stand for the apron position at, respectively, 0, 2.5 and 5 cm from the edge of the ﬁeld. The letter A indicates the internal scatter, B1 the external scatter from the tube, B2 the external scatter from the radiological table and C the backscatter radiation from the apron. Dbot and Dtop are respectively the scatter dose proﬁles along the bottom radius and top radius.
r: Radial position from the phantom centre
y: Vertical position given by Cartesian coordinates centred in the middle of the circular section of the phantom
z: Longitudinal position from the primary ﬁeld edge R: Radius of the phantom
μ: Linear attenuation coeﬃcient of the phantom correspond- ing to the X-ray radiation
Ta: Thickness of the shielding material
μa: Linear attenuation coeﬃcient of the shielding
Doses measured in air were used to represent the scatter doses at the phantom surface due to the tube and its accessories (B10). Given the tube rotation, this scatter source (B1) was considered as homo- geneous around the phantom and the absorption in the phantom an exponential function of the radial distance from the phantom surface (eq. (1)).
@1
Scattered radiation from the table (B2) was determined from the dose proﬁle measured along the vertical diameter (y-direction) on the external section of the CTDI phantom, in scatter. B2 was con- sidered as the difference between the scatter dose proﬁles measured along the bottom radius Dbot(r) and top radius Dtop(r) (Fig. 2), without shielding (eq. (2)).
@2
The internal scatter source A was determined by subtraction of the component B1 to the dose proﬁle Dtop(r) (eq. (3)).
@3
Backscatter from the shielding (C) was determined from the dose difference, at the top surface of the phantom, under the shielding ( Dt*op R) and without shielding (Dtop(R)), after addition of the scat-
tered radiation coming from the external equipment and stopped
by the apron. As the shielding was rolled around the phantom, back- scatter emission was considered as homogeneous around the phantom and the absorption in the phantom an exponential func- tion of the radial distance from the surface of the phantom (eq. (4)).
@4
Results
Dose estimation in primary and secondary ﬁelds
The CTDIw given by the console was 34.83 mGy and conﬁrmed by an independent measurement made with one of our phantoms and a dosimeter (Radcal 9015) with a 10 cm long CT ionizing chamber (10X5-3CT) traceable to national standards which gave a CTDIw of 35.32 mGy. Doses measured with TLDs in the middle of the scanned length – 35.7 mGy in the central hole, 52.8 mGy in the top hole and 51.5 mGy in the bottom hole – were all higher than CTDIw. Dose measured with the Radcal for the scan and phantom lengths used in our experiments (a 45 cm long phantom and a 28 cm long scan) gave averaged doses similar to the one obtained with TLDs: 34.7 mGy, 51.9 mGy and 48.6 mGy respectively for the centre,top and bottom holes of the phantom.
In the primary ﬁeld, dose decreased when going deeper inside the phantom (Fig. 3). The pattern was reversed outside of the primary ﬁeld with the highest scatter dose in the phantom centre and the lowest at the surface. As shown in Fig. 3 the dose in scatter de- creased exponentially as a function of the longitudinal distance z from the edge of  the beam. The dose data for the three positions  in the phantom (centre, table and top) could be adequately ﬁtted using an exponential decay function. An attenuation coeﬃcient μ  of 0.23 (±0.01) cm−1 was found for the beam quality used in our study (120 kV).
Scatter dose distribution in a slice
The doses measured in scatter allowed to deﬁne equations for the scatter sources: A, B1, B2 and C. As shown in Fig. 3, the shield- ing did not have any measurable inﬂuence on scatter dose at the phantom centre. Accordingly, it was deduced that scattered radia- tions from external sources were negligible at the phantom centre and the internal scatter was by far the most important source of scattered radiations. The scatter dose measured at the phantom
Figure 3. Doses per unit CTDIw in the primary (box 1) and secondary ﬁelds (boxes 2 to 5) without shielding (open symbols) and with a shielding (ﬁlled symbols) at 0 cm from the beam. Scatter doses measured in the centre (box 2), top (box 3), bottom (box 4) and surface (box 5) of the phantom.
centre was therefore used to determine the maximal amount of in- ternal scatter (A) in the phantom. The scatter dose measured at the centre of the phantom at the beam edge (z = 0) was 0.65 CTDIw
(A0.CTDIw in eq. (5)). The internal scatter dose distribution inside the phantom determined from eq. (3) could be ﬁtted with a sigmoid function (ﬁt coeﬃcients b and c in eq. (5)). The internal scatter dose distribution in the entire volume of the phantom was therefore ex-pressed with eq. (5)
@5
The internal scatter contribution (relative to the total scatter dose)
decreased slowly from 100% at the centre to a value between 70 and 50% at the phantom surface depending on the azimuth (70% and 50%, respectively at the top and bottom surfaces: Fig. 4a). The internal scatter proportion fell below 90% only within the two outer centimetres in the upper part of the phantom and within the four outer centimetres for the lower part.
Scatter dose measured in air used to determine the amount of external scatter produced by the X-ray tube and its accessories (B1) was 0.12 CTDIw (B10 = 0.12 in eqs. (1) and (6)). Considered as a ho- mogeneous external emission around the phantom, in the absence of table, this external scatter dose distribution was modelled with eq. (6).
@6
The external scatter dose from the X-ray tube and its accesso- ries stood for 30.8% of the total scatter dose at the top of the phantom, where its contribution to the total scatter dose was maximal, and for 22% of the surface dose at the phantom bottom,above the radiological table (Fig. 4b).
Scatter dose produced by the radiological table (B2) was mea-sured at 0.03 CTDIw at the bottom surface of the phantom (B20.CTDIw in eq. (7)). This external scatter dose distribution could be ﬁtted with an exponential decay of the vertical distance from the table. Con- sidering a homogeneous external planar emission at the bottom of the phantom, the scatter dose distribution from the table was ex- pressed with eq. (7).
@
The scatter dose due to the table amounted to 28% of the total scatter dose at the bottom of the phantom, where it was maximal (Fig. 4c).Finally, the total scatter dose distribution (S0) for a slice at a given longitudinal position z not covered by the shielding is the sum of the three scatter sources.
@8
Figure 5a shows an example of a scatter dose map calculated for a slice at 1 cm from the beam edge. The scatter dose was not ho- mogeneous in the phantom, maximal at 6 cm above the table where it reached 57% of the CTDIw value, and minimal at the top surface with a value equal to 27% of the CTDIw. With a value between 52% and 57% of the CTDIw, the scatter dose can be considered as rea- sonably homogeneous in the central part of the phantom, up to 4 cm from the surface.
The backscatter from the shielding (C), modelled using eq. (9) and considered as being homogeneous around the phantom, amounted to 23% of the internal scatter dose at the phantom surface (the ﬁrst parenthesis in eq. (4) was equal to C(R) = 0.23·A(R)).
@9
The total scatter dose distribution for a slice under the apron (S) at a given longitudinal position z is the sum of the four scatter sources. The protection of the shielding acts only on the external scatter sources B1 and B2. Accordingly, the total scatter dose dis- tribution with a shielding is deﬁned by the following eq. (10).@10
Figure 5b shows an example of a scatter dose map with shield- ing calculated from eq. (10) for a slice at 1 cm from the beam edge.
Figure 4. Fractions of the three scatter sources compared to the total scatter dose in a slice of the cylindrical phantom, without shielding. a) internal scatter. b) external scatter from the tube and its accessories. c) external scatter from the table.
The effect of  the shielding on the scatter dose is the difference in dose with and without shielding, as expressed below:
The surface dose increase, noticed when the apron was at the ﬁeld edge (Fig. 3), was also visible when the shielding was at 2.5 cm from the ﬁeld, but occurred only in the part covered by the apron,
S r, y  S0 r, y  B1 r   B2 r, y1 expaTa   C r 
(11)
i.e. starting at 2.5 cm from the ﬁeld (results not shown). Doses re-
Figure 5c is the difference between Fig. 5b and Fig. 5a and ex- plicitly shows the effect of the shielding on the scatter dose distribution in a slice of the cylindrical phantom. The shielding in- creased the dose within the upper half of the phantom (eg. + 0.03 CTDIw at the top surface). A protective effect against scatter from the table could be noticed within the lower part of the phantom (−0.08 CTDIw at the bottom surface). The scatter dose in the centre and at middle height of the phantom remained roughly unchanged. The overall effect of the shielding was a decrease in scatter dose of 1.5% on average in a slice under the apron.
At the table level, when the apron was placed at 2.5 cm from  the edge of the ﬁeld, measured doses between the edge of the ﬁeld and the apron were similar to those estimated without the apron (Fig. 6). A small dropout of dose level was visible in the part covered by the apron, i.e. starting at 3 cm. Measured doses further away from the ﬁeld, with the apron at 2.5 cm, laid between those measured with the apron appended to the ﬁeld and without the apron. A similar trend was observed when the shielding was placed at 5 cm from the ﬁeld, with a very slight doses drop at 6 cm from the ﬁeld.
corded at 5 cm from the ﬁeld were very similar between our four protocols (with and without apron), so when the shielding was placed at this distance, no difference could be noticed in the surface doses. A similar pattern was observed for the dose at the phantom top, with the apron attached to the ﬁeld the estimated doses were slightly higher than without the apron (Fig. 3). However when the apron was at 2.5 and 5 cm the measured doses at these distances were equivalent between the four protocols (results not shown). Finally, in the middle of the phantom, the measured doses were similar regardless of the location of the apron (results not shown).
Discussion
Measurements performed with and without the apron showed that the scatter dose decrease due to the apron was only of 1.5% in a slice on average, and this result is roughly independent of the lon- gitudinal position of the slice under the shielding. Furthermore, the shielding has no effect in the uncovered secondary ﬁeld as well as on the dose delivered in the direct beam, which contributes most Figure 5. Scatter dose distribution per unit CTDIw calculated for a slice of the cylindrical phantom at 1 cm from the beam. a) without shielding. b) with shielding. c) dif- ference between b) and a). The dotted line represents the isodose curve.
to the total dose. The overall (primary and scatter) dose reduction depends on the scan length, but is nevertheless small, much smaller than 1.5%. The effect of the shielding on the total dose is therefore very low, corroborating a previous study [17]. An apron of 0.25 mm was chosen since it corresponds to the legal minimum thickness   in Switzerland. The use of a thicker apron would have increased its effectiveness against external scatter, although its global eﬃcien- cy would remain weak. Indeed, the greatest scatter contribution is internal scatter on which a change in apron thickness would not have any impact.
It is important to notice that the effect of the shielding becomes marginal in the deepness of the phantom, where the internal scat- tered radiations are largely dominant. The apron in CT does not protect against this main source of scattered radiations, and con- sequently, deep organs like stomach, pancreas and small intestine can not be protected. Similarly, Hidajat et al. [13] found no effect  of the apron on the dose to uterus and ovaries with an Alderson- Rando phantom.
Concerning the other scatter contributions, our measurements showed the CT table participated in a non-negligible way to the scat- tered dose in increasing the dose to the bottom side of the phantom.
Placing an apron allowed decreasing the dose at the phantom bottom. Indeed the maximal dose reduction was observed in this area with −7.5% of the CTDIw (Fig. 5c). According to the ICRP103, in this area, bone marrow is a radiosensitive organ with a weighting factor of 0.12 [18]. An apron between the CT table and the patient should protect this organ and other speciﬁc organs such as the kidneys, rectum and gonads when they are close to the primary beam edge.
Furthermore, we pointed out that backscattered radiation from our shielding was not negligible and amounted to 23%. This rela- tively high proportion may result from the apron being lead free. The shielding materials (antimony and bismuth) are within a vinyl resin and a plastic matrix which may backscatter. The presence of the apron had a negative effect in the upper part of the phantom, causing an increase in skin dose of 3%. This result showed that back- scatter from the apron was higher than its protection against the external scatter dose due to the tube and its accessories. Placing a shielding on the chest, when realising a CT exam of the superior abdomen may therefore slightly increase the dose to superﬁcial organs, such as breast. If the effect is relatively small, it remains nev- ertheless that the isodose (between with and without apron) was Figure 6. Measured doses per unit CTDIw at the bottom of the phantom without an apron (open circle), with an apron placed at 0 cm (ﬁlled square), 2.5 cm (ﬁlled circle), and 5 cm from the edge of the beam (ﬁlled triangle).
observed at the centre of the phantom. This contradicts the results of some authors [17] mentioning a dose decrease to superﬁcial organs, such as breast or thyroid.
Some authors reported high dose reductions with the apron. For instance, maximal point dose reductions of 19% and 61% were men- tioned respectively at 7.5 and 15 cm from the primary ﬁeld [14]. Such differences were measured far from the beam, where scat- tered doses are very small and can be estimated only with large uncertainties. Such dose differences refer to localized small values of dose, and are therefore diﬃcult to interpret in terms of global dose gain. In our study, doses differences were expressed per unit CTDI, and are thus all comparable to the reference dosimetric quan- tity displayed on the console. Applying the same process to the previously mentioned data [14], these seemingly high dose de- creases correspond respectively to 4 and 3% reductions compared to the CTDIvol of 10.82 mGy reported in this study.
A question often raised in clinical practice is the usefulness of
apron for foetus protection. Chatterson et al. [19] found, in the ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy,  a  negligible  dose  diminution  from  45 μGy ± 30 to a level not detectable with the TLD. This is in ac- cordance with our results pointing out the absence of shielding effectiveness in the middle of the phantom. However, in the third trimester, these authors observed a signiﬁcant foetal dose de- crease with the addition of an apron protection: from 0.13 (±0.03) mGy to 0.04 (±0.03) mGy. These results can be interpreted in light of our work that modelled scattered radiation and decom- posed it into four contributions (i.e. internal, external from the table, external from the tube and accessories, and backscattered). In the late stage of pregnancy, the foetus is located in the protruded mot- her’s womb and, accordingly, is notably exposed to internal radiations released from the thorax. These radiations propagate along the body of the mother but also exit the body to irradiate the foetus. The apron can therefore in this case be effective because it can protect the foetus from internal scattered radiations (the main scatter contribution), released from the mother’s thorax, that “externally” irradiates the foetus.
As pointed out in our study, dose reduction with an apron is low
compared to the results obtained with the optimization of acqui- sition parameters (kV, mA, pitch), or typically the use of the auto- mA [20,21], auto-kV modes [22], or iterative reconstructions [9,21]. Accordingly, the radiographer should consider in priority these methods for radiation protection. If a protective shielding is used,
suggestions can be made to improve its eﬃciency. Actually, when the apron is placed for CT exam, it is wrapped around the patients with an anterior double thickness. However, our results pointed out, that on the top of the phantom the shielding is not protective and even deleterious due to backscatter. Accordingly, it seems more ef- ﬁcient to either put the apron lying on the table to protect the patient’s back or to put the double thickness in the back to protect the patient against scatter radiation issued from the table. None- theless, this deserves to be tested.
The shielding positioning may be tricky when using the auto- mA and a high pitch, both effective in reducing the dose. Indeed,  the effectiveness of the shielding will notably depend on its posi- tion relative to the beam edge. Scattered radiations follow an exponential decay as a function of the distance from the ﬁeld edge, and the dose saved by the shielding will decrease the same, start- ing at the shielding edge, as shown by our results with the apron  at 2.5 and 5 cm from the ﬁeld. In clinical practice the apron will never be positioned exactly at the beam edge. A margin of a few centimetres will insure the shielding not to crop the examination volume. The use of axial acquisitions in our study allowed precise positioning of the apron at the beam edge, which insures an optimal protection. In helical scan, because of the overranging, the apron can not be contiguous to the ﬁeld to avoid the apron being in the X-ray ﬁeld. Accordingly, in helical acquisition, the dose saving would be even lower than the one measured in our study. Auto-mA was not used in our study, because it is irrelevant for a homogeneous cylindrical phantom. Our study can thus not account for the varia- tions in thickness and density along the scan axis, where AEC will play a role. This was not considered in our work whose objective was to analyse the shielding eﬃciency through a distinction between the contributions of different sources to scattered radiation. A measure of dose reduction to speciﬁc organs would have required to consider variations in thickness and density along the scan axis, and the results of our study may not be accurate for particular cases where the geometry is very different, for example for advanced preg- nant women. Monte Carlo simulations were already successfully used to determine patient dose in CT [23–25] and would be typically a suitable alternative for ﬁnding out how effective shielding really is for these cases.
Finally, dose measurements performed with TLDs or Radcal do-
simeter were in close agreement. This indicates that the difference between the CTDIw and the measured doses with the TLDs came from a difference in the amount of scatter produced within the phantom. This result was however expected since it is well known that the integral of the dose over a 28 cm scan length will be higher than the dose integrated over the 10 cm of the pencil chamber for  a single gantry rotation (usual geometry for CTDIw measure- ments) [26].
Conclusions
This study showed that the global protective effect of the apron was very low. A scattered dose reduction of only 1.5% on average was observed for the volume of the phantom covered by the shield- ing. The overall patient dose fraction saved by the shielding will depend on the scan length but will be anyway very small, much smaller than 1.5%. Its protective effect is indeed limited to the minor external sources of scattered radiations, i.e. the X-ray tube and its accessories, and the radiological table. The mathematical model- ling of the different sources of scatter showed that the 0.25 mm lead equivalent apron used in this study added a backscatter radiation of 23% of scatter coming out of the phantom. Internal scatter pro- duced in the phantom was by far the main source of scatter – from 100% at the phantom centre to 50% at the bottom and more than 90% in average – against which the apron does not act. In addition the shielding will exponentially decrease with its distance rela- tive to the X-ray beam. A gap between the shielding and the primary ﬁeld is however necessary in clinical practice to prevent the shield- ing entering the irradiation ﬁeld, under risk of having a dose at maximum when using the auto-mA. The shielding may however be effective for particular geometries where internal scatter created in the patient is likely to come out and become external irradia- tion. In the case of the foetus in the protruded mother’s womb in the last months of pregnancy, the apron is an option that could be used to protect the foetus.
