<title>Radiographer research in radiation protection: National and European perspectives</title>
<author>G. Paulo</author>
<Affiliation>Instituto Polit´ecnico de Coimbra, ESTESC-Coimbra Health School, Medical Imaging and Radiotherapy Department Rua 5 de Outubro, S. Martinho do Bispo, 3046-854, Coimbra, Portugal</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Radiography</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radi.2020.05.0061078-8174</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radi.2020.05.0061078-8174</URL>
ABSTRACT
The author of this paper gives an overview about the evolution of radiography education in Portugal and reﬂects about the importance of Radiographer-led research, especially in the ﬁeld of radiation protection and its impact in clinical practice.
It also pinpoints several aspects that contribute to the visibility and recognition of the role of radi- ographer both at national and European level, where the importance of the European Federation of Radiographers Societies is crucial.
Radiographer led research is necessary and fundamental to develop the radiography profession ﬁeld ok knowledge and to provide evidence to sustain the implementation and adoption of new clinical practices.
Evidence shows that Radiographer-led research in the ﬁeld of Radiation Protection contributes signiﬁcantly to decrease patient and staff exposure to ionizing radiation, while maintaining the quality of diagnostic and therapeutic procedures.
Keywords:
Radiographer research   Radiography education
The evolution of radiography education in Portugal
The ﬁrst Portuguese radiographer Bento Fernandes was appointed  in  1900  at  the  Hospital  Sa~o  Jose´ in  Lisbon,  after  the Minister of the Kingdom authorized the establishment of the ﬁrst radiology department in 1897, exactly two years after Roentgen's discovery.
Since then, the radiography profession evolved dynamically, adapting itself to the evolution of healthcare, technology, science, knowledge and obviously to the social, economic and cultural changes that inﬂuenced Portugal in the last 120 years.
The education and training of radiographers in Portugal started formally in the 1960s and was organized in three semesters.
It took then 20 years for the ﬁrst reform to happen, when in 1980 the course structure was changed into six semesters (three years) for each area: diagnostic imaging, nuclear medicine and
radiotherapy. These separated courses gave access to three different and  independent  professions  in  Portugal  (T´ecnico  de  Radiologia  e Radiographer in Diagnostic Imaging; T´ecnico de Medicina Nuclear Radiographer   in   Nuclear   Medicine;   T´ecnico   de   Radioterapia   e
Radiographer in Radiotherapy).
Another important reform took place in 1993, with the inte- gration of the three independent courses into the Portuguese higher education system as bachelor studies.
In 2008, following the complex Bologna process reform in Portugal, the three-year course structure was transformed into a four-year program, while still maintaining the three courses sepa- rate and independent (diagnostic imaging, nuclear medicine, radiotherapy).
In 2014, following a reform process developed under the Por- tuguese Agency for Assessment and Accreditation of Higher Edu- cation (A3ES), a proposal was made to merge the three separate and independent programs (diagnostic imaging, nuclear medicine and radiotherapy) under the same four-year (240 ECTS) course,1 named Medical Imaging and Radiotherapy.
After the formal approval of the new proposed combined four- year model by the Health, Higher Education and Labour Minis- ters, the ﬁrst combined course started in September 2014 and is  now a reality in all public and private higher education institutions accredited to deliver such programs in Portugal.
Despite the establishment of the new combined Medical Im- aging and Radiotherapy course, the three separate and independent radiographer professions for diagnostic Imaging, nu- clear medicine and radiotherapy still exist in Portugal, each with its own title issued by the health authorities. However, the new graduates from the Medical Imaging and Radiotherapy programs are entitled to request all three professional titles and to work in any of the three areas.
Despite the favourable evolution of the educational program described above, the inclusion of research and radiation protection topics in the radiography course curriculum has always been a concern but became more relevant in the last 20 years.
In Portugal, the research activity in the ﬁeld of radiation pro- tection started at the beginning of the current millennium and has since then been pursued continuously, which has positively impacted clinical practice in medical imaging and radiotherapy departments. This development has greatly contributed to raising awareness and creating a favourable environment to establish a radiation safety culture amongst all health professionals in the country.
The importance of radiographer-led research
The research team at Coimbra Health School (IPC-ESTESC), one of the Portuguese public higher education institutions where the medical imaging and radiotherapy course is delivered, was one of the pioneers in Portugal to develop research in the ﬁeld of medical radiation protection.
They started by implementing optimization programs in pae- diatric imaging2 and interventional cardiology procedures with the aim to reduce dose to both patients and staff.
Due to the success of these programs, which brought together academic and clinical staff to develop strategies for dose reduction (in some cases up to 80%) in both patients and staff in interven- tional cardiology procedures, they were awarded the Portuguese national prize for “best practice in health care”3 by the general health authority and the association for hospital development.
The attribution of this award marked a turning point in Portugal and raised awareness among health authorities and health pro- fessionals of the importance of developing and incorporating ra- diation protection safety culture in daily healthcare practice.
Taking advantage of this momentum, the IPC-ESTESC research team started to engage with radiographers from clinical environ- ment to start implementing dose reduction strategies in CT and paediatric plain imaging, as a strategy to establish diagnostic reference levels (DRLs).4e8
Despite being mandatory since the 97/43 Euratom Directive (MED)9 and reinforced by the recast Directive 2013/59/Euratom,10 the Portuguese health authorities have never (until this date) established or adopted national DRLs.
The commitment and involvement of senior and chief radiog- raphers, together with the heads of department has allowed to translate the results of the research evidence into clinical practice and has facilitated the process of awareness, acceptance and adoption. A key factor of success has been the involvement of radiographers in the research activities, which has contributed to the development of their knowledge, skills and competences in daily clinical practice. Therefore, building solid bridges between clinical and academic environments with the objective to develop the radiographers’ ﬁeld of knowledge through evidenced-based research has been the key for the change.
The development of this new radiation protection momentum in Portugal based on research was very important and strategic as it gave evidence to policy makers and health authorities about the relevant and crucial role of radiographers in the ﬁeld of radiation protection. It was also essential for a better acknowledgement of radiographer competences in the transposition of the Council
Directive 2013/59/Euratom (BSSD e Basic Safety Standards Direc- tive)10 into Portuguese law.
Considering the importance of this topic and taking into account the visibility of the work developed in the ﬁeld of radiation pro- tection, the IPC-ESTESC, together with the Portuguese Society of Radiographers (ATARP), the Portuguese Society of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine (SPRMN), the Superior Technical Institute of Lisbon (IST) and the Brazilian Society of Radiology (CBR), with the support of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the World Health Organization (WHO), established a platform for the Portuguese Speaking Countries across the world (Angola, Brazil,
Cape Verde, Guinea  Bissau, Mozambique, Portugal, Sa~o Tome´ and
Príncipe, East Timor).
In 2015 this platform signed the “Lisbon Commitment”,11 with the objective to develop strategies to improve the quality of care delivered to patients exposed to ionising radiation, following the principles of the Bon Call for Action.12
Recognising the activities developed by IPC-ESTESC in this ﬁeld, its Medical Imaging and Radiotherapy Department was nominated a WHO Collaborative Centre for Radiation Protection and Health in December 2016,13 which has further strengthened the  importance  of radiographer-led research for the improvement of the quality of care delivered to patients in medical imaging and radiotherapy departments.
Radiographers in the European context
The new paradigm in Portugal related to radiographer-led research in the ﬁeld of radiation protection, previously described, was fortunately followed by a new momentum for radiographers in Europe. In November 2007, the establishment of the European Federation of Radiographer Societies (EFRS) was announced, which immediately boosted the visibility and recognition of the role of radiographers in Europe.
Before the establishment of the EFRS, radiographers had no formal voice at EU level and have never been involved in any Eu- ropean projects related to radiation protection research or in the discussion of topics with implications to the radiography profession.
Until that moment radiographers, as a professional group at European lev, were doomed to be reactive instead of proactive. But fortunately (better late than never) the EFRS was legally established on the 28th of March 2008,14 which opened new horizons and perspectives for radiographers across Europe.
After its legal establishment, the EFRS has been directly or indirectly involved in several European projects in the ﬁeld of ra- diation protection (e.g. EMAN, MEDRAPET, PiDRL, EUCLID, MEDI- RAD),15 which has contributed to the implementation of the concept of teamwork among the health professionals involved in the application of ionising radiation to the patients at European level.
Another milestone in this collaboration was the establishment  of the European Alliance for Medical Radiation Protection Research (EURAMED)16 in 2017, which represents a consortium of associa- tions involved in the application of ionising radiation in medicine, namely the European Association of Nuclear Medicine (EANM), the European Federation of Organizations for Medical Physics (EFOMP), the EFRS, the European Society of Radiology (ESR) and the Euro- pean Society for Radiotherapy and Oncology (ESTRO), with the goal of jointly improving medical care and its medical radiation pro- tection issues through sustainable research efforts, based on a Medical Strategic Research Agenda (SRA) to overcome current and future research gaps and to be a constructive partner in European radiation protection research.17
Another important initiative that has strongly contributed to the development of the new momentum for radiation protection in Europe is the Eurosafe Imaging Campaign (http://www. eurosafeimaging.org), led by the ESR, involving all relevant stake- holders (including the EFRS) whose mission is to support and strengthen medical radiation protection across Europe following a holistic, inclusive approach.
The EFRS signiﬁcantly increased the visibility of radiographers at European level, which was greatly enhanced by using the Eu- ropean Congress of Radiology (ECR) as the ofﬁcial EFRS congress for radiographers and adopting the peer-reviewed journal “Radiog- raphy” (from the UK Society and College of Radiographers) as its ofﬁcial scientiﬁc journal.
All these EFRS activities and achievements were crucial in pro- moting and developing the radiography profession and provided the necessary evidence to advocate and achieve an upgrade of the
ﬁ radiographers in the entire workﬂow process of medical imaging and radiotherapy and their crucial role in decreasing the patients’ risk from exposure to ionizing radiation.
Conﬂict of interest statement
None.
