<title>Manipulation robot system based on visual guidance for sealing blocking plate of steam generator</title>
<author>Xingguang Duana, Yonggui Wanga, Qingsong Liub, Meng Lia & Xiangzhan Konga</author>
<Affiliation>a Intelligent Robotic Institute, Key Laboratory of Biomimetic Robots and System, Ministry of Education, Beijing Institute of Technology, 5 Nandajie, Zhongguancun, Haidian,
Beijing 100081, China
b China Nuclear Power Technology Research Institute, Shenzhen 518000, China Published online: 29 Apr 2015.</Affiliation>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2015.1037807</DOI>
<URL> http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2015.1037807</URL>
To reduce labor intensity and irradiation exposure time inside the steam generator during the maintenance period of the nuclear power plant, a blocking plate manipulation robot system, including manipulation robot and pneumatic control console, is developed as an automatic remote-control tool to help staff to complete sealing steam generator primary pipes. The manipulation robot for fastening/loosening bolts utilizes visual guidance for target position, and the recognition algorithm is exerted to extract the bolt center coordinate values from image captured by camera in the procedure.  The control strategy based   on the position and current feedback is proposed for single bolt operation and whole bolts automatic operation. Meanwhile, the virtual interactive interface and remote monitoring are designed to improve the operability and safety. Finally, the relative experiments have verified the work effectiveness and the future work would be discussed.
Keywords: manipulation robot; steam generator; control strategy; image recognition
1.Introduction
As the development of nuclear power automation, the robot, image processing technologies have been widely applied to the special industry. To solve the problem of working in the nuclear power environment and exposure to radiation, robot application can not only lower the cost of artificial protective equipment and management cost, but also reduce the staff radia- tion dose and labor intensity [1,2]. After the Chernobyl disaster and the Fukushima disaster, more attention has been taken to nuclear safety by governments and organization.
In recent years, many robots have  been applied  in the nuclear plant. The Pioneer (RedZone robot company), which has six degrees of freedom (DOFs) arm, was an electric tracked vehicle and used for re- processing nuclear accident [3]. The radiation-resistant robot RaBOT (JAERI robot company) was a mobile robot with double arm and equipped with seven charge coupled device (CCD) cameras [4]. It could work under the γ radiation field of 10ˆ5 Sv and complete switching valves, sample collections. The PackBot robot (iRobot company, American) aimed to detect the working condition, analyzing and recording the parameters [5]. In addition, it could provide tipping self-adjusting, self-recovery communication and global position
system (GPS) positioning. The trans-world reactor vessel examination system (TWS) system (AREVA company, French) including robot, ultrasonic-phased array module and analysis system, was a general de- tection tools for reactor pressure vessel. Furthermore, other robot has also been used under the complex environment of nuclear power plant [6–8].
During the maintenance period of the nuclear power plant, the inlet and outlet of steam generator primary pipes, which are on the 40 degree slope inside the steam generator, would be blocked in order to protect the maintenance staff and guarantee the normal work of other steam generator. Now the seal of inlet and out-  let of the steam generator allows for the rubber inflat- able capsule and blocking plate. The aluminum blocking plate, which is divided into 3 parts for being convenient to carry and attaches 14 bolts in order to connect with the steam generator, is delivered into the steam gener- ator one by one from the manhole, then the staff puts the blocking plate and rubber inflatable capsule on the inlet of steam generator, as shown in Figure 1. In this way, the staff would fasten the bolt from the manhole by using a long fastening tool on which the camera was in- stalled. This process spends much time in operating the bolt and the staff also would be exposed to the radioac- tive environment (the radiation dose rate is 100 rad/h) for a longer time [9–11].
Figure 1. Blocking plate and fastening the bolt.
Therefore, a blocking plate manipulation robot sys- tem based on the visual guidance, which has the characteristics of compact structure, light weight and easy to handle, is proposed as a tool for operating bolts inside the steam generator. This system could reduce la- bor intensity and irradiation exposure time, complete operations automatically in a reliable way. Meanwhile for being close to the real operation, the 40 degree work platform is manufactured to verify robot prototype. On account of the uneven distribution of bolt location on the blocking plate, the angle between the adjacent two bolts is not the same. The camera could be involved for acquiring the bolt location. To improve the safety oper- ation, multiple security measures is designed in mecha- nism and control system.
2.System overview
According to the functional requirements, the block- ing plate manipulation robot system (in Figure 2) was
divided into the manipulation robot and pneumatic con- trol console. The manipulation robot was used for fas- tening 14 bolts with certain torque, and the pneumatic control console for sealing the rubber inflatable capsule after fastening bolts.
2.1.Manipulation robot
The manipulation robot (in Figure 3) as a system car- rier completes fastening 14 bolts in the steam generator. Because of the limitation of work space, the mechani- cal structure of the robot is compact, light-weight with quick installation and safety. Taking account for the function of fastening the bolt, the manipulation robot adapts to a typical structure of cylindrical arm with roll wrist. Therefore, the robot allows for four joints, three joints determine the target positions, and the other one is used for fastening bolt with the cooperation of first three DOFs.
As there are the installation deviation of blocking plate and the flexibility of rubber capsule, each bolt po- sition of blocking plate to robot is uncertain. Through processing the image from the camera, which is installed in the robot arm in order to keep the constant distance from the camera to the surface of blocking plate, the image recognition system could acquire the bolt cen- ter coordinates values. Then the center coordinates val- ues are converted and transferred to the blocking plate manipulation robot so that the manipulation robot com- pletes the bolt fastening
Figure 2. The blocking plate manipulation robot system.
Figure 3. Manipulation robot (model and prototype).
Figure 4. Blocking plate and rubber capsule.
2.2.Pneumatic control console
The rubber capsule is used for sealing the blocking plate. It has two inflatable chambers (wet and dry cham- ber) and an annular cavity. Pneumatic control console feeds through 30 m nylon reinforced air hoses, the two inflatable chambers and the annular cavity with air and constantly monitors the pressure in each of the three pressurized areas as shown in Figure 4. The following normal operating conditions of the seal are satisfied.
•Wet chamber dry chamber air pressure 4 bar/58 psi; no flow.
•Channel air pressure 1 bar or 14.5 psi; no flow.
•Each console is designed to control two inflatable seals nozzle capsules.
•Pressure adjustment knobs, isolation and drain valves, alarm reset switch inside the console key locked box.
•Integrated battery supplied alarm.
•Integrated 2 auto-switching air back-up tank.
•Auto-obturating air connectors.
Multiple security alarms are designed to improve the operational safety. When the emergency situation (loss of plant electric supply or air supply pressure) appears, the console could provide sequentially enough pressure, not less than 60 minutes in experiments. Any faults re-
sults automatically in local alarm (buzzer + lamps).
2.3.Workflow
The working procedure for blocking plate manipula- tion robot system is illustrated as follows.
First, the blocking plates and rubber capsule into the steam generator are delivered, the manipulation robot is mounted on the middle one of blocking plate by using fast locking mechanism and pre-tighten bolts on the in- let and outlet of the steam generator.
Next, the automatic fastening bolts operation is set up. The control system and capture image using the cam- era are initialized. The bolt center coordinate values of
the images could be obtained by the image recognition system.
Then, the control system handles the center coordi- nate values and drives the fastening device just above the bolt. The fastening device and lift joint complete fasten- ing or loosening bolts operation.
Finally, the pneumatic control console feeds the two inflatable chambers and the annular cavity with air and constantly monitors the pressure in each of the three pressurized areas.
3.Control system
The blocking plate manipulation robot aims to be easy to deliver into the steam generator, and quick instal- lation on the blocking plate. By analyzing the working space, the typical structure of the cylindrical coordinate system with roll wrist was used for completing the task on the blocking plate. Four joints are available for ma- nipulation procedures. The control system ensures the positional accuracy and safety operation. The reason- able hardware configuration is chosen and the research of control method was conducted to optimize the bolt operation.
3.1.Hardware design
The hardware design scheme of manipulation robot is illustrated in Figure 5. In order to provide enough op- erability, the driver (Elmo Motion Control Inc.) and AC motor are regarded as the driving source of each joint. Because of reliable communication, real-time, flexibility, strong robustness, long transmission distance, the dis- tributed control mode based on controller area network (CAN) bus is remarked as a competent choice [12,13]. Industrial CAN cards of peripheral component inter- connect (PCI)-50XX series can commendably fit the application scenario. CANopen protocol, a high-layer protocol based on CAN filed bus, is applied in the sce- nario, being supported by the selected CAN card. The vision device includes the camera, image collector and PCI card transmitting image information to industrial PC (IPC).
3.2.Control strategy
In order to realize the automatic operation and human intervention, the fully automatic and semi- automatic control methods are provided to the operat- ing staff. When the fully automatic control method is executing, the work staff can immediately stop the au- tomatic mode and use the semi-automatic mode to fin- ish the remaining bolts operation. In consideration of modular design of the control system, the single bolt op- eration (including fasten and loosen) method is designed as a control unit. During the operation, the control unit is called to complete the same operation toward every bolt.
Figure 5. Hardware design scheme.
To the single bolt operation, the positional accuracy is a key parameter for robot design. Through the exper- iment, the accuracy of rotation and linear joint is less than 0.09 degree and 0.46 mm, respectively. Due to the long cantilever of the joint 1, the accuracy of the end point is less than 0.798 mm when joint 1 is working. The angle change of every joint could be obtained from reading the encoder. The single bolt operation is illus- trated in Figure 6. The camera first captures the image and transmits to the IPC. Through the image recogni- tion algorithm, the bolt center coordinate values in the image could be acquired. IPC calculates the target po- sition and controls every joint to complete the bolt op- eration. In the procedure, the control mode of joints 1,
Figure 7. Fully automatic control mode.
2, 3 is position mode and joint 4 is the current mode for the reason that joint 4 provides the torque for fastening or loosening the bolt. By current feedback, the bolt with the certain torque is operated.
According to modular deigns, the fully automatic mode for 14 bolts operation is designed. In order to demonstrate the humanization design and prevent an in- terruption during operation, every bolt is given a cer- tain number to show the operation situation for staff. Because of the flexibility of rubber capsule and uneven distribution of bolt location on the blocking plate, the angle between the adjacent two bolts is unknown to the robot. The visual system could help to ensure the accu- rate location of the bolt. Therefore, the camera is moved to the top bolt within certain limits, so that the robot can acquire the center coordinate values of the bolt. In the beginning of whole bolt automatic operation, the bolt number has to be input to state the start location of op- eration. The fully automatic control mode of whole bolts operation is designed in Figure 7.
The operation of manipulation robot is carried out inside the steam generator; the monitoring camera mounted inside it by the magnetic chuck could monitor the robot. Because of the limitation of light and clarity of observation, the virtual interactive interface is designed to be convenient for observing the operation situation. It could real-time display the joint movement, operation position and the quantity of bolt handled. The interac- tive interface is designed in Figure 8.
Figure 6. The control mode of single bolt operation.
Figure 8. Interactive interface.
4.Image recognition
The image recognition system aims to capture the image, extracts that bolt center coordinate values and converts it into the joint angles [14–16]. As the struc- ture of bolt is special, identifying hexagon is more effec-tive than the circle in the process. Because the blocking plate could have a number of circular structures and it is prone to recognize other center coordinate values ratherthan the bolts, the circle is not an ideal recognition fea- ture. The camera is specially designed for radiation pro- tection due to complex working environment.
As acquiring bolts image in real-time, the light, uneven exposure and other factors brought to the image noise. Without the noise removal, image segmen- tation, image enhancement and image analysis and judg- ment would be affected. Therefore, the corresponding approach is applied in order to realize the image recog- nition and acquire the center coordinate values [17, 18]. Image recognition aims to acquire the center coordi- nate values of bolts. Through the procedure (Figure 9), the center values could be obtained. In this procedure the image binarization and identification center become key steps.Through the analysis of different image recognition
algorithms, the Canny operator could obtain optimum efficiency of edge detection. High signal noise ratio, bet-
ter positioning performance and only a single response to a single edge are the advantages  of the Canny  algo-rithm.The basic principle of the Canny algorithm is to cal-culate the gradient magnitude and direction of the Gaus-n    sian filter impulse response [19].
The gradient vectors are described in the following equation:@1
where fx(i, j ) and fy(i, j ) are the first derivative opera- tor of the smoothed image by Gaussian convolution in the direction x and y.The gradient amplitude and gradient angle are described@2
@3
where i, j is the gradient amplitude, and θi, j is the gra- dient angle.
However, geometrical figure is incomplete, which will make finding the center of bolt difficult. Besides that, the light direction and illumination have a great in- fluence on image recognition. Non-maximum suppres- sion method and two threshold judgment are applied in edge detection.
After the adjustment of threshold, a satisfied result can be obtained, as shown in Figure 10.
Through the analysis of the hexagonal spatial mo- ment, the center values of the hexagonal could be calcu- lated by
24
where	n	xi p(xi , yi )and	n	yi p(xi , yi )are the first-
order spatial moment of hexagon in x and y direction.i =1
p(xi , yi )is the spatial moment of hexagon.Then transform the center values to joint angles,
which enable the manipulation robot to get the target position, and complete fastening the bolts.
When fitting the tool end of manipulator into hexagon head bolt, it is difficult to directly insert and operate the bolt. Therefore, the phase of the tool end of manipulator robot is adjusted to align the hexagon of bolt. The methods, including mechanical structure and control strategy, are considered. The spline struc- ture and buffer spring are used in the tool end of ma- nipulator in order to avoid the rigid damage and keep
Figure 9. Process of image recognition.
contact force. The position and torque control method  is adapted. When the tool end moves down to a certain position, the tool end begins to spin with slow speed. In the position control, the relational angles and laps are conducted with the slow rotation and fall of tool end. According to a large number of experimental data, this method could ensure the tool end move down into the hexagon of bolt. Then the torque control is used with
Figure 10. Result of image recognition.
the current feedback. The bolt is deemed to have been tightened until the output torque of tool is up to the tar- get torque. In addition, the tool of manipulator reverses a small angle in order to release the tightening torque af- ter having reached the target torque. At the same time, the time of operating a blot is monitored. Once it exceeds one time threshold and the tightening torque is still less than the target torque, this operation is considered a fail- ure and the tool is back to the initial position. If the fail- ure situation happens, the operation is performed again and fed back to the interface.
5.Result and discussion
The blocking plate manipulation robot system aims to realize the bolt operation in the steam generator. In this robot system, the weight of robot is less than 25 kg, which is convenient for delivering into the steam gen- erator.  The output torque from the motor 4 could be  set according to the requirement between0   20N   m. If the axis deviation between the tool end of the ma- nipulator robot and the bolt is more than 1 mm, it is likely to lead to the operation failure. Therefore, posi- tioning accuracy of less than 1 mm is one of the design and use requirements. The positioning accuracy experi- ment of robot is conducted with optical navigation (NDI Canada), which could determine the three-dimensional coordinates of spatial point in its workspace. In the ex- periment, the measurement tool of optical navigation   is fixed on the end-effector of robot arm as a mea- surement point. The robot is driven from one position to another position and the corresponding joint angles are recorded. The theoretical value of distance between two positions is derived and calculated according to the robot kinematic. The actual value is calculated by the coordinates of measurement tool. By comparing the the- oretical and actual values, the positioning accuracy of robot could be obtained. The positioning accuracy of robot could be obtained through measuring equipment as shown in Figure 11. In the 10 tests, the accuracy was less than 0.798 mm, the average 0.6242 mm and the min- imum 0.471 mm. The result satisfied the design and use requirement.
Figure 11. Positioning accuracy of the robot.
The bolt center coordinate values is extracted from the image, this step is decisive for the whole robot system. During the experiment, the light had an influence on acquiring the bolt center coordinate values especially the evening without light. As the light inside the steam generator is not enough, so the light source (LED) is installed around the camera and could provide enough light to improve the visual system. The camera is radiation-proof to test in the real environment. In or- der to test the efficiency of extracting bolt central val- ues, the procedure in which the robot moves to some positions, the image is captured and the central values is extracted which is repeated about 100 times. The result shows that every time the center coordinate values could be obtained. But the failure occasionally happened with uncertain reason during experiments of eight months. To avoid the consequences causing by failure, the cor- responding method is applied in the procedure. If the failure happened, the joint 1 moves a small angle (0.1de- gree) and the camera captures the image again until get- ting the central values.
The robot system aims to improve work efficiency and reduce worker’s radiation exposure time. The radia- tion dose rate of work environment in the steam genera- tor is 100 rad/h. When blocking plate is placed on the inlet or outlet of steam generator primary pipes, the workers use a long fastening tool (about 2.5 meters) with the camera to fasten/loosen bolts from the manhole. In this way, the process takes about 9 minutes according  to the field workers. The repeated and missing opera- tions are likely to occur in general. By contrast, the robot takes about 2 minutes and the workers could reduce the radiation exposure time. Once the process operation is replaced by the robot system, the radiation dose of one worker exposure reduces more than 15 rad for inlet or outlet of steam generator every time. According to the maintenance times of one steam generator every year (twice maintenance and two ports of steam generator), more than 60 rad radiation dose of worker exposure would be reduced.
For our cooperator, China Nuclear Power Technol- ogy Research Institute has built the reactor equipment according to the actual size to serve as test range of re- search equipment without radiating material, including reactor, steamer generator, MSTM (multi stud tension- ing machine) as shown in Figure 12. A lot of experiments
Figure 12. Experiment field.
have been implemented inside the steam generator to verify the effectiveness of the blocking plate manipula- tion robot system.
Even though the prototype has been verified, there would be more important experiments to be conducted until applying the real environment. The operation of manipulation robot and pneumatic control console should be implemented under different environment (temperature, humidity, light). In consideration of the radiation protection, some measures have been designed in the manipulation. The camera is specially designed for radiation protection and the cables have shielding layer inside. In order to decontamination, the sleek designs have been involved into the design of the robot and shell. In the future, the experiment under the irradiation envi- ronment will be attempted to verify the blocking plate manipulation robot system.
6.Conclusion
This paper introduces a manipulation robot system based on visual guidance for sealing blocking plate of steam generator, which is divided into the manipulation robot and pneumatic control console. To achieve high positioning accuracy and safety operation, the reason- able hardware configuration is chosen and the research of control strategy is conducted to optimize the bolt operation. Fully automatic and semi-automatic control methods are proposed to improve the automatic oper- ation and human intervention. In addition, the recog- nition algorithm is illustrated to extract the bolt cen-  ter coordinate values from image in the process. Finally, the positioning accuracy experiments and field test were conducted to verify the work effectiveness.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National High Technol- ogy Research and Development program of CHINA [grant number 2011AA040201].
