<title>Nurses’ knowledge of radiation protection: A cross-sectional study</title>
<author>L. Hirvonen， T. Schroderus-Salo, A. Henner, S. Ahonen, M. Ka€a€ria€inen,
J. Miettunen, K. Mikkonen </author>
<Affiliation>a.Research Unit of Nursing Science and Health Management, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland
b.Research Unit of Nursing Science and Health Management, University of Oulu, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland
c.Degree Programme in Radiography and Radiation Therapy, Oulu University of Applied Sciences, Kiviharjuntie 4, 90220, Oulu, Finland
d.University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland
e.Medical Research Center Oulu, Oulu University Hospital and University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland
f.Center for Life Course Health Research, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland
g.Central Finland Health Care District,  Jyva€skyla€, Finland</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Radiography</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radi.2019.04.0111078-8174</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radi.2019.04.0111078-8174</URL>
ABSTRACT
Introduction: Nursing roles are changing, as several countries have amended legislation so that nurses can make referrals for medical imaging examination that utilize ionising radiation. Nevertheless, nurses' radiation knowledge remains a poorly studied concept. The aim of the study was to characterize Finnish nurses’ knowledge of radiation use and radiation safety. In this study, nurses were working in operating theaters, ﬁrst aid clinics and cardiology laboratories.
Methods: A cross-sectional design was applied in which data were simultaneously collected from nurses working in eight hospitals. All nurses working in operating theaters, ﬁrst aid clinics and cardiology laboratories (N ¼ 1500) at the hospitals in Finland were invited to participate in the study. The response rate was 17% (n ¼ 252). The employed Healthcare Professional Knowledge of Radiation Protection (HPKRP) scale included three areas of knowledge: radiation physics, biology and principles of radiation use; radiation protection; and guidelines of safe ionizing radiation use. Descriptive statistics and logistic regression analyses were used to identify factors that inﬂuence these three areas.
Results: Nurses reported high knowledge levels in radiation protection but low knowledge levels in radiation physics, biology and principles of radiation use. Moreover, nurses who had not received radi- ation education reported lower knowledges across all three areas than the nurses who had completed education.
Conclusion: This study identiﬁed one major factor that signiﬁcantly affects nurses’ radiation knowledge, namely, having completed medical radiation education, as this factor positively inﬂuenced all three of the included areas of radiation knowledge factors. Therefore, healthcare organizations should concen- trate on providing education to all nurses working with, or exposed to, radiation.
Keywords: Education Ionising radiation Knowledge
Nurse Safety
Radiation protection
Introduction
The extent to which nurses use, and are exposed to, ionizing radiation in their daily work varies  internationally and  depends on their speciﬁc work  assignments.1e4  Hence,  several  studies have investigated nurses' levels of exposure to ionizing radiation.5,6 Today, its use is covered by guidelines issued by international radiation safety organizations.7 In addition, in Eu- ropean countries, its use in healthcare settings is governed by regulations set by the European Council. Individual  countries  may also have their own national regulations and guidelines, such as the Radiation Act (859/2018) that governs use of ionizing radiation in Finland.3 In recent years, nurses in several countries have been given the right to make referrals for medical imaging examinations that utilize radiation.  For  example,  nurses  have  this right in the Republic of Ireland, provided they have sufﬁcient training.8 These changes raise important questions regarding the required level of radiation knowledge and guarantees that all of  the relevant nursing staff acquire it.8,9 Another issue relates to the overlapping involvement of distinct professional groups (nurses, doctors and radiographers with varying degrees of expertise and  specialization).  This  complicates  implementation  of the changes, since evaluating the level of radiation knowledge among different occupational groups is complex.8 Moreover, this shift in nurses’ responsibilities is accompanied by a continuing need to modify their training to improve their understanding of uses, beneﬁts and risks of ionizing radiation8,10 Thus, interna-  tional studies have identiﬁed a need for further research on the current level of radiation knowledge among nurses working in relevant environments,5,6,8,10,11 to  identify  deﬁciencies  and facilitate formulation of the most effective educational in- terventions to meet the new requirements.
Previous studies have noted a general lack of radiation educa- tion among nurses working with radiation,5,12 and various coun- tries’ radiation safety policies impose few (if any) requirements for nurses to have such education.13 In Finland, only a few universities of applied sciences provide modules related to radiation safety in nurse education programs.
In their workplaces, nurses receive radiation training according to stipulations in the Radiation Act (859/2018), i.e. if their work requires use of radiation and their basic education did not include a radiation module.3 Nurses working in operating theaters, ﬁrst aid clinics or cardiology laboratories who work with ﬂuoroscopic medical imaging equipment must meet medical radiation knowl- edge criteria set in the Regulation of Ionizing Radiation (1044/2018) before starting work, and receive 20 h of additional training during the next ﬁve years.4 The completion of this training, either at the place of work or at an educational institution, is intended to ensure that nurses have sufﬁcient competence to work in environments where radiation is used and/or there are risks of signiﬁcant expo- sure to above-background radiation.
To ensure that nurses have sufﬁcient radiation knowledge (deﬁned here as an individual's ability to use radiation in a safe manner) it is ﬁrst essential to establish their current level of knowledge, and identify speciﬁc deﬁciencies. To assist such efforts, in this study the radiation knowledge of Finnish nurses was gauged using the Healthcare Professional Knowledge of Radiation Protec- tion (HPKRP) scale,15 which is designed to provide indications of three areas of radiation knowledge. These are: radiation physics and principles of radiation use in a medical context3e5; radiation protection, covering the protection of patients and personnel from ionizing radiation3,5,14; and guidelines for medical radiation use, concerning knowledge about international and national guidelines for safe use of radiation.3,7
Methods
Aim
The aim of the study was to characterize Finnish nurses’ knowledge of radiation use and radiation safety. In this study, nurses were working in operating theaters, ﬁrst aid clinics and cardiology laboratories.
Two speciﬁc research questions were addressed:
1.What is these nurses' current level of radiation knowledge?
2.What background factors affect their knowledge of radiation use and safety?
Study design
A cross-sectional design was applied, in which data were simultaneously collected from nurses working in eight hospitals.
Participants and settings
All nurses working in operating theaters, ﬁrst aid clinics and cardiology laboratories (N 1500) at four randomly selected uni- versity hospitals and four randomly selected central hospitals in Finland were invited to participate in the study. Thus, stratiﬁed random sampling based on territorial division of the Finnish healthcare system was applied. Inclusion criteria were that nurses had to be working in a unit where s/he may use ionizing radiation or be exposed to it, and had received radiation education in the form of a course or module(s) in a degree program. Nurses who are exposed to radiation daily are usually working in operating the- atres, ﬁrst aid clinics and cardiology laboratories in Finland. In such units no radiographer may be present, so nurses may have sub- stantial responsibility. Invitations and questionnaires were sent to the nurses at the end of spring and beginning of autumn 2017. The response rate was 17% (n ¼ 252).
Instrument
The questionnaire was self-administered and consisted of background questions and the HPKRP scale items, which (as mentioned above) are divided into three sections. Background questions covered age, gender, work experience, educational level and information about the nurses' hospital and working unit. The Healthcare Professional Knowledge of Radiation Protection (HPKRP) scale15 was developed for this study by the authors and used to evaluate the radiation knowledge of participating nurses. The scale's three sections cover the following areas or dimensions of radiation knowledge: Radiation physics, biology and principles of radiation use (12 items); Radiation protection (13 items); and Guidelines for safe ionizing radiation use (8 items). Participants scored aspects of their radiation knowledge speciﬁed in the items using a 10-point Likert-scale, ranging from 1 (no knowledge) to 10 (full knowledge). Thus, the scale has been designed to obtain high- accuracy information about participants' self-reported knowledge of multiple aspects of radiation and its use. It has been psycho- metrically tested, and found to have adequate face, content and construct validity,14 with Cronbach's alpha coefﬁcients ranging  from 0.93 to 0.96 and an overall S-CVI value of 0.83.
Data collection
All 1500 nurses working in operating theaters, ﬁrst aid clinics and cardiology laboratories at the selected hospitals were invited to participate in the study by an email that was sent via their supe- riors. Due to a low response rate, this initial email was followed by three weekly reminders by the researchers (TSS, LH) to the supe- riors during the study, and on each occasion the superiors conﬁrmed receipt of the reminder. All data were collected through the Webpropol survey program, which participants could access via a link in the e-mail. Participants’ responses were anonymous and processed following published principles of good research practice.
Data analysis
The data were analyzed using SPSS versions 23.0 and 24.0 (IBM Corporation, Armonk, NY). Background data were analyzed with descriptive statistics, and presented as percentages, means and standard deviations. Logistic regression was used to analyze whether any of the background factors were related to a nurse's radiation knowledge, with binary logistic regression models built using the forced entry method, as implemented in the software.  The outcome variables were transformed from Likert scale
responses into dichotomous variables (0 for scores of 1.00e4.99 and 1 for scores of 5.00e10.00, designated ‘lower’ and ‘higher’ knowledge, respectively). The goodness-of-ﬁt of the models was assessed with the Omnibus test of model coefﬁcients, Cox & Snell and Nagelkerke R square tests, and the Hosmer and Lemeshow test, as implemented in the software. The results were investigated and presented as odds ratios with conﬁdence intervals of 95%.16 Sta- tistical signiﬁcance was set at p < 0.05. Effect sizes were measured using the odds ratios of statistically signiﬁcant results, and inter- preted according to the following thresholds: 1.5- small, 2.5- moderate, 4- large, and 10 every large.17e19
Ethical considerations
Research permission was granted by all eight selected hospitals. In addition, the research committee of each hospital and head  nurse of each work unit involved approved the research. The study was conducted according to principles of good research practice and respect for human dignity.20 The study did not require permission from an ethics committee since it did not involve pa- tients, underage children, or vulnerable research areas that could cause psychological or physical harm to participants.21
Results
Of the 252 participating nurses, most (215, 85%) were female. The nurses had various educational backgrounds: 157 (62%) had a bachelor's degree from a university of applied sciences, 13 (6%) had a master's degree, and 82 (33%) had a diploma. Most of the participating nurses, 163 (65%), had completed separate medical radiation education that was not connected to their educational degree, but the other 89 (35%) had received no such education (Table 1).
The mean values for the three dimensions of radiation knowl- edge, measured using a 10-point Likert scale, varied between 3.79 and 6.46 (Table 2). Participating nurses scored their knowledge of radiation protection most highly (mean 6.46, SD 2.40), followed by
Table 1
Background information of the nurses (n ¼ 252).
guidelines for safe radiation use (mean 4.77, SD 2.55), and radiation physics and principles of radiation use (mean 3.79, SD 2.26).
Logistic regression analysis showed that educational level, medical radiation education and nurse's work unit correlated with each assessed dimension of radiation knowledge (Table 3). Nurses with a master's degree from a university of applied sciences re- ported signiﬁcantly higher levels of knowledge of radiation physics, biology and principles of radiation use than nurses with diploma- level education (OR		0.07, 95% CI		0.07e0.80,  p	0.03). Simi- larly, nurses who had completed medical radiation education re- ported signiﬁcantly higher levels of this knowledge than nurses who   had   not   completed   such   education   (OR		0.16, 95% CI 0.06e0.41, p < 0.01). The nurses' work units were also linked to self-rated knowledge in this dimension. For example, nurses working in a cardiology laboratory unit reported higher levels of knowledge of radiation physics and principles of radiation use than operating theater nurses (OR	5.62, 95% CI 2.14e14.80, p < 0.01). Nurses who had received medical radiation education also re- ported signiﬁcantly higher levels of knowledge of radiation pro- tection  than  nurses  who  had  not  completed such  education (OR		0.21, 95% CI	0.10e0.44, p < 0.01). Age was also correlated with radiation knowledge, as nurses in the 38e47 years age group reported signiﬁcantly higher levels of knowledge of guidelines for safe  radiation  use  than  nurses  who  were   18e27   years   old (OR		0.34, 95% CI	0.12e0.96,   p	0.04). Once again, nurses who had completed medical radiation education reported higher levels of radiation knowledge in knowledge of guidelines for safe radia- tion  use  than  nurses  who  had  not  done  so  (OR		0.20, 95% CI	0.10e0.41, p < 0.01). Classiﬁcation of logistic regression model ranged from 71.40% to 82.1%. The effect sizes calculated from the binary  logistic  regression  were  moderate  (OR  ¼ 2.94),  large (OR ¼ 4.09, OR ¼ 4.76, OR ¼ 5.00, OR ¼ 5.62, OR ¼ 6.25), or very
large (OR ¼ 14.3).
Discussion
The presented research revealed that participating nurses rated their  knowledge  of  radiation  protection  more  highly (6.46 on average, on the 10-point Likert scale) than their knowledge of the other two tested dimensions of radiation knowledge. The indication that nurses have relatively good understanding of radiation protection measures is reassuring, given the importance of radiation protection for people  who  may be exposed to it.22 The participating nurses scored their knowledge of guidelines for safe radiation use second highest,  but the mean Likert score was just 4.77 (in the  ‘lower’  cate-  gory). They reported that they were adept at using  warning  signs in radiation safety, but lacked knowledge about reporting abnormal radiation use  and  health  monitoring.  Shortcomings  in knowledge of radiation safety protocols and measures have been previously noted,9 and should clearly be addressed to ensure the safe use of radiation.23
The lowest reported knowledge levels (mean Likert score just 3.79) were for the dimension of radiation physics and principles of radiation use. Moreover, the item eliciting the lowest score (3.59) concerned knowledge of the ALARA (As Low As Reasonably Achievable) principle. Lack of knowledge of this key principle has been noted (and previously raised concerns) internationally.5,23 Another important ﬁnding is that the nurses  felt  that  they  had not received enough radiation education, as also previously dis- cussed.5 However, their educational level and completion of med- ical radiation education were both positively correlated with their knowledge of radiation physics and principles of radiation use. In addition (and perhaps more importantly) nurses working in car- diology laboratory units reported signiﬁcantly higher levels of this
Table 2
HPKRP-scale's items and sub-dimensions of competence (n ¼ 252).
knowledge than operating theater nurses. This is consistent with previous ﬁndings that nurses working in radiology departments have more knowledge of radiation physics and basic radiation use
than colleagues working elsewhere (including those engaged in ﬂuoroscopic examinations in operation theaters).5 It should be noted that radiation doses are relatively high in operation theaters
Table 3
Background factors related to three areas of radiation knowledge (n ¼ 252).
compared to the conventional radiation examinations, thus a lack of knowledge about radiation use among nurses working in them poses higher health risks. In conclusion, healthcare organizations should pay more attention to provisions of radiation education for nurses working outside radiology departments, and more generally seek to improve knowledge of radiation and foster a culture of ra- diation awareness and safety.23
The need to improve education is supported by  another ﬁnding, of a clear difference in knowledge of radiation protection between nurses who had and had not received radiation edu- cation. This corroborates previous reports that formal radiation safety training outside of work is positively linked to knowledge  of radiation safety,9 and lack of knowledge of  radiation protec- tion increases risks of adverse events.12 Our results also indicate that education improves knowledge of guidelines for safe radi- ation use, and this knowledge is associated with nurses’ work units. In overall conclusion, education is essential  for  ensuring that staff effectively implement relevant rules and procedures for safe radiation use,24 improving the safety culture among  radia- tion users, and adhering to both national and international guidelines.
Limitations
This study had several limitations. The results for nurses working in a cardiology laboratory regarding knowledge of radi- ation physics, biology and principles of radiation use, had very wide conﬁdence intervals and should therefore be  interpreted  with   caution   (for  example  OR       5.62,   95%   CI       2.14e14.80,  p < 0.01). The large differences in sample sizes of nurses working in  the  three  included  kinds  of  work  unitsdoperating  theaters   (n     170),  cardiology  laboratories  (n      29)  and  ﬁrst  aid  clinics (n 53)dmight have also affected outcomes of the study. The differences in sample size and generally low response rates should also be considered when generalizing the presented results. Po- wer analysis before the study could have been helpful for deter- mining required sample sizes and strengthening the prediction of size effects, but it was not possible since we found no previous studies of the same scale or similar studied phenomena. However, the STROBE checklist was used throughout the planning, con- ducting and reporting of the study in efforts to improve its quality.25
Conclusion
The study identiﬁed a major factor that signiﬁcantly affected nurses' radiation knowledge: completion of medical radiation ed- ucation, which was positively correlated with all three tested di- mensions of radiation knowledge. Therefore, healthcare organizations should improve provisions of education for all nurses working with, or exposed to, radiation. The results show the importance of radiation knowledge and most importantly, the role of education in ensuring safe medical radiation use. However, further studies are needed to identify optimal interventions to address deﬁciencies in nurses’ radiation knowledge, and this is particularly important in Finland, where changes to the radiation act are being considered.
Conﬂict of interest statement
None.
Acknowledgement
We thank the nurses who took their time to answer the survey and participate in the research. We would also like to acknowledge Sees-Editing Ltd. (http://www.sees-editing.co.uk) service for improving the language and helping us to communicate our ﬁnd- ings to readers of the Journal.
Funding statement: None.
