<title>Nanoscopic designs of radiological protection in environmental scale for the Fukushima nuclear accident: Strategy by dispersion, dissolution, and filtration</title>
<author>Tae Ho Woo</author>
<Affiliation>Department of Radiation Convergence Engineering, Yonsei University, 1  Yonseidae-gil, Wonju, Gangwon-do  26493, Republic of Korea  Department of Mechanical and Control Engineering, The Cyber University of Korea, 106 Bukchon-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul 03051, Republic of Korea Systemix Global Co. Ltd., 3 F, 494-48, Yonggang-dong, Mapo-Gu, Seoul 04162, Republic of Korea</Affiliation>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2015.10.019  </DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2015.10.019 </URL>
ABSTRACT
The environmental defense system in the nuclear power plants (NPPs) is investigated in the aspect of the environmental scale incorporated with atmospheric and marine sectors. The object is to find the radio- logical protection protocol in the environmental scale which is different from the conventional three kinds of radiological protection principles. Conventional laboratory based principles are not applicable in the mass failure accident such as the case of Fukushima disaster. This newly introduced protocol   has many useful applications for the nature treatment oriented methods where the atmospheric protec- tion of dispersion and dissolution is performed first and the filtration of seawater would follow. The max- imum and minimum values in fan velocity are about 7.5 m/s and 5.3 m/s respectively. For the spray system, the mole fractions by the water spray are shown where maximum and minimum values are
6.57 × 10—17 and 8.84 × 10—19 moles respectively. The maximum and minimum values of discharged val- ues in filtration are 99.4 and 1.3 square velocity (m/s), respectively. The total and general radiological protection concept is suggested in the nanoscopic molecular scale performance.
Keywords:
Environment
Monte-Carlo simulations Radiological protection Dispersion
Dissolution Filtration
1.Introduction
The radiation contamination is very serious matter in the life for the people who live around Fukushima area. Especially, following the nuclear accident, the Japanese food markets have been collapsed due to the radiation contaminations. Tables 1 and 2 show the trend of import and export of Agricultural raw products, Forest products and Seafood products (Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries (MAFF, 2012)). The import of products has increased after Fukush- ima nuclear disaster. In addition, the neighbor nations had been in turmoil during a few years after the accident on many areas includ- ing food and living pattern. In the case of South Korea, the seafood market had collapsed for a while right after the accident, although the major seafood import from Japan had been prohibited at that time. The seemingly contaminated Japanese food has provoked the psychological disorder by the possible radiation damage (ABC Nightly News, 2014; Fox news, 2013; Terashima, 2014).
After the accident, the radioactive material has spread out around world. Although the quantities of the hazard radioactive material are variable following the region, this accident induced material has reached to many areas. It is important to  consider new kinds of radiological protection strategy comparing to the conventional principles of distance, time, and shielding. Fig. 1 shows the distances form Fukushima site to major cities. According to the radiological protection concept, the distance is one of impor- tant factors. Although the far distance region is better in the pro- tection, it is needed to consider the method in the environmental scale. The amounts of radioactive materials released into  the  air are as follows, the evaluation was done from  March  12  to  31,  2011 (TEPCO, 2012),
Noble gas: Approx. 5	1017 Bq.
131I: Approx. 5	1017 Bq. 134Cs: Approx. 1		1016 Bq. 137Cs: Approx. 1		1016 Bq.
The amounts of radioactive materials released in April and later in 2011 are not taken into account in this evaluation result as the released amounts were less than 1% of that in March 2011, which are considered to be insignificant (TEPCO, 2012). The amounts of radioactive materials released into the ocean are as follows, the evaluation was done from March 26 to September 30,  2011 (TEPCO, 2012),
Table 1
National import trend in Japan.
Table 2
National export trend in Japan.
Fig. 1. Distances from Fukushima site to major cities.
Urban Area
131I: Approx. 1.1	1016 Bq.
134Cs: Approx. 3.5	1015 Bq.
137Cs: Approx. 3.6	1015 Bq.
Using the data, the modeling is performed for the radiological protection estimation. Total of atmospheric released radioactive material is a summation of the above values as 1.02	1018 Bq. In the same way, the quantity of oceanic released radioactive material is a summation of the above values as 1.82	1016 Bq. Hence, the activity quantity is calculated in the molecular related equations. It is important to know there are several assumptions to solve the non-linear situations in which the incoming radioactive mate- rial is variable by random numbers. The object of this study is to find the radiological protection protocol in the environmental scale which is different from the conventional three kinds of radiological protection principles as distance, time and shielding. The exact numbers of leak atom numbers of the  broken nuclear fuels. The raw data are from the site with approximated values. The quantity was oscillated by the accident scenarios. Although there are many uncertainties, it is meaningful to design to remove the hazard radioactive material in the environmental scale instead of the con- ventional radiological protection concept (Hassey, 1987; Hrncir
and Necas, 2013).
2.Method
In the modeling, there are 3 kinds of processes are proposed for the new radiological protection tools as dispersion, dissolution and filtration. Conventional radiological protection has been modified to apply to the wide range of region from laboratory scale to global environmental scale. Although the complete removal of hazard radiation is impossible, the local area including one nation scale could be under control with the regulated dose limit. The disper- sion could be  made  by  the  ventilation  systems  which  are  in  Fig. 2 (Woo, 2012). In the calculations, the Monte-Carlo simula- tions have performed in the each variable.
The mathematical equation is described for the mechanics of ventilation system which is from the aerodynamics algorithms (Chanute, 1997; Clancy, 1975; Hirschel, 2004). Using the simplified momentum equation in  (2.1),  the velocity  of air  flow  is shown
(Woo, 2012). vo  (m/s) is the input air, ve  (m/s) is the exit air, and the velocity of the  fan is  vp  (m/s). In  vo  (m/s), this is  obtained by
Fig. 2. Configuration of radiation dispersion by fan system in urban area.
random number generations due to the velocity change of incom- ing air which is frequently variable.@1
@2
@3
@4
where q (g/cm3) is the density and A (cm2) is area of the air flow. This velocity is used to the fan operation energy. In addition, the dissolution of radioactive material is described in the Fig. 3 (Woo, 2012). Using some modifications,@5
This means the length of moving radioactive material in which the position of arbitrary radioactive material is with the specified radioactivity.    In    the    calculation,    the    inputted   radioactivity
decreases by exponential form.  Furthermore,   using  the  transport
trend will be seen in the figures. This could be used in the NPPs during the early stage of the accident (Woo, 2014). To find out      the mole number, one can use the following equation,
equation, it is possible to conclude that the number of particle con- centration  is  directly  proportional  to  vp   (m/s)  and  indirectly  pro- portional to distance from the particle source.In addition, the solubility of radioactive material in water can be calculated with the general equation in (2.6). The solution for mole fraction is as follows (Rosenberg and Epstein, 1997), using ideal gas law,@6
For the pressure dependent effect consideration and some manipulations (Suzuki et al., 1970),@7
Fig. 3. Configuration of radiation dissolution by rain system in urban area.
@8
@9
where n (mole) is in mole, Ni (mole fraction) is the mole fraction of the i-th component in the solution, T (K) is the temperature, P (atm) is the pressure, Vi sol (l) is the partial molar volume of the i-th com- ponent in the solution, and Vi, dis (l) is the partial molar volume of the i-th component in the dissolving solid which is variable by ran- dom number sampling, because the values are changeable. R is the universal gas  constant  of which value is  0.08206 l atm/mol K. The
melting point of nuclear fuel for UO2 is 2865 °C ( 3,138.15 K) assumed as the temperature of the radioactive material. The tem-
perature of the solution is 20 °C in this work. In the equation, the Vi sol (l) and Vi, dis (l) are proportional to the each mole. The sea water solution is assumed as the 1000 and the trend of the dissolving trend will be seen in the figures. This could be used in the NPPs during the early stage of the accident (Woo, 2014). To find out      the mole number, one can use the following equation,
@10
where NA is 6.02 1023 number/mole. T1/2 (s) is half-life of time. a
is a constant. So, there are values in the Tables 3 and 4 for atmo- sphere and ocean respectively. In the noble gas, the contents are assumed as Half-life (Xe-133) is 5.2475 days  and Half-life (Kr-85)  is 10.752 years (NNDC, 2013). The value is used as the mean value, 1.698 108 s. So, n (mole) is 203.5 mol.
Furthermore, the filtration of radioactive material is applicable
in the contaminated sea water. Although the enormous funds are needed  to  be  effective,  the  theoretical  application  is imaginable.
molecule in the sea to reach to anywhere eventually. Unless the half-life of the radioactive element is much shorter than the time   of radioactive material approach to the human, it is necessary to remove the contaminated matter from sea water. The filtration could be usable near the land which is seen in Fig. 4. The scavenger ship makes the filtering the radioactive contaminated  seawater. For the equation for filtration, several kinds of filtration methods are considered. The microfiltration and ultra-filtration could be used for the filtering radioactive material (Cheryan, 1998). The size of object to be filtered is about 0.1–10 lm in microfiltration and about 1 nm–0.1 lm in ultra-filtration (Cheryan, 1998). For these filtrations, Darcy’s law is used which is a phenomenological
Table 3
Radioactive material in atmosphere.
Table 4
Radioactive material in ocean.
Fig. 4. Configuration of radiation filtering by scavenger ship.
Fig. 5. New radiation protection concept.
constitutive equation of the flow through a porous medium as follows (Darcy, 1856; Kanny and Mohan, 2014);
@11
where Q (m3/s) is total discharge, k (m2) is the intrinsic permeabil- ity of the medium, A (m2) is the cross-sectional area to flow, (Pb–Pa) is the pressure drop, l (Pa s) is the viscosity, and L (m) is the length over which the pressure drop is taking place. So, the pressure drop
is the important factor to describe the filtration process. For the pressure relation, the dynamic pressure is applied to this algorithm, which is useful for the incompressible flow like water. The equation is written as follows (Clancy, 1975);@12
where Dp is dynamic pressure (Pa), q is density (kg/m3) and v is velocity (m/s) which is generated by random number due to the variable characteristics of the sea velocity. Therefore, the pressure is related to the velocity of seawater in the scavenger ship. Then,@13
So, the higher velocity can discharge of radioactive material as molecular state. This velocity is decided by the speed of  ship. If the ship moves with parallel to the seawater, the velocity of water will decrease.
Fig. 6. The results of the ventilation system (a) fan velocity by time (Y-axis unit: m/ s), (b) length of radioactive material traveling (Y-axis unit: m), (c) radioactivity of fall out material in the atmosphere (Y-axis unit: Bq.).
3.Results
The Fig. 5 shows the radiation protection diagram using radia- tion shielding and water spray, where the radiation shielding is made by the defense in depth and multiple barrier concepts. The environmental radiological protection system can be constructed using the ventilation system. In addition, water spray can dissolve the radioactive material. Also, the filtration can remove the radioactive material in the seawater. For the results of the ventila- tion system in Fig 6, Fig. 6(a) is the fan velocity by time, Fig. 6(b) is the length of radioactive material traveling, and Fig. 6(c) is the radioactivity of fall out material in the atmosphere where the
Fig. 7. The results of spray system (a) modified mole fraction by the radioactive fallout (Y-axis unit: mole number weighted by random number), (b) modified mole fraction by the water spray (Y-axis unit: mole fraction).
quantity is assumed to be decreased as an exponential scale. The maximum and minimum values in Fig. 6(a) are 7.487 m/s and
5.295 m/s respectively.
For the spray system in Fig. 7, Fig. 7(a) is the mole fraction by the radioactive fallout. The maximum and minimum values are
103.63 and 2.0    10—7 moles respectively where the molar volume   is assumed as the mole number. The solution volume is assumed as 1000 mol. Fig. 7(b) is the mole fraction by the water spray where maximum   and   minimum    values    are    6.566    10—17    and 8.840 10—19 moles respectively.
In the filtration of the seawater in Fig. 8, Fig. 8(a) is the radioac- tivity of fall out material where the quantity is assumed  to  decrease as an exponential scale and Fig. 8(b) is the discharge vari- ations in the sea. Hence, the filtering rate is the adverse values of the discharged values. The maximum and minimum values are
99.402 and 1.302 square velocity respectively.
4.Conclusions
New kinds of radiological protection strategy are suggested. The conventional method is distance, time, and shielding, which is effective comparatively in the small sized laboratory scale space. So, it is needed to consider in the different aspect of environmental scale as the dispersion, dissolution, and filtration in which the  value are obtained as the nano-scale molecules. It is constructed    of the radiological protection for the new strategy in which the dis-
Fig. 8. The results of filtration system (a) radioactivity of fall out material in the sea (Y-axis unit: Bq.), (b) discharge variation in the sea (Y-axis unit: square velocity).
persion (ventilation system), dissolution (spray system), and filtra- tion (filtration system) are combined followed by the situational status.
The operator can manage the radiological protection proce- dures. This could be used for the political protocol for any possible nuclear accident. There are some significant conclusions of the modeling as follows,
New kind of radiological protection concept is introduced.
The shielding concept is accompanied with the water spray system.
The solubility of radioactive material could be used for protection.
●Practical method is suggested.
●The system is variable by the random number quantities.
There are some other applications by the above methods. The contaminated-air induced smog could be manageable by the ven- tilation system. Although the local region is manageable, the effect could be useful comparing the case in non-preparing situation in the air pollution state. In addition, it is useful for the chemical stuff related matters. For example, the chemical accident is one of example for the applications. Hazard material can be resolved in the liquid type substance where the dissolution is major factor to control an accident situation. The seawater can be contaminated easily by the oil leakage in the oil carrying ship accident. The filter- ing is very important method to remove hazard material.
This paper shows the combined method can increase the effect of radiological protection in the environmental state. Hence, the national level strategy should be proposed in the case of nuclear accident in which it is not easy for the personnel to do anything effectively due to the confused situation. The prepared manual could be usable in the case of nuclear accident.
