<title>Development and validation of a psychometric scale for assessing healthcare professionals' knowledge in radiation protection</title>
<author>T. Schroderus-Salo, L. Hirvonen, A. Henner, S. Ahonen, M. Ka€a€ria€inen ,
J. Miettunen, K. Mikkonen </author>
<Affiliation>a.Research Unit of Nursing Science and Health Management, University of Oulu, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland
b.Degree Programme in Radiography and Radiation Therapy, Oulu University of Applied Sciences, Kiviharjuntie 4, 90220 Oulu, Finland
c.Academic Affairs, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland
d.Medical Research Center Oulu, Oulu University Hospital and University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland
e.Center for Life Course Health Research, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Radiography</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radi.2018.12.0101078-8174</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radi.2018.12.0101078-8174</URL>
ABSTRACT
Introduction: Healthcare professionals must sufﬁciently understand ionising radiation and the associated protection measures to avoid unnecessarily exposing patients and staff to ionising radiation. Hence, a proper safety culture is important to lowering health risks. The development and establishment of an instrument that can indicate healthcare professionals' understanding/knowledge of radiation protection concepts can greatly contribute to a good safety culture.
The purpose of the present study was to develop and psychometrically test the Healthcare Professional Knowledge of Radiation Protection (HPKRP) self-evaluation scale, which was designed to measure the knowledge level of radiation protection by healthcare professionals working with ionising radiation in a clinical environment.
Methods: The presented research employed a cross-sectional study design. Data were collected from eight Finnish hospitals in 2017. A total of 252 eligible nurses responded to the newly developed HPKRP scale. The face and content validity were tested with the Content Validity Index (CVI). Explorative factor analysis was used to test construct validity, whereas reliability was tested with Cronbach's alpha.
Results: Overall S-CVI for the HPKRP scale was 0.83. Exploratory factor analysis revealed a three-factor model for the HcPCRP scale containing 33 items. The ﬁrst factor was deﬁned by Radiation physics and principles of radiation usage, the second factor by Radiation protection, and the third factor by Guidelines of safe ionising radiation usage. These three factors explained 72% of the total variance. Cronbach's alpha coefﬁcient for the scale ranged from 0.93 to 0.96.
Conclusion: The results provide strong evidence for the validity and reliability of the HPKRP scale. Additionally, educators can use the scale to evaluate healthcare students' understanding in radiation safety before and after education.
Keywords:
Radiation protection knowledge Healthcare professional Instrument development Ionising radiation
Psychometric testing
Introduction
The ionising radiation used in healthcare to examine and treat a patient is governed by international regulations.1e3 Furthermore,there are strict criteria for when ionising radiation can be used, including justiﬁcation of the beneﬁts and risks of medical exposure, optimisation of the patient dose to the lowest achievable dose level that provides sufﬁcient image quality, and that the individual dose does not exceed the limits set for staff and population.1e3 Radiation use is a crucial part of radiation protection, which includes the optimisation of ionising radiation use and compliance with general radiation safety regulations.1,3e5 The use of ionising radiation is so strictly regulated because it may cause health risks. Radiation safety standards have been established to protect both people and the environment from the harmful effects of ionising radiation.
According to the international safety standards (ICRP, WHO, IAEA), protection must be optimised to the highest level of safety that is reasonably possible.6,7 The lack of knowledge regarding ionising radiation among healthcare professionals may render them unable to effectively protect themselves and their patients.8e10
Nurses may participate in several medical ionising radiation procedures. These procedures occur in a controlled area and, in this way, exposure to ionising radiation is restricted to, for example, the operating theatre or the cardiology laboratory.8,9,11 When a patient  is exposed to ionising radiation in the procedures guided with ﬂuoroscopy, staff members are exposed to the scattered radiation.12 Tissue reactions, previously referred to as ‘deterministic effects’, depend on the amount of radiation exposure, and health effects such as skin damage and blood changes, among others, will be more severe at higher doses.12e14 Tissue reactions have appeared following both interventional radiology and cardiology proced- ures.15,16 In this way, exceeding the radiation threshold seriously endangers the health of patients and staff.11 The stochastic  effects of radiation include tumours and leukaemia and occur over long periods of time due to modiﬁcations in genetic material.13,14 Healthcare professionals should understand the potential sto- chastic risks of exposure to ionising radiation whereas patients should be aware of both stochastic and deterministic risks.11
There is a lack of knowledge and skills among healthcare pro- fessionals (e.g. radiographers, medical practitioners and nurses) regarding the safe use of radiation and the associated safety culture.8e10,17e19 According to the latest evidence, healthcare pro- fessionals do not have sufﬁcient skills to effectively communicate beneﬁt-risk information about paediatric imaging  examina- tions.18,19 The knowledge, skills and attitudes on radiation protec- tion of healthcare professionals have been measured in multiple studies, all of which applied their own instruments.8e10,17,20e22 Dianati et al. (2014) validated a questionnaire and checklist measuring radiation protection knowledge and behaviours by conducting a study with nurses. However, the questionnaire was limited to measuring variables categorically and, as such, could not provide information on nurses' levels of knowledge on radiation protection. Tok et al. (2015) studied the attitudes and knowledge of ionising radiation of healthcare professionals working in the operating theatre. However, the authors did not provide any in- formation on the validation of the instrument. A validated ques- tionnaire developed by Maharjan (2017) measured radiographers' and radiography students' awareness of radiation protection but was not applicable for measuring other healthcare professionals’ awareness of radiation safety.
The psychometric testing of a newly developed instrument evaluates the instrument's quality by quantifying reliability and validity.23 Instruments are commonly developed in the behavioural or social sciences to measure participants' social and/or psycho- logical aspects and can also include variables as part of a broader theoretical framework.24 Validity describes the degree to which an instrument measures what it claims to measure,24 whereas an in- strument's reliability denotes the accuracy, consistency and reproducibility of the measured scores.25,26 The determination of face and content validity, construct validity and the reliability co- efﬁcient is one way to conﬁrm an instrument's reliability and validity.26
However, it has been suggested that the absence of a reliable scale results in unsystematically collected and unreliable data.27,28 According to published evidence8,10,11 and regulations,1e3 all healthcare professionals who are involved in the use of ionising radiation need to possess adequate competence (knowledge, skills and attitudes) in radiation safety. This competence comprises three areas: 1) knowledge of principles, theories and practical examples concerning the physical background of radiation; 2) skills of the
basic principles of radiation exposure in the healthcare setting; and
3) responsibility and autonomy in recognising radiation hazards. All healthcare personnel in the European Union should have radi- ation competence that matches the ﬁfth of six levels described in the European Qualiﬁcation Framework.4,29 In Finland, healthcare professionals do not receive any formal radiation protection edu- cation. For this reason, educational institutions differ greatly in the extent to which radiation safety is covered by the curriculum. However, all Finnish healthcare professionals must demonstrate a certain level of radiation safety competence, which is deﬁned by guidelines from the Radiation Protection and Nuclear Safety Authority.30
Professional competence is understood in this study as an attribute that includes the knowledge, skills and attitudes neces- sary for providing the required level of quality and capability.31 In this study, radiation knowledge includes areas of Radiation physics and radiation biology, Radiation protection regulation and radiation use in healthcare, and Radiation safety at work.
Methods
Aims
The purpose of the present study was to develop and psycho- metrically test the Healthcare Professional Knowledge of Radiation Protection (HPKRP) self-evaluation scale, which was designed to measure the knowledge level of radiation protection by healthcare professionals working with ionising radiation in a clinical environment.
The research questions were:
1)What is the face and content validity of the HPKRP scale?
2)What is the construct validity and reliability of the HPKRP scale in measuring healthcare professionals' knowledge in use of ra- diation protection?
Design
The research employed a cross-sectional survey design.
Participants
Eight organisations from the 19 hospitals in Finland were cho- sen by stratiﬁed random sampling according to territorial repre- sentation  of  the  Finnish  healthcare   system.32,33   All   nurses (N 1500) in four university hospitals and four central hospitals who participate in medical ionising radiation procedures during their daily work were invited to take part in the study during the autumn of 2017. The invited participants comprised the study population. The stratiﬁed sampling was guided by pre-determined eligibility criteria, namely, job title of nurse and working with ionising radiation in the operating theatre, ﬁrst aid clinic or cardi- ology laboratory.
Data collection
The participants were invited to participate by email for rapid information delivery and cost-effectiveness.32 An email was sent by researchers (TSS, LH) to the head nurses of all departments using medical ionising radiation, who then forwarded the email to their nurses working with ionising radiation. The questionnaire was accessible through the Webropol electronic data collection sys- tem.34 The participants were invited three times by their head nurses, with reminders sent every two weeks during the data
collection period. The head nurses conﬁrmed with researchers (TSS, LH) every time the reminders were sent to the nurses.
Development process of the HPKRP scale
The instrument was developed in phases: 1) creating of the scale, 2) testing of face and content validity, and 3) testing of construct validity and reliability (see Fig. 1).
Generating items
The ﬁrst consisted of generating items and developing the in- strument. This phase started with a study of the theoretical back- ground necessary to develop the instrument, i.e. radiation standards and act1,3 radiation safety reports2,4e6 and research ar- ticles investigating the phenomenon.8,9,17 The theoretical frame- work was built by using content analysis for the chosen literature and organizing data into open codes, sub-categories and three categories. The sub-categories were transformed into items. The categories were transformed into sub-dimensions of the scale.35 Prior to construct validity testing, the scale included sub- dimensions of: 1) Radiation physics and radiation biology; 2)  Radi- ation protection regulation and radiation use in healthcare; and 3) Radiation safety at work (41 items in total). The HPKRP scale employed a ten-point Likert scale, ranging from 1   no knowledge to 10 full knowledge. The Likert scale is appropriate when an instrument includes a lot of assertions and the researchers want to gain insight into the subject's claims. A participant's response to questions applying the Likert scale is inﬂuenced by their level of experience in the ﬁeld. It can be used to measure qualitative qualities such as attitudes, skill levels, and opinions.27,33 The scale used in the presented research was developed and validated in Finnish. The English version presented in the manuscript was for- ward and backward translated according to established scientiﬁc practises for translating an instrument.36
Figure 1. Development process of the HPKRP scale.
Face and content validity
Next phases were face and content validity testing. The objective of this psychometric testing was to evaluate the quality of the HPKRP scale,23 including face and content validity. Face and content validity were tested before the main data collection by using an expert panel in a focus group setting. The panel included a team of nine professionals who specialised in either ionising radiation or nursing (e.g. physician, radiographer, radiation expert, operating theatre nurse).37 Face validity represents the right look of the construct found in the instrument that it is claiming to be measuring.26 The experts evaluated the face validity of items by judging their content, wording and grammar. Based on the experts' evaluations, any unclear items were revised and clariﬁed. This ensured that respondents would be able to correctly comprehend the items in order to accurately complete the scale.38 The content validity was tested by evaluating the scale's relevance (1 not relevant;   2          useful   but   not   relevant;   3          quite  relevant;
4 relevant). The content validity index (CVI) method was used by rating of items measuring content. The experts' scores were pooled according to the total score averaging method (S-CVI), i.e. individ- ual item method (I-CVI) values were divided by the number of statements. The I-CVI was also calculated by dividing essential claims by the number of experts.37 The I-CVI threshold was kept at
0.78,     and     S-CVI     threshold     was     kept     at     0.82.37  After face and content validity testing, the HPKRP scale was pilot
tested with 22 participants from an operating theatre at a univer- sity hospital. The purpose of the pilot test was to evaluate the utility of the scale.39 We hoped that the pilot testing would result in at least 10 answers to each group, which is considered a reasonable amount of data for minimising errors.39 The data were transferred from the Webropol electronic data collection system into the SPSS programme in Microsoft Excel format. The main data analysis was performed using SPSS (v23.0, IBM Corporation, Armonk, NY).
Construct validity and reliability of the instrument
The last phase was construct validity and reliability testing. Construct validity was tested after the main data collection using explorative factor analysis (EFA). The aim of EFA was to reduce the items into main factors so that signiﬁcant correlations could be easily interpreted and understood between the items.40,41 The KMO test and Bartlett's test of sphericity (BTS) provided values that were used to evaluate EFA sampling adequacy for the model chosen of the scale (p < 0.01).40 The number of factors was deﬁned by number of eigenvalues >1 and scree plot. The Principle Axis Factoring (PAF) method was used in combination with a promax rotation. This rotation method is recommended for factor analysis when the multiple factors are correlated.41 Since the overall construct being factored is radiation protection it is expected that there will be some correlation among factors. The cut-off for included items to each factor was 0.40.41 The cross-loading items loading on more than one of the items were removed. The EFA was repeated after removing of cross-loading items to conﬁrm the goodness of ﬁt model. Cronbach's alpha coefﬁcient was used to examine the in- ternal consistency of the scale and thus test instrument reli- ability.26,33,42 The Cronbach's alpha coefﬁcient demonstrates an acceptable newly designed instrument if ≤0.70, a well-established
instrument if ≤0.80, and a clinically reliable tool if ≤0.90.26,27
Ethical considerations
Permission to perform this study was obtained from all eight hospitals according to their own research practises. The partici- pants received an informational email about the study that explained the purpose of the study, voluntary participation, ano- nymity, conﬁdentiality and data handling procedures.43 The study
was carried out in accordance with ethical principles of research.44 The study did not require permission from an ethics committee since the study did not include patients, underage children or vulnerable groups. It was determined that the research could not cause psychological or physical harm to the participants.45
Results
Participants
A total of 252 participants agreed to participate, representing a response rate of 17%. There was no missing data in participants' responses, as the instructions speciﬁed that answering all of the items was compulsory. The participants were 85% (n 215) female. The age of study participants ranged from 18 and over 57 years, with a mean value of 32 years (standard deviation 5.81). The educational level varied between  diploma  level  education  33%  (n  82), Bachelor's degree from a University of applied sciences   62% (n 157), Master's degree from a University of applied sciences 4% (n 9) and Master's degree from a University 2% (n 4). Most of participants  primarily  worked  in  the   operating   theatre   68%  (n  170) or the ﬁrst aid clinic 21% (n   53). Of all the participants,  47% (n 118)  had previously received 1e10  h of radiation protec-  tion education (Table 1).
Face and content validity
The HPKRP scale was developed with 41 items. Testing the face validity of the HPKRP scale resulted in the modiﬁcation of 20 items, while testing content validity resulted in the modiﬁcation of nine items, deletion of four items, combination of two items into one item, and creation of ﬁve additional items. The I-CVI ranged from
0.66 to 1. Overall S-CVI, i.e. the mean validity score, for the HPKRP scale was 0.83, which was interpreted as sufﬁcient for a newly developed scale. Following the evaluation of face and content
Table 1
Participant  background  (n ¼ 252).
validity, the HPKRP scale included 41 items. The Cronbach's alpha for the pilot study, which was conducted with 22 nurses, was 0.98.
Exploratory factor analysis
The KMO test result for the exploratory factor analysis model chosen for the HPKRP scale was 0.96, while BTS was signiﬁcant at 8899.39 (df 528, p < 0.001). Thus, the exploratory factor analysis, which yielded a three-factor model, had adequate sample size. Eigenvalue and scree plot determined three factors (see Fig. 2). There were 14 items which demonstrated cross-loading; as a result, eight items were deleted, and 33 items remained in the ﬁnal EFA model. The ﬁt of the EFA model was judged against the theoretical framework of the study and statistical measures of the goodness of ﬁt model. The three-factor loading was explained by 72% of the cumulative percentage of the total variance (Table 2). The ﬁrst factor, Radiation physics, biology and principles of radiation usage (12 items), explained 60.1% of the total variance; the second factor, Radiation protection (13 items), explained 7.8% of the variance; and the third factor, Guidelines of safe ionising radiation usage (8 items), explained 3.5% of the variance. The ﬁrst, second and third factors of the EFA model showed Cronbach's alpha coefﬁcients of 0.96, 0.95, and 0.93, respectively, all of which are above the threshold for a well-established scale.
Discussion
The purpose of the study was to develop and psychometrically test the Healthcare Professional Knowledge of Radiation Protection (HPKRP) self-evaluation scale, which was designed to measure knowledge level of radiation protection by healthcare professionals who work with radiation in the clinical environment. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst study to provide a validated in- strument for evaluating healthcare professionals' radiation knowledge internationally. Instruments presented in earlier studies assessed awareness, understanding and attitudes regarding ionis- ing radiation and protection individually, but not together.20e22 Previous studies that have presented instruments for measuring radiation protection have been limited to measuring variables categorically or the authors did not provide any information on the validation of the instrument or measured radiographers' and radiography students' awareness of radiation protection but was not applicable for measuring other healthcare professionals' knowledge of radiation safety.20e22 The instrument presented  in this study measures healthcare professionals' knowledge in three different areas of radiation, namely, physics and radiation biology, regulation concerning radiation protection, and radiation use in healthcare. The items in each area speciﬁcally assess the pro- fessionals’ understanding, skills and attitudes. This study included a sample size that was satisfactory for testing construct validity, as each item of the scale received eight answers per variable. It is well established that a larger sample size will help conﬁrm psycho- metric properties.26 The psychometric testing presented in this study was based on rigid research methodology and instrument development process.
Furthermore, previous attempts to describe knowledge of ra- diation safety have not applied and/or not presented an underlying theoretical framework. We argue that any new instrument must cover all the theoretical concepts related to radiation protection within healthcare. Support for the content validity of the HPKRP scale was based on the theoretical framework and evidence-based practise. During development of the HPKRP scale, information ob- tained from radiation safety experts was used to modify, delete and edit instrument items.37 The selection of which items will be included in the ﬁnal instrument is always crucial, as poorly
Figure 2.  Scree plot of HPKRP  scale.
Table 2
HPKRP exploratory factor analysis (n ¼ 252).
developed instruments can cause researchers to draw invalid conclusions about studied phenomena.24,28 The HPKRP scale offers the possibility for improving radiation protection in the clinical environment and is also applicable to the educational context. The objective of this instrument is to gauge the levels of radiation knowledge among healthcare professionals, determine future training needs and identify development targets both in Finland and on an international level.
Limitations
The study has several limitations. First, the response rate was only 17%. A larger sample size could have provided more reliable results; however, the sample met speciﬁc inclusion criteria which reﬂected the research purpose.32,33 Power analysis was not possible since no previous studies had used scales that were similar to the one presented in this study. In this way, there was no data available from which to calculate the effect size.46,47 However, according to the recommendations by DeVon et al. (2007), sampling adequacy for exploratory factor analysis was reached.26 Furthermore, this study reached eight participants per variable, which exceeds the recommended minimum of ﬁve participants per variable.26 Second, the self-evaluation nature of the questionnaire includes the possi- bility that professionals will evaluate their own knowledge higher than the actual level it is at. Previous studies have suggested that healthcare professionals have the tendency to overrate their clinical knowledge, skills and/or attitudes when completing self- assessment scoring.48,49 Third, the generalisability of the pre-  sented instrument to other healthcare professionals or environ- ments should be considered with caution, as the instrument should be further tested on healthcare professionals other than nurses working with ionising radiation as well as in another context than the Finnish healthcare system. Another limitation is that the scale does not measure modality-speciﬁc competence of professionals specialised in imaging examinations, but rather focuses on healthcare professionals' knowledge of radiation  protection. Finally, the ﬁrst factor measuring Radiation physics, biology and principles of radiation usage explained 60.1% of  the  total variance; the second factor Radiation protection accounted for 7.8% and the third factor measuring Guidelines of safe ionising radiation usage explained only 3.5% of the total variance. The theoretical frame- work guided the authors to keep the third factor in order to be able to measure nurses’ knowledge of guidelines of safe ionising radi- ation usage. We suggest that since the last factor explained only 3.5% of the construct validity of the scale, the factor could be improved in the future by creating new items and/or modifying the content of the existing items. The STROBE (2007) checklist was used to assess the quality of the study, and each of the 22 sections received full points.50
Conclusion
The validated HPKRP scale presented in this paper has the po- tential to be used in educational, clinical practise and research settings. The scale can provide valuable information on the state of healthcare professionals’ knowledge of radiation use and safety. Additional studies should be conducted to test and validate this instrument in different contexts and settings.
Conﬂict of interest
None.
Funding statement
None.
Acknowledgements
We would like to acknowledge the nurses who took their time to answer the survey and take part in the research. We would also like to acknowledge Sees-Editing Ltd (http://www.seesediting.co.uk).