<title>The potential use of biogas producing microorganisms in radiation protectionA simple voxel-based assessment and visualization of dose to human for radiation protection using virtual simulation</title>
<author>Meng-kun Li, Yong-kuo Liu, Min-jun Penga, Chun-li Xie, Li-qun Yang</author>
<Affiliation>a.Fundamental  Science  on  Nuclear  Safety  and  Simulation  Technology  Laboratory,  Harbin  Engineering  University,  Harbin  150001,  China;b.Traﬃc  College,  Northeast  Forestry  University,  Harbin,  150040,  China</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2017.12.019</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2017.12.019</URL>
ABSTRACT
In this paper, virtual simulation was taken as an auxiliary tool for radiation protection, dose assessment. So radiation protection using virtual reality was taken as a research subject. A simple voxel modeling for virtual human was proposed. Based on the voxel model, dose assessment and visualization methods for virtual human in radiation environment were proposed. The parallel technology contributed to dose assessment  in  real-time. Based on dose assessment and visualization methods, a radiation protection method using virtual simulation was developed for the preparation of working in radiation environment. These validation tests demonstrate these methods make it possible to plan for the exposure dose to workers in radiation environment using virtual si- mulation.
Keywords:
Dose assessment Radiation visualization Radiation protection Nuclear decommissioning Virtual reality
1.Introduction
The decommissioning activities of nuclear facilities are under high radioactivity (IAEA, 2014), so it is necessary that before decom- missioning activities of nuclear facilities, the radiation exposure dose of workers has to be assessed and the radiation protection measures have to be taken under the principle of ALARA (as low as reasonably achievable).
Much work has been done recent years on exposure dose assessment method for human in virtual radiation scene in radiation environment. For example, path-planning method took POint Model (POM) to assess the potential exposure dose in radiation ﬁeld (Liu et al., 2015). POM takes dosimeter sensor as a point at the navel of virtual human and the received dose rate is interpolated value of neighbor dose rates, but calculation accuracy is bad.
Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute designed a dose assessment method based on game engine (Jeong et al., 2014). It is denoted as COllider Model (COM) in this paper. The virtual human is taken as a capsule collider and cubes of dose rate are distributed in virtual scene. The received dose is assessed based on collision detection in game en- gine, but it ignores the radiation sensitivity of organs and tissues.
Chinese Institute of Nuclear Energy Safety Technology developed the voxel-based organs dose assessment method to achieve precise organ-level  dose assessment compared with traditional  methods (Li  et al., 2013), but millions of voxels cause long calculation time.
The U.S. Department of Energy developed the Radiological
Environment Modeling System (REMS) which was also capable of computing an eﬀective dose equivalent by summing doses at certain sensor locations and applying appropriate weighting factors (SNL, 1996). In this paper, this method is denoted as BAsedline method (BAM) in which the sensors are taken as points decorated in virtual human to detect dose rates.
In addition, mathematical phantom was proposed by Oak Ridge National Laboratory in America (Eckerman et al., 1996), in which the human body is simpliﬁed as the assembly of several geometries (Snyder et al., 1978). It is used for dose assessment has advantages of a little internal memory, great eﬃciency and so on.
Diﬀerent from above-mentioned research results, this paper is in- tended to design an exposure dose assessment method which has a high precision based on radiation sensitivity of organs and tissues and real- time computing speed, and then address dose visualization for virtual human. In addition, a primary application of dose assessment and vi- sualization for radiation protection is designed to plan worker's ex- posure dose.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 brieﬂy de- scribes the representation of radiation risk in virtual environment. Section 3 focuses on a simple voxel-based dose assessment method, including virtual human modeling, dose assessment methods and dose visualization for virtual human. Section 4 brieﬂy introduces the appli- cation of dose assessment and visualization for radiation protection. Section 5 describes the test and results. Section 6 presents the summary and conclusion.
Fig. 1. Application ﬂow of dose calculation for virtual simulation.
2.Representation of radiation risk in virtual environment
Radiation data in virtual scenario and simulation is used to provide data support for dose assessment and visualization. Four radiation vi- sualizations were designed using Unity engine, which are basis of the following dose assessment methods.
2.1.Application of dose calculation for virtual simulation
According to virtual scenario, radiation data is calculated by any transport code calculations such as Monte Carlo (X5 Monte Carlo Team, 2003), point-kernel integral method (Prokhorets et al., 2007) and dis- crete ordinates method (Azmy, 1996). In this paper, gamma dose rate distribution in virtual scenario is calculated by point-kernel program.
The application ﬂow of dose calculation for virtual simulation is shown in Fig. 1. Firstly, 3D models of nuclear facilities are built using 3D modeling software and virtual scenario is decorated using Unity. Secondly, data of radiation distribution is calculated and radiation data is stored into database for reusing. Thirdly, radiation data from data- base is inserted into virtual scenario for dose visualization and exposure dose assessment for virtual human. The functions of dose assessment
and dose visualization in the simulation program were developed using C# language based on Unity.
2.2.Radiation risk in virtual environment
Radiation visualization contributes to understand and watch the dose distribution in special environment, which helps users to plan work under the principle of ALARA. To convenient to use radiation data in virtual scenario, dose rate distribution is equidistant and uniform in 3D space.
To directly perceive radiation risk through the senses and fast reﬂect the high and low radiation place, ﬁgure and graph are combined to present the radiation data to environment and human in virtual sce- nario. According to the existing radiation visualization methods, none of the techniques should be considered fundamentally ﬂawed for ra- diation visualization purposes limitations of each technique. So several dose visualization methods were designed, such as dose mesh, dose volume and dose point for environment, dose voxel and value for human.
Dose mesh is used to graphically display the dose distribution at a given height using a mesh with diﬀerent colors according to dose rates, but it lacks of a vertical dimensionality. Diﬀerent from the re- presentation of dose cubes in reference (Jeong et al., 2014), dose vo- lumes have their own dose rates and independent colors. Dose points are used to display the dose distribution in 3D space using points with diﬀerent colors. Fig. 2 presents the interpretation of the references to color in above three radiation visualizations. Fig. 3 presents a synthe- tical example of above three radiation risk visualization to environ- ment.
To represent radiation risk for human, voxel-based dose assessment and visualization for virtual human were introduced in the following paper.
3.Voxel-based dose assessment and visualization for virtual human
A simple voxel modeling of virtual human body, two kinds of dose assessment methods and dose visualization are described in this section.
3.1.A simple voxel modeling for virtual human
In radiation protection, radiotherapy and radiation processing, human phantom is designed to simulate measure and calculate the absorbed dose distribution of human from external radiation source. To give human qualities to virtual human in virtual simulation, a simple virtual bottle human was designed according to BOttle MAnnikin ABsorber (BOMAB). Based on virtual bottles human, voxel model of virtual human is built to estimate exposure dose and visualize dose distribution in human body.
The BOMAB was developed by Bush in 1949, which consists of 10 polyethylene bottles, either cylinders or elliptical cylinders, that
Fig. 2. The interpretation of the references to color in three radiation visualizations. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this ar- ticle.)
Fig. 3. Three representations of dose distribution in virtual scenario: dose mesh, dose volume and dose point. The dose distribution in 3D space is displayed by dose volumes with diﬀerent color in 3D space. The dose point can be regarded as the center of the voxel and refers to a dose value. The dose mesh is the dose distribution at one height. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
Table 1
Main characteristic of virtual human model.
Table 2
Statistics information of bottle and voxel model of virtual human.
represent the head, neck, chest, abdomen, thighs, calves, and arms. Because virtual human has movable joints, Bottles manikin was im- proved and modiﬁed for the need of virtual human simulation. Table 1 gives the main characteristics of virtual human. Table 2 gives the sta- tistics information of bottle and voxel model of virtual human.
Fig.  4  illustrates  the  voxel  modeling  for  virtual  human.  Firstly,
virtual human, skeleton model and skeletal animations are built using
to fast and instant dose assessment and dose distribution visualization in human body.
3.2.Averaging-based dose assessment method (ADAM)
(1)Flow of voxel-based dose assessment method
The dose assessment method is based on Unity engine, the speciﬁc ﬂow is shown in Fig. 5. Firstly, virtual human with skeletal animations is initialized and information of voxel is read from database and con- verted into digital data which matches with virtual human. Secondly, dose rate and cumulative dose of virtual human is calculated and stored into database at intervals of 0.1 s. The walking speed of virtual human is 1.5 m/s, so the moving speed of a voxel also is 1.5 m/s. 1.5 m of oﬀset leads to larger error of dose assessment in one second. In addition, virtual human can ﬁnish a lot of actions in one second. One of actions of virtual human in one second may lead to more radiation exposure. So the interval time should be short as much as possible. Considering the current hardware resource, the interval time is deﬁned as 0.1s.
(2)Interpolation for dose rate of voxel
Numerous dose rate points have been placed in the radiation en- vironment so that exposure dose to virtual human can be calculated by inverse distance weighted (IDW) method based on its eight surrounding dose points, as shown in Fig. 6. The dose points are evenly distributed in 3D space, so the distance between the adjacent dose points is 50 cm. IDW is a type of deterministic method for multivariate interpolation with a known scattered set of points. The assigned values to unknown points are calculated with a weighted average of the values available at
the known points. The formula of dose rate of a voxel is as follows:
8 (dis )−PR
@1
where, Ri is dose rate of voxel i, j is j-th adjacent dose point of voxel i,
disi,j is the distance between voxel i and j-th adjacent dose point, Ri,j is dose rate of j-th adjacent dose point of voxel i. P is the power parameter. It is reasonable that P is from 0.5 to 3 and default value of P is 2. In this paper, it is deﬁned as 1 which reduces the calculating amount and improves the calculating speed.
(3)Exposure dose of virtual human
Individual dosimeter is used to monitor the dose of external radia- tion at nuclear power plants. The external exposure dose is determined by Exposure  dose=On-site  dose  rate×Time.
According to voxel model of virtual human, exposure dose to human is the combined eﬀect of exposure doses to voxels. Average dose rate to
Fig. 4. Voxel modeling for virtual human. A: bottle model of human body; B: voxel model of human body; C: virtual human in Unity3D.
Fig. 5. The algorithm of exposure dose assessment using voxel in virtual scenario.
virtual human is deﬁned as:
@2
where, N is the number of voxels, Ri is dose rate of i-th voxel.
Cumulative dose of virtual human is deﬁned as:
@3
every dose assessment.
3.3.Weighted-based dose assessment method (WDAM)
Because the size of voxel is larger, it is diﬃcult to represent the shapes and the positions of organs accurately, weighting factors of or- gans and tissues are not available. A simpliﬁed organ weighting method is designed, which is used to calculate the exposure dose to virtual human.
According to the reference (ICRP, 1998), the absorbed dose is de-
ﬁned as:
@4
where, Ka is air kerma rate, CDT is relevant organ dose conversion coeﬃcient.
The formula of equivalent dose is deﬁned as:
@5
where, WR is the radiation weighting factor deﬁned by regulation, DT, R
is the absorbed dose in grays in tissue T by radiation type R. The formula of eﬀective dose is deﬁned as:
@6
where, WT is the tissue weighting factor deﬁned by regulation, HT is the equivalent dose absorbed by tissue T.
According to the percentage of the total fresh skeletal mass con-tributed by various bones and approximate positions of organs in human body (ICRP, 1995; 2002), the weighting factors of organs and tissues are reallocated and combined to form the weighting factors of
bottles. Fig. 7 illustrates the design of weighting factors of bottles.
The exposure dose of human consists of the dose of all bottles and
the absorbed dose of a bottle is the mean dose of the voxels in the bottle.
@7
Fig. 7. Design of weighting factors of bottles.
Fig. 6. The interpretation of the dose rate interpolation for voxel in virtual human.
@8
@9
bottle B, n is the number of voxels in bottle B. Equivalent dose of a bottle is deﬁned as:Fig. 8. Flow of instant dose assessment method based on parallel technology.
Fig. 9. Flow of dose visualization for virtual human body.
body was developed using C# code and taken as an extended plug-in in Unity.
Fig. 10 presents the illustration of voxel-based dose visualization for virtual human. Based on voxel model of virtual human, two dose vi- sualizations for human are designed, namely Instant Dose rate
Visualization (IDV) and Cumulative Dose Visualization (CDV). IDV presents instant dose rate of every voxel using diﬀerent colors, con- tributes to understand instant radiation eﬀect in diﬀerent actions. CDV presents cumulative dose of every voxel during simulation using dif- ferent colors, contributes to understand cumulative radiation inﬂuence to every part of virtual human. When virtual human is static, dose vi- sualization for virtual human needs a little CPU hardware resources, and doesn't inﬂuence the other functions of virtual simulation. When virtual human is moving, a mass of rendering will lead to delay. So we recommend that CDV is to be used when virtual human is static or virtual simulation program is suspended. IDV and CDV help users to better understand potential radiation risk to virtual human in diﬀerent virtual operation, to take eﬀective radiation protection measures and to regulate worker.
4.Application of dose assessment and visualization for radiation protection
Based on dose assessment, dose visualization, virtual reality and radiation calculation, a primary radiation environment and human si- mulation program (REHSP) was developed using Unity and C# pro- gramming language in this research. Considering a mass of rendering, the minimum requirements of hardware resource for REHSP are 2 Core CPU, 4 Gb RAM, Window 7. The program contains four subsystems. Human voxel modeling system simpliﬁes the modeling eﬀort of human
Fig. 10. Illustration of voxel-based dose visualization.
voxel model, and the voxel model is converted into the data ﬁle of voxel model. Radiation calculation system is conﬁgured for a point kernel code to calculate the dose rate distribution for virtual scene, but dose rate data can be supplied by any transport code calculations. Virtual simulation system presents virtual scenario with the radiation data, simulates a motion sequence consists of an ordered collection of pos- tures with simple commands. Dose assessment system is utilized for real-time assessing exposure dose to virtual human during simulation and visualizing the dose in virtual human body.
A primary application ﬂow of REHSP for radiation protection is shown in Fig. 11. It contains four main steps: radiation environment initialization, virtual human simulation, dose assessment and radiation protection management. When virtual scenario changes, geometrical and physical information of 3D model are identiﬁed and then radiation ﬁeld in 3D space is calculated. When radiation protection measures changes, radiation ﬁeld and dose assessment need to be updated. At present, REHSP can simulate some simple behaviors of human and fast dose calculation on virtual simulation platform. According to dose as- sessment for human, some simple schemes for radiation protection can be planned to reduce exposure dose to human.
5.Test and results
Two experiments were run using REHSP developed to verify the eﬀectiveness of the proposed dose assessment and visualization methods and their application.
5.1.Comparisons of dose assessment methods for virtual human
According to existing dose assessment models or methods for virtual human in Introduction, several methods from them are selected for comparison test. In hypothetical experiment, POM, COM, ADAM, WDAM and BAM are used to calculate the exposure dose to human. According to characteristic of these methods, the result of BAM is taken as the standard of dose assessment in this research.
Virtual scene and radiation distribution of the hypothetical case are shown in Fig. 12. The virtual human is controlled to walk from a to b, complete a hypothetical task at working place b, and then walk from b to c to leave the work area. Table 3 displays statistics about the cu- mulative doses of ﬁve methods for the initial scheme. In the initial scheme, the activity of human is divided into three parts: Walking Path
1(WPA 1)、Working Place (WP) and Walking Path 2(WPA 2), as shown
in Fig. 13 (A). Three special places are selected from the scene in Fig. 13 (A), which are borders between direct and indirect irradiation, denoted as SP1, SP2 and SP3.
From the view of Fig. 14, instant dose rates of BAM are higher than other methods. But assessment result of WDAM is much nearer to BAM than other methods. Because tissues and organs in body of virtual human are far more sensitive to radiation, weighting factor of body is greater than weighting factors of other parts. The weighting factors in BAM and WDAM reﬂect the radiation sensitivity of tissues and organs. Body is irradiated from radiation source directly and legs and hip are irradiated indirectly at between 15 s and 32 s, so dose rates in BAM and WDAM are higher in comparison with other models. Because these methods have diﬀerent instant dose rates deviations to BAM, the cu- mulative dose deviations between these methods increase over time in Fig. 15. As can be seen from Table 2, POM, COM and ADAM are surely at a greater disadvantage.
In theory, more samples covers the entire human body is accurate for dose assessment. As can be seen from Table 4, dose rates in other methods are lower than dose rates in BAM, so the deviations to BAM are negative. Dose rates in other methods are higher than dose rates in BAM, so the deviations to BAM are positive. Because of the shield, the radiation distribution in 3D space becomes complex. Diﬀerent sampling mechanisms in diﬀerent methods lead to positive or negative devia- tions. The deviation between WDAM and BAM is universally lower than most of deviations between other models and BAM. In addition, WDAM takes account of the radiation sensitivity of diﬀerent parts of human. So WDAM is in high precision than other methods.
Fig. 16 shows dose rate visualizations for human at three special places which are borders between direct and indirect irradiation in Fig. 13 (A). The incomplete radioactive shields lead greater dose rate volatility in human body than the other places, so a little of samples cannot describe and represent the dose rate distribution in human body exactly. Compare to other methods, the voxel model has an advantage of dose visualization.
5.2.Application for dose assessment and visualization
This test aims at demonstrating REHSP's feasibility by assessing exposure dose to virtual human and ameliorating initial scheme under the principle of ALARA. BAM takes tissues and organs as several points, which cannot realize dose visualization. Fewer samples lead to BAM in lower precision. WDAM is a balance between dose visualization and
Fig. 11. Application ﬂow of REHSP.
Fig. 12. Virtual scene and radiation distribution of the hypothetical case.
Table 3
Statistics about the cumulative doses of ﬁve methods for the initial scheme.
accuracy of calculation. Because dose visualization and the accuracy of calculation meet our requirements of planning worker's exposure dose, WDAM is selected for dose exposure assessment to the virtual human.
(1)Walking Path 1
For Walking Path 1, several diﬀerent walking paths were designed to improve both irradiated time and distance between virtual human and radiation source, to reduce the exposure dose to virtual human. The radiation ﬁeld was not changed, so the virtual human simulation needed be updated according to the application method. The walking path in Fig. 17 (A) is the initial path. The walking paths in Fig. 17(B)and (C) are the improved path that human keeps far away from ra- diation source as far as possible during walking. From the  view of  Fig. 17, cumulative doses of the improved paths are lower than cu- mulative doses of the initial path. No matter which kind of paths is, upper body of human has higher exposure dose than other parts, especially head. Although the initial path is shorter than other paths, radiation intensity for the initial path is stronger than radiation in- tensity for other paths, so the initial path has the maximum cumulative dose. Although the improved paths are far away from radiation source, the path in Fig. 17 (C) takes longer time than the path in Fig. 17 (B), so
Fig. 13. Walking-path and the cumulative dose visualization of in- itial scheme.
Fig. 14. Instant dose rate curves in ﬁve diﬀerent methods.	Fig. 15. Cumulative dose curves in ﬁve diﬀerent methods.
Table 4
Statistics about the dose rates of human at these special places.
Fig. 16. Virtual human's instant dose rate visualizations at special places.
Fig. 17. Three improved walking paths and the cumulative dose.
it has the minimum cumulative dose.
(2)Working Place b
At Working Place b, adjusting standing position and setting shielding were used to reduce exposure dose to human. Fig. 18(A) shows the initial scheme that virtual human stands at the place which is near to radiation source. Fig. 18(B) shows the ﬁrst improved scheme that virtual human stands at the place which is far away to radiation source.   Fig.   18(C)   shows   the   second   improved   scheme   that   a
1.5 m × 0.2 m × 1.5 m iron shield is set between virtual human and radiation source, and virtual human stands at the place which is far away to radiation source. To adjust standing position, human simula- tion is updated. To set shielding, radiation ﬁeld is updated. According
to cumulative dose in Fig. 18, we can see that the right standing posi- tion and the shield contribute to reduce radiation exposure to human, and the shield reduces the radiation exposure to human signiﬁcantly. According to dose visualization, head of human gets more irradiated than other parts.
(3)Walking Path 2
The walking path in Fig. 19 (A) is the initial path that it is the shortest path as far as possible. The walking path in Fig. 19 (B) is the improved path that human keeps far away from radiation source as far as possible during walking. From the view of Fig. 19, cumulative dose of the improved path is lower than cumulative dose of the initial path.
Fig. 18. Adjusting standing position and arranging shielding at Working Place B.
Fig. 19. Two improved walking paths and the cumulative dose for Walking Path 2.
Fig. 20. The virtual human's working path of the ﬁnal scheme.
technology is done in less than 0.1 s. In addition, the primary radiation environment and human simulation program was developed and the application of dose assessment and visualization for radiation protec- tion was designed.
This work is developed as a tool of simulation for radiation pro- tection before working in radiation environment. The voxel-based dose visualization has potential as a measure to regulate safe working pos- ture of worker and establish the ALARA plan for working in radiation environment. Currently, virtual human has a few simple actions and the program contains a few simple radiation protection measures, so the inﬂuence of diﬀerent postures of human in radiation ﬁled is not ana- lyzed. To improve and ﬁnish our research, more skeletal animations of virtual human and more simulation of practical radiation protection measures are our following works.
Acknowledgements
This research work was funded by Decommissioning of Nuclear Facilities and Radioactive Waste Management Research, Project sup- ported by the Natural Science Foundation of Heilongjiang Province,
Fig. 21. The cumulative doses at diﬀerent stages.
(4)The whole working of virtual human
To determine the minimum cumulative dose scheme, the least dose schemes for WP1, SP2 and WP2 are selected from above schemes to constitute the ﬁnal scheme, as shown in Fig. 20. The cumulative dose visualizations at diﬀerent stages are shown in Fig. 21.
Exposure dose of virtual human in the ﬁnal scheme is 1.7718 μSv. It is far less than initial scheme's 5.7781 μSv. The new scheme adapts radiation measures is safer than the initial scheme. According to dose
visualization, it is clear that the head and right upper body are irra- diated greater than other parts, so pertinence radiation protection measures can be taken.
6.Summary and conclusion
In this paper, a simple voxel modeling for virtual human is pro- posed. The virtual human is divided into 12 parts and weighting factors of these parts are deﬁned. ADAM and WDAM are proposed based on voxel model for dose assessment of virtual human. Voxel model can synchronize with animation of virtual human. By test, WDAM is more accurate than other approximate dose assessment methods. Diﬀerent from other existing dose assessments, instant and cumulative dose distributions in human body in diﬀerent action are given by dose vi- sualization for virtual human. Instant dose assessment based on parallel
China (Grant NO.A2016002 and NO.E2015053), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NO.51379046), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (NO.DL13CB14) and the State-Sponsored Program of China Scholarship Council (NO.201506605006).
