<title>A European survey on the regulatory status for the estimation of the effective dose and the equivalent dose to the lens of the eye when radiation garments are used</title>
<author>Eleftheria Carinou, Robert Kollaard, Jelena Stankovic Petrovic and Merce Ginjaume</author>
<Affiliation>1.Greek Atomic Energy Commission (EEAE), Agia Paraskevi, Attiki, Greece;2.Nuclear Research and Consultancy Group (NRG), Arnhem, The Netherlands;3.Vinca Institute of Nuclear Sciences, University of Belgrade, M. P. Alasa 12-14, 11351 Belgrade,Serbia;4.Institut de Tècniques Energètiques, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya. Avda. Diagonal, 647, 08028 Barcelona, Spain</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Radiological Protection</Journal>
<Publishing_house>IOP Publishing</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1088/1361-6498/aaf456</DOI>
<URL> https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6498/aaf456</URL>
Abstract
Following the proposal of the ICRP for the reduction of dose limit for the lens of the eye which has been adopted by the International Atomic Energy Agency and the European Council a lot of concern has been raised about the  implementation of proper dose monitoring methods defined in the national regulations and the harmonisation within European countries.EURADOS organised a survey at the end of 2017, through a web questionnaire, regarding the national dose monitoring regulations. The questions were related to: double dosimetry, algorithm for the estimation of the effective dose, methodology for the determination of the equivalent dose to the lens of the eye and structure of the national dose registry. The results showed that more than 50% of the countries that responded to the survey have legal requirements about the number and the position of dosemeters used for estimation of the effective dose when radiation protective garments are used. However, only in 5 out of 26 countries there are nationally approved algorithms for the estimation of the effective dose. Moreover, in 14 out of 26 countries there is a legal requirement to estimate the dose to the lens of the eye. All of the responding countries use a kind of national database for keeping the individual monitoring data but in only 12 out of 26 countries the  estimated effective dose values are stored. The personal dose equivalent at depth 3 mm is stored in the registry of only 7 out of 26 countries. From the survey performed just before the implementation of the European Basic Safety Standards Directive it is concluded that the national occupational exposure framework require intensive and immediate work under the coordination of the competent authorities to be in line with the latest basic safety standards and achieve harmonisation within the European countries.
Keywords: effective dose, equivalent dose to the lens of the eye, double dosimetry, regulatory status
1. Introduction
the annual limit on the equivalent dose to the lens of the eye for the exposed workers which was subsequently adopted by 3the International Atomic Energy Agency (2) and the European Council (3) within the international and European basic safety standards framework respectively. Different organisations,	such	as	regulatory	bodies,	scientific committees, professional societies and international fora have shown concern about the practical implementation of the reduced limit. In particular, concerns were raised about workplaces where the eyes are close to the radiation source and the radiation field is non-homogeneous, such as in interventional radiology suites (4,5,6). Several studies have already highlighted the difficulties in setting up an appropriate monitoring programme for the lens of the eyes (7,8,9,10). One of the  most frequent approaches to  estimate the equivalent dose to the lens of the eyes, Hlens, is the use of a whole body dosemeter placed on an unprotected part of the body (usually above the thyroid collar or on the lead apron) (11,12). This dosemeter is then used both for the estimation of the effective dose and the equivalent dose to the lens of the eyes.
One of EURADOS (European Radiation Dosimetry Group) working groups (WG12-Dosimetry in medical imaging) prepared a survey addressed to regulatory authorities, in Europe and countries that participate in EURADOS activities, in order to investigate how the various countries are dealing with the estimation of the effective dose,E, and of the equivalent dose to the lens of the eyes, Hlens, when protective garments, such as thyroid collars, lead aprons or lead glasses are worn. This situation is most frequently occurring for exposed workers in X-ray medical imaging departments. The main objective of this survey is to  provide an  overview  of  the  regulatory  status  of  whole body dose monitoring (especially when two dosemeters are used) and monitoring of dose to the lens of the eye, focusing mainly on interventional applications (13), since they have been considered as the procedures during which the workers have the highest probability to exceed the new dose limit for the lens of the eye.
2.Design of questionnaire
The	survey	was	performed	using	an	electronic questionnaire. The questionnaire was divided into six main sections. The first section covered introductory and,voluntarily, contact information, in case there was a need for clarification of some of the answers. The second section referred to gathering information about country’s regulations with respect to the estimation of the effective dose and the operational quantities. The third and fourth section addressed the main issues of double dosimetry and the monitoring of the dose to the lens of the eye, respectively. The questions were asked about the methodology for the estimation of the effective dose and the dose to the lens of the eye, the number of dosemeters, their position and the use of algorithms. The fifth section dealt with the content of the national dose register (NDR) and finally the last section included questions about any recent or future changes in the NDR and its structure due to the implementation of the new basic safety standards (2,3). The questionnaire was designed and distributed using the google survey tool which ensures that the responders can express their opinions anonymously. There were about 15 questions with multiple answers and space for entering
comments as free-text.
The questionnaire was distributed electronically to regulators, and where possible, it was specifically addressed to the person in charge of this topic. The first distribution was made in October 2017 and a second reminder and some specific clarification questions were sent in February 2018.
The survey was conducted only a few months before the deadline for the implementation of the reduction of the annual limit for the dose to the lens of the eye in the national regulations and procedures in February 2018 for the countries member of the European Union. It is to be expected that part of the information gathered needs to be interpreted in the light of the foreseen modifications.
Figure 1: Countries that responded to the questionnaire in dark grey.
3.Results
3.1General
Authorities from 26 countries responded to the questionnaire (responses were received from European countries and Israel, see Figure 1) between 16th October and 27th November 2017.3Many of these countries are part of the European Union and have to comply with the European Council Directive 2013/59/EURATOM (3), requiring certain modifications in occupational exposure monitoring, one of the most important being the reduced equivalent dose limit for the lens of the eye of 20 mSv per year or 100 mSv per 5 years.
3.2 Regulatory context
All of the 26 countries have certain provisions in their regulatory framework for the estimation of the effective dose and/or the operational quantities for individual monitoring.Some of the countries have implemented them at the governmental level, others at state level or in technical guidance  from  the  competent  authority  (Figure  2). Some countries   specify   the   requirements   in   more   than   one egislative document.
Out of the 26 countries, 14 (54%) countries have legal requirements about the number and the position of dosemeters used for estimation of the effective dose when radiation protective garments (aprons and/ or thyroid collar) are  used. The methodology for the estimation of the effective dose is defined by the regulator in a few cases, but in others this responsibility is given to other parties such as the dosimetry service provider, the national dose registry provider, the radiation protection expert or officer.
Figure 2: Number of countries and the respective legislative level of regulatory guidance for estimation of the effective dose and/or the operational quantities for individual monitoring.The legislative level of regulatory guidance in some countries is in more than one level.
3.3 Estimation of the effective dose
The number of dosemeters used for the individual monitoring of the whole body dose varies from 1 to 2. The responses are summarised in Table 1. In some countries the number of dosemeters is based on a decision protocol depending on the expected dose. The wearing position on the body as prescribed by the authorities is presented in Figure 3 for the whole body dosemeters.
Only in 5 (19%) out of the 26 responses it is mentioned that there are nationally approved algorithms for the estimation of the effective dose. For the countries using the measurements above the radiation protection apron, different coefficients are in use. The algorithms, where applicable, are as shown in Table 2.
Table 1: Countries grouped per dosemeter’s prescribed position as stated in regulatory framework in different countries.
Figure 3: Prescribed wearing position for the whole body dosemeter
Table 2: Reported approved algorithms for the estimation of effective dose, E
are used. In one of these a correction factor of 0.5 is used, while in the other, the value of the factor is not prescribed.
Estimation of the dose to the lens of the eye An overview of the specified methods for the estimation of the dose to the lens of the eye is presented in Figure 4. In 14 (54%) out of 26 countries there is a legal requirement in place to estimate the dose to the lens of the eye  at the time the questionnaire was distributed. In almost half of the countries the dosemeter above the protection is being used for estimation of the dose to the lens of the eye (Figure 4). In 7 (27%) countries dedicated eye lens dosimetry is being used.In 3 countries, the guidance depends on the expected level of exposure to the lens of the eye or the preference of the user.In 6 countries there was, at the time of the survey, no guidance to estimate the eye lens dose by measurement.Two countries reported an algorithm for the estimation of the dose to the lens of the eye when radiation safety glasses are used. In one of these a correction factor of 0.5 is used, while in the other, the value of the factor is not prescribed.
Figure 4: Specified method for estimation of the dose to the lens of the eye
3.5 National dose registry
All of the responding countries use a kind of national database for keeping the individual monitoring data. Many countries seem to include all personal dosimetry data in the NDR. The various parameters kept in the databases are summarised in Figure 5. As it is shown from the figure, only in 12 countries the estimated effective dose values, E, are recorded. In 5 out of 12 of these cases the NDR does not contain Hp(10) values above and below the protective garments. There are 14 cases where E is not recorded at all; in 11 of the 14 cases the Hp(10) values below the protection are stored and in 8 out of the 14 cases, the Hp(10) values above the protection are stored (some 3registries contain doses below and above). What is surprising is that from the 3 countries that use 2 dosemeters for the estimation of E plus the 13 countries that use 1 or 2 dosemeters for the estimation of E (16 in total) only 9 include the estimated values of E in the NDR. The Hp(3) quantity is stored only in 7 out of 26 countries (either the Hp(3) above and/or below the protection). Some of the countries store the Hp(3) values both for above and below the protection. The extremity operational quantity, Hp(0.07), is stored in 17 out of 26 countries.
Figure 5: Recorded parameters in national dose registries. Hp(d) stands for the operational quantities at depth 10, 3 and 0.07 mm  Changes foreseen in the system Quite some countries (15 out of 26) consider changing their national dose registry to be able to record additional parameters, such as the results of double dosimetry, the measured values of Hp(3), the correction factor for the applied protective measures or trigger alarm levels for the dose to the lens of the eye.
4.Discussion
The results of the survey should be interpreted considering certain limitations. First of all, not all of the European countries are present in the survey though a serious effort was made towards this direction. The questionnaire was sent to the contact persons established within EURADOS network with the remark to be sent to the person responsible for the occupational exposure in each country. Despite the compliance with European Council Directive 96/29 (16) the specific and this puts one extra limitation to the interpretation of the results of the survey. Additionally, there were many blanks in the responses for which the reason is not clear; either the questions were not applicable or there seemed to be no clear answers at the time of the survey. For some of the responses that were not clear or inconsistent with the rest of the questionnaire an extra clarification email was sent in order to glean the right data.
Another important limitation of the survey is the time line. Many of the responders described the situation as it was implemented in their respective countries at the moment of the survey. However, many countries were already planning to modify their system to comply with the requirements on occupational exposure and the data system for individual radiological monitoring from the new European and international basic safety standards (2,3).
Having taken the above into consideration, the response to the survey can be considered reasonably representative 3having received answers from 25 European countries plus Israel.
Regarding the regulatory framework it is encouraging that in all responding countries there are requirements in different levels for the estimation of the effective dose and/or determination of the operational quantities. However, there is a variety in the degree in which authorities have specified the methodology for the estimation of the effective and/or lens of the eye doses, including requirements for the number and position of the dosemeter used, the respective algorithm and the relevant responsibilities by the competent authorities, authorised parties, the individual monitoring services and the radiation  protection  officer.  These  differences  depict  the different  structure  of  the  radiation  protection  system  in Europe. Though the international recommendations by IAEA (2) and the European directive (3) describe the general outline of the system there are many degrees of freedom for the Member States to adopt their own policies. As part of the EURADOS CONRAD project (17), a questionnaire was distributed in 2008 to 13 dosimetry services in 13 European countries which showed that even in the year 2008, 8 years after the implementation of previous basic   safety   standards   directive   (17),    no    harmonized regulations existed in the field of occupational exposure monitoring. The project showed that the estimation of the effective dose was mainly based on single dosemeter measurements either above (5 out of 13 countries) or below (7 out of 13 countries) the protective apron. The current survey results shows that, compared to the previous project (17) where only in one out of 13 countries two dosemeters were used for the estimation of E, more countries (16 out of 26) are at least in part of the exposure situations making  use of  two  dosemeters.  However,  there  are  still   quite   some countries using only one dosemeter either above (3 countries) or below (7 countries) the radiation protection garments.  At the end of 2017, only in 5 out of 26 countries there seemed to be nationally approved algorithms which use a combination of the dose readings recorded above and below the radiation protection apron (data  are  shown in  Table  2). The relevant algorithms are also found in the literature (17) and considered to overestimate the effective dose by 2-4 times depending on the irradiation setup. No nationally approved algorithms were mentioned for the cases that use only one dosemeter above the radiation protection apron (3 countries) and subsequently there is no official provision for recording the effective dose at the NDR.
Annex X of the European Council Directive 2013/59 (3)requires that the results of the individual monitoring of exposed  workers  is  included  in  the  official  dose  record, including the effective dose and in the event of  non-uniform exposure, the equivalent doses in the different parts of the body. Only in 7 cases the Hp(3) values are stored in the NDR.It is clear from the results of this questionnaire,  summarised in Figure 5, that at the end of 2017 a serious effort was still to be made to comply with the directive.
Finally, there was no harmonised methodology and procedures at the moment of the survey for the algorithm for the estimation of the dose to the lens of the eye. A factor of
0.5 is mentioned by one respondent for the cases where radiation protection glasses are worn. However, the situation is not firm: there are cases that dedicated eye lens dosemeters are used and other cases where the whole body dosemeters are used for the estimation of the dose to the lens of the eye. In the first case guidance is required about how to calculate the dose to the lens of the eye when radiation protection glasses are used, while in the latter case which correlation factor to be used for the estimation of the dose form the whole body indication. In both cases the position of the dosemeter should be specified clearly.
5.Conclusion
The results of the survey should not be interpreted as a clear realistic view on the current regulatory status of the occupational exposure framework due to the time period that the survey has been conducted. Many of the countries participated in the survey are in the process of drawing their road maps for drafting and implementing the new basic safety standard regulations set in the international and European scene.
However, the results can be seen in the view of where each country stands, what is required, where the country would like to be –based on country specific resources and particularities- and how to get there. Therefore, intensive and immediate work is needed under the coordination of the competent authorities in order to smooth out the differences as well as to comply with the European Council Directive 2013/59 on basic safety standards (3). In order to achieve this objective, it is needed to learn from the lessons of the past, especially of the status formed during the implementation of the previous European Council Directive 96/29 on basic safety standards (16), and to make room for issues of primary importance that have been identified in the present study and include the:
-Harmonization of the procedures for the estimation of the effective dose and the equivalent dose to the lens of the eye. This includes also the number and position of dosemeters used; and
-Definition of the minimum parameters related to dose quantities and the methodology applied, apart from the data mentioned at Annex X of the European Council Directive 2013/59, to be included in the NDR.
Finally it would be very interesting in the future to repeat a similar survey in order to note whether the objectives set have been accomplished.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank all EURADOS members for  their  help  in  the  dissemination  of  the  survey  in their respective countries as well as all the responders who replied
to it.
