<title>Use of big data analysis to investigate the relationship  between natural radiation dose rates and cancer incidences in Republic of Korea</title>
<author>Han Young Joo, Jae Wook Kim, Joo Hyun Moon*</author>
<Affiliation>Department of Nuclear Engineering, Dankook University, 119, Dandae-ro, Dongnam-gu, Cheonan, Chungnam, 31116, Republic of Korea</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>NUCLEAR ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2020.01.015</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2020.01.015</URL>
ABSTRACT
In this study, we investigated whether there is a signiﬁcant relationship between the natural radiation dose rate and the cancer incidences in Korea by using a big data analysis. The natural dose rate data for this analysis were the measurement data obtained from the 171 monitoring posts of the 113 adminis- trative districts in Korea over the 10 years from 2007 to 2016. The relative cancer incidences for this analysis were the difference in the cancer patients per hundred thousand people year-on-year in the administrative districts with the ﬁve highest and the ﬁve lowest natural gamma dose rates each year over the same period. To analyze the correlation between the two variables, Spearman's rank correlation coefﬁcient between the two rates was derived using R, a well-known big data analysis tool. The analysis showed that Spearman's rank correlation coefﬁcient was more than 0.05 and that the correlation be- tween the two variables was not statistically signiﬁcant.Keywords:
Natural radiation dose rate Cancer incidences
Big data analysis
Relative cancer incidence Spearman's rank correlation analysis1.Introduction
Natural radiation is emitted from a variety of sources and is a constant source of ionizing radiation present in the environment. Hence, every human being is constantly exposed to natural radia- tion. The worldwide average natural radiation dose to human be- ings is approximately 2.4 mSv per year, and the average natural radiation dose in Korea is known to be approximately 3 mSv per year [1,2].
The observed radiation effects are usually classiﬁed into two categories: deterministic effects and stochastic effects. In the case of deterministic effects, the magnitude of an effect increases with an increase in the size of the radiation dose exceeding the threshold dose. Moreover, there is a clear, unambiguous causal relationship between exposure to radiation and the deterministic effects. In the case of stochastic effects such as cancer, the linear, zero-threshold dose-response model (called LNT model) has been adopted for the radiation protection of the population; this model assumes that the frequency of occurrence of a stochastic effect is linearly pro- portional to the size of the radiation dose without a threshold [3e7].
Although the LNT model is adopted as an ofﬁcial model for
evaluating stochastic effects because of the radiation exposure by International Commission on Radiological Protection, this model has been a disputed issue because it is inherently unveriﬁable at doses less than 100 mGy where the postulated number of sto- chastic effects is less than the statistical variability of the natural occurrence of these effects [3]. Thus far, the mechanisms of low dose and low dose rate-induced health effects have been poorly
understood, and many experts have attempted to identify the doseeresponse relationship in the low radiation dose region [8,9].
In this study, we investigated whether there is any statistically signiﬁcant relationship between the natural dose rate and cancer incidences, a representative stochastic effect, in the  administra- tive districts of the Republic of Korea (ROK). We analyzed the natural radiation dose rate data over  the  10-year  period  from 2007 to 2016, measured by the environmental radiation moni- toring network operated by Nuclear Safety and Security Com- mission of Korea. Furthermore, we compared the  natural  radiation dose rate with the relative  cancer  incidence  derived from the number of cancer patients obtained from the homepage  of the National Cancer Center. For analyses of these big data, R- language, a well-known big data analysis tool, was applied.
Table 1
Spearman's correlation coefﬁcient classiﬁcation [12].
2.Method
2.1.Data
There are 250 elemental administrative districts in ROK. As of the end of 2016, the Korean government and nuclear utilities were operating the 171 monitoring posts at the 113 elementary admin- istrative districts, which monitor the environmental radiation dose rate of each district. Each monitoring post measures the gamma dose rate (mSv/h) in air each hour with an ion chamber and/or a scintillation detector, and transmits the measurement data to the
Fig. 1. Dose rate distribution over the entire country from 2007 to 2016.
Fig. 2. Box graph of the average of the radiation dose rates at the 171 monitoring posts.
central monitoring post located at Korea Institute of Nuclear Safety in Daejeon, ROK. The radiation dose rate data for this analysis were the data obtained in the hourly measurements at the 171 moni- toring posts over the 10 consecutive years from 2007 to 2016, which were acquired through a request of information disclosure to Nuclear Safety and Security Commission in ROK.
Then, the relative cancer incidences were derived for the dis- tricts that were identiﬁed as the ones with the ﬁve highest and the ﬁve lowest natural gamma dose rates each year over the same period. The raw data for deriving the relative cancer incidences were the number of cancer patients in each district that were registered at Central Cancer Information Center in National Cancer Center of Korea (CCIC). The number of cancer patients for this analysis was acquired through a request of information disclosure to CCIC. Because the exact number of new cancer patients for the districts was not included in the raw data provided by CCIC, we derived the relative cancer incidence by comparing the difference in the number of cancer patients year-on-year. Because the resident registration number of each district was different, a direct com- parison of the relative cancer incidence of each district was not
Table 2
Top ﬁve districts with the highest/lowest annual average dose rates from 2007 to 2016 (unit: mSv/h).Table 3
Districts with the highest/lowest annual average dose rate and the relative cancer incidence from 2007 to 2016 (unit: mSv/h, per 100,000 persons). possible. For comparison, hence, the relative cancer incidence per hundred thousand people in each district was derived by consid- ering the number of cancer patients and the resident registration number in each district.
2.2.Statistical analysis methodology
The R language is widely used among statisticians and data miners for developing statistical software and for data analysis. In
this study, R was used to analyze the data of the radiation dose rates in each administrative district and compare them with the corre- sponding cancer incidence rates.
We applied a correlation analysis method to check whether there is a correlation, statistically signiﬁcant, between the natural dose rate and the cancer rate in each administrative district with the ﬁve highest and the ﬁve lowest natural radiation dose rates in ROK. For the correlation analysis, the following two correlation coefﬁcients have been widely used: Pearson's correlation
Fig. 3. Locations of the regions with the highest and the lowest dose rates on the geological map of ROK.
coefﬁcient and Spearman's rank correlation coefﬁcient. To  apply the two coefﬁcients to the correlation analysis, the samples for the analysis have to be random and mutually independent. In contrast to Pearson's correlation coefﬁcient, Spearman's rank correlation coefﬁcient could be applied to a dataset that does not follow a normal distribution or not have a linear relationship between the variables [10].Of the two coefﬁcients, we used Spearman's rank correlationcoefﬁcient  for the correlation  analysis.  Spearman's rank coefﬁcient
was derived using their ranks, instead of the two values themselves,and has a real number ranging from 1 to 1. If the coefﬁcient is greater than 0, it can be interpreted that the correlation between
the two variables for comparison is positive; that is, if one variable increases, the other variable also tends to increase. If the coefﬁcient is 0, there is no correlation between the two variables. If the coef- ﬁcient is less than 0, the correlation between them is negative; that is, if one variable increases, the other variable tends to decrease. The correlation coefﬁcient is deﬁned as Eq. (1) [11]:@1
where di ¼ xi — yi is the difference between the two equalities assigned to i. The xi is the rank of the i-th data element of variable X,
Fig. 4. Relative cancer incidence over the entire country from 2007 to 2016.
yi is the rank of the i-th data element of variable Y, and n is the total number of the samples.
The use of Eq. (1) allows the computation of Spearman's rank correlation coefﬁcient and p-value. As mentioned before, Spear- man's rank correlation coefﬁcient shows how the two variables for comparison are correlated. The degree of correlation according to the correlation coefﬁcient values can be interpreted as shown in Table 1.
If the p-value is greater than 0.05, there is no statistically sig- niﬁcant monotonous correlation between the two variables. Otherwise, there is a statistically signiﬁcant monotonous correla- tion between the two variables. However, a low p-value implies that the hypothesis that there is no correlation between the two variables can be rejected, but it does not mean the degree of cor- relation between the variables, itself. Hence, the degree of corre- lation between the variables should be separately analyzed using the absolute value of the correlation coefﬁcient.
We used the R program to compute Spearman's rank correlation coefﬁcients between the gamma radiation dose rate data and the cancer incidence rate data over the 10 years from 2007 to 2016 in ROK, to determine the relationship between the two variables. The null hypothesis H0 for this analysis was that there is no positive correlation between the gamma dose rate and the cancer rate in each administrative district in ROK. The alternative hypothesis H1 was that there is a positive correlation between the two variables.
3.Results and discussion
From the hourly measurements, the annual averages of the gamma dose rates at each monitoring post from 2007 to 2016 were derived. For mapping the annual dose rates on the entire country region, we assumed that the average dose rate at each monitoring post was representative of the entire administrative district where the monitoring post is located, and/or of the uniﬁed region of both the district having the monitoring post and the neighboring dis- tricts if the neighboring districts do not have a monitoring post. Fig. 1 shows the distribution of the annual averages of the gamma dose rates over the 10 consecutive years from 2007 to 2016.
Fig. 2 shows the ﬂuctuation in the gamma dose rates measured at the 171 monitoring posts against the annual average dose rate over the entire country. The average dose rate was 0.1157 mSv= h, equivalent to about 1 mSv=y and its ﬂuctuation was 0.0041 mSv= h. This implies that considering that the average individual dose from the natural radiation in ROK is approximately 3 mSv/y, 30% of the total radiation dose could vary in different locations.
We identiﬁed the ﬁve districts with the highest annual average dose rates every year and have summarized them in Table 2. Over the period from 2007 to 2016, Sokcho was the district with the ﬁrst highest annual average dose rate, whose annual average ranges from 0.1697 to 0.1816mSv=h. It was followed by Paju and Yuseong. We also identiﬁed the ﬁve districts with the lowest annual average dose rate every year and have summarized them in Table 3. Ongjin was the district with the ﬁrst lowest annual average dose rate during the period considered for the analysis.
The main cause for the difference in the natural radiation dose rate in each district might be related to the type of bed rock in each district [13]. To check this out, therefore, we mapped the regions with the highest and the lowest average dose rate on the geological map of ROK, as shown in Fig. 3. Interestingly, we found that the regions with the highest average dose rate are commonly located on granite bedrock that was formed in the Jurassic period of the Mesozoic Era [14,15].
In this study, we derived the relative cancer incidence of the current year from the equation as Eq. (2):
@2
where xi is the number of cancer patients in the i-th year, xi—1 is the number of cancer patients in the (i e 1)-th year, and ni is the number of residents registered in each district in the i-th year.
Fig. 4 shows the distribution of the relative cancer incidence of the districts with the ﬁve highest and the ﬁve lowest natural gamma dose rates in ROK from 2007 to 2016. While the natural gamma dose rates in the districts did not change considerably with time, the relative cancer incidence of the districts changed considerably with time, as shown in Fig. 5. Fig. 6 show the average dose rates and the relative cancer incidence of the districts with the natural radiation dose rates each year.
We applied a regression analysis model to check the linearity between the average dose rate and the relative cancer incidence     of the district and found no  linearity between the  two variables  for    the    regions    with    the    highest    radiation    dose    rate    (r      0.00096)  and  the  regions  with  lowest  radiation  dose  rate  (r 0.02019). This means that the relationship between the two variables cannot be explained by a simple linear correlation.
Because we had only the measurements of the natural gamma dose rate for 113 districts of the 250 districts, we could not directly compare the relative cancer incidence in the 250 districts with the gamma dose rates in the 113 districts. Hence, we only compared the relative cancer incidence with the gamma dose rates in the districts that were identiﬁed every year as those with the ﬁve highest and the ﬁve lowest natural radiation dose rate districts from 2007 to 2016, as shown in Table 3.
To check whether there is a correlation between the natural radiation dose rate and the relative cancer incidence in the districts with the highest and the lowest natural radiation dose rates, Spearman's rank correlation coefﬁcients between the two variables and their p-values were computed and have been summarized in Tables 4 and 5.
Spearman's rank coefﬁcient with a p-value greater than 0.05 implied that there was no statistically signiﬁcant monotonous correlation between the two variables. As shown in Tables 4 and 5, the p-values of the 19 districts, except Cheorwon, were greater than 0.05, and the null hypothesis for these 19 districts could not be rejected. That is, it could be concluded that there was no signiﬁcant correlation between the natural radiation dose rates and the rela- tive cancer incidence for the 19 districts. For the degree of corre- lation between the two variables, 11 districts had grades of “little if any relationship” or “low” [16].
Fig. 5. Box graph for cancer rate in ROK.
Fig. 6. Relative cancer incidences per hundred thousand people for the regions with the ﬁve highest and the ﬁve lowest natural radiation dose rates with the dose rates.
Table 4
Spearman's rank coefﬁcients for the districts with the highest radiation dose rate.4.Conclusions
We applied the R language to investigate whether there is a relationship between the natural radiation dose rate and the cancer incidences by deriving Spearman's rank coefﬁcients between the two variables. As a result, we did not ﬁnd any statistically signiﬁ- cant correlation between the two variables for the districts with the ﬁve highest and the ﬁve lowest radiation dose rate. This implied that the variation in the natural radiation dose could not be considered as a main cause of cancer incidence. This could be conﬁrmed by seeing that the relative cancer incidence, that is, the
number of new cancer patients in the district with the highest ra- diation dose rate, was never the highest among the other districts. Hence, we concluded that, at least, a low radiation dose rate was not only a main cause of cancer.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea grants NRF-2017M2B2A9A02049319 and NRF- 2020M2D2A2062436 founded by the Korean Government.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2020.01.015.