<title>Postmastectomy Radiation Therapy: Are We Ready to Individualize Radiation?</title>
<author>Ashlyn S. Everett  ,1,2 Drexell Hunter Boggs,1,2 and Jennifer F. De Los Santos  1,3</author>
<Affiliation>1. Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA
2.Hazelrig Salter Radiation Oncology Center, 1700 6th Ave South, Birmingham, AL 35249, USA
3 .Te Kirklin Clinic at Acton Road, 2145 Bonner Way, Birmingham, AL 35243, USA</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral> Science and Technology of Nuclear Installation</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Hindawi</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1155/2018/14028243</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/1402824</URL>
Contemporary recommendations for postmastectomy radiation have undergone a shif in thinking away from simple stage based recommendations (one size fts all) to a system that considers both tumor biology and host factors. While surgical staging has traditionally dictated indications for postmastectomy radiation therapy (PMRT), our current understanding of tumor biology, host, immunoprofles, and tumor microenvironment may direct a more personalized approach to radiation. Understanding the interaction of these variables may permit individualization of adjuvant therapy aimed at appropriate escalation and deescalation, including recommendations for PMRT. Tis article summarizes the current data regarding tumor and host molecular biomarkers in vitro and in vivo that support the individualization of PMRT and discusses open questions that may alter the future of breast cancer treatment.
1. Introduction
Breast cancer is the most commonly diagnosed malignancy andthesecondmostfrequentcauseofcancerdeathinwomen [1].   Radiation  therapy  remains   an   important  treatment modality for patients with locally advanced breast  cancer, with randomized trials investigating postmastectomy radia- tion therapy (PMRT) continuing to demonstrate decreased locoregional recurrence (LRR) and improved overall survival (OS)  in  appropriately  selected  patients  [2–4].  Historically, surgical staging provided risk-stratifcation that served as the basis  for  recommending  PMRT;  however,  modern  under- standing of genetics, immunology, and molecular biology is shedding light on tumor and host biomarkers that may alter patients’ rates of response, progression, or survival [5].
Precision  radiation  therapy  currently refers  to  the  use of advanced technology to improve target delineation and treatment  delivery.  However,  to  usher  radiation  oncology into  the  era  of personalized  medicine,  we  must  consider individual  patient  and  tumor  parameters  that  infuence treatment response and complications to provide appropriate treatment  recommendations.  Applying  our  understanding
of molecular markers representing tumor and host biology may permit individualization of radiation therapy aimed at appropriate escalation and deescalation of PMRT based on biologic parameters. Tis article summarizes the current data regarding molecular markers, which support the individual- ization of radiation using tumor molecular profles, stromal microenvironment  data,  and  patient  genetic  and  immune parameters.
2. Tumor Molecular Profile
2.1.  Tumor Biology.  In  the  past  decade,  great  strides  have been  made  in  understanding  tumor  biology  and  using this knowledge to design tumor-directed targeted therapies. For  example,  the  addition  of  targeted  monoclonal  anti- body therapies against the HER2 protein (i.e., trastuzumab, pertuzumab)  to  chemotherapy  regimens  has  signifcantly improved overall survival in patients with HER2 amplifed breast cancers [6]. However, heterogeneity within individual tumorssignifcantlylimitstargetedtherapiespotentialtocure cancer,  as we  have  recognized  tumors  developing  evasion mechanisms and resistance to targeted treatment strategies.
In  breast  cancer,  tumor  heterogeneity,  as  represented by receptor status, has been recognized for decades. More recently, genomic assays of 12–70 or more genes, including Oncotype Dx (Genomic Health, Inc., USA, Redwood City, CA)  and  MammaPrint  (Agendia,  Inc.,  USA,  Irvine,  CA), have further elucidated the heterogeneity of breast tumors. Medical oncologists apply this data in making treatment rec- ommendations regarding adjuvant chemotherapy; however, little  data  relates this  genomic  data to  radiation  oncology recommendations. While genomic models provide primarily information  regarding  distant  failure  rates,  as  opposed  to local  failure  rates,  several  investigators  have  explored  the applicability  of existing  recurrence  scores  to  the  issue  of locoregional recurrence [7].
Some  studies  propose  models  accounting  for  intrinsic radiosensitivity  of tumors  to  help  guide  radiation  recom- mendations  and  dose  schedules.  Eschrich  and  colleagues validated a radiosensitivity molecular signature in a cohort of breast patients, which demonstrated that patients predicted to be radiosensitive versus radioresistant had improved 5- year  relapse-free  survival  and  5-year  distant  metastasis- free  survival  when  treated  with  radiation  [8].  A  similar model was used to predict local recurrence in breast cancer and identifed that radiosensitive triple-negative phenotype breast  cancers  had  similar  local  recurrence  to  those  with luminal  A  or  B  subtypes  [9].  While  there  is  no  defned role for these clinical models at this time, they potentially can provide clinicians with valuable information regarding intrinsic tumor radiosensitivity and biology that may shape clinical recommendations in the future.
2.2. Genomic Factors.  While genetic mutations in tumors are widely recognized, epigenetic changes are now appreciated to  infuence  response  to  radiation  treatment  across  many cancer histologies, including breast cancer [10]. DNA methy- lation is a process involved in regulating gene transcription, and,  therefore,  gene  expression  and  cellular  function  [11]. Data  suggests  a  correlation  between  radiosensitivity  and DNA methylation in vitro  [12], and in vivo studies demon- strate DNA methylation levels of specifc genes before and afer exposure to radiation are signifcantly correlated with response to radiotherapy and with total dose [13]. In clinical context,  using  methylation  of particular  genes  to  predict treatment  response  may  help  physicians  tailor  radiation therapy using individual patients’ genomic DNA methylation pattern.
3. Stromal Microenvironment
Te tumor microenvironment is a known factor infuencing radiation treatment and response but has proven difcult to study, given our limitations in reproducing its conditions in vitro.  Several  recent  studies  have  demonstrated  molecular infuences of the stroma on irradiated tissues. When compar- ing tumor cells irradiated in vitro versus in vivo, gene expres- sionproflesaferradiationdiferedsignifcantly,withauthors concluding that the tumor microenvironment  (accounting for  hypoxia,  nutrient  availability,  blood  fow,  etc.)  plays  a major role in gene expression afer radiation [14]. Similarly,
International Journal of Breast Cancer
studies investigating DNA methylation of breast cancer show that  methylation  changes  in  vitro  are  signifcantly  lower than the methylation seen in patient samples, suggesting a signifcant impact of the tumor microenvironment and host immune system [13].
Tere is also striking diference between gene expression afer single fraction dose radiation versus multifraction dose radiation, with multifraction dose radiation demonstrating increased expression of IFN-related genes. IFN-related genes are  known  to  contribute  to  infammation  and  be  associ- ated with radiation resistance that is ofen associated with multifraction  radiation  schedules  [14].  Tis  data  suggests that  infammation  in  the  microenvironment  around  the time  of radiation may infuence the  response to  radiation therapy  and  could  be  a  potential  target  to  increase  the therapeutic ratio of radiation in future studies. Other studies investigating  the  stromal  microenvironment  demonstrate that genetic changes, notably in the c-Kit and ER proteins, are present  and  continually changing years  afer  radiation therapy, likely contributing to fbrosis, telangiectasias,  and other  normal  tissue  complications  [15].  While  signifcant questions remain, there is now concrete data demonstrating that  tumor  microenvironment  plays  a  substantial  role  in infuencing the efect of radiotherapy and may play a part in individualizing radiation therapy in the future.
4. Host Parameters
4.1. Genetic Factors.  Host genetic factors are known to play a role in development of cancer. Genetic mutations are of two varieties: germline genetic mutations, arising from the gamete  and  therefore  afecting  every  cell  in  the  ofspring patient, and somatic mutations, occurring in a population of cells afer conception and ofen found in tumor cells [16, 17]. Patients harboring germline mutations, such as BRCA1 or BRCA2andTP53(Li-Fraumenisyndrome)orATM,areofen at higher risk of developing cancers, since every cell in the body has an existing mutation.
In contrast, somatic mutations are not known to confer
higher risks of developing future cancers, since the known defect is limited to a certain population of cells. Using known geneticriskinformationtoassistinmakingtreatmentrecom- mendations in breast cancer is crucial for optimizing patient outcomes. In general, adjuvant radiation therapy risks and benefts should be discussed in a multidisciplinary setting, with an understanding of treatment-related complications. Here we will briefy discuss two genetic syndromes that are relevant with regard to adjuvant radiation therapy.
4.1.1. Li-Fraumeni Syndrome.  Patients with Li-Fraumeni syn- drome have germline TP53 mutations, and signifcant risk of early onset breast cancer, the most common malignancy diagnosed in adults with this mutation  [18]. With modern understanding of this genetic mutation, there is an appre- ciation for increased risk of second cancers, including sar- coma, leukemia, and second breast primaries (ipsilateral and contralateral) [19]. Radiation therapy is generally avoided in patients with Li-Fraumeni syndrome but should be discussed with  a  multidisciplinary  team,  considering  the  risks  and
benefts of disease recurrence with complications including second malignancies.
4.1.2. ATM.  Mutation  in the  ataxia telangiectasia  mutated (ATM)  gene  is  another  one that  confers  increased  risk of breast cancer. Homozygous ATM mutations also results in potentially increased toxicity with radiation therapy, due to defective  DNA  repair  and  genomic  instability  in  normal tissues  [20]. However, patients with heterozygous germline ATM  mutations  do  not  appear  to  have  increased  toxicity with radiation therapy  [21]. Radiation therapy is generally contraindicated in patients with homozygous germline ATM gene  mutations  but  appears  to  be  safe  in  appropriately selected patients with heterozygous mutation [22].
4.2. Host Immune Profle.  For  over  40 years, the  immune system has been implicated as crucial for optimal response to radiation therapy  [23]. Modern studies show that DNA methylation   of  immune   pathway   genes   is   signifcantly altered  afer  radiation  therapy,  consistent  with  an  infu- ence  on  response  to  radiation  [13].  In  addition,  upregu- lated  infammatory  signaling  pathways  are  implicated  in improving  response  to  radiation  and  may  be  promising targets for enhancing radiosensitivity of tumors [24]. Current immunotherapies in use for other cancer types include ipil- imumab, pembrolizumab, and nivolumab. Trials incorporat- ing immunotherapies neoadjuvantly are currently underway in  high  risk  breast  cancer.  One  such  study,  the  I-SPY  2 trial (http://www.ispy2.org), investigates the genomic profle of breast  tumors  using  the  MammaPrint  Assay  (Agendia, Inc.  USA,  Irvine,  CA).  Patients  with  high  risk  results  on
the  MammaPrint  are  then  randomized  to  various  arms  of
neoadjuvant  chemotherapy, with  one  arm  including pem- brolizumab   (anti-PD-1  antibody).  Preliminary  results  in the pembrolizumab  arm  demonstrate increased pCR rates (TNBC 20 versus 60%, HER2+ 13 versus 35%) compared to the standard chemotherapy arm  [25]. Tese are promising results and will hopefully translate into improved outcomes with further follow-up  and may open the  door for  incor- porating immunotherapies into the standard chemotherapy regimen for locally advanced breast cancers.
5. Current Strategies for       Individualizing Radiation
Researchers from Moftt Cancer Center recently proposed one  method  of  adjusting  radiation  dose  using  biological diferencesin tumors.Tegenome-basedmodelforadjusting radiotherapy  dose  (GARD)  incorporates  gene-expression- based radiation sensitivity, standard of care radiation dose, and  fractionation  for  a  particular  tumor  and  the  linear quadratic model to produce a value which predicts for the therapeutic efect of radiotherapy. In short, a higher GARD value predicts a higher therapeutic efect of radiation, which could be extrapolated to clinical beneft. Retrospective cohort studies using the GARD model have stratifed patients into low,middle,andhighgroups,demonstratingthatGARDmay be an independent predictor of clinical outcome in breast
3
cancer patients. In multivariate analysis, distant metastasis- free  survival  and  relapse-free  survival  in  multiple  cohorts were  statistically  associated  with  GARD  values.  Authors discussed that GARD may be used as a method to customize radiation  dose  to  match  the  radiosensitivity  of individual patient’s  tumors,  paving  the  way  for  future  clinical  trial design. However, limitations of GARD include the fact that it does not account for host or microenvironmental factors, or normal tissue toxicity factors, which, if included, would further allow clinicians to optimize radiation dose [26].
6. Conclusion
In the past decade, we have seen a paradigm shif in the treat- mentofbreastcancer,withamoreindividualizedapproachto understanding tumor biology and recommending adjuvant chemotherapy. Moving into the next decade of cancer care, it is imperative that personalized medicine moves beyond medical oncology and includes radiation therapy. Tis will present  many challenges,  requiring  radical  changes to the traditional model of delivering radiation—which has been to deliver the high dose radiation therapy within normal tissue tolerances.
Clinicians  must  synthesize  our  current  understanding of tumor biology, stromal microenvironment, host genetic and immune factors, risk of recurrence and complications, and improved therapeutics to make up-to-date and appro- priate recommendations for our patients. Ongoing research may  enhance  our  understanding  of  factors  that  may  be incorporated into future clinical trials, testing various dose levels based on the genetic, genomic, immune, stromal, and tumor molecular profles discussed in the body of this paper. Future studies may include similar models to GARD, where combinations  of tumor  factors,  tumor  microenvironment, host immunity,  and normal tissue  complications  and host genetics and immune profles are implicated in designating radiation dose levels. Ultimately, precision radiation therapy must begin  to  incorporate  personalized  treatment  recom- mendations,  eliminating  use  of radiation  in  patients  who do not beneft from it and preferentially treating those with highest beneft, to optimize breast cancer patient outcomes and improve our quality of care.
Additional Points
Key Points.  (i) Current understanding of genetic, genomic, immune,  stromal,  and  tumor  molecular  profles  may  be useful  in  providing  a  strategy  for  bringing  personalized medicine into the feld of radiation oncology. (ii) Precision radiation therapy should eliminate the use of radiation in patients who do not beneft from it and preferentially treat those with highest beneft, to optimize breast cancer patient outcomes.
Conflicts of Interest
Te  authors  have  no  commercial  or  fnancial  conficts  of
interest to disclose.
