<title>Development of high-performance heavy density concrete using different aggregates for gamma-ray shielding</title>
<author>Ahmed S. Ouda</author>
<Affiliation>Housing and Building National Research Center (HBRC), Dokki, Giza, Egypt</Affiliation>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2014.11.009 </DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2014.11.009</URL>
ABSTRACT
Primary and secondary containment structures are the major components of the nuclear power plant (NPP). The performance requirements of the concrete of containment structures are mainly radiological protection, structural integrity and durability, etc. For this purpose, high-performance heavy density concrete with special attributes can be used. The aggregate of concrete plays an essential role in modifying concrete properties and the physico-mechanical properties of the concrete affect signiﬁcantly on its shielding properties. After extensive trials and errors, 15 concrete mixes were prepared by using the coarse aggregates of barite, magnetite, goethite and serpentine along with addition of 10% silica fume (SF), 20% ﬂy ash (FA) and 30% ground granulated blast-furnace slag (GGBFS) to the total content of OPC for each mix. To achieve the high-performance concrete (HPC- grade M60), All concrete mixes had a constant water/cement ratio of 0.35, cement content of 450 kg/m3 and sand-to-total aggregate ratio of 40%. Concrete density has been measured in the case of fresh and hardened. The hardened concrete mixes were tested for compressive strength at 7, 28 and 90 days. In some concrete mixes, compressive strength was also tested up to 90 days upon replacing sand with the ﬁne portions of magnetite, barite and goethite. The attenuation measurements were performed by using gamma spectrometer of NaI (Tl) scintillation detector. The utilized radiation sources comprised 137Cs and 60Co radioactive elements with photon energies of 0.662 MeV for 137Cs and two energy levels of 1.173 and 1.333 MeV for 60Co. Some shielding factors were measured such as half-value layer (HVL), tenth-value layer (TVL) and linear attenuation coefﬁcients (m). Experimental results revealed that, the concrete mixes containing magnetite coarse aggregate along with 10% SF reaches the highest compressive strength values exceeding over the M60 requirement by 14% after 28 days of curing. Whereas, the compressive strength of concrete con- taining barite aggregate was very close to M60 and exceeds upon continuing for 90 days. The results indicated also that, the compressive strength of the high-performance heavy density concrete incor- porating magnetite as ﬁne aggregate was signiﬁcantly higher than that containing sand by 23%. Also, concrete made with magnetite ﬁne aggregate improved the physico-mechanical properties than the corresponding concrete containing barite and goethite. Therefore, high-performance concrete incorpo- rating magnetite as  ﬁne aggregate enhances the shielding efﬁciency against g-rays.
Keywords:
Heavyweight aggregates High-performance concrete
Linear attenuation coefﬁcient (m)
Half-value layer (HVL) Tenth-value layer (TVL)
1.Introduction
Concrete is by far the most widely used material for reactor shielding due to its cheapness and satisfactory mechanical prop- erties. It is usually a mixture of hydrogen and other light nuclei, and nuclei of fairly high atomic number (Ikraiam et al., 2009). The aggregate component of concrete that contains a mixture of many heavy elements plays an important role in improving concrete shielding properties and therefore has good shielding  properties for the attenuation of photons and neutrons (El-Sayed, 2002;  Akkurt et al., 2012). The density of heavyweight concrete is based on the speciﬁc gravity of the aggregate and the properties of the other components of concrete. Concretes with speciﬁc gravities higher than 2600 kg/m3 are called heavyweight concrete and ag- gregates with speciﬁc gravities higher than 3000 kg/m3 are called heavyweight aggregate according to TS EN 206-1 (2002). The ag- gregates and other components are based upon the exact applica- tion of the high density concrete. Some of the natural minerals used as aggregates in high density concrete are hematite, magnetite,
limonite, barite and some of the artiﬁcial aggregates including materials like steel punchings and iron shot. Minerals like bauxite, hydrous iron ore or serpentine, all slightly heavier than normal weight concrete can be used when high ﬁxed water content is required. It is essential that heavy weight aggregates are inert with respect to alkalis and free of oil, and foreign coatings which may have undesired effects on bonding of the paste to the aggregate particles or on cement hydration. Presently, heavyweight concrete is extensively used as a shield in nuclear plants and radio therapy rooms, and for transporting, and storing radioactive wastes. For this purpose, concrete must have high strength and high density. Heavyweight and high strength concrete can be used for shielding purposes if it meets the strength and radiation shielding properties. Such concrete that normally utilizes magnetite aggregate can have  a density in the range of 3.2e4 t/m3, which is signiﬁcantly higher than the density of concrete made with normal aggregates (Gencel et al., 2011, 2012). Concrete specimens prepared with magnetite, datolite-galena, magnetite-steel, limonite-steel and serpentine were  simulated.  Researchers  (Bas¸ yig˘it  et  al.,  2011)  used  heavy- weight aggregates of different mineral origins (limonite and siderite) in order to prepare different series of concrete mixtures and investigated the radiation shielding of these concrete speci- mens. They reported that, the concrete prepared with heavyweight aggregates of different mineral origin are useful as radiation ab- sorbents. The heart of a nuclear power project is the “Calandria” and it is housed in a reactor concrete building typically with a double containment system, a primary (or inner) containment structure (PCS) and a secondary (or outer) containment structure (SCS). This reactor containment structure is the most signiﬁcant concrete structure in a nuclear power plant.
The main objective of the current research is to investigate the
suitability of some concrete components for producing “high- performance heavy density concrete” using different types of aggregates that could enhances the shielding efﬁciency against g-rays.
2.Methodology of research
2.1.Materials
The starting materials used in this investigation for preparation of the concrete mixes are ordinary Portland cement- OPC- CEM I (42.5 N), complying with ASTM C-150 (2009), obtained from Suez Cement Company, Egypt. Some of the mineral admixtures were used as supplementary cementitious materials including, ground
granulated blast-furnace slag (GGBFS), obtained from Suez Cement Company- Tourah Plant (source: Japan), ﬂy ash-class F (FA), ob- tained from Geos Company, Cairo, Egypt, (source: India) and silica fume (SF), provided from the ferrosilicon alloy Company, Edfo, Aswan, Egypt. As each country has to make use of its own available raw materials; we had to search for the relevant aggregates that would be suitable for usage as a concrete component and satisfy the needed requirements for the construction of the nuclear power plants (NPP). Consequently, four types of coarse aggregates were used, namely, magnetite (Fe3O4), obtained from Wadi Karim, Eastern Desert, Egypt. Goethite [a-FeO(OH)] and barite (BaSO4), obtained from El- Bahariya Oasis, Western Desert, Egypt. While, serpentine [(Mg, Fe)3Si2O5(OH)4], obtained from El-Sdmin district, Eastern Desert, Egypt. Fine aggregate was local sand, washed at the sieve to remove the deleterious materials and the chloride contamination. The chemical composition of the starting materials was conducted using XRF Spectrometer PW1400 as shown  in  Table 1. Coarse aggregates were separated by manual sieving into various fractions of size 5e20 mm according to ESS 1109 (Egyptian Standard Speciﬁcation No. 1109, 2002) and ASTM C637 (2009). The nominal maximum size of coarse aggregates was 20 mm. Effective dispersion has been achieved by adding superplasticizer admixture (SP- Type G) to the concrete mixes, compatible with ASTM C494 (2011). In some concrete mixes, sand has been replaced by the ﬁne fractions for coarse aggregates of size < 5 mm to produce heavy density concrete according to TS EN 206-1 (2002). The physical and mechanical properties of coarse aggregate and their ﬁne fractions given in Table 2 were evaluated according to the limits speciﬁed by (Egyptian Standard Speciﬁcation No. 1109, 2002; ASTM C637, 2009) and ECPRC 203 (Egyptian Code of Practice for Reinforced Concrete, 2007)). The results showed that, barite coarse aggregate had higher speciﬁc gravity than magnetite, goethite and serpentine. Further- more, water absorption of goethite aggregate was several times higher than that of barite, magnetite and serpentine by 13, 10 and 6%, respectively. This is may be due to, the microcracks and ﬁssures generated in aggregate in addition to vesicular surface that forced the introduction of more water into aggregate to compensate its absorption.
2.2.Mix proportions
To investigate the effect of heavyweight aggregate on the physical and mechanical properties of concrete, high-performance heavyweight concrete mixes using the coarse aggregates of magnetite (M), barite (B), goethite (G) and serpentine (S) were
Table 1
Chemical composition of the starting materials (wt., %).
Table 2
Physical and mechanical properties of coarse aggregate and its ﬁne portions.
designed. Heavyweight concrete mixes can be proportioned using the American Concrete Institute method (ACI) of absolute volumes developed for normal concrete (Bunsell and Renard, 2005). The absolute volume method is generally accepted and is considered to be more convenient for heavyweight concrete (Kaplan, 1989). Hence, the absolute volume method to obtain denser concrete was used in the calculation of the concrete mixtures. Mix pro- portions of aggregates per 1 m3 of the concrete mixture are listed in Table 3. Four series of high-performance concrete mixes with compressive strength in excess of 60 MPa (grade- M60) were prepared using 10% SF, 20% FA and 30% GGBFS as a partial addition to OPC to study the effect of a supplementary cementing material on the properties of concrete containing heavyweight aggregate. The optimum ratios of supplementary materials were selected on the basis of an earlier research work conducted by Ouda (2013). After extensive trials and errors, cement content (450 kg/m3) and sand-to-total aggregate ratio (40%) were adjusted for all concrete mixtures. Coarse aggregates were used in a saturated surface dry condition to avoid the effect of water absorption of coarse aggregate during mixing and consequently to assess the real effect of coarse aggregate on the concrete properties. All concrete mixes had a constant water to cementitious ratio of 0.35 and super- plasticizer (SP)  was  used  to  maintain  a  constant  slump  of  10 ± 2 cm.
2.3.Mixing, curing and testing specimens
The procedure for mixing heavyweight concrete is similar to that for conventional concrete. In a typical mixing procedure, the materials were placed in the mixer with capacity of 56 dm3 in the following sequence: for each mix, coarse aggregate and ﬁne aggregate followed by cement blended with mineral cementing material were initially dry mixed for 2 min. Approximately, 80% of the mixing water was added and thereafter the mixer was started. After 1.5 min of mixing, the rest of the mixing water was added to the running mixer in a gradual manner. All batches were mixed for a total time of 5 min. In order to prevent fresh concrete from segregation, the mixing duration was kept as low as possible. After the mixing procedure was completed, slump test were conducted on the fresh concrete to determine the workability according to ASTM C143 (2010). All concrete specimens were cast in three layers into 100 100  100  mm cubic  steel  moulds; each  layer consoli- dated using a vibrating table. After casting, concrete specimens were covered with plastic membrane to avoid water evaporation and thereafter kept in the laboratory for 24 hrs at ambient tem- perature. After demoulding, concrete specimens were submerged into water tank until the time of testing. It is well recognized that adequate curing is very important not only to achieve the desired compressive strength but also to make durable concrete. Thus,
Table 3
Mix proportions of heavyweight concrete per 1 m3.
curing of specimens was performed according to ASTM C511 (2009).
2.3.1. Compressive strength
This test was determined at the curing ages of 7, 28 and 90 days according to European Standard EN 2390-3 (2001). The test wascarried out using a 2000 kN compression testing machine and a loading rate of 0.6 MPa/s. A set of three cubic specimens repre- senting the curing time were used to set the compressive strength.
2.3.2.Density of concrete
The density of fresh and hardened concrete was performed ac- cording to ECCCS e part VII (Egyptian Code for Design and Construction of Concrete structures, 2002).
2.3.3.Radiation attenuation test
The attenuation measurements of gamma rays were performed using sodium iodide NaI (Tl) scintillation detector with a Multi Channel Analyzer (MCA). The arrangements of experimental set up used in the test are shown in Fig. 1. The utilized radiation sources comprised 137Cs and 60Co radioactive elements with photon en- ergies of 0.662 MeV for 137Cs and two energy levels of 1.173 and
1.333 MeV for 60Co as standard sources with activities in micro curie (5 mCi). After 28 days of water curing, specimens were taken out and left to oven dry at 105 ○C prior to the test as recommended
by Yilmaz et al. (2011). Test samples with different thicknesses of 20e100 mm were arranged in front of a collimated beam emerged from gamma ray sources. The measurements were conducted for  20 min counting time for each sample. The attenuation coefﬁcient of gamma rays was determined by measuring the fractional radi- ation intensity Nx passing through the thickness x as compared to the source intensity No. The linear attenuation coefﬁcient (m) has been obtained from the solution of the exponential BeereLambert's law (Kazjonovs et al., 2010):
Nx ¼ No$e­mx cm­1
Half-value layer (HVL) and tenth-value layer (TVL) are the thicknesses of an absorber that will reduce the gamma radiation to half and to tenth of its intensity, respectively. Those are obtained by using the following equations (Akkurt and Canakci, 2011):@
The mean free path (mfp) is deﬁned as the average distance between two successive interactions of photons and it is given as:@
Table 4
Slump values of concrete mixtures.
3.Results and discussion
3.1.Physico-mechanical properties of concrete
3.1.1.Workability of fresh concrete
The mixability, placeability, mobility, compactability and ﬁn- ishability are collectively known as workability. Slump is the easiest test that can be used in the ﬁeld for the measurement of work- ability. The slump of almost all the mixes was in the range of 100e120 mm. Table 4 depicts the slump values of fresh concrete made with the coarse aggregates of magnetite, barite, goethite and serpentine. Evidently, the concrete mixes made of barite aggregate (B1, B2 and B3) give the highest slump values; whereas, the con- crete mixes containing serpentine aggregate (S1, S2 and S3) give  the lowest values. The differences in slump values are mainly due to the differences in the rate of water absorption for the used aggre- gates; these values are 0.6, 0.83, 1.3 and 8.07% for barite, magnetite, serpentine and goethite, respectively (Table 2). The results showed also that, there is a decrease in slump values by 18, 33 and 20% upon replacing sand by the ﬁne portions of barite, magnetite and goethite, respectively. This tendency can be attributed to the dif- ference in the rate of water absorption between sand and ﬁne aggregate, where the latter absorbs more water than sand; also,
could be due to the rough surface of aggregates requiring ﬁner material to overcome the frictional forces (Nadeem and Pofale, 2012).
3.1.2.Density of concrete
The density of fresh and hardened concrete mixes made of magnetite, barite, goethite and serpentine coarse aggregates are summarized in Table 5 and graphically represented in Fig. 2. To call
Fig. 1.  Experimental setup for  gamma radioactive test.
the concrete as high density concrete, it must have unit weight more than 2600 kg/m3 as stated in TS EN 206-1 (2002). In general, the density of concrete is directly proportional to the speciﬁc gravity of coarse aggregate (Table 2); therefore, concrete specimens made of barite coarse aggregate along with 10% SF (B1), 20% FA (B2) and 30% GGBFS (B3) as additives to OPC exhibited the highest values of density whether in the case of fresh or hardened. Whereas, the density of hardened specimens made of magnetite aggregate along with 10% SF (M1), 20% FA (M2) and 30% GGBFS (M3) were found to be slightly higher than that normal concrete by about 1.5, 0.38 and 2.7%, respectively. It is evident also from Fig. 2 that, the concrete mixes made from the coarse aggregate of  goethite and containing 10% SF (G1) and 20% FA (G2) meet the requirements of dense concrete exceeding by about 2% and 1%, respectively; whilst, the density of concrete was declined by about 2% for the concrete matrix containing 30% GGBFS (G3) as a pozzolanic material. On the other hand, the density values were signiﬁcantly decreased for all serpentine mixes including 10% SF (S1), 20% FA (S2) and 30% GGBFS (S3) by approximately 3, 6 and 6.5%, respectively. The results revealed also that, the density of concrete increased by about 7, 14 and 20.6% upon replacing sand with the ﬁne portions of goethite, magnetite and barite along with 10% SF (G4, M4 and B4), respectively.
3.2.Compressive strength
The rate of strength development in high-performance concrete systems depends mainly on the pozzolanic activity of mineral ad- mixtures; in addition to the physical and mechanical properties of the used aggregate. The compressive strength results of concrete mixes made with barite, magnetite, goethite and serpentine coarse aggregates and containing 10% SF, 20% FA and 30% GGBS as addi- tives to OPC, cured in water for 7, 28 and 90 days are graphically plotted in Fig. 3. It is found that, the compressive strength increases with curing time for all hardened mixes; this is attributed to the increased content of hydration products (especially tobermorite gel) leading to an increase of compressive strength. The results indicated that, the compressive strength of concrete mixes M1, M2 and M3 (containing magnetite aggregate) are signiﬁcantly higher than the other concretes (containing barite, goethite and serpen- tine) at the age of 7 days. Fig. 3 showed also that, the concrete mixes M1 and B1 (incorporating 10% SF) meet the requirements of compressive strength for concrete e grade M60 (i.e. 600 kg/cm2) after 28 days of curing compared to the compressive strength of concrete mixes containing 20% FA (M2, B2) and 30% GGBS (M3, B3).
Fig. 2. Density of fresh and hardened concrete.
Whereas, the magnetite concrete reaches the highest compressive strength values exceeding over the M60 requirement by 14%. While, the compressive strength of barite concrete was very close  to M60 and exceeds upon continuing for 90 days. This enhance- ment in the compressive strength is attributed to, silica fume with its high ﬁneness and high silica content provides a ﬁller effect and a pozzolanic reaction. Thus resulted in a pore reﬁnement by consuming the weaker calcium hydroxide binder with the forma- tion of a stronger binder of calcium silicate hydrate, that results in additional strength improvement as compared to FA and GGBS; besides the higher physico-mechanical properties of magnetite aggregate than those of the other aggregates; particularly, water absorption (0.83%), crushability value (19.87%) and abrasion resis- tance (28.1%). On the contrary, the concrete mixes made with goethite and serpentine coarse aggregate along with 10% SF, 20% FA and 30% GGBS did not satisfy the requirements of high- performance concrete (grade- M60), whereas the compressive strength could not reach 600 kg/cm2 even after 90 days of curing. This reduction in compressive strength is probably due to, the high water content consumed by goethite and serpentine coarse aggregate; these are 8.07 and 1.3%, respectively. The high water content may causes internal bleeding under the aggregate surface leading to the formation of voids in the vicinity of aggregate and thus porous interfacial transition zone (ITZ) will be formed, which generates a weak bond between coarse aggregate and mortar matrix.
Table 5
Density of fresh and hardened concrete.
Fig. 3. Compressive strength of concrete made with barite, magnetite, goethite and serpentine coarse aggregates, cured in tap water at 7, 28 and 90 days.
From the perspective of compressive strength, heavy density concrete mixes M1 and B1 (containing magnetite and barite coarse aggregate) with addition of 10% SF to OPC meet the requirements of HPC-M60 after 28 days of curing.
3.3.Substitution of sand by the Aggregate's ﬁne portions
Fig. 4 demonstrates the compressive strength results of con- crete mixes made with barite and magnetite coarse aggregate  along with 10% SF upon replacing sand by the ﬁne portions of coarse aggregate (size < 5 mm), cured in tap water  for  7,  28  and 90 days. It is clear that, the compressive strength increases with curing time for all hardened mixes. As the hydration proceeds, more hydration products are formed. This leads to an increase in the compressive strength of concrete. Also, the hydration prod- ucts possess a large speciﬁc volume than the unhydrated cement phases, therefore, the accumulation of the hydrated products will ﬁll a part of the originally ﬁlled spaces resulting in decrease the total porosity and increase the compressive strength  (El- Didamony et al., 2011). The results indicated also that, the compressive strength values of the concrete specimen B4 (incorporating barite ﬁne aggregate) are lower than those con- taining sand by about 10.7 and 10.3% at curing ages of 7 and 28 days, respectively. The interfacial zone is generally weaker than either of the two main components of concrete. Thus, it has a signiﬁcant effect on the performance of concrete. That is why, the decrease of compressive strength of concrete containing  barite- ﬁne aggregate may be related to the vulnerable nature of barite either coarse or ﬁne; particularly, crushing value and abrasion resistance (Table 2). Also, this tendency is probably due to the formation of a weak ITZ between coarse aggregate and mortar matrix. On the contrary, the compressive strength of concrete containing ﬁne aggregate of magnetite M4  was  signiﬁcantly higher than that containing sand by 23, 15 and 20% at ages of 7,
28 and 90 days, respectively. Angular particles of magnetite aggregate either coarse or ﬁne increase the compressive strength, since they have larger surface area, therefore, greater adhesive forces develop between aggregate particles and  the  cement matrix.
3.4.Gamma eray radiation shielding
The linear attenuation coefﬁcient (m), half-value layer (HVL) and tenth-value layer (TVL) of concrete mixes prepared with magnetite
Table 6
The relationship between the attenuation coefﬁcients (m), half-value layer (HVL) and tenth-value layer (TVL) of concrete made with the coarse aggregate of magnetite.
coarse aggregate were measured at photon energy of 0.662 MeV for
137Cs and two photon energies of 1.173 and 1.333 MeV for 60Co. The
measured results are summarized in Table 6. The variation of linear attenuation coefﬁcients as a function of different shield thickness for concrete mixes (M1 and M4) in the ﬁeld of gamma-ray emitted by 137Cs and 60Co sources are graphically plotted in Figs. 5 and 6, respectively. As shown in the two ﬁgures, the linear attenuation coefﬁcients for both 137Cs and 60Co increase with shield concrete thickness. The linear attenuation coefﬁcients of concrete sample made with magnetite ﬁne aggregate (M4) are higher than the concrete made with sand (M1) at photon energy  of  0.662  MeV (Fig. 5). Also, linear attenuation coefﬁcients for the two concrete mixes decrease with the increase of gamma ray energy. Therefore, at the two photon energies of 1.173 and 1.333 MeV, the attenuation values of concrete containing ﬁne magnetite are greater than that containing sand (Fig. 6).  With regard to gamma-ray shielding,  ﬁne
magnetite in sample M4 (r 3.02 ton/m3) increases the density of concrete by 14% compared to M1 containing sand (r 2.64 ton/m3).
It is clearly seen that, the linear attenuation coefﬁcients depend on the  photon  energy  and  the  density  of  the  shielding material,
Fig. 5. The variation of linear attenuation coefﬁcients with shield concrete thickness made with magnetite aggregate for 137Cs with photon energy of 0.662 MeV.
Fig. 6. The variation of linear attenuation coefﬁcients with shield concrete thickness made with magnetite aggregate for 60Co with two photon energies of 1.173 and
1.333 MeV.
accordingly, the concrete samples containing ﬁne magnetite (M4) are remarkably effective for shielding of gamma rays.
The effectiveness of gamma-ray shielding is described in terms of the HVL or the TVL of a material. HVL is the thickness at which an absorber will reduces the radiation to half and TVL is the thickness at which an absorber will reduces the radiation to one tenth of its original intensity (Akkurt et al., 2010).
Figs. 7 and 8 show the HVL and TVL values of concrete mixes M1 and M4 (incorporating magnetite aggregate) for different gamma energies emitted by 137Cs and 60Co sources as a function of concrete thickness. As shown in two Figs., the HVL and TVL values of mixes M1  and  M4  decrease with the  increase  of  concrete thickness   for
137Cs and 60Co, respectively. The lower are the values of HVL and
TVL, the better are the radiation shielding materials in term of the thickness requirements. At photon energy of 0.662 MeV for 137Cs source, the values of HVL and TVL for mix M4 (incorporating magnetite ﬁne aggregate) are lower as compared to the mix M1 (incorporating sand) at the same energy (Fig. 7). The results shown in  two Figs.  indicated  also that,  the  values  of  HVL  and TVL are
inversely proportional to the concrete density, therefore, sample M4 (r 3.02 ton/m3) showed lower HVL and TVL values than sample M1 (r 2.64 ton/m3) for different gamma energies. At photon energies of 1.173 and 1.333 MeV for 60Co (Fig. 8), the results are in a good agreement with that obtained for 137Cs (Fig. 7), where
Fig. 7. Half-value layer (HVL) and tenth-value layer (TVL) as a function of concrete thickness for magnetite concrete using 137Cs source at photon energy of 0.662 MeV.
Fig. 8. Half-value layer (HVL) and tenth-value layer (TVL) as a function of concrete thickness for magnetite concrete using 60Co source at two photon energies of 1.173 and
1.333 MeV.
the HVL and TVL of sample (M4) decrease with increasing the density of concrete. Therefore, sample (M4) could be considered as the best for gamma radiation shielding.
4.Conclusions
From the preceding discussions, the following conclusions can be summarized:
1.Barite aggregate has higher speciﬁc gravity than magnetite, goethite and serpentine aggregates. Furthermore, water ab- sorption of goethite aggregate was several times higher than that of barite, magnetite and serpentine aggregates by 13, 10 and 6%, respectively.
2.High-performance heavy density concrete made with magnetite coarse aggregate along with 10% SF reaches the highest compressive strength values exceeding over the M60 require- ment by 14% after 28 days of curing. Whereas, the compressive strength of concrete containing barite aggregate was very close to M60 and exceeds upon continuing for 90 days. On the con- trary, the concrete mixes made with goethite and serpentine coarse aggregate along with 10% SF, 20% FA and 30% GGBS did not satisfy the requirements of high-performance concrete (grade-M60), since the compressive strength could not  reach 600 kg/cm2 even after 90 days of curing.
3.Concrete made with magnetite ﬁne aggregate showed higher physico-mechanical properties than the corresponding concrete containing barite and goethite.
4.High-performance heavy density concrete made with the ﬁne portions of magnetite aggregate enhances the shielding efﬁ- ciency against g-rays for 137Cs at photon energy of 0.662 MeV and for 60Co at two photon energies of 1.173 and 1.333 MeV.