<title>Implementation of Optimal Protection Coordination for    Microgrids with Distributed Generations Using Quaternary Protection Scheme</title>
<author>Panida Thararak   1,2 and Peerapol Jirapong   1</author>
<Affiliation>1Faculty of Engineering, Chiang Mai  University, Chiang Mai 50200, ailand</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral> Science and Technology of Nuclear Installation</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Hindawi</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1155/2020/2568652</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/2568652</URL>
(e ﬂexible operation of microgrids, along with the availability of distributed generation (DG) units, causes a variety of changes in short-circuit current levels, magnitudes, and directions, which has undesirable eﬀects on the operation of protection systems. Conventional protection schemes use typical directional overcurrent relays (DOCRs) with limited operating capability, unable to respond to microgrid operations in the manner of short-circuit current changes. In this paper, a quaternary protection scheme implemented with dual-directional overcurrent relays (dual-DOCR) and a protection control strategy is developed for protecting against faults in microgrids, taking into account the existence of DGs and connection and disconnection of DG units. (e optimal dual-DOCRs  setting  and  coordination  are  formulated  as  an  optimization  problem  solved by  evolutionary programming to minimize the relay operating times. (e proposed protection scheme is implemented with a centralized protection control system based on the smart grid concept to increase the adaptability of the dual-DOCRs, which have multiple relay setting groups in accordance with system state changes. (e simulation case studies are performed using the IEEE  14-bus test system, which is modiﬁed as a meshed microgrid operation. Test scenarios, including possible operations of microgrids, DGs availabilities, and diﬀerent fault events, are analyzed and discussed. (e comparative studies and simulation results show that the proposed scheme provides eﬃcient coordination between the primary and backup relays and increases the responsibility of the protection system, which can be observed from the signiﬁcant reduction in the relay operating times, resulting in the enhancement of selectivity, sensitivity, and speed of microgrid protection systems.
1. Introduction
A  microgrid  is  a  form  of  active  small-scale  distribution system operated in a modern smart grid structure, which has gained more importance, especially in the manner of ﬂexible operation in grid-connected and islanded modes to enhance reliability and security of electricity grids. (e integration of distributed generators (DGs) to the microgrid is an essential part of supplying electricity to the loads when operating in the islanded mode. Distributed generations provide higher system  eﬃciency  and  power  quality  with  fewer  environ- mental  impacts  than  those  of the  traditional  centralized power generation system.
(e transitioning from traditional distribution systems to microgrids causes changes in the power ﬂow and short- circuit currents that can adversely aﬀect the operation of the protection system [1]. (e electrical power will change from one direction ﬂow to bidirectional one. Meanwhile, short- circuit  current  magnitude  and  direction  will  also  change accordingly   depending   on   the   operating   status   of  the microgrid, including the type, size, and location of the DGs installed in the system. (e conventional protection system designed  based  on  high  short-circuit  current  in  a  radial system  structure  under  a  speciﬁc  system  state  uses  over- current relay equipped with nondirectional elements unable to respond to the dynamic system state changes and will fail to operate. Failure of the protection system causes various protection issues, including miscoordination, fault tripping, and blinding of protection, which results in the beneﬁts from the  microgrid with the  integration  of DG, which  are  sig- niﬁcantly reduced  [2]. (e  design  and  implementation  of appropriate protection systems for the microgrid with DGs are,  therefore,  essential  for  increasing  system  reliability, security, eﬃciency, and resiliency.
(e development of eﬀective protection systems for the microgrid with DGs is important in determining the two main  points:  protective  devices  and  protection  schemes. (e use of nondirectional overcurrent relays that operate regardless  of  the  fault  current  direction  leads  to  false tripping decisions due to the microgrid operations and the backfeed  fault  current  from  DGs  [2].  Electromechanical and  digital  overcurrent  relays  equipped  with  directional components and a single relay setting have been developed to overcome the deﬁciency of faulty current detection [3]. Dual setting directional overcurrent relays (DOCRs) have been  proposed  in  [4,  5]  to  improve  the  capabilities  of conventional  DOCRs  for  protecting  meshed  distribution systems with DGs. (e proposed relays are equipped with two  inverse  time-current  characteristics whose  relay  set- tings will depend on the forward and reverse fault direc- tions. (is feature contributes to improving performance in reducing relay operating times. However, the improvement of  these  relays  to  provide  additional  functionality  for protecting against faults in microgrids is still a challenge in modern protection systems.
Protection schemes are a crucial part of the planning of the protective  device  operation  according to the  speciﬁed relay setting and coordination to ensure that the fault events are  detected  and  cleared  correctly  as  quickly  as  possible. Conservative   protection   schemes   suggest   automatically disconnecting the DG from the system in the event of any abnormalities due to safety and security concerns [6]. (ese methods limit the operation of electrical systems in the form of microgrids. Conventional protection schemes designed in accordance with the recommended practices provided by the IEEE and the IEC standards are used extensively by many electrical utilities to prevent faults in traditional distribution systems  [7,  8].  (e  typical  time-current  characteristic  for conventional overcurrent relays can be determined using the standard   relay   equations   in   [8,  9].   Various   protection schemes for distribution systems and microgrids that do not require  communication  capability have been presented  in literature  where  several  protection  coordination  methods have been proposed [10–12]. However, these methods do not take into account the availability of DGs and connection and disconnection  of DGs,  which  cause  the variation  of fault
currents. In addition, the optimal protection coordination using computational intelligence-based techniques such as particle  swarm optimization  (PSO)  [13]  and genetic  algo- rithm  (GA)  [14]  has  been  proposed  for  determining  the optimal relay setting to minimize the total relay operating times. (ese protection schemes are determined according to speciﬁc system state and network conﬁguration in which if  any  system  changes  occur,  the  relay  settings  must  be reevaluated.
Journal of Electrical and Computer Engineering
In  recent  years,  the  protection  schemes  designed  for protecting against faults in microgrids with DGs have been developed in the literature, which can be categorized by the microgrid  operations.  (e  protection  schemes  for  grid- connected mode only have been proposed in [15, 16]. In [15], a  protection  scheme  that  relies  on  time-dependent  char- acteristics  of fault  current  is  proposed  to  maximize  DG connection.  A  protection  scheme  that  uses  conventional overcurrent  relays  with  deﬁnite  time  grading  has  been presented  in  [16].  (ese  methods  are  unclear  about  their implementation with the islanded microgrid. (e protection scheme for islanded mode must be more sensitive because fault currents in islanding will be of much lower magnitudes than  those  of the  grid-connected  system.  In  this  regard, protection schemes for particular islanded mode have been proposed  in  some literature.  (ese  methods  are  designed based  on monitoring  diﬀerent  system  conditions,  such  as harmonic  content  of converter-based  DGs  (C-DGs)  [17], output voltages of C-DGs [18], and symmetrical component combined with residual current  [19].
(e  protection  schemes  developed  for  both  grid-con- nected  and  islanded  microgrids  have  been  proposed  in [20–22].   An   implementation   of  undervoltage   relay   for islanded  mode  together  with  overcurrent  relay  for  grid- connected mode, which does not require adaptive protection capability, is proposed in  [20]. In  [21], digital overcurrent relays  that  can  update  their  setting  based  on  microgrid functions  are  used  for  protecting  microgrid with  a  radial system structure. A similar approach that uses an adaptive protection  scheme  along  with  communication  using  IEC 61850 is proposed in  [22].
(e  previous  works  related  to  the  development  and implementation of protection schemes for microgrids with DGs have shown that these methods can be used suﬃciently for  the  protection  of  faults  occurring  in  grid-connected microgrids  with  uninterrupted  DG  connection  in  radial system  structures.  However,  there  is  no  mention  in  the literature for the optimal protection coordination of modern DOCRs that are used for microgrids in the mesh structures that take into account the connection and disconnection of the  DG  units.  (erefore,  an  eﬀective  protection  scheme, which can adjust the relay settings optimally according to the status of both the microgrid operations and the availability of the DGs, is still a challenge for engineers to improve the eﬃciency of the protection system.
In  this  paper,  a  novel  quaternary  protection  scheme utilizing smart grid technologies and computational intel- ligence  optimization  has  been  developed  for  protecting microgrids taking into account the availability of DGs. (e proposed protection scheme implemented with a centralized protection   control   strategy   is   capable   of  automatically adjusting  the  optimal  relay  setting  and  coordination  in accordance with the operations of both microgrids and DGs. (e intelligent electronic device-  (IED-) based dual-direc- tional  overcurrent  relay  (dual-DOCR) with  adaptive  relay setting groups is implemented for protecting against short- circuit faults considering both the forward and reverse fault current  directions. (e relay setting  and  coordination  are optimally determined using the evolutionary programming
(EP) technique to minimize the total relay operating times. (e  proposed  approach  aims  to  mitigate  the  protection problems arising from the operation of microgrids with the integration of DG units as well as enhance the selectivity, sensitivity, speed, and reliability of the protection system.
2. Conventional Protection Scheme
(e conventional relay setting for DOCRs based on the IEC 60255  relay  standard  is  to  determine  the  two  main  pa- rameters:  relay  setting  current   (Is)  and  time  multiplier setting   (TMS)   [23].  (e  operating  time  of  the  DOCR expressed in (1) is an inverse-time characteristic function of the  relay  setting  values  and  the  short-circuit  current  (I) passing through it.@1
where t is the operating time of protective relay. I and Is  are the measured short-circuit current passing through the relay and the relay setting current, respectively. (e parameters A and B are the constant values that change according to the
time-current characteristics of DOCR.
(e protection coordination for conventional DOCRs is a  process  of  determining  the  operating  sequence  of  the primary  and  backup  relays  in  accordance  with  the  relay settings  and  a  speciﬁc  fault  current  direction  under  the coordination  time  interval  (CTI)  criteria.  A  typical  relay time-current characteristic curve showing the coordination between primary and backup relays is illustrated in Figure 1. Conventional protection schemes assign which relays will be either primary or backup in the system. Figure 2 shows an example of a three-bus meshed microgrid equipped with six DOCRs.  If a  fault  occurs  at  the  middle  point  of the  line section between Bus 1 and Bus 2, relay R1 will operate as the primary  relay  to  protect  the  fault  current  ﬂowing  in  the forward direction, and the next relay R5, which has the same fault direction setting, will be its backup. Similarly, R2 will operate as the primary relay and R4 will be its backup, which is responsible for clearing the reverse fault current.
3. Quaternary Protection Scheme
In this paper, a new quaternary protection scheme equipped with  intelligent  electronic  devices-  (IEDs-) based  dual-di- rectional overcurrent relays (dual-DOCRs) is proposed for protecting  against  fault  in meshed  microgrids taking  into account the operating status of both microgrids and DGs including  the  fault  current  directions.  In  addition,  the proposed  relay  settings  and  coordination  are  optimized using  an  evolutionary  programming  (EP)  approach.  (e centralized control strategy with monitoring and commu- nication systems from smart grid technology is utilized for the implementation of the proposed scheme.
3.1.  Quaternary Relay Setting and  Coordination.  (e  pro- posed dual-DOCR is capable of bidirectional fault current detection from the use of phase correlation between voltage
Figure 1: (e conventional time-current curve and coordination of DOCRs.
Figure 2: Operation of DOCRs with the conventional scheme.
and current with decision-making logic to discriminate the
forward  and  reverse  fault  current  directions.  Each  dual-
DOCR is equipped with a relay setting group consisting of four pairs of relay setting values according to the microgrid operations and fault current directions, as shown in Table 1. (e  quaternary  inverse  time-current  curve  of each  dual- DOCR is depicted in Figure 3. Regarding the dual-DOCR coordination, the relay that is closest to the fault location will operate  as  the  primary relay.  (en,  the  next  relay that  is closest to the primary relay, which has the same fault di- rection, is determined to be the backup relay. For the ex- ample depicted in Figure 4, if a fault occurs at point F, relay R1 will operate as the primary relay for the fault current in the  forward  direction,  and  the  next  relay  R6  will  be  its backup. Similarly, relay R2 will be the primary relay for the fault current in reverse direction, and the next relay R3 is its backup.
Table 1: A relay setting group for each system state.
Figure 3: (e proposed quaternary time-current curve for each dual-DOCR.
3.2.   Optimal   Protection   Coordination.  (e   dual-DOCR setting and coordination will be predeﬁned into four relay settings for each system state. (e relay operating time (t) of each  relay  setting  is  determined  from  the  inverse  time- current characteristic function in (2).@2
where i is the relay identiﬁer and n is the relay setting group identiﬁer. (e variables t, TMS, and I  are the operating time, the time multiplier setting, and the current setting of the ith relay in the relay setting group n, respectively. Ii is the fault current ﬂowing through the ith relay. (e constant relay characteristics  A   and   B   are   set   to   be   0.14   and   0.02, respectively.
(e optimal dual-DOCR coordination is formulated as an optimization problem. (e total relay operating times in (3) is deﬁned as the objective function for the optimal relay setting and coordination to minimize the total relay tripping times in each relay setting group.@3
where  m is the total number of dual-DOCRs in the relay setting group n.
Regarding  the  coordination  condition,  the  operating time  of the  primary  relay  and  backup  relay  needs  to  beFigure  4:  Operation  of dual-DOCRs  with  the  quaternary  pro- tection scheme.
controlled  within  the  coordination  time  interval   (CTI) constraint, which is a minimum time interval, 0.2–0.5 sec, allowed between the primary/backup relays operation. It is set to be 0.20 sec for this study. (erefore, the coordination time constraint is deﬁned in@4
where tpi  and tbk  are the primary and backup relays op-
respectively. In addition, the upper and lower relay setting
limits can be deﬁned in@5
where Imin   and Imax   are the minimum and maximum
setting group n, which are determined from the load current
calculation.  TMSmin   and  TMSmax   are  the  minimum  and
maximum boundaries of the time multiplier  setting for the
ith  relay in each relay setting group  n.
Evolutionary programming (EP) is an eﬃcient optimi- zation technique in which populations of individual solu- tions   are   evolved   through   mutation,   random   changes, competition,  and  selection.  (e  EP  approach  in  [24]  is proposed to  solve the  optimal coordination problem. (e optimization process shown in Figure 5 is performed using MATLAB and DIgSILENT PowerFactory software. (e EP algorithm  is  created  as  an  m-ﬁle  script  in  MATLAB  for evaluating the optimal solution. (e load ﬂow analysis and short-circuit calculation are carried out by a DPL script in DIgSILENT.  (e  data  exchange  process  and  interactive communication between these analysis tools are automati- cally interchanged using the sw.csv ﬁle.
Figure 5: Flowchart of the optimal
3.3. Protection System Control Strategy.  (e implementation of the  dual-DOCR  conﬁguration  with  the  proposed  pro- tection system control strategy can be presented in Figures 6 and  7.   (e   protection   control   algorithm   illustrated   in Figure  7  consists  of the  system  state  monitoring  of the microgrid  operations  and  the  availability  of  DGs,  from which  input  data  are  the  status  of the  point  of common coupling  (PCC)  at the microgrid interconnection  and the
status of circuit breakers at the DGs. (ese data will be sent
through the communication system conformed with the IEC 61850 standard  [21] to the microgrid controller. (e cen- tralized  protection  control  system  (CPCS)  is  a  function within the microgrid controller that is responsible for the operation and control of the protective relays. (e CPCS will determine the present  state of the  system from the infor- mation received and compare it with the predeﬁned system state and the matching of the optimal relay settings stored in
dual-DOCR setting and coordination.
the protection system database, as depicted in Figure 8. If the system  state  matches,  CPCS  will  send  the  optimal  relay setting group that is predeﬁned for that state to each dual- DOCR. On the contrary, if the system state does not match, CPCS will reassess the optimal relay settings in accordance with that new system state and update the protection system database.
(e decision-making process for the operation of dual- DOCR depends on the system state and the status of the fault current directions. (e dual-DOCR will receive the opera- tion setting corresponding to the present system state from the CPCS, which makes the relay ready to work regardless of
the fault current directions. When the dual-DOCR detects a
fault current, the relay will be able to distinguish the short- circuit  current  direction  from  the  phase  correlation  of voltage and current with the decision-making logic depicted in  Figure  9.  Any  current  ﬂowing  into  the  prespeciﬁed
Figure 6: Structure of the centralized protection system control.
Figure 7: Protection system control strategy.
direction  or  a polarity mark  can be  considered to be  the forward direction; otherwise, it is the reverse direction. With this approach, the dual-DOCR can respond diﬀerently for faults in both directions.
Figure 6 demonstrates a meshed microgrid operated in
an islanded mode connected with two DGs. (e CPCS will determine  the  present  state  of the  system  from  the  PCC status  and  the  DG  status,  and  then  the  individual  relay
setting group is assigned to each dual-DOCR. (e protective relay is  ready to  operate  as  soon  as  a  fault  occurs  in  the system.  In  the  event  that  a  fault  occurs  at  point  F,  the primary relay R1 will operate using the Roperation setting of its relay setting group. (e backup relay R6 will operate using  R   of its  relay  setting  group.  Besides,  the  primary relay R2 and the backup relay R3 will operate using the Ret operation setting of each relay setting group.
Figure 8: Set of relay setting groups for each dual-DOCR
Figure 9: Symbolic decision-making logic for the operation of dual-DOCR.
4. Case Studies and Results
In this section, the proposed quaternary protection scheme implemented with the  optimal  setting  and  coordination of dual-DOCRs  is  evaluated  and  compared with  the  conven- tional  protection  scheme  equipped  with  DOCRs  for  pro- tecting microgrids taking into account the variation of DGs interconnection. (e simulation case studies of the protection schemes  are performed  using the  IEEE  14-bus test  system with a mesh structure of 132/33 kV, as shown in Figure 10. (e system structure is divided into two main parts: a 132 kV transmission system and a 33 kV distribution system. Further system parameters and conﬁguration are available in  [25].
(e  33 kV  distribution  system  portion  equipped  with two DGs, DG1 connected at bus 0006 and DG2 connected at bus  0007,  is modiﬁed  as  a meshed microgrid that  can be operated in both grid-connected and islanded modes. (e microgrid connects with the main grid at the PCC located at
bus numbers 0004  and 0005. Each DG is  deﬁned as  a  100
MVA synchronous-based generator operated at  1.0 power factor. It is assumed that the installed DGs can supply the total system demand and the microgrid must have at least one DG to operate in the islanded mode.
(e conventional protection scheme equipped with six DOCRs  (R1 to R6) is implemented in the microgrid area, with  the  direction   of  each  relay,  which  is  determined according to the scheme as shown in Figure 1. On the other hand, the proposed quaternary protection scheme installed with six dual-DOCRs (R1 to R6) is implemented in the same microgrid  area,  with  the  direction  of  each  dual-DOCR,
which is deﬁned in accordance with the proposed scheme shown in Figure 6. (e fault events F-1 to F-3 are simulated as three-phase faults occurring at the middle point of the distribution lines in the microgrid. It should be mentioned that the relay coordination needs to be considered the worst fault events at the ends of the lines. However, in the case studies, fault occurrences are simulated at the middle point of the lines to represent any faults that may occur at any location throughout the line length in meshed microgrids. In addition, the middle point fault  simulation in  accordance with the examples presented in Figures 2 and 4 will make it easier to understand the proposed protection approach.
System  modeling  and  simulation  are performed  using DIgSILENT PowerFactory software. To study the eﬀects of DG  connection  and  disconnection,  the  simulation  case studies will determine the DGs availability according to the operating  status  shown  in  Table  2.  System  scenarios  are classiﬁed  in  accordance  with  the  diﬀerent  operating  con- ditions  of DGs  availability,  protection  schemes,  relay  set- tings, and protective devices, as shown in Table 3. Tables 4 and 5 show the relevant fault currents in the grid-connected and islanded microgrid, respectively.
4.1. Conventional Protection Coordination Scheme with Di-
rectional Overcurrent Relay.  (ese case studies demonstrate the implementation of the conventional protection scheme with DOCRs in the modiﬁed IEEE 14-bus test system. (e relay settings shown in Table 6 are determined based on the IEC 60255 for the grid-connected and islanded microgrid.
Figure 10: (e modiﬁed distribution portion of the IEEE  14-node test feeder.
Table 2: Available operating status of DGs for the microgrid.
Table 3: Classiﬁcation of the comparative case studies.
Table 4: Fault current magnitude in grid-connected microgrid.
Table 5: Fault current magnitude in islanded microgrid.
Tables 7  and 8  show the primary and backup relay coor- dination and relay operating times while protecting against fault events at F-1 to F-3 in the grid-connected and islanded microgrid. For the test results, each primary relay has more than one backup relay, according to the coordination and the  protection  zone  setting  of each  relay.  (e  simulation results presented only the coordination between the primary relay and its ﬁrst backup relay.
Table 6: DOCR settings for conventional protection scheme.
Table 7: Directional primary and backup relay operating times for conventional scheme in grid-connected microgrid.
When the microgrid operates in either grid-connected or islanded  mode  with  both  DGs  supplying  power  to  the system, the  operating times  of the  DOCRs  for protecting against faults show that all relays in the microgrid are co- ordinated correctly without violating the CTI constraint. For example,  in  Table  7,  when  a  fault  occurs  at  F-3  in  the grid-connected mode with DG status 1, the operating time of
Table 8: Directional primary and backup relay operating times for conventional scheme in islanded microgrid.the  primary relay R6  and  its backup  relays R2  and R4  is 0.272, 0.580, and 0.799 sec, respectively. Besides, in Table 8, when the fault occurs in the islanded microgrid, the time of the  primary relay R6  and  its backup  relays R2  and R4  is 0.286, 0.601, and 0.691 sec, respectively. (e operating time of the primary relay which is less than that of the secondary relay indicates that the primary relay will operate before its backup  in  accordance  with  the  principle  of  protection coordination.
For  the  grid-connected  operation  with  only  one  DG connected to the microgrid, DG operating status 2 and 3, test results in Table 7 show that all primary and backup relays can be still coordinated. For example, when a fault occurs at F-3  in  the  grid-connected  microgrid  with  DG  operating status 3, the operating time of the primary relay R6 and its backup  relays  R2  and  R4  is  0.309,  0.525,  and  0.788 sec,
Table 9: Dual-directional overcurrent relay settings for the quaternary protection coordination scheme.
respectively.  It  is  observed  that  the  relay  operating  times obtained from the DG status 2 and 3 are close to the times
obtained from the DG  status  1. (ese results indicate that
when  a  fault  occurs  in the  grid-connected  microgrid, the dominated fault currents are from the main grid, which is higher than those from DGs. Disconnecting one of the DGs from the microgrid has little impact on the total system fault current magnitudes. (e protective relays can still operate normally with the corresponding relay operation times.
For the islanded operation with only one DG connected to the microgrid, DG status 2 and 3, test results in Table 8 show that  all  relay  coordination  can  be  satisﬁed.  For  ex- ample, when a fault occurs at F-3 in the islanded microgrid with DG operating status 3, the operating time of the pri- mary relay R6 and its backup relays R2 and R4 is 0.867, 1.086, and  1.099 sec,  respectively.  It  is  observed  that  the  relay operating times obtained from the islanded microgrid are higher than those from the grid connection.
(ese  results  indicate  that  when  a  fault  occurs  in  the islanded microgrid, all fault currents are from the DGs, which are much lower compared to the grid-connected operation. Disconnecting one of the DGs from the islanded microgrid has much impact on the total system fault current levels and magnitudes.  Using  relay  settings  based  on  grid-connected mode causes the operating time of the relays to slow down when protecting the islanding, especially for the backup re- lays, which may lead to protection blinding problems.
4.2. Quaternary Protection Coordination Scheme with Dual- Directional  Overcurrent Relay.  For  evaluating  the  perfor- mance  of the  quaternary  protection  scheme  presented  in Section 3, the implementation of the proposed scheme with dual-DOCRs in the IEEE 14-bus test system is demonstrated
in this section. Each dual-DOCR is equipped with a relay setting group that is optimally determined according to the present system state. Each relay setting group consists of four pairs of relay setting values (I , TMSn ) in accordance with the microgrid operations and the fault current directions.
(e  optimal  dual-DOCRs  settings  shown  in  Table 9  are determined based on system state variations that take into ac- count  the  microgrid  operations,  DG  availability,  and  fault
current directions. It can be seen that each dual-DOCR has three
relay setting groups according to the operating status of the DGs availability. Each relay setting  group will have  diﬀerent  relay setting values depending on the short-circuit current level and magnitude that are caused by the operations of the microgrid and  DGs.  In particular, the  short-circuit  current level  in the islanded mode, which is lower than that of the grid-connection mode, causes the relay setting values to be reduced accordingly to improve the sensitivity of the protection system. (us, the protective relay settings obtained from the proposed scheme are more suitable and responsive to the ﬂexible operations of the microgrid with DGs, which have dynamic variations of short- circuit current levels, magnitudes, and directions.
Tables 10  and 11  show the primary and backup  relay coordination  and  relay  operating  times  while  protecting against fault events at F-1 to F-3 in the grid-connected and islanded microgrid.
For example, in Table 10, when a fault occurs at F-3 in the grid-connected microgrid with DG status 1, the operating time of the primary relay R6 and its backup relays R1 and R2 is 0.124, 0.466, and 0.475 sec, respectively. Besides, in Table 11, when the fault occurs in the islanded microgrid, the time of the primary relay R6 and its backup relays R1 and R2 is 0.196, 0.531, and 0.548 sec,  respectively.  (e  simulation  results  of  the  relay operating times show that the optimal protection coordination obtained from the proposed approach can be successfully used
Table  10:  Dual-directional  primary  and backup  relay  operating times for quaternary scheme in grid-connected microgrid.
to coordinate the primary and backup relays without violating any coordination constraints. In addition, the relay operating times  obtained from the  quaternary scheme  are lower than those  from  the  conventional  scheme,  which  indicates  the improving sensitivity and speed of the protection system.
For  the  grid-connected  operation  with  only  one  DG connected to the microgrid, DG operating status 2 and 3, test results in Table 10 show that all primary and backup relays are coordinated correctly. For example, when a fault occurs at F-3 in the grid-connected microgrid with DG status 3, the operating time of the primary relay R6 and its backup relays R1  and  R2  is  0.129,  0.461,  and  0.474 sec,  respectively.  In addition,  for  the  islanded  operation  with  only  one  DG connected to the microgrid, DG status 2 and 3, test results are shown in Table 11. For example, when a fault occurs at
Table  11:  Dual-directional  primary  and backup  relay  operating times for quaternary scheme in islanded microgrid.
Table 12: Comparison of the total relay operating times of diﬀerent protection schemes in grid-connected microgrid.
F-3 in the islanded microgrid with DG operating status 3, the operating time of the primary relay R6 and its backup relays R1 and R2 is 0.238, 0.548, and 0.561 sec, respectively.
(e comparison of the total relay operating times ob- tained from the conventional and the proposed protection
Table 13: Comparison of the total relay operating times of diﬀerent protection schemes in islanded microgrid.
schemes is  summarized in Tables 12  and 13 for the grid- connected and islanded modes of operation, respectively. It is observed that the coordination of all relays can be achieved eﬃciently, as seen from the much faster operating time of the protective  relays  when  compared  with  the  conventional scheme.
5. Conclusion
(e  operation  of microgrids  in  islanded  mode  causes the short-circuit current to be lower than the operation in grid- connected microgrid due to only the DGs installed in the islanding, which supplies the fault current. In addition, the existence of DGs in the microgrids causes  changes in the short-circuit  current  magnitudes  and  directions  from  the connection  and  disconnection  of the  DGs. (ese  changes aﬀect the performance of conventional protection systems that are designed based on the grid-connected microgrid. In this  paper,  the  quaternary  protection  scheme  with  dual- DOCRs is proposed for protecting against faults in meshed microgrids with the interconnection  of DGs. (e optimal relay setting and coordination are determined using an EP approach to minimize the relay operating times, improving the speed of the protection system operation. (e proposed protection  approach  is  implemented  with  a  centralized protection control system based on the smart grid concept to increase the adaptability of the dual-DOCRs. (e simulation case studies of the protection scheme are performed using the modiﬁed IEEE 14-bus test system. Scenarios, including possible  operations  of  microgrids,  DGs  availability,  and diﬀerent fault events, are analyzed and discussed.
(e simulation results and analytical studies show that the  use  of the  quaternary  protection  scheme  with  dual- DOCRs coordinated optimally according to the operations of microgrids  and  DGs  availabilities  can  increase  the  re- sponse-ability of the protection  system, which can be ob- served from the signiﬁcant reduction in the relay operating times.  In  addition, the primary and backup relays  can be coordinated eﬃciently for protecting microgrids and DGs without   violating   protection   system   constraints.   (ese performances led to the enhancement of selectivity, sensi- tivity, and speed of the microgrid protection system.
Data Availability
All relevant  data including relay setting  and  coordination and  relay  operating  time  are  included  in  the  article.  (e additional data regarding the IEEE  14-bus test system and relay modeling in DigSILENT PowerFactory 2019, student license,  used  to  support  the  ﬁndings  of  this  study  are available from the corresponding author upon request.
Disclosure
(e funding organizations had no role in the design of the study and collection, analysis, and interpretation of the data or writing of the manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest
(e  authors  declare  there  are  no  conﬂicts  of interest  re- garding the publication of this paper.
Acknowledgments
(e authors would like to thank the Energy Policy Planning Oﬃce,  Ministry  of  Energy,  (ailand,  in  addition  to  the Faculty of Engineering and the Graduate School, Chiang Mai University, (ailand, for ﬁnancial supports.
