<title>Study on long-term radiation exposure analysis after the Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear power plant accident: validation of the EU long-term radiation exposure model (ERMIN)</title>
<author>Minsik Kim, Ryohji Ohba, Masamichi Oura & Shinsuke Kato</author>
<Affiliation>Institute of Industrial Science, The University of Tokyo, Komaba 4-6-1, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8505, Japan</Affiliation>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2015.1077170</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2015.1077170</URL>
The Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear power plant accident led to the dispersion of radioactive material by wind that resulted in soil and air pollution over a wide area. Even now, more than 150,000 people in Fukushima prefecture are still relocated from their homes. In order to estimate how long such relocation might con- tinue, we estimated radiation exposures for the 10 years following the accident that occurred on 12 March 2011, using European model for inhabited areas (ERMIN) developed by a partnership of several Euro- pean organizations. We validated the estimated results of long-term radiation exposure with the observed data at 1, 2 and 3 years after the nuclear accident. We analyzed the deposition velocity and re-suspension coefficient using the observed data on air concentration, amount of falling dust and soil contamination, and compared them with the published data.
Keywords: accident; caesium 137; deposition; radiation dose; recovery
1.Introduction
After the Chernobyl nuclear  accident  in  1986,  EU and Russian countries conducted many research projects into the reduction of radiation exposure. Some of them were reported for the formulae of the weathering factor by Andersson [1] and Golikov [2]. Several Euro- pean organizations including Health Protection Agency (now called Public Health England), UK; Risø National Laboratory, Denmark; Helmholtz-Zentrum Muenchen, Germany; Prologue Development Centre, Denmark and Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany, developed the model called European Model  for  Inhabited  ar- eas (ERMIN) to estimate long-term radiation exposure considering the effect of the weathering (removal from surfaces by rainfall and so on), re-suspension, shielding and ventilation processes of buildings and decontamina- tion measures [3].
ERMIN calculates the internal and external radia- tion exposure from the distribution of radioactive ma- terials on the ground surface and the roof, wall and floor of residential houses. The distribution of radioac- tive materials depends on the ground-surface conditions and the type of the residential house. Therefore, we in- stalled the database of the ground-surface conditions and the soil contamination map of radioactive materials deposited on the ground surface in Fukushima area into ERMIN.
The parameters of deposition velocity and re- suspension coefficient used by ERMIN are the empirical parameters based on the observations of air concentra- tion and soil contamination in European countries, after the Chernobyl nuclear accident [1]. As the re-suspension coefficient depends on the ground-surface and meteo- rological conditions, we derived deposition velocity and re-suspension coefficients from the observed data in the Fukushima area and compared them with the values used by ERMIN, before the estimation of long-term ra- diation exposure.
2.Calculation method
Inputs and outputs are shown in Figure 1. In-  put data to ERMIN are ground-surface condition (or environment), soil contamination and decontamina- tion measures, while output data are long-term ex- posure (external and internal) and the consequences of decontamination (reduction effect, cost and waste amount).
The calculation models of ERMIN are explained in Appendix 1, which are referred from the manual of ER- MIN [4] under the permission of its authors. The total image of ERMIN is shown in Figure 2. All of the pa- rameters used for our calculations are the default values defined by the ERMIN model.
Figure 1. Input data and output image of ERMIN.
3.Analyzed parameters from the observed data
3.1.Deposition velocity
We gathered observations of air concentration: C (Bq m−3) and falling dust amount: F (Bq m−2   s−1)   for Iodine (I-131) and Caesium (Cs-134 and Cs-137) in Fukushima city and Tokai-mura, and analyzed the de- position velocity, based on the following equations. The air concentration was measured from the filter of sam- pler, and the falling dust amount from the tray placed near the ground,@1
3.1.1.Fukushima city
Time histories of air concentration and amount of falling dust for Cs-137 in Fukushima city are shown in Figure 3. These data were observed from the rooftop of a building.
From the time histories, summarized in Figure 3, the observed data can be divided into two groups, the first month after the accident, and the data thereafter. The former group seems to be dominated by the release of radioactive materials from the Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear power plant (FDNPP), while the latter group   is dominated by the re-suspended particulate materi- als. Then we analyzed the deposition velocity Vd, from
Figure 2. Total image of the calculation models of ERMIN.
Figure 3. Time histories of air concentration and falling dust amount in Fukushima city.
Figure 4. Time history of deposition velocity Vd, analyzed from observed data in Fukushima.
these data and got the result for Cs-137, as shown in
Figure 4.
They almost agree with the order from 0.01 to
1.0 (cm s−1) for the deposition velocity, until one month passed, recommended by ERMIN and other published papers [5], while the latter group after one month passed became much higher than the value of published papers. The reason of these differences seems to be due to the underestimation of air concentration at the ground level, after one month passed, because the data of air concen- tration were usually measured at a certain height of ap- proximately 1 m, not near the ground surface, as shown in Figure 5.
The deposition velocity of 100 cm s−1 corresponds to
the gravitational falling velocity of particles with a diam- eter larger than 100 µm. Therefore, the high deposition velocities are due to the re-suspension phenomena, and are considered practically unrealistic.
3.1.2.
Tokai-mura
Time histories of air concentration and falling dust amount for I-131 and Cs-137 in Tokai-mura are shown in Figures 6 and 7. The figures show that the variance of I-131 is much larger than that of Cs-137 by order of 2, because I-131 has a faster radioactive half-decay rate than Cs-137 and has a tendency to become a large aerosol.
From the time histories, summarized in Figures 6 and 7, we analyzed the deposition velocity Vd, as shown in Figure 8.
They almost agree with the order from 0.01 to
1.0 (cm s−1) for the deposition velocity, until one month passed, recommended by ERMIN and other published papers [5], similar to the data for Fukushima city, as shown in Figure 4, while some higher values were ob- served, which are greater than 10 cm s–1. These values may be due to the re-suspension of radioactive materi- als from the ground and trees around the sampling point in Tokai-mura, not the air concentration released from FDNPP at that time. A higher radiation dose rate was recorded for a long period after the accident in the forest around the sampling point of the Japan Atomic Energy Agency than in open areas. The ground-surface condi- tions in Tokai-mura are shown in Figure 9.
3.1.3.Comparison with data used by US-NUREG/CR-7161
The dry deposition velocity is important for the cal- culation of radiation dose at the initial stage of a nuclear accident in order to create an evacuation plan. In USA, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) published the recommended value of the deposition velocity by the
Figure 5. Imaginary mechanisms of deposition phenomena during and after release period.
Figure 6. Time histories of air concentration and falling dust amount of Iodine (I-131) in Tokai-mura.igure 7. Time histories of air concentration and falling dust amount of Caesium (Cs-137) in Tokai-mura.
technical report of NUREG/CR-7161 [5] used for the probabilistic safety analysis method known as MACCS2 (the MELCOR Accident Consequence Code System, version 2). The NRC gathered data of deposition ve-
where
+ e h z0 + f h z0   + g h V,	(2)
locity from many experts by the elicitation method, and constructed an empirical formula using the cumulative probability density function of deposition velocity, as shown in Equation (2) and Figure 10.@2
Vd: deposition velocity (cm s−1), dp: particle diame- ter (µm),
z0: roughness length (m), V: wind velocity (m s−1).
Calculated value of Equation (2) shows the irregular curve for z0 = 0.7 m at the high cumulative probability of
Figure 8. Time history of deposition velocity Vd, analyzed from observed data in Tokai-mura.
Figure 9. Ground-surface conditions near the sampling point in Tokai-mura.
Figure 10. Empirical formula using cumulative probability density function of deposition velocity (NUREG/CR-7161), where
z0 = 10 m, V = 2m s−1.
more than 90%. This seems to be due to the approxima- tion error of the empirical formula of Equation (2) with the gathered data. We had better not to use Equation (2) under the condition of more than z0 0.7 m.
The analyzed data on deposition velocity were com- pared with the results obtained using the empirical for- mula of NUREG/CR-7161 [5], as shown in Figure 11. The observed data agreed well with the empirical for-
mula for particle diameters of 1–10 µm, except for that of Cs-137 after 31 March. It was found from these com-
parisons that the empirical formula of NUREG/CR- 7161 [5] seems to be reasonable.
3.2.Re-suspension factor
We gathered observations of air concentration: C (Bq m−3) and soil contamination: D (Bq m−2) for I-131 and Cs-134 and Cs-137 in Fukushima city, and analyzed the re-suspension factor K (m–1), based on the following Equation (3). The soil contamination was estimated by multiplying the conversion factor, defined by IAEA [8] with radiation dose rate,
Re-suspension factor: K (m−1)@3
Time histories of air concentration and soil contam- ination for Cs-137are shown in Figure 12. The air con- centration of Figure 12(a) is the same one as Figure 3.
We analyzed the re-suspension factor K, from these data and got the result for Cs-137, as shown inFigure 13.
The re-suspension factor K (m−1) was also consistent with the order of 108 (m−1), used by ERMIN until one month passed, as shown in Figure 13, while it became
Figure 11. Comparison of the observed  data  in  Tokai-  mura and that obtained using the empirical formula of NUREG/CR-7161, where z0 = 10 m, V = 2m s−1.Figure 12. Time histories of air concentration and soil contamination in Fukushima city.
Figure 13. Time history of re-suspension factor K, analyzed from observed data in Fukushima.
much lower than the value of Equation (A-2) after one month passed, due to the same reason as the deposition velocity Vd.
4.Calculation condition and results
4.1.Installation of Japanese ground-surface and contamination database into ERMIN
Japanese database of ground-surface condition and contamination map were entered into ERMIN, as shown in Figure 14.
The soil contamination map depicted in Figure 14(b) represents observed data collected by airplane around
15 April. The data were converted into the radiation dose rate at 1 m height over the ground surface. The high radiation dose rate area to the northwest of FDNPP is due to the wet deposition by rainfall on 15 March 2011. The remaining portion of contaminated area is mainly due to the dry deposition during a few weeks after 12 March. It is considered that the nuclide that contributes most is Caesium, not Iodine, because one month had passed after the accident.
4.2.Calculated results
Total effective radiation dose resulting  in  exter- nal and internal exposures was calculated by ERMIN for one week, one month, one year and 10 years at Fukushima and Koriyama cities, as shown in Figure 15. Results indicate that the radiation exposure in out- doors is much higher than in indoors. Normal living means that the population spend time indoors and out- doors; in this example 90% and 10% of 24 h each. The other two scenarios assume 100% of the time is spent outdoors and indoors. The difference between the indoor and outdoor radiation dose seems to be due
Figure 14. Graphical depiction of ground-surface condition and soil contamination around Fukushima Dai-ichi NPP used in ERMIN, 1 = wet farmland; 2 = dry farmland; 5 = forest; 7 = urban; A = open space and F = sea surface near coastline.
Figure 15. Total radiation dose rate from external and inter- nal exposure.
Figure 16. Comparison between calculated results by ER- MIN and Golikov’s formula, and observed results (OBS) in Fukushima area.
to the contamination level and the shielding effect of buildings.
The radiation dose exposure in Fukushima city is higher than that in Koriyama city due to the dry de- position. A decontamination program is now being un-dertaken in Fukushima area, in order to reduce the ra- diation dose rate to less than a target value of 20 to  1 mSv y−1 ( 2.3 to 0.1 μSv h−1) for ‘normal living’ condition.
4.3.Comparison between calculated and observed results of radiation dose rate
Nearly three years have passed since the nuclear ac- cident, and many observed data have become available for the validation of the calculated results. Therefore, we compared the calculated and observed results, as shown in Figure 16.
We validated the ERMIN code with the observed data of radiation dose rate in the Fukushima area, as shown in Figure 16. As shown, the ERMIN code can be used to estimate the long-term radiation dose in the Fukushima area by considering the decontamination measures.
Golikov’s formula [2] was derived from the observed data in Russia after the Chernobyl accident and is writ- ten as follows:
@4
where τ 1 1.8 (y), τ 2 15.2 (y), Cw1 0.86, Cw2 0.
The calculated results by Golikov’s formula over- estimated the observed data until 3 years passed in Fukushima area.
5.Conclusion
The results of this study indicate the following.
(1)
The deposition velocity and re-suspension fac- tor up to one month after the nuclear acci- dent are almost in agreement with the values used by ERMIN. The deposition velocity is also in agreement with the recommended value of NUREG/CR-7671 [5].
(2)However, some larger values of deposition veloc- ity were obtained after a month when the gas release stopped, which seems to be due to the re-suspension effect near the ground surface or from the trees around the observation point, not the deposition effect from upper air.
(3)The estimated value of the effective radiation dose rate obtained using ERMIN agreed well with the observed data in Fukushima area. It can be expected that ERMIN will be used for the estimation of the long-term radiation dose  in Fukushima area.
Acknowledgements
This study has been conducted Figure 16. Comparison between calculated results by ER- MIN and Golikov’s formula, and observed results (OBS) in Fukushima area.
to the contamination level and the shielding effect of buildings.
The radiation dose exposure in Fukushima city is higher than that in Koriyama city due to the dry de- position. A decontamination program is now being un-with the technical sup- port of PDC-ARGOS in Copenhagen and also PHE in UK and RISO of Denmark Technical University. We appreciate the kind advice of Dr Tom Charnock of PHE and Dr Kasper
Andersson of RISO. Some sentences and figures of this paper are referred as Appendix, without any modifications from the published technical manual of ERMIN [4], in order to exactly introduce the capability of ERMIN.
This study is the result carried out under the Strategic Pro- motion Program for Basic Nuclear Research by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.