<title>Extracting the Spatiotemporal Pattern of Cropping Systems From NDVI Time Series Using a Combination of the Spline and HANTS Algorithms: A Case Study for Shandong Province</title>
<author>Shou-Zhen Liang, Wan-Dong Ma, Xue-Yan Sui, Hui-Min Yao, Hong-Zhong Li, Tao Liu, Xue-Hui Hou & Meng Wang</author>
<Affiliation>1Shandong Institute of Agricultural Sustainable Development, Shandong Academy of Agriculture Sciences, Jinan, 250100, China
2Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, China
3Satellite Environment Center, Ministry of Environmental Protection, Beijing 100094, China 4Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Spatial Smart Sensing and Services, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Radiological Protection</Journal>
<Publishing_house>IOP Publishing</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/07038992.2017.1252906</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/ 10.1080/07038992.2017.1252906</URL>
Abstract. Multiple cropping systems are beneficial for grain yields. Monitoring the spatial and temporal variations in cropping systems is important for evaluating food production and making scientific decisions for agricultural development. Satellite-derived NDVI time series can describe crop metrics (e.g., seeding, jointing, and harvesting) and can be used to obtain cropping information. In this study, rather than statistical data, MODIS NDVI time-series data at a resolution of 250 m for 2000, 2005, and 2010 were used to extract the cropping index in Shandong province. A method combining the spline interpolation and HANTS algorithms was proposed to reconstruct high-quality NDVI time series. The results showed that the proposed method can compensate for the weaknesses of the individual algorithms and effectively reduce the noise in NDVI time series. The NDVI-derived cropping index using the proposed method showed a high degree of consistency with statistical data and field sample data. The errors in the cropping index were due to land use changes and mixed crop types within a pixel. Croplands with 2 crops per year were mainly located mainly in the western plain, whereas croplands with 1 crop were found throughout Shandong province, most predominantly in the north, the middle mountainous regions, and the eastern hilly regions. The cropping index was largest in 2000 and smallest in 2010. The interannual variations are caused mainly by social and economic factors such as economic profit and crop rotation.
Résumé. Plusieurs systèmes de culture sont bénéfiques pour les rendements en grains. Le suivi des variations spatiales et tem- porelles dans les systèmes de culture est important pour l∗évaluation de la production alimentaire et pour prendre des décisions scientifiques pour le développement agricole. Les séries temporelles de l’IVDN «NDVI» provenant de satellites peuvent décrire les mesures de culture (par exemple, l’ensemencement, la montaison et la récolte) et peuvent être utilisées pour obtenir des informa- tions sur la culture. Dans cette étude, plutôt que des données statistiques, des données de séries temporelles MODIS IVDN à une résolution de 250 m pour 2000, 2005, et 2010 ont été utilisées pour extraire l’indice des cultures dans la province de Shandong. Une méthode combinant l’interpolation spline et des algorithmes HANTS a été proposée pour reconstruire des séries temporelles de l’IVDN de haute précision. Les résultats ont montré que la méthode proposée peut compenser les faiblesses des algorithmes individuels et de réduire efficacement le bruit dans les séries chronologiques de l’IVDN. L’indice de culture provenant de l’IVDN qui utilise la méthode proposée a montré un haut degré de cohérence avec les données statistiques et les données d’échantillonnage sur le terrain. Les erreurs dans l’indice de culture étaient dues à des changements d’utilisation des terres et des types de cultures mixtes à l’intérieur d’un pixel. Les terres cultivées avec 2 cultures par an ont été principalement situées dans la plaine occidentale, alors que les terres cultivées avec 1 culture ont été trouvées partout dans la province de Shandong, plus principalement dans le nord, les régions centrales montagneuses et les régions des collines de l’est. L’indice de culture a été plus important en 2000 et plus petit en 2010. Les variations interannuelles sont principalement causées par des facteurs sociaux et économiques tels que le profit économique et la rotation des cultures.
INTRODUCTION
There is a need to ensure future increases in food produc- tion as populations continue to rise; however, increasing food production constitutes a major challenge to mankind, espe- cially in regions with limited resources. Presently, much of  the world’s arable land suitable for crop production is already in use; therefore, expanding the cultivated arable land is not a viable option to ensure a sustainable food supply. Future yield increases must rely on other methods. Multiple cropping, the practice of growing 2 or more crops in succession on the samefield in 1 year, can increase yields by improving the utilization rate of available resources (Philippe and Paul 2007). In China, multiple cropping is both common and necessary due to the large population and small arable land area per capita (Yan et al. 2005). Approximately half of the cropland in China is already used in multiple cropping systems; in fact, the high productivity of China’s cropland is primarily due to this extensive use of multiple cropping (Qiu et al. 2003). However, in addition to the increased total yield, intensive cropping might also have significant side effects on water, soil, biogeochemical cycles, and climate (Li et al. 2003; Biradar and Xiao 2011).
The degree of multiple cropping is usually characterized by the cropping index (CI), which is defined as the ratio of the total sown area to the total cropland area in 1 year (Liu 1992). Tra- ditionally, the CI is calculated based on administrative statisti- cal data collected for the cropland and sown areas (Guo 1997; Frolking et al. 2006; Qiu et al. 2003); however, this method is both time consuming and resource intensive. Additionally, the CI from statistical data cannot always describe the spatial pat- tern of a cropping system in sufficient detail.
In recent decades, the number of studies involving CI based on remote sensing has increased. Remote sensing has the abil- ity to acquire spatial information of Earth’s surface with a high temporal refresh rate and consistency (Thenkabail et al. 2012). Therefore, remote sensing can provide the information neces- sary to compute the CI, including the crop type, crop area, cropping pattern, crop dates, and other parameters (Panigrahy et al. 2004). Unlike statistical data, remote sensing data can be used to map the CI at various scales and spatial resolutions. The Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) is most commonly used to derive the CI. The NDVI  products from  the Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer (AVHRR) sensors onboard National Oceanic and Atmospheric Adminis- tration (NOAA) spacecraft, the VEGETATION (VGT) sensor onboard SPOT satellites, and the Moderate Resolution Imag- ing Spectroradiometer (MODIS) onboard Terra and Aqua satel- lites are freely available. The NOAA/AVHRR NDVI data have the longest time series (>30 years), and the VGT and MODIS
NDVI products began to be used in 1998 and 2000, respectively. Therefore, in earlier studies, NOAA/AVHRR NDVI data were the main data source for cropland system monitoring (Rangoon- wala et al. 1993; Fischer 1994). The VGT sensor is designed specifically for vegetation and land surface studies, and the VGT NDVI is produced as 10-day composite datasets at a 1-km spa- tial resolution. Fan and Wu (2004a) and Gu (2003) extracted the CI in China using VGT NDVI time series data. In contrast to their predecessors, MODIS data products incorporate enhanced cloud screening, atmospheric correction, and improved georef- erencing (Running et al. 1994; Sinkyu et al. 2003). The MODIS archive provides NDVI products at different spatial resolutions (250 m, 500 m, and 1 km), which allows CI monitoring at dif- ferent scales (Peng et al. 2012; Lü and Liu 2009, Liang et al. 2012). In India, a Linear Imaging Self-Scanning System (LISS) onboard the India Remote Sensing satellite has also been used to obtain the CI (Ray et al. 2005; Panigrahy et al. 2005).
The CI varies substantially from year to year. These changes are driven mostly by variations in climate, soils, topography, and water availability, as well as regional and global crop markets, individual farmers’ practices, and various other factors. For a long time, the decrease in arable land area was the main focus of studies, and the effects of CI annual variations on grain yield were ignored. Quantifying and understanding the effects of CI are important in order to ensure food security and plan for sus- tainable agriculture development. We focused on 2 objectives in this study: (i) deriving the CI based on MODIS NDVI time series and (ii) analyzing the spatiotemporal pattern of the CI and its driving factors. Shandong province was selected as our study area because of its large agricultural sector.
DATA AND METHODS
Study Area
Shandong   province   is   located   in   eastern   China,   lying approximately between 34° 23j–38° 28j  North and 114° 36j– 122° 43j  East (Figure 1). It covers an area of 156,700 square
FIG. 1. The geographic location and spatial distribution of cropland (2000) and sample plots of Shandong province.
kilometers. The Yellow River passes through Shandong’s western areas, entering the sea along its northern boundary. Shandong province is divided into 16 prefecture-level cities and 137 counties. The climate in Shandong province is dominated by a warm-temperate monsoon climate; its average annual temperature ranges from 11 °C to 14 °C, and annual rainfall is between 550 mm and 950 mm. The rainfall decreases gradually from the southeast to northwest. Shandong’s relief is relatively flat. The northwestern, western, and southwestern areas of the province are a part of the vast North China Plain, whereas the mountainous and hilly terrains are located mainly in the central and eastern areas. Land use types include woodland, grass- land, cropland, built-up, water bodies, wetland, and unused land.
Advantageous natural conditions have made Shandong province one of China’s  major agricultural bases. One and     2 crops per year are the 2 primary cropping patterns in this region. The double-cropping system consists mainly of winter wheat and summer maize, although the single-cropping system may include cotton, peanuts, tobacco, and other types of crops. In the western plain, winter wheat/summer maize is the most popular cropping pattern. Generally, winter wheat is sown in October and harvested in early to mid-June of the following year. Then, maize is sown immediately after the wheat harvest and is generally harvested at the end of September or beginning of October. In eastern Shandong province, the single-cropping system dominates.
Data
MODIS NDVI Data
The NDVI is regarded as a good indicator of vegetation con- ditions (Tucker 1979; Reed et al. 1994). It is calculated from 2 reflectance bands as follows:@1
where RNIR and RRED represent the spectral reflectance mea- surements acquired in the near-infrared and red spectral regions, respectively. NDVI values range from 1 to 1.
In this study,  MODIS 16-day composite NDVI data with a resolution of 250 m (MOD13Q1) were collected for 2000, 2005, and 2010 from the United States Geological Survey Land Processes Distributed Active Archive Center (USGS LPDAAC) and used to extract the cropping patterns in Shandong province. The MODIS is an optical sensor onboard the Terra (launched in 1999) and Aqua (launched in 2002) satellites. Terra MODIS and Aqua MODIS view Earth’s entire surface every 1 to 2 days and acquire data in 36 spectral bands with a spatial resolu- tion ranging from 250 m to 1 km (Salomonson et al. 1989). Daily spectral data from the MODIS sensors are processed to apply atmospheric corrections (molecular and aerosol scattering and absorption), cloud screening, and bidirectional reflectance distribution function (BRDF) correction (Vermote et al. 2002;Schaaf et al. 2002). The MODIS NDVI product is generated from the red (0.62 µm–0.67 µm) and near-infrared (0.841 µm– 0.876 µm) bands as 16-day composite products by applying the maximum value compositing (MVC) or constraint-view MVC (CV-MVC) algorithms (Holben 1986; van Leeuwen et al. 1999). The compositing algorithm is designed to minimize atmospheric effects, including residual clouds, and to select the highest-quality vegetation index for each composite period. The MODIS NDVI products are referred to as the continuity product to the existing NOAA/AVHRR NDVI time series (Gallo et al. 2005; Fensholt and Sandholt 2005). In comparison to AVHRR, the MODIS sensor represents a significant technical improve- ment in terms of spatial resolution, geolocation accuracy, atmo- spheric correction, cloud screening, and sensor calibration. The MODIS NDVI shows better consistency with in situ NDVI than does the AVHRR NDVI (van Leeuwen et al. 1999; Fensholt and Sandholt 2005).
Global MOD13Q1 data are provided as a gridded level-      3 product in the sinusoidal projection. The gridded data also include quality-assurance (QA) flags, documenting the prod- uct quality for each pixel. Two QA flags (pixel reliability and VI quality) are also included in the MOD13Q1. The pixel reliability flag (8 bits) contains ranked values describing the overall pixel quality, and the MOD13Q1VI quality flag (16 bits) contains a more detailed description of  pixel  quality. The QA flags are very useful for NDVI data analyses and applications.
MOD13Q1 data are organized in tiles. Each tile covers an area of approximately 1200 km by 1200 km. The total number of tiles for the entire globe is 648, of which approximately 290 are classified as land. Our study area is covered by a MOD13Q1 tile (h27v05), and there are 23 tiles available for each year. The tiled NDVI data were reprojected from the sinusoidal projection to a geographic latitude–longitude coordinate projection, using the
MODIS Reprojection Tool (MRT) version 4.1 (Land Processes DAAC 2011).
Agricultural Statistics and Field Survey Data
Agricultural statistical data for Shandong province in 2000, 2005, and 2010 were acquired from the Shandong statistical yearbook. These data contain the crop-sown areas and cropland areas at the province and the prefecture city levels. The cropland area for 2010 was not available from the government records, therefore, the cropland area statistics for 2008 (the latest avail- able date) were used instead. In addition, a dataset including 205 field-sampled plots of specific crops for 2000, 2005, and 2010 was used. These sample plots are distributed throughout Shandong province (Figure 1). The size and shape of the sample plots are usually determined according to the terrain and natu- ral boundaries of the cropland (e.g., roads, rivers, etc.), but the smallest sample plots are larger than 250 m by 250 m. These data were used to test the accuracy of the CI derived from the NDVI time-series data.
Land Use and DEM Data
The national land use data of China for the year 2000 at a spa- tial scale of 1:100,000, developed by the Chinese Academy of Science, were used to determine cropland areas (Liu et al. 2005). The classification scheme employs 6 land use types: croplands, woodlands, grasslands, water bodies, unused land, and built- up areas, which include urban areas. The land use map was produced from Landsat Thematic Mapper (TM) imagery. The Landsat archive offers the longest continuous global image time series of Earth’s surface (since 1972). The TM is one of the sen- sors onboard Landsat-5, which was launched in 1984. Landsat has a 16-day repeat cycle. The TM data are obtained in 7 spec- tral bands. The spatial resolution of bands 1–5 and 7 is 30 m 30 m, whereas band 6 (thermal channel) has an Instantaneous Field of View  (IFOV)  of 120 m	120 m. The national land use data for China utilized more than 500 Landsat TM images in 2000. These images were radiometrically calibrated and geo- referenced using field-collected ground control points and high- resolution digital elevation models before being used in the clas- sification process. The thematic map of land use was generated through visual interpretation and digitization of TM images by using Intergraph MGE (Modular GIS Environment) software (Liu et al. 2002; Zhuang et al. 1999). Supervised classification was conducted manually by operators through identification of the land use types, based mainly on their understanding of spec- tral reflectance, spatial structure, and other relevant information specific to a certain land use type. The MGE software deter- mined the object boundaries and assigned attributes (labels) to each polygon to produce the digital map. The land use clas- sifications were validated against extensive field surveys, and the interpretation accuracy was determined to be over 92% (Liu et al. 2005). The cropland map for our study area was extracted from the thematic base map described.
To analyze the effect of topography on the CI, Global Mul- tiresolution Terrain Elevation Data 2010 (GMTED2010) was acquired from USGS.1 The GMTED2010 dataset, developed by USGS and the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA) to replace the GTOPO30 dataset, provides improved global topographic data. The GMTED2010 product suite incor- porates the current best-available global elevation data. The pri- mary source of these data are NGA’s Shuttle Radar Topogra- phy Mission (SRTM) Digital Terrain Elevation Data,2 which have a 1-arcsecond spatial resolution. The GMTED2010 prod- ucts were produced using the following 7 aggregation meth- ods: minimum elevation, maximum elevation, mean elevation, median elevation, standard deviation of elevation, systematic subsample, and break-line emphasis. Therefore, 7 products (1 for each aggregation method) are available at 3 spatial reso- lutions each (30, 15, and 7.5 arcseconds) (i.e., 21 products in total). The GMTED2010 dataset provided a major improvement in consistency and vertical accuracy over the GTOPO30 product (Danielson and Gesch 2011). In this study, we selected the ele- vation dataset with the 7.5-arcsecond spatial resolution (approx- imately 250 m) that was generated based on the mean elevation approach.
Methods
CI and NDVI Time Series
Field-based studies have demonstrated that crop growth tends to follow relatively well-defined temporal patterns (Zhang et al. 2003). Leaf emergence is normally followed by a period of rapid growth, followed by a relatively stable period with maxi- mum leaf area. From the period of maximum leaf area to senes- cence, crop growth follows a reverse pattern. The dynamics of crop growth (e.g., seeding, jointing, heading, and harvesting) can be monitored using NDVI time series, which show charac- teristic temporal patterns corresponding to vegetation growth. Figure 2 shows the seasonal dynamics of the MODIS NDVI at 2 cropland sites, including double-cropping and single-cropping systems, in Shandong province. There are some peaks and val- leys in the NDVI curves. The peaks generally correspond to the period of crop tasseling, and the valleys correspond to the period of crop harvesting (Fan and Wu 2004a). For the double- cropping systems, 2 cycles are completed within one year; con- sequently, 2 peaks can be found in the NDVI time series. A single-cropping system completes only 1 growth cycle; conse- quently, only 1 peak occurs in the NDVI plot. This implies that the number of peaks is equal to the harvesting or planting fre- quency. Therefore, CI can be determined by detecting the num- ber of NDVI peaks in the temporal profile (Fan and Wu 2004a). It should be noted that there might be 3 NDVI peaks in some double-cropping systems. However, the winter peak is generally small and cannot be considered as a growing season. Therefore, it should be removed or ignored when extracting the cropping pattern from NDVI time series.
FIG. 2. NDVI temporal profiles for different cropping systems.
The Time Series Reconstruction
Radiation reflected and/or emitted by the land surface is attenuated by clouds, aerosols. and molecules along its way to satellite sensors. These effects can be compensated for by atmo- spheric correction algorithms. To further reduce the influence of noise, daily MODIS NDVI data are composited by means of the MVC or CV-MVC algorithm to produce 16-day MODIS NDVI products. Nevertheless, some residual noise might still appear in the data due to residual cloud contamination or imper- fect atmospheric or BRDF corrections, especially when cloud cover persists longer than the compositing period (e.g., during the rainy season) (Jönsson and Eklundh 2002; Park et al. 1999; Huete and Liu 1994; Xiao et al. 2003). These problems tend to create data gaps and limit the application of NDVI (Reed et al. 1994). Therefore, it is necessary to reconstruct the high-quality NDVI data before applying a particular retrieval scheme.
In recent years,  several  algorithms  have  been  proposed to reduce the noise and reconstruct high-quality time series, including the Harmonic Analysis of Time Series (HANTS; Roerink et al. 2000), the spline method (Hmimina et al. 2013; Hermance et al. 2007), the double logistic and asymmetric Gaussian model (Jönsson and Eklundh 2004), the Savitzky– Golay filter (Chen et al. 2004), the Temporal Window Opera- tion (TWO) method (Park et al. 1999), and Best Index Slope Extraction (BISE; Viovy et al. 1992). Each algorithm has its particular advantages and drawbacks. The ultimate objective of a specific time series application, the nature of the noise present in data, and the ease of use should be considered when select- ing an algorithm to reconstruct NDVI time series (Hird and McDermid 2009).
When compared with other algorithms, the spline algorithm is easy to use because of its intrinsic adaptability to a vari-   ety of intra-annual fluctuations and the simplicity of its input parameters. More importantly, it can be applied without any assumptions (Hermance et al. 2007; Liang et al. 2011). The spline algorithm reconstructs NDVI time series through tem- poral interpolation to replace missing or noisy values. The spline interpolation algorithm is limited in that the locations  of gaps and noise in time series must be known in advance. MOD13Q1 pixel reliability flags can be used to determine the overall quality of each pixel. The NDVI values for pixels with low quality, such as cloud- and snow-contaminated pixels, can be estimated through the spline algorithm to generate a new NDVI time series. However, cloud and snow contamination might not be the only source of noise. Other factors, such as uncorrected aerosol or anisotropy effects, could also play an important role in the creation of unreasonable fluctuations (false peaks). Therefore, the reconstructed time series might still con- tain noise and false peaks, which makes it difficult to correctly detect the phenological cycle of cropland. The HANTS algo- rithm, also referred to as harmonic analysis or Fourier analysis, can produce smooth curves (Roerink et al. 2000). This algorithm considers the seasonality of vegetation, which makes it suitable for processing time series to retrieve vegetation metrics (White
et al. 2009). The basic theory behind the HANTS algorithm is that a complex curve can be expressed as the sum of a series of periodic cosine or sine waves (terms) and an additive term (Rayner 1971). Vegetation development as indicated by NDVI time series has strong seasonal dynamics in most parts of the world; therefore, the time curve of the NDVI can be described by using a series of low-frequency sine or cosine functions with dif- ferent phases, frequencies, and amplitudes (Jakubauskas et al. 2001). Cloud cover and other factors can be considered as high- frequency noise. This algorithm considers the most significant frequencies expected to be present in the temporal profiles and works in an iterative manner (Verhoef et al. 1996). The HANTS process is controlled mainly by 5 parameters: a fit error toler- ance (threshold), the frequencies selected, the maximum num- ber of points that may be thrown away, the number of itera- tions, and the valid data range. Initially, all points in the orig- inal time series are used as input to the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), and harmonic components are selected from the Fourier spectrum. Next, the inverse FFT (iFFT) transforms the spec- trum back into a filtered NDVI time series. Then, the original time series is compared with the filtered NDVI time series and the differences are calculated. Points in the original time series outside a user-defined threshold are considered noise and are replaced with the value of the filtered NDVI time series to gen- erate a new NDVI time series. This process continues until no new contaminated points can be found. This iteration eventually leads to a smooth curve that approaches the upper envelope over the data points (de Wit and Bob 2004; Julien and Sobrino 2010). Although the HANTS algorithm smooths the time series, it pre- serves the curve pattern, which is a desired function for many applications.
Based on the above analysis, we combined the spline and HANTS algorithms to reconstruct the NDVI time series for each cropland pixel. A data processing flow chart is shown in Figure 3. In the first step, the NDVI time series were constructed for each study year from the MODIS composite NDVI product. Those pixels contaminated by clouds or snow were identified by using QA flags, then their values were interpolated by the spline algorithm. In the next step, the HANTS algorithm was used to smooth the NDVI time series derived by spline interpo- lation, and new NDVI time-series data were generated. These data will be used to extract the CI. When reconstructing a time series based on this combination approach, the cubic spline, which is the most commonly used spline, is adopted. Addition- ally, the 5 control parameters for HANTS (fit error tolerance, frequencies selected, maximum number of points thrown away, number of iterations, and valid data range) were set to 0.07, 4, 8, 50, and [ 0.2,1], respectively, based on the MODIS NDVI characteristics.
Retrieving the Number of NDVI Peaks
The number of peaks in the NDVI time series can be obtained by searching for local maxima in the NDVI time series. This
FIG. 3. Flow chart of the data processing.
method is implemented as a moving window with a predeter- mined window size. The design of the window size is key:     if it is too small, a local maximum could be missed; if it is   too large, it might identify false peaks. To determine the opti- mal window size, the length of the time series and crop phe- nological metrics must be considered. For winter wheat (i.e., the first crop in the double-cropping system), the plant heading occurs in mid-May and corresponds to the NDVI peak. Win- ter wheat is usually harvested in mid-June, which corresponds to the NDVI valley. Maize or peanut is sown immediately after the winter wheat is harvested. In some regions, maize or peanut might be intercropped to wheat fields 10–15 days before the wheat is harvested. Due to the selection of the highest NDVI value within the 16-day composite period in the MOD13Q1 product, the NDVI can increase rapidly with the growth of maize or other second crops, leaving very few points marking the NDVI decrease following the first peak (i.e., the winter- wheat heading phase). Therefore, considering the crop metrics in Shandong province and the length of the time series of the MODIS NDVI (23 temporal images per year), we selected a window size of 5. The rules to determine a local peak are as follows:@
where NDVIi-2, NDVIi-1, NDVIi (the central point), NDVIi+1, and NDVIi+2 denote a sequence from the first point to the last point, respectively.
If the above conditions are satisfied, the ith point is regarded as a peak, and the number of peaks is incremented by one. The process repeats for the next temporal window until all points have been considered. Any peaks detected during the winter sea- son are not counted in our algorithm.
After the number of peaks has been determined, the CI is calculated as follows:@2
where CI is the cropping index, n is the number of cropland pixels, and Ni is the number of peaks found for the ith pixel.
RESULTS
Comparison of CIs Calculated from Different Data Sources
In the present study, CI values from field sampling data and statistical data were calculated and compared with satellite- derived results. The statistical data were taken from the Shan- dong statistical yearbook for 2000, 2005, and 2010. Note that the cropland area of 2008 was used as a substitute for that of 2010 because cropland data for 2010 was not available; the lat- est official data were from 2008. The CI for Shandong province was calculated by using the statistical sown area and crop- land area for each year and comparing them with the NDVI- derived CI. Satellite-derived CI values for 2000, 2005, and 2010 were 171.68%, 161.08%, and 149.92%, respectively, whereas CI values from statistical data for 2000, 2005, and 2010 were 173.69%, 155.42%, and 144.04%, respectively (Table 1). The satellite-derived CI values for 2005 and 2010 were higher than the CI values based on statistical data, whereas the CI value for 2000 was slightly lower. The smallest bias was 2.01%, which occurred in 2000, whereas the biases in 2005 and 2010 were 5.66% and 5.88%, respectively.
Two approaches were adopted when comparing CIs based on field sampling data with satellite-derived CIs. The first approach was to count the number of pixels that have the same CI derived from satellite data and from the corresponding sample plots. The second approach was based on comparing the mean CI value
TABLE 1
The CI values in Shandong province based on different data sources
FIG. 4. CI spatial patterns for 2000, 2005, and 2010.
of all sample plots and the mean CI values for the correspond- ing pixels. The results showed that the CI values of more than 96% of the sample plots were identical to those derived from remotely sensed data, especially in 2000 (99%). The CI val- ues based on all sampling data were 171.21%, 158.54%, and 148.78% for 2000, 2005, and 2010, respectively (Table 1). The satellite-derived CI values were higher than CI values from sam- pling data, but the differences were small.
Spatial and Temporal Patterns of the CI in Shandong Province
Figure 4 shows the spatial distribution of double- and single- cropping fields in 2000, 2005, and 2010 at a 250-m spatial resolution. Croplands with one crop can be found throughout Shandong province, particularly in the east, north, and cen- tral regions. However, they are sparsely distributed, especially in the eastern mountainous region. Croplands with 2 crops FIG. 5. The CI for different prefecture-level cities in Shandong province.
occur mainly in the west and around the central hilly region. The double-cropping system is typically applied in the west- ern plain of Shandong province, including Dezhou prefecture, Liaocheng prefecture, and Heze prefecture, where winter wheat and maize or other crops (e.g., peanut and soybean) are sown sequentially.
In 2000, 2005, and 2010, the CI values were 171.68%, 161.08%, and 149.92%, respectively. A significant interannual variation can be found, in which the area of single cropping increased, while the area of double cropping decreased. The results at the prefecture level in Shandong province are shown in Figure 5. The mean CI for 3 years  was  the  highest  in Heze prefecture, followed by that in Liaocheng. The small-  est CI (124.12%) occurred in Weihai prefecture. The tempo- ral decrease of the CI in each prefecture was consistent with that of the entire province from 2000 to 2010. The most signifi- cant CI variation occurred in Weihai prefecture, with a standard deviation of 18.63%, whereas the standard deviation was small- est (4.67%) in Zaozhuang prefecture, located in the south of Shandong province.
DISCUSSION
In this study, a method combining HANTS and spline algo- rithms was proposed to reconstruct MODIS NDVI time series. Then, the CI was derived based on the reconstructed time series. By comparing the CIs from different data sources, we found a high degree of consistency and only small differences between MODIS NDVI data-derived CIs and the CIs derived from sta- tistical data and sampling data. This result indicates that the proposed combined method is suitable for reconstructing time series for the purpose of extracting the CI.
Factors Influencing CI Accuracy
Errors from the Time Series Reconstruction Algorithm
The NDVI time series can better reflect the dynamics of vegetation after noise reduction (Figure 6a). In our study, 2
algorithms play different roles. The main aim of the HANTS algorithm is to smooth and further reduce noise in time series interpolated by the spline algorithm. Spline interpolation processes only those pixels marked as cloud or snow cover according to the MODIS NDVI pixel reliability data; however, some pixels covered by clouds might not be identified by the cloud-detection algorithm, and some pixels might be influenced by other factors (e.g., residual aerosol or surface anisotropy). For example,  in Figure 6b, although the point in DOY  257   is obviously contaminated by noise, it is not processed by    the spline algorithm because—according to the reliability data—there is no cloud or snow. The integration of the HANTS and spline algorithms effectively resolves this problem. The HANTS algorithm can not only smooth time series but can also fill gaps left by the spline algorithm. However, some unexpected or undesired results occur because the reconstruction algorithm usually fits to an NDVI time series based on a specific function. For example, in Figure 6c, 2 local peaks can be detected in the time series according to the peak rules—but this image shows the time series curve of cropland with 1 crop. These cases are rare, but reconstructing time series inevitably introduces some errors.
The Effect of Land Use Change
When extracting the CI in this study, the cropland data for 2000 was used. We assumed that those croplands did not change from 2000 to 2010. However, the cropland area in Shandong province decreased from 2000 to 2010. Land use changes can produce 2 results. If croplands with 2 crops transfer to other lands, the CI will be underestimated, whereas, if the reverse transfer occurs (from croplands with 1 crop to other lands), the CI might not be affected because other lands usually have only 1 growing season. Overall, the utilization of the cropland data for 2000 causes the CI values for 2005 and 2010 to be underestimated. To illustrate the effects of land use changes on the CI, land use data for 2005 and 2010 were also collected as base maps and used to extract the CI values for those 2 years.FIG. 6. Reconstructed time series under varying conditions.
Compared with the CI based  on land use data for 2000, the  CI values increased when the land use data for 2005 and 2010 were used (Table 2).
Moreover, the CI value for 2010 based on statistical data could be smaller than the true  value.  Presently,  only  the  area of cropland before 2008 is available; therefore,  the CI  for 2010 was calculated based on the area of cropland for 2008. However, cropland area for 2010 should  be  smaller than that for 2008 because rapid urbanization caused a reduc- tion of the cropland area. If the true area of cropland for
TABLE 2
The CI values of Shandong province based on land use data for different time periods
2010 were used, the CI based on statistical data would be larger than the CI calculated in this study. Thus, the difference between the CI values obtained from remote sensing and sta- tistical data would decrease. Accordingly, the error of the CI extracted based on remotely sensed data for 2010 would also decrease.
The Effect of Topography
Topography also has a large influence on the accuracy of the CI extracted based on remote sensing. In the plains regions, the accuracy of the CI extracted from remotely sensed data was far greater than that in other regions. In Liaocheng, Heze, and Dezhou prefectures, the absolute errors (the difference between the satellite-derived CI and the statistical-data-based CI) and the relative errors (the ratio of the absolute error to  the statistical-data-based CI) were small, especially in Dezhou prefecture where the absolute error was only 1.50% in 2005. These prefectures are located on typical plains terrain. How- ever, the absolute errors in the Zibo and Weihai prefectures were 26.04% and 23.05%, respectively. These results can be attributed to the effect of topography. In hilly and mountain- ous regions, croplands are fragmented, and cropland patches are usually small, which dramatically increases the number of mixed pixels. The mosaic of vegetation with different growing patterns will increase the probability of error when calculating the CI based on remote sensing.
The Influencing Factors of the Spatiotemporal Pattern
In Shandong province, the CI values in the west (e.g., Liaocheng, Heze, and Binzhou prefectures) were usually larger than those in the east (Weihai and Yantai prefectures), and there were interannual variations in the CI. The factors that influence the CI can be classified into 2 categories: natural and social. Precipitation, solar radiation/photosynthetically active radiation (PAR), and temperature are the 3 major climate factors that influence the CI. According to Fan’s model based on accumu- lated temperature and sunshine duration, the CI potential in Shandong province is 199.5% (Fan and Wu 2004b). The amount of available solar radiation and the temperature conditions can support 2 crops in 1 year. However, the actual CI is far less than the maximum potential value. In addition to climatic factors,
FIG. 7. CI values for different topographies.
crop growth requires suitable soil, and topography can induce the spatial heterogeneity of natural resources. Thus, these fac- tors influence the spatial distribution of the CI.
The northern alluvial plain in Shandong province formed from the deposition of sediments by the Yellow river as it flows into the sea. The alluvial plain has high soil salinity, which is suitable for only some salt-tolerant crops. In Shandong province, the first crop for the double-cropping system is usually winter wheat; however, the high salinity makes it difficult for winter wheat to grow in this region. Cotton is also extensively cultivated in this region because of its high salt tolerance; how- ever, cotton is sown in April and harvested in October, which means that the land can support only single-cropping systems in this region. Consequently, the CI in this region will be lower than the CI potential.
The effect of topography on the CI spatial pattern is also significant. As the elevation increases, a negative trend can be found in the CI (Figure 7). For example, the CI values in hilly and mountainous regions were always smaller than those over low-lying plains. In 2010, CI values for tablelands, hills, and mountains were 118.04%, 111.77%, and 112.64%, respectively, whereas the CI was 168.69% for plains. At the prefecture level, there were very high CI values in Liaocheng and Heze prefec- tures, which have very low elevations compared to the high ele- vations of the Yantai and Weihai prefectures (Figure 8). In Shan- dong province, the rainfall distribution is not uniform over time. According to the rainfall data for 15 meteorological stations maintained by the China Meteorological Administration, most rainfall in Shandong province is concentrated in the summer, whereas in other seasons, rainfall is scarce (Figure 9). Winter wheat (the first crop) of the double-cropping system in Shan- dong province usually grows rapidly in spring and is harvested in early June. Hence, the rainfall in spring and winter is the most important and effective for winter wheat, especially the rainfall in spring. Winter wheat requires more than 380 mm of
water (Fang et al. 2009), but the rainfall in the 2 seasons ranges from 110 mm to 184 mm according to climate data. There- fore, the rainfall alone is insufficient for growing winter wheat (Tian et al. 2006). Consequently, farmers must irrigate their fields using water obtained from rivers, lakes, or groundwater. In Shandong’s western plain, cropland irrigation is convenient due to the flat terrain and the available surface and groundwa- ter. However, the irrigation conditions in the mountainous and hilly regions are poor. Consequently, a single crop is more com- mon in these areas, and fruit trees are planted extensively. For example, the area of orchards has been greater than 20,000 ha in Yantai prefecture.
Multiple factors influence the interannual variation in CI. Among these, water and heat are 2 fundamental factors (Guo 1997). According to the climate data from 15 meteorological stations in Shandong province, the mean and standard devia- tion of the temperatures from 2000–2010 were 13.45°C and 0.35°C, respectively, and the mean rainfall and standard devi- ation of rainfall were 793.65 mm and 160 mm, respectively (Figure 10). The variations in annual mean temperature and rainfall from 2000 to 2010 were small except for the abnor- mally low rainfall of 2002. This fact may be attributed to the El Niño of 2002—the periodic abnormal warming of the sea sur- face off Peru, which recurs approximately every 3 years–7 years (McPhaden 2004). In total, although fluctuations in temperature and rainfall occurred, the hydrothermal conditions in Shandong did not change abruptly from 2000 to 2010.
As a result, the interannual variations in the CI were probably not induced by climate factors; instead, they can be attributed to human activities. Crop rotation and the profit potential from croplands can affect the spatiotemporal pattern of cropping sys- tems in addition to human-induced land use changes. Crop rota- tion is helpful in improving soil productivity, and it contributes to weed control and pest control to a certain extent. Rotat-   ing between 1 and 2 crops (e.g., cotton and winter maize) can cause the CI to fluctuate interannually. The input–output ratio of cropland, or the potential net income, is also a very impor- tant factor that affects cropping patterns. According to statisti- cal data from the Shandong statistical yearbook, the proportion of the grain crop area to the total sown area in 2010 was lower than that in 2000, whereas the proportions of other crops (e.g., peanut and cotton) increased. One possible cause is that eco- nomic crops or cash crops—agricultural crops grown for sale to return a profit—can offer more profit than food crops (Jayne 1994). Food crops can often be sown twice per year in Shandong province, and the typical pattern is winter wheat/maize. How- ever, croplands with economic crops such as peanut, cotton, or tobacco have only 1 growing season each year. Consequently, an increase in the proportion of economic crops will reduce the CI. However, quantitatively assessing the effects of human activities on the CI is difficult due to the complexity of human behaviors, especially in China, with its household contract responsibility system.
FIG. 8. The topography (a) and spatiotemporal distribution of the CI (b) in Shandong province.
FIG. 9. The rainfall for 15 meteorological stations in Shandong province from 2000 to 2010.
FIG. 10. The interannual variations of the annual mean temper- ature and rainfall for 15 stations.
CONCLUSIONS
The CI reflects the intensity of agricultural land use, and  its measurement can affect grain output and food security— especially in China, the most populous nation in the world. NDVI time series can reflect the dynamics of vegetation; thus, it can be used to monitor crop growth. In this study, instead of the typical statistical method, a method based on remote sensing was used to monitor the cropping pattern in Shandong province. This study proposed an algorithm that combines spline interpo- lation and the HANTS algorithm. The proposed method gener- ated the desired results. Errors in the cropping index extracted from remotely sensed data stem mainly from the algorithm, from land use changes, and from mixed pixels. The 2 differ- ent algorithms each have their own advantages, and integrating them can overcome their disadvantages. As a result, the com- bination of the 2 algorithms improves the quality of time series reconstruction to a certain extent. However, some errors can also be introduced into the time series by reconstruction. This is com- mon to all reconstruction algorithms because of their limitations and the irregularity of noise.
In this study, land use data for 2000 was used as a base map to extract the CI. The accuracy of the CI calculated from NDVI time series is influenced by land use data because some lands have only 1 growing season, whereas croplands have 1 or 2 har- vests in Shandong province. However, at a small time scale, the effect of land use changes on the CI is small when no large areas of land transfer occur between croplands and other lands. Regardless, cropland data with high accuracy can improve the accuracy of remote-sensing-based CI.
In hilly and mountainous regions, the CI and its accuracy lev- els are always smaller than those same measurements made in plains regions. This smaller CI can be attributed to poor irri- gation, profit, and transportation. Shandong province does not have sufficient rainfall for 2 crops (mainly the first crop) because of scarce spring rainfall; therefore, irrigation is required. Addi- tionally, nongrain crops (with only 1 crop per year) usually yield greater profits than grain crops. In hilly and mountainous regions, cropland patches are fragmented and small, resulting in an increase in mixed pixels composed of different land types in images with 250 m resolution and, consequently, a reduction
in the accuracy of the CI extracted from remotely sensed data over these regions. Although mixed pixels still exist, mixed pix- els composed of different land types are rare in plains regions compared with regions that have high relief amplitude.
From 2000 to 2010, the cropping pattern in Shandong province changed: the CI for 2000 was the largest, and the CI for 2010 was the smallest. The local climate, soils, topography, water availability, rotation, profit, and other factors affect the spatiotemporal pattern of the CI in Shandong province. Inter- annual variations of the CI depended mainly on social factors during the period of 2000–2010. Crop rotation and profit were 2 major factors.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the editor and reviewers for their insightful and valuable comments, which greatly improved the quality of  our study. We thank the Land Processes Distributed Active Archive Center (LP DAAC), located at the U.S. Geological Sur- vey (USGS) Earth Resources Observation and Science (EROS) Center (lpdaac.usgs.gov) for providing MODIS data.
or Project for Application Technology Innovation of Agriculture (2016).
