<title>Exposure of the examiner to radiation during myelography versus radiculography and root block: A comparative study</title>
<author>Kentaro Yaman, Nobuo Kai, Tadashi Miyamoto, Tomohiro Matsushita</author>
<Affiliation>National Hospital Organization Fukuyama Medical Center (Department of Orthopaedic Surgery), Japan</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radphyschem.2017.04.015</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2017.04.015 </URL>
abstract
Background: Exposure to radiation over many years prompts concerns regarding potential health-related effects, particularly the incidence of cataracts and the development of cancer. The purpose of this study was to examine and compare the exposure of the examiner to radiation during myelography versus radiculography and root block.
Methods: A total of 114 examinations were performed in our institute in the 6 months. Sixty-two ex- aminations were performed during myelography in the ﬁrst 3 months (MG group), while 52 were performed during radiculography and root block in the last 3 months (RB group). The examiner wore a torso protector, a neck protector, radiation protection gloves, and radiation protection glasses. Optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) dosimeter badges were placed on both the inside and the outside of each protector. The dosimeters were exchanged every month. Radiation doses (mSv) were measured as the integrated radiation quantity every month from the OSL dosimeters. The effective dose and the equiv- alent doses of hand, skin, and eyes were investigated.
Results: The mean equivalent doses were signiﬁcantly lower outside the neck, torso, eye protectors, and inside the torso protector in the RB group than in the MG group. Conversely, the mean equivalent dose was signiﬁcantly lower outside the hand protector in the MG group than in the RB group. The use of a neck protector signiﬁcantly decreased the effective dose compared to the non-use of a neck protector in the RB group.
Conclusions: The present study showed the standard radiation exposure to the examiner during mye- lography, radiculography, and root block. Receiving full protection including a neck protector and pro- tection gloves is an easy and reliable means to reduce radiation exposure.
Article history:
Received 18 August 2016     Received in revised form    23 November 2016  Accepted 25 November 2016    Available online xxx
1.Introduction
Myelography and radiculography are traditional radiographic examinations and remain among the most useful examinations to evaluate the spinal condition before surgery [1,2]. Recently, mag- netic resonance imaging (MRI) is often performed as the ﬁrst im- aging examination to evaluate the spinal cord and nerve roots [3e5]. Myelography and radiculography, which are invasive examinations, are giving way to noninvasive MRI as an essential examination [6]. However, myelography and computerized to- mography with myelography (CTM) are more helpful for spine surgeons when examining patients who have some medical de- vices, such as a of the advantages of CTM over MRI is that CTM gives a wider continuous image and detailed contrast among the bones, the surrounding soft tissues, and the spinal canal. Furthermore, a se- lective nerve root block is an essential diagnostic test performed to determine if a speciﬁc spinal nerve is the source of pain. These characteristics of CTM and diagnostic root block also help with surgical planning [7].
From this perspective, myelography, radiculography, and root block are still worthwhile examinations. On the other hand, large numbers of these examinations increase radiation exposure for the spine surgeon. It is impossible for the spine surgeon to overlook the radiation exposure during myelography, radiculography, and root block. However, there has been no detailed report on the exposure dose of the examiner during myelography, radiculography and root block. The purpose of this study was to examine and compare the exposure of the examiner to radiation during myelography versus radiculography and root block.
2.Materials and methods
In order to measure the radiation exposure to the examiner during myelography, radiculography and root block, a total of 114 examinations were performed in our institute in the 6 months between November 2015 and April 2016. We usually performed radiculography and root block as needed following myelography. In the present study, radiation doses were measured in two different situations. Sixty-two examinations were performed during myelography in the ﬁrst 3 months (MG group), while 52 were performed during radiculography and root block in the last 3 months (RB group). Thirty-six examinations were performed of lumbar sites, one of a thoracic site, 11 of cervical sites, one of cervical and lumbar sites, four of thoracic and lumbar sites, and nine of the whole spine in the MG group. An over-tube ﬂuoros- copy system (Sonialvision ZS-100 IR, Shimadzu, Co., Kyoto, Japan) was used in all procedures. All procedures were performed by a single skilled examiner (K. Y.). The examiner wore a torso pro-  tector (Smart Light and Apron; HOSHINA, Co., Tokyo, Japan), a neck protector (MLNG-25; MAEDA, Co., Tokyo, Japan), radiation pro- tection gloves (GLF25; KIRAN, Co., Navi Mumbai, India), and ra- diation protection glasses (Panorama Shield; Toray Medical, Co., Tokyo, Japan). Optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) dosimeter badges (Nagase-landauer, Co., Ibaragi, Japan) were placed on both the inside and the outside of each protector (Fig. 1). The examiner also wore OSL dosimeter ring badges on his hand on the inside  and the outside of the protection glove, and the nanoDot OSL dosimeter tips were placed both inside and outside the protection glasses.
Our myelography procedure is as follows. The patient lies in the lateral position on the examination table. The ﬂuoroscopic monitor is located toward the head of the patient. The skin of the lower lumbar area is cleaned, and local anesthetic is applied. A needle is advanced within the subarachnoid space within the spinal canal. Contrast material is injected through the needle, and then the needle is removed. A ﬂuoroscope is used to determine the injection level in all examinations, to advance the needle in some exami-  nations, and to check whether the contrast material was injected correctly immediately after injection in all examinations. Six im- ages including ﬂexion, neutral, extension, left/right oblique, and prone position are obtained at the lumbar site. Four images including ﬂexion, neutral, extension, and prone position are ob- tained at thoracic and cervical sites. The examiner assists the pa- tient to keep the image positions during these image shots. Radiculography and nerve root block are performed as needed following myelography. The patient lies in the prone position. The skin of the lower lumbar area is cleaned again, and the injection level is determined with the ﬂuoroscope. The needle is advanced at the transverse process and adjusted forward to the intervertebral foramen (medial-caudal direction). If the patient complains of radiating pain along the leg, the contrast material or local anes- thetic is injected through the needle. A ﬂuoroscope is used continuously, and the ﬁeld size of the ﬂuoroscope is narrowed as much as possible during needle handling. An image shot in the prone position is obtained. The examiner stands facing the patient through the myelography and parallel to the patient during radi- culography and root block examinations to check the monitor continuously. The ﬂuoroscopic exposure times are recorded in each examination.
The dosimeters were exchanged every month. Radiation doses (mSv) were measured as the integrated radiation quantity every month from the OSL dosimeters. The effective dose and the equivalent doses of hand, skin, and eyes were investigated. The effective dose was calculated according to the International Com- mission on Radiation Units and Measurements Inc. (ICRU) [8]:
Fig. 1. Radiation protectors and placement of dosimeters. The examiner wore the optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) dosimeter badges or tips on the inside (Circles in A, B, C) and the outside of each protector (Dotted circles in B, D).
HEE ¼ 0.08Ha þ 0.89Hb þ 0.03Hm
in which HEE is the equivalent dose of external radiation for the whole body, Ha is the equivalent dose of external radiation for the head and neck (1-cm depth), Hb is the equivalent dose of external radiation for the upper abdomen (1-cm depth), and Hm is the equivalent dose of external radiation for the maximum dose of Ha or Hb (1-cm depth). The equivalent doses for the hand, skin, and eye were the values measured at a depth of 70-mm. The mean effective and equivalent doses of both per month and per exami- nation were calculated based on the integrated radiation quantity. All data are expressed as means ± standard deviation. Statistical analyses were performed using Student's t-test for comparing two groups. Comparative analysis among groups was performed with ANOVA for continuous variables. The TukeyeKramer multiple comparison procedure was used to identify differences among the groups after ANOVA was found to be signiﬁcant. P-values of less than 0.05 were considered signiﬁcant. The study was approved by
the Fukuyama Medical Center Research Ethics Committee.
3.Results
The mean radiation exposure times were 73 ± 61 s (range 17e357 s) in the MG group and 127 ± 107 s (range 21e521 s) in the
Table 1
Mean equivalent doses of different measurement areas.
RB group. The mean radiation exposure time was signiﬁcantly shorter in the MG group than in the RB group (P 0.002).
The mean calculated exposure doses are shown in Table 1. The calculated exposure doses inside of the protectors per examination were: torso 0.01 ± 0.00 mSv, neck 0.02 ± 0.00 mSv, hand skin
0.20 ± 0.18 mSv, and eyes 0.01 ± 0.00 mSv in the MG group, and torso   0.00   ±  0.00   mSv,   neck   0.01   ±  0.01   mSv,   hand  skin
0.43 ± 0.14 mSv, and eyes 0.01 ± 0.00 mSv in the RB group. In contrast, the calculated exposure doses outside of the protectors per examination were: torso 0.10 ± 0.03 mSv, neck 0.14 ± 0.04 mSv, hand skin 0.32 ± 0.27 mSv, and eyes 0.06 ± 0.02 mSv in the MG group, and torso 0.03 ± 0.00 mSv, neck 0.04 ± 0.00 mSv, hand skin
0.83 ± 0.04 mSv, and eyes 0.03 ± 0.01 mSv in the RB group. The mean equivalent doses inside of the neck, torso, and eye protectors were signiﬁcantly lower than the doses outside the protectors in the MG group, while the doses were signiﬁcantly lower inside all protectors including the hand than the doses outside the protectors in the RB group. In a comparison of two groups, the mean equiv- alent doses were signiﬁcantly lower outside the neck, torso, eye protectors, and inside the torso protector in the RB group than in the MG group. Conversely, the mean equivalent dose was signiﬁ- cantly lower outside the hand protector in the MG group than in the RB group (Fig. 2).
The     calculated     effective     doses     per     examination  were
0.01 ± 0.00 mSv with a torso and a neck protector, 0.02 ± 0.01 mSv with only a torso protector, and 0.10 ± 0.03 mSv without both protectors in the MG group, and 0.00 ± 0.00 mSv with a torso and a neck protector, 0.01 ± 0.00 mSv with only a torso protector, and
Fig. 2. The comparison of the mean equivalent doses per examination between the
MG group and the RB group. The mean equivalent doses outside of the neck, torso, eye protectors, and inside of the torso protector are signiﬁcantly lower in the RB group than in the MG group. Conversely, the mean equivalent dose outside of the hand protector is signiﬁcantly lower in the MG group than in the RB group. MG, MG group; RB, RB group; IN, inside of protector; OUT, outside of protector.
0.03 ± 0.00 mSv without both protectors in the RB group (Table 2). The mean effective doses with a torso and/or a neck protector were signiﬁcantly lower than without both protectors in both groups. The use of a neck protector signiﬁcantly decreased the effective dose compared to the non-use of a neck protector in the RB group. The effective dose in each protector's condition was signiﬁcantly increased in the MG group than in the RB group (Fig. 3).
4.Discussion
This study investigated the exposure of the examiner to radia- tion during myelography, radiculography and root block. The re- sults showed that receiving full protection by wearing all protectors is an effective method to reduce the radiation exposure of exam- iners. The use of a neck protector and protection gloves was considered to be more essential, because the use of a neck protector decreased the effective dose, and the examiner's hands received the greatest amount of radiation.
The spine surgeon has more opportunities to be exposed to radiation in recent years because of the various minimally invasive ﬂuoroscopically-assisted surgical procedures, such as percutaneous pedicle screw insertion [9,10], oblique lateral interbody fusion, and extreme lateral interbody fusion [11,12]. According to some previ- ous reports that investigated the surgeon's radiation exposure dose during these procedures, the radiation doses were within the level of safe occupational exposure risk [13e15]. However, minimally invasive spine surgeons may be exposed to much greater radiation exposure during ﬂuoroscopically assisted surgical procedures than during other, nonspinal musculoskeletal procedures [14]. Myelog- raphy and radiculography and root block also involve the use of radiation. Usually, the spine surgeon performs these procedures in Japan. The radiation exposure doses during myelography, radi- culography and root block should be considered to determine the surgeon's whole exposure dose.
The International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP)
provides recommendations and guidance for occupational radia- tion exposure [16]. Normal occupational dose limits allow 20 mSv/ year  as  the  effective  dose, 150  mSv  for  the  lens  of  the  eye, and
Table 2
Mean effective doses with and without each protector.
Fig. 3. The comparison of the mean effective doses per examination between the MG group and the RB group. The effective dose in each protector's condition is signiﬁcantly higher in the MG group than in the RB group. MG, MG group; RB, RB group.
500 mSv for the skin or hands as the equivalent dose. The present study showed that the effective doses during only myelography were 0.01 mSv with a torso and a neck protector, 0.02 mSv with only a torso protector, and 0.10 mSv without both protectors per examination, while the effective doses during radiculography and root  block  were  0.00  mSv  with  a  torso  and  a  neck  protector,
0.01 mSv with only a torso protector, and 0.03 mSv without both protectors per examination. The equivalent doses of the eye and hand skin during only myelography were 0.01 mSv and 0.20 mSv with protectors and 0.06 mSv and 0.32 mSv without them, while during  radiculography  and  root  block  they  were  0.01  mSv  and
0.43 mSv with protectors and 0.03 mSv and 0.83 mSv without  them, respectively. These data show that the radiation exposure of an examiner was effectively reduced by wearing protectors, and close to a few thousand myelographies with full protectors can be allowed within the ICRP guidance. The radiation dose of hand skin was the highest of all parts in both groups. The RB group received signiﬁcantly more radiation than the MG group without protection gloves. This is because the examiner's hand should be near the radiation ﬁeld during radiculography and root block, and the ﬂuoroscope was usually used continuously during needle handling. The effect of radiation protection gloves was larger in the RB group than in the MG group. The RB group seemed to receive more direct radiation and can beneﬁt from the radiation shielding effect with protection gloves. The radiation exposure in the MG group increased more in the torso, neck, and eye parts than in the RB group, despite the fact that the radiation exposure time was signiﬁcantly shorter in the MG group than in the RB group. Consequently, the calculated effective dose in each protector's condition was signiﬁcantly increased in the MG group compared to the RB group. This result seemed to be inﬂuenced by the examiner's position during the examinations. In this study, the examiner stood facing the patient during myelography, while the examiner stood parallel to the patient during radiculography and root block. The OSL dosimeters except those of the hand during myelography received more scatter radiation than during radiculography and root block. The neck protector is sometimes disregarded for radi- ation protection. This study showed that the effective dose with a torso and a neck protector signiﬁcantly decreased compared to that with only a torso protector during radiculography and root block. Moreover, the equivalent dose of the neck with the neck protector signiﬁcantly decreased compared to that without the neck pro- tector  during  myelography  and  during  radiculography  and root block. It has been reported that the incidence of thyroid cancer in spine surgeons can be higher than in men of the same generation [17]. The use of a neck protector is indispensable to reduce the effective dose and protect one's thyroid even during myelography and during radiculography and root block.
Although the heath-related risks of chronic or low-dose radia- tion exposure remain essentially unknown, it is important for spine surgeons to reduce the radiation exposure as much as possible. We can reduce the radiation exposure by changing the method of performing myelographies, radiculography and root block, such as adopting a wide distance from the ﬂuoroscopy system, a narrower radiation ﬁeld, and the introduction of pulsed ﬂuoroscopy instead of continuous ﬂuoroscopy [18]. The limitation of this study was that there were no data about such useful conditions. To solve these limitations, further comparative studies are needed. Despite the limitations, the present study is the ﬁrst to show the standard ra- diation exposure to the examiner during myelography and during radiculography and root block. The most reliable means to reduce
radiation exposure is full protection by wearing all protectors.
5.Conclusion
The present study showed the standard radiation exposure to the examiner during myelography, radiculography and root block. The examiner's hands received the greatest amount of radiation. The radiation exposure of the hand skin without protection gloves was signiﬁcantly greater during radiculography and root block than during myelography. The use of protection gloves signiﬁ- cantly decreased radiation exposure during radiculography and root block. The use of a neck protector with a torso protector decreased the effective dose more than the use of only a torso protector. Receiving full protection including a neck protector and protection gloves is an easy and reliable means to reduce radiation exposure.
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of interest.
