<title>Effects of -radiation on a direct disposal system for spent nuclear fuel – (1) review of research into the effects of -radiation on the spent nuclear fuel, canisters and outside canisters</title>
<author>Akira Kitamuraa∗ and Hiroyasu Takaseb</author>
<Affiliation>aSector of Decommissioning and Radioactive Waste Management, Japan Atomic Energy Agency, 4-33 Muramatsu, Tokai, Naka, Ibaraki 319-1194, Japan; bQuintessa Japan, Queen’s Tower A 7-707, 2-3-1 Minatomirai, Nishi-ku, Yokohama 220-6007, Japan</Affiliation>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2015.1018362</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2015.1018362</URL>
The Japanese geological disposal programme has started researching disposal of spent nuclear fuel (SF) in deep geological strata (hereafter “direct disposal of SF”) as an alternative management option other reprocessing followed by vitrification and geological disposal of high-level radioactive waste. In the case of direct disposal of SF, the radioactivity of the waste is higher and the potential effects of the radiation are greater. Specific examples of the possible effects of radiation include increased amounts of canister corrosion; generation of oxidizing chemical species in conjunction with decomposition of groundwater and accompanying oxidation of reducing groundwater; and increase in the dissolution rate of SF and the solubility of radionuclides. Focusing especially on the effects of α-radiation in safety assessment, this study has reviewed research into the effects of α-radiation on the SF, canisters and environment outside the canisters.
Keywords: safety assessment; direct disposal of spent nuclear fuel; alpha-radiation; radiolysis of water; oxidative dissolution of spent nuclear fuel; review of research
1.Introduction
Prior to the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear  power  plant accident in March 2011, it was planned that all spent fuels generated by Japanese nuclear power plants should be reprocessed and only high-level radioactive waste (HLW) in the form of vitrified glass was consid- ered for disposal. Therefore, Japanese deep geological disposal research concentrated on HLW (e.g. [1]) and the low-level waste generated during the operation and dismantling of reprocessing facilities and MOX fuel fabrication facilities containing long-lived radionuclides (TRU waste) (e.g. [2]). Following the accident, the government of Japan has been promoting research into alternative disposal options for spent nuclear fuel (SF), including direct disposal [3], based on the “Strategic Energy Plan”, which was published by the Japanese government in April 2014. Only a preliminary safety assessment of SF disposal has been performed as a basis for cost estimation and comparison with HLW disposal in Japan [4]. More detailed safety assessments for SF should consider specific waste properties and related radiation effects. In preliminary safety assessments for SF disposal undertaken in other countries, such as the
SITE-94 assessment by the Swedish Nuclear Power Inspectorate [5], radiation effects were treated as uncer- tainties and further investigations were recommended to reduce these uncertainties.
It is believed that should SF be disposed of in a ge- ological repository, the major α-radiation effect could be radiolysis of groundwater after a waste container is breached and groundwater ingresses. However, what ad- ditional research into α-radiation would be needed to support the option of direct disposal of SF is being con- sidered. The motivation is that compared to other kinds of waste that have been considered for possible deep disposal in Japan hitherto, SF generates relatively high α-radiation activities. Since many extensive studies on the effects of α-radiation for SF disposal have been per- formed in other countries, one issue to be considered is whether there needs to be additional specific research into the effects of α-radiation, and if so, what kinds of research are needed.
Since no attention has been paid to SF disposal in Japan, no studies have been performed for SF disposal explicitly in Japan; only a few Japanese studies have in- vestigated the effects of α-radiation (e.g. [6]) from HLW.
In contrast, many studies on the effects of radiation   on SF and groundwater have been undertaken in many other countries, but especially by Swedish and Cana- dian scientists. Also, the European Commission (EC) has, in recent years, supported several research projects that have investigated the processes by which SF and its associated barrier systems may evolve within a deep geo- logical repository. The research has covered the effects of α-radiation from the SF, although none of the projects have been focused on this topic. Two particularly rel- evant EC-supported projects are the NF-PRO project (Understanding and Physical and Numerical Modelling of the Key Processes in the Near-Field and their Cou- pling for Different Host Rocks and Repository Strate- gies) [7] and MICADO project (Model Uncertainty for the Mechanism of Dissolution of Spent Fuel in Nu- clear Waste Repository) [8]. Eriksen et al. [9] have re- cently reviewed the various attempts at modelling the radiation-induced dissolution of SF, including the ef- fects of α-radiation. Because of the nature of the experi- mental studies that have been performed, the predictive models that have been developed tend to be either chem- ically or electrochemically based. The dissolution rate is reasonably predicted by the rate of radiolytic production (as predicted using bulk radiolysis models) and suggests that the presence of a corroding interface has no signif- icant impact on the radiolytic yield. Shoesmith [10] and Ollila [11] also have extensively reviewed the effects of α-radiation on SF (UO2) matrix dissolution.
These various studies provide a good basis for treat- ing α-radiation effects appropriately in a safety case. However, to fully understand all the processes by which α-radiation may affect the SF and barrier components, including the buffer following canister failure (e.g. the potential for enhanced solubility of Se-79, Tc-99 and Np-237), and resolve fully the issues highlighted in the SITE-94 report [5], further research would be needed.
The purpose of the present paper is therefore to re- view European and North American research into the effects of α-radiation not only on SF dissolution, but also on other various phenomena both inside and out- side canisters as follows:
•influence of α-radiation on the instant release frac- tion (IRF), which is the fraction of the radionu- clides that are released immediately upon contact between the SF and water;
•effect of α-radiolysis products on container corro- sion;
•oxidative dissolution of SF;
•effect of predicted U(VI) corrosion products;
•co-precipitation of α-emitters;
•effect of water composition on the effects of radi- olysis;
•self-irradiation;
•effect of α-radiation on radionuclide migration; and
•effect of α-radiation on buffer mineralogy.
2.
Research into the effects of α-radiation on the SF and canisters
2.1.Influence of α-radiation on IRF
The gap and grain boundary radionuclides are gen- erally assumed to be released rapidly upon failure of the container or cladding and are described as the IRF. Al- though the IRF includes α-emitters [12], it is generally assumed that there is no inherent effect of α-radiation in determining which radionuclides partition to the gap or grain boundary or their release mechanism. There- fore, the discussion here is focused primarily on the ef- fects of radiation, and in particular α-radiolysis, on the alteration of the fuel matrix and the consequences for the IRF.
One area of research in the EC-supported  NF-  PRO Project [7] concerned this possible influence of α-radiation on the IRF. This influence could arise by α-radiation leading to the creation of microstructures within the SF, prior to ingress of water after canister failure. Potential creation of microstructures could al- low radionuclides to migrate to SF pellet rims and grain boundaries and thereby add to the initial IRF (that IRF immediately following irradiation within a reactor). This initial IRF consists of radionuclides that are located ini- tially in the gap, and potentially in the rim and grain boundaries.
Research into SF evolution prior to canister breach- ing and full re-saturation related to IRF release was un- dertaken and involved the following activities:
•review of literature concerning grain boundary characteristics in SF following irradiation;
•assessment of the evolution of the SF microstruc- ture and the influence of He under geological dis- posal conditions, notably by carrying out Vickers indentation tests to determine the relationship be- tween fracture type (intra- or inter-granular) and the local burned-up UO2 SF; and
•researching experimentally the SF source term in the repository, in particular the IRF.
In the NF-PRO project, experimental studies were carried out on the evolution of SF prior to water  ingress and during the thermal transient period. Var- ious studies improved knowledge of grain boundary characteristics/inventories and grain boundary stability in SF. Amongst others, the effect of He on the SF microstructure and diffusion processes was re-assessed. As a result, it is possible to justify a reduced level of conservatism of previously used IRF values of key safety relevant radionuclides for pressurized water reactor (PWR) UO2 fuels.
The NF-PRO project also undertook calculations to assess the potential effect of He accumulation on the mi- crostructure of the pellets. Using a realistic density of intra-granular bubbles as a function of the bubble size at the end of irradiation and assuming that all He atoms produced are trapped in pre-existing fission gas bubbles, microcracking would require the concentration of He to
reach 4 1020 atm/cm3 (or 0.6 atm%) in 10 nm bub-  bles. For larger bubbles, a He concentration of about 1021 atm/cm3 was calculated to be required. For new He bubbles, assumed to be 100 nm in diameter, the critical pressure would be reached when the He concentration becomes 3 1020 atm/cm3. By comparing these results with measurements of the quantities of He in SF pellets, it was concluded that the quantity of He produced by α-decay in UO2 pellets is insufficient to produce microc- racks in pellet cores. Consequently, there is insignificant He release to grain-boundaries as a result of He accumu- lation. More generally, the microstructure of uranium oxide SF located in the central and intermediate parts of fuel pellets should not significantly change as a result of He accumulation. As a result, these grain-boundaries should remain isolated from water and the IRF should be unaffected by the radionuclide inventories of these parts of SF pellets.
In contrast to the central and intermediate zones of a pellet, the rim zone undergoes significant microstruc- tural changes during irradiation, producing a so-called “high burnup structure” (HBS). The NF-PRO project also investigated He build-up in this structure. The HBS is characterized by sub-micrometer grains (c. 0.3 μm) and micrometre-scale pores that have a total porosity ranging between 10% and 15%. At the pellet edge, the fis- sion rate is two to three times higher than the mean pellet value. The result is that He is produced by α-decay in two to three times greater quantities than in the mean pellet. Assuming an upper value for the diffusion coefficient of He, it was concluded that around 50% of this He would be released to the pores owing to the small grain size.
It can be seen that the critical amount of He is insen- sitive to the sizes of the relatively large bubbles in the rim zone. It was therefore concluded that there is insufficient He to cause crack propagation within the rim zone and that consequently rim inventories would not contribute to the IRF. This conclusion is robust, since, in reality, some of the He would be released by diffusion and along pre-existing microcracks and therefore not accumulate within bubbles.
Leaching experiments were carried out on samples of mixed-oxide (MOX) pellets, to determine the grain boundary radionuclide inventories for the MOX. The results confirmed that performance assessment prior to the NF-PRO project had specified the IRF for MOX conservatively (1%–2% of key radionuclides were shown to comprise the IRF). However, the study did not shed any light on the possible effects of α-radiolysis on MOX fuel.
In summary, effects of α-radiolysis on IRF would be insignificant because the quantity of He gas produced by α-decay is insufficient to increase the IRF.
2.2.Effect of α-radiolysis products on container corrosion
Oxidizing α-radiolysis products (primarily hydrogen peroxide H2O2) may, in principle, support either the
dissolution of the SF or corrosion of metallic con- tainer components [13–19]. The question of whether α-radiolysis products will result in corrosion of the container depends on:
•the physical layout of the SF and container com- ponents and, in particular, their relative spacing;
•the relative reactivity of the SF and container com- ponents towards the radiolytic oxidants (and re- ductants);
•the rate of production and the spatial distribution of radiolysis products; and
•the mass-transport conditions within the con- tainer and particularly whether the container is fully or partially filled with (ground) water or whether the container is filled with a humid atmo- sphere.
Figure 1 shows the spatial relationship between the SF, defective cladding, and a container component, here assumed to be fabricated from carbon steel (C steel) (af- ter [15]). The container component in the figure could represent a structural insert inside the container or, in the case of a C steel container, the container wall itself.
A prerequisite for the production of radiolytic oxi- dants is the presence of water. It is useful to distinguish two periods: the period prior to container failure and the period following through-wall penetration. Prior to container failure, the production of radiolytic oxidants is only possible if water is carried over into the con- tainer in defected SF assemblies and which is not sub- sequently removed before sealing. Depending upon the volume of carried-over water, the water may be present as a pool of liquid water at the base of the container and/or as water vapour. Following through-wall pene- tration of the container, ground water, chemically modi- fied by interaction with the surrounding buffer material (typically highly compacted bentonite or a cementitious material), will enter the container, although it may take some time before the container is completely filled by the
Figure 1. Schematic geometrical relationship between SF, cladding, and carbon steel canister components (after [15]).
Figure 2. Reaction scheme for the impact of α-radiolysis on the corrosion of SF and carbon steel container components [19]. In the figure, interfacial electrochemical reactions are coloured blue, mass-transport processes are coloured green, precipitation/dissolution reactions in red, homogeneous re- dox reactions in brown, adsorption/ desorption processes are coloured pink, and the formation of H2O2 by α-radiolysis is denoted by the yellow arrow.
incoming chemically modified ground water. For α- radiolysis to occur during either period, the cladding must be defected to allow contact of the SF by either liquid water or water vapour. Furthermore, the temper- ature of the SF surface must be sufficiently low that, as a minimum, a thin surface water film is present.
Given the presence of a bulk aqueous  phase  or thin surface water film, α-radiolysis will produce a range of molecular and radical oxidants and reductants which may interact with  each  other  or  with  either the SF or metallic components inside the  container. The predominant stable radiolytic species is hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). Figure 2 shows the reaction scheme for the effect of α-radiolysis on the corrosion of SF and of C steel container components [19]. In the figure, the left-hand interface represents the SF (UO2) surface at which H2O2 is produced by α-radiolytic decomposition of water. The H2O2 can then participate in one of a number of reactions:
•electrochemical reduction to OH− on the SF sur- face (rate constant kD) to support the anodic dis- solution of UO2 (rate constants kA/kB);
•decomposition on the SF surface to O2 and H2O (OH−) (rate constants kC/kD);
•mass transport away from the fuel surface (diffu- sive flux JH2 O2 );
•homogenous redox reaction with Fe(II) to pro-
duce OH and Fe(III) (rate constant k4); and
•electrochemical reduction on the C steel surface (rate constant kH) to support the corrosion of the steel container components (rate constant kJ).
In order for α-radiolysis to impact upon the corro- sion behaviour of the container, the radiolytically pro- duced H2O2 must diffuse from the SF surface to C steel surfaces where it can then act as on oxidant (i.e. be elec- trochemically reduced) to support C steel corrosion. As noted above, the extent to which the radiolytically sup- ported corrosion of the container occurs depends on the geometry of the system and the relative rates of the pro- cesses denoted by the flux JH2 O2 and the interfacial rate constants kA/kB, kC, kD, kH and kJ and the homoge- neous rate constant k4.
The other important factor is the location at which H2O2 is produced by α-radiolysis. Unlike γ -radiation which can penetrate a few centimetres from the SF sur- face, the energy from the decay of α-emitters is absorbed within a few tens of micrometres in water [20–22]. Al- though the distribution of energy loss by α-particles is a function of distance from the source [18,20,21,23], a reasonable approximation is that the energy is absorbed within a distance of 30–40 μm from the SF surface. This distance is clearly far shorter than the distance to the nearest C steel container component (of the order of mm to cm) and even of the inner surface of the cladding (of the order of 100s of μm).
Because of the complexity of the reaction scheme and the sensitivity to the precise geometrical config- uration, the competition between the SF and C steel surfaces for radiolytic oxidants has not been studied experimentally. Instead, the question of whether α- radiolytically produced oxidants can support container corrosion is best addressed using mathematical mod- elling based on a suitable reaction scheme such as that shown in Figure 2.
Even without a mathematical model, however, it is apparent that H2O2 produced radiolytically at the SF surface is unlikely to reach the C steel surfaces prior to being consumed by some other process. Not only are there geometrical constraints (for example, the H2O2 formed at the SF surface must escape from the cladding before it can be transported to the C steel surface), but the SF surface itself is reactive and is likely to consume the H2O2, either in support of the dissolution of the SF matrix, according to the reactions@1
@2
to give the overall reaction
@3
or via the surface-mediated decomposition reaction
@4
The implication that the majority of H2O2 will be consumed at the SF surface and will not cause con-  tainer corrosion is supported by the results of detailed mathematical modelling based on the reaction scheme
in Figure 2. For SF/C steel separation distances of 5– 50 mm, the fraction of the C steel corrosion supported by the reduction of H2O2 is predicted to be <0.01% [16], with corrosion of the C steel primarily supported by the interfacial reduction of H2O (rate constant kK in Figure 2) or, to a much smaller extent, by the reduction of O2 produced by the decomposition of H2O2 (rate con- stant kI). Even if the SF/C steel gap is reduced to 0.5 mm, the fraction of C steel corrosion supported by H2O2 re- duction only increases to 0.3%.
Although it is clear that α-radiolysis is unlikely to im- pact upon the corrosion of the container, it is interesting to consider whether corrosion of the container can in- fluence the dissolution behaviour of the SF [13,24]. Two possible influences are of interest:
•Can the presence of H2 (formed during the anaer- obic corrosion of C steel container components) suppress the dissolution rate of SF sufficiently that it no longer consumes radiolytically produced H2O2 formed close to the surface?
•Can dissolved Fe(II) from anaerobic steel corro- sion consume radiolytically produced H2O2 via the Fenton reaction (Fe2 + + H2O2 = Fe3 + +
OH• + OH−, rate constant k4 in Figure 2)?
The mechanism of the effect of H2 on SF dissolution is believed to be involved in the catalysis of the oxidation of H2 by epsilon particles (segregated oxides and immis- cible metallic alloys, consisting mainly of Mo, Ru, Pd, Tc and Rh) in the SF, which effectively suppresses fuel dissolution by a galvanic coupling process (essentially involving cathodic protection of the SF surface) [10,25]. Wu et al. [18] included this process in a mathematical model based on a similar scheme to that in Figure 2 and predicted that H2O2 could diffuse up to a distance of a few tenths of a millimetre from the SF surface for a bulk dissolved H2 concentration of 10−6 mol/L, albeit only at concentrations of the order of nmol/L (absorbed dose rate of 9.03 105 Gy/y, equivalent to 103 Gy/h). This dif- fusion distance is reduced if Fe(II) is present in solution, although Wu et al. [18] suggest that the presence of dis- solved iron has little impact on the dissolution rate of the SF.
In summary, because of the high reactivity of UO2 and because the radiolytically produced H2O2 is formed so close to the SF surface, the vast majority of oxidizing radiolysis products are expected to be consumed at or close to the fuel surface. Consequently, it is unlikely that α-radiolysis will impact the corrosion behaviour of the container materials.
2.3.Oxidative dissolution of SF
The oxidative dissolution of SF is an interfacial pro- cess involving the reduction of oxidants (primarily H2O2 for α-radiolysis) coupled to the oxidation of U(IV) to U(VI). Since it is considered to be a major effect of α-
radiolysis [9–11], extensive studies have been performed to determine the dissolution rate of SF with various ex- perimental techniques and interpreted by some models. In this section, we categorized published papers and re- ports into four groups according to the following topics:
•data acquisitions and understanding the mecha- nism of oxidative SF dissolution;
•electrochemical techniques for determination of oxidative SF dissolution;
•effect of H2 on the oxidative dissolution of SF; and
•predictive modelling of the effects of α-radiolysis on SF dissolution.
Details of these different groups of studies are de- scribed below.
2.3.1.Data acquisitions and understanding the mechanism of oxidative SF dissolution
In describing the mechanism of dissolution, it is pos- sible to either consider the oxidation and reduction pro- cesses (e.g., reactions (1) and (2), respectively) separately, in which case the mechanism is discussed in electrochem- ical terms, or combined (e.g. reaction (3)), in which case the dissolution process can be considered as a chemical reaction. Shoesmith and co-workers [e.g. 26–31] favour the electrochemical approach, whereas various Euro- pean workers [e.g. 24,32–36] favour the chemical reac- tion description. In an electrochemical approach, each of the individual processes illustrated in Figure 2 can be studied separately (with some exceptions), so that the effect of variables, such as the rate of mass transport, the composition of the (electrode) surface and the solu- tion composition, on the oxidation and reduction pro- cesses can be determined. In a chemical approach, only the combined effects of the oxidation and reduction re- actions are accessible, as measured by the concentrations of oxidant and/or dissolved U(VI) in solution.
Certain aspects of the experimental procedures are common to both electrochemical and chemical ap- proaches. Because the β/γ -radiation effects from actual SF would overshadow the effects of α-radiolysis, it is not feasible to use SF samples for the study of the effects of α-radiation. Instead, a number of experimental ap- proaches have been used:
•The addition of H2O2 to the test solution to chem- ically simulate the effect of α-radiolysis (using un- irradiated UO2 samples) [24,32–54]. This method is, by far, the simplest of the various experimen- tal techniques. A wide range of H2O2 concentra- tions can be used to simulate a correspondingly wide range of alpha dose rates. There are, however, a number of drawbacks to this method, including
(1)it is then necessary to relate the concentration of H2O2 to the α-dose rate, which is typically done using bulk radiolysis models which may, or may not, properly simulate the radiolytic yield in the presence of a reactive surface, (2) the addition to the bulk solution does not replicate the spatial dis- tribution of H2O2 due to radiolysis, and (3) the use of H2O2 does not simulate the production of other, minor, radical radiolysis products.
•The use of UO2 samples doped with an α-emitter, such as 225Ac [55,56], 233U [56–58], 239Pu [59], or 238Pu [56,59–70]. This method, clearly, is the clos- est simulation of the actual geometry and yield of α-radiolysis products. Different “ages” of SF can
be simulated through the use of different doping levels of different α-emitters. A minor drawback with this method is that it does not exactly repli- cate the variety of α-emitters and the correspond- ing range of α-particle energies emitted by SF. In addition, depending upon the method of prepara- tion, the distribution of α-emitters in the sample may not exactly reflect that in SF, especially if there is a concentration of α-emitting radionuclides at grain boundaries in the fuel.
•Placement of a sealed α source (such as 241Am or 210Po) close to the UO2 surface [26–31]. The gap between the source and UO2 surface is typi- cally of the order of a few tens to hundreds of μm, but some radiolytically produced H2O2 is still in- evitably lost by diffusion out of the gap. A range of α source strengths can be used to simulate a range of dose rates and, hence, fuel ages. This tech- nique has the advantage that it is relatively “clean” from a radiological standpoint, but does not ex- actly replicate the spatial distribution of radiolysis products.
•Irradiation of the solution with a high-energy  He2 + beam generated by a cyclotron [34,71–73].
This technique can produce a range of dose rates, but at the high dose rates typically used, there is a danger of induced radiation damage.
Many studies of the effect of α-radiation on the mechanism of the dissolution of SF (UO2) have been based on leaching tests of α-doped UO2 or of un-doped UO2 with the addition of H2O2. In such tests, the dis- solved U concentration is typically measured as a func- tion of time in either static (batch) or dynamic (flow- through) mode. In batch mode, the solution can also be periodically refreshed to prevent saturation of the solu- tion with dissolved U. A typical static leach test in which the solution was replaced at each sampling time was per- formed with un-doped, 1 wt.% and 10 wt.% 233U-doped specimens [56,58]. The leach rate decreases with time be- cause of the saturation of the solution (in the case of non-refreshed solutions) and because of the initial dis- solution of high-activity sites or fine particles on the surface with high surface area (both refreshed and non- refreshed conditions). The amount of U in solution is clearly higher for the 10 wt.%-doped samples, although there is little apparent difference between the un-doped
Figure 3. Dependence of the dissolution rate of UO2 on the source strength for various α-doped samples and indication of the α-activity representing the threshold between oxidative and chemical dissolution of SF [10,56]. Data for un-doped UO2 are plotted at a source strength of 0.01 MBq/g. Data for spent fuel are also included. The dashed lines are arbitrarily drawn to bound the data of Poinssot et al. [56], with the solid ver- tical lines indicating the approximate location of the oxida- tive/chemical dissolution threshold. The shaded box represents the range of dissolution rates estimated from the ECORR mea- surements in Figure 5 and the red arrow represents the range of rates estimated using the electrochemical mixed potential model [19] for spent Candu fuel.
and 1 wt.% specimens. This may suggest a threshold α- dose rate below which there is no effect of irradiation, within the accuracy and reproducibility of the experi- mental technique.
It has been found that the dissolution rate of UO2 is a function of the α-dose rate. Dissolution rates can be estimated from the steady-state leach rate or from the results of dynamic leach tests. Figure 3 shows a com- pilation of dissolution rates as a function of α-source strength from the European Spent Fuel Stability (SFS) project [56]. Data for un-doped UO2 are shown for com- parison (plotted at a source strength of 0.01 MBq/g) along with two points for SF. There is clear evidence  for an increase in dissolution rate with increasing source strength. The dissolution rates at the lowest doping lev- els (1–10 MBq/g) are similar to those for un-doped UO2 (within the experimental scatter), possibly suggesting a lower limit for the effect of α-radiolysis. The scatter in the data is a consequence of a number of factors, includ- ing differences in solution composition, measurement methods, surface area:volume ratios, sample prepara- tion, etc., and is commonly observed in measurements of alteration rates for SF.
Hydrogen peroxide is considered to be the primary stable oxidant produced by the α-radiolysis of aqueous solutions and many researchers have simulated the ef- fects of α-radiation by adding H2O2 to the solution. Var- ious researchers have developed rate equations for the dissolution of UO2 as a function of activity of H2O2 ([H2O2]) and other parameters [24,32,33,35]. The disso- lution rate is invariably proportional to the [H2O2] [33] and the dependence on pH [33] exhibits the well-known
amphoteric dependence of the solubility of U(VI) on pH [74].
It is interesting to note that the results of the leach tests with α-doped UO2 and with additions of H2O2 to un-doped UO2 are consistent. Simulations using well- established aqueous radiolysis models suggest a linear dependence of the steady-state [H2O2] on α-dose rate [31]. The observed linear dependence of the dissolution rate on [H2O2] [33] is then consistent with the approx- imately linear dependence of the dissolution rate on α source strength in Figure 3.
Jonsson and co-workers [36,37,44–49,53,54] have also considered the oxidative dissolution of UO2 by H2O2 and have considered the elementary steps involved in the overall process. Possible rate-determining steps in- volving single-electron transfer processes were identified
[36] and the associated rate constants were determined. Although the dissolution rate of UO2 is similar to that of UO2 doped with non-active heavy metals (such as Y, Pd or the range of dopants present in SIMFUEL [49]), there is a significant difference in the so-called dissolution yield, i.e. the ratio of dissolved U to the amount of H2O2 consumed. Thus, the doped UO2 materials (which sim- ulate the range of dopants and metallic epsilon particles present in SF) catalyze the decomposition of H2O2 into O2 and H2O (Reaction (4)). This ability of the surface to decompose the radiolytically produced H2O2 into the less-reactive species O2 may also explain some of the scatter in the dissolution rates for α-doped materials in Figure 3.
2.3.2.Electrochemical techniques for determination of oxidative SF dissolution
Electrochemical techniques are useful for investigat- ing the elementary steps in the overall dissolution mech- anism. Electrochemical measurements using α-doped electrodes are challenging, so the majority of studies have been performed using either remote 241Am or 210Po sources or the addition of H2O2 [26–31,38–46,20–52]. In addition to electrochemical measurements, Shoesmith and co-workers [28,50,51] have determined the surface composition of U(IV), U(V) and U(VI) species as a function of electrochemical potential E and the com- position of the solution phase. The benefit of electro- chemical techniques is that it is possible to study the (an- odic) dissolution reaction (e.g. Reaction (2)) and the (ca- thodic) reduction of H2O2 (Reaction (1)) separately by applying a suitable potential to the UO2 electrode. The rate of the dissolution reaction increases with increas- ingly positive E and the rate of the cathodic reaction in- creases with increasingly negative E. Under freely cor- roding conditions, i.e. under the conditions of the leach tests described above and under the conditions that the SF will experience, the rates of the anodic and cathodic reactions are equal and occur at a potential referred to as the corrosion potential ECORR.
Goldik [38] and Goldik et al. [39–42] have studied the mechanism of the cathodic reduction of H2O2 on UO2 and on UO2 containing various non-radioactive dopants added to simulate SF, the so-called SIMFUEL. The mechanism and rate of reaction is highly dependent on the extent of oxidation of the surface, in particular the relative amounts of surface U(IV), U(V) and U(VI) species, which in turn is dependent on potential [10]. The presence of the U(V) species (stable as a surface inter- mediate but not commonly found in solution) is crucial, as electron-shuttling between adsorbed U(IV) and U(V) species catalyzes the surface-mediated H2O2 reduction reaction. Unlike O2, the reduction of which is also cat- alyzed by the adsorbed oxidized sites, H2O2 can gener- ate surface U(V) species, so that the reduction of H2O2 is 200 times faster than that of O2. At higher potential, or higher [H2O2], the surface is oxidized to the predom- inantly U(VI) state which inhibits electron transfer. The reaction order with respect to the H2O2 concentration varies from approximately 0.5 to 1 over this range of po- tentials [40]. On SIMFUEL electrodes, H2O2 reduction proceeds faster on the noble metal particles than on the UO2 surface.
Under freely corroding conditions, the concentra- tion of [H2O2] and the strength of a remote α-source lo- cated close to the electrode surface have an impact on the value of ECORR. Figure 4 shows the dependence of ECORR on [H2O2] in deaerated 0.1 mol/L NaClO4 (used as an inert supporting electrolyte) at pH 9.5 [74]. The plateau in the ECORR at a potential of 100 mVSCE (mV vs. saturated calomel electrode) is due to the catalysis of the H2O2 decomposition reaction by surface U(IV) and U(V) sites.
A similar plateau is observed in the dependence of ECORR  on the strength of a remote α-source (Figure  5). In this case, the range of source strengths used was
Figure 4. Dependence of the steady-state ECORR of UO2 on the concentration of H2O2 in deaerated 0.1 mol/L NaClO4 so- lution at pH 9.5 [74].
Figure 5. Dependence of the steady-state ECORR of UO2 on the strength of an adjacent α source in deaerated 0.1 mol/L NaClO4 solution at pH 9.5 [74].
insufficient to drive the potential to more oxidizing potential above the plateau representing the H2O2 decomposition reaction. The rate  of  dissolution  of  the UO2 can be calculated based on the empirically measured ECORR values and a knowledge on the rate of anodic dissolution as a function of potential determined separately [10,74] or from an electrochemical model based on the rate expressions of the individual anodic and cathodic processes and the rate of H2O2 production by α-radiolysis [14–16,19,23,75,76].
The  mechanistic  insight  developed  on  the  ba-  sis of electrochemical investigations is summarized in Figure 6. The surface dissolves oxidatively (i.e. by the
-1.2 -1.0 -0.8 -0.6 -0.4 -0.2 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6
Corrosion Potential (ECORR)(V vs SCE)
Figure 6. Summary of the surface oxidation state of “UO2” and the corresponding ranges of potential for various pro- cesses [10]. The range of potentials indicated by arrow A rep- resents the predicted conditions due to α-radiolysis [10]. The vertical dashed line represents the threshold between the po- tentials at which UO2 dissolves chemically as U(IV) or oxida- tively as U(VI).
oxidation of U(IV) to U(VI)) at potentials more posi- tive than approximately  0.4 VSCE, a potential that can be achieved due to α-radiolysis (as indicated by the pre- dicted range of potentials indicated by arrow A), or due to the presence of O2 or γ -radiation (not shown). Also shown in the figure is the effect of H2, which suppresses ECORR and the effect of α-radiation.
Figure 6 indicates the electrochemical criterion for the onset of oxidative dissolution of SF. At potentials more negative than 0.4 VSCE, the UO2 surface is not oxidized and dissolves chemically as U(IV):@5
At more positive potentials, the UO2 surface is ox- idized and dissolves according to Reaction (3) (or as    a U(VI) carbonate complex ion). As the α-activity de- creases with time, the SF will transition from dissolving oxidatively as U(VI) to chemically as U(IV) at a rate de- termined by the solubility of UO2 and the rate of trans- port of dissolved U(IV) species away from the surface. Defining this transition is important as it impacts how the SF matrix alteration rate (and the corresponding re- lease of radionuclides) is modelled.
The point at which this transition occurs can be es- timated based on measurements of ECORR as a func- tion of α-source strength (such as those in Figure 5) and the known time-dependence of the activity of the SF. Figure 3 shows a combination of this approach and the estimates of α-activity at which the transition from ox- idative to chemical dissolution occurs are obtained from dissolution data. The figure suggests that at α-activities of below approximately 2–10 MBq/g, the dose rate is in- sufficient to support oxidative dissolution. The time at which this occurs in the repository depends, of course, on the decay characteristics of the SF.
As discussed in the following section, however, the threshold activity is affected by the presence of H2 which will shift the threshold to higher activity levels.
2.3.3.Effect of H2 on the oxidative dissolution of SF
It is well established that the presence of H2 sup- presses the dissolution of SF, as well as the individual effects of α- and γ -radiation [10,25,29,45,54,77,78]. The effect also occurs on un-irradiated UO2 in the absence of any radiation field [79]. In addition to the effect on the dissolution rate, the presence of H2 also suppresses the value of ECORR (Figure 7). Compared with the values of ECORR observed in the presence of different concentra- tions of H2O2 or different α-dose rates, the suppression in ECORR by H2 is many hundreds of mV correspond- ing to many orders of magnitude decrease in dissolution rate.
There is consensus that the mechanism by which  H2 suppresses the dissolution rate is a surface-mediated process that involves the generation of the strongly re- ducing H• radical [25]. There are, however, various Figure 7. Effect of H2 partial pressure  on  the  ECORR  of UO2 at 5 MPa H2 with and without γ -radiation (open and solid black symbols), 238Pu-doped UO2 at 0.003 MPa H2 (red squares), and 1.5 atm% SIMFUEL for a range of H2 pressures (blue triangles) [80]. The ranges of ECORR values for UO2 in the presence of N2, O2, α-radiation, and H2O2 at various concen- trations and under various conditions are shown for compari- son.
methods by which this species can be generated. Both α- and γ -radiation can produce H radicals through radi- olysis, which can then scavenge radiolytic oxidants such as H2O2. In the absence of radiation, the noble metal (epsilon) particles in SIMFUEL act as anodes for the oxidation of H2 (which produces H radicals), but which also serves to cathodically protect the adjacent UO2 sur- face to which they are galvanically coupled.
Based on the data in Figure 7, it appears that as lit- tle as 0.01–0.1 MPa H2 (0.1–1 bar) is sufficient to shift ECORR below the oxidative dissolution threshold of -0.4 VSCE (see Figure 6). Given that either the container itself or some internal component is likely to be constructed from C steel, there is likely to be large amounts of H2 produced by anaerobic corrosion once the container has failed. For bentonite-backfilled repository designs, the H2 pressure is expected to be as high as the sum of the gas breakthrough pressure and the hydrostatic pressure, or of the order of 5–8 MPa for a repository at a depth of 500 m. Therefore, it seems likely that there will be suffi- cient H2 present in a failed container to completely sup- press the oxidative dissolution of SF due to both β/γ - radiation (for early container failures) or, in the long term, α-radiation.
2.3.4.Predictive modelling of the effects of
α-radiolysis on SF dissolution
As mentioned previously, Eriksen et al. [9] have re- cently reviewed the various attempts at modelling the radiation-induced dissolution of SF, including the ef- fects of α-radiation. Because of the nature of the experi- mental studies that have been performed, the predictive models that have been developed tend to be either chem- ically or electrochemically based. The most important conclusions from their critical review are:
•The use of measured interfacial rate constants gives results that are in generally good agreement
with observations, whereas the use of homoge- neous rate constants does not.
•The use of distance-dependent dose rates is impor- tant for short-term simulations.
•Calculating the dissolution rate based on the rate of oxidant production provides a reasonably good estimate of the dissolution rate, although care must be used in the prediction of the radiolytic yield.
•It is important to use experimentally determined rate constants and verified reaction mechanisms.
As highlighted by the reaction mechanism in  Figure 2, the dissolution of SF (UO2) is an interfacial process. As Eriksen et al. [9] infer, modelling the in- terfacial dissolution process as a pseudo-homogeneous step so that it can be incorporated into a bulk radiolysis model is inappropriate. The suggestion that the dissolu- tion rate is reasonably predicted by the rate of radiolytic production (as predicted using bulk radiolysis models) suggests that the presence of a corroding interface has no significant impact on the radiolytic yield.
A number of models developed to predict the effect of α-radiolysis on the dissolution of SF meet the require- ments defined above based on the review of Eriksen et al. [9]. As part of the European SFS project, the matrix alteration model (MAM) was applied to the effects of α-radiation [56,80–84]. The MAM is based on the fol- lowing steps:
•Step 1: generation of radiolytic oxidants from a conventional radiolysis model.
•Step 2: simulation of interfacial oxidation as a sur- face complexation reaction, with rate constants derived from experimental studies with O2 and H2O2 as oxidants.
•Step 3: dissolution of surface U(VI) species mod- elled as a two-step process.
Including the effects of a precipitated surface layer has been considered, but not yet implemented. The model has been used to simulate the results of various experimental studies with UO2 and SF and appears to give reasonable agreement (within a factor of 10) of the observed rates [56,83].
The mixed potential model  (MPM)  was  developed as part of the Canadian programme to specifically pre- dict the effect of α-radiolysis, although it has broader application [14–16,19,23,75,76]. The MPM is based on electrochemical principles and couples the interfacial re- actions on the SF surface with those occurring  in  the bulk medium, as well as those occurring on C steel sur- faces inside the failed container (Figure 2). Among the processes included are:
•anodic dissolution of UO2 as UO22 + or UO2 (CO3)22−;
•cathodic reduction of O2 and/or H2O2 on the SF surface;
•interfacial decomposition of H2O2;
•precipitation of UO3  2H2O and the formation of a porous surface layer;
•adsorption/desorption of UO22 + or UO2  (CO3)22− on clay mineral surfaces or steel corrosion products;
•homogeneous redox reactions between dissolved U(VI), O2, and H2O2 and dissolved Fe(II);
•anodic dissolution of C steel;
•cathodic reduction of dissolved U(VI), O2, H2O2 and H2O on the steel surface;
•spatially dependent radiolytic yield of H2O2, mod- ified by the formation of a precipitated U(VI) layer; and
•diffusive mass transport of reactants to and prod- ucts away from the corroding interfaces.
Interfacial and homogeneous rate constants and bulk solution diffusion coefficients were derived from experimental electrochemical studies or taken from the literature. The primary output of the MPM is the time- dependent ECORR, the SF dissolution rate, and the spa- tial and temporal distributions of the concentrations of each of the ten chemical species included in the reac- tion scheme. The MPM has been used to simulate the effect of α-radiolysis on the dissolution of SF and the effects of precipitation of U(VI), redox reactions with Fe(II) [14,17,19,23] and the effect of cladding [15], and has been used to predict effective G values (GEFF) for simplified SF dissolution models [75]. GEFF is the frac- tion of radiolytic oxidants that result in the dissolution of SF and was introduced by Johnson and Smith [85] asa useful method for predicting the long-term oxidative dis- solution of fuel in performance assessment models. The MPM has been validated against experimental data [76] and was found to be capable of predicting the fractional reaction order of the dissolution rate of UO2 with re- spect to the dissolved [O2] and the dissolution rate itself, the plateau ECORR value in H2O2-containing solutions, and the observed steady-state ECORR values, dissolution rates and GEFF values in the presence of alpha radioly- sis. The MPM also accurately predicts the temperature dependence of UO2 dissolution in aerated solution [76]. The MPM tends to overestimate both the ECORR and dissolution rate under mildly oxidizing conditions. This is a consequence of the use of interfacial rate constants derived from data obtained under oxidizing conditions, and the fact that the surface reactivity of UO2 decreases with decreasing potential [76].
Recently,  Wu  et  al.  [18]  have  developed  a model
based on a similar reaction scheme to that used for the MPM using the commercially available COMSOL soft- ware package. Because of the limitations of the COM- SOL software, the model does not predict the ECORR,  so equivalent chemical surface rate constants are used instead of electrochemical rate constants. As with the MPM, and as highlighted by Eriksen et al. [9], Wu et al.
[18] found it important to take into account the distance-
dependence of the α-dose rate when predicting the dis- tribution of radiolytically produced H2O2. In the case of both the MPM and the predictions by Wu et al. [18], the SF surface is found to be so reactive and H2O2 is pro- duced so close to that surface that little radiolytic oxi- dant is scavenged by the C steel container components. An improvement over the MPM was the inclusion of the effect of H2 [18]. Hydrogen was assumed to be oxi- dized by noble metal epsilon particles on the fuel sur- face galvanically coupled to the UO2 matrix. Critical dissolved H2 concentrations necessary to suppress the effect of α-radiation were predicted to be approximately 10−5 mol/L after 100 years, equivalent to a H2 partial pressure of the order of 0.01 bar and only slightly lower than the pressure that would be predicted based on the
experimental data in Figure 7.
2.3.5.Summary on oxidative dissolution of SF
Various techniques have been applied to determine oxidative dissolution of SF, and an increase in disso- lution rate with increasing source strength has been found. The electrochemical techniques have suggested that lower α-activities of below approximately 2–10 MBq/g, the dose rate is insufficient to support oxida- tive dissolution. There will be sufficient H2 present in a failed container to completely suppress the oxidative dis- solution of SF due to both β/γ -radiation (for early con- tainer failures) or, in the long term, α-radiation. Models such as the MPM have been used to simulate the results of various experimental studies with UO2 and SF and appeared to give reasonable agreement of the observed rates.
2.4.Effect of precipitated U(VI) corrosion products
In systems with limited U(VI) solubility (i.e. neu- tral to slightly alkaline pH, low carbonate concentra- tion), the dissolving SF surface is likely to accumulate a precipitated U(VI) surface layer. In many experimen- tal studies, the effect of the surface layer is not ob- served because of the use of either carbonate-containing solutions, low surface area:volume ratios, or refreshed or flowing leaching solutions. However, under stagnant conditions inside a failed waste container, precipitation of a range of porous U(VI) phases is likely to occur (Figure 8 [74]).
A porous surface deposit may have various effects on the dissolution behaviour of SF due to α-radiolysis, including:
•blocking surface sites and slowing the rate of dis- solution;
•restricting the transport of reactants towards, and of corrosion products away from, the dissolving interface;
Figure 8. Sequence of U(VI) alteration products observed at natural analogues for used fuel dissolution [74].
•co-precipitation of radionuclides, thus delaying their release but also modifying the dose rate dis- tribution; and
•promoting the development of locally acidic con- ditions in the pores of the precipitated layer.
The first three of these processes have been incorpo- rated into the MPM [14,17,19,23]. Of the first two ef- fects, by far the greatest is the surface blocking of dis- solution sites. This effectively decreases the dissolution rate by a factor ε, where ε is the bulk porosity of the film and is also equal to the fraction of the underlying SF surface exposed at the base of the pores in the film.
Surface acidification has been observed under cer- tain experimental conditions, but has not been unequiv- ocally demonstrated for SF dissolution. Acidification results from the hydrolysis of dissolved U(VI) and can occur during anodic polarization experiments where the dissolution reaction is accelerated artificially through the use of a potentiostat. It is postulated that the an- odic dissolution reaction could be spatially separated from the cathodic reduction of H2O2 by the presence
of a porous surface layer [10]. Under these conditions, the OH− ions produced by the reduction of H2O2 do not neutralize the H+ produced by the hydrolysis of U(VI) and locally acidic (and, at the cathodic site, al- kaline) conditions could be created. This is exactly the same mechanism involved in the well-known acidifica-
tion of pits and crevices during the localized corrosion of passive materials such as stainless steel. Cheong et al.
[86] have modelled this process and concluded that lo- cally acidic conditions could be maintained if the poten- tial is more positive than 0.05 VSCE and the pore depth is greater than a threshold value that increases with de- creasing potential.
Local acidification in pores may be of significance because one mechanism for the spatial separation of an- odic and cathodic sites is the catalysis of one or other reaction by noble metal particles or non-stoichiometry at grain boundaries. If the local anode site corresponds to a grain boundary at which radionuclides have pref- erentially segregated, then the rapid release of the grain boundary inventory could occur. This would justify the inclusion of the grain boundary inventory in the IRF
and contradict any suggestion that the addition of this inventory to that in the fuel pellet-cladding gap is con- servative.
2.5.Co-precipitation of α-emitters
One  of the possible effects of the precipitation of   a U(VI) layer is the co-precipitation of α-emitting ra- dionuclides. For example, the preferential precipitation of neptunium at the corroding fuel/film interface has been shown [87,88].
If α-emitting radionuclides are co-precipitated in the corrosion product film then the α-radiation field is mod- ified and the effective yield of radiolysis products is in- creased. Because of the limited path of α-particles in UO2, only those radionuclides close to the fuel sur- face contribute to the radiolysis of the aqueous phase [14,17,19–23]. Furthermore, these particles travel only a matter of a few tens of micrometres into the aque-  ous phase, with the deposited energy decreasing rapidly with distance away from the fuel surface. If, however, the α-emitters are incorporated into the porous film, then the α-particles can penetrate a further distance from  the fuel surface and irradiate a larger volume of water and, hence, produce a greater yield of oxidizing radiol- ysis products. A predicted consequence of this modified radiation field is that the rate of SF dissolution can in- crease with time as the effective yield of radiolysis prod- ucts increases with ongoing precipitation of U(VI) cor- rosion product [14]. Such an effect has not been reported in the literature, although high SF alteration rates were reported from drip tests conducted for the US Yucca Mountain Project in which the accumulation of surface deposits and the retention of α-emitting radionuclides were observed [87,89].
In summary of Sections 2.4 and 2.5, neither ef-
fect of precipitated U(VI) corrosion products nor co- precipitation of α-emitters affects radiolysis of water sig- nificantly.
2.6.Effect of water composition on the effects of radiolysis
The dissolved species of importance for the oxida- tive dissolution of SF due to α-radiolysis are carbon- ate, Si (present as dissolved silicate), calcium, chloride and sulphide [10,74,90]. Of these species, the first three specifically affect the kinetics of the anodic dissolution reaction and, as such, have a similar effect in aerated  or γ -irradiated solutions [74,91]. Briefly, carbonate pro- motes the oxidative dissolution of SF by forming sta- ble complexes with uranyl ions, such as UO2(CO3)22− [42,68,73]. Calcium and silicate suppress dissolution by forming protective U(VI) corrosion products, such as uranophane and soddyite (Figure 8) [92,93].
Chloride ions are generally considered inert in terms of the anodic dissolution reaction, but, when present at high concentration, can result in the formation of alter-
native oxidizing species in the presence of α-radiation. Kelm and Bohnert [63] irradiated a 5 mol/L NaCl solu- tion using either 238Pu-doped UO2 pellets or dissolved 238Pu. Over periods of up to 700 days, the stable radioly- sis products were H2, O2 and ClO3− which were formed with yields of 2 10−7, 8 10−8 and 7 10−9 mol/L/Gy, respectively. The short-term radiolytic oxidants present in solution are believed to include OH, H2O2, HO2, O2−, O2, Cl2− and HClO [63]. Gime´nez et al. [24] inves- tigated the effect of ClO− on the oxidative dissolution of UO2 in 5 mol/kg NaCl solution. The expression for the dissolution rate (r in mol/m2/s) of UO2 was found to be very similar to that for H2O2 and a combined rate expression was proposed for both H2O2 and ClO−:
log r = (−8.0±0.2) + log[oxidant]0.93±0.07, (6)
where the oxidant concentration is given in mol/L. In salt brines, therefore, oxidants other than H2O2 may be important in the presence of α-radiation.
The effects of bromide ions, and specifically their im- pact on the inhibition of SF alteration by H2, have been considered in the context of the salt brine programme in Germany [94–96]. At a concentration of 10−4–10−3 mol/kg, Br− appears to suppress the inhibitive effect of H2 on the dissolution of SF and the γ -irradiation of UO2 in 5 mol/L NaCl solution. Bromide reacts with OH and H radicals produced by β/γ -radiation, the latter species believed to be involved in the scavenging of oxidants in the presence of H2. There is no indica- tion that Br− has a similar effect in the presence of α- radiation and it is unclear whether bromide would inter- fere with the dissociation of H2 on noble metal particles, which is believed to be an alternative mechanism for the production of oxidant-scavenging H radicals.
Sulphide ions have been shown to consume H2O2 as well as to suppress the oxidative dissolution of UO2 by γ -radiation [90]. Effects are observed for dissolved sul- phide concentrations of the order of 10−4–10−3 mol/L,
approximately one to two orders of magnitude higher than those typically observed in deep ground waters. Furthermore, the concentration of HS− at the fuel sur- face in a repository will approach zero as the supply of sulphide will be inhibited by the presence of bentonite backfill (if used) and sulphide will react with dissolved Fe(II) or, more significantly, the container material be- fore reaching the fuel surface. Therefore, in practice, the impact of ground water sulphide on the oxidative disso- lution of SF is likely to be minimal.
In summary, the influence of water composition on the effects of radiolysis is negligible or minimal although the contribution of S, Cl and Br has been identified.
2.7.Self-irradiation
As noted in Section 2.1, it is generally assumed that there is no inherent effect of α-radiation in determining which radionuclides partition to the gap or grain bound-
ary or their release mechanism. Recently, however, work in the French programme in particular has suggested that long-term α-irradiation of the fuel prior to con- tainer failure may impact the IRF and these proposed effects are briefly discussed in the section.
Poinssot and co-workers [83,97,98] have suggested that long-term self-irradiation by α-particles prior to container failure may affect the distribution of radionu- clides within the fuel. Thus, the use of measurements of the grain boundary inventory on “fresh” SF may under- estimate the IRF for fuel that is only exposed to ground water after container failure tens or hundreds of thou- sands of years into the future.
Two effects are suggested:
•Damage of the SF structure by the accumulation of He produced by α decay may lead to an increase in the effective surface area exposed to solution.
•Enhancement of the diffusion of radionuclides by α-self-irradiation (referred to as ASIED) may lead to a redistribution of radionuclides within the fuel.
Studies on α-doped UO2 have shown measurable increases in hardness, lattice spacing parameters from X-ray diffractometry (XRD), and microscopic swelling, especially with higher activity samples [64,98,99]. How- ever, the extent to which enhanced diffusion by self- irradiation will lead to a preferential diffusion to the grain boundaries is unclear [100].
In summary, neither of the effects above has been conclusively demonstrated, but it has been proposed that the definition of the IRF be extended to include those radionuclides that could be rapidly released from aged SF as a result of these effects of α-radiation [83,98,101].
3.Research into the effects of α-radiation outside canisters
3.1.Effect of α-radiation on radionuclide migration
Normally, α-radiation effects are of no concern for the engineered barrier system (EBS) outside the canis- ter. However, once a canister is breached, α-emitting ra- dionuclides may leave the canister and enter the buffer. Consequently, the effects of this α-radiation on long- term buffer performance need to be established.
Of particular concern has been establishing whether α-radiolysis might cause locally more oxidizing con- ditions within the buffer and hence enhance the rate    at which redox-sensitive radionuclides might migrate through the buffer [102,103]. The LET-value (linear energy transfer, the energy absorbed per unit path length of absorber) is much greater for α-radiation,  than for β- and γ -radiation, and hence locally the α-dose rate will be much larger than that of β- and γ -radiation. Consequently, α-radiation will locally generate higher concentrations of oxidants than β- and γ -radiation (see
Table  1.  G-values in neutral water for  water radiolysis (in molecules/100 eV). Values for α-radiation are from Eriksen et al. [104] and those for β- and γ -radiation are from Choppin et al. [105].G-values in Table 1). However, the overall concentration of oxidants generated by α-radiation will be decreased by the effects of β- and γ - radiation, which include the generation of more H atoms, hydroxyl radicals and electrons than are produced by α-radiation. These products of reactions involving β- and γ -radiation will consume some of the molecular oxidants (H2O2 and O2) produced from α-radiation.
Overall, water radiolysis will produce the stable molecular species, O2, H2O2 and H2, and several highly reactive radicals.
Jansson et al. [103] describe a study of the extent to which water radiolysis products might affect the diffu- sion of the redox-sensitive element technetium through compacted bentonite. Technetium was selected for study because:
•Three electrons are transferred in the oxidation of one atom of Tc(IV) to Tc(VII), making Tc(IV) rel- atively slow to oxidize, but once oxidized, the re- duction of Tc(VII) is relatively slow as well.
•The oxidized Tc is present in anionic form (pertechnetate) and therefore will not sorb signif- icantly to the mineral surfaces of the bentonite, which are negatively charged. That is, the pertech- netate will be retarded much less than cationic species and hence the influence of radiolysis prod- ucts on the mobilization will be easier to detect.
Two cases were studied:
•one in which an α-radiation source was placed suf- ficiently far away from Tc that only molecular wa- ter radiolysis products reached Tc (indirect radiol- ysis); and
•another in which Tc was placed in direct contact with an α-radiation source so that both radical and molecular water radiolysis products reached Tc (direct radiolysis).
The experiments were performed in situ at a depth of  450  m  in  the  A¨ spo¨  Hard  Rock  Laboratory,  using the CHEMLAB probe and a 241Am source. The radia- tion sources and experiment cells containing compacted MX-80 bentonite and Tc(IV) were prepared and placed in CHEMLAB in a conventional laboratory before the probe was installed underground. The experiment lasted 100 days, after which the bentonite in the cells was thin- sectioned, dried, weighed and analyzed for 99Tc-activity. In the indirect radiolysis experiment, it was found that the Tc migrated very slightly if at all. Probably, this
limited migration reflected the very slow kinetics of the oxidation of Tc(IV) in the aqueous phase by O2 and H2O2.
In the direct radiolysis experiment, technetium had clearly started to migrate from its original position. This finding was interpreted to indicate that either  OH   and
CO3−  are involved in the oxidation process or that the
local concentration of H2O2 is sufficiently high to ox- idize TcO2. However, it was noted that migration pro- cesses are complex and that reduction of Tc(VII) by Fe(II) in the solid phases is expected to occur; this pro- cess will limit the migration of Tc that has previously been oxidized by radiolysis.
Liu et al. [102] present the results of modelling the ef- fects of water radiolysis caused by certain α-emitting ra- dionuclides once they have left a failed container. They developed a model for the effects of secondary water ra- diolysis caused by dispersed radionuclides in the ben- tonite buffer surrounding a copper canister. This radi- olysis is caused by radionuclides that are present as so- lutes in the pore-water or as sorbed species on the sur- face of other minerals, or as secondary minerals, follow- ing their release from failed or defective canister. The most important radionuclides are those anticipated to be the dominant α-emitters in the long term (e.g. 239Pu, 240Pu, 241Am). The modelling showed that SF will not be oxidized at a rate significantly faster compared to the case where secondary radiolysis is completely neglected. However, a large domain of the near-field can be oxi- dized due to a much faster depletion of reducing min- erals in the buffer where secondary radiolysis occurs, compared to the case where secondary radiolysis is ne- glected.
In summary, water outside a canister will not be ox- idized in contrast to the most pessimistic scenario in SITE-94 [5].
3.2.Effect of α-radiation on buffer mineralogy
The possible impact of α-radiation on clay mineral structure has been reviewed by Wilson et al. [106].
The main impact of α-radiation on clay minerals
such as smectite is damage to the microstructure with consequent implications for cation diffusion. Beall [107] described some experiments in which various clay min- erals were placed in contact with the α-emitter 253Es. He noted that a correlation between the cation exchange ca- pacity (CEC) and the rate at which the minerals were
destroyed: montmorillonite (CEC = 100 meq/100g) was
destroyed in less than 1 day; attapulgite (CEC 33 meq/100g) was destroyed in 2–3 days and kaolinite (CEC 10 meq/100g) was destroyed in about 4 days. However, he also stated that the amorphous material re- maining after exposure to the 253Es retained significant sorbing capacity. The experiments showed that a dose in the order of 4 1018 α/g is needed to completely de- stroy the structure of a clay mineral and convert it to an amorphous, siliceous mass. It was pointed out that this dose is around 200 times greater than would actually be produced by dissolution of 10−5 of the SF inventory per year, 1000 years following disposal.
Grauer [108] also considered that this α-radiation
dose of around 4 1018 α/g would have an insignificant effect on the HLW disposal concept developed by Na- gra in the Gewa¨hr Project. The rationale was that only a small fraction of the total quantity of bentonite backfill would be impacted.
SKB [109,110] cite the radionuclide migration cal- culations for SR 97 [111], which concluded that in the buffer closest to the canister, the total concentration of α-emitters would give a maximum total dose of 8 1015 α/g of bentonite. This dose was calculated for the first million years following repository closure, with the as- sumption that there is early canister failure. SKB con- cluded that this dose is <1% of that required to destroy the material closest to the failed canister. SKB [109,110] also stress that in most parts of the buffer, the α-dose will be much less because the α-emitters are strongly ab- sorbed and will remain near to the canister, so that only a very small part of the bentonite buffer will be affected. However, if water flow takes place only through a few channels, they may well transport significant amounts of Am and similar radionuclides through the buffer to the surrounding rock, thereby increasing the potential for deleterious effects on clay mineral structure. Even so,
8 1015 α/g corresponds to an absorbed dose of 8 MGy, which is more than three orders of magnitude less than the dose of 30 GGy that has been found to cause amor- phization of montmorillonite [112]. It can be concluded that even for very pessimistic assumptions, the impact of α-radiation on the properties of the buffer would be very small.
4.Conclusions
This review has covered research into the effects of α-radiation from SF in European and North American countries. This research has covered:
•the effects of α-radiation on the fuel itself;
•the effects of α-radiation on metal components of the canister interior;
•the effects of α-radiation from α-emitting ra- dionuclides on radionuclides migration through the buffer that surrounds a canister, once the can- ister has been breached.
Effects of α-radiolysis on the IRF would be insignif- icant because the quantity of He gas produced by α- decay is insufficient to increase the IRF. Because of the high reactivity of UO2 and because the radiolytically produced H2O2 is formed so close to the SF surface, the vast majority of oxidizing radiolysis products are ex- pected to be consumed at or close to the fuel surface; consequently, it is unlikely that α-radiolysis will impact the corrosion behaviour of the container materials.
Various techniques have been applied to determine oxidative dissolution of SF and an increase in disso- lution rate with increasing source strength has been found. The electrochemical techniques have suggested that lower α-activities of below approximately 2–10 MBq/g, the dose rate is insufficient to support oxidative dissolution. There will be sufficient H2 present in a failed container to completely suppress the oxidative dissolu- tion of SF due to both β/γ -radiation (for early container failures) or, in the long term, α-radiation. Models have been developed to simulate the results of various exper- imental studies with UO2 and SF and appeared to give reasonable agreement of the observed rates.
It was found that neither the effect of precipitated U(VI) corrosion products, nor co-precipitation of α- emitters, affects radiolysis of water. The effect of water composition on the effects of radiolysis is negligible or minimal. Neither of the effects above has been conclu- sively demonstrated, but it has been proposed that the definition of the IRF be extended to include those ra- dionuclides that could be rapidly released from aged SF as a result of these effects of α-radiation.
Water outside a canister would not be oxidized in contrast to the most pessimistic scenario in SITE-94. It can be concluded that even for very pessimistic assump- tions the impact of α-radiation on the properties of the buffer would be very small.
Acknowledgement
The authors acknowledge Dr Fraser King of Integrity Corrosion Consulting, Canada, and Dr Richard Metcalfe of Quintessa Ltd., United Kingdom, for many useful comments and discussion.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
