<title>Estimation of eﬀective dose using two ICRP criteria, applied to radiation protection of personnel in an unshielded PET cyclotron facility</title>
<author>Teresa Jakubowska, Magdalena Długosz-Lisieck</author>
<Affiliation>a.Lodz University of Technology, Institute of Applied Radiation Chemistry, Wróblewskiego 15, 90-924, Lodz, Poland;b.MikołajKopernik Provincial Multidisciplinary Center of Oncology and Traumatology,ul. Pabianicka 62, 93-513, Lodz, Poland</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radphyschem.2020.108688</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2020.108688</URL>
ABSTRACT
Neutrons have no charge, but ionize indirectly through secondary particles.Neutron radiation is a source of exposure to ionizing radiation for personnel working withcyclotronsthat produce isotopes forpositron emission tomography (PET) radiopharmaceuticals.During production of isotopes in cyclotron in nuclear reactions beside gamma radiation are created also neutrons. The new recommendations of the International Radiological Protection Commission (ICRP) −103 have changed the method of calculating the neutron radiation weighting factor and the tissue weighting factor value that were deﬁned in earlier ICRP recommendations (ICRP,  2007; ICRP, 1991; ICRP, 1996).
The aim of this work is to estimate how this change inﬂuencesthe calculation of an eﬀective dose in neutron radiation with a complex energy spectrum. This spectrum consists of three regions: a plateau area for thermal neutrons, a peak in the area of fast neutrons with a sharp edge from the high-energy side, and a mild ﬁeld of decline for intermediate and epithermal neutrons.
The application of new recommendations reduces the calculated eﬀective dose by more than 10 mSv. The   eﬀect of increasing the eﬀective dose for the maximum ﬂuence area, i.e. energy near 1 MeV,by using a higher  value of wR is negligible. The study ﬁnds that the new recommendations are less restrictive, and this is of great practical importance becauseno modiﬁcation to the used shields is required.
Keywords:
Neutron production    PET    Cyclotron   Neutron dosimetry
1.Introduction
Medical facilities that use diagnostic and therapeutic techniques provide many sources of ionizing radiation exposure for medical staﬀ and patients. Patients are exposed to radiation during diagnostic pro- cedures and radiopharmaceutical therapy marked with isotopes emit- ting α, β+, β−  and γ radiation, as well as X-rays used in hybrid single photon emission computed tomography-computed tomography (SPECT-CT) or positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT). (Cho et al., 2017; Wrzesień et al., 2019; Peet et al., 2012).
Medical staﬀ is the largest group of people professionally exposed to ionizing radiation in Poland, and the group that receives the highest doses. The eﬀective dose for medical staﬀ working in the ﬁeld of medical diagnosis and therapy is from 0.4 to 1 mSv/year. In most cases, this dose is from gamma radiation. In facilities performing PET ex- aminations that are equipped with a cyclotron used for isotope pro- duction, there is an additional source of radiation hazard – neutron radiation (Cyclotron produced radion, 2008; Cyclotron produced radion, 2012). Neutron radiation around cyclotron facilities is usually
not monitored by personal dosimetry systems.
Although they do not directly ionize atoms, free neutrons cause ionizing radiation. As such, depending on the dose, they can be a bio- logical threat. Neutrons, due to their neutrality, similarly to photons, deposit doses of radiation in tissue through a two-step process (Ervin, 2010). First, energy is transferred to charged particles such as protons and heavier nuclei in tissue. Next, energy is deposited in tissue through the Coulomb interaction of the charged particles with atoms of tissue. The number and type of interactions with the tissue depends on the kinetic energy of the neutrons. In medicine, there are thermal, epi- thermal, intermediate, and even fast neutrons (ICRP, 2007; Ervin, 2010).
For radiation monitoring, in most cases, the simple International Commission on Radiation Units and MeasurementsICRU sphere phantom adequately approximates the human body as regards the scattering and attenuation of the radiation ﬁelds under consideration. This is a sphere built of composition describes as the poly- methylmetacrylate or lucite that has been used as a tissue equivalent witch is deﬁnied as material with a density of 1 g cm-3 and mass composition of 76.2% oxygen, 11.1% carbon, 10.1% hydrogen, and  2.6% nitrogen (Alloni and Prata, 2017; ICRU, 1989). Thermal neutrons interact with the nuclei of tissue through neutron capture through the reaction of14N(n,p)14C or1H(n,p)2H, with a cross-section of reaction
1.84 b/atom and 0.33 b/atom, respectively. Despite a lower cross-sec- tion for capture in hydrogen compared to nitrogen, thermal neutrons have a much larger probability of being captured by hydrogen than nitrogen in tissue because of the higherconcentration of atoms per gram of tissue. The 1H(n, γ)2H reaction is the main factor aﬀecting the ra- diation dose delivered to people from thermal neutrons because it generated additional gamma radiation.The dose in the tissue for epi- thermal, intermediate, and fastneutrons is produced because the body acts as a moderator for the thermalization of neutrons. For neutrons with kinetic energies above 100 eV, the most important interaction is the elastic scattering with the nuclei of tissue. In this process, the most important collisions are hydrogen collisions for two reasons: hydrogen has the largest number of atoms in the tissue and it has the most eﬃ- cient energy transfer (50%) (Ervin, 2010).
Exposure to neutron radiation increases the probability of adverse health eﬀects. In terms of deterministic eﬀects, their occurrence de- pends on exceeding a certain threshold dose(e.g. cataracts - 0,5 Gy, skin burns 5–10 Gy, temporary sterylity - 0,1 Gy (ICRP, 2011)) and the ef- fects intensify with increasing doses. For stochastic eﬀects (e.g. leu- kemia), the threshold dose is not deﬁned. The probability of occurrence of eﬀects depends on the size of the accepted radiation dose.
The new International Commission for Radiological Protection (ICRP)-103 recommendations have changed the method for calculating the radiation weighting factor of neutrons and the value of the tissue weighting factor. The aim of this work is to estimate how this change inﬂuencesthe calculation of eﬀective dose in the non-monoenergetic neutron radiation ﬁeld around a medical cyclotron used in hospitals to produce isotopes with short half-lives.Due to the complicated energy spectrum of neutron radiation around a cyclotron, this is not trivial task. A review of the literature shows that energyspectra of neutron radiation have been found to share the same features: a peak in upper- level energy, low medium energy, and a wide-energy plateauplateau in the thermal neutron range. In addition, the maximum peak falls on the energies for which the radiation weighting factor values have increased in the new recommendations.
2.Materials and methods
We used a cyclotron facility located at the Provincial Multidisciplinary Center of Oncology and Traumatology in Lodz city, Poland. The Eclipse™ RD cyclotron used is a non-self-shielded cyclotron that accelerates proton energy to 11 MeV and produces positron-emit- ting radioisotopes — 18F and 11C. The isotope 18F is produced during the bombardment of asilver body target material enriched in 18O water by reaction 18O(p,n)18F. Typical irradiation parameters include the following:
18O enrichment, typically > 95%; •chemically pure
18O-enriched water, higher than 99.99%;
•target  volume of 2.5 ml;
•proton beam of 11 MeV;
•beam current of 60 μA;
•irradiation time of 90 min.
For the measurement of ambient dose equivalent Ḣ*(10) in neutron ﬁelds in the cyclotron bunker, we used MDN-01 monitor - a propor- tional 3He detector mounted in a moderator – a Bonner sphere made of polyethylene  with  a  diameter  of  25  cm.  This  probe  is  part  of  the
Radiation Monitoring System manufactured by VF installed in PET center with cyclotron. The measuring parameters were an energy range from 25E-9 to 16 MeV, eﬀective measuring range from 1E-7 to 1E-1 Sv/
h, and eﬃciency (252Cf) 4 cps/μSv/h.The probe makes measurements continuously, the measurements are saved and stored in the memory of the computer controlling the system. The measurement of background neutron radiation when the cyclotron was turned oﬀ was 0.007 μSv/h.
3.Results
The medical source of neutrons are (p,n) and (d,n) nuclear reactions used to produce radionuclides for PET diagnostics. Examples of these reactions are  18O(p,n)18F,  15N(p,n)15O,  12C(d,n)13N,  and  14N(d,n)15O.  In addition to these basic reactions, neutrons can be generated by other side reactions caused by interaction with components of the cyclotron located directly in the beam path of accelerated charged particles.These elements are as follows:
The target material as a result of a direct reaction.
Beam path control elements placed near the cyclotron output: gra- phite extraction ﬁlms, beam deﬂectors, collimators.
Foils forming the shield input window, most often made of Havar alloy (Co (42%), Cr (19.5%), Ni (12.7%), W (2.7%), Mo (2.2%), Mn
(1.6%), C (0.2%), and Fe), as well as aluminum, niobium, and ti- tanium.
Copper or aluminum supporting grid bands that increase window resistance to high pressures inside the target body.
The target body. The most commonly used materials for the target body are aluminum, titanium, nickel, niobium, tantalum, and silver (Gallerani et al., 2008).
The primary nuclear reactions of the activation process (Table 1) can be predicted by identifying the isotopes activated in theabove
Table 1
Activated isotopes incomponentsof the cyclotron andtheir possible formation reactions, Q-values, and energy thresholds (keV)
Table 2
Summary of the maximum energy of neutrons generated during the operationof medical cyclotrons.
Fig. 1. Dependence of the radiation weighting factor on the energy of neutrons inaccordance with the recommendations of ICRP Publication 103 (ICRP, 2007).
componentsand knowing the initial composition of the irradiated components.
Neutrons collide with elements of the cyclotron and lose energy.They also interact with the walls of the room of the cyclotron and with the air, which causes them to lose more energy. Therefore, the energy spectrum of neutrons around the cyclotron contains both fast and thermal neutrons. The shape of the spectrum changes at various points around the unshielded cyclotron. Near the target, the maximum peak of energy is observed for fast neutrons (Table 2). In theroom of the cyclotron with concrete walls, neutrons lose energy from multiple col- lisions with the walls, ﬂoor, and ceiling. These neutrons are reﬂected back to the room (room-return neutrons) and are in the thermal and epithernal range on the neutron energy spectrum (Vega-Carrillo, 2001; Cruzate, 2015; Guimaraes et al., 2012; Benavente et al., 2015; Alloni  and Prata, 2017; Carroll, 2002; Kuo et al., 2011; Vega-Carrillo et al., 2007). Investigations of the neutron energy spectrum from a 18O(p, n)
18F  reaction  in a large  bunker, the dimensions  of which   limited  the eﬀects of scattering, showed one peak of neutron energy above 2.5 keVand mean energy of 1.57 MeV without a low energy component from thermal neutrons (Lagares et al., 2016).
The angular distribution of neutrons and their energy depend on the type of target (gas or liquid). The energy of neutrons determines their distribution around the cyclotron facility. Neutrons with low energies scatter relatively uniformly in all directions, while those with higher energies are focused in the direction of the cyclotron's beam (Carroll, 2002; Lin et al., 2013).
Radiological protection standards have been introduced into reg- ulations based on the recommendations of the ICRP, which deﬁnes
radiation doses and determines the eﬀects of these. The dose limit va- lues that are currently binding in Poland are set out in the Regulation of the Council of Ministers of 18 January 2005 on Ionizing Radiation Dose Limits. According to it, in Poland, the limit of exposure to ionizing radiation expressed as an eﬀective dose is 20 mSv/year. The limit dose expressed as an equivalent dose is.
150 mSv for eyes,
500 mSv for the skin –theaverage value for any surface of 1 cm2 of irradiated skin,
500 mSv for hands, forearms, feet, and skins (Rozporządzenie Rady Minis, 2005).
The ambient dose equivalent, H*(10), has been deﬁned by the ICRU (ICRU 51, 1993) as the dose equivalent that would be produced by the corresponding expanded and aligned radiation ﬁeld in the ICRU sphere (30 cm diameter, made up of tissue equivalent material) at a depth of10 mm. The eﬀective dose (1) is deﬁned as the sum of all equivalent doses HT in all exposed organs and tissues, taking into account the dimension assigned to them less the tissue weighting factor,wT:
@1
In order to obtain information about the equivalent dose of HT in a given organ/tissue, it is necessary to multiply the average dose D ab- sorbed by a given organ/tissue by the dimensionless mass ratio of wR radiation, which takes into account the relative biological eﬀectiveness of a given type of radiation. In mixed ﬁelds, the equivalent dose is the sum of the products of the doses absorbed for a given volume and the corresponding radiation weighting factors for all components of the mixed radiation ﬁeld. In accordance with previous ICRP re- commendations and Polish regulations, the value of wR for neutrons depends on their energy. A value of 5 is for neutron radiation below
10 keV and above 20 MeV, a value of 10 is for  energy  ranges  of 10–100 KeV and 2–20 MeV, and the maximum value of 20 is for the interval 100 keV-2 MeV (Rozporządzenie Rady Minis, 2005). Currently, instead of numerical values, wR is described by continuous functions (Fig. 1) determined according to three diﬀerent equations for energy (Fig. 1). To assess the actual exposure of employees to neutron radia- tion, we use the ICRP 103 recommendations not yet implemented in Poland as they are based on improved knowledge of radiobiology and new epidemiological studies.
Function of the dependence of the radiation weighting factor on the energy of neutrons (ICRP, 2007) can be calculated using equation (2,3,4).
Due to the highest relative biological eﬃciency (RBE), the most dangerous neutron radiation is that with 1 MeV energy. Lowering the
Table 3
The average ambient dose rate due to neutrons during F-18 production in the room of the cyclotron.
neutron energy to below 10 keV causes the RBE value to be reduced to a minimum.
The average ambient dose rate due to neutrons in the room of a cyclotronover a period of 17 production days was 34.24 mSv/h, which with an average production time of 86.12 min,resulted in anaverage dose from one production period of 49.06 mSv (Table 3). Of course, no one is in the cyclotron room during a production period: the doors are automatically blocked, and the walls of the room are designed to ensure safety for people around.
For further considerations, the model of neutron energy dis- tributioninside the cyclotron bunkergenerated during the production of 18F, which was based on the neutron ﬂuence spectra, was adopted. It consisted of three regions: a plateau area for thermal neutrons, a maximum energy range in the area of fast neutrons with a sharp edge from the high-energy side, and a mild ﬁeld of decline for intermediate and epithermal neutrons. The following approximation was used to further analyze the impact of changing the guidelines regarding the method of deﬁning the value of the wRcoeﬃcient for neutrons produced in a cyclotron. The distribution of neutron ﬂuence depending on energy as described in the cited publications could be divided into three areas: a plateau area for thermal neutrons, an area of mild growth for epi- thermal neutrons, and a clear maximum energy range of 10 keV to      10 MeV with a peak around 1 MeV (Vega-Carrillo, 2001; Cruzate, 2015; Guimaraes et al., 2012; Benavente et al., 2015; Alloni and Prata, 2017; Kuo et al., 2011).(Table 4).
Based on the measured dose and the neutron ﬂuence distribution model, we recalculated the absorbed dose. This dose was used to
Table 4
Example of normalized neutron ﬂuence distribution produced by a medical cyclotron.
calculate a new eﬀective dose value using coeﬃcients deﬁned in ICRP 103(Table 5).
4.Discussion
A simpliﬁed model of the neutron spectrum produced during the production of radioisotopes inside the bunker was used to illustrate the impact of the new ICRP recommendations on the neutron dose. This model contains common features of neutron spectra measured in pub- lications of other authors. The application of this compact method of analyzing dose in neutron radiation with a complex energy spectrum has shown that new recommendations reduce the calculated eﬀective dose 10,43 mSv. The eﬀect of increasing the eﬀective dose for the maximum ﬂuence area, i.e. energy near 1 MeV,by usinga higher value of wR (according to the ICRP103) is negligible. In the case of mono- energetic neutrons with energy near 1 MeV, this is important, however, for neutron radiation with a broad energy spectrum, this eﬀect com- pensates for lowering the dose for the rest of the neutrons.The ICRP recommends the use of the operation quantity of H*(10) to provide a conservative estimate of eﬀective dose E for strongly penetrating ra- diation e.g. neutrons. For neutrons H*(10) is not conservative with respect to E under AP irradiation conditions in the energy range from 1eV to about 50 keV. In realistic neutron ﬁelds with a broad neutron energy distribution, however, this energy range mostly is of small im- portance and in practice H*(10) therefore remains in most cases con- servative with respect to E. Furthermore, the person inﬂuences the ra- diation ﬁeld by scattering and attenuating the radiation. In a non- isotropic radiation ﬁeld the value of the personal dose equivalent, Hp (10), also depends on the orientation of the person in this ﬁeld.
5.Conclusions
In this study, the most recent ICRP recommendations together with the available data about neutron energy during radiopharmaceutical production in a cyclotron have been applied. It can be seen that the new recommendations are less restrictive, which is of great practical im- portance because no modiﬁcation to shields are required. Additionally, in rooms outside the cyclotron room, a further reduction in neutron energy and amount should be expected as a result of interactions with the walls of the cyclotron room. Moreover, the new tissue weighting factors tend to decrease the eﬀective dose value compared to the pre- vious factors. This was also observed in analysis of total eﬀective dose for most of the radiopharmaceuticals (Claumarchirant et al., 2010). However, the complexity of the neutron radiation spectrum around the cyclotron as well as the partial increase in the value of wR as a con- sequence of this had not been taken under consideration before this study.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Teresa Jakubowska: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Validation, Formal analysis, Writing - original draft. Magdalena Długosz-Lisiecka: Supervision, Investigation, Writing - review & editing.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂu- ence the work reported in this paper.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2020.108688.
Table 5
The eﬀective dose value using coeﬃcients deﬁned in ICRP 103 and ICRP 60 (ICRP, 2007 and ICRP, 1991).
