<title>Ground deposition assessment of radionuclides following a hypothetical release from Ghana Research Reactor-1 (GHARR-1) using atmospheric dispersion model</title>
<author>S.A. Birikorang a, b, *, R.G. Abrefah a, b, R.B.M. Sogbadji a, b, B.J.B. Nyarko a, b, J.J. Fletcher b,
E.H.K. Akaho b</author>
<Affiliation>a.National Nuclear Research Institute, Ghana Atomic energy Commission, P.O. Box LG 80, Accra, Ghana
b.University of Ghana, School of Nuclear and Allied Sciences, P.O. Box AE1, Atomic Energy, Accra, Ghana</Affiliation>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2014.11.013</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2014.11.013 </URL>
ABSTRACT
With the sustained development in computer technology, the possibilities of code capabilities have been enlarged substantially. Advanced safety evaluations and design optimizations that were not possible few years ago can now be performed. There is a challenge today in assessing radiological dose from nuclear reactor using a more reliable computer tool in addressing the released radionuclide to the atmosphere and ground effectively and to compute the dose rates. As such the dealing of atmospheric dispersion of radionuclide release from a nuclear facility has become very imperative. This has enhanced the idea of revisiting the safety features of the existing nuclear plants and particularly research reactors. One of such kind of research reactors whose safety is of concern now is the 30 kW Ghana Research Reactor-1 (GHARR-1) which uses a Highly Enrich Uranium (HEU) fuel. In connection with conversion of GHARR- 1 from HEU fuel to the use of Low Enrich Uranium (LEU) fuel; assessment of a postulated radiological dose from possible radionuclides released using computer technology is essential. An effective computer model which is based on a reliable atmospheric transport and dispersion theory can help address such drawbacks. Atmospheric dispersion modeling and radiological safety analysis were performed for a postulated accident scenario of the HEU fuel of the GHARR-1 core. The simulation was performed using a reliable health physics atmospheric dispersion code called HotSpot. The HotSpot code which employs a Gaussian plume technique was used to perform the atmospheric transport modeling which was then applied to determine the ground deposition of radionuclides and to estimate the Total Effective Dose Equivalent (TEDE) of release radionuclides. The source term was generated from an inventory of peak radioisotope activities released by using the Oak Ridge isotope generation code ORIGEN-2. The adopted methodology used was based on the predominant site-speciﬁc meteorological data. Some selected ra- dionuclides were evaluated to prove whether their release may have radiological effect on the public. Nonetheless, prudence requires assessing the effect on the public during such events. The results indicate that the maximum ground deposition value of 1.5E-04 kBq/m2 occurred at 96 m distance and the maximum TEDE value of 1.9E-02 mSv occurred at 93 m from the reactor. It was observed that the values were far below the NRC acceptable limit of the 0.1 rem (1 mSv) for the public in a year even in the event of worse accident scenario.
Keywords: Hypothetical Radiological Meteorological Source term Gaussian
1.Introduction
With the call by the international community and the IAEA for Highly Enriched Uranium (HEU) fuel to be converted to Low Enriched Uranium (LEU) fuel; there is a need to convert Ghana Research Reactor-1 (GHARR-1) HEU fuel to LEU fuel. The worries increased over the potential use of HEU in the manufacturing of nuclear weapons, with the growing concern about the possibility of HEU-fueled research reactors becoming a source of the material (Staples, 2007). Notwithstanding the need to convert HEU to LEU, it is essential for the assessment of possible release of radionuclidesto the atmosphere and the ground. Effectiveness and efﬁciency of the program will much depend on the safety analysis and envi- ronmental impact assessment which involve assessment of a hy- pothetical release of radionuclides to the environment. The environmental assessment reported is clearly stated in the Safety Analysis Report (SAR) of GHARR-1 (Akaho et al., 2003). Atmo- spheric dispersion modeling and radionuclide release dose calcu- lations for hypothetical accident scenario are important for background radiation data and licensing requirements for the se- lection of a suitable site prior to nuclear activities, such as a nuclear reactor facility (Raza and Iqbal, 2005). During radioactivity emis- sion as a result of accident from a nuclear facility, there has been several ways of measuring released radionuclides concentration using instrumental techniques. The outcomes from the measured released concentration from those techniques are just a snapshot. However, Turner, 1997 pointed out how important it is to incor- porate the use of newer techniques in the regulatory systems, and radionuclide dispersion modeling. Thus making it more important to call for more reliable methods like the use of computer codes. Such computer dispersion models are based on a set of mathe- matical equations which serve as a tool capable of predicting concentrations and radiological doses for almost all kinds of release scenarios. The trend has broadened the atmospheric dispersion modeling capacity to foresee any possible emergency situation for pre-emptive measures, and the avoidance of any possible mishap (Lauritzen et al., 2002; Jilani, 2009; IAEA, 2010).
In this work, we have performed assessment on radionuclide dose calculations for radiological consequences of a postulated severe accident at GHARR-1. Under normal operating conditions, nuclear  reactors,  especially  research  reactors  do  not  release any signiﬁcant  quantity of  radioactive  material  to the atmosphere.
Notwithstanding this, estimation of radiation doses to be received by the public at different receptor locations is imperative in order to
propose mitigation measures in the event of an accident. Speciﬁc meteorological characteristics of the Ghana Atomic Energy Com- mission (GAEC) site were used as input for this atmospheric transport modeling. The main objective of this work is to model and analyze radionuclides transport in the atmosphere for a hypo- thetical release from Ghana Miniature Neutron Source Reactor (MNSR).The results can be useful for the LEU SAR and also form a2003).
Description of GHARR-1
The Ghana Research Reactor-1 (GHARR-1) is a commercial version of the Miniature Neutron Source Reactor (MNSR) and be- longs to the class of pool-in-tank type reactors (Gao, 1993). It is under-moderated with an H/U atom ratio of 197. The thermal po- wer rate of the facility is 30 kW with a corresponding peak thermal neutron ﬂux of 1.0 10E12 n/cm2 s. For fresh core, its cold clean excess reactivity is about 4 mk. Cooling is achieved by natural convection using light water. Presently, the GHARR-1 core consists of a fuel assembly HEU (UeAl alloyed) fuel elements arranged in ten concentric rings about a central control rod guide tube, which houses the reactor's only control rod. The control rod's reactivity worth is about 7mk, providing a core shutdown margin of 3 mk of reactivity. The small core has a low critical mass. However, its stability of ﬂux and moderate cost, the MNSR has recently found enormous application in various ﬁelds of science particularly in trace elements in matrices of biological and environmental samples (Su-De, 1984), soil fertility studies and geochemical mapping. Fig. 1 shows a schematic diagram describing the lattice conﬁguration of the core while Table 1 gives the composition of the fuel meat for HEU of GHARR-1. A detailed description of the reactor is presented elsewhere (Akaho et al., 2003).
2.Theory
This section gives brief account on the theoretical expression presented in this work and how useful it is to this work. It discusses the mathematical models in which the depletion and atmospheric dispersion codes are based upon.
2.1.Depletion calculation
In determining the time dependence of radionuclide core in- ventory and depletion calculation, ORIGEN-2 is primarily con- cerned with developing solutions for the following equation @1
ORIGEN-2 considers radioactive disintegration and neutron absorption (capture and ﬁssion) as the processes appearing on the right-hand side of Eq. (1). The time rate of change of the concen- tration for a particular nuclide,Ni in terms of these phenomena can be written as @2
where
i	1; ::::I
Pi gjisf ;jNjf ¼ yield rate of Ni due to the ﬁssion of all nuclidesNj;neutron captured by nuclideNi—1;
l0iNi0  ¼ rate  of  formation  of  Ni  due  to  the  radioactive  decay  of
i
sf ;iNif ¼ destruction rate of Ni due to ﬁssion
sc;iNif ¼ is the destruction rate of Ni due to all forms of neutron absorption other than ﬁssion ((n,g), (n,a), (n,p), (n,2n),(n,3n));
liNi ¼ radioactive decay rate of Ni
Eq. (2) is written for a homogeneous medium containing a space-energy-averaged neutron ﬂux, 4, with  ﬂux-weighted average cross sections, sf and sc, representing the reaction probabilities.
The diffusion equation and the Gaussian plume model
The general Gaussian parameters for atmospheric dispersion model are
@3
Making Dy and Dz the subject of the formula from Eq. (3)
@4
Fig. 1. Cross sectional view through GHARR-1 core (Boafo et al., 2012).
Fig. 2. Coordinate system showing Gaussian distributions in the vertical and horizontal (Lamarsh and Baratta, 1982).
Table 1
Composition of the fuel meat for HEU of GHARR-1 (Akaho et al., 2003).
@5
Substituting Eqs. (4) and (5) into the expression,
c ðx; y; z; H Þ ¼  	Q	 expΣ — .y2   þ z2 Σ   m Σ,	the	general
equation to calculate the steady state concentration of an air contaminant in the ambient air resulting from a point source is given by:
@6
Hence the overall concentration c of gas or aerosols at x,y,z from
a continuous source with an effective emission height (H) is given by the following equation (Macdonald, 2003):
@7
where,
H e is the Height of the plume [m], sy and sz e are respectively
horizontal and vertical deviations of plume concentration distri- bution [m], Q e is the uniform emission rate of pollutants [kg/s], x e Along-wind coordinate measured in wind direction from the source [m], y e Cross-wind coordinates direction [m], z e Vertical coordinate measured from the ground [m], c x; y; z e Mean con- centration of diffusing substance at a point x; y; z [kg/m3] and m e Mean wind velocity affecting the plume along the x e axis [m/s]. Fig. 2 shows the Gaussian distribution coordinate coded in the code (Al-Adwani, 2013).
3.Methodology
The core nuclide inventory data were calculated with ORIGEN-2 code package, a zero-dimensional isotope decay and transmutation code. A Gaussian atmospheric dispersion code HotSpot was used to estimate the radiological doses of the released radionuclides. The effect of Cs-137, I-131 and Sr-90 on the public were considered, and were  selected  based  on  their  physical  and  chemical  properties.
Their selections were based on the reason that they are b e emit-
ters, and transmute respectively to Ba-137, Xe-131 and Zr-90 (BIPM-5, 2008). I-131 is mobile, volatile; readily taken up in the food chain and accumulate in the thyroid gland, where it produces tumors. Cs-137 has an attraction to the liver and skeleton while Sr- 90 is a bone-seeker, where it is naturally deposits in bone tissues, and behaves chemically like calcium.
3.1.Selected hypothetical accident scenario
In order to illustrate the use of methodology in source term and radiological consequence evaluation, a hypothetical severe accident scenario was considered. The kind of scenario being considered was the assumption that a heavy object escaped from the crane hook hanging on top of the reactor and dropped over the 30 kW MNSR in the attempt of removing the core from the reactor vessel resulting in mechanical damage of the reactor vessel and the core. The sce- nario was considered during the core removal process from the reactor vessel to be stored in a cask under the pool water. It was assumed that no core melting occurred, but only fuel-cladding rupture being involved for several 344-fuels assemble. It was also assumed that the radionuclide released to the atmosphere passed
3.2.Site-speciﬁc conditions of the GHARR-1 site gas purge system had failed.
Site meteorological data collected from Ghana Meteorological Agency  (GMet)  database  since  2010  were  analyzed.  The average monthly wind speed data were collected and determined for 16 directional sectors using a cup anemometer at different intervals of days.  Observations  from  different  wind  roses  showed  that  the
predominant direction is the West (W), which occurs for 66.6% of
the  total  time  of  the  day,  compared  to  South  West  (SW)  and SoutheSouth  West  (SSW)  directions,  with  16.6%   of   occurrence
each. In the dominant wind direction, the records indicate that the maximum wind speed is 6.7 ms—1, which occurs in the month of August of relatively low rainfall, with the annual average wind speed of 4.2 ms—1. Occasionally, a strong gust blows at the site, generally during the heavy rainy season (that is within the month
of July), whose speed may be an average of 18.2 ms—2, with a minimum and a maximum wind speed of 10.3 ms—1 and 28.3 ms—1,
Fig. 3. GHARR-1 roof vent, GAEC.
Table 2
Distribution of Pasquill-Guifford stability class of the GHARR-1 site from 2010  to 2013.
respectively. Accra, the capital of Ghana, where the facility is situ- ated has the coolest period of the year between June and September where rainfall is experienced. Variations in temperature for both daily and annual period are quite small. Temperature records show that the mean daily maximum temperature is 30.9 ○C, ranging from
27.5 ○C to 34.5 ○C. The average daily minimum temperature (hot and  humid)  is  24.2  ○C; ranging  from 22.2  ○C to  26.9  ○C for total
observations  of   the  year.   August  is  the   coldest  month  with  a
maximum temperature of 28.4 ○C and a minimum of 22.9 ○C and March the hottest with a maximum of 34.5 ○C and a minimum of24.2 ○C. Table 2 presents the distribution of PasquilleGuifford at- mospheric stability classes as an annual base of the GHARR-1 site for ﬁve consecutive years (Homann, 2011).
The degree of atmospheric stability is directly related to the vertical temperature gradient and the horizontal wind speed. A large negative gradient leads to unstable conditions. Neutral con- ditions correspond to just negative temperature gradients while positive temperature gradient indicates stable conditions. Data were processed from mean daily wind speeds considering the sun high in the sky. It is observed that stability class B is predominant with 50% of occurrence, followed by class C with 33.3%, and class A with 16.7% for the 2010e2013 year period.
The most popular scheme of stability classes known as Pasquill stability that is used to calculate a stability category ranging from A to F was used to help predict how well the plume will disperse. In this scheme, unstable conditions are represented by; A, strongly unstable; B, moderately unstable; C, slightly unstable; D, neutral; while stable conditions are; E, slightly stable; F, moderately stable. The low wind speed at night time represents strongly stable at-
mosphere sometimes referred as “G”. There were fourteen dis- tances chosen for the calculations: 100 me1200 m with 100 m interval were considered at different wind speed.
3.3.Generation of source term
In this study, the fuel burnup and radionuclide inventory anal- ysis are based on reference HEU core for the GHARR-1 core. Anim- Sampong et al., 1999, calculated the maximum discharged burnup of GHARR-1 HEU core using the WIMSD/4 lattice code with a comparable experimental work carried out by the Chinese on Miniature Neutron Source Reactor (MNSR) (Gousheng, 1990), as well as results generally accepted for low power research reactors (IAEA, 1998) as presented in Table 3. The ORIGEN-2 HEU model for GHARR-1 was used to perform a fuel depletion analysis and the output was used as source term to study the atmospheric transport of radionuclides released during the postulated accident assumed
Table 3
Comparison of maximum discharge burnup.
Table 4
Inventory of the peak HEU fuel rod with 1.22% 235U burnup, transfer factors and source term for the scenario investigated.
using the burnup value of 1.22% for the HEU core. The source term for this study was generated by fuel burnup and radionuclide in- ventory calculation of the GHARR-1 HEU core by the use of the depletion code known as ORIGEN-2 (ORNL, 1979).
A modiﬁcation was made to the existing ORIGEN-2 input deck for GHARR-1, a 3-dimensional model of the reactor by introducing the BURN card. The code solves the transmutation equations using libraries of radioactive decay data and 1-group cross section data. The base code libraries allow the tracking of over 100 actinides and nearly 900 ﬁssion product nuclides. An input deck was set up and calculations were performed to obtain the inventory of halogens, noble gases, alkaline metals, and actinides in the peak power fuel rods for the core operated at typical power level. The inventory data reported here were fed into the HotSpot code for radiological dose assessment of the released radioactive material. The total activity of ﬁssion products in the core is given in Table 4.
3.4.Evaluation of radiation dose
After considering the postulated accident scenario, the gener- ated radionuclide inventory was calculated using the results from the depletion code ORIGEN-2. The integrated source term for each radionuclide was then estimated. Atmospheric dispersion was accounted by using the general Gaussian plume model in HotSpot code, a Health Physics code from Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (Homann, 2011). As ﬁssion products are released to the atmosphere, they escape from the building through the gas purge
Table 5
Radionuclide inventory in the HEU of GHARR-1 reactor core.
Table 6
Downwind distance and other plume parameters at different arrival time intervals.
circuit at an air ﬂow rate of about 75 m3 h—1, and are picked up by the wind where they are immediately transported from the release point to downwind receptor locations. This was towards the pre- dominant wind direction following the speciﬁed meteorological data of the site. Radiation dose calculations are then performed at the end, and ﬁnal results assessed to extract necessary and needed information.
4.
Results and discussion
Fifteen important radionuclides accumulated in the  reactor were selected after the core was depleted with the depletion gen- eration code. They were selected based on the harm they can cause to human health, their release fraction to the atmosphere and ﬁssion yields (US-NRC, 2000). The results from this study were compared to other works on MNSRs, with the use of different isotope generation codes under similar assumptions (Mirza et al., 2010; Omar and Ghazi, 2011; Waqar et al., 2009) as presented in Table 5.
The outputted result from the depletion code was used in the input deck of the atmospheric dispersion code, HotSpot. At the calculated effective height,  the  stack  efﬂuent  temperature  was  30 ○C, which exits from the roof vent pipe of 0.32 m of internal diameter, shown in Fig. 3. Inversion layer height was not accounted for but all the calculations were performed under a Pas- quilleGuifford stability class B, the predominant condition at the site.
The TEDE (Sv), the respiratory time-integrated air concentration (kBqm—3) and the ground deposition (kBqm—2) were generated as a function of the downwind distance as presented in Table 6. From the emission source, the maximum TEDE value of 1.9E-02 mSv occurred at 93 m at an arrival time of less than one minute. Following the Gaussian model depicted in Figs. 4e6, the dose
Fig. 4. Plume centerline ground deposition as a function of receptor downwind distance for stability class B.
Fig. 5. Plume centerline ground deposition of radionuclides as a function of downwind receptor locations for all stability classes.
Fig. 6. Plume centerline Total Effective Dose Equivalent (TEDE) as a function of receptor downwind distance for stability class B.
decreases with time and distance. The maximum dose values ob- tained at various short distances are below the acceptable limit of the 0.1 rem (1 mSv) for the public in a year (NRC 10 CFR). This shows that even under worst accident scenario the GHARR-1 HEU core will not contribute to severe dose that will be received by people living in the vicinities or the radius of the reactor building. The trend observed on this curve shows that the released radionuclides might be transported to long distances but will still not have any harmful effect on the public.
The Figs. 4 and 5 presents the trend for ground deposition for the predominant stability class at the site as compared to all other stability classes. From Fig. 4 it can be seen that the doses increases from say 1.89E-9 to a peak height of say 1.86E-4 at a distance of
0.08 km and decreases slowly downwards. This shows that the dose levels are high for the ﬁrst 1e2 h of the release, making people within the emergency zone prone to radiation risk. Only if the ra- diation level was above the recommended dose level of the 25 rem for the whole body after 2 h of the radiation release.
The ground deposition concentration, groundshine dose rate and TEDE at different position points are very minimal as presented in Table 6.
The plume contour distribution for groundshine deposition as a function of downwind distance as it moves away from the source is depicted in Fig. 7. The contour distribution depicts the severity of the radionuclide dose distribution. The doses from 0.0 km to about
0.13 km show higher dose risk as shown in Fig. 7.
Fig. 8. Concentration proﬁle of I-131, Sr-90 and Cs-137 verses downwind distance.
The Atmospheric dispersion modeling and radiation dose calculation were conducted based on the contribution of three ra- dionuclides: Cs-137, I-131 and Sr-90. Fig. 8 shows the maximum TEDE for each of the radionuclide selected and the summation of all the radionuclides. The result from the respiratory time-integration
Fig. 7.  Plume Contour ground deposition  distribution.
air concentration as a function of receptor downwind distance is minimal with no health implication on the surrounding in- habitants. The highest contributor comes from the I-131 followed by Sr-90 and then Cs-137 in order of severities to human organs. The maximum TEDE values are as presented in Fig. 8 below.
5.Conclusion
The generally accepted requirement from regulatory bodies like the NRC (US-NRC, 2000) and the Radiation Protection Board of Ghana are the bases of this study. The result obtained from the depletion code was in agreement with other researchers. The analysis of site-speciﬁc meteorological conditions prevailing at the GAEC site has allowed a good understanding of the situation in a more realistic way using Atmospheric Dispersion theories. Analysis and discussion of ground deposition and TEDE values obtained show that radiation doses released, even during a worst case ac- cident scenario will not cause any problem because estimated dose values are far below the annual acceptable limits. This is what the regulatory authorities and the IAEA BSS 115 (IAEA, 1996) recom- mend. The maximum ground deposition value obtained was 1.5E- 04 kBq/m2 and it occurred at 96 m distance, whilst the maximum TEDE value obtained was 1.9E-02 mSv, also occurring at 93 m dis- tance from the reactor (source term). These values obtained are as results of contribution from three main radionuclides selected in this study which have very signiﬁcant importance as far as Radia- tion Protection is concerned. Cs-137, I-131, and Sr-90 were selected and the analyses of these results showed that the highest contributor to the radioactivity was I-131 due to its higher dose value as shown Fig. 8. This observation was conﬁrmed by the higher value of TEDE and respiratory time-integration air concentration.
Acknowledgements
The Authors thank the Ghana Atomic Energy Commission for the ﬁnancial support in purchasing the code and allowing the research team use their research reactor.
