<title>RADCOM: Radiation dose computation model- a software for radiological	 impact assessment</title>
<author>Sabyasachi Rout *, D.G. Mishra, P.M. Ravi, Vandana Pulhani, R.M. Tripathi</author>
<Affiliation>Health Physics Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai, 400085, India
</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2019.103141</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2019.103141</URL>
ABSTRACT
Radiological impact assessment codes are used for environmental transport and radiological impact of radio- nuclides releases to the environment. The RADCOM computer code performs the environmental transport of radionuclides and calculations of radiation dose to members of public due to routine releases of radionuclides from Nuclear Power Plants (NPPs) via atmospheric and aquatic routes. The code is written on Visual Basic platform and follows IAEA, Safety Reports Series No. 19 (SRS 19) and TECDOC 1616 methodologies for dose evaluation. The code comprises a large data base consisting of 114 radionuclides and respective radiological, non-radiological data and environmental parameters associated to environmental transport of radionuclides. It is designed to automate the computation of radionuclide concentrations in different environmental compartment and their impact in the food chain, as well as the estimation of effective dose to humans. The validation of software was carried out by several QC exercises following alpha and beta testing. The code was used for
calculation of hypothetical scenarios given in the Annex IV of IAEA, SRS 19. Statistical significance test such as χ2
test was performed and it was found that, there is no significant difference between code output results excels generated results and reported results.
Keywords:
Radiation dose Nuclear power plants Radionuclides
Environmental transport
1.Introduction
During normal operation of NPPs, radionuclides discharges to the environment through atmospheric and aquatic discharges as routine releases. These releases are distributed more smoothly over the whole operation cycle. Radiological environmental impact assessment models are used to predict the concentration of radionuclides in the different environmental matrices, consequent to a release to the environment from an operating plant and their impact to general public and envi- ronment. As per International commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) recommendations, Basic Safety Standard (BSS), IAEA dose limit prescribed for members of the general public is 1mSv/y for operation of nuclear facilities (ICRP, 1991; Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 1996; International Atomic Energy Agency, 2001). As per the existing regulatory requirements, it is necessary to allocate an apportioned dose for every nuclear facility to ensure the regulatory compliance with respect to the public dose limit and the environmental discharges during operation of the facilities (International Atomic En- ergy Agency, 2001). A strategy involving an experimental evaluation of radionuclides in the environment and their prediction using
environmental models helps in optimizing the environmental moni- toring program and also leads to better understanding of the processes involved in environmental transport of radionuclides. Numerous codes or software are developed by different organisations for radiation dose calculation such as RESRAD (developed at Argonne National Labora- tory, USA), SPEEDI (System for Prediction of Environment Emergency Dose Information, developed by JAERI, Japan), CAP-88 PC (developed by US-EPA), PC-CREAM (Public Health England) and CROM (developed by CIEMAT, Spain) (Yu et al., 2009; Chino et al., 1984; Fritz and Phillips, 2013; Kuntjoro et al., 2018; International Atomic Energy Agency, 2017). RESRAD has advantage of calculating the cancer risk in addition to the dose estimation. SPEEDI is a network system mainly dedicated to acci- dental like scenario, where there is a massive discharges occurs from the nuclear installation. CAP88-PC is limited to the atmospheric discharges only. PC-CREAM basically comprises six models such as PLUME, RESUS, GRANIS, FARMLAND, DORIS, RIVER used for dose evaluation corre- sponds to different pathways of exposure. CROM is based on Safety Report Series 19 and Radiation protection-72 (International Atomic Energy Agency, 2001; EUR, 1995) but scope for batch calculation i.e., simultaneous dose calculation from more than one radionuclides is
Fig. 1. Exposure pathways for members of public due to discharges to a) Atmosphere and b) Aquatic body.
2.Methodology
Since all these codes or software are highly sophisticated need experienced persons for its run as well as all are associated with some pros and cons, objective of our work is to design a software for dose calculation, which must be simple and user friendly. This paper presents ‘RADCOM’ software, an interactive and customisable tool, capable of predicting the concentrations of radionuclides in the environmental matrices around the nuclear installations and to estimate the dose to the member of public during routine releases. The software can also be used for the dose evaluation during pre-commissioning stage for the predic- tion of impact, consequent to the operation. The interactive interface of RADCOM guides the user along every step of the analysis, which is particularly helpful for users who may be new to dose calculation. Moreover, the software also takes into account the most recent de- velopments in environmental transport model. The software is capable for calculating dose to member of public from all the exposure pathways due to all the 114 radionuclides (in database) simultaneously. In addi- tion to this the user can expand the database by adding ‘N’ number of radionuclides to the database without any restrictions.
In order to estimate the public dose, information about the mode of discharge, quantities, types of radionuclides to be discharged, period of the discharge, exposure pathways are required. The discharge rate for the different release routes such as atmospheric and/or aquatic should be specified separately. A default discharge period of 30 years is assumed based on the reactor life (for new generation reactors it may be different), with the result that doses are estimated for the 30th year of the discharge, and include the contribution to the dose from all materials discharged in the previous 29 years.
2.1.Overview of the approach
The exposure pathways considered and the information needed to assess their contributions to the dose, is illustrated in Fig. 1(a and b).
The steps involved in public dose assessment are as follows:
a.Calculation of concentrations of radionuclides in air and water.
Fig. 2. Plume dispersion around the NPP in 16 sectors.
Table 1
Parameters used in dose calculation.
b.Calculation of radionuclide concentrations in soil, sediment and grass.
c.Calculation of concentrations of radionuclides in terrestrial and aquatic food.
Evaluation of dose from various pathways such as (Plume submer- sion, Ground shine, Inhalation and Ingestion of foods …. )
2.1.1.Atmospheric discharges
Radionuclides releases to the atmosphere undergo downwind  transport (advection) and mixing processes (turbulent diffusion). Ra-dionuclides removed from the atmosphere by both wet and dry depo-
sition on the ground and by radioactive decay. Atmospheric dispersion calculations consider the environment around to be divided into 16radial sectors (such as N: North, NNE: North North East ….) as shown in Fig. 2.The concentration of radionuclide in air is calculated using following equation:
@1
where, CAir(x,y) (Bq.m—3) is the estimated annual averaged concentration
in air at the receptor location (x, y), R.R(Bq/s) is the annual averaged release rate of radionuclides. χ/Q (s/m3) is the atmospheric dilution factor at the receptor location. This is estimated using suitable atmospheric
dispersion model: Gaussian Plume model calculated using, hourly average wind speed, wind direction and stability category (Miller and Hively, 1987). Calculation of radionuclides concentrations in different matrixes such as soil, grass, crops/vegetables, milk and meat are based on equation (30)–(37) as mentioned in IAEA, SRS 19 (International
Atomic Energy Agency, 2001). In addition to these, the representative
reas CROM incorporated old model reported in SRS 19.person will receive direct radiation dose due to plume submersion, inhalation and ground shine. The stepwise calculation of environmental transport of radionuclides and final dose to human being (adult and infant) is based on models recommended in SRS 19 except for radio- nuclides such as C-14 and H-3. For which we have followed more advanced model i.e., specific activity model recommended in IAEA TECDOC1616 (International Atomic Energy Agency, 2009) whe
2.1.2.Aquatic discharges
Concentration in receiving water bodies are calculated assuming that the liquid effluent is diluted by plant specific engineered dilution and by additional site specific dilution offered by the receiving water body (Sea, lake, River and Reservoir etc.). Radionuclide concentration at the discharge point should be calculated using the following equation: @2
Fig. 3. Diagrammatic overview of processes flow in RADCOM for a) atmospheric discharges b) aquatic discharges of radionuclides.
(Cw)i, aq is the concentration of radionuclide ‘i’ at the point of public utility (Bq/m3)
(Qw)i is the annual average release rate of the radionuclide (Bq/s) and
(FE) is the flow rate of the effluent stream (m3/s) being discharged to
receiving water body.
Since different water bodies offers different degrees of dilution, for estimation of radionuclides concentration at different distance or at public utility point different dilution models were followed as recom- mended in chapter 4 of SRS19 and it is valid for point source discharge only (International Atomic Energy Agency, 2001). If the source is not a point source, it is necessary to know the instantaneous dilution factor, to do more accurate and precise calculation otherwise it will end up with an output associated with large uncertainty. In such case, there is a
provision in software to calculate the concentration at discharge point by direct inputting dilution factor to the software in aquatic dilution details, and then the further estimation of concentration at different distance will be taken care by the model. Moreover, the concentration of radionuclides in bed sediments, suspended sediments and fish etc. also calculated using equations as mentioned in chapter 4 and 5 of SRS 19 (International Atomic Energy Agency, 2001).2.1.3.Special consideration for H-3 and C-14
Environmental transfer of H-3 and C-14 can be assessed based on the behaviour of the stable elements hydrogen and carbon using specific activity (SA) models under equilibrium condition. Specific Activity
model assumes that, the radioisotope mixes both chemically and phys- ically with its stable counterparts (such as for 3H: 1H and for 14C: 12C) within the environmental compartment, resulting in a definite specific
activity. Any species drawing the stable element from this environ- mental compartment also draws the radioisotope in the same ratio and attains the same specific activity as in the source compartment. Isotope concentration in the species can be readily calculated from the stable element concentration, which is usually well known.
The specific activity (SAx) in a compartment x that draws an element S from N other compartments mathematically is given by.@3
where,
Ai: concentration of the radioisotope in compartments i (Bq. kg—1),
Fig. 4. Template of input files for (a) Atmospheric discharges (b) Aquatic discharges.
Si: concentration of the stable isotope (g. kg—1),
qi: flux of the element from compartment i to J (g. d—1)
DF: isotopic discrimination factor that is introduced to allow for different transfer rates between compartments due to significant difference between the masses of isotopes of same element.
The radioisotope concentration(Ai) in compartment x is estimated by multiplying SAx with the stable element concentration (SI) in the compartment.
H-3 can be incorporated to human through, inhalation/skin ab- sorption, ingestion of water, plant and animal products. The combined inhalation and skin absorption dose (immersion) obtained by multi-plying inhalation dose by 1.5. For calculation of H-3 and C-14 concen-tration in terrestrial plant and animal products and aquatic species likefish, in this software, we have followed specific activity model is used
IAEA Techdoc1616 (International Atomic Energy Agency, 2009).
2.1.4.Estimation of dose
For generic assessment purposes the total hypothetical representa- tive people group (both adult and infant) dose due to a particular source is estimated by summing the doses from all pathways and all radionu- clides. Thus the hypothetical representative group is assumed to repre- sent those members of the public most exposed from the source from all possible pathways. The representative person receives dose from external (Immersion and Ground Shine) and internal (Inhalation and ingestion) pathways can be calculated using following equations.
External Dose: The annual effective external dose is calculated using equation:@4
Similarly, annual effective internal dose is calculated using@5
Details of the parameters used is presented in Table 1.
Total annual dose to public is the sum total of all the exposure pathways from all types of radionuclides.@6
@7
where “i” is the radionuclide contributing to dose.
2.2.Software framework
2.2.1.Software architecture
RADCOM is designed as Visual Basic (VB) graphical user interface (GUI), which can run in WINDOWS. The code is compatible with Win- dows XP and above except Vista. An overview of the process flowchart is
Table 2
Scenarios used for validation of software along with the required input parameters.Table 3
Comparison of software output result with exercise and excel generated result.shown in Fig. 3 (a & b).
2.3.Software functionalities
RADCOM was designed to automate the calculation of radionuclide concentrations in different compartments of the environment such as air, water, soil, sediment and their impact in the food chain as conse- quences of releases from NPPs as well as calculation of effective dose to humans. The user is guided through this process via interactive icons and punctual in the software. Software is capable of adding N number of sites or cases and creating a new database for each site. During this
process the default data base will not change. Editing new database is very use full for researchers to perform uncertainty and sensitivity studies. User can add ‘N’ number of radionuclides to the database pro- vided the radiological and non-radiological data of the isotope is available.
2.4.Create an input file
The templates for input files are already provided in software package and snapshots are presented in Fig. 4 (a, b). The captions in the column and their uses is discussed as follows:
Fig. 5. Comparison of the software output results with excel generated and reported results for different scenarios: a) scenario 1; b) scenario 2; c) scenario 3; d) scenario 4; e) scenario 4; f) scenario 5; g) scenario 6.
a)radionuclides: User can add any radionuclides out of 114 in database.
b)Station: stands for the name of site/case and can be alpha-numeric. The station name must be same as case/set name so user must be careful when entering the station name.
c)Unit: Can be alpha-numeric must be given to the cell. If the same station has two different sub-units, the column will be useful to distinguish between sub units.
d)qi: stands for release rate (Bq/s)
e)chiq: Atmospheric dilution factor(χ/Q) in s/m3
f)distance: distance at which user interested to measure radionuclide concentration in different environmental matrices and dose to pub- lic. Although it is taken care by Atmospheric dilution factor (χ/Q), user needs to enter it to distinguish outcome result for different distances.
g)Irwconc: radionuclide concentration in irrigation water (Bq/L), if not known put zero.
h)adwconc: radionuclide concentration animal drinking water (Bq/L), if not known put zero.
In the aquatic discharges template, first three column heading are
same as in case of atmospheric calculation. Fourth one waterbody stands for type of water body such as, river water (rw), sea water (sw), lake water (lw), small lake water (slw) and estuary water (esw). Based on discharges to aquatic body user need to input the abbreviations mentioned in parenthesis. qiw stands for aquatic discharge rate(Bq/s),
efdisrate: for effluent discharge rate (m3/s) and distance for distance of
the interest or utility point, where user want to measure radionuclide concentration.
2.5.Validation of the software output
The validation of software was carried out by several QC exercises following alpha and beta testing. For alpha testing a no. of exercises were carried out and results were compared with the manually calcu- lated as well as calculated by excel sheet and result was found to be in good agreement. For beta testing exercises were carried out at various stations for a particular scenario by different users.
For alpha testing, case studies presented in the Annex IV of IAEA, SRS 19 were randomly chosen as discussed below (International Atomic Energy Agency, 2001). The description of scenario’s along with the required input parameters are presented in Table 2.
3.Results and discussion
The software output results, exercise reported results and manually calculated using excel results are compiled and presented in Table 3.
The results are also graphically presented in Fig. 5(a–g). Investiga- tion of graphs and tabulated results revealed that, there is no major
difference between the code output results reported results and excel generated results. For applying χ 2 test code output and excel calculated results considered as actual observations and reported result as expected
observation. For null hypothesis, it was assumed that there is no sig- nificant difference between actual observation value and expected value. The χ 2 value for all the scenarios are less than the critical value
(9.21) at degrees of freedom 2, for p 0.01. This confirms that, null hypothesis is accepted at 1% of significance, which concluded that there is no significant difference between reported value and code output value. This clearly revealed that the software is running properly without any bug.
The software can be used for probabilistic and deterministic dose calculation for representative person (both adult and infant). Variability in dose estimates arises from variability in the input parameters led to probabilistic dose distribution. For probabilistic dose calculation, a specified number of values (must be with in minimum and maximum) will be selected for each parameter according to their distribution functions. Set of data for each parameter then put together to form a specified set of input data. RADCOM process the input data and generate a specified number (corresponds to each parameter values) of the dose results, which can be analysed for probability distributions. The deter- ministic dose output is a single dose value generated by taking 95th percentile value of each parameter as input parameter value. The re- lationships between the output dose and the input parameters can be analysed in terms of correlation coefficient to identify the sensitive pa- rameters. Identification of sensitive parameter is an important task for precise or more realistic dose calculation. The software can also be used for accidental scenario, for which the time integrated concentration (TIC) of radionuclides released need to be considered in input instead of annual average concentration.
4.Conclusion
The comparative study of dose calculation for different scenarios using RADCOM software, excel calculated result and the reported result reveled that there is no statistically significant difference between the software output result and reported result at 1% of significance level. This indicates that, the software is an alternative tool to rigorous manual calculations and existing packages, with its user friendly nature allowing
users the flexibility to customize their analysis as per requirement. This is an essential tool for nuclear power plant authority and regulators for planning as well as for regulatory control of routine releases to the environment. The scope of sensitivity analysis using the software will help the researchers to identify the sensitive input parameters influ- encing output dose, so that research can be more focused on that particular parameters for more precise dose calculation.
Acknowledgements
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
