<title>Radio-protective properties of some sunblock agents against ionizing radiation</title>
<author>Shams A.M. Issaa,b,∗, A.M.A. Mostafab, Sayed H. Audac,d</author>
<Affiliation>a Physics  Department,  Faculty  of  Science,  University  of  Tabuk,  Saudi  Arabia
b Physics  Department,  Faculty  of  Science,  Al-Azhar  University,  Egypt
c Department  of  Pharmaceutics,  College  of  Pharmacy,  King  Saud  University,  Saudi  Arabia
d Department  of  Pharmaceutics  and  Industrial  Pharmacy,  Faculty  of  Pharmacy,  Al-Azhar  University,  Assiut,  Egypt</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2018.04.027</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2018.04.027</URL>
ABSTRACT
When the human exposure to nuclear radiation such as gamma ray, neutrons or charged particles (protons and alpha) it may cause the menacing consequences of skin organ. The devastating eﬀects of nuclear radiation pose a need radioprotective for protecting the skin organ and to avoid the deadly related to these radiations. The sunblock agents samples: Padimate O (SB1), Homosalate (SB2), Dioxybenzone (SB3) Sulisobenzone (SB4), ti- tanium dioxide (SB5) and zinc oxide (SB6) have been studied in terms of mass attenuation coeﬃcient, eﬀective atomic number, buildup factors, fast neutron removal cross section and proton, alpha and electron mass stopping power. The results showed that the ZnO sunblock agent (SB6) has better shielding properties followed by TiO2 sunblock agent (SB5). This study could be very useful to develop novel pharmacological compounds used in radioprotection, medical diagnostics, and radiation therapy.
Keywords: Sunblock agents Gamma-ray
Fast neutrons Protons Alpha
1.Introduction
In today's world, the mischievous eﬀects of radiation are customary. Due to the speedy technological progress, day-by-day the level of ra- diation has been increased, therefore there is a required to protect the human against such mischievous eﬀects of nuclear radiation. Radiations exist in our world from the origin of the Universe. The human exposure to 5% of the radiation comes from outer space (cosmic rays). Exposure to nuclear radiation causes threatening consequences of skin organ. Destructive impacts of nuclear radiation pose a need for radioprotective for protecting the skin organ and to avoid the deadly related to these radiations. In the worldwide twenty-two million people are cancer patients and about 27% die of the disease. When the nuclear radiation interacts with healthy cells, it may be a reason to generate free radicals from cytoplasmic water, which induce harm to the DNA content of the nucleus. This DNA harms may lead to cause cancer in healthy cells. It means that the nuclear radiations are closely related to cancer. Thus, it is required to create such pharmacological eﬃcient radioprotective that can present the protection of human skin against the destructive and damaging outcome of nuclear radiation (Painuli and Kumar, 2016).
The incidence of skin cancers (melanoma and nonmelanoma) has been increased in many countries recently and many of these cases are
attributed to long exposure of skin to intense sunlight. Many public health authorities are initiating primary prevention programs re- commending the regular use of sunscreens that absorb ultraviolet ra- diation. The chemical agents such as Padimate O, Homosalate, Oxybenzone, Dioxybenzone and Sulisobenzone and the natural mate- rials such as titanium dioxide and zinc oxide are absorbers whereby radiation enter the skin (Marks et al., 1993).
To examine the eﬀectiveness of sunblock materials as radio- protective agents, in this present study, an endeavor was made to study the interaction of nuclear radiation with some sunblock agents samples. The mass attenuation coeﬃcient (μm), half value layer (HVL), mean free path (MFP) and eﬀective atomic number (Zeﬀ) have been calculated in the photon energy range of 1 keV–100 GeV for six sunblock agents: Padimate O (SB1), Homosalate (SB2), Dioxybenzone (SB3), Sulisobenzone (SB4), Titanium dioxide (SB4) and Zinc oxide (SB6). Furthermore, the exposure buildup factor (EBF) and energy absorption buildup factor (EABF) have been calculated using the G-P ﬁtting method for the selected compounds in the energy range 0.015–15 MeV up to penetration depths 40 mfp. Also, fast neutron removal cross sections (∑R) in addition to projected range and stopping power for proton have been calculated in the energy range of 10 keV-1GeV.
Table 1
Chemical composition, weight fraction % and density of sunblock agents.
Fig. 1. The molecular structure of sunblock agents.
Fig. 2. Variation of total mass attenuation coeﬃcients versus photon energy (1 keV-100 GeV) for sunblock agents.
2.Materials and methods
The mass attenuation coeﬃcient, half value layer, mean free path
The sample code, chemical composition, weight by the fraction and densities of the investigating Padimate O (SB1), Homosalate (SB2), Dioxybenzone (SB3), Sulisobenzone (SB4), Titanium dioxide (SB5) and Zinc oxide (SB6) are listed in Table 1 and them molecular structure are shown in Fig. 1. Fig. 2 shows that the variation of μm values with photon energy and composition of investigating sunblock agents. It is clear that, the values of μm for all samples decrease with increasing photon energy and depend on the composition of the sunblock agents. The μm values increase quickly up to photon energy < 0.02 MeV. This behavior may be attributed to the photoelectric absorption cross sec- tions which are conversely relative the energy (E3.5) of photon (Issa, 2016). At 0.02 < E < 20 MeV MeV the values of μm decrease slowly with the photon energy increasing. This may be attributed to the pro- cess of Compton scattering was the predominant mechanism. Because the process of Compton scattering is conversely relative the energy (E−1) of photons. Due to the processes pair production begin ruling, the μm values decrease very slowly with the photon energy greater than  20 MeV. Because the cross section of the pair production process de- pends on the atomic number (Z2) (Han et al., 2009). As shown in Fig. 2 the ZnO sunblock agent (SB6) has the highest values of μm followed by TiO2 sunblock agent (SB5).
3.1.Half-value layer (HVL) and mean free path (MFP)
It is important to express the attenuation of photons in terms of another quantity named as half value layer (HVL). The HVL is an in- dication of the equivalence of the sunblock agents thickness that de- creases the intensity of the photon to half. The HVL physically indicates that the penetration of the photon increases with the increase of the energy of this photon. Moreover, mean free path (MFP) is another important quantity to investigate the attenuation of photon and mea- sures its probability of interaction. MFP represents the average-distance between consecutive interactions of photons with material (sunblock agents of this work). It is worth mentioning that both HVL and MFP are used to estimate the eﬀectiveness of a protection of the present sun- block agents. The HVL and MFP for the present samples in the photon energy range1 keV–100 GeV are given in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 respectively. Up to photon energy 8 keV and 50 keV the HVL values are the photon
Fig. 3. Half-value layer (HVL) of the sunblock agents as a function of photon energy.Fig. 4. Mean free path (MFP) of the sunblock agents as a function of photon energy.
energy independent for (SB1, SB2, SB3 and SB4) and (SB5 and SB6) samples respectively. For sunblock agents the HVL values increase with the photon energy increasing up to 40 MeV. The maximum values of HVL are 47.2, 44.5, 33.3, 28.9, 6.35 and 3.44 cm for SB1, SB2, SB3,
SB4, SB5 and SB6 sunblock agents. With further photon energy in- creases (up to 2 GeV) the HVL values decrease rapidly for all sunblock agents. Fig. 3 shows that the ZnO sunblock agent (SB6) has the lowest values of HVL followed by TiO2 sunblock agent (SB5).
As shown in Fig. 4 the values of MPF increase with increasing photon energy. The values of MFP reach to maximum which depends on
Fig. 5. Variation of eﬀective atomic number (Zeﬀ) as a function of photon en-   ergy in the range of 1 keV-100 GeV for sunblock agents.
the composition of the sunblock agents. With further photon energy increases the MFP values are independent upon the photon energy. It is clear also, the ZnO sunblock agent (SB6) has the lowest values of MFP followed by TiO2 sunblock agent (SB5).
3.2.Eﬀective atomic numbers (Zeﬀ) and electron densities (Nel)
Variation of eﬀective atomic number (Zeﬀ) as a function of photon energy in the range of 1 keV-100 GeV for sunblock agents are plotted in Fig. 5. At energy ranges 1–8 keV, 0.04–40 MeV and 0.15–100 GeV the Zeﬀ values are independent upon the photon energy for the SB1, SB2 and SB3 samples. For the SB4, SB5 and SB6 samples, the Zeﬀ values increase up to maximum (depends opon the composition of sunblock agents) with increasing photon energy. And then it decrees rapidly as the photon energy increases up to 0.3 MeV. In the photon energy ranges 0.3–1.5 MeV and 0.8–100 GeV the values of Zeﬀ are independent upon the photon energy. As shown in Fig. 5, the ZnO sunblock agent (SB6) has the highest values of the Zeﬀ followed by the TiO2 Sunblock agent (SB5). The results of Nel present identical photon energy dependence to what was observed for Zeﬀ.
3.3.Buildup factors
The variation of EBF and EABF with photon energy and penetration depth for the SB1, SB2, SB3, SB4, SB5 and SB6 sunblock agents are shown in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 respectively. The EBF and EABF values in- crease with penetration depth due to increase the number of scattered photons. The variations of EBF and EABF can be explained by the domination of three photon interaction processes at diﬀerent energy regions. (i.e. photoelectric process, Compton scattering and pair pro- duction dominate in the low, intermediate and high photon energy respectively) (Sayyed et al., 2017). Fig. 8 represents the EBF at 5 and 40 mfp, and EABF at 10 and 20 mfp for all sunblock agents. It can be easily seen from Fig. 8 that SB1 sunblock has the maximum EBF and EABF
Fig. 6. EBF Variation of SB1, SB2, SB3, SB4, SB and SB6 samples with incident photon energy at 1, 10, 20, 30 and 40 mfp.
Fig. 7. EBF Variation of SB1, SB2, SB3, SB4, SB and SB6 samples with incident photon energy at 1, 10, 20, 30 and 40 mfp.
Fig. 8. (a, b, c and d) represents the EBF and EABF at diﬀerent penetration depth.
values, while ZnO sunblock agent (SB6) has the minimum EBF and EABF values followed by TiO2 (SB5) sunblock agent. This is because the SB6 sample contains the high Z element Zn, this leads to high equiva- lent atomic number (Zeq) when compared with the other sunblock samples. The Zeq values have been varied from 6.01 to 5.36 (electron/ atom), from 6.36 to 5.89 (electron/atom), from 6.49 to 6.03 (electron/
atom), from 8.83 to 7.22 (electron/atom), from 18.04 to 16.04 (elec- tron/atom) and from 27.11 to 25.25 (electron/atom) for SB1, SB2, SB3, SB4, SB5 and SB6 respectively. The equivalent atomic number (Zeq), G- P exposure (EBF) and energy absorption (EABF) Buildup factor coeﬃ- cients for ZnO have been listed in Table 2 (an example).
3.4.Neutron removal cross sections (∑R)
The calculated values of fast neutron removal cross sections ∑R has
been plotted in Fig. 9. Fig. 9 shows that the ZnO sunblock agent (SB6) sample in this investigation has the highest values of ∑R among the selected sunblock agents which might be due to the higher density of ZnO sunblock agent (Table 3). From this result, we can conclude that the SB6 sample constitutes an excellent candidate for both photon and neutron shielding.
3.5.Mass stopping power and projected range of proton
The mass stopping power (MeVcm2/g) is a very important property since it expresses the rate of energy loss of the charged of the medium traversed. The total mass stopping power of sunblock agents has been calculated using SRIM code for proton and alpha interaction in the energy region 10 keV-1 GeV and the results are shown in Fig. 10. It can be seen from Fig. 10 that the mass stopping powers increase to
Table 2
Equivalent atomic number (Zeq), G-P exposure (EBF) and energy absorption (EABF) Buildup factor coeﬃcients for ZnO sunblock agent.Fig. 9. The fast neutron removal cross sections ∑R for the selected sunblock agents.
maximum for proton and alpha (depends upon the composition of the sunblock samples) with increasing kinetic energy and then decrease with further kinetic energy increases. In addition, mass stopping powers have diﬀerent distribution in the lower and higher energy region. At the 0.01–20 MeV and 0.01–100 MeV energy regions, the mass stopping powers of proton and alpha respectively are depends upon the com- position of sunblock agents, where the ZnO sunblock (SB6) has the lowest mass stopping power.
The projected range (μm) of sunblock agents has been calculated
using SRIM code for proton and alpha interaction in the energy region 10 keV-1 GeV and the results are shown in Fig. 10. The projected range expresses the average value of the depth to which a proton and alpha will penetrate upon slowing down to rest, thus represents how eﬀective the shielding material is. The lower values of projected range are re- quired for better shielding materials. As shown in Fig. 10, the ZnO sunblock (SB6) has the lowest the projected range for proton and alpha. It means that the sample SB6 is the best for protection from proton and alpha.
Table 3
Calculated values of the fast neutrons eﬀective removal cross-sections for Sunblock agents.
Fig. 10. Variation of Mass stopping powers and projected range with kinetic energy of proton and alpha interaction for the selected sunblock agents.
Conclusion
This study aimed at the investigation of some sunblock agents with respect to the gamma, proton, and alpha as well as fast neutron inter- action. The Xcom and SRIM code have been used to calculate the mass attenuation coeﬃcients and mass stopping power respectively. The results showed that the ZnO sunblock agent (SB6) sample has the highest values of μm, Zeﬀ and ∑R and lowest values of mass stopping power and projected range for proton and alpha among the selected sunblock agents. That SB6 has superior protection from nuclear radia- tion.
