<title>Long-term predictions of ambient dose equivalent rates after the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant accident</title>
<author>Sakae Kinase , Tomoyuki Takahashi & Kimiaki Saito</author>
<Affiliation>aFukushima Environmental Safety Center, Japan Atomic Energy Agency, Tokai-mura, Naka-gun, Ibaraki, Japan; bGraduate School of Science and Engineering, Ibaraki University, Mito, Ibaraki, Japan; cDepartment of Nuclear Science and Engineering, Kyoto University, Kumatori-cho, Sennan-gun, Osaka,, Japan</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2017.1365659</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2017.1365659</URL>
ABSTRACT
To analyze radiation protection strategies and rehabilitation programs in Fukushima, prediction models have been developed for ambient dose equivalent rate distributions within the 80 km- radius around the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant. The prediction models characterized by ecological half-lives of radioactive caesium for land-use, enable Fukushima residents to obtain dis- tribution maps of ambient dose equivalent rates after the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant accident. Model parameters such as the ecological half-lives for the short-term component and the fractional distribution of short-term component were evaluated using ambient dose equiv- alent rates through car/vehicle-borne surveys. It was found that the ecological half-lives among land-use differ only slightly, whereas the fractional distributions of the short-term component are clearly dependent on land-use. In addition, uncertainties concerning predictions of ambient dose equivalent rates arising from variability in model parameters were assessed using Monte Carlo simulations. Long-term changes of ambient dose equivalent rates were predicted for dif- ferent land-use areas. Distribution maps of ambient dose equivalent rates for the next 30 years after the accident, created by the prediction models are expected to be useful for follow-up of the radiological situation since they provide information on the space variation of the ambient dose equivalent rates in inhabited areas.
KEYWORDS
Ambient dose equivalent rate; ecological half-life; prediction model; long-term contaminated area; existing exposure situation; radiological protection; Fukushima
1.Introduction
The accident at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant in Japan  occurred in March  2011. The release  of significant quantities of radionuclides over wide areas was made. As a result of the accident, large inhabited areas in eastern Japan became extensively contaminated with radionuclides, of which radioactive caesium (134Cs and 137Cs) subsequently proved to be the most radiologically important. The contaminated areas resulting from the accident were defined with relevant conditions according to a graded approach.  It was essential to establish radiation monitoring sys- tems allowing follow-up of the radiological situation in the short-, and long-term contaminated areas. To assess current levels of contamination and its space and  time  distribution,  radiation  monitoring  such  as car/vehicle-borne, airborne, measurements using survey meters has been performed after the accident [1]. At the Japan Atomic Energy Agency (JAEA), to assess the evolution of the long-term existing exposure situations after the accident, prediction models have been developed for ambient dose equivalent rate dis- tribution within 80 km-radius around the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant [2–7]. The prediction models were expressed using bi-exponential functions
CONTACT Sakae Kinase kinase.sakae@jaea.go.jp
characterized by ecological half-lives – the time for half the radioactive caesium to disappear from the local environment due to natural removal phenomena and human activities – for land-use. In the present study, ecological half-lives of the short-term component and the fractional distributions of the short-term compo- nent were evaluated using ambient dose equivalent rates through car/vehicle-borne surveys. Uncertainties concerning future ambient dose equivalent rates were also assessed using Monte Carlo simulations of model parameter variability in conjunction with the predic- tion models. In addition, distribution maps of ambient dose equivalent rates for the next 30 years after the  accident were created using the prediction models with the updated model parameters within the 80 km-radius around the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant.
2.Materials and methods
2.1.Radiation monitoring
Radiation measurements have been carried out using various mobile systems such as car/vehicle-borne, air- borne and simply walking on the ground after the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant accident [1]. In particular, ambient dose equivalent rates over wide
Table 1areas in eastern Japan were measured through a series of car-borne surveys. Nine car-borne surveys were car- ried out by JAEA in collaboration with many organi- zations until the late 2014: the first survey (4–13 June 2011), the second survey (5–28 December 2011), the third survey (13–30 March 2012), the fourth survey (from 20 August to 12 October 2012), the fifth survey (from 5 November to 12 December 2012), the sixth survey (from 12 June to August 8 2013), the seventh survey (from 5 November to 12 December 2013), the eighth survey (from 23 June to 8 August 2014) and  the ninth survey (from 4 November to 5 December 2014). Inside the evacuation order areas, 20 vehicle- borne surveys were also performed under the compre- hensive monitoring plan between 2011 and 2015 [8]. The ambient dose equivalent rates obtained every 3– 10 seconds using the KURAMA-II systems in moving car were converted to those outside the car [9]. The errors of the KURAMA-II systems may not exceed 20% in measurements of background ambient dose equiva- lent rates [10].
Table 1 The number of data obtained in the car/vehicle- borne surveys within the  km-radius around the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant.
summarizes the implementation periods of the car/vehicle-borne surveys, along with the number of their associated data within the 80 km-radius around the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant. In the database for inside the evacuation order areas observation points with wet deposition of radioactive caesium dominate, whereas for outside the evacuation order areas observation points with dry deposition of radioactive caesium dominate..
2.2.Prediction models and model parameters
According to previous studies on prediction models [11–17], the local environment is described by one or more interconnected compartments depending on therate of radionuclide distribution to the different partsin the local environment. The two-compartment model with the central/peripheral compartments is the most common one used to describe the radionuclide behav- ior in the local environment. The change with time   in the ambient dose equivalent rate contribution from radioactive caesium on grounds can be expressed using the following equation
@1
where Y(t) is the ambient dose equivalent rate at time t; Y(0) is the ambient dose equivalent rate at time zero, which is derived from the measurements; αshort is the fractional distribution of the short-term component; Tshort is the ecological half-life of the short-term com- ponent; Tlong is the ecological half-life of the long-term component; λ134 and λ137 are the physical decay con- stants of 134Cs and 137Cs, respectively; k is the ambient dose equivalent rate ratio of 134Cs to 137Cs at time zero,
2.7(as of 15 March 2011); YBG is background radiation, approximately 0.05 μSv/h [18]; Y(t), Y(0) and YBG are the ambient dose equivalent rates at 1 m height above ground.
The Equation (1) contains two exponents, one expo- nent describes the distribution process and the other describes the elimination process in the local environ- ment. These exponents contain the hybrid rate con- stants for the distribution and elimination processes. The ecological half-lives for the short-/long-term com- ponents that are the hybrid rate constants, are termed the macro rate constants, while the transfer coefficients in the two-compartment model are termed the micro rate constants. In the present study, the ecological half- lives for the long-term components are based on the results from the previous studies [11,13]. At this point, it is not possible to make a final determination on the values for the predictions.
The model parameters such as the ecological half- lives of the short-term component and the fractional distributions of the short-term component were eval- uated using the changes with time in ambient dose  equivalent rates through the car/vehicle-borne surveys. They were obtained using the controlled random search algorithm for global optimization and the conjugate gradient algorithm for local optimization when plot- ting the ambient dose equivalent rates over time. To identify key parameters in the prediction models, the
Figure 1. Cumulative distribution functions of the ecological half-lives of the short-term component Tshort. (a) inside the evac- uation order areas and (b) outside the evacuation order areas.
model parameters were categorized according to land- use/land-cover. The categories were made using the precise land-use and land-cover map by the advanced land observing satellite ‘Daichi’ (ALOS) [19]. Eight cat- egories were classified: water, urban, paddy, crop, grass, deciduous forest, evergreen forest and bare surface in ALOS. The 90% confidence intervals of the model parameters were determined for model features, and the true but unknown values were assessed with rea- sonably high confidence to lie between 5th and 95th percentiles.
2.3.Uncertainty quantification in model predictions
Uncertainties in predictions arise from those in the model parameters. In the present study, the uncertain- ties in predictions of ambient dose equivalent rates  for the next 30 years after the accident were assessed using Monte Carlo simulations of model parameter variability. The Monte Carlo simulations with Latin hypercube sampling (LHS) [20] were performed. Use of LHS method ensured that sampling occurred from the
Figure 2. Cumulative distribution functions of the fractional dis- tributions of the short-term component αshort. (a) inside the evacuation order areas and (b) outside the evacuation order areas.
complete distribution of each model parameter. Each model parameter distribution was divided into equal probability sections, and random sampling from each equal probability section was carried out to produce a probability distribution function. Three model param- eters were taken into consideration: the ecological half- life of the short-/long-term components and the frac- tional distribution of the short-term component. The model parameter uncertainties and distributions were used to assess the uncertainties of predictions. In accor- dance with the previous studies [13], the ecological half- life of the long-term component is given: 45 years for the 5th percentile, 90 years for the median and 135 years for the 95th percentile. The distribution is assumed to be uniform.
In addition, to validate the prediction models, the predictions of ambient dose equivalent rates based on the ninth car-borne survey data (from 4 November to 5 December 2014) were compared with the ambient dose equivalent rates obtained in the 10th car-borne survey (from 29 June to 4 August 2015) that were not used for evaluating the model parameters.
Table 22.4.Distribution maps of ambient dose equivalent rates
Distribution maps of ambient dose equivalent rates within the 80 km-radius around the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant were created using the pre- diction models. The maps were made for the next 6,  9, 15 and 30 years after the accident, that is, for 2017,
2020, 2026 and 2041. To predict ambient dose equiva- lent rates within living areas, corrections were made to the initial ambient dose equivalent rates obtained using the mobile systems such as the ninth car-borne sur- vey (from 4 November to 5 December, 2014), the 20th vehicle-borne survey under the comprehensive mon- itoring plan (from October 21, 2014 to January 19, 2015) and the ninth airborne monitoring (7 November 2014) [21]. That is, the ambient dose equivalent rates obtained using the mobile systems were corrected using the relationship of ambient dose equivalent rates between those on roads and those around roads so as to be consistent with those within living areas [1,4]. On the maps relative to the categories in ALOS, the ambient dose equivalent rates including the background radia- tions were indicated using image colors in 100 m mesh units.
3.
Results and discussion
3.1.Model parameters
Cumulative distribution functions of the ecological half-lives of the short-term component Tshort were obtained for both inside and outside the evacuation order areas. For inside the evacuation order areas con- sisting of the difficult-to-return zone, the restricted res- idence area and the zone in preparation for the lift- ing of the evacuation order (the cancel preparation  zone) (designated in March 2012, evacuation orders have been gradually lifted. Some of the evacuation order areas in Kawauchi village, Tamura and Minami- soma cities were lifted from April, 2012.), the cumu- lative distribution functions of Tshort were plotted in Figure 1(a), based on whether or not the land-use area falls under deciduous and evergreen forest areas. On the other hand, the cumulative distribution functions of Tshort for outside the evacuation order areas were plot- ted for each land-use in Figure 1(b). There are signif- icant differences of Tshort between inside and outside the evacuation order areas. They seem to reflect the essential features of Tshort that would be related to the physical and chemical properties of radioactive caesium
Table 3. Fractional distributions of the short-term component αshort for inside/outside the evacuation order areas.. Ecological half-lives of the short-term component Tshort for inside/outside the evacu- ation order areas.
Figure 3
the cumulative distribution functions of Tshort, it is diffi- cult to re-evaluate Tshort for evergreen forest outside the evacuation order areas. However, from the standpoint of the application of model parameters in the predic- tion models, they are not considered to be sources of excessive error in the future predictions. The 5th, 50th (Median) and 95th percentiles of the ecological half- lives of the short-term component Tshort for both inside and outside the evacuation order areas and the assigned distributions are presented in Table 2. On the whole, the Tshort for outside the evacuation order areas, which depends little on land-use, differ from that for inside the evacuation order areas. The Tshort (Median) is consis- tent with that (0.33–1.5 years) from the previous studies [11–17].
In a similar fashion, cumulative distribution func- tions of the fractional distributions of the short-term component αshort for inside and outside the evacuation
(n)bare surface area outside the evacuation order areas.
order areas were plotted in Figure 2(a) and (b), respec- tively. As shown in Figure 2(a), the αshort for inside the evacuation order areas reflect the different situations in the three zones: not easy comings and goings of people to the difficult-to-return, the restricted residence and the cancel preparation zones. The αshort for the difficult- to-return zones is smaller than that for the cancel prepa- ration zones with people coming and going. Figure 2(b) shows that the αshort for outside the evacuation order areas largely depends on land-use. The cumulative dis- tribution function of the αshort for water such as lakes, reservoirs and rivers outside the evacuation order areas is not smooth since the number of the water category is small. The αshort for evergreen forest outside the evac- uation order areas is smaller than those for urban areas with people coming and going. These findings sug- gest that the αshort increases with an increase in human activity such as traffic. In view of the current situation
. Relative ambient dose equivalent rates inside/outside the evacuation order areas. (a)–(f ) inside the evacuation order areas and (g)–(n) outside the evacuation order areas.
fell onto the ground by wet/dry deposition processes, deposition velocities and the weathering effect [12,22]– the reduction of ambient  dose  equivalent  rate  due  to natural removal phenomena such as run-off, re- suspension and migration. Figure 1(b) also shows that Tshort for evergreen forest outside the evacuation order
areas is different from those for other land-use. The ecological half-lives of the short-term component of
<0.1 year (about 30 days) are sampled for 15% of Tshort for evergreen forest outside the evacuation order areas. Since the available monitoring data within 30 days after the accident are not sufficient to identify the form of
Figure 4. Comparisons of ambient dose equivalent rates between predictions and the measurements through the th car-borne survey. The dashed lines represent variations by a factor of .–.
that there are differences of human activities among the zones, the αshort for areas where human activities occur might change. Table 3 summarizes the 5th, 50th (Median) and 95th percentiles of the fractional distribu- tions of the short-term component αshort for inside and outside the evacuation order areas and the assigned dis- tributions. The αshort (Median) is also consistent with that from the previous studies [11–17]. It is confirmed that the αshort for inside the evacuation order area is much smaller than that for outside the evacuation order area. The αshort that depends on time and space varia- tions is the influential model parameter that affects pre- dictions.
In the present study, model parameters were updated for the prediction models. The updated model parame- ters are different from those used in the previous study [7]. The differences would be due to the expanded data of ambient dose equivalent rates. Whereas the Tshort for inside the evacuation order areas is changed, the influential model parameter αshort for the predictions is consistent with that in the previous study. Hence, the updated model parameters do not seem to affect long-term predictions largely.
3.2.Uncertainty of ambient dose equivalent rates
The model parameters and their  uncertainties,  that is, the 90% CI values and distribution were used for sampling the Monte Carlo simulation inputs. The pre- dictions obtained by the Monte Carlo simulations were
normalized by the associated ambient dose equivalent rates on 15 March 2011. The uncertainty of the relative ambient dose equivalent rates inside/outside the evacu- ation order areas is shown in Figure 3(a)–(n). For inside the evacuation order areas, the time variations of the predictions were plotted, based on whether or not the land-use area falls under deciduous and evergreen for- est areas. On the other hand, for outside the evacuation order areas, they are the time variations of the pre-  dictions for land-use: water, urban, paddy, crop, grass, deciduous forest, evergreen forest and bare surface in ALOS. In all figures, the 90% CI of relative ambient dose equivalent rates through the car/vehicle-borne surveys and the uncertainties in predictions of relative ambient dose equivalent rates for the next 30 years after the  accident are indicated. The lower and the upper ends of the whiskers show the 5th and 95th percentiles, respec- tively. From the figures, it can be stated that decrease of ambient dose equivalent rate would be faster than those due to physical decay of radioactive caesium. The ambi- ent dose equivalent rates inside the evacuation order areas decrease ata bit slower rate than those outside the evacuation order areas. In addition, the 50th percentiles (Median) of predictions of relative ambient dose equiv- alent rates were found to be in good agreement with actual data through the car/vehicle-borne surveys. As shown in Figure 3(c)–(f), the variation in ambient dose equivalent rates through the vehicle-borne surveys would be due to the full-fledged decontamination that were carried out in the restricted residence and the Figure . Distribution maps of ambient dose equivalent rates evaluated using the th percentile model parameters, the ninth car- borne survey data, the th vehicle-borne survey data and the ninth airborne monitoring data. (a) , (b) , (c)  and (d) . The red line represents the evacuation order areas designated in March .
cancel preparation zones. However, it is confirmed that almost all of data through the car/vehicle-borne surveys are within the prediction intervals. After lifting evacuation orders, the ambient dose equivalent rates inside the evacuation order areas would be significantly
reduced by human activities such as road sweeping and traffic.
Figure 4 shows comparisons of ambient dose equiv- alent rates between those predicted using the predic- tion models with the ninth car-borne survey data and those through the 10th car-borne survey. They are the ambient dose equivalent rates over 0.1 μSv/h for out- side the evacuation order areas. The background dose rate ranges from 0.02 μSv/h to 0.07 μSv/h [18]. The dashed lines represent variations by a factor of 1.5–2. On the scatter plot, there are several variations at low dose rates around 0.2 μSv/h, which become small at higher dose rates. It was found that the predictions agree within a factor of approximately 2 with the actual data. Hence, the prediction models would be useful for a bet- ter understanding of the radiological situation.
3.3.Distribution maps of ambient dose equivalent rates
Figure 5(a)–(d) show the distribution maps of ambient dose equivalent rates within 80 km-radius around the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant for 2017, 2020, 2026 and 2041 (Please refer to the distribution maps for inside the evacuation order areas in supplementary online material). These maps with 100 m mesh units provide the radiological situation based on the predic- tion models in conjunction with the 50th percentile (Median) model parameters, the ninth car-borne sur- vey data, the 20th vehicle-borne survey data and the ninth airborne monitoring data. The figures indicate the ambient dose equivalent rates over 0.2 μSv/h at 1 m height above ground. It was found from a comparison with the results that the ambient dose equivalent rates decrease certainly. The area where the annual cumu- lative dose of radiation is expected to reach 20 mSv (>3.8 μSv/h) in 2041 might decrease to 15th part of that in 2017. It is concluded that the distribution maps of ambient dose equivalent rates for the next 30 years after the accident would be essential information to support the implementation of all protection strategies after the Fukushima accident.
4.Conclusions
Prediction models for ambient dose equivalent rate within 80 km-radius around the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant have been developed using bi-  exponential functions characterized by ecological half- lives. Model parameters were obtained for each land- use using a huge number of measured data through the car/vehicle-borne surveys. The ecological half-lives of the short-term component and the fractional distribu- tions of the short-term component would be change- able by human activities. In addition, distribution maps of ambient dose equivalent rates were created for the next 30 years after the accident. It was expected that the distribution maps with high resolution would be use- ful for follow-up of the radiological situation after the Fukushima accident. The uncertainties in predictions of ambient dose equivalent rates for the next 30 years after the accident were assessed using Monte Carlo LHS
simulations. The prediction models applicable to dif- ferent land-use areas would be useful for more realistic risk assessments. The authors plan in the near future to develop prediction models of ambient dose equivalent rates in the early phase of the accident to reconstruct external doses for Fukushima residents.
Acknowledgments
This study was conducted in a government-commissioned research project from the Nuclear Regulation Authority of Japan. The distribution maps of ambient dose equivalent rates after the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant accident can be created on knowledge that has been obtained in the project. The authors thank Mr S. Sato, Mrs Y. Murakami, Mr M. Ando, Mr S. Mikami, Mr H. Yamamoto and Mr R. Sakamoto for their technical supports.
