<title>Spanish translation and psychometric evaluation of the healthcare professional’s knowledge about radiologic protection scale</title>
<author>Luis Llurda-Almuzar，Raquel Olaya Lubián，David Pérez de Gracia，</author>
<Affiliation>1.Área de estructura y función del cuerpo humano. Unidad de Anatomía. Universitat
Internacional de Catalunya, Sant Cugat, Spain.2.Parc Sanitari Pere Virgili, Barcelona, Spain.3.Hospital Plato, Barcelona, Spain.4.Research Unit of Nursing Science and Health Management, University of Oulu, Oulu
University Hospital, Oulu, Finland.5.Oulu University of Applied Science, Oulu, Finland.
6.Grupo de Investigación en Estrés y Salud (GIES), Facultad de Psicología, Universidad Autónoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Cerdanyola del Vallès, Barcelona, Spain.Unidad de Investigación y Comunicación Científica,7. Escoles Universitàries Gimbernat,Universidad Autónoma de Barcelona, Sant Cugat del Vallès, Barcelona, Spain.</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Radiological Protection</Journal>
<Publishing_house>IOP Publishing</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1088/1361-6498/ab1812</DOI>
<URL> https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6498/ab1812</URL>
ABSTRACT
PURPOSE: To make an intercultural adaptation, and to provide a Spanish translation and psychometric evaluation of the original English version of
the Healthcare Professionals Knowledge about Radiation Protection scale. METHODS: The Spanish translation was carried out following international
Guidelines  for  the  process  of  cross-cultural  adaptation  of  self-report measures. A cross-sectional design study was carried out. A hundred and thirty-eight	nurses	from	4	different	hospitals	in	Barcelona	(Spain) completed the Spanish version of the scale. Total score of the scale was
calculated. The Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) was used to evaluate a possible correlation between score and years of experience. A T-test for independent samples was used to evaluate significant differences between different  groups.   Cronbach’s   alpha  and   corrected  item-total correlatiocoefficient  and  test-retest  coefficient  were  used  to  determine internal consistency.	The	exploratory	factor	and	parallel	analysis	was	also
calculated. All statistical tests were carried out with a level of significance α=0.05.
RESULTS:  The  mean  scale  score  was  poor  among  Spanish  nurses.  The PCC between total score and years of experience showed a non-significant correlation (p>0.05).  No differences were  found between nurses who  work in radiation exposed units and those who work in radiation unexposed units (p>0.05). A Cronbach α of 0.98 was obtained for the items of the scale.The corrected item-total correlation range was 0.5-0.8. The test-retest correlation coefficient was 0.9. The exploratory analysis factor showed a single factorial structure which explained a 60.86% of the variance.CONCLUSIONS: The new scale translated into Spanish (Sp- HPKRP) could be used to evaluate the degree of knowledge about radiological protection.
KEYWORDS:
radiologic protection,healthcare professionals,nursing,training programs
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
INTRODUCTION
Many treatments and diagnostic procedures in healthcare involve the use of
radiological exposure. Despite the fact that its benefits and need are clear, many radiological-related risks  have been  described among  the  literature, these  of  which  should  be  taken  into  account.  Radiological-related  risks affect both patients and healthcare professionals and it may lead to severe pathologies	such	as	cancer	[1–6].	Due	to	these	health	risks,	the radiological	use	in	European	healthcare	is	covered	by	international regulations set by European Council [7].The  nursing  staff  have  a  crucial  role  in  radiation  use  and  protection, especially nurses working in radiological units [8]. Not only is radiation  a part of radiological units, but also emergency units, in that an increase in the use of radiological imaging methods has been noted [9]. Therefore, nurses exposure to  radiation is	currently increasing among some Europe countries [6,10].Interestingly, many studies have shown a severe lack of knowledge pertaining  to  this  issue  among  healthcare  professionals  and specifically among nurses [11–13]. The lack of knowledge among nursing  staff about radiation   use   and  protection   could  lead  to   inadequate   practice,  and uncontrolled or harmful exposure for both them and patients. Thus, many studies conclude that there needs to be knowledge improvement among nursing staff [14].
It is important to evaluate the knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors about radiological	protection	in	nursing	healthcare	professionals.	This	will determine   whether   or  not   the   staff   has sufficient  radiation  protection training for a safe working environment. Moreover, if the knowledge is not sufficient enough to identify specific deficiencies, it is crucial to develop new   educational  programs   in   order   to   improve   knowledge  about the subject.	This	could	help	eliminate	pathologies	derived	from	high
radiological exposure to radiation.Different instruments have been used to evaluate radiological protection knowledge,	attitudes,	and	behavior	among	healthcare	professionals. However, all of them had some limitations regarding its applicability to nursing staff [11,15,16].
Schroderus-Salo	et	al	[17]	developed	and	validated	an	English
physicometric scale to assess healthcare professional knowledge about radiation	protection.	Their	scale	was	the	Healthcare	Professionals Knowledge of Radiation Protection (HPKRP) [17].Many authors have studied nursing and healthcare professionals’ exposures to radiation, and their knowledge and behaviors. However, no studies have been found among Spanish nurses [18]. Hence, there are no Spanish validated scales or methods to evaluate this phenomenon.Therefore,  the  principal  purpose  of  this  study  was  to  perform  a  cross-cultural  adaptation  through  the  Spanish  translation,  and  a psychometric evaluation of the original English version of the HPKRP scale. Secondly,this study aims to evaluate the Spanish nursing staffs knowledge about radiation protection in their corresponding practice.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Design
This  study  followed  a  cross-sectional  design.  Following  the International guidelines [19], the HPKRP scale was translated into the Spanish language after obtaining the original author’s permission. Two independent Spanish nurses translated the original English version into Spanish language. Then, a  Spanish  research  group  evaluated  the  translation  and  agreed  on the preliminary Spanish version. Subsequently, an independent researcher with English as their first language performed a back-translation, and the final Sp_HPKRP version was accepted (annex 1).
A pilot study was carried out in order to determine the understanding of the
new  Spanish  version.  The  study  consisted  of  8  Spanish  nurses  what concluded that there was no language difficulty in understanding the questions.The questionnaire with the Sp-HPKRP was sent to 4 different hospitals from  Barcelona,  Spain.  The  questionnaire  had  some  demographic  data questions (age, sex, unity, hospital, official academic qualification, specific radiological protection formation,  and nursing years of experience) and  the Sp-HPKRP scale.
The Sp-HPKRP is a scale that evaluates the nurses’ knowledge about radiological protection in the hospital. The scale is composed of 33 statements graded from 0 (no knowledge) to 10 (total knowledge).The inclusion criteria to be included in this study were 1) to be and work as a nurse and 2) to work in one of the followings units: radiological unit, palliative unit, oncology unit, or geriatric unit.A total of 138 nurses from four different hospitals answered the Sp-HPKRP during March 2019. All participants were informed about the study and were aware that participation was voluntary. Moreover, all of them knew that the data  obtained  by  the  survey  would  be  kept  confidential.  All participants signed informed consent waivers to participate in this study. The study was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of the International University of Catalunya.
Outcome measurements
The HPKRP scale aims to evaluate the knowledge level of radiation protection  among  healthcare  professionals  who  work  with  radiation. The total scores range from 33 to 330 points, where the highest scores mean a deeper understanding about radiation exposure and protection. Moreover, demographic  data  such  as  age,  sex,  years  of  experience  and  specific training on radiological protection were asked.
Statistical Analysis
Data was tabulated and analyzed using the IBM SPSS Statistics v21. All statistical tests were carried out with a level of significance α=0.05. Kolgomorov-Smirnov test was used to determine that all Sp-HPKRP score had normality.Descriptive statistics were used to explain the demographic characteristics of the sample.Floor and ceiling effects were calculated. This effect corresponds to percentage of subjects with a minimum or maximum score. Their score must not exceed 15% in either maximum or minimum cases. Cronbach’s alpha was used to determine internal consistency of the adapted Spanish scale. Moreover, the corrected item-total correlation coefficient was calculated for the total of the items.
As inferential tests, Pearson coefficient between years of experience and total Sp-HPKRP score was calculated. The determined validity of the scale
was  measured  using  the  T-student  for  independent  samples.  This  was
used to analyze significant differences between 1) nurses with and withoutspecific  radiological  protection  formation,  2)  sexes,  and  3)  nurses  in radiological	exposed	and	unexposed	units.	Temporal	stability	was
measured by test-retest (two weeks follow-up) correlation coefficient.The exploratory factor analysis was done applying the maximum likelihood
method. The number of factors was analyzed following Kaiser [20] and
Cattell [21] criteria and the parallel analysis proposed by Horn [22,23].
Before  the  factor  analysis  of  the  items,  the  Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin  test
(KMO=0.9)	and	the	Bartlett’s	sphericity	test	(p<0.01)	were	used	to determine the adequacy of the data.
RESULTS
Descriptive data
A total of 138 nurses completed the Sp-HPKRP scale with no missing data in  the  participants’  responses.  The  sample  consisted  of  101  females (73.2%) and 37 males (26.8%). The age of the nurses ranged from 21 and over 62 with mean of 38 (SD 11.0). The years of experience ranged from 1 to 41 with mean value of 14 (SD 10.4). Ninety-four nurses (68%) worked in radiation  exposure  units  and  forty-four  (32%)  did  not  work  in  radiation exposure units. Regarding the specific radiation protection training among the nurses, only 21 % of the sample answered “yes” while a total of 109 nurses  (79%)  answered  “no”.  All  descriptive  data  for  quantitative  and qualitative variables is shown in Table 1 andTable 2.
Cross-Cultural adaptation
The translation and the subsequent back-translation procedure to develop
the	Sp-HPKRP	were	conducted	without	grammatical	or	linguistic
controversies which guaranteed the linguistic equivalence of the scale. All 8 nurses   who   participated   on   the   pilot   study reported  no	difficulty in understanding each of the 33 items of the Scale. Moreover, they said items were clear, concise, and easy to understand.
Sp-HPKRP outcomes
The  total   Sp-HPKRP  score  was   calculated  for   all   participants,   and it
showed a mean score of 159 points with a standard deviation of 76. The total scores ranged from 33 to 322.Results from Kolgomorov-Smirnov test (Z=0.79; p>0.05) allowed us to accept that the data follows a normal distribution, and it justified the use of parametric tests for the inferential analysis The Pearson correlation coefficient between total Sp-HPKRP score and years	of	experience	showed	a	non-significant	correlation	(p>0.05; R2=0.008) [Figure 1].The T-student test for independent samples between males and females showed significant differences.  Males  had significantly  higher  scores than females  (p<0.05).  Moreover,  T-student  test  revealed  significantly  higher (p<0.05) scores in nurses with specific radiation protection formation than those   who   did   not   have   specific   formation.   However,   no significant differences were found between nurses who work in radiation exposed units and those who work in radiation unexposed units (p>0.05).
Floor and ceiling effects
No significant floor and ceiling effects were found. 1.4% of the participant scored  33  points  and  no  one  scored  330  points  which  would  mean complete knowledge about radiation protection. Only 2.1% scored higher than 300 points and 5.8% scored fewer than 50 points.
Internal consistency
A Cronbach’s α of 0.98 was obtained for the 33 items of the Sp-HPKRP scale. It was not affected by the removal of any item. Means and standard deviations, corrected item-total correlation, and α if the item was removed are shown on Table 3. The corrected item-total correlation range was 0.5-
0.8. The test-retest correlation coefficient measured two weeks after the first  answered  questionnaire  was  0.9,  and  it  revealed  a  good  temporal stability.
Factorial validity
Although three eigenvalues were greater than one, both scree-plot visual examination  and parallel analysis  showed a single factorial structure.  This explained 60.86% of the variance. The scree-plot is on Figure 2.
DISCUSSION
This study aimed to make a cross-cultural adaptation of the Healthcare Professional Knowledge about Radiation Protection scale to the Spanish language. The pilot study revealed a good language adaptation of the scale. It is crucial and indispensable to translate validated and useful scales in other languages in order to facilitate healthcare professionals’comprehension around the world. Thus, it could be used to assess the grade of knowledge about the topic and, if necessary, to develop and incorporate new educational strategies.
The principal finding of this study was that the Sp-HPKRP has been statistically	validated	from	this	work,	with	satisfactory	psychometric properties similar to those obtained by Schroderus-Salo et al [17] in his original HPKRP scale version. The Sp-HPKRP had an excellent coefficient of internal consistency (α=0.98) similar to the original version.In the original version of the scale, Schroderus-Salo et al [17] observed afactorial structure with three factors explaining 60.1%, 7.8%, and 3.5% of the variance respectively. However, although three eigenvalues were greater than one in our sample, the scree-plot visual examination revealed a one-dimensional structure. Moreover, unlike the original version, this study performed the parallel analysis and a one-dimensional structure that
explained 60.86% of  the variance  found. Future studies with larger sample sizes are expected to enable confirmatory factor analyses to be performed.This will deepen the current knowledge regarding the nature of the structural components of the instrument.
As expected, nurses with specific radiation protection education scored statistically higher than those without. Surprisingly, nurses who work in radiation exposed units did not score significantly higher than those who work in unexposed units. The Pearson correlation test showed a non-significant correlation. This means that the radiation protection knowledge is  not  a  question  of  years  of  experience,  but  a  question  of  specific education  about  the  topic.  Moreover,  nurses  who  recently  finished their university  studies  did  not  have  better  results  than  the  nurses who  had not.The nursing  school curriculum should be checked and modified  in  order to improve this specific knowledge among Spanish nurses.Results from this study showed a mean score of 159 points for the Sp- HPKPR among Spanish nurses. The maximum score was 330, meanin that	Spanish	nurses	could	improve	their	knowledge	about	radiation protection. No studies have been found using this scale in order to evaluate nurse’s knowledge about radiation protection, therefore, the results cannot be compared to nurses from other countries. Improving radiation protection knowledge among nursing staff will increase precaution and it subsequently will prevent radiation-related damage.Many studies have demonstrated a lack of knowledge about radiation protection   among   healthcare professionals  [18,24,25],but no studies have been found among the Spanish population. This study demonstrated that  this  lack of  knowledge is  also  found in Spanish nurses. The potential risk  of  this  condition  [3,4,26–28],  requires  improved  knowledge. Clinical applications of this study such as educational and training programs about specific radiation protection should at least be carried out among Spanish nurses.
CONCLUSION
The Sp-HPKRP was a valid and reliable instrument to assess the radiation protection knowledge among the population of Spanish nurses with really good psychometric properties. However, a lack of knowledge about radiation protection was noted and scores only reached half of the maximum score. New education and training programs should be carried out among Spanish nurses in order to improve this lack of knowledge and prevent radiation-associated risks.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Conflict of interest: The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Funding: There is no funding source.
