<title>On the justiﬁcation of justiﬁcation in radiation protection - legal and sociological considerations</title>
<author>B. Michael Moores</author>
<Affiliation>Integrated Radiological Services Ltd, Unit 110, Century Building, Brunswick Business Park, Liverpool, L3 4BJ, UK</Affiliation>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>Radiography</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radi.2020.10.0071078-8174</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radi.2020.10.0071078-8174</URL>
abstract
Objectives: The objectives of the review were to investigate the legal and sociological basis of justiﬁca- tion in society in order to fully assess its relevance to radiation protection. The difference between the justiﬁcation of practices as distinct from the justiﬁcation of reasons for the justiﬁcation of individual activities within a practice and the relevance of costebeneﬁt analysis to this process are key elements. Key ﬁndings: Justiﬁcation of practices as a principle of radiation protection is automatically enshrined within the appropriate legislation once it has been enacted. However, the justiﬁcation of reasons for justiﬁcation of activities within a practice are subject to many sociological factors, which are often conﬂicting and indeterminate and can be subject to political, economic and environmental factors that may change over time. This applies especially to new developments where the primary reason for justiﬁcation is based upon potential but possibly ill-deﬁned future beneﬁts.
Conclusion: The primary mechanism whereby society develops a collective consensus on the justiﬁcation of practices lies within a legal framework. This represents the mechanism by which society deﬁnes the accepted standards that must be applied for acceptance of a practice. The justiﬁcation of reasons for justifying activities that form part of a practice has largely been ignored within the framework of ra- diation protection.
Implications for practice: The employment of justiﬁcation of practices as a fundamental principle of ra- diation protection should be eliminated since it is already enshrined within the legal framework applicable to applications of ionising radiation. Justiﬁcation of reasons for pursuing new or modiﬁed practices is based upon their perceived beneﬁts to society, which underpins most developments in society.
Keywords:
Radiation protection Risks   Justiﬁcation   Principles of radiation protection Sociological aspects
Introduction
The International Commission of Radiation Protection (ICRP) established the three principles of radiation protection; justiﬁca- tion, optimisation and dose limitation over 40 years ago.1 The principle of justiﬁcation arose from radiation protection consider- ations in the medical ﬁeld when it was assumed that all medical exposures would be clinically justiﬁed.2 Prior to this justiﬁcation had not been a consideration for all other practices involving the use of ionising radiation.
ICRP 103 deﬁnes the principle of justiﬁcation as: “Any decision that alters the radiation exposure situation should do more good than harm”.3 How should society formulate an assessment of good and harm when applied to multiple diverse activities employing ionising radiation, such as:
Medical; diagnostic, therapeutic and nuclear medicine; both  staff and patients
●Dental; both staff and patients
●Veterinary
●Civil nuclear industry
●Non-nuclear general industry
●Defence industry
●Radionuclide production
●Research and tertiary education
●Transport of radioactive materials
●Consumer products, etc?
The three principles are assumed to operate in a sequential or- der. A practice is justiﬁed, then optimised and then dose limits are
applied. However, the logic of this order has been criticised.4 Nu- clear and medical activities were being used or practised well before the justiﬁcation principle was established by ICRP. Also, if a practice does not operate at safe levels of exposure could it ever be justiﬁed and what level of optimisation is required to ensure a practice would be justiﬁed?
In May 2000 the OECD Nuclear Energy Agency's (NEA) Com- mittee on Radiation Protection and Public Health (CRPPH) under- took a detailed review of the system of radiation protection.5 In this review it was noted that “Justiﬁcation” is of no particular practical use to operational radiation protection.
The NEA's review was stimulated by a paper presented by Roger Clarke, a former Chairman of ICRP in which he suggested that the apparent incoherence of the system of radiation protection should be addressed.6 The paper was concerned with the control of low- level radiation exposure and asked whether it was time for a change. An important proposal presented in this paper was “that consideration should be given to dropping the principle of justiﬁ- cation from the ICRP system”.
Aim
There is an obvious lack of clarity on the role and relevance of the principle of justiﬁcation in radiation protection. A simplistic deﬁnition in terms of good and harm has been applied since its inception with little or no effort to clarify its application to the numerous diverse applications of ionising radiations in society. The aim of the present work is to undertake a detailed review and analysis of the basis of justiﬁcation in society from a sociological and legal perspective in order to assess its relevance as a funda- mental principle of radiation protection.
Method
A detailed narrative review of the literature on justiﬁcation has been undertaken in order to debate its ethical, sociological and legal basis. This has included a review of up to date studies within the political and sociological sciences, which were concerned with how individuals and organisations justify their actions and the underlying reasons for so doing. Of speciﬁc importance is the mechanisms by which society establishes defensible consensus views or reasons for the justiﬁcation of practices since the ability to question or disagree with justiﬁcations as well as settle any dis- putes should be a democratic right. Consequently, the legal aspects of justiﬁcation have been investigated. Also, the difference between the  justiﬁcation  of  practices themselves  as  distinct  from the justi-
ﬁcation of reasons for undertaking them is investigated. Costebe-
neﬁt analysis as a component of justiﬁcation is also considered since it can act as a basis for quantifying good (beneﬁts) and harm (detriments), which underpin the ICRP deﬁnition of justiﬁcation.
Results and discussion
Justiﬁcation e sociological and legal considerations
The principle of justiﬁcation in radiation protection is under- pinned by sociological factors that need to be considered in the justiﬁcation of practices.7,8 This includes the underlying reasons involved in justifying the pursuit of a practice.9 However, justiﬁ- cations must be amenable to the resolution of reasonable dis- agreements that can arise between those affected by the practice. This implies that justiﬁcations should be framed either in legal10e12 or scientiﬁc7,8 terms since these are the proven most robust
mechanisms by which modern society seeks to establish the moral or factual truth of an established viewpoint. However, it has been
shown that justiﬁcation cannot be treated as a scientiﬁc variable.13 Thus, the primary reasons for justiﬁcation of practices must be framed in legal terms. Hence it is necessary to draw a distinction between the justiﬁcation of practices themselves as distinct from attempts to justify reasons for pursuing them.
The socio-political factors that underpin the concept of justiﬁ- cation have been presented in a detailed review.7 This work concluded that justiﬁcations fall into six main logic areas or “so- ciological worlds” exempliﬁed by the following six well known philosophical or social authors: civic (Jean Jacques Rousseau), market (Adam Smith), industrial (Claude Henri de Rouvroy, Comte de Saint-Simon), domestic (Jacques Benign Bossuet), inspiration (Augustine of Hippo) and fame (Thomas Hobbes). These concepts form the social and moral backdrop as to how society justiﬁes and attempts to normalise permitted activities or practices.
The social acceptance of good and harm, which underpins the ICRP deﬁnition of justiﬁcation, may be expressed in terms of costebeneﬁt and it has been indicated that this can vary according to local, national and international perceptions as well as over time.14 Consequently, how we integrate such factors into the framework of justiﬁcation must also be a consideration. The relevance of each sociological world to the justiﬁcation process can be considered separately.
The civic world
Justiﬁcation of activities by governments, or organized groups of individuals fall into this category. In the Civic world the legiti- misation of civic worth or value must ultimately be exercised within legal forms that deﬁne the limits of the territory covered by any justiﬁcation. Thus, in the case of radiation protection in Europe, Directives or Guidance have been drawn up at the International level and then formulated and integrated into the legislative framework of individual countries. The enactment of resulting legislation by each government is the primary mechanism by  which practices involving the use of ionising radiations are formally justiﬁed.
The moral rights underpinning the legal process in democratic countries have been indicated to be based upon a globally domi- nant “culture of justiﬁcation.”10,12 This requires that governments provide substantive justiﬁcation for all their actions in enacting legislation, as distinct from merely following the accepted demo- cratic process of enacting it, which in the UK involves seeking the assent of Parliament. Thus, governments have a moral duty to ensure that the content of legislation as well as the mechanisms by which it is enacted adhere to a culture of justiﬁcation.11,12
Governments must show the rationality and reasonableness of any legal actions it pursues for the common good and the trade-offs they entail.12 This would imply that government action in passing legislation should be a prime reason for justiﬁcation of any practice covered by it. Legislation deﬁnes the conditions which must be fulﬁlled for acceptance. Governments would not be expected to enact legislation in respect of practices that could not be justiﬁed. Practices such as nuclear power generation are certainly justi- ﬁed by the Civic world because of the strategic and political aspects associated with this activity. For example, justiﬁcation of the gen- eration of electricity from nuclear energy in a light water cooled, light water moderated thermal reactor (EPR) was made by the Secretary of State in the UK in 2010 under the Justiﬁcation of
Practices Involving Ionising Radiation Regulations 2004.15
A detailed 176-page document laid out the case for justifying this practice in which beneﬁts and detriments were considered at length. Factors considered were:
●Carbon reduction
●Security of supply and other economic effects
●Radiological Health detriment
●Radioactive waste
●Environmental detriment
●Safety, security and safeguards
The document demonstrates the two distinct elements associ- ated with justiﬁcation. A fundamental reason for justiﬁcation must be based on the ability to fulﬁl all appropriate legal requirements; from planning and design, through construction, eventual opera- tion and ﬁnally decommissioning. However, of speciﬁc importance to the ﬁnal decision was a costebeneﬁt analysis undertaken as part of the evaluation of the economic effects.16 This analysis demon- strated that justiﬁcation could depend signiﬁcantly upon variable political, economic and environmental reasons. Thus, one conclu- sion was:
Nuclear generation is likely to be justiﬁed in a world where there is continued commitment to carbon emissions reduction and gas prices are at or above 38p/therm.16
The term “likely justiﬁcation” is an example of an attempt to justify reasons for justiﬁcation when future considerations may be unknown. The costebeneﬁt analysis presented could equally be used to justify reasons for not proceeding with the project given the uncertainty of future economic and political factors. The use of reasons for justiﬁcation that might be applicable at some future date is reinforced in relation to the long-term management of  waste products.
Interim storage may be required for up to160 years following the start of power station operation.15 This storage would be required to enable development of one or more geological disposal facilities (GDF) for long term storage. Whereas a regulatory framework exists for interim storage it would need to be formulated and enacted for the GDF storage. There are no spent fuel GDF's in operation currently in the world. However, in the timescales involved, un- known changes may occur in society. For example, space travel will have matured signiﬁcantly so that some countries may even see deep space disposal as a viable cost-effective alternative. Who can predict whether this approach would or would not be justiﬁable in 160 years?
A British Geological Survey concluded that at least 30% of the UK land mass has suitable geology for siting a deep geological disposal facility.17 Furthermore, the Survey document found that “there is high conﬁdence in the scientiﬁc community that there are areas of the UK where the geology and hydrology at 200 m or more below ground will be stable for a million years and more into the future.” It is impossible to predict changes that might occur in society over such long timescales in order to formulate reasons for justiﬁcation. It must be stressed that the purpose of this discussion is not to question the relevance of nuclear power but to highlight the indeterminate nature of reasons proposed as part of a justiﬁcation process.
The importance of a legal framework for the justiﬁcation of practices demonstrates clearly that the existing principles of ra- diation protection cannot be implemented sequentially. Many activities involving the use of ionising radiation preceded the enactment of radiation protection legislation, which in the UK stemmed from International Directives and Safety Standards. Prior to the implementation of legislation, medical practices were covered by a Code of Practice in the UK that had no legal status. In fact, the NHS operated under Crown Immunity. Consequently, prior to the implementation of legislation, prac- tices employing ionising radiation could not have been legally justiﬁed. Also, there was no legal framework for resolving dis- putes involving radiation protection, including the pursuit of damages in the event of injury or death, which was itself unjustiﬁable.
The market world
Whilst legislation represents a primary component in the justiﬁcation process, other sociological considerations come into play when attempting to establish reasons for justifying practices. In the market world actions are motivated by the needs of in- dividuals seeking to satisfy desires for the same objects (health, wellbeing, energy, services etc). However, conﬂicts can arise amongst the different sociological worlds. Justiﬁcation applied to medical exposures is a classic example.
Medical exposures represent the largest single man-made source of population exposure that may contribute to cancer in- duction, which is a public health (Civic) issue. This source of exposure has grown signiﬁcantly over the past 30 years with the development of volume CT. The doses delivered and frequency of CT examinations has increased continuously during this period. However, any potential increase in beneﬁts arising from improved diagnostic efﬁcacy are generally ignored in radiation protection. Optimization is expressed solely in terms of patient dose. Increased diagnostic efﬁcacy would represent an obvious reason for justiﬁ- cation of increased patient doses.
As indicated previously, the application of ionising radiation in medicine provided the basis for applying the principle of justiﬁ- cation to radiation protection in general. Diagnostic radiography was by far the most prevalent X-ray modality employed at this time and referral for an examination and associated exposure was deemed to be clinically justiﬁed. In order to support this hypoth- esis, the Royal College of Radiologists established a set of referral criteria in the UK in 1990, which indicated when an X-ray exami- nation could be clinically beneﬁcial for diagnosis.18 These referral guidelines have since been updated on a number of occasions and were subsequently accepted at the European level.19
Early diagnosis of disease affects individual patients and their families so that Market considerations of health and wellbeing arise. However, observed variations in the frequency of X-ray ex- aminations in countries with similar socio-political frameworks are well known. For example, in spite of the promotion of referral guidelines, in the EU this still ranges from 513 per 1000 of the population in Belgium to 2129 in Switzerland.20 Justiﬁcation for an examination should occur at the level of the individual patient,21 however, these wide variations in examination frequencies within a well-established activity such as medical imaging demonstrate how reasons for justifying a practice must vary signiﬁcantly.14 Moreover, examples discussed in this paper highlight the funda- mental difference between the concept of justiﬁcation of practices as distinct from the justiﬁcation of reasons for their justiﬁcation. These are shown to vary signiﬁcantly across the many different activities that employ ionising radiations.
The industrial world
The status and capability of countries is often deﬁned in terms of their industrial strength. Many of the practices that involve the use of ionising radiation exist within or have developed from within the industrial world. These practices involve multiple reasons for their pursuit but they all, individually, require justiﬁcation. This is ach- ieved by ensuring each practice fulﬁls the requirements of a com- mon legal framework.
The cost of fulﬁlling legal radiation protection requirements aimed at mitigating risks can be a source of friction between the Industrial and Civic worlds when comparisons with other sources of societal risks may be ignored or minimised in legislation.14 Higher standards of risk reduction with associated cost overhead (detriment) may be required in respect of radiation protection re- quirements for different practices. It has been indicated  in respect of the nuclear industry.22 “The existing regulatory regime has given no real safeguard against disproportionate use of resources on the reduction of discharges.”
Equally in the medical ﬁeld one London hospital arranged for sampling and measurement of Iodine-131 in eel samples as part of an environmental impact assessment required by the regulator.22 Legislative requirements may be driven by political considerations.
The domestic world
The domestic world is represented by the establishment of an accepted hierarchical order of status or seniority in society in general and not just within a family circle. The domestic world can have an indirect bearing upon justiﬁcation as applied to radiation protection. Domestic worthiness inherent in justiﬁcation forms  part of a hierarchy and therefore, the presence of government or international agencies within the ﬁeld of radiation protection represents a political dimension that can enhance the perceived importance and justiﬁcation of radiation protection itself.
The inspired world
Although this sociological world is the least deﬁned from an organisational perspective, it none-the-less is the source of most major changes within society. Inspiration tends to operate outside other sociological frameworks since it is largely driven by in- dividuals. Organisations, governments etc, attempt to establish the circumstances that can allow inspiration to ﬂourish. However, often it occurs in-spite of other sociological constructs since it may release disruptive forces that can upset social, political, industrial and/or economic stability. Persons operating in this domain are not limited by conventional ways of thought and outcomes created by inspiration may eventually need to be justiﬁed. There will often be a time lag between a new discovery and its eventual formal justi- ﬁcation through absorption into a legal process. Potential beneﬁts that might arise from new activities then represent a reason for justifying their development and testing. Computed tomography is an excellent example, which was accepted for use and evaluation almost immediately because of its unique imaging capability although it involved much higher patient doses.
The need to justify developments arising from inspiration is on- going. For example, Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) could offer signiﬁcant beneﬁts to society especially within the ﬁeld of medical-imag- ing.23,24 It has the potential to lower patient doses in CT25 or aid in the quality of diagnostic outcomes.24 However, these developments may eventually require completely new legal instruments for their acceptance by society. Clinical outcomes could be dictated by ma- chines rather than humans. These developments need to be eval- uated prior to legal justiﬁcation and reasons for their evaluation would be justiﬁed if they have the potential to provide signiﬁcant future beneﬁts.
The world of fame
In the world of fame, it is the opinion of others that creates a sense of worth or value to individuals. This applies to activities such as music, movies etc. However, it can equally apply to specialist and professional ﬁelds involving sub-groups or organisations within society. Thus, in the world of public opinion the relation of worth (justiﬁcation) is the relation of identiﬁcation within the group. In- dividuals then establish worth through the identiﬁcation with others who possess shared values and interests. An individual's actions may then be dictated by a desire for identiﬁcation with and by the group and this collective identiﬁcation can form the basis of group dynamics and engender a degree of conformity.
The desire to conform to the group views and opinions, partic- ularly when professional status maybe involved, can override any thoughts of dissent or disagreement. This can have a signiﬁcant impact on the ability to initiate change that may require new ways of thinking and could be detrimental to progress.
Conclusions
ICRP introduced the concept of justiﬁcation as the ﬁrst principle of radiation protection over 40 years ago. Since then this concept has been applied to diverse applications of ionising radiation without any consideration for the varied sociological as well as legal implications that underpin its meaning. The concept as deﬁned and implemented has little or no practical relevance to radiation protection since it is automatically enshrined in legal requirements. A legal framework is required in order to resolve any disputes that may arise from the practice, which is a democratic right.
Radiation protection has confused the justiﬁcation of practices with the justiﬁcation of reasons for justiﬁcation and these may be formulated either some time prior to the introduction of a practice or need to take cognisance of changing circumstances for existing practices. The reasons for justiﬁcation of a new nuclear power station provide a recent example of attempts to justify known unknowns. Such reasons for justiﬁcation may be inﬂuenced by numerous sociological factors (political, economic and environ- mental) that may change over time. Developments in CT are also an example from medical practice of changing circumstances.
Attempts to ascertain the likely beneﬁts and risks to society that underpin justiﬁcation may depend upon variable factors outside the control of the justiﬁcation process. The future costs of gas and political commitment to carbon reduction is an example from the practice of nuclear power generation.
The evaluation and testing of new practices in medical imaging such as Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) may fall outside existing radiation protection legislation. However, its application could affect the doses delivered to patients or the clinical beneﬁts arising from an examination. The investigation of this practice would then need to be justiﬁed by potential future beneﬁts, which could signiﬁcantly enhance the use of ionising radiation in medicine. Potential for future but unknown beneﬁts would then need to provide a reason for justiﬁcation of practices.
