<title>High-value utilization of kraft lignin: Color reduction and evaluation as	 sunscreen ingredient</title>
<author>Hui Zhang, Xinxin Liu, Shiyu Fu , Yuancai Chen </author>
<Affiliation>a State Key Laboratory of Pulp and Paper Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, Guangdong, China
b Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Pollution Control and Ecological Remediation for Industrial Agglomeration Area, College of Environment and Energy, South China University of Technol- ogy, Guangzhou 510006, China</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.04.092</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.04.092 </URL>
ABSTRACT
Dark color of lignin puts brakes on its development as sunscreen ingredient. In order to address this issue, the color of lignin was whitened by facile and economical approach via solvent fractionation and follow-up acetyla- tion. After the two-step treatment, the color of lignin was highly lightened by 313.5% owing to the separation of dark-colored condensed structures and the blocking of free hydroxyls. The UV absorbability of the light-colored lignin was investigated, which indicated that the UV absorbance of the light-colored lignin are not as strong as commercial sunscreen actives under certain wavelengths, however it presented broad-spectrum absorbability and obvious synergistic effects with the commercial sunscreen actives. Based on that, lignin-based sunscreen was prepared by blending light-colored lignin with an SPF15 lotion, and the SPF of the as-prepared lignin sun- screen was boosted from 15.3 to 75.2 under a lignin addition amount of 8%. The as-prepared lignin sunscreen is stable enough under UV irradiation and exhibits outstanding color performance, which make it possible to sat- isfy the daily requirement of consumers. Brieﬂy, an effective approach was demonstrated in this work to prepare light-colored lignin, which makes lignin a green alternative to replace synthetic sunscreen actives and imparts lignin potentials in cosmetics applications.
Keywords: Kraft lignin Fractionation Acetylation Color reduction Sunscreen
Synergistic effect
1.Introduction
The increasing consumption of petrol chemical resources and rising environmental concerns have resulted in an interest in the valorizations of biomass resources [1–3]. As the second most abundant and fascinat- ing natural polymer next to cellulose, lignin has gained great attention in academic and industrial research due to its inexpensive and attractive properties, such as high carbon content, high thermal stability, biode- gradability, antioxidant activity and favorable surface activity [4–7]. These advantages have motivated interest in developing lignin into bio-chemicals [8–10], bio-polymer [11,12], bio-nanomaterials [13–15] and bio-based composites [16–18] to replace petrol-based products, which are more environmentally friendly and contribute to the sustain- ability of human society. In recent years, some researches proved that lignin from different resources are safe and nontoxic to cells [19–21]. In addition, as a productive aromatic biopolymer, lignin contains plenty of benzene rings and ketone structures [22,23], which make it a good candidate in UV defense applications [24–26]. Based on that, lignin was evaluated as sunscreen additive and achieved favorable UV blocking efﬁciency [27,28]. It undoubtedly pushes lignin into high-end utilization, however, the dark color of lignin hinders the market promo- tion of lignin-based sunscreens and it is necessary to whiten lignin to an acceptable color.
Traditional chemical bleaching is not suitable for the color reduction of lignin on such occasions since it aims to crash the lignin structure as much as possible in order to endow the pulp with high brightness [29,30]. The degraded lignin after bleaching is hard to maintain the UV absorbability therefore it cannot be used as sunscreen ingredient. Lee and co-workers separated lignin (Björkman lignin) from lignocellulosic biomass at room temperature using neutral solvents in order to prevent lignin from darkening [31]. This approach is helpful and a light-colored lignin-based sunscreen with favorable UV absorbability was success- fully prepared. But as we know the Björkman lignin is really expensive due to a high energy consumption and low productivity. Therefore, the market promotion of the sunscreen prepared by Björkman lignin  is still hard to be expanded.
There is no doubt that a variety of chromophores are introduced into lignin during the harsh pulping conditions. Among them, the condensed structures that formed between lignin units or between lignin and hemicellulose enlarged the conjugation degree of lignin. It is also an im- portant factor that response for the dark color of kraft lignin [32]. Rely on our previous work, the condensed structures can be removed by methanol/water fractionation according to the solubility difference [33]. It is a nice choice to reduce the color of lignin without degradation, but single fractionation seems not enough to whiten lignin to an acceptable color especially in a sunscreen utilization. In another work we reported that the hydroxyl in lignin is easy to be oxidized into carbonyl or transform into quinoid structure which all contribute to the dark color of lignin. 1,4-Butane sultone, a kind of sulfonation agent, was used to block the free hydroxyl in lignin. After the modiﬁca- tion, the color of the sulfonated kraft lignin was reduced by cutting off the transition between hydroxyls and unsaturated groups and the structure of lignin was not degraded owing to a mild reaction condition [34]. 1,4-Butane sultone seems a nice candidate to further reduce the color of lignin after the fractionation, but Qian and co-workers proved that the high molecular polarity of sulfonated lignin resulted in the demulsifying of lignin-based sunscreen and ﬁnally led to a phase separation [35], which means the 1,4-butane sultone is not a proper choice to reduce the color of lignin in this work.
What can efﬁciently block the hydroxyls meanwhile decrease the molecular polarity of lignin? Acetylation is a good and simple option to satisfy the requirement. In this work, the kraft lignin was ﬁrstly frac- tionated by methanol/water to remove the condensed structures and then was acetylated by acetic anhydride to block the free hydroxyls. The color degree and UV absorbability of modiﬁed lignin were quanti- ﬁed and compared with those of the commercial sunscreen actives (Avobenzone and Octinoxate). Finally, the color-reduced kraft lignin was used to prepared lignin-based sunscreen. The aging stability, sun protection factors (SPF) and color performance of the lignin-based sun- screen were investigated and achieved favorable results. Overall, this work provides a facile and economical approach for the color reduction of kraft lignin, which successfully whitens lignin to an acceptable color
and create great potentials in accelerating the market promotion of lignin-based sunscreens.
2.Materials and Thethods
2.1.Materials
The eucalyptus kraft lignin was puriﬁed from eucalyptus wood pulping black liquor supplied by a pulp mill in south China (Parameters of the lignin are listed in supplementary material, Table S1). Sulfuric acid, sodium hydroxide and diethyl ether anhydrous were produced by Guangzhou Chemical Reagent Factory. Methanol and pyridine were purchased from Guangzhou Jinhuada Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. Acetic anhydride was produced by Hengyang Kaixin Chemical Reagent Factory. 1,4-Dioxane and 1-(4-methoxyphenyl)-3-(4-tert-butylphenyl)-1,3- propanedione (Avobenzone, BMDM) were purchased from shanghai Macklin Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. 2-Ethylhexyl-4-methoxycinnamate (Octinoxate, OMC) was purchased from TCI (Shanghai) Development Co., Ltd. All the chemical reagents mentioned above were of analytical grade and used without further puriﬁcation. The Johnson & Johnson baby lotion and Haiermian SPF 15 sunscreen lotion were bought from Jingdong Mall.
2.2.Fractionation and acetylation of lignin
The eucalyptus kraft lignin was slowly added into 80% of methanol/ water (v/v) solution under stirring condition and then it was ﬁltrated to remove the undissolved part. The remaining solution was vacuum ro- tary evaporated at 65 °C to obtain fractionated lignin. The fractionated
Fig. 1. Acetylation mechanism (a) and FTIR spectrum (b) of lignin samples.kraft lignin was dissolved in acetic anhydride/pyridine (1:1, v/v) solu- tion, and was stored in a dark room at 50 °C for 48 h. Then it was precip- itated in diethyl ether. The redundant acetic anhydride/pyridine solution was extracted by diethyl ether until the smell of acetic anhy- dride and pyridine was totally vanished in the modiﬁed lignin. At last, the puriﬁed acetylated lignin was vacuum rotary evaporated to solid powder at 40 °C.
2.3.Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy analysis
The FTIR spectroscopies of lignin samples were obtained by Vector 33 spectrophotometer (Bruker Corp., Ettlingen, Germany) within the frequency range of 4000–400 cm−1. The measurement was carried out using a potassium bromide pressed-disk technique. Squashes were prepared by mixing 200 mg of KBr with 2 mg of samples in an agate mortar. Then the squashes were tableted and tested for infrared spectrum analysis.
2.4.2D heteronuclear single quantum correlation (HSQC) NMR spectra analysis
120 mg of lignin was dissolved in 0.5 mL of DMSO-d6. The Tetramethylsilane (TMS) was used as an internal chemical shift refer- ence. 2D HSQC NMR spectra were recorded in HSQC experiments (Bruker Co., Ettlingen, Germany). The spectral widths were 5000 and 20,000 Hz for the 1H and 13C dimensions, respectively. The number of collected complex points was 1024 for the 1H dimension with a recycle delay of 1.5 s. The number of transients was 64, and 256-time incre- ments were always recorded in the 13C dimension. Data processing was performed using standard Bruker Topspin-NMR software.
2.5.Ultraviolet and visible (UV–Vis) spectrum analysis
Lignin samples and chemical synthetic sunscreen actives were dis- solved in 1,4-dioxane/water (4:1, v/v) to prepare certain concentrations of solutions. The solutions were tested by a UV–Vis spectrophotometer (UV-2450, Shimadzu Corp., Japan) to evaluated the UV absorbing abili- ties. Before test, 1,4-dioxane/water solution was scanned at the same wavelength to build a baseline.
2.6.Optical test
The colors of lignin samples were compared by optical photographs and were quantiﬁed at solid state by an L&W brightness and color tester (Elrepho 070, Sweden). The tested items include brightness and CIE L*a*b* value. A higher brightness and L*a*b* value is related to a lighter color. Each sample was tested ten times to get an average.
2.7.Preparation and evaluation of lignin-based sunscreen
The lignin-based sunscreens were prepared by mechanical agitation. For example, the lignin sunscreen with an addition amount of 5 wt% was prepared by blending 0.1 g lignin and 2.0 g pure lotion at 1000 rpm for 8 h under room temperature. After blending, lignin sunscreen was transferred onto a transpore tape (3M Company, U.S.A.) surface for the measurement of UV transmittance using a UV-3600 spectropho- tometer equipped with an integrating sphere (Shimadzu, Japan). Transmittance measurement per 1 nm was collected in the wavelength range from UVB (290–320 nm) to UVA (320–400 nm). The Sun Protec- tion Factor (SPF) value was calculated by the method mentioned in the previous works [27,36], according to the Eq. (1).@1
where Eλ = erythemal spectral effectiveness, Sλ = solar spectral effec- tiveness, Tλ = spectral transmittance of sample.
2.8.Aging test of lignin-based sunscreen
The stability of lignin-based sunscreen was investigated after UV ra- diation for 3 h using a 365 nm UV lamp (Gongben illumination, Zhongshan). The power density of the illuminant is 10 mW/cm2. The test was carried out under the temperature of 30 °C and relative humid- ity of 80%. The UV transmittances of lignin-based sunscreens were re- corded and translated into SPF values.
3.Results and discussion
3.1.Preparation of light-colored lignin
In the previous works we demonstrated that the fractionation using methanol/water as a solvent reduced the color of lignin since most condensed and unsaturated structures that contribute to the dark color of lignin can be separated with the undissolved part [33]. Besides, a sulfonation that reacted with hydroxyls of kraft lignin was processed in another work, which proved that the color of lignin can be further re- duced by a hydroxyl blocking method [34]. Based on these successful examples, we decided to whiten the color of kraft lignin in a two- combination method. Considering that the color-reduced lignin will be evaluated as sunscreen actives and the main ingredient of sunscreen are emulsions, it is improper to reduce the color of lignin by sulfonation, because the sulfonated lignin exhibits a strong molecular polarity which can break the balance of sunscreen system and leads to a demulsiﬁcation
Fig. 2. Optical photograph (a) and quantiﬁcation (b) comparison of lignin samples.
Fig. 3. UV absorbance of lignin, OMC and BMDM.
effect. For the purpose of blocking the hydroxyl at the same time preventing the lignin-based sunscreen from demulsiﬁcation, acetylation seems a good candidate to meet these two requirements since the ace- tyls primarily react with hydroxyls in lignin and do not lead to the demulsiﬁcation owing to a low polarity (Mechanism in Fig. 1a).
The original kraft lignin was ﬁrstly fractionated by 80% methanol/ water to obtain the light-colored fractions, and then it was acetylated for a further color reduction. The acetylation evidence can be found in Fig.  1b.  1367  and 1760  cm−1 which belong to the acetyl  and C_O stretching vibration were enhanced in the FTIR spectrum [37]. Mean- while, the absorption band around 3500 cm−1 was weakened due to the consumption of hydroxyls in lignin.
The color of lignin was gradually lightened after fractionation and acetylation (Fig. 2a), and they were quantiﬁed by brightness and CIE L*a*b* values. The L* value stands for the luminosity of lignin, which can better reﬂect the color performance of lignin, therefore the a* and b* values were omitted and only brightness and L* value was used to il- lustrate the color tendency. As shown in Fig. 2b, both the brightness and L* value were increased after the fractionation, and the color of lignin achieved the best performance after acetylation. It was improved by 313.5% and 145.6% regarding the brightness and L* value respectively, which well agreed with the photo comparisons in Fig. 2a.
3.2.UV absorption investigation
Fractionation and acetylation are simple and effective collocation for the color reduction of lignin. However, with the decrease of visual color
performance, what happened to the UV absorption property of lignin. Therefore, the UV absorbances of the original kraft lignin and the acetylated lignin were compared in UVA (320–400 nm) and UVB (290–320 nm) regions. As seen in Fig. 3, the UV absorbance of lignin was decreased after the fractionation and acetylation. Based on the structure analysis, the distinction of UV absorbances may be illustrated in two aspects. First, in order to reduce the color of lignin, some unsatu- rated and conjugated structures that also contribute to the UV absor- bance were separated from the kraft lignin in the fractionation. As seen in Fig. 4a, the δ13C/δ1H (102.5/4.29; 73.1/3.10; 74.8/3.30; 76.1/ 3.60; 63.8/3.90) are attributed to carbons in the xylan structure. These signals only exist in undissolved fraction (no such xylan signals can be found in the dissolved fractions, Fig. 4b) indicating that the carbohy- drate is tightly connected with lignin. As was already demonstrated in previous studies [38,39], part of the xylans were oxidized in the pulping process and covalently bonded with lignin forming larger and stronger conjugations which contributed to the dark color and UV absorbance of lignin. These stubborn structures were separated and abandoned with the undissolved fractions in order to reduce the color of lignin, which in- evitably led to the decrease of the UV absorbance of lignin. Another fac- tor that inﬂuence the UV absorbance of lignin is the phenolic hydroxyl blocking. The phenolic hydroxyl is a kind of electron-donating group which can strengthen the conjugation of benzene rings and provide lig- nin a better UV absorbance. However, excessive conjugation also results in negative effects on the color darkening of lignin. Furthermore, the phenol structures in lignin are unstable and are easily converted to qui- nones, a small amount of which can lead to a really dark color of lignin. Therefore, the fractionated lignin was acetylated to block the free phenolic hydroxyls, the evidence can be found at the non-oxygenated region of Fig. 4c. The band of δ13C/δ1H (19.5–22.5/0.75–2.75) are the sig- nals of acetyls and the dispersive signals such as δ13C/δ1H (62.5–67.5/ 3.75–4.45; 72.5–77.5/4.85–6.15) belong to the Cγ-Hγ and Cα-Hα in the acetylated lignin structures [40], all of which are absence in the fractionated lignin (Fig. 4b). After the acetylation the color of lignin was further reduced (Fig. 2a), but the electron-donating of phenolic hydroxyls was also restricted, which resulted in the UV absorbance decrease of lignin. In view of this, the UV absorption decrease seems inevitable in order to whiten lignin to an acceptable color. But in fact, the retained UV absorptivity still meet the daily needs of sunscreens. It will be further demonstrated in the latter part of the paper.
The commonly used synthetic chemical sunscreen actives, such as Avobenzone (BMDM) and Octinoxate (OMC), were also tested to inves- tigate the UV absorptivity distinctions. The comparison was exhibited in Fig. 3. As a kind of highly puriﬁed and regulated synthetic molecules, the BMDM and OMC present stronger absorbances compared with lignin that consist of complicated unsaturated groups and disordered structural connections. But BMDM and OMC are available only within a limited wavelength. There is no absorbance beyond the effective
Fig. 4. 2D-HSQC spectra of lignin samples. (a) The undissolved part of fractionated kraft lignin. (b) The dissolved part of fractionated kraft lignin. (c) The fractionated and acetylated kraft lignin.
Fig. 5. UV transmittance of baby lotion blended with different amount of lignin.	Fig. 7. UV transmittance of lignin sunscreen before and after UV radiation.
wavelengths, which means the BMDM and OMC are hard to be solo used on account of a limited UV protection. On the contrary, lignin shows its advantage and presents a wider UV absorptivity both under UVA and UVB, although the absorbance under certain wavelength is lower than that of BMDM and OMC. In addition to the wavelength limitation of the BMDM and OMC, recently the synthetic sunscreen actives were consid- ered unsafe [35]. Because they are composed of small molecules which can be easily degraded into free radicals under UV radiation and acceler- ate the aging of skin. As a natural macromolecular, lignin has been proved safe and stable [20], which become a considerable advantage that ignites our motivation to evaluate it as sunscreen active.
3.3.Preparation and evaluation of lignin-based sunscreen
The color-reduced lignin (Particle size distribution is exhibited in Fig. S1) was blended with Johnson & Johnson baby lotion to prepare lignin-based sunscreen. The UV protection efﬁciencies were investigated and showed in Fig. 5. We can tell that the baby lotion that without adding lignin shows a transmittance of approximately 100%. The SPF value was calculated to be 1.63 which means the baby lotion do not contain sunscreen actives and barely exhibits sun protection ability. It is in accordance with the design purpose of decreasing the skin-irritation of baby lotion as much as possible. With the increase of addition amount of lignin, the UV transmittance was gradually decreased. At an addition
Fig. 6. SPF value of baby lotion blended with different amount of lignin.
amount of 10%, the lignin-based sunscreen absorbed most of the UV radiation and the transmittance has decreased below 20%. According to the Eq. (1), the SPF values of the samples were calculated and presented in Fig. 6. The best-performing sunscreen that blended with 10% lignin reached SPF value of 6.56. It means the time that keeping human skin from damage under sun radiation condition was extended by 6.56 times.
The aging test was also carried out under a 365 nm UV radiation to detect the utilization stability of lignin-based sunscreen. The sunscreens blended with 5% and 10% lignin were investigated as representative. We can see in Fig. 7, after 3 h of high intensity UV irradiation, the transmit- tances of lignin-based sunscreens are increased. It indicates that the reduction of sun protection ability does occur after the aging test, but optimistically, the increases of transmittance are inconspicuous. After converting to SPF values, as seen in Fig. 6, the two groups were just decreased by 0.07 (with an addition of 5% lignin) and 0.29 (with an addition of 10% lignin), which means the lignin-based sunscreen is stable enough under UV aging test and it is adequate in protecting the skin from UV injury.
3.4.Synergistic enhancement and color performance of lignin sunscreen
Strictly speaking, the lignin-based sunscreen with a SPF of 6.56 cannot satisfy the daily use, as the SPF values of most commercial
Fig. 8. UV absorbance of acetylated lignin combined with BMDM or OMC.
Fig. 9. SPF values of the sunscreens blended with different amounts of acetylated lignin.
sunscreens are basically no less than 15 and are commonly around the value of 30. A higher addition percentage of lignin may address the low-SPF issue, but it resulted in a deep color performance of lignin- based sunscreen even if the color of lignin has been lightened. In view of this, we may realize that there are lots of work need to be done in the future to improve the UV protection efﬁciency of lignin. But for now, the light-colored lignin prepared in this work is still a good candi- date to replace or partly replace the synthetic sunscreen actives, since most of the synthetic chemical sunscreen actives are small molecules which can be photo-degraded into free radicals under UV radiation and accelerate the photo-damage of skin cells [35].
The cooperation between acetylated lignin and synthetic sunscreen actives (BMDM and OMC) were investigated with the help of UV spectrum. As seen in Fig. 8, the acetylated lignin, BMDM and OMC were dissolved in 1,4-dioxane/water (4:1, v/v) to prepare solutions with a same concentration of 4 mg/L respectively, and the UV absor- bances of the three samples were recorded as single component under UVA and UVB regions. After that, the solutions of lignin and synthetic actives were mixed together with a same volume. For example, 1 mL of acetylated lignin solution was mixed with 1 mL of OMC solution. Since the total volume of new solution was doubled, the concentration of lignin and OMC were both decreased from 4 to 2 mg/L. Therefore, the UV absorbance of the new solution was supposed to coincide with curve I according to the quantitative calculation. Similarly, the solution mixed with lignin and BMDM should coincide with curve II. But unex- pectedly, all of the new solutions exhibited stronger UV absorptions than the calculated ones which means the sun protection ability was
enhance due to a synergistic effect between the acetylated lignin and the synthetic active.
Based on the synergistic effect, a new kind of lignin sunscreen was prepared using SPF 15 lotion as substrate, since BMDM and OMC had been added in the lotion during the production process. The sun protec- tion property was investigated and converted to SPF values. As shown in Fig. 9, the SPF value of the substrate without adding lignin is 15.35, which is in accordance with the UV protection ability of the product (SPF 15). The sun protection efﬁciency was gradually increased with the addition of acetylated lignin. It is noteworthy that with an addition of 8% the lignin sunscreen has been highly boosted to 75.2 regarding SPF value. Even with an addition amount of 2% lignin, the SPF value has been over 30 which can well satisfy the daily requirement regarding the sun protection property. Owing to synergistic enhancement between acety- lated lignin and the synthetic actives, the SPF increasement shows an absolute superiority compared with the sunscreen only using acetylated lignin as active.
The color performance of the lignin sunscreens using SPF 15 lotion as substrate were displayed in Fig. 10. It is worth noting that, with an addi- tion amount of 2%, the color of lignin sunscreen blended with acetylated kraft lignin was highly lightened compared to that of the sunscreen blended with the unfractionated and unacetylated kraft  lignin  (Fig. 10d). Although the sunscreen is still colored with the addition of acetylated kraft lignin, it is bright enough and generally acceptable for consumers. Under a lower addition amount of 1%, the lignin sunscreen exhibits a lighter color (Fig. 10b), at the same time its SPF value is nearly 25 (Fig. 9) which is also adequate in some less-demanding sun protec- tion situations.
4.Conclusions
In summary, we explored a facile approach to improve the utiliza- tion value of kraft lignin as sunscreen ingredient. In order to solve the dark color problem, the kraft lignin was fractionated by methanol/ water to remove condensed structures and was acetylated by acetic anhydride to block the free hydroxyls. After modiﬁcation, the color of lignin was highly lightened by triple times. The UV absorbance of the light-colored lignin is not as strong as BMDM and OMC under certain wavelengths however it presents a broad-spectrum absorbability. Owing to the synergistic effects between lignin and synthetic sunscreen actives, the SPF value of commercial sunscreen was boosted from 15 to
75.2 with an addition of 8% lignin. The acetylation reduced the molecu- lar polarity of lignin, which made it steadily dispersed in sunscreen. After exposure under UVA irradiation, the lignin-based sunscreen main- tained its sun protection ability. Furthermore, the sunscreen with an ad- dition of 1% lignin obtained both favorable SPF value and acceptable color performance which make it possible to satisfy the daily require- ments of consumers.
Fig. 10. Photograph of the sunscreen with acetylated lignin addition amount of (a) 0%, (b) 1%, (c) 2%, and (c) sunscreen with an addition of 2% of initial kraft lignin.
AcknowledgeThents
We gratefully acknowledge the National Key Research and Develop- ment Program (2017YFD0601003), the ﬁnancial support from the Na- tional Science Foundation of China (31570569), and the Guangzhou Science and Technology Program key projects (201607020025).
