<title>Application of artiﬁcial neural network for predicting the optimal mixture of radiation shielding concrete</title>
<author>A. Yadollahi a, E. Nazemi b, *, A. Zolfaghari a, A.M. Ajorloo c</author>
<Affiliation>a.Engineering Department, Shahid Beheshti University, G.C, P.O. Box: 1983963113, Tehran, Iran
b.Young Researchers and Elite Club, Kermanshah Branch, Islamic Azad University, Kermanshah, Iran
c.Water and Environmental Engineering Department, Shahid Beheshti University, P.O. Box: 167651719, Tehran, Iran</Affiliation>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2016.02.010 </DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2016.02.010 </URL>
ABSTRACT
In the production of radiation shielding concrete (RSC), it is necessary to ﬁnd an optimal mixture to fulﬁll all the desired quality characteristics simultaneously. In this study, Taguchi method and artiﬁcial neural network (ANN) were implemented to ﬁnd the optimal mixture of RSC containing lead-slag aggregate. Using Taguchi method for experimental design, 27 concrete samples with different mixtures were fabricated and tested. Waterecement ratio, cement quantity, volume ratio of lead-slag aggregate and silica fume quantity were selected as control factors and slump, compressive strength and gamma linear attenuation coefﬁcient were considered as the quality responses. Obtained data from 27 experiments were used to train 3 ANNs. Four control factors were utilized as the inputs of all the 3 ANNs and 3 quality responses were used as the outputs, separately (each ANN for one quality response). After training the ANNs, 1024 different mixtures with different quality responses were predicted. At the ﬁnal, optimum mixture was obtained among the predicted different mixtures. Results demonstrated that the optimal mixture of RSC has a waterecement ratio of 0.45, cement quantity of 390 kg, a volume fraction of lead
slag aggregate of 60% and silica fumeecement ratio of 0.15.
Keywords: Concrete Lead-slag
Radiation shield Artiﬁcial neural network Taguchi method
1.Introduction
Today the design and construction of radiation shielding to protect people, equipment and structures from the harmful effects of radiation is one of the most important problems in nuclear en- gineering. It has been shown that concrete, is a robust, effective, and economical material for the construction of radiation shielding. It has been used for many purposes and particularly for large, permanent installations such as nuclear power plants, research reactors, particle accelerators, and high-level radioactive research laboratories (Kaplan, 1989).
In RSC mixtures, a large variety of materials may be used to attenuate gamma rays. The most common aggregates are produced from natural ores of high density minerals such as hematite, limonite, magnetite, and barite  (Demir  et  al.,  2010,  2011;  Akkurt et al., 2006, 2005, 2004). From an environmental point of view, substitution of these natural aggregate with industrial by-products and wastes materials can be done in RSC production. Lead slag extracted from recycling of the spent batteries, is one of the by- products which can be utilized as substitute of raw materials in construction of RSC. The utilization of lead slag in RSC, can saves our natural resources and reduces environmental problems related to aggregate mining and waste disposal. It can also increase the attenuation of gamma radiations due to the large content of heavy elements in lead slag (de Brito and Saikia, 2012).
Concrete used in nuclear applications besides shielding prop- erties must have adequate and satisfactory structural and engi- neering properties such as compressive strength and workability (Kaplan, 1989). Therefore, it is necessary to ﬁnd an optimal mixture to produce RSC with desired structural and shielding characteris- tics. In this study, ANN and Taguchi design of experiments method were used to ﬁnd the optimal mixture of RSC.
It has been shown that ANN is a useful tool for evaluating the performance of concrete, because lots of parameters such as type and proportion of ingredients, waterecement ratio and different additives quantity could affect the performance of concrete (Akkurt et al., 2010; Chou and Pham, 2013; Chou and Tsai, 2012; Chou et al., 2014). Since fabricating and testing all the possible mixtures in order to ﬁnd the optimal one is a difﬁcult task and also requires
long time, we implement the Taguchi method which use the orthogonal array to set up the experiment for the advantages of less number and elastic deployment of experiment.
In the application of this method, waterecement ratio, cement
quantity, volume ratio of lead-slag aggregate and silica fume quantity were selected as control factors and slump, compressive strength and gamma linear attenuation coefﬁcient were considered as the quality responses.
In the following, the overview of simultaneous optimization technique based on ANN and Taguchi design of experiments method is given ﬁrst. Then, optimal mixture of RSC with consid- eration of multiple quality characteristics are obtained and veriﬁed. Finally, the paper concludes with a summary of this study.
2.Methodology
2.1.Experiment
In any experiment, the results depend to a large degree on the way in which the data were collected. In a lot of cases, full factorial experiments are conducted or one-factor-at-a-time strategies are followed. The former cannot be implemented when there are too many factors under consideration because the number of repeti- tions required would be prohibitive, from a time and cost view- point. The latter are not able to produce credible results in case interactions among the factors exist (Montgomery, 2008). The most efﬁcient method of experimental planning is Taguchi design of experiments method. Taguchi method incorporates the orthogonal arrays to successfully design and conduct fractional factorial ex- periments that can collect all the statistically signiﬁcant data with the minimum possible number of repetitions (Montgomery, 2008; Ross, 1996).
Before an orthogonal array could be structured, the key factors which affect the performance of RSC must be examined. Concrete is composite material composed of cement, sand, gravel, and water. The design of a RSC mixture depends upon many factors including; type and proportion of cement, ordinary and heavy weight aggre- gates, waterecement ratio, additives to improve water-tightness or curing time, slump or workability requirements, and geometry of the form.
After gathering information from a variety of engineering texts on RSC design (Kaplan, 1989; Demir et al., 2010, 2011; Akkurt et al., 2006, 2005, 2004; de Brito and Saikia, 2012; Akkurt et al., 2010) and based on the primary test results conducted on the cement mortar containing lead-slag aggregate, four three-level parameters are considered as control factors in this study. As shown in Table 1, these parameters include waterecement ratio, cement quantity in the wet paste mixture, volume ratio of lead-slag aggregate towards total ﬁne and coarse aggregate and silica fumeecement ratio which are labeled by A, B, C, and D, respectively.
Four parameters each at three levels would require 34 81 runs in a full factorial experiment whereas Taguchi's factorial experi- ment approach reduces it just to 27 runs which is offering a great
Table 1
Designation of parameters and corresponding levels.
advantage. The arrangement of these 27 mixtures is shown  in  Table 2.
Three responses of slump, compressive strength and gamma linear attenuation coefﬁcient are considered as the quality re- sponses for evaluation of RSC.
After using Taguchi method, 27 concrete samples were fabri- cated. The material properties of concrete constituents, mixture design and sample preparation and test procedures are discussed in the following.
2.1.1.Material properties
Type II Portland cement from Sabzevar cement plant in compliance with the requirements of ASTM C150 has been used (ASTM-C150, 2004). Table 3 shows the chemical composition and physical characteristics of the cement. Silica fume with speciﬁc gravity of 2.2 (g/cm3) is the mineral admixture which was used in this investigation for all the mixtures. Chemical composition and physical characteristics of silica fume used in this research, met the requirements of ASTM C1240 as listed in Table 4 (ASTM-C1240, 2003).
A high performance concrete superplasticiser (POWERPLAST- SM, a product of the Abadgaran group) based on modiﬁed poly- carboxylic ether was used in a quantity of 1% of cement to increase the mixture workability (ASTM-C494, 2004). The relative speciﬁc gravity of this admixture was between 1.1 and 1.2 (g/cm3).
Locally available river sand and crushed limestone were used as ordinary ﬁne and coarse aggregates. The sand was 100% passing ASTM sieve No. 4 and the gravel had maximum size of 19 mm. Lead- slag used in this research was supplied from recycling of the spent batteries electrodes and crushed to the desired gradation.
The water absorption capacity and the unit weights of normal and lead-slag aggregates determined according to ASTM-C127 (ASTM-C127, 2003) and ASTM-C128 (ASTM-C128, 2001) were
given in Table 5. The chemical compositions of the used aggregates are given in Table 6.
2.1.2.Sample preparation
Proportions of all mixtures constituents used in this study were designated with Table 2 information and satisﬁed the requirements of the ACI 211 (ACI-211, 1991).
The mixing procedure was done according to ASTM C39. The replacement of lead-slag aggregate by ordinary aggregate was carried out based on volume fractions mentioned in Table 1. To avoid segregation of lead-slag aggregate, smaller volumes of heavy material were used per batch (ASTM-C39, 2003). All the concrete specimens were cast in cubic 100 100 100 mm according to British standard EN12390-Part 2 (EN-12390, 2002). The specimens were demolded after 24 h, and then subjected for 28 days to standard moist curing by immersing them in curing tanks con- taining lime saturated water at 23C.
2.1.3.Test procedures
2.1.3.1.Workability. Fresh concrete is a transient material with continuously changing properties. It is, however, essential that hardened properties of concrete have been affected by fresh phase of concrete. As well as to form a homogenous batch, usually void- free concrete, testing and measuring this fresh solid  mass  has  been crucial. A wide range of techniques and systems are available for these processes. In this research the slump test according to ASTM C143 was carried out to measures the workability of fresh concrete (ASTM-C143, 2004).
Compressive strength. Three cubic specimens for each mixture were made to determine the compressive strength. After  28 days, the specimens were taken out from the curing tank and
Table 2
Used 27 set of mixtures for radiation shielding concrete in experiments.
Table 3
Chemical composition and physical characteristics of the cement (TYPE- II OPC).
Table 4
Chemical composition and physical characteristics of Silica fume.
Table 5
Physical properties of used aggregates.
were end capped with a capping compound material. The compressive strength was measured in compliance with EN12390- Part 3, as follows (EN-12390, 2002):
@1
Where fc is compressive strength of concrete in MPa, F is the maximum load in N and Ac is the cross-sectional area of specimen in mm2.
2.1.3.3.Radiation test. Shielding tests of gamma rays were per- formed using a 137Cs source with activity of 7.4  107  Bq (2 mCi). Tests were carried out on different sides of 100   100   100 mm   cubic specimens using a 2.54 2.54 cm NaI (sodium iodide crystal) detector (this is a high-sensitivity material used to measure the gamma activity behind the shield) connected to a computerized Multi-Channel Analyzer (MCA). Only transmitted gamma rays (under photo peak) with energy of 662 keV were registered in detector. The different sides of each specimen were subjected to radioactive source for three times to investigate the shielding properties to gamma radiation. The distance between source and
Table 6
Chemical compositions of the used aggregates.
Fig. 1. Experimental setup for gamma linear attenuation coefﬁcient measurement.
dosimeter was kept 20 cm for all measurements. Fig. 1 shows the experimental setup for gamma linear attenuation coefﬁcient measurement of concrete blocks.
The Linear Attenuation Coefﬁcient of studied samples was the average linear attenuation coefﬁcient value of each tested side us- ing the following attenuation equation:@2
Where I is the registered count after putting the concrete block
between source and detector, Io is registered count before putting the concrete block between source and detector, m is the linear attenuation coefﬁcient factor and x is the thickness of concrete block.
2.2.Artiﬁcial neural network
An ANN is a multilayered architecture composed of one or more hidden layers placed between the input and output layers. The layers include processing units known as neurons. They are con- nected with variable weights that must be determined. Each neuron receives total input from all of the neurons in the preceding layer (Taylor, 1996). Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) networks are the most commonly used ANNs (Gallant and White, 1992). In recent years, the ANN tool has had widely applications in nuclear engi- neering (Nazemi et al., 2015a, 2015b; Roshani  et al., 2014;  Nazemi  et al., 2014; Roshani et al., 2015). In this study, three separate ANNs model of MLP were used to predict quality responses of RSC. The suggested MLP models are shown in Fig. 2, where the inputs of
all the three ANNs are waterecement ratio, cement content, vol- ume ratio of lead slag aggregate and silica fumeecement ratio and
the output is slump, linear attenuation coefﬁcient and compressive strength for ﬁrst, second and third ANN, respectively.
Experimental results have been used as the data set required for training the network. The training of presented MLP networks was done by LevenbergeMarquardt (LM) algorithm. In this method, ﬁrst derivative and second derivative are used for network weight correction (Hagan and Menhaj, 1994). Number of samples for
Fig. 2.  The proposed ANN architectures.
Table 7
Speciﬁcations of the three proposed predicting ANN models.
Table 8
Comparison between experimental and predicted results used for training.
Table 9
Comparison between experimental and predicted results used for testing.training and testing data in all the three ANNs are 20 (74%) and 7 (26%), respectively. In this study, different ANN structures have been tested and optimized to obtain the best ANN conﬁguration. MATLAB 7.0.4 software was used for training the ANN model. The speciﬁcations of the three proposed ANN models used in order to predict quality responses of RSC were tabled in Table 7.
3.
Results and discussion
Table 8 and 9 show the average values of the speciﬁed three responses for the selected 27 mixtures used for training and testing the ANN. According to experimental results, we have found that there is only a minor effect of lead slag added to concrete on its Fig. 3. Comparison of experimental and predicted results for e Slump: (a) training data (b) testing data e Linear attenuation coefﬁcient: (c) training data (d) testing data and e
Compressive strength: (e) training data (f) testing data.Fig. 4. Optimum values for waterecement ratio and cement content in radiation shield concrete.
results. Table 10 shows the obtained errors for the proposed ANN model, where the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) of the network was calculated according to the following equation (Taylor, 1996):
physical and mechanical properties. The compressive strength and workability of concrete with lead slag do not differ from those of ordinary concrete. But the linear attenuation coefﬁcient of concrete samples increases as the volume ratio of lead slag aggregate in- creases in the mixture. This increasing is due to the large content of heavy elements in lead slag aggregates.
The comparison between experimental and predicted ANN re- sults for training and testing data are tabled in Tables 8 and 9, respectively, and also are shown in Fig. 3. As it is shown in Fig. 3, the precision of the ANNs were indicated using regression diagram. The more precise the network is, the closer the data to the x ¼ y line.
According to Table 8, Table 9, and Fig. 3, it is clear that the predicted results using ANN model are close to the experimental
Table 10
Obtained errors for training and testing results of the proposed ANN models.
@5
Where, N represents the number of data and ‘X (Real)’ and ‘X
(Pred)’ show experimental and predicted (ANN) values, respec- tively. It is important to note that RMSE has the same unit as the dependent variable. It means that there is no absolute good or bad threshold, however it can be deﬁned based on dependent variable. For instance, as shown in Table 10, RMSE of testing results for slump which ranges from 35 to 130, is 1.01. This value is pretty good in this range of data because if we normalize RMSE relate to average of testing data, it would be 1.4%. Similarly, as shown in Table 10, normalized RMSE of training and testing results for linear attenu- ation coefﬁcient and compressive strength, is less than 1%.
Obtained data from trained networks were used for optimizing the constituent ratios of RSC. At the ﬁrst step, between each two data sets which were obtained from experiments (27 data sets), 40 data sets were predicted by trained ANNs ((27-1)*40 totally 1040 data set). In the case of RSC, in addition to gamma attenuation, other quality responses such as slump and compressive strength should also be optimized, simultaneously. Since obtained quality responses (gamma linear attenuation coefﬁcient, slump and compressive strength) are not in the same range, at the next step all the obtained quality responses were normalized from 0 to 1. Then quality responses were added with each other and ﬁnally were divided in 3, because we considered importance and weight of all the three quality responses same to each other. At last, maximum value was chosen among the sum of weighted quality responses. Constituent ratios of related to this maximum value, is the optimum constituent ratios for fabricating a proper RSC.
Since optimization was done on quality responses of 4 control factors (waterecement ratio, cement content, volume ratio of lead slag aggregate and silica fumeecement), we showed weighted quality responses versus 4 control factors in 2 separate ﬁgures. As it can be seen in Fig. 4, the optimum weighted quality responses is
obtained when waterecement ratio and cement content are 0.45 and 390 kg/m3, respectively. Also, as shown in Fig. 5, the optimum
weighted  quality  responses  is  obtained  similarly  when  volume
ratio of lead slag aggregate and silica fumeecement are 60% and
0.15, respectively.
The design of RSC for nuclear reactors, particle accelerators and
other sources of nuclear radiation is an involved process. In this situation, besides radiation shielding, other physical and mechan- ical properties of concretes are important issues in point of view of engineering properties. There are many factors which affect the design of RSC. These factors must be considered and integrated so as to produce the optimum design.
The modeling work proposed in this study could be used to help the design procedure of RSC. In fact, the predicted data obtained by ANN method could be adopted as an important reference for designing a RSC for any speciﬁc nuclear facility.
For example, structures like nuclear power plant buildings using RSC must have adequate and satisfactory mechanical and shielding characteristics. By considering these speciﬁc constraints and re- quirements, the optimal mixture of RSC would be determined by using the data sets obtained by the proposed model. The selected optimal mixture by this method could fulﬁll all the desired quality characteristics of RSC simultaneously.
4.Conclusions
This paper presents a new approach based on ANN and Taguchi design of experiments method, to the prediction of the workability, compressive strength and gamma linear attenuation coefﬁcient of a RSC containing lead-slag aggregate.
The conclusions that were drawn from this paper can be sum- marized in the following points:
Fig. 5. Optimum values for volume ratio of lead slag aggregate and silica fumeecement in radiation shield concrete.
1.Substitutions of natural aggregate with lead slag improve the compressive strength and gamma linear attenuation coefﬁcient of RSC. Therefore, using of this waste material in RSC production is an efﬁcient method of environmental protection both for ra- diation and for waste utilization points of view.
2.Predicting the quality characteristics of RSC as a function of the mixture ingredient, using analytical and traditional methods, is so difﬁcult. Whereas, a trained neural network model can pre- dict such properties easily and accurately. Therefore, ANN can provide a drastically powerful alternative approach.
3.ANN prediction results demonstrated that slump, compressive strength and gamma linear attenuation coefﬁcient of the RSC optimal mixture are 107.2 (mm), 47.3 (MPa) and 0.198 (1/cm), respectively, which are in a good agreement with experimental results (normalized RMSE error of less than 1.7%).
4.The proposed model demonstrates the ability of ANN to predict the quality characteristics of RSC such as workability, compressive strength and gamma linear attenuation coefﬁcient, with sufﬁcient accuracy (with a normalized RMSE error of less than 1.7%). Therefore ANNs can be used reliably, successfully and very accurately for predicting the quality characteristics of RSC, and the predicted results can be adopted as an important reference for radiation shielding engineering design.
