<title>Assessment of radiological parameters and radiation dose received by the miners in Jaduguda uranium mine, India</title>
<author>Durga Charan Panigrahi a, Devi Prasad Mishra a,⇑, Patitapaban Sahu a, Subhas Chandra Bhowmik b</author>
<Affiliation>a.Department of Mining Engineering, Indian School of Mines, Dhanbad 826 004, India
b.Uranium Corporation of India Limited, East Singhbhum 832 102, India</Affiliation>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2014.12.024 </DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2014.12.024  </URL>
ABSTRACT
Monitoring of radiological parameters in underground uranium mines is essential to maintain the radi- ation levels within safe limits. In this study, the radiological parameters such as external gamma emitted from ore body, long-lived alpha activity associated with ore dust and radon concentration in an operating underground uranium mine located at Jaduguda, India were measured using different equipments such as micro-R radiation survey meter, personal air sampler and scintillation cell. The geometric mean values of external gamma radiation level, long-lived alpha activity, radon activity concentration and equilibrium equivalent radon (EER) concentration were found to be 2.39 lGy h—1, 16.84 mBq m—3, 872.89 Bq m—3 and
436.44 Bq m—3 respectively with their geometric standard deviations of 1.56, 3.21, 1.58 and 1.58. The total radiation dose received by the miners estimated from the radiological parameters was found to   be well below the prescribed limit of 20 mSv y—1 recommended by International Commission on Radiation Protection (ICRP), and hence, it may not pose signiﬁcant health hazards to the Jaduguda miners.
Keywords:
Underground uranium mine External gamma radiation Long-lived alpha
Radon activity concentration
Equilibrium equivalent radon concentration Radiation dose
1.Introduction
The increasing use of uranium for generation of nuclear power due to depletion of conventional sources of energy has enhanced the exploration, mining and processing of uraniferous ore. Pres- ently, about 60,000 tons of uranium is produced globally, of which about 47,000 tons of uranium is produced by ﬁve major countries like Kazakhstan, Canada, Australia, Niger and Namibia. In order to meet the energy demand, India is also targeting to increase its nuclear share of electricity from the present level of  3–10%  by  2022 (McDonald, 2008). Uranium Corporation of India Limited (UCIL) currently operates six underground uranium mines at Jaduguda, Bhatin, Turamdih, Bagjata, Narwapahar and Mohuldih, and one open pit mine at Banduhurang in Singhbhum Shear Zone of Jharkhand. Apart from these, UCIL also operates an underground uranium mine at Tummalapalle in the state of Andhra Pradesh to meet the growing demand of uranium for the committed nuclear power program in India.
Uranium ore contains natural uranium comprising of 238U (99.2739%), 235U (0.7205%) and 234U (0.0056%) (Krane, 1987). Of
these, the ﬁrst two isotopes are the parents of two different chains of  radionuclides,  while  the  third  is  a  member  of  the  238U series 222Rn, an inert gas, is the immediate decay product of radium (226Ra). Most of the radon atoms decay in situ in the ore matrix itself due to fairly short half-life of 222Rn (3.82 d). However, some of the atoms which diffuse from ore body into the mine atmo- sphere may be quantiﬁed in terms of the radium content, porosity and moisture content of the ore, atmospheric pressure etc. (Clements and Wilkening, 1974; Semkow and Parekh, 1990; Bossew, 2003; Khan and Fellow, 2008; Mudd, 2008; Adler and Perrier, 2009; Breitner et al., 2010; Girault and Perrier, 2012). Sev- eral other factors that enhance the radon concentration in mine atmosphere include cracks and ﬁssures in the ore body, broken ore, backﬁll mill tailings and mine water (Misaqi, 1975; Sakoda et al., 2011; Sahu et al., 2013; Mishra et al., 2014).
Radon in the mine air decays to 210Pb (half-life of 22 y) through  a series of short-lived decay products, which acts as an effective block against further decay. Ideally, these short-lived radon proge- nies should reach secular equilibrium with radon in about 3 h. But normally this does not happen because of a number of reasons, such as, dilution by ventilation, wall losses etc. Nevertheless, one can expect some degree of equilibrium. 218Po atoms on formation are positively charged and are highly mobile. They attach them- selves to the ambient aerosols in a very short time of few seconds. When radon is inhaled, the alpha particles from its radioactive decay directly strike sensitive lung tissues causing  damage  that can lead to lung cancer. However, since radon is a gas, most of it   is exhaled. But its decay products, which are atoms of heavy met- als, deposit in the respiratory system and continue to irradiate the lung tissues even after one leaves the workplace. The radiation dose to the respiratory system due to the alpha decay of inhaled radon daughters is 100 times  greater than that  due to  the  decay  of radon itself (ICRP, 1981). Extensive epidemiological studies have revealed a signiﬁcant correlation between exposure to radon daughter products and induction of lung cancer in underground mines (ICRP, 1989, 1993; Lubin et al., 1995; BEIR VI, 1999;
Gulson et al., 2005; UNSCEAR, 2006).
Monitoring of radiological parameters in uranium mines is essential to ensure the radiation levels within safe limits as stipu- lated by the regulatory bodies so that the miners are protected from radiation hazards. ICRP (1993) has recommended the derived air concentration (DAC) limit of 1,000 Bq m—3 for any mixture of radon and its progenies. The derived air concentration of long-lived alpha activity is 600 mBq m—3 (ICRP, 1991) and the derived limit for gamma radiation exposure for uranium mine workers based on  2,400 h  per  year  working  is  8 lGy h—1  (Raghavayya,  1999). The derived air concentration of long-lived alpha  activity  is  600 mBq m—3 (ICRP, 1991). The average annual effective dose limit prescribed by ICRP (2007) is 20 mSv, which is equivalent to 4 Working Level Month (WLM) for radon progenies.
In the present study, we measured the different radiological parameters such as the external gamma level, long-lived alpha activity concentration, atmospheric radon and its progeny concen- trations in Jaduguda uranium mine. Based on the radiological parameters, the radiation dose received by the miners was also calculated.
2.Description of the study area
The radiological monitoring was carried out at Jaduguda uranium mine of Uranium Corporation of India Ltd. (UCIL) located in the East Singhbhum district of Jharkhand, India (Fig. 1). At Jaduguda, the uranium ore lenses of Proterozoic age are hosted in the highly folded and sheared metamorphic rocks. The host rocks are brecciated quartzite and quartz-chlorite-biotite- magnetite schist. The primary ore mineral is uraninite occurring as discrete grains along with autunite and torbernite. The strike of the main ore body dipping towards north is in the east–west direction. The maximum vertical extent and thickness of the ore body are about 905 m and 10 m, respectively. Horizontal cut-and-ﬁll method using de-slimed coarser fraction mill tailings as backﬁll is the principal stoping method adopted in Jaduguda mine. The collection of air samples for measurement of radon and long-lived alpha activity (LLa) concentrations and measure- ment of external gamma level in the mine were done in different stopes operated between 434 and 685 m levels (ML). The schematic layout of the mine depicting the sampling locations is shown in Fig. 2.
3.Methodology
3.1.Measurement of external gamma level
External gamma levels in the Jaduguda mine were measured at
34 locations using a pre-calibrated direct reading instrument Micro-R Radiation Survey Meter (PRM-151P), which directly gives the exposure rate value in terms of micro-roentgen per hour (lR/h) at the desired location of measurement. The exposure rate was converted to the absorbed dose in terms of micro-gray per hour (lGy h—1) using the relation @1
3.2.Measurement of long-lived alpha activity (LLa) concentration
Long-lived alpha activity (LLa) associated with ore dust in the mine was measured at 20 locations using AFC 123 Personal Air Sampler (Casella, London) attached with a ﬁlter holder and an alpha counter as shown in Fig. 3. In this method, a known volume of air was drawn through a glass ﬁbre ﬁlter paper of 0.8 lm pore size and 25 mm diameter maintaining an optimum ﬂow rate of 1.9–2.0 l min—1 to measure the associated  airborne  long-lived alpha activity. In order to estimate the airborne long-lived radio- nuclides, a delay interval of 3 days is usually allowed before start- ing the counting to ensure the decay of relatively shorter lived radionuclides. The alpha activities were counted using a ZnS(Ag) screen of a-counter for a longer duration (P 100 min). The air- borne long-lived alpha activity concentration (Bq m—3) was com- puted using the relation@2
where c is the net counts per second, F is the ﬂow rate of personal sampler (l min—1) and T is the total sampling duration (min) and E is the efﬁciency of the alpha counter (%). The efﬁciency of the counting system is about 25% and the minimum detectable limit worked out to be 2.1 mBq m—3 for a counting duration of 100 min (Jha et al., 2000).
3.3.Measurement of radon concentration
The radon concentration in the mine was measured at 28 loca- tions using scintillation cell (Scintcell) technique. The scintillation cell is a cylindrical aluminium chamber of about 150 ml in volume. One end of the cell is closed with a glass window and the other end is provided with a swage-lock quick connector valve for evacuation and sampling. The internal surface of the cell except the glass win- dow is coated with ZnS(Ag) scintillator. Air samples at the desired locations were collected by opening the valve of the evacuated scintillation cell. Three radon laden air samples were collected in three scintillation cells at a time to obtain the average radon con- centration at each location. Glass ﬁbre or membrane ﬁlters were used to ﬁlter the air samples to avoid contamination of the cells
Fig. 1. Map of India showing the location of Jaduguda uranium mine.
by ore dust as well as to stop the entry of the radon progenies already present in the atmosphere. This also ensures the collection of pure radon sample in the scintcell.
The scintcell was later connected to a photo-multiplier assem- bly as shown in Fig. 4 and the alpha counts during a speciﬁed delay interval were noted. A delay interval of at least 180 min is usually allowed before starting the counting to ensure equilibrium  between radon and its progenies in the cell. The concentration of radon was computed from the relationship (Raghavayya, 1981; Panigrahi et al., 2005)@3
where Rn is the radon concentration (Bq m—3), c is the net counts obtained during the counting duration, E is the efﬁciency of the cell (%), V is the volume of the cell (litre), t is the delay time after the end of the sampling (s), T is the counting duration (s) and k is the decay constant of radon (s—1).
3.4.Determination of equilibrium equivalent radon (EER) concentration
The equilibrium of radon progenies with radon is not found in underground uranium mines because of a number  of  reasons  such as dilution by ventilation, wall losses etc. In practice, an ‘Equilibrium Equivalent Radon (EER)’ concentration concept has been introduced internationally to account  for  the  non-existence of equilibrium between radon and its progenies  at  workplaces, and to avoid the cumbersome process of measuring radon progeny concentrations. EER is the activity concentration of radon that is in equilibrium with each of its short-lived progenies having same potential alpha energy concentration (IAEA, 1996). Further, the state of equilibrium is described as the equilibrium factor (F). Equilibrium factor is the ratio of the potential alpha energy con- centration that exists in the mixture to that which would exist if     all the decay products were in equilibrium with the radon present. In other way, it can also be deﬁned as the ratio of the equilibrium equivalent radon concentration to the actual concentration  of radon and may be expressed as @4
where CRn is the concentration of radon gas (Bq m—3). Once the equilibrium  factor  is  determined,  EER  can  be  determined using the Eq. (4). The International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) recommends the use of a default value of 0.4 for the purpose of radiation protection in uranium mines where the equilibrium factor is unknown or difﬁcult to determine experimen- tally (ICRP, 1991, 1993). However, in case of Jaduguda mine, the equilibrium factor has been determined to be 0.5 (Eappen et al., 2006). The radon progeny concentration in terms of working level (WL) can be calculated from the relation@5
3.5.Assessment of radiation dose received by the miners
Assessment of radiation dose received by the miners is required to evaluate the radiological health hazards. Radiological hazards associated with uranium mining arise mainly from external expo- sure to gamma radiation emitted from the ore body and internal exposure to long-lived alpha emitters as well as radon and its daughters. The external effective  dose ‘EG’  (mSv y—1)  received by a miner due  to  gamma exposure was computed using  the relation@6
where A is the absorbed dose rate (lGy h—1), Ty is the exposure time period (2,000 h y—1) and Dec is the dose conversion factor for absorbed dose to effective dose equivalent (Sv Gy—1). The dose conversion factor of 0.7 Sv Gy—1 recommended by UNSCEAR (2000) has been used in Eq. (6) for calculation.
The  internal  effective  dose  due  to  the  LLa  emitter  ‘ILLa’ (mSv y—1) was calculated using the relation@7
where LLa is the long-lived alpha activity concentration (mBq m—3), BR is the breathing rate (1.2 m3 h—1) and Dic is the inhalation dose conversion factor (4.82 10—6 Sv Bq—1). The inhalation dose conversion factor  of  4.82  10—6 Sv Bq—1  has  been  recommended by IAEA (2004) and used in Eq. (7) for calculation.
For estimation of dose received by the miners due to radon and its daughters, calculation of cumulative exposure to radon daugh- ters is required. Cumulative exposure is expressed in terms of ‘Working Level Month (WLM)’, which is the product of WL and the duration of exposure. One WLM corresponds to the exposure at 1 WL concentration of radon daughters for 170 h duration. Since a miner invariably spends different time intervals at locations with
Fig. 2. Schematic layout of Jaduguda uranium mine showing the sampling locations.
different WL values during the course of a working day, the cumulative exposure to radon daughters can be expressed as@8
where WLi is the radon progeny concentration at the ith location (WL), n is the number of locations, Ti is the time spent at the ith location (hours per day) and 170 is the number of working hours per month. In the present study, it is assumed that a miner is exposed to a constant value of WL for  the  duration  of  about  2,000 h per year. The occupational exposure period of 2,000 h per year was calculated based on the miner’s  annual  attendance  of 300 days and about 6.5 h working period per day, which includes the time spent by the miners at work sites in underground mines such as in stopes, development drivages etc. where they are actually exposed to the radiation. The internal effective dose received by a miner due to radon and its progenies was calculated from Eq. (8) using the conversion factor of 5 mSv WLM—1 (ICRP, 1993).
4. Results and discussion
4.1.Radiation levels in the mine
Table 1 presents the statistical results of external gamma radiation, long-lived alpha activity, radon activity concentration, equilibrium equivalent radon (EER) concentration, radon progeny concentration and cumulative exposure in Jaduguda uranium mine. The gamma radiation levels measured at 34 locations of the  mine  varied in  the  range of  0.9–5.04 lGy h—1  with  geometric mean  of  2.39 lGy h—1  and  geometric  standard  deviation  of  1.56. Raghavayya (2005) reported the gamma radiation values of 1.28,
2.7  and  3.9 lGy h—1  for  Narwapahar,  Bhatin  and  Jaduguda  mines
Fig. 3. The personal dust sampler (a) and the alpha counting setup (b).
Fig. 4. Photomultiplier assembly for determining radon counts in the scintillation cell.
of UCIL respectively. The variation in the present ﬁnding and ear- lier reported values may be due to the variation of uranium content in the ore. However, all the gamma radiation values were found to be  quite  below  the  prescribed  limit  of  8 lGy h—1.  In  the  present study, the average value of gamma radiation  was  found  to  be 70% lower than the prescribed limit.
The long-lived alpha (LLa) activity varied in the range of 2.03–
77.86 mBq m—3 with geometric mean of 16.84 mBq m—3 and geo- metric standard deviation of 3.21 (Table 1). The LLa values for Indian uranium mines have been variously reported in the past     as 44 mBq m—3 (Jha and Raghavayya,  1989),  21.25 mBq m—3  (Jha et al., 2000) and 2–12 mBq m—3 (Patnaik et al., 2009). This variation may be due to the difference in the radionuclides content of the uranium ore and the generation of ore dust of different particle sizes during various mining operations. All the measured values  of  long-lived  alpha  activity  were  found  to  be  well  below  the
prescribed limit of 600 mBq m—3 recommended by ICRP  (1991). The average long-lived alpha activity in  the mine was found to     be about 3% of the prescribed limit and hence may not pose signif- icant health hazards to the miners.
The radon activity concentration in the mine varied from 360 to 1,964 Bq m—3 with geometric mean of 872.89 Bq m—3 and geomet- ric standard deviation of 1.58. The radon activity concentration in uranium mines at Colorado of United States has been reported as
2.18 106 Bq m—3 (Wagoner et al., 1964) and in Canadian uranium mine it varies in the range of 481–2,960 Bq m—3 (Cheng and Porritt, 1981). The activity concentrations of radon in the surveyed mine were found to be much lower than these reported values, which may be due to the variation in grade, porosity, moisture content of uranium ore, radon exhalation characteristics of uranium ore and backﬁll materials, and ventilation condition of the mine (Mishra et al., 2014; Panigrahi et al., 2014; Sahu et al., 2014a, 2014b, 2014c).
The equilibrium equivalent radon concentration calculated based on the measured radon concentration and equilibrium factor in the mine varied in the range of 180–982 Bq m—3 with geometric mean and geometric standard deviation of 436.44 Bq m—3 and 1.58 respectively. The variation in the measured 222Rn concentration may be due to the effect of several parameters such as (i) quality and quantity of ventilation, (ii) location of stopes, levels and drives and (iii) radon exhalation rate from different sources like mine walls, broken ore and backﬁll tailings. The measured values of equilibrium equivalent radon concentration in the mine were found to be lower than the recommended upper reference level of 1,500 Bq m—3 for workplace (ICRP, 2007). However, the radon concentration may increase if the planning and design of ventila- tion systems of the mine are not implemented properly. Further- more, although the radon concentration is lower than the prescribed limit, the mine workers should take safety precautions
Table 1
Statistical results of the radiological parameters in Jaduguda uranium mine.
Table 2
Statistical results of the radiation dose (mSv y—1) received by a miner in Jaduguda uranium mine.
Fig. 5. Contributions of radiation dose from different sources.
while working in the mine. Precautionary measures are essential because even low concentrations of radon may increase the risk of lung cancer (WHO, 2009).
The concentration of radon daughters in the mine was esti- mated directly from the radon concentration (EER) values given in Table 1 using the Eq. (5). The radon daughters concentration varied in the range of 0.05–0.27 WL with geometric mean and geometric standard deviation of 0.12 WL and 1.57 respectively. This indicates that the concentration of radon daughters in the mine is within the derived air concentration limit of 0.33 WL recommended by several regulatory bodies (ICRP, 1991, 1993; IAEA, 1996).
4.2.Radiation dose received by the miners
The statistical results of external effective dose due to gamma exposure, internal effective dose due to LLa as well as radon and  its progenies are presented in Table 2. The external effective dose varied in the range of 1.26–7.06 mSv y—1 with geometric mean of
3.34 mSv y—1 and geometric standard deviation of 1.56. The average value of external effective dose was found to be in good agreement with the values reported for the same mine by Patnaik et al. (2009) in the range of 3.16–3.90 mSv y—1. The internal effective dose due to LLa varied in the range of 0.02–0.9 mSv y—1 with geometric mean of
0.19 mSv y—1 and geometric standard deviation of 3.37.
The cumulative exposure of miners to radon daughters varied in the range of 0.59–3.18 WLM with geometric mean of 1.39 WLM, which is well below the annual limit of 4 WLM recommended by ICRP. The internal effective dose received by the miners due to exposure to radon daughters varied in the range of 2.94–
15.88 mSv y—1 with the geometric mean of 6.95 mSv y—1 and geometric standard deviation of 1.57. The total average effective dose received by miners was estimated to be 10.48 mSv y—1, which is about 52% of the dose limit of 20 mSv y—1 recommended by ICRP (2007). Although the average effective dose is comparatively low, the mine workers should observe safety precautions during their work in the mine so that the effective dose is reduced further.
Fig. 5 compares the contributions of radiation dose due to exter- nal gamma, long-lived alpha, radon and its progenies. The contri- butions of radiation dose in the mine due to external gamma and long-lived alpha activity were found to be lower than the dose due to radon and its progenies. Comparatively, the long-lived alpha activity contributed least towards the radiation dose received by the miners. This may be due to the low-grade of Jaduguda uranium ore. It has been reported that long-lived alpha activity in the air-borne ore dust is not a signiﬁcant source of internal exposure to the miners in low-grade uranium mines (ICRP, 1993). On the other hand, radon (222Rn) and its progeny concentrations which are not necessarily related to the ore grade may cause signiﬁcant hazard to the miners in low-grade underground uranium mines with inadequate ventilation. Thus, it may be concluded that radon and its progenies are mainly responsible for the radiation hazard in underground uranium mines.
In the present study, though the average effective dose received by the miners was found to be well within the prescribed limit, it may increase beyond the limit unless the ventilation conditions of the mine are improved and other control measures are adopted in the mine. Further, several assumptions such as equilibrium factor, exposure time period etc. were made for the calculation of dose  due to exposure to radon daughters and therefore, the calculated doses may be treated as approximate values. However, the ﬁgures obtained from this study are encouraging and portray useful infor- mation on radon exposure in a typical underground uranium mine.
5. Conclusions
The radiological hazards associated with mining of uranium ore cannot be neglected, even if the grade of uranium ore is low. The hazards may be severe if adequate precautions are not taken. Thus, monitoring of radiological parameters is required to accomplish  the regulatory protocols. This paper presents the measurement of different radiological parameters such as external gamma level, long-lived alpha activity concentration, radon and its progeny con- centrations using different techniques in an operating uranium mine at Jaduguda, India. The effective radiation doses received by the miners were estimated based on the radiological parameters. The study revealed that the contributions of effective radiation dose in the mine due to external gamma and long-lived alpha activity are comparatively lower than the dose received from radon and its progenies. The long-lived alpha activity contributed least towards the radiation dose received by the miners. This indicates that the radiological health hazards to the miners may arise pri- marily due to the inhalation of radon and its daughters. However, due to good ventilation conditions of the mine, the total effective dose received by the miners was found to be well below the dose limit of 20 mSv y—1 as recommended by ICRP and hence it may not pose signiﬁcant radiological health hazards to the miners.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to express their sincere thanks to Mr. D. Acharya, Chairman and Managing Director, Uranium Corporation of Indian Ltd. for granting necessary permission to carry out the work in Jaduguda uranium mine. Authors are also thankful to the administration of Health Physics Unit, BARC, Jaduguda for extending their support for carrying out the experiments.
