<title>The effect of titanium (Ti) additive on radiation shielding efficiency of	 Al25Zn alloy</title>
<author>M. Sirin</author>
<Affiliation>Recep Tayyip Erdogan University, Central Research Laboratory, 53100, Rize, Turkey
</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2020.103470</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2020.103470</URL>
ABSTRACT
In this study, gamma ray and neutron shielding properties of Al25Zn alloy samples  prepared  by  induction melting technique with the composition of (75—x)Al–25Zn–xTi (x = 0, 0.01, 0.1 and 1 wt %) were investigated theoretically and experimentally. The mass attenuation coefficients (μ/ρ) of the alloys were measured experi-
mentally with a coaxial high purity germanium (HPGe) detector at 59.54, 662, 1173 and 1332 keV photon energies. The theoretical values have been calculated in the energy ranging from 1 keV to 1 GeV using WinXcom database. Afterwards, the obtained mass attenuation coefficient values have been utilized for determination of some shielding parameters such as half value layer (HVL), mean free path (MFP), effective atomic number (Zeff)
and gamma–ray kerma coefficients (kγ ). The calculated values are in good agreement with the observed values.
Furthermore, the macroscopic fast neutron removal cross-sections (ΣR, cm—1) have also been calculated. Ti1 coded alloy sample containing 1% Ti was found to have maximum radiation protection efficiency (RPE) and
neutron removal cross section (ΣR, cm—1) as well as the smallest half value layer (HVL) and mean free path
(MFP) values. Hence, the results of this study showed that Ti1 alloy specimen has superior gamma and neutron radiation shielding performance among the other compared alloys.
Keywords:
Alloy Shielding Neutron
Gamma photon Macroscopic cross–section
ABSTRACT
In this study, gamma ray and neutron shielding properties of Al25Zn alloy samples  prepared  by  induction melting technique with the composition of (75—x)Al–25Zn–xTi (x = 0, 0.01, 0.1 and 1 wt %) were investigated theoretically and experimentally. The mass attenuation coefficients (μ/ρ) of the alloys were measured experi-
mentally with a coaxial high purity germanium (HPGe) detector at 59.54, 662, 1173 and 1332 keV photon energies. The theoretical values have been calculated in the energy ranging from 1 keV to 1 GeV using WinXcom database. Afterwards, the obtained mass attenuation coefficient values have been utilized for determination of some shielding parameters such as half value layer (HVL), mean free path (MFP), effective atomic number (Zeff)
and gamma–ray kerma coefficients (kγ ). The calculated values are in good agreement with the observed values.
Furthermore, the macroscopic fast neutron removal cross-sections (ΣR, cm—1) have also been calculated. Ti1 coded alloy sample containing 1% Ti was found to have maximum radiation protection efficiency (RPE) and
neutron removal cross section (ΣR, cm—1) as well as the smallest half value layer (HVL) and mean free path
(MFP) values. Hence, the results of this study showed that Ti1 alloy specimen has superior gamma and neutron radiation shielding performance among the other compared alloys.
Keywords:
Alloy Shielding Neutron
Gamma photon Macroscopic cross–section
1.Introduction
The use of ionizing radiation has been increasing recently in different medical applications such as medical imaging, irradiation therapy, and nuclear medicine. It is also used in various industrial application fields, such as food preservatives and sterilization. Strong ionizing radiation sources, such as gamma and X–ray, require intensive radiation protec- tion measures due to their potential negative effects on living tissues. Therefore, it is extremely important to take measures to reduce radiation effects and prevent radiation risks in order to protect radiation workers and patients exposed to radiation. It is well known that the most commonly used protective materials in medical imaging rooms are aprons made of a thin lead layer. However, the use of lead causes various effects and limitations such as toxicity, weight, flexibility, cost and installation (Abuzaid et al., 2018; Ngaile et al., 2008; Tekin and Kili- coglu, 2020; Trattner et al., 2014). For this reason, it is important to develop non–toxic and low–cost materials instead of lead–based pro- tective materials and to replace the lead that is currently in use (Man- junatha et al., 2019). As a result, many studies and researches have been done to improve different shielding materials in medical and industrial areas, as well as to overcome lead limitations (Agar et al., 2019a; Akman
et al., 2019; Ersundu et al., 2018; Manjunatha et al., 2019; Obaid et al., 2018; Olukotun et al., 2018; Tekin and Kilicoglu, 2020). Among the alternative materials, intensive studies have been conducted on alloy materials commonly used in different fields such as transportation, aerospace, modern technologies, biomedical and pharmaceutical in- dustries (Agar et al., 2019a). It is well known that the alloy is formed by the combination of different metal types (Tekin and Kilicoglu, 2020). Alloys often have better properties than the individual metals formed at the base of the alloy. For example, brass is a zinc (Zn) and copper (Cu) alloy with superior properties than pure Zn and Cu metals (Kaur et al., 2019). Based on this basis, various researches have been done by different researchers on the use of different types of alloys as an alter- native material to block gamma rays: CS–516, SS–403, SS–410, SS–316, SS–316L, SS–304L, Incoloy–600, Monel–400 and Cupero–Nickel alloys were explored by Singh and Badiger (2014); Cu–Pb alloys were inves- tigated by Singh et al. (2015); binary alloys of Pb–Sn, Pb–Zn and Sn–Zn alloys were investigated by Sharma et al. (2016), binary alloys of Pb–Sn were investigated by Kaur et al., (2016); Pb–Cu alloys were investigated by Sing et al (2018); Leaded Brass alloys were investigated by S¸ akar et al. (2019); Pd/Ag–based alloys were investigated by Agar et al. (2019b); Ga doped Pd/Mn binary alloys were investigated by Tekin and
Kilicoglu (2020) (Agar et al., 2019a; Kaur et al., 2016; S¸ akar et al., 2019; Sharma et al., 2016; Singh et al., 2015, 2018; Singh and Badiger, 2014; Tekin and Kilicoglu, 2020).Aluminum (Al) and zinc (Zn)–based alloys have been successfullyused in many fields, especially in the space, aerospace and automotive industries, in a growing density. Among the advantages that cause these alloys to be used extensively is that they have high specific strength and abrasion resistance, and they are easy to be manufactured and shaped (Hekimog˘lu et al., 2019). Aluminum alloys are also used for different purposes, such as tank material for TRIGA Mark Reactors in nuclear reactors (Yıldırım et al., 2016). In addition to excellent corrosion resistance, titanium (Ti) containing alloys is used in advanced aviation systems due to the unique combination of high specific strength at both room temperature and moderately high temperature (Stankovi´c et al., 2009). Moreover, in some recent studies, the effects of titanium addi- tives on the structural and mechanical properties of Al–Zn alloys con- taining Zn in certain proportions were investigated. Depending on the master alloy used in some of these studies, titanium has been found to improve both strength and ductility properties in Al–Zn alloys thanks to the  grain  thinning  feature  (Bura´s  et  al.,  2017;  Hekimog˘lu  and  Çalıs¸ , 2020; Krajewski and Haberl, 2011). Moreover, studies reported on the radiation shielding efficiency of Al–based alloys are very limited. Man- junatha et al. (2018) studied the gamma, X–ray and neutron shielding parameters of the Al–based glassy alloys (Manjunatha et al., 2018). On the other hand, Yıldırım et al. (2016) investigated gamma shielding properties of six different Al–based alloys in gamma energies of 0.662 and 1.25 MeV (Yıldırım et al., 2016). Although high–Z materials and composite materials have high resistance to radiation, they cause problems in radiation shielding works due to difficulties in use and high price. Al25Zn alloy was chosen in this study because aluminum based alloys have many advantageous properties such as low density, machinability and cost (Zaim and Bayhatun, 2018). Due to all these features of Al–Zn based alloys, the main purpose of this study is to determine the gamma ray and neutron shielding parameters of Al25Zn alloys containing different ratios of titanium (Ti). The mass attenuation
coefficients (μ/ρ) of these alloys produced with different Ti additiveratios were experimentally measured at photon energies of 59.54, 662,keV–100 GeV) using the WinXcom database. The determined experi-mental and theoretical mass attenuation coefficient values were used in
the calculation of some shielding parameters such as half value layer (HVL), mean free path (MFP), effective atomic number (Zeff) and gamma
kerma coefficient (kγ). At the same time, macroscopic effective removal cross sections (ΣR, cm—1) for fast neutrons have been also calculated.
2.Theoretical background
If an x–thick absorber is placed on a gamma ray path, the intensity of the incident beam will be attenuated according to Beer–Lambert’s law:@1
where I0 and I are the photon intensity and passing photon intensity to the absorbent material, respectively, and μ (cm—1) is the linear attenu-ation coefficient of the material.
Since alloy samples contain more than one metal, the mass attenu- ation coefficients (μ/ρ) of these samples can be evaluated using the mixture rule Eq. (2):@2
where ρ is the density of the alloy, while wi and (μ/ρ)i are the weight
fraction and mass attenuation coefficient values of the ith constituent element in alloy, respectively (Hubbell and Seltzer, 1995; Jackson and Hawkes, 1981).For the chemical mixture, wi can be calculated using Eq. (3):@3
where Ai is the atomic weight of the ith element and ai is the number of formula units.
Theoretical mass attenuation coefficients (μ/ρ) of alloy samples were calculated using the WinXCom software (Berger, 1999; Gerward et al., 2004, 2001).
The performance of the studied alloys to reduce gamma photons was examined with the radiation protection efficiency (RPE) parameter. RPE from incoming and transmitted photon densities (I0 and I) was evaluated using Eq. (4) (Sayyed et al., 2018):@4
The half value layer (HVL) and mean free path (MFP) values for the existing alloys were determined by using the mass attenuation co- efficients. The thickness of any material in which 50% of the incoming photon density is weakened is known as the HVL. The required absorber thickness, which reduces the initial radiation intensity to 36.8% after passing through the absorber, is known as the average free path. HVL and MFP values were calculated using Eqs. (5) and (6), respectively (Agar et al., 2019a; Gaikwad et al., 2019; Sayyed et al., 2018):@5
@6
The effective atomic number (Zeff) is a factor used to investigate the shielding efficiency for any material. From the determined mass atten- uation coefficient values, the effective atomic number (Zeff) for the existing alloys was calculated using Eq. (7):@7
where fi, Ai, and Zi represent the fractional abundance, the atomic
weight, and the atomic number of the element ith, respectively (Hine, 1952; Manohara et al., 2008).
The name given to the abbreviation of the kinetic energy released from the material is kerma (K). Kerma and the absorbed dose are equal at this point when the charged particle balance and bremsstrahlung losses in an irradiated target are negligible. Moreover, kerma replaces tradi- tional exposure as a shielding design parameter (El-Khayatt and Vega-Carrillo, 2015). The detailed method for calculating the photon kerma coefficients of alloys is given in previous studies (Baltas et al., 2019; El-Khayatt, 2017). In this study, the kerma coefficients of the al- loys were determined by using the methodological method mentioned above.
The macroscopic effective removal cross-section ΣR (cm—1) is briefly
defined as the probability of a specific reaction per unit path length
passing through the alloy medium. Eqs. (8) and (9) were used to calculate the ΣR value of the studied alloys:@8
and @9
where ρi (g/cm3) and ΣR/ρ (cm2/g) are the partial density and the fast neutron removal cross section of the ith  element, respectively (Chilton
Fig. 1. The samples of alloys prepared for gamma attenuation measurements.
et al., 1984; Hine, 1952; Kaplan, 1989; Wood, 2013). The partial density of the ith element (ρi) is obtained from Eq. (10):@10
where ρ represents the density of the sample (g/cm3) and wi denotes the weight fraction of the ith element, respectively (Tekin et al., 2019b).
3.Experimental procedure
3.1.Preparation of alloys
The alloy samples with (75  x)Al–25Zn–xTi (x  0, 0.01, 0.1 and 1 wt %) composition were prepared by induction melting technique. Commercial purity (99.8%) aluminum, high purity (99.9%) zinc and Al–10Ti master alloy were used in the production of alloys. Alloy ele- ments and master alloys were weighed with the aid of a 0.001 g preci-
sion scale to obtain the appropriate chemical composition. The weighed alloy materials were melted at an average of 700 ◦C in an Indemak brand induction furnace with a capacity of 20 kg. The melted mixture was then
poured into a mold made of SAE (AISI) 8620 steel, which was kept at room temperature, and solidified. The temperature of the liquid metal in the furnace before casting was measured using a Tempstick 529 model K type thermocouple (Hekimog˘lu and Çalıs¸, 2020). After casting, the alloy ingot is in the casting mold until it cools to room temperature. The alloyabout 0.5 × 1 cm with the help of a turning machine for the attenuation
coefficient measurements. The prepared alloys according to Ti additive
ratios were tagged Ti0, Ti0.01, Ti0.1 and Ti1, respectively. The photo- graphic image of the prepared Ti doped alloys is shown in Fig. 1.
Archimedes principle method was used to determine the density of alloy samples. Density measurements were performed using benzene as a lifting fluid and a sensitive microbalance. The alloy samples wereweighed first in air (W1) and then in immersion liquid (W2) with a density of ρB 0.876 g/cm3. The density of the alloys was obtained using Eq. (11) (Gaikwad et al., 2019):
@11
Besides, an attractive tool for elemental investigation is energy- dispersive X–ray (EDX) technique. EDX, one of practical, rapid and suitable analytical methods mostly carried out for multielement deter- mination, was used for achieving qualitative information of elements in a vast variety of materials (Agar et al., 2019b). Therefore, the elemental analysis of the prepared Ti doped alloy samples were analyzed under 20 kV acceleration voltage by EDX (Oxford Instruments, Inca X–act) spec- trometry attached to the scanning electron microscope (JEOL, JSM 6610). The chemical compositions and densities of the manufactured alloys are listed in Table 1.3.2.Gamma-ray attenuation measurements
Total mass attenuation coefficient measurements of the alloys were
made with a hyper pure germanium (HPGe) detector (Ortec, GEM55P4–76) with 25% yield. The samples were irradiated by photons emitted from 241Am, 137Cs and 60Co radioactive sources in 59.54, 662,
1173 and 1332 keV energies, respectively. Alloys were counted 8 cm from the top of the detector surface to determine the photon density. All measurements, regardless of whether the detector is a sample or not, were made within a live time of 5000 s. For all alloys at four gamma energies, measurements were made three times, and the average value of these three measurements was reported. The photos and more detailed information about the measurement system are given in the article published by Baltas¸ et al. (2019) (Baltas et al., 2019).
Errors occurring in determining mass attenuation coefficients come from deviations in thickness (x), density (ρ) and counts (I and I0). For this reason, Eq. (12) is used to estimate the errors in the attenuation coefficients:@12
where, ΔI0, ΔI, Δx and Δρ are the uncertainty in the counts with and without alloys, thickness and density, respectively. The error in the measured mass attenuation coefficient values was found to be within 2% (Kumar et al., 2020).
Table 1
Physicochemical properties of prepared alloys.
Table 2
Measured and calculated total mass attenuation coefficients μ/ρ (cm2 g—1) of alloys at different energies.Fig. 2. The mass attenuation coefficients of the alloys as a function of photon energy.
The relative deviation between the experimental and theoretical mass attenuation coefficient values found varies between 4.36% and 1.50%. These differences between values can be attributed to the mixture rule, which ignores interactions between atoms in mixtures and compounds (Agar et al., 2019a). Therefore, it can be said that there is a satisfactory fit between experimental and theoretical values. μ/ρ values of the alloys varied depending on chemical composition, density and incident photon energy (Al-Buriahi et al., 2020; Ekinci et al., 2019; Sayyed et al., 2018). For instance, when the energy varies from 59.54 to 1332 keV, the experimental μ/ρ values decrease for all the alloy samples. It is also seen
that the variability of μ/ρ with the chemical composition is negligible or very low in all energies. These variations are interpreted as being due to
(i)photoelectric effect which varies with atomic number as Z4–5, (ii) less,
but significantly due to incoherent scattering which varies with atomic number as Z and (iii) pair production which varies with atomic number as Z2 (S¸ akar et al., 2019; Yılmaz et al., 2011). Since the photoelectric
absorption is dominant at low energies, the highest attenuation coeffi-
Fig. 3. Radiation protection efficiency (%) for the given alloys.
4.Result and discussion
Experimental and theoretical values of mass attenuation coefficients (μ/ρ) for alloys at gamma energies 59.5, 662, 1173 and 1332 keV are given in Table 2. Theoretical values of mass attenuation coefficients were calculated from WinXcom in the range of 1 keV to 1 GeV energy. The percentage relative deviations (RD) RD% μ /ρExp μ /ρT /μ /ρExp among the experimental and WinXcom results of μ/ρ were established.
cient among the studied alloy samples was calculated experimentally and theoretically for the Ti1 alloy containing 1% Ti in 59.54 keV photon energy. The change in mass attenuation coefficients of the alloys was found to be constant with the incoherent scattering and pair production process being dominant in the intermediate and high energy region. The μ/ρ variations as a function of photon energy for all alloy samples are given in Fig. 2. All alloy samples seen from Fig. 2 showed the same trend of change and it was determined that the mass attenuation coefficients of the alloys decreased with increasing gamma energies. The photo- electric effect is the dominant event in the low energy region (0.01
Table 3
The values of half value layer (HVL), mean free path (MFP) and effective atomic number (Zeff) for the investigated alloys.Fig. 4. The variation of the half value layer (HVL) with the energy for the given alloys.
MeV–0.1 MeV) and the cross section of this possibility is proportional to Z4—5/E3.5. Therefore, as photon energy increases, mass attenuation co-
efficients decrease rapidly. In addition, there is an abrupt increase around 0.00156 and 0.00965 MeV photon energies. This increase can be attributed to the K X–ray absorption shores of Al (0.00156 MeV) and Zn (0.0096 MeV). In general, absorption edges are formed in the low energy region for the K, L and M shells of the atom (Oto et al., 2016). At the
intermediate energy region (0.1 MeV–5 MeV), Compton scattering (incoherent) predominates. Since the Compton cross section varies with Z, the μ/ρ values of the alloys gradually decrease first and then take the lowest value. In the high energy region (10 MeV <E), the pair produc- tion  interaction  predominates, and  the  cross  section  of the  pair pro-
duction interaction depends on the atomic number (Z2). Finally, μ/ρ
values increase in an energy zone of about 100 MeV and then become
Fig. 5. The variation of the mean free path (MFP) with the energy for the given alloys.
increasing photon energy. Among the studied alloy examples, the Ti1 sample was found to have maximum RPE at low energy (about 98.635% at 59.54 keV). This finding implies that Ti1 sample shows maximum gamma photon attenuation properties for low energy photons compared to other alloy samples. Agar et al. (2019b) stated that the density of the samples plays a very important role in weakening the intensity of the incoming gamma rays, and materials with higher density are more effective in absorbing gamma rays (Agar et al., 2019a). Therefore, among the investigated alloys, the Ti1 alloy sample was found to be more efficient in reducing the intensity of incoming gamma rays due to higher density compared to other alloys.
Experimental and theoretical values of HVL and MFP for alloys at gamma energies 59.5, 662, 1173 and 1332 keV are given in Table 3. The change graph of HVL and MFP values versus photon energy is plotted in the 1 keV–1 GeV energy range and shown in Figs. 4 and 5, respectively. As clearly seen from Figs. 4 and 5, it was seen that HVL and MFP values displayed the same trend for all alloys and HVL and MFP values increased with increasing photon energy. An increase in HVL and MFP
Fig. 6. Variation of effective atomic numbers Zeff of the alloys  versus  the photon energy.
almost constant (El-Agawany et al., 2019; Oto et al., 2016).
Fig. 3 shows bar graph changes of RPE for investigated alloy samples. As can be clearly seen from Fig. 3, all RPE values showed reduction with
values indicates that more photons will penetrate through the sample. Samples with low HVL and MFP for all practical applications are more efficient at reducing the intensity of gamma photons, as high HVL and MFP values will worsen absorption of incoming photons. Figs. 4 and 5 revealed that the HVL and MFP of Ti1 were lower than other alloys, suggesting that this alloy was more efficient at absorbing incoming gamma photons. Because the Ti1 alloy has higher physical density
Table 4
Values of the theoretical (T) and experimental (Exp) kerma coefficients k (in pGy.cm2) for alloys.
Fig. 7. The kerma coefficients of alloys as a function of photon energy.
(density 3.215 g/cm3) than other alloys, the HVL and MFP values of this alloy were found to be smaller than other alloys. Moreover, as the density of the alloy samples is high, the HVL and MFP values are so low that higher density alloys are very efficient in reducing the density of the incoming gamma photons (Kaçal et al., 2019; Sayyed et al., 2018).
In addition, experimental and theoretical values of Zeff for alloys at gamma energies 59.5, 662, 1173 and 1332 keV are given in Table 3. In addition, using theoretical mass attenuation coefficients calculated with the help of WinXcom, theoretical Zeff values were calculated between 1 keV and 1 GeV. The variation of Zeff with photon energy in all alloy samples is shown in Fig. 6. It is seen from the figure that Zeff has been shown to change depending on the energy. This result supports the statement made by Hine (1952), who states that Zeff is changing with energy (Hine, 1952). In the low energy region, where photoelectric interaction is the main event, maximum Zeff values are determined for all alloy samples. It was observed that Zeff values for all alloys from the
figures increased with energy up to 0.02 MeV. In the 0.2 MeV < E < 3 MeV energy zone where Compton scattering is dominant, effective  atomic numbers are almost constant for alloys. Effective atomic numbers of alloys increase with increasing gamma energy as the  formation  of pairs in the 3 MeV <E < 100 MeV energy range becomes the dominant process. Above 100 MeV energy, pair production is dominant and the effective atomic number is fixed again (Oto et al., 2016). In general, although the effective atomic number (Zeff) strongly depends on the chemical composition of the material interacted in the low and high energy region, the dependence of the chemical composition in the me- dium energy region becomes very weak (Sharma et al., 2012).  There- fore, Ti1 alloy has the maximum effective atomic number values in the continuous energy zone due to the highest Ti content. That is, the ab- sorption efficiency of Al25Zn alloys increases with the addition of Ti.  The interaction cross-sections of photoelectric absorption and pair production events prevailing in the low and high energy region are
Fig. 8. Fast neutron removal cross sections of the given alloys.
proportional to the atomic number of the material, Z4—5 and Z2, respectively. Therefore, as the Z value of the alloys grows, the Zeff values will be higher accordingly (Agar et al., 2019a; Obaid et al., 2018; S¸ akar et al., 2019; Sayyed et al., 2018).
The theoretical (kT), and semi–experimental (kExp) values of the gamma kerma coefficients for the alloys are given in Table 4 for energies of 511, 662, 1173 and 1332 keV. From this table, it can be seen that the theoretical and semi–experimental results calculated for the gamma kerma coefficient are compatible with each other. It is clearly seen that kerma  depends on  the  chemical  content.  Hence,  a slight  increase in
kerma coefficients was detected with the increase of Ti additive to the alloys. Furthermore, Fig. 7 illustrates the γ-ray kerma coefficients of alloys as a function of photon energy (Gy.cm2/photon). It can be clearly
seen from Fig. 7 that regardless of the Ti contribution rates of the alloys, the γ–ray kerma coefficients of all alloys reached the minimum level with a sharp decrease in the low photon energy zone with the same trend. It was later determined that the alloy coefficient of alloys converged around 1 MeV. The energy behavior of the γ–ray kerma co- efficient can be explained in terms of both the relative importance of partial photon interaction processes and the exchange of energy accu- mulation with photon energy and absorbent atomic number Z. In the low energy region, photoelectric absorption is the dominant interaction
process. It is strongly depending upon the atomic number and the photon energy (~Z4/E3); and therefore, a significant variation in kerma coefficients occurs and higher kerma values are recorded for heavy and
intermediate atoms and low–energy gamma–rays. At intermediate en- ergies, Compton scattering is dominating and Compton scattering cross section varies with Z. Accordingly, the kerma coefficient of all materials
has nearly the same amount. Pair production processes predominate at higher energies, and the probability of this event is related to Z2. Therefore, the value of kerma coefficients is also higher (Baltas, 2020;
El-Khayatt, 2017). As a result, the gamma kerma coefficient trends of alloys showed a change similar to the mass attenuation coefficient and the effective atomic number throughout the expanded energy range in the alloy samples studied.
In this section, the effective removal cross-sections (ΣR) for the different alloys were calculated. In addition, determined macroscopic
cross section values are plotted in Fig. 8. It can be seen from Fig. 8 that the highest ΣR (cm—1) value was recorded for Ti1 and the lower one was
noticed for Ti0. It is clear that ΣR values are affected by the density of the alloy samples (Kaçal et al., 2019; Tekin et al., 2019b, 2019a). Therefore, Ti1 alloy has a higher ΣR value since it has a higher density than other alloys. Consequently, Ti1 alloy has been the best absorber for neutrons as well as gamma shielding.
5.
Conclusions
In this study, gamma-ray shielding parameters such as μ/ρ, RPE, HVL, MFP, Zeff and kγ of Al25Zn alloys developed by adding Ti in different ratios were investigated theoretically and experimentally at
gamma energies of 59.54, 662, 1173 and 1332 keV. Furthermore, the macroscopic fast neutron removal cross-sections (ΣR, cm—1) have also
been calculated. The theoretical values of mass attenuation coefficient (μ/ρ) have been calculated in the energy ranging from 1 keV to 1 GeV by means of the WinXCom software. The results calculated by WinXCom software and experimental method were found to be compatible with each other. The variation of μ/ρ, Zeff and kγ shielding parameters was found depending on the photon energy and the elemental composition of the alloys, and the maximum and minimum values of these parameters were obtained in the lower and intermediate energy regions, respec- tively. It was noticed that the density of alloys affected RPE, HVL, MFP and ΣR values. Therefore, it has been found that the Ti1 coded alloy sample containing the highest Ti additive has maximum RPE and ΣR as well as the smallest HVL and MFP values. Among the alloys studied, it was concluded that the Ti1 alloy containing 1% titanium is a very promising material for gamma and neutron radiation shielding appli- cations. The results obtained from this study may be useful in the development of new alternative materials used as shielding material for gamma ray and neutron.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
M. Sirin: Conceptualization, Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing, Visualization, Project administration, Supervision, Software.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
The author would also like to thank Doctor Ali Pasa Hekimoglu, who assisted in the preparation of alloy samples, Doctor Ahmet Celik for assisting in attenuation measurements, and Professor L. Gerward from the Technical University of Denmark for providing WinXCom software.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2020.103470.
