<title>The International Atomic Energy Agency action plan on radiation protection of patients and staﬀ in interventional procedures: Achieving change in practice</title>
<author>V. Tsapaki, S. Balter, C. Cousins, O. Holmberg, D.L. Millere, P. Mirand, M. Rehani,
E. Vano</author>
<Affiliation>a.Konstantopoulio General Hospital, Agias Olgas 3-5, 14233 Nea Ionia, Greece
b.Department of Radiology and Medicine, Columbia University, New York, USA
c.FRCP, FRCR, Chair ICRP, 280 Slater Street, Ottawa, Ontario K1P 5S9, Canada
d.Radiation Protection of Patients Unit, International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna International Center, Vienna, Austria
e.Center for Devices and Radiological Health, Food and Drug Administration, 10903 New Hampshire Avenue, Silver Spring, MD, USA
f.Hemodynamic Department, Cardiovascular Service, Luis Calvo Mackenna Hospital, Santiago, Chile
g.Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
h.Radiology Department, Medical School, Complutense University, 28040 Madrid, Spain</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Physica Medica</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.ejmp.2018.06.634</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmp.2018.06.634</URL>
ABSTRACT
Introduction: The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) organized the 3rd international conference on radiation protection (RP) of patients in December 2017. This paper presents the conclusions on the interven- tional procedures (IP) session.
Material and methods:  The IAEA conference was conducted as a series of plenary sessions followed by various thematic  sessions.  “Radiation  protection  of  patients  and  staﬀ  in  interventional  procedures”  session  keynote speakers presented information on: 1) Risk management of skin injuries, 2) Occupational radiation risks and 3) RP  for  paediatric  patients.  Then,  a summary  of the  session-related  papers  was  presented  by a  rapporteur, fol- lowed by an open question-and-answer discussion.
Results: Sixty-seven percent (67%) of papers came from Europe. Forty-four percent (44%) were patient studies,  44% were occupational and 12% were combined studies. Occupational studies were mostly on eye lens dosi- metry. The rest were on scattered radiation measurements and dose tracking. The majority of patient studies related to patient exposure with only one study on paediatric patients. Automatic patient dose reporting is considered as a ﬁrst step for dose optimization. Despite eﬀorts, paediatric IP radiation dose data are still scarce. The keynote speakers outlined recent achievements but also challenges in the ﬁeld. Forecasting technology, task- speciﬁc targeted education from educators familiar with the clinical situation, more accurate estimation of lens doses and improved identiﬁcation of high-risk professional groups are some of the areas they focused on.
Conclusions: Manufacturers play an important role in making patients safer. Low dose technologies are still expensive and manufacturers should make these aﬀordable in less resourced countries. Automatic patient dose reporting and real-time skin dose map are important for dose optimization. Clinical audit and better QA pro- cesses together with more studies on the impact of lens opacities in clinical practice and on paediatric patients    are needed.
Keywords:
Radiation protection
Risk management of patients Occupational dose
Paediatric dose
1.Introduction
Physicians in many medical specialties perform minimally invasive interventional procedures (IP) using ﬂuoroscopic guidance. For pa- tients, these procedures usually pose less risk, typically cause less pain
and provide a shorter recovery time compared with open surgery [1–4]. Eﬀorts to monitor and optimize radiation protection in IP both for patient and staﬀ have been conducted for many years [5–15]. The continuous evolution of ﬂuoroscopy systems is rapidly transforming the landscape leading to higher utilization, potential for better
management of radiation dose or even reductions in dose and a greater likelihood of a successful clinical outcome [16–18]. High performance digital X-ray detectors, coupled with sophisticated, dedicated software and advances in computing and low dose technology have boosted patient throughput, facilitated the growth of interventional applications and patient dose optimization [19]. The use of ﬂuoroscopy, however, still poses a certain risk for both patients and staﬀ [20,21]. Patient characteristics (e.g. size, clinical condition, co-morbidities) and op- erator skills are key determinants of radiation use [22]. Technical evolution of ﬂuoroscopic equipment, other medical devices and inter- national standards for the safety and eﬀective performance of these devices play important additional roles in making patients safer [23,24].
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) organized an in- ternational conference on radiation protection (RP) of patients in March 2001 in Malaga, Spain. This conference resulted in an international action plan on the radiation protection of patients. The IAEA held a second conference on RP in medicine, in Bonn, Germany in 2012. The result of the Bonn conference was the “Bonn Call for Action” [25]. Since then, a substantial number of national, regional and international ac- tions have been initiated, either by professional or by scientiﬁc societies or organizations related to radiation protection campaigns. At the same time, the medical industry introduced a number of technological de- velopments with the potential to reduce radiation doses to patients, staﬀ and the public. These initiatives, together with the increased in- terest of many professional groups in RP, indicated a need for a third conference, where improvements in RP since the Bonn conference could be highlighted, discussed, and placed in perspective. A 3rd conference on RP in medicine was held at IAEA headquarters in Vienna in De- cember 2017 [26]. The conference was organized by the IAEA and co- sponsored by the World Health Organization (WHO) and the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO). The objectives of the con- ference were to gather all international, regional, national or local work done on this topic, to investigate change in practice and provide a toolkit that consolidates information available from cooperating orga- nizations as the way forward.
This paper presents information and conclusions from the con- ference session that focused on patient and staﬀ exposure in IP. The objectives of the session were to: 1) show possible advances, challenges and opportunities, 2) assess the impact of the international action plan,
3) identify tools for improving RP in IP and 4) develop new interna- tional recommendations, if deemed appropriate, in interventional ﬂuoroscopy.
2.Materials and methods
The conference was conducted as a series of plenary sessions fol- lowed by various thematic sessions. Session number 6 focused on “Radiation protection of patients and staﬀ in interventional proce- dures”. Keynote speakers presented information on: 1) Risk manage- ment of skin injuries, 2) Occupational radiation risks and 3) RP for paediatric patients.
The topic of each session was introduced by a chairperson, followed by three keynote speakers, a summary of the session-related accepted papers presented by a rapporteur, and an open question-and-answer discussion session lead by a chairperson. Authors were given the op- portunity to present their work in the form of posters at the conference exhibition area.
3.Results and discussion
3.1.Submitted papers
Eighteen papers were accepted in the “RP of patients and staﬀ in IP” session as shown in Table 1. Table 1 provides data on the number of submitted papers in interventional ﬁeld related to each of the ten Bonn
Actions. The accepted papers originated from twelve countries and one multi-national research study. Sixty-seven percent (67%) of papers came from Europe. Forty-four percent (44%) were patient studies, 44% were occupational studies and 12% were combined patient and staﬀ studies. Fifty percent (50%) were dedicated to interventional cardi- ology (IC), 39% to interventional radiology (IR) and the remaining 13% to combined subﬁelds. Occupational studies were mostly on eye lens dosimetry (60%). The remaining studies were on scattered radiation measurements (20%, European studies) and combined patient and staﬀ exposure tracking (20%, European studies). Eye lens research work was largely from Europe (5 papers, 83%); there was only one study from Asia (17%) and none from Africa, the Middle East, Australia, or the Americas. The majority of patient studies related to patient exposure (75%, 2 African, 1 Asian and 3 European papers). One paper reported a skin injury (12.5%, Asian study) and one paper focused on paediatric doses (12.5%, Latin American paper). Paediatric research work ac- counted only for 5.5% of all studies in the interventional procedures section.
Selected observations from the occupational studies, as available at
[27] are:
1)A pilot individual monitoring assessment is one of the best ap- proaches to identify workers in IP, who require eye lens monitoring, and to decide on the best dosimetry system.
2)Online occupational dosimetry systems can have a positive eﬀect on the behavior of IP personnel.
3)There is need for guidance on occupational IP dosimetry with em- phasis on pulsed ﬁelds and eye lens dosimetry.
4)Eye doses in endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), an IP performed usually by gastroenterologists, can be signiﬁcant for over couch X-ray machines.
5)Use of a conversion factor to derive eye lens dose from patient ra- diation dose measured in terms of kerma-area product (PKA) is not recommended if limitations are not established.
6)Eye lens dosimeters should be calibrated to take into account the spectrum energy range of 20–35 keV.
Selected observations from the patient studies were [27]:
1)Patient dose recording (mainly automatic patient dose reporting) could be considered as a ﬁrst step for dose optimization in IC and IR (this is reported in ﬁve patient studies).
2)There is a need to establish and reinforce national diagnostic re- ference levels (DRLs) in IP, especially in paediatric procedures.
3)Public awareness and safety culture in IP must be improved.
4)Paediatric radiation dose studies are scarce and must be increased.
3.2.Invited presentations
3.2.1.Risk management of skin injuries in interventional procedures
The clinical beneﬁts of IP are generally much higher than the ra- diation risk for patients [4]. Radiation risk should be explicitly included in overall pre-procedure justiﬁcation for: Extremely large patients, certain complex pathologies, or repeated procedures in the same pa- tient [4,22,28]. The frequency of major radiation injuries is estimated  to be between 1:10000 and 1:100000 procedures (based on 10 injuries reported every year in the United States from nearly 10 million inter- ventions, using a rounded ﬁgure), but the true risk is not known, mainly because these injuries are not reported around the world [22]. Several factors can contribute to tissue reactions such as skin eﬀects or skin injuries [29]. These include a complex clinical problem, the type of procedure, operator experience, X-ray equipment that is not optimal for the procedure, long ﬂuoroscopy times, large number of images, or op- erating with non-optimized technical parameters (beam rotation, po- sition of X-ray tube and image detector, magniﬁcation, ﬂuoroscopy mode, use of ﬁlter, etc) [30–34]. Medical physics evaluation of
Table 1
The table shows the number of scientiﬁc papers submitted at the “radiation protection of patients and staﬀ in interventional procedures (IP)” conference session. The table shows how these papers relate to each of the Bonn Call for Action items.
ﬂuoroscopy machines is limited to measurements such as entrance-air- kerma rates and certain image quality characteristics. Medical physics test measurements cannot predict total procedural dose and may not predict physician acceptance of the images. Patient and physician fac- tors are the key elements that aﬀect total irradiation and clinical suc- cess.
As far as the Bonn Call for Action list is concerned, several items are particularly relevant to managing patient irradiation during IP. Table 2 lists six Actions and related recommendations that could facilitate the process of risk management of tissue reactions in IP. Clinical audit goals include collecting data for justiﬁcation of any speciﬁc procedure and avoiding inappropriate irradiation during procedures. Quality assur- ance (QA) and quality management are multifactorial. Regulatory re- quirements are usually written to avoid unsafe performance of all in- stalled equipment. Meeting regulatory requirements provides safety assurance only for items speciﬁcally listed in the regulations. Imaging equipment continuously evolves in areas such as hardware, control software, and image processing. Equipment used for IP frequently has many characteristics that are not addressed by existing regulations. Better QA processes are needed to optimize such equipment. These include formal protocol management to assure that each system is op- timized for the range of clinical procedures that might be performed on it, inclusion of a conﬁguration check as part of the pre-procedure safety check performed in most facilities and technical testing appropriate to this type of machine. Dose metrics should be recorded for every ﬂuoroscopic procedure [35]. Technology has evolved to facilitate skin injury risk management. One example is radiation exposure reporting tools [36]. There are two major components: 1) Radiation Dose Struc- tured Reports (RDSR) produced by the imaging equipment and 2) ra- diation dose collection platforms of various types. However, a number of challenges are also acknowledged. Currently, data collection within a
facility is impeded by connectivity challenges. Data comparison is im- peded by highly inconsistent terminology among facilities. Ad- ditionally, all of the forgoing are limited to reporting what has already happened. It may be prudent to add forecasting technology to all de- partmental radiation dose-tracking systems. Almost all industrial con- trol processes use past data to forecast future behavior—it is better to predict that a process will go out of use next month and take appro- priate actions in advance.
Changed operator behavior and improvements in technology com- bine to reduce patient irradiation in a complex manner. One example is presented in Fig. 1. The data are from IC Laboratory at Columbia University, New York City, United States of America (USA). This lab is a tertiary care facility with a volume of around 7500 procedures per year. The displayed data was collected from clinical records under a protocol approved by Columbia’s Institutional Review Board (ethics board).
The average ﬂuoroscopy time remained constant over the decade from 2007 to 2016. This implies that the average operator work eﬀort was constant over this period. Part of this ﬁnding may be attributable to the introduction of better angiographic devices over time or/and pro- gress in material used resulting to treatment of more complex cases using similar ﬂuoroscopy time. Reference air kerma (Ka,r), PKA, and radiographic contrast material use all declined substantially during the decade. Contributing factors included a reduction in dose rates for both ﬂuoroscopy and cineﬂuorography (lower frame-rates and lower dose per frame), and the substitution of retrospectively-stored ﬂuoroscopy for new cine acquisitions in many parts of the procedure. The reduction of PKA was not as great due to the introduction of larger format image receptors and image displays in several of the procedure rooms.
Fig. 2 documents the reduction in the number of procedures with a substantial Ka,r (> 5 Gy) at the same institution. The annual number of such procedures declined by 80% from 2007 to 2017. Patients with Ka,r
Table 2
Bonn Call for Action items relating to risk management of skin injuries in IP.
Fig. 1. Trends in median per-procedure radiation use in a single high-volume Interventional  Cardiology  Laboratory  at  Columbia  University,  New  York  City. All  procedures  (approximately  75000)  between  2007  and  2016  are  included. Radiation   and   contrast   material   doses   are   normalized   to   2007   doses. Kar = reference  air  kerma;  Pka = kerma-area  product;  Fmin = ﬂuoroscopy  time; CONcc = contrast material volume.
Fig. 2. Number of procedures with a Ka,r > 5 Gy (substantial dose procedure). Data are from the same institution shown in Fig. 1 (Interventional Cardiology Laboratory at Columbia University, New York City). A Ka,r > 5 Gy is used to initiate patient education and follow-up [39].
doses of this magnitude are given radiation discharge instructions, in- cluding a request to self-examine and call in at one month [4,37]. The lowest known Ka,r associated with any tissue reaction among these patients was 6.8 Gy. The second lowest Ka,r was > 8.0 Gy. Most reac- tions were at a Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) grade 1 level, a few at low grade 2 [22,38]. The department’s quality team had called all patients with Ka,r > 7 Gy six weeks after the procedure. Over this time interval, the quality team has not identiﬁed any tissue reactions that were not previously self -reported. Operators performing these procedures were fully aware of the potential of tissue reaction and often moved the beam during procedures [39]. Operators were informed of Ka,r levels starting at 3 Gy and at 1 Gy intervals thereafter [4]. Similar results might not be found for other types of IP because of diﬀerences of ﬁeld size and beam motion during diﬀerent types of procedures.
Industry has developed a range of technical solutions that improve radiation utilization and clinical utility. These advances involve com- binations of imaging hardware, image processing algorithms, and control logic. One example of the eﬀects of these advances is shown in Table 3 [19]. All three systems are from the same manufacturer. The step between Conventional (C) and Intermediate (I) technology was a Table 3
The eﬀect of technical improvements in ﬂuoroscopic equipment on patient radiation dose, in terms of reference air kerma (Ka,r) and kerma-area product (PKA), for coronary chronic total occlusions (CTO) [19].
change in imaging hardware. The step between Intermediate (I) and Advanced (A) technology was an improvement in image processing (the Intermediate hardware was upgraded to a new image processor with related adaptions of the system’s dose-rate control logic). Data in this table were collected from coronary chronic total occlusion recanaliza- tion (CTO) procedures performed in one facility by essentially the same team of physicians. Ka,r was cut in half while ﬂuoroscopy time was constant between C and I. Despite this, the technical success rate was maintained, even with a 50% increase in formal complexity. It should be noted that J-CTO score, a score that is used in a multicenter CTO registry in Japan to predict successful guidewire crossing within 30 min [40]), is currently the most widely used scoring system. Classiﬁcations are: easy (J-CTO = 0), intermediate (J-CTO = 1), diﬃcult (J-CTO = 2), and very diﬃcult (J-CTO ≥ 3). Going from Intermediate (I), to Ad- vanced (A) technology for procedures with similar J-CTO scores did not lead to much of a Ka,r reduction. However, physicians were able to perform longer procedures (ﬂuoroscopy time almost doubled) and achieved a noticeable improvement in success rates (70% to 80%).
Another very important issue is targeted education, which needs to be task-speciﬁc and delivered by educators who are familiar with the clinical situation. ICRP Publication 113 [41] describes the topics that should be included in this training. For physicians who perform IP, an additional level of training should be provided beyond that re- commended for physicians who use ﬂuoroscopy only for simple pro- cedures. A USA government guideline [42] recommends both didactic and hands-on training, including training on the actual ﬂuoroscopy machine that is to be used clinically (or an essentially similar X-ray system), including the use of controls, activation of various modes of operation and displays.
Table 2 refers to prospective risk analysis and its help in avoiding undesirable skin eﬀects from radiation. Techniques such as Failure Mode and Eﬀects Analysis (FMEA), a structured approach to discover potential failures that may exist within the design of a product or process can be used for process improvement [43].
Table 4 refers to a number of recommendations based on a risk analysis performed by the IC Laboratory at Columbia University spe- ciﬁcally for IP [44]. There is still a great deal of work to be done re- garding process improvement. Traditional radiation optimization principles may be driven sometimes by misinterpreting the As Low As Reasonably Achievable (ALARA) concept and making radiation reduc- tion the only endpoint. This can increase the patient’s clinical risk. The actual goal should be minimizing unnecessary radiation (e.g. images that are much crisper than clinically needed) and using amounts of radiation that are commensurate with the clinical purpose [45].
Table 4
Recommendations on risk management of skin injuries based on risk analysis performed at Columbia University, New York City, United States of America, speciﬁcally for IP [44].Because patients and procedures diﬀer, radiation use should be pre- planned, based on the clinical importance of achieving the desired medical result. This is analogous to radiation therapy treatment plan- ning. In most cases, the goal should be to manage radiation use so that the administered dose is less than that which would result in a tissue reaction. However, radiation doses that have potential to result is tissue reactions may be in the patient’s best interest if the procedure goal is that of saving life or avoiding another other unacceptable outcome.
There are major unmet clinical and technology needs. Clinical needs include protocol development and audit, sets of complexity indices for high risk procedures, automated alerts (both during procedures and based on radiation tracking), process forecasting, and increasing the feedback loop by including longer range (e.g., 1 year) clinical outcomes. Many of the technology gaps occur in radiation reporting. One major step forward would be the display of real-time skin dose maps by the interventional ﬂuoroscopy machine. Finally, standards and regulations that reﬂect current safety and performance goals and capabilities need to be implemented on a timescale commensurate with evolutions in clinical and technical practice. All stakeholders should be involved in writing these documents. Regulatory requirements should encourage performance of technical QA testing using the best practices known to the community. This is safer than limiting evaluations (and their as- sociated costs) to least-common-denominator safety checks. The med- ical and health physics communities need to have a better under- standing of both current clinical practice and the actual use of individual systems within their area of responsibility. Additional fo- cused technical training for physicians is needed because their ability to select appropriate technical factors during a procedure is critical. In this respect, radiation management in IP diﬀers from CT radiation man- agement because the IP physician is an active part of the ﬂuoroscopy machine’s control loops. It is encouraging that physicians who do not traditionally receive advanced training in RP have begun to include radiation dose and ﬂuoroscopy time measurement and recording in their procedural quality indicators [46]. Other medical specialists should follow this example.
3.2.2.Occupational radiation risks in interventional procedures
Although the clinical beneﬁt of IP to the patient has been shown to be much higher than the radiation risks, the corresponding occupa- tional radiation risks are not always properly considered when planning the interventional laboratories and the appropriate X-ray system to be used. ICRP highlighted, as part of the justiﬁcation for medical proce- dures, that “The principal aim of medical exposures is to do more good than harm to the patient, subsidiary account being taken of the radia- tion detriment from the exposure of the radiological staﬀ and of other individuals” [47]. Furthermore, as part of the principle of optimisation, ICRP has also stated that “the choice of protection option directly alters the level of exposure of the patient, the staﬀ and sometimes the public” [45]. This is especially relevant for some IP practices. IP procedures
diﬀer from most imaging examinations because potential beneﬁts ac- crue to the patient, but both patients and staﬀ are exposed to potential risks. These ICRP recommendations have been included as part of the European Basic Safety Standards (European BSS) in articles 19.4 (for justiﬁcation) and 32.b (for optimisation) [48]. In addition, a number of diﬀerent health professionals may be involved in these procedures and they are not always properly trained in RP. ICRP has recommended using a global approach and also considering occupational radiation risk as part of the justiﬁcation and optimisation processes (Bonn Actions 1 and 2) [25].
New technology in X-ray and imaging systems and advances in image post processing allows a substantial reduction in patient (and staﬀ) doses. In recent years industry has worked to improve RP (Bonn Action 3). Education and training (Bonn Action 4) also need industry involvement and greater support from medical physicists in order to maximize the beneﬁt of new technology and to avoid radiation in- cidents (Bonn Action 7). Areas of needed improvement in protection are highlighted in the recent ICRP Publication 139 [49].
The eﬀort to promote RP culture in the medical community is especially relevant for those medical specialties where ﬂuoroscopically guided IP are commonly performed, but RP training may not be ade- quate (e.g. vascular surgery, urology, gastroenterology, etc). In 2012, Picano and colleagues alerted the cardiology community to this issue – “Attention to radiation protection is one aspect – and not the least important – of good practice of medicine. A smart interventional car- diologist cannot be afraid of radiation, but must be very afraid of ra- diation unawareness” [50].
Avoidance of unintended and accidental exposures [51] should be part of the quality assurance programme for interventional practices and are part of Bonn Action 7. The European [48] and International BSS
[52] contain more requirements than before on radiation safety for interventional practices (Bonn Action 10). Unintended and accidental exposures refer to medical exposures in the international and European BSS but in these situations, occupational exposures should also be analyzed, especially for IP practices.
The ‘Ibero-American Conference on Radiation Protection in Medicine’ (CIPRaM) held in Madrid, in October 2016, tried to analyse progress in the implementation of the Bonn ‘Call for Action’ in the Ibero-American region [53]. One of the thematic sessions was dedicated to image-guided IP. Among the main problems identiﬁed as needing additional eﬀort were the lack of RP culture, proper personal occupa- tional dosimetry and enough training in RP for some of the profes- sionals involved in IP.
Regarding occupational RP in IP, some of the most important achievements and the most signiﬁcant gaps are:
3.2.2.1.New occupational dose limit for the lens of the eye. For occupational RP for IP, the most relevant issue in recent years has  been the new ICRP recommended limit on the equivalent dose for the lens of the eye; 20 mSv in a single year, or 100 mSv in ﬁve consecutive years subject to a maximum dose of 50 mSv in a single year. This was proposed by ICRP in Publication 118 [54], advanced in the ICRP Statement on Tissue Reactions [55] and later adopted by the International [52] and European [48] BSS.
3.2.2.2.Research actions on lens dose evaluation and radiation injuries. Several research eﬀorts  were initiated  by the IAEA and the  EC to evaluate lens doses during medical procedures and improve personal dosimetry methods. In Europe, the “Optimization of RAdiation protection for MEDical staﬀ” (ORAMED) project was conducted from 2008 to 2011 [56]. It was followed by the ELDO project (2010–2015, funded by the DoReMi network of excellence) on Eye Lens DOsimetry (Dosimetry protocol for retrospective assessment of lens doses for Interventional Cardiology) [57] and completed by the EURALOC project (EUropean epidemiological study on RAdiation-induced Lens Opacities among interventional Cardiologists) just ﬁnished in 2017
IAEA promoted the RELID project (Retrospective Evaluation of Lens Injuries and Dose) [59]. During this programme, eight surveys were carried out to evaluate occupational lens doses and lens opacities de- rived from interventional cardiology procedures [60–66]. Recently, a follow-up of 10 professionals with lens opacities compatible with lack of protection during IC practices, evaluated in 2010 as part of the RELID survey, was conducted in Buenos Aires, Argentina [62].
3.2.2.3.Scientiﬁc papers on occupational radiation risks in interventional procedures. One way to measure the impact of the Bonn Conference in promoting research in occupational RP for IP (Bonn Action 6) is to compare the number of published scientiﬁc papers in the 5 years before the Bonn Conference (2008 – 2012) and the 5 years after the Bonn Conference (2013 – 2017). By using the “Web of Science” [67] and looking for the terms “Occupational radiation risks in interventional procedures” an increase of 114% was found, and if the word “lens” is also included then the increase is 317% (search made in November 2017). The contribution of the Bonn conference on this process is recognized (occupational RP, Bonn Action 5).
3.2.2.4.Training material and guidelines on occupational radiation protection. IAEA has made a substantial eﬀort to produce training material (slides and webinars) for physicians (radiologists, cardiologists  and other medical specialties  in IP) that is available at no cost on the IAEA website in order to help improve safety culture. ICRP has also published several reports containing recommendations on occupational RP for IP and for training activities such as ICRP Publication 113 [41], ICRP Publication  117  [68],  ICRP  Publication  120 [37] and ICRP Publication 121 [69]; these have been accompanied by educational slides available at no charge on the ICRP website.
The National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements (NCRP) in the USA published a report in 2010 entitled “Radiation dose management for ﬂuoroscopically guided interventional medical proce- dures”. The report stated that the ALARA principle should be applied without compromising either patient safety or the clinical procedure and without unacceptably increasing workers’ occupational dose [4]. In 2016, NCRP published Commentary 26 on “Guidance on radiation dose limits for the lens of the eye” [70]. In this report, after evaluating current epidemiological evidence, NCRP determined that it is prudent to reduce the recommended annual lens of the eye occupational dose limit from an equivalent dose of 150 mSv to a dose of 50 mGy and concluded that signiﬁcant additional research is still needed [70].
IAEA and the International Radiation Protection Association (IRPA) also published relevant reports on the implications for occupational protection of the new dose limit for the lens of the eye. The IAEA report indicates the need to identify any workers who might receive a sig- niﬁcant dose to the lens of the eye (e.g. of the order of a few mSv in a year), and especially those for whom the dose limit for the lens of the eye will be more restrictive than the limit on eﬀective dose [71]. It also has one annex providing typical values for equivalent dose to the lens of the eye per procedure in IP. IRPA has evaluated the results of a ques- tionnaire on implications for dosimetry, methods of protection, and implications of the change to the limit [72–73].
Guidelines and consensus documents produced by medical societies are also very useful training material to promote good RP practices for IP. The Cardiovascular and Interventional Society of Europe (CIRSE) together with the Society of Interventional Radiology (SIR) in the USA have produced a document on “Occupational radiation protection in interventional radiology” [74]. As part of the IC component of the IAEA programme ISEMIR [75], a document entitled “Recommendations for occupational radiation protection in interventional cardiology” was published, with endorsement by the Asian Paciﬁc Society of Interven- tional Cardiology, the European Association of Percutaneous Cardio- vascular Interventions, the Latin American Society of Interventional Cardiology and the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and
Interventions (SCAI) in the USA [76]. The European Heart Rhythm Association (EHRA) published a guide on “Practical ways to reduce radiation dose for patients and staﬀ during device implantations and electrophysiological procedures” [77]. Issues related to pregnant or potentially pregnant workers in IR were addressed in a 2015 SIR-CIRSE joint guideline [76]. In 2017, the European Heart Rhythm Association published a consensus document endorsed by the U.S. Heart Rhythm Society (HRS) on a similar topic [78].
3.2.3.Radiation protection in paediatric interventional procedures
The most recent and complete report on health eﬀects of ionizing radiation to children is that of United Nations Scientiﬁc Committee on the Eﬀects of Atomic Radiation (UNSCEAR) Report on Eﬀects of Radiation Exposure of Children [79]. The UNSCEAR report states that exposures received by children and adults from the same source of io- nizing radiation can have diﬀering impacts and thus should be con- sidered separately to predict risk following exposure more accurately for children. For a given radiation dose value, infants and children are at greater risk than adults for developing a variety of tumors. This risk is not always immediate but extends later into life. The UNSCEAR report reviewed 23 cancer types, some of which are highly relevant for eval- uating the radiological consequences of nuclear accidents and of some medical procedures. Children were found to be more sensitive than adults for the development of about 25% of tumor types, including leukemia, as well as thyroid, brain, and breast cancer. The risk can be signiﬁcantly higher in children, depending on circumstances. There is also recent literature that focuses on the association of radiation in the mSv range, such as from CT, and cancer induction [80–85]. Some of these studies use risk models and others use epidemiology. Several risk models have been applied to estimate the cancer burden caused by ionizing radiation from CT. All models predict higher risks for cancer among children exposed to CT as compared to adults. Similar data on IP simply do not exist, except in very limited circumstances [86].
The increased risk of developing a malignancy highlights the im- portance of establishing DRLs for paediatric IP. RP issues in IP have recently been addressed in ICRP documents, including the need for DRLs [69,87]. Data concerning dose exposure from paediatric IC pro- cedures are still scarce. The few published studies greatly diﬀer in methodology and the information provided, making comparisons very diﬃcult. Furthermore, the conclusions are sometimes contradictory. Better standardization and guidelines are needed, especially for the patient dose surveys used as the basis for DRL values. Data concerning dose exposures from IP other than IC in children are extremely scarce and limited to common vascular and enteric procedures. No data are available about embolization or sclerotherapy of vascular malforma- tions, neuroradiology procedures, arteriography, CT guided biopsies, and biliary IR. Although relatively rare, these procedures can result in very high dose exposures. No national or regional DRL values are available, as just local DRL values are provided by each study [88–92]. Despite the large number of studies available from European countries, European DRLs for paediatric patients are only available for some common radiological examinations. Due to the huge variation of pa- tient sizes among the paediatric population, several age, size or weight groups and extensive patient dose surveys are needed to establish DRL values [87]. Unfortunately, there has been little consistency in patient grouping. The European Diagnostic Reference Levels for Paediatric Imaging (PiDRL) project produced guidance on this issue. The project concluded that the development of local DRLs should be encouraged and the feasibility of national or regional DRLs should be studied. The initial focus should be to establish local DRL values where the number of variables is smaller. These values should then be compared between centres and reasons for any large diﬀerences should be studied, in order to decide if national DRL values are appropriate. Within the report, a few IP were speciﬁed where local DRL values could be established [93].
Regarding the Bonn Call for Action, several steps must be followed for practical implementation. These include:
3.2.3.1.Action 1: Enhance the implementation of the principle of justiﬁcation. Clinical imaging referral guidelines must be implemented globally, keeping local and regional variations in mind.
3.2.3.2.Action 2: Enhance the implementation of the principle of optimization of protection and safety. Diagnostic reference levels for radiological procedures, including IP, must be established, used, and updated regularly, especially for children.
3.2.3.3.Action 3: Strengthen manufacturers’ role in contributing to the overall safety regime. All stakeholders must support development of technical solutions for the reduction of radiation exposure of patients.
3.2.3.4.Action 4: Strengthen radiation protection education and training of health professionals. Health professionals must receive appropriate training whenever new technology is introduced.
4.Conclusion
There has been a continuous increase in the number and complexity of IP and this trend is expected to continue. Manufacturers play an important role in making patients safer—new technology helps to re- duce patient and staﬀ doses. Patient and staﬀ monitoring are becoming easier and optimisation strategies are being implemented. Automatic patient dose reporting is considered as a ﬁrst step for dose optimization. Despite national, regional, and international eﬀorts, paediatric IP ra- diation dose data are still scarce.
The new radiation dose limit for the lens of the eyes is having an important regulatory impact. There is a need for improved protection and routine occupational dosimetry in some professional groups (e.g. surgeons and workers in hybrid rooms). There is also a need to estimate lens doses and to identify high-risk professional groups. A pilot in- dividual monitoring assessment seems to be one of the best approaches to identify workers in IP who require eye lens monitoring and to decide on the best dosimetry system. Medical lens examination for more highly exposed professionals should be considered.
A lack of RP training persists. International and medical societies’ guidelines on RP for interventions should be used as part of training programmes. Online real-time dosimetry systems could have a positive eﬀect on the behavior of IP personnel.
For the IP session, the answers to the questions posed by the Scientiﬁc Committee of the IAEA Conference are:
1)What has been done since the Bonn Call for Action?
Several research actions, more regulation, more training material, multiple patient dose monitoring software programs, low dose X-ray technology, more guidelines and better occupational protection have all been reported.
2)What results have been achieved and changes in practice im- plemented?
Technology has evolved immensely, facilitating patient skin injury risk management. Publications on occupational RP for IP increased by 100–300% after the 2012 Bonn Conference. Better occupational dosi- metry and better technology are available, and allow real time feed- back.
3)What can be done further for better implementation of the Bonn Call for Action?
Equipment used for IP frequently has many characteristics that are not addressed by the regulations. Therefore, clinical audit and better QA processes are needed to optimize IP equipment. Regulatory re- quirements should encourage performing technical QA testing using the best practices known to the community. Presentation of real-time skin dose maps by the interventional ﬂuoroscopy machine will lead to better patient dose management and further optimization of radiation use. Patient radiation use should be preplanned, based on the clinical im- portance of achieving the desired medical result. Software development companies and the industry in general could consider adding
forecasting technology and FMEA techniques for patient process im- provement. Continuous RP training and personal dosimetry (including new medical specialties involved in IP) should be reinforced. More important, targeted education, which is task-speciﬁc and delivered by educators who are familiar with the clinical situation, is essential. RP tools must be readily available. More studies on the impact of lens opacities in clinical practice should be done. Paediatric studies are still scarce, and more studies are needed. Clinical imaging referral guide- lines are also necessary, keeping local and regional variations in mind. All related stakeholders must support the development of technical solutions for reduction of radiation exposure of patients.
4)What challenges were not seen before?
There are more clinical specialties where IP are performed, and most of these physicians have no RP training at all. New techniques are continuously introduced that require the use of complex technology in hybrid rooms with many diﬀerent professionals involved. Fluoroscopy machines with newer low-dose technology (especially important in paediatric IP) is expensive and not aﬀordable in countries with fewer ﬁnancial resources. Manufacturers could consider including dose re- duction technology as standard equipment and not as an additional option at extra cost.
