<title>Gas-cooled reactor thermal hydraulic analyses with MELCOR</title>
<author>Bradley Beeny*, Karen Vierow</author>
<Affiliation>Texas A&M University Department of Nuclear Engineering, 3133 TAMU, College Station, TX 77843, USA</Affiliation>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2015.06.002</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2015.06.002 </URL>
ABSTRACT
Pursuant to the Energy Policy Act of 2005, the High Temperature Gas-Cooled Reactor (HTGR) has been selected as the reference design for the Next Generation Nuclear Plant (NGNP). Stemming from a U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) HTGR research initiative, a need was identiﬁed for validation of systems-level computer code modeling capabilities in anticipation of the eventual need to perform licensing analyses. Because the NRC has used MELCOR for light water reactors (LWR) in the past and because MELCOR was recently updated to include gas-cooled reactor (GCR) physics models, MELCOR is among the system codes of interest to the NRC. This paper describes MELCOR modeling of the General Atomics' Modular High Temperature Gas-Cooled Reactor (MHTGR). The MHGTR is a suitable design for demonstration of MELCOR GCR modeling competency for two reasons: 1) the MHTGR is a predecessor to the more advanced General Atomics’ Gas-Turbine Modular High Temperature Reactor (GTMHR), and 2) experimental data useful for benchmark calculations may soon become available. Using the most complete literature references available for the MHTGR design, researchers at Texas A&M University (TAMU) constructed a MELCOR input deck for the MHTGR to partially validate MELCOR GCR modeling capabilities. Normal and off-normal system operating conditions were modeled with appropriate boundary and initial conditions. MELCOR predictions of system response were obtained for steady-state, pressurized conduction cool-down (PCC), and depressurized conduction cool-down (DCC) scenarios. Code results were checked against nominal MHTGR design parameters, physical intuition, and antici- pated GCR thermal hydraulic response. No inherent deﬁciencies in MELCOR modeling capability were observed, suggesting that the newly-implemented GCR models are adequate for systems-level analysis. If and when experimental benchmark data becomes available, further validation activities may proceed given the modeling efforts discussed herein.
Keywords:
MELCOR HTGR MHTR
Pressurized/depressurized conduction cool- down
Licensing
1.Introduction
The DOE has selected the HTGR as the Generation IV reactor design that will become the NGNP and will partially satisfy nuclear initiatives calling for increased safety and reliability. Plans were in place to build an NGNP demonstration plant at Idaho National Laboratories (INL) as per the Energy Policy Act of 2005, but reali- zation of this goal is unlikely under present political and economic circumstances. An NRC cooperative agreement was established in 2008 with the overall goal of expanding the HTGR knowledge base through integral facility experiments, separate effects tests, and various computational studies. TAMU, as a party to this agreement for a time, was appointed several tasks related to HTGR computa- tional analysis. The present study pertains to systems-level analysis of a prismatic-type gas-cooled reactor with MELCOR. MELCOR is a systems-level thermal hydraulics and severe accident computer code developed by Sandia National Laboratories (SNL) for the NRC. It has been used as a safety analysis tool for evaluation of LWRs under Design Basis Accident (DBA) and Beyond Design Basis Acci- dent (BDBA) conditions. Code capabilities were recently extended for application to HTGRs. Validation of its predictive capabilities is necessary to qualify MELCOR as a reliable safety analysis tool for future HTGR installations. The MELCOR model described herein will facilitate a future code-to-experiment benchmark.
1.1.Objectives
The objectives of this work are as follows:
To develop a MELCOR input deck for the MHTGR with latest references;
To apply and test new GCR MELCOR models and input devel- opment techniques;
To assess MELCOR capabilities for modeling normal (steady- state) and off-normal (pressurized and depressurized conduc- tion cool-down) HTGR operating scenarios; and
●To prepare for future code-to-experiment benchmark studies.
1.2.Signiﬁcance of work
Material temperature limits caused downward revisions to the NGNP target outlet temperature. “High Temperature” or “Very High Temperature” as in HTGR/VHTR generally refers to core outlet temperatures approaching 1000 ○C. This outlet temperature is attractive from a thermodynamic perspective because it enables energy/hydrogen co-generation and lends the reactor design to any of several other industrial applications. NGNP temperature re- visions have dropped the target from 1000 ○C to about 700 ○C. However, one may still anticipate a future need for HTGR licensing tools and it is in this sense that the present work bears relevance to the state of the art of reactor thermal hydraulics analysis.
1.3.Technical approach
Pursuant to the aforementioned objectives, a MELCOR input deck was built for the MHTGR using system design documents and the GCR physics modeling features of MELCOR (version 2.1). For the MHTGR, the primary source of design information was a Pre- liminary Safety Information Document (PSID), reference 3, desig- nated as HTGR-86-024. The primary source for graphite property information was reference 6 (Ho, 1991). The basic, steady-state input deck was augmented with certain control logic to model steady-state, PCC, and DCC scenarios. Several assumptions were made at this stage of the process because there is considerable uncertainty associated with off-normal HTGR operations.
1.4.Brief background
A working knowledge of MHTGR design philosophy informs the modeling efforts outlined in the present paper. The reader is directed to previous publications (e.g., Beeny, 2012) for an extensive discussion of MHTGR history, programmatic objectives, and design. Brieﬂy, the MHTGR is a prismatic-type, thermal spectrum, helium- cooled reactor with an active core region comprised of large hex- agonal graphite blocks (fuel elements) that have coolant, fuel, and control rod channels interspersed in a triangular/hexagonal lattice. Tri-isotropic (TRISO) coated ﬁssile/fertile fuel kernels are sus- pended in cylindrical graphite compacts and stacked into holes in fuel elements. Most thermal energy is removed, under normal operating conditions, by conduction to and convection from fuel element coolant channels. An individual MHTGR unit has a thermal power output of 350 MWth. Typical operating vessel pressure is about 6.4 MPa while typical core outlet coolant temperature is approximately 690 ○C.
It is also helpful to understand, on some level, the modeling
philosophy of MELCOR (Beeny, 2012). Created by Sandia National Laboratories for the NRC, MELCOR was originally conceived as a ﬂexible, fast-running probabilistic risk assessment tool that has since  evolved  into  a  best-estimate,  systems-level  severe accident
analysis code for light water reactors. It employs a lumped parameter control volume/ﬂow path modeling approach that is quite general and adaptable. MELCOR version 2.1 is as capable as its predecessor, MELCOR version 1.8.6, but is more versatile due to new input options and incorporation of gas cooled reactor physics models.
The MELCOR COR physics package predicts the thermal response of the reactor core and lower plenum. Built-in conduction, convection, radiation, oxidation, and thermal/mechanical stress models simulate core behavior under normal operating conditions. When constructing the core nodalization, the user must adhere to MELCOR's two-dimensional cylindrical core modeling concept. The core and its contents - apart from hydrodynamic material associ- ated with the control volume hydrodynamics (CVH) physics pack- age - is split into a user-deﬁned number of radial rings and axial levels so as to create a network of core cells. Each cell is azimuthally symmetric about the core centerline and represents the intersec- tion of a ring with a level. Ring numbers monotonically increase from inside to outside, while level numbers monotonically increase from bottom to top. Fig. 1 shows an axial slice of a quarter section of a representative HTGR core. The general ring/level nodalization approach is illustrated.
Inside each core cell are one or more core components desig- nated for fuel (FU), cladding (CL), supporting structure (SS), and non-supporting structure (NS) among others. Every core cell is described by inner and outer radii, bottom elevation, axial thick- ness, boundary area, and channel/bypass ﬂow areas. Each compo- nent is comprised of one or more materials (e.g. uranium dioxide, graphite, steel, etc.). Each component is described by an equivalent diameter, a surface area, and material mass. Cell-to-cell contact areas for conduction and radiation heat transfer follow from these geometric parameters. Heat transfer occurs between core compo- nents or between core components and hydrodynamic material of the CVH package. Effectively, ﬁssion/decay heat causes the core cells to act as thermal power sources to control volumes (CV). The radial and axial power proﬁles are input by the user as are geo- metric parameters for all components including surface areas, equivalent diameters, ﬂow areas, and cell boundary areas.
To quickly summarize the GCR PCC and DCC transients, both cases are initiated by a loss of forced cooling. Subsequently, if no break in the pressure boundary exists the transient follows the PCC path as coolant stagnates in the vessel, plena, and inlet/outlet ducts. Combined effects of thermal conduction, thermal energy storage, and natural coolant circulation govern the thermal hydraulic response. If the pressure boundary is compromised, helium can escape the vessel and no natural coolant circulation factors in to the thermal hydraulic response. Different patterns of heat removal are observed but ultimately the mechanism of passive thermal con- duction cools the core.
2.Theory: MELCOR GCR physics models
The following overview of GCR core heat transfer models gives insight into MELCOR predictions of core thermal response. Included in the discussion are axial, radial, and boundary conduction as well as convection. Emphasis is placed on 1) newly implemented MEL- COR models for prismatic GCRs and 2) pre-existing MELCOR models that still apply to prismatic GCRs. As such the following discussion addresses most of the MELCOR code modiﬁcations that make GCR modeling possible. Other noteworthy code additions ﬁnd applica- tion in the context of GCR physics modeling, e.g. the new reﬂector core component (RF), the redeﬁned cladding core component, and the ability to include graphite in the fuel core component. It is noted that the GCR physics model development is the work of the Fig. 1.  Generalized COR nodalization.
MELCOR developers and has been included with their permission to enable understanding of the MELCOR code calculations.
2.1.Axial conduction
Component-wise axial conduction can occur between like components of axially-adjacent core cells. This is not a new physics modeling capability in MELCOR, but it ﬁnds application in the context of GCRs because axial conduction between RF, CL, FU, etc. is an important aspect of core physics. The conduction equation as-
@1
@2
The effective conductance [W/K] of Equation (2) is written as a parallel combination of a conductance for core cell i and conduc- tance for core cell j. The equations above apply to any core component. The only necessary condition for axial conduction is that there are two like components in axially-adjacent core cells i and j with a nonzero temperature difference between them.
2.2.Radial conduction
Cases of inter-cell (between components in radially-adjacent cells) and intra-cell (within a component inside a core cell) radial conduction will both be mentioned. The general, inter-cell formula for radial conduction is used for supporting structure but is not a new model speciﬁcally for GCRs. The same general, inter-cell treatment with an augmented, effective conductivity from the TanakaeChisaka model is applied to radial conduction in a pris- matic modular reactor (PMR) core. The case of intra-cell conduction between fuel and “cladding” in a PMR is also considered.
2.2.1.General inter-cell core conduction
Equation (1) in Section 3.1 above for axial conduction is applied to the general case of radial conduction. The only differences are deﬁnitions of the conductance parameters. The necessary condition for radial conduction is that there are two like components in radially-adjacent core cells with a nonzero temperature difference between them.
2.2.2. TanakaeChisaka effective conductivity
In PMR's, the core consists of solid graphite blocks perforated by coolant channels and fuel compact holes. The radial conductivity of graphite blocks is obtained via the TanakaeChisaka expression (Gauntt et al., 2008):@3
@4
@5
Assuming the thermal conductivity of the fuel compacts approximately equals that of the graphite block, ks, the porosity ε is a simple function of material volumes (Gauntt et al., 2008):
@6
The porosity is therefore the ratio of discontinuous volume (channel without solids) to continuous volume (Gauntt et  al.,  2008). The pore conductivity,kpore, is a parallel combination of a radiative conductivity and helium coolant thermal conductivity. Thus, the radial block conductivity is characterized only by the porosity, the thermal conductivity of the solid graphite,ks, and the effective pore conductivity kpore. To get to the effective radial block conductivity, one must account for all gaps that exist between the many hexagonal blocks comprising a prismatic core. This amounts to adding a parallel resistance term for the gaps.
2.2.3.Intra-cell core conduction and the “thick cladding” approximation
Compared to zircaloy cladding of an LWR, the PMR graphite regions surrounding each fuel compact hole are much thicker. Whereas the assumption of a linear temperature proﬁle in the cladding is allowable for an LWR, it is incorrect for a PMR. The graphite “cladding” of the PMR is treated by MELCOR as “thick” by assumption of a logarithmic temperature proﬁle. Thus, there is actually a temperature distribution in the CL component of a PMR.However, MELCOR derives an average CL temperature from the assumed temperature proﬁle as outlined below.
equation if no volumetric power sources exist. Given speciﬁed- temperature boundary conditions, the complete problem is:
@7
The radius R0 is the inner radius of the cladding (the outer radius of the fuel compact plus any gap thickness). The radius R1 is an effective cladding radius computed by transforming a hexagonal unit cell to a circular unit cell via preservation of total cell area. Solution of this equation subject to the given boundary conditions results in:
@8
Averaging T(r) with annular, cross-sectional cladding area as a weight function (i.e. taking an area average), one recovers:
@9
MELCOR deﬁnes a weighting factor between the inner and outer surface temperatures (Gauntt et al., 2008):
@10
This weighting factor is the fractional location of the average
temperature in the wall (Gauntt et al., 2008). The quantity f is used by MELCOR as a weighting factor for conductive resistance in the thick PMR cladding and factors in to the deﬁnition of an effective conductance between the FU and CL components. MELCOR can therefore model the effects of the thick PMR cladding and still use one CL average temperature and one extra conductance term in the FU-to-CL heat rate equation.
Similar to the axial conduction heat rate formula, the fuel-to- cladding heat rate equation uses an effective total gap conduc- tance to account for factors affecting heat transfer between fuel and cladding. The gap conductance includes terms for conduction through the fuel, conduction across any existing gas gap, radiation between fuel and cladding across the gap, and conduction through the cladding (in the case of PMR's with thick cladding). The fuel-to- cladding heat rate equation is (Gauntt et al., 2008):
@11
@12
@13
The conductance term hgap [W/m2*K] consists of a term for fuel (h ), a term for thick cladding in PMR's (z ), terms for conduction/radiation across a gas gap (hgas and hrad), and an optional user- deﬁned term (hCF). The fuel-to-cladding surface area Af for con- duction heat transfer equals the product of fuel compact circum-ference (pD FU) and FU (or core cell) height H FU.
2.2.4.Boundary conduction
By design, prismatic-type reactors conduct heat to the core boundaries for cooling under accident scenarios. Therefore, MEL- COR must be able to model conduction at the boundary of the core region, where graphite treated by the COR package meets graphite or steel treated by the HS package. Boundary heat structures can receive thermal energy via conduction from designated compo- nents in the outermost radial ring of the core nodalization.2.3.Convection
Convection heat transfer calculations in the core package occur for every component that has a non-zero surface area. The problem re- duces to computing a suitable heat transfer coefﬁcient for prevailing ﬂow conditions. Four Nusselt (Nu) numbers are computed using various correlations for different possible ﬂow conditions. Nu is omputed for forced and free convection in both laminar and tur-bulent regimes. The numerically largest Nu values for both forced and
free convection are identiﬁed and taken as representative of the core ﬂow conditions. Note this procedure is not unique to GCR modeling in MELCOR. The heat transfer coefﬁcient can then be computed, relaxed by an averaging technique to mitigate potential numerical instability,and used to compute a convection heat rate (Gauntt et al., 2008):
@14
The surface area As and the temperature Ts belong to the core component. The temperature Tf is derived from the CV that is coupled to the core cell housing the core component.
3.Material and methods: MELCOR modeling approach and input development
This section discusses the MELCOR input development for the MHGTR, which is the original work of the current authors. MELCOR input adheres to certain code requirements that dictate modeling approach. The user must translate a geometrically complex reactor core into a simpliﬁed, two-dimensional cylindrical representation. The MHTGR model is intended to represent the reactor vessel and communicating components. The active core, reﬂector regions, metallic vessel structures, plenum spaces, inlet/outlet ducts, and reactor cavity cooling system (as a boundary condition) are considered. Boundary conditions are applied where necessary to stand in for omitted parts of the primary and secondary loop.
3.1.MELCOR modeling approach
The core is divided along axial and radial boundaries. The axial level boundaries correspond to those of stacked fuel elements, i.e. the right hexagonal graphite blocks. Radially, a region-wise grouping strategy is adopted as illustrated in Fig.  2.  Each  core ring in the model is associated with a region in the MHTGR core such as the solid central reﬂector, part of the active core, the inner replaceable side reﬂector, the solid side reﬂector, etc. These regions
Fig. 2.  Geometric transformation of an HTGR  core.
are hexagonal as opposed to circular, so each is transformed to an annular shape based on preservation of cross sectional area. The number of hexagonal elements within a given region is summed and the result multiplied by the hexagonal area of a single element. The resulting total area is used to sequentially solve simple equa- tions for ring radii and thereby derive a radial ring nodalization. This process is illustrated in Fig. 2.
The MHTGR core nodalization diagram, as a vertical half-section view, is included in Fig. 3. The model has two central reﬂector rings, three active core rings, and two side reﬂector rings. Two rings are dedicated to each of the central and replaceable side reﬂectors to facilitate bypass ﬂow modeling.
For a PMR in MELCOR, the “cladding” represents fuel element graphite “webbing” around the fuel compacts and coolant chan- nels. The user must compute a cladding radius, which is a well- deﬁned design characteristic in LWRs but is a derived quantity for HTGRs. The graphite webbing is transformed into an annular region with an effective radius as demonstrated in Fig. 4.
3.2.MELCOR input (ex-core)
Parts of the system external to the core are modeled with con- trol volumes, ﬂow paths, and heat structures. The MHTGR has an
upper and lower plenum, a set of up-comer ducts, an outlet duct, an air cavity, and several steel structures like the core barrel, pressure vessel wall, and RCCS panels. Each feature is discussed below. Time- independent helium source/sink CVs act as boundary conditions upstream of the up-comer and downstream of the outlet duct.
The upper plenum is treated with three large CVs that receive ﬂow from the up-comer and convey ﬂow to the core region. The detail is sufﬁcient for present modeling purposes. The lower plenum consists of a single, large CV. Flow exits the core from one of several ﬂow paths and enters the lower plenum to mix before passing to the outlet duct. The outlet duct is represented by a single CV. The ex-core nodalization is shown in Fig. 5.
An air cavity surrounds the vessel and separates the reactor vessel wall from the RCCS panels. Radiation occurs across the cavity and should dominate vessel heat removal. While natural circulation could occur within the cavity, the cavity is not nodalized to capture such effects.
The system has a core barrel between the permanent side reﬂector and the up-comer region. Up-comer duct metal is not modeled, but the neighboring vessel wall is included and is visible to the core barrel so as to permit radiation heat transfer. The barrel and vessel walls are modeled with heat structures and are either stainless steel or carbon steel. The RCCS consists of steel heat
Fig. 3. COR nodalization of the MHTGR.
Fig. 5. Representative CVH nodalization for MHTGR/HTTF.
structures with a constant-temperature boundary condition at the outside surface.
3.3.Steady-state and transient control logic
Steady-state boundary conditions consist of source and sink CVs connected to the system with valves and ﬂow paths. The source CV is connected with a time-independent ﬂow path so that the incoming coolant mass ﬂow rate is user-speciﬁed. The thermody- namic conditions of the source control volume match nominal core inlet conditions, while those of the sink control volume match expected outlet conditions. Time-independent ﬂow paths were used between the up-comer and upper plenum CVs so that bypass ﬂow could be split off from coolant channel ﬂow as desired.
To model pressurized and depressurized conduction cool- downs, some event-initiating control logic was required. For both cases, a loss of forced circulation (LOFC) must occur at some time subsequent to the establishment of a steady state. The LOFC is
Fig. 4. Determination of an “effective clad radius” in a prismatic fuel element hexagonal lattice cell.
achieved by changing steady-state boundary conditions so as to immediately eliminate or quickly coast down the coolant ﬂow rate from the source CV. This LOFC induces a transient state and begins a PCC or DCC accident sequence. In a PCC, the stagnating coolant remains in the system at pressure and is able to develop natural circulation patterns. Thus, for a PCC the source control volume mass ﬂow rate must be immediately forced to zero or forced to coast down at the time of LOFC. The sink control volume may remain connected to the system at operating pressure to preclude a depressurization. In a DCC, the system must blow down through a duct break to the reactor cavity. Thus, the source and sink CVs must be isolated and, simultaneously, a ﬂow path must be opened to the reactor cavity.
3.4.Decay heat
For both accident scenarios, intervention of the reactor protec- tion system at the point of LOFC is assumed. Accordingly, a reactor scram occurs and the core thermal power immediately transitions to decay heat. An ANS standard decay curve was used to calculate decay heat. MHTGR decay heat is based on a steady-state power level of 350 MW. The whole-core decay heat calculation assumes a long irradiation time before shutdown (584 days) and a certain distribution of ﬁssion power (before shutdown) among three nu- clides: U235, Pu239, and U238.
4.Results and discussion: MELCOR predictions of MHTGR thermal hydraulic response
The MHTGR was modeled at full power (350 MWth) with decay heat calculated by MELCOR. Three operating scenarios were considered: steady-state, pressurized conduction cool-down, and depressurized conduction cool-down. For the steady-state sce- nario, core structure and coolant temperature distributions were obtained. For the PCC and DCC scenarios, the predicted time evo- lution of certain derived quantities (mass-averaged thermal hy- draulics parameters) was observed. Note that for PCC and DCC scenarios, instantaneous LOFC was assumed.
4.1.Steady-state
Table 1 summarizes some important steady-state characteris- tics. User-deﬁned boundary conditions set the speciﬁed inlet mass ﬂow rate, temperature, and pressure.
The desired outlet temperature was achieved if 157.0 kg/s of helium cooled the active core (rings 3, 4, and 5). For this “channel- side” mass ﬂow rate and for an estimated 10% bypass ﬂow (Donohew, 1995), a total (channel plus bypass) coolant mass ﬂow rate of 174.44 kg/s must come from the time-independent source CV.
Table 2 is a color-coded core structural temperature map. Axial levels and radial rings are noted in Table 2 (IA/IR), as are the geo- metric locations of axial level mid-heights (Z) and radial ring cen- ters (R). The pressure vessel temperatures are omitted from Fig. 6. The cladding temperatures of Table 2 (green boxes within the thick
Table 1
Steady-state parameters for the 350 MWth MHTGR.
black boundaries) were used to produce Fig. 6 as opposed to the fuel temperatures.
The axial temperature distribution is relatively ﬂat in the upper and lower reﬂector regions and is consistent with the chopped cosine power proﬁle in the active core region. The active core dis- tribution is somewhat bottom-peaked with the hottest reported temperature (excluding fuel) being 781.8 ○C. In the radial direction, the central reﬂector temperature distribution is relatively ﬂat but indicates the reﬂector is warmer in the region nearest the active core. This suggests that upon LOFC, heat conduction to the center of the central reﬂector will proceed. In the active core, the innermost region is hotter than the outermost region, which in turn is hotter than the central region. The replaceable side reﬂector exhibits a relatively steep radial temperature gradient, while the permanent side reﬂector is characterized by a more gradual temperature gradient. Thus, conduction heat transfer will occur “downhill” along temperature gradients from the active core to both the cen- tral and side reﬂectors.
Table  3  shows the  steady-state coolant  temperatures  corre-
sponding to core levels and rings. The coolant enters the upper reﬂector at a uniform 259.15 ○C before moving to the core channel/ bypass CVs. The active core uses three CVs per ring (rings 3 to 5) between levels 9 and 18, while the bypass regions (rings 1,  2, 6, and
7) use only one CV for this same axial level range. Helium emerging from the core mixes in the lower plenum and a temperature roughly equal to the MHTGR target outlet is achieved.
4.2.Pressurized conduction cool-down (PCC)
At the time of LOFC, an immediate stoppage in coolant ﬂow is imposed by boundary conditions and the system is opened to a time-independent CV at normal operating pressure. The core po- wer transitions from steady-state to decay heat as would occur after actuation of the reactor protection system. In the ensuing PCC transient, natural coolant circulation patterns lead to axial core temperature redistribution from the initial steady state proﬁle. Simultaneously, radial conduction to the central reﬂector and core boundary cools the active core region. A transient problem time of seven days is sufﬁcient for core temperatures to rise, peak, turn over, and begin to decrease. MELCOR results are presented as mass or area averaged temperature/time proﬁles for core rings, core levels, and the RPV outer wall.
MELCOR predicts a central reﬂector heat-up and subsequent radial conduction to the core periphery, as shown in Fig. 6 by mass- averaged (by core ring) core graphite temperature proﬁles. The time-to-peak temperature and the peak temperature for each average core ring are readily identiﬁable. The rate of central reﬂector (R1 and R2) heat-up exceeds that of other rings, and at about 57.2 h post-LOFC, rings R1, R2, and R3 reach a maximum of approximately 1028 ○C. This behavior is consistent with expecta- tions, as the large graphite inventory of the central reﬂector is designed to act as a heat sink for the fueled core region under ac- cident conditions. The outer rings R4, R5, R6, and R7 subsequently reach their respective peak temperatures of 1001 ○C, 934 ○C, 861 ○C, and 805 ○C at times of 59.5 h, 65.3 h, 71.5 h, and 75.5 h. Radial conduction from the active core to both the central and side reﬂector removes residual heat well before damage limits (begin- ning around 1650 ○C) are reached.
The effects of density gradient-driven helium circulation on axial core temperature redistribution during a PCC event are evident from Fig. 7. The lower core structures (L9 through L13) are much warmer than the upper core structures (L14 through L18) at the point of LOFC. When forced convection stops, the lower struc- tures heat stagnant helium, causing it to rise towards the cooler upper structures. Thus, heat is removed from the lower core
Table 2
Steady-state core temperature map (○C to nearest degree), same color code as Fig. 3 (white ¼ steel).
Fig. 6. Mass-averaged (by ring) core graphite temperatures during PCC.
Table 3
Steady-state helium temperature map, 350 MWth MHTGR. (all temperatures given in ○C)
Fig. 7. Mass-averaged (by level) core graphite temperatures during PCC.
structures and is effectively relocated by convection to the upper core structures. All core structures will heat up, but the upper core graphite will do so at a comparatively greater rate so that the axial core temperature distribution ﬂattens out from its bottom-peaked steady-state shape. This behavior is apparent in Fig. 7 as the high rate of temperature increase in L14-L18 and the comparatively lower rate of temperature increase in L9-L13 allows L18 to catch up with L9, L17 to catch up with L10, etc. Note the peak temperatures of Fig. 7 do not coincide with those of Fig. 6 because level averages were used instead of ring averages.
As an indicator of passive heat removal from the metallic pressure vessel, an area average of the RPV outer wall temperature was computed from MELCOR data. Fig. 8 shows the result and suggests that radial conduction causes RPV heat-up and, in turn, increases radiation heat transfer to the RCCS. The RPV outer wall reaches a maximum of 291 ○C at 95.5 h post-LOFC.
4.3.
Depressurized conduction cool-down (DCC)
At the time of LOFC, an immediate stoppage in coolant ﬂow along with a linear, 10 s system depressurization is enforced by system boundary conditions. Also, the core power transitions from steady-state to decay heat as would occur after actuation of the reactor protection system. Subsequently, the system is connected to time-independent CVs at atmospheric pressure and temperature.  In the ensuing DCC transient, core cooling primarily through radial conduction is observed. A transient problem time of seven days is sufﬁcient for core temperatures to rise, peak, turn over, and begin to decrease. MELCOR results are presented as mass or area averaged temperature/time proﬁles for core rings, core levels, and the RPV outer wall.
Fig. 9 shows mass-averaged (by ring) core graphite temperatures during the DCC. Results for the DCC qualitatively resemble those of
Fig. 8. Area-averaged outer RPV wall temperature during PCC.
Fig. 9. Mass-averaged (by ring) core graphite temperatures during DCC.
the PCC since radial conduction remains the most important heat removal mechanism. Compared to a PCC, the DCC peak tempera- tures - on a ring-to-ring basis - are larger by about 200○ on average. Thus more time elapses before structural temperatures peak. These differences from the PCC transient are explained by the absence of circulation cooling. Because natural circulation cannot remove or redistribute thermal energy, comparatively more heat is stored in structures as radial conduction conveys thermal energy to the RPV. Hence, more time is required for conduction to catch up with thermal energy storage and then reduce structural temperatures. Rings R1, R2, and R3 reach a peak temperature of 1232 ○C, while rings R4, R5, R6, and R7 reach peaks of 1204 ○C, 1138 ○C, 1052 ○C, and 983 ○C, respectively. Rings R1, R2, and R3 require roughly 69.7 h to
reach maximum temperature, while rings R4, R5, R6, and R7 need
70.0 h, 71.4 h, 77.9 h, and 82.25 h, respectively, to reach maximum temperature.
Fig. 10 shows mass-averaged (by level) core structural temper- atures during the DCC. There is no axial temperature proﬁle redistribution due to natural circulation as occurred in the PCC. The lower levels L9-L13 heat up at a greater rate (relative to the PCC case) because energy is stored rather than removed/redistributed by natural circulation. Because lower structures begin the DCC transient (from steady-state) at higher temperatures than upper structures and because redistributive effects of convection are ab- sent, there is a greater lag in time-to-peak between the upper and lower core. The lower core therefore conducts more and stores less
Fig. 10. Mass-averaged (by level) core graphite temperatures during DCC.
Fig. 11. Area-averaged outer RPV wall temperature during DCC.
energy early on in the DCC transient. One consequence is that for some period of transient time the lower core cools while the upper core warms.
As an indicator of passive heat removal from the metallic pressure vessel, an area average of the RPV outer wall temperature was computed from MELCOR data. Fig. 11 shows the result and suggests that radial conduction causes RPV heat-up and, in turn, increases radiation heat transfer to the RCCS. A peak temperature of 301 ○C was reached after about 102 h. Comparing to Fig. 8, one notices that the curve in Fig. 11 exhibits a slight “nose” within 24 h after the LOFC. This is likely a consequence of the area-averaging method use to derive an RPV wall temperature. The upper RPV heat structures have a larger surface area in the MELCOR model and, in a DCC, the upper core structures store more energy than they conduct radially outward early on in transient time. Therefore, the upper core periphery stays cooler for a longer time after LOFC. Hence, the large upper RPV heat structures have cooler tempera- tures early on in a DCC, and this causes the area-averaged RPV wall temperature to be cooler. The “nose” in the curve of Fig. 11 is not purely an artifact of area averaging as it actually indicates differ- ences in axial core temperature distribution for a DCC compared to a PCC.
5.Conclusions
A MELCOR input deck for the MHTGR at full power was con- structed according to the latest available design references. Using new GCR modeling capabilities of MELCOR, steady-state and tran- sient cases were run to predict PMR thermal-hydraulic response to normal and off-normal operating conditions. The analyses included pressurized and depressurized conduction cool-down scenarios
that essentially constitute design basis accidents for prismatic-type HTGRs. Code predictions of system behavior were compared to nominal design parameters and to hypotheses of HTGR thermal- hydraulic response, e.g. the expectation that conduction heat transfer will, under accident conditions, allow for residual heat removal without exceeding certain damage limits. The analyses lead to the conclusion that MELCOR phenomenological models can likely predict HTGR thermal-hydraulic response under steady- state, PCC, and DCC conditions. Speciﬁcally, the phenomena of heat conduction, natural circulation, and radiation behave as ex- pected during the cool-down process.
Acknowledgments
The authors wish to recognize the Nuclear Regulatory Com- mission for its partial support of this research. The authors also thank the technical staff of the severe accident modeling group at Sandia National Laboratories for their counsel.
