<title>Licensing documentation and licensing process for dismantling and decontamination projects in Lithuania</title>
<author>Eugenijus Uˇspuras, Sigitas Rimkeviˇcius, Egidijus Babilas*</author>
<Affiliation>Lithuanian Energy Institute, Breslaujos g. 3, LT-44403 Kaunas, Lithuania</Affiliation>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2015.03.020</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2015.03.020 </URL>
ABSTRACT
One of the main tasks of any decommissioning project is the licensing process, which allows imple- mentation of developed strategies in the real nuclear power plant. The Lithuanian laws on nuclear energy and radioactive waste management require that dismantling and decontamination projects shall be licensed by the Lithuanian State Nuclear Power Safety Inspectorate and other Authorities. Licensing is an inseparable part of the Lithuanian regulatory and supervisory system for safety of nuclear facilities. The licensing process starts when the nuclear power plant submits the ﬁrst licensing document(s) to the Authorities. Usually the licensing documents cover Basic Design, Safety Assessment, Environmental Impact Assessment and Civil Design reports. Safety Assessment Report is a major document, which justiﬁes that the proposed activities will be implemented in compliance with design and regulatory requirements. Licensing process is completed when all the licensing documents are approved by the Authorities and authorization to start dismantling and decontamination activities is received by the nuclear power plant.
Current paper discusses the main steps of the licensing process adopted for the ﬁrst dismantling and decontamination projects at Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant and provides examples of safety assessment in the case of bounding initiating events that can be caused by dismantling and decommissioning activities.
Keywords: Licensing Dismantling Decontamination
1.Introduction
Authorizing speciﬁc activities and/or nuclear installations or parts of them, through a process of licensing, is one of the principal functions of a regulatory body. This licensing process could result in the granting of one or more licenses during the lifetime of the nuclear installation, depending on national regulations and laws.
A license is a legal document issued by the regulatory body granting authorization to create a nuclear installation and/or to perform speciﬁed activities, such as decommissioning, or more speciﬁcally as it is discussed in this paper e to perform dismantling and decontamination (D&D) of nuclear power plant (NPP) equip- ment. The regulatory body is an authority or a system of authorities designated by the government as having legal authority for con- ducting the regulatory process, including issuing authorizations (International Atomic Energy Agency, 2007). A license is a product of an authorization process generally covering a particular stage of the lifetime of a nuclear installation. The term ‘licensing process’ is often used for nuclear installations; it includes all licensing and/or authorization processes for a nuclear installation and its activities. Authorization may take different forms, such as certiﬁcation, granting a permit, agreement, consent, regulatory approval or granting another similar regulatory instrument, depending on the governmental and regulatory framework.
The licensing process should be understood by concerned parties and should be predictable (i.e. well-deﬁned, clear, trans- parent and traceable). Usually the licensing process is established in a systemic way to facilitate efﬁcient progression of regulatory activities. The steps in the licensing process are discrete and follow a logical order. The licensing process starts when NPP submits the ﬁrst licensing document(s) to the Authorities. It is completed when all the licensing documents are approved by the Authorities and authorizations to start envisage works is received by NPP.
Existing safety standards require that an appropriate safety assessment be performed to support any activities related to the sitting, operation, modiﬁcations and decommissioning of nuclear facilities. The main purpose of the safety assessment is to demon- strate that residual risks have been reduced to As Low As Reason- ably Achievable (ALARA) and to nationally prescribed safety criteria. Dismantling and decontamination activities at any nuclear
facilities signiﬁcantly increase radiological and non-radiological hazards to the workers, public and environment. During justiﬁca- tion that proposed D&D activities will be implemented in the safe way and established safety criteria will be not violated safety assessment plays major role. Considering that it can be stated that the Safety Assessment Report (SAR) is one of the main licensing documents for the dismantling and decontamination activity. The SAR describes the fundamental assumptions and criteria upon which the strategy of dismantling activity and the D&D systems and methods are based; the assumptions regarding the range of conditions under which the activities may be performed, the haz- ards, which may occur during D&D activities and adequacy of their means of control. Since 1995 experts of Lithuanian Energy Institute supports Ignalina NPP in development of different safety assess- ments related to the safe operation of Ignalina NPP (Uˇspuras, 2010). Accumulated experience in preparation of safety analysis for operating NPP was successfully adopted for safety assessment of D&D activities at Ignalina NPP.
In addition, to the existing safety assessment practice, a special method for identiﬁcation and evaluation of the potential hazards, raised due to proposed D&D activities, was used. A wide range of different methods, such as Hazards and Operability Study (HAZOP), Failure Mode and Effect Analysis (FMEA), Fault Tree Analysis, are used for the hazards identiﬁcation and analysis. In the nuclear in- dustry HAZOP method is used rather often  (Hashemi-Tilehnoee  et al., 2010; Jeong et al., 2008; John Garrick, 1988; Nelson et  al., 2007). The same HAZOP method was employed during safety assessment of ﬁrst D&D project at Ignalina NPP.
Current paper discusses the main steps of the licensing process applied to authorized activities under ﬁrst separate D&D projects at Ignalina NPP and presents the examples of consequences assess- ment of major bounding initiating events, which are analyzed within the SAR.
2.Overview of activities related with licensing process of D&D projects at Ignalina NPP
Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant (INPP) was an important part of Lithuania's Energy Sector since 1983 (Unit 1 e started operation in 1983, Unit 2 e in 1987, design lifetime was envisage up to 2013 for Unit 1 and up to 2017 for Unit 2). As a result of the political dialogue leading up to European Union (EU) enlargement, Lithuania agreed to the early shutdown of its reactors: Unit 1 shutdown in 2004 and Unit 2 shutdown in 2009. The INPP issued Preliminary Decom- missioning Plan (PDP) in 2000. Later, in 2001, the report “Selection of the Decommissioning Strategy for INPP” was issued. In November 2002, in accordance with the Decree of the Government of Republic of Lithuania, an Immediate Dismantling option to prevent heavy long-term social, economical, ﬁnancial and environmental conse- quences was selected. According to the INPP Final Decommissioning Plan, the INPP decommissioning process is split into several D&D projects. Each of these D&D projects covers a particular building, system or ﬁeld of activity, for example, initial primary circuit decontamination or dismantling of equipment using “room by room” or “system by system” approach. Each of the discussed D&D projects includes development of a set of documentation needed for licensing process and implementation of D&D works. The licensing process used in Lithuania usually covers approval by the Authorities following documents e D&D Basic Design, D&D Safety Assessment, D&D Environmental Impact Assessment Reports, General Data Set on radioactive waste disposal plan and Design for Construction Works. The D&D documents such as Strategy, Detail Design including D&D working procedures, Operational and Maintenance Manual and Training programs may be inspected by the Authorities, but do not require approval from them.
At the time of the ﬁrst D&D projects development there was no precedent for the licensing (authorization) process of the Decon- tamination and Dismantling activities in a nuclear facility in Lithuania, therefore additional effort in order to establish this procedure was required. All activities related to the decom- missioning project licensing used in Lithuania presented in Fig. 1. As it is shown in Fig. 1, the development of Ignalina NPP decom- missioning projects was divided into three Sections. Section 1 mainly covers development of all required documents, such as Basic Design or Safety Assessment Report, etc. During Section 1, based on the proposed Strategy, the decision about the type of Civil Design (i.e. Design for construction works) was taken. This has major inﬂuence on the scope and complexity of Civil Design. Sec- tion 1 includes the ﬁrst discussion with the expert team from NPP and with authorities about the content and further results of developed documentation. This is done via the so called Knowledge transfer sessions. Knowledge transfer sessions enable to put together D&D projects developer's ideas and view on the ﬁnal re- ports and reviewers expectations. This during D&D projects development leads to the speed up of review process.
Section 2 presents a licensing phase of the developed D&D documentation. The licensing process applied in Lithuania involves different authorities and expert teams (see Table 1). As it is pre- sented in Fig. 1, not all documents developed during decom- missioning project is subjected for the authority approval. Usually Detail Design documents which include detailed working pro- cedures and work schedule do not require approval from authority but can be submitted to them for information according to request. A similar situation is with the supporting documents of Safety Assessment Report, such as hazards identiﬁcation reports. Process of hazards identiﬁcation is applied to identify the possible hazards arising during implementation of different D&D strategies. The results of this process are used to compare the strategies and to develop a fault schedule. Further during development of Safety Assessment Report, identiﬁed faults or accidents are analyzed in more detail. As it is presented in Fig. 1, after receiving all authori- zations from the authorities, the authorization to start D&D works is issued. With this authorization Section 3 is launched e i.e., D&D works implementation phase. Table 1 summarizes the licensing actions and lists authorities involved in each step of the licensing process.
3.Licensing process of environmental impact assessment report
The licensing process of the Environmental Impact Assessment Report is regulated in Lithuania by the Law on the EIA (Law on Environmental Impact, 1996) and Regulation (EIA, 2005). In the Law (Law on Environmental Impact, 1996) the following partici- pants of the EIA process are deﬁned:
1)Responsible institution: Ministry of Environment or other institution authorized by the government;
2)Subjects of environmental impact assessment of proposed economic activity: state institutions responsible for public health, ﬁre safety, protection of cultural heritage, institutions of district and municipality;
3)Undertaker (client) of proposed economic activities;
4)Developer of documentation on environmental impact assessment;
5)Public.
The subjects of the environmental impact assessment can include other state institutions which are not speciﬁed in item 2 above if they are invited to participate by the responsible
Fig. 1. Schematic of activities related with licensing process of D&D.
institution or if these institutions are interested in participating in the process of environmental impact assessment.
Environmental Impact Assessment report (EIAR) licensing pro- cess is comprised of several steps, such as Public presentation, Experts review, Decision of the Responsible Institution and Public Information about Decision. Further are discussed main aspects about each main the step of EIAR licensing process.
3.1.Environmental impact assessment report public presentation
EIA report public presentation is regulated by Regulation (EIA, 2005). In accordance with this Regulation, prior to the public presentation of EIA report all information concerning the pro- posed activity and contractors is provided in the national and local  press  and  on  the  appropriate  web-sites  (Ragaiˇsis  et  al., 2014).
This step provides an opportunity for the public to get famil- iarized with the report and to provide suggestions to the EIAR developers prior to the planned meeting with the public. Addi- tionally the public has another possibility to submit their  feed- back or suggestions on EIA report after the EIA report public
presentation. All suggestions received prior to public presenta- tion, during the presentation and after are assessed and written answers to the questions raised by the interested members of the public, explaining how their suggestions are implemented, are prepared.
3.2.Conclusion of the EIA subjects
The second step after public presentation is a review of EIA report by state institutions responsible for public health,  ﬁre  safety, protection of cultural heritage, institutions of district and municipality. Based on the Law (Law on Environmental Impact, 1996), all  the  above  mentioned  institutions  have  the  possibil- ity to provide the reasoned conclusions concerning  the  EIA  report. After that, the Ignalina NPP or contractor experts sup- plement or correct the report as required and resubmit it to the above mentioned institutions  for  the  second  review  round.  Later, the involved institutions issue reasoned conclusions. After collecting public suggestions and conclusions from the involved institution, the EIA report is issued to the Ministry  of Environment.
Table 1
Licensing actions and involved Authority.
3.3.Decision of the ministry of environment
When the conclusions from the EIA subjects are received, EIA documentation is submitted to the responsible institution (the Ministry of Environment). The responsible institution has the right to demand a repeat of the EIA report public presentation if this report is changed, corrected or supplemented in essence after the ﬁrst public presentation (Law on Environmental Impact, 1996).
The responsible institution, after receipt of the EIA report immediately organizes an announcement on the web page of the Ministry of Environment concerning the proposed activity. Inter- ested members of the public have the right to submit in writing reasoned questions concerning the EIA to the responsible institu- tion and to the subjects of the EIA (EIA, 2005).
The responsible institution after the analysis of the report, the conclusions of the EIA subjects on the report and the possibility of proposed economic activity as well as the assessment of sugges- tions from interested members of the public performs the following actions:
1)submit reasoned requirements to correct or supplement the report, or
2)accept the reasoned decision whether the proposed economic activity is allowable in the selected area taking into account corresponding laws and other legal acts, policy and (or) envi- ronmental impact (Law on Environmental Impact, 1996).
3.4.Public information about decision of responsible institution
The responsible institution after the acceptance of decision about the acceptability of the proposed economic activity, an- nounces the information on its own web page and on the web page of the Ministry of Environment (EIA, 2005).
Ignalina NPP after receipt of the decision from the responsible institution concerning the acceptability of the proposed economic activity provides this information to the public through the na- tional and local press, as well as on billboards in the municipality of proposed economic activity (EIA, 2005). At that point, the complex review process of EIA report is ﬁnished.
4.Expertise of the D&D basic design and D&D safety assessment
In the Law on Nuclear Energy (Law on Nuclear Energy, 1996) it is deﬁned that without a license issued by the Government of the Republic of Lithuania in a prescribed manner, it shall be prohibited (among others):
1)To design, construct and reconstruct nuclear facilities, in- stallations and equipment;
2)To operate nuclear facilities;
3)To store nuclear and radioactive materials and their waste;
4)To retire a nuclear facility from service;
5)To bury nuclear and radioactive materials and their waste.
Licenses for the activities listed above shall be issued by VATESI after co-ordination with the Ministry of the Environment (or an institution authorized by it), the Radiation Protection Centre and the director of administration of the municipality whose territory  or its part is within the sanitary protection zone of a nuclear facility (Law on Nuclear Energy, 1996).
For the licensing the D&D Basic Design and D&D Safety Assessment documents are issued together as documents which support each other. Usually Basic Design document present a technology proposed for the indicated D&D activities and Safety Assessment Report justify that proposed technologies can be applied in safe way.
The Safety Assessment Report is the major document in the licensing process, because it justiﬁes that all D&D activities will be performed in compliance with design and regulatory requirements and safety limits will be not violated during both e normal opera- tion and accident conditions. It shall be justiﬁed that all worst emergency cases raised by the proposed D&D technology are identiﬁed and possible consequences are analyzed. Due to that one of the main part for the review is fault schedule and accident anal- ysis sections of Safety Assessment Report. The identiﬁcation of initiating events and the analysis of their evolution should be carried out using an appropriate technique (e.g. HAZOP), and appropriate sources of information, such as checklists, maps of dose rates for the facility, inventories of radioactive waste, and feedback of experience from the decommissioning of other facilities (Jeong et al., 2008). Already during the development of the Strategy report the ﬁrst analysis of the possible hazards is applied. The HAZOP procedure was applied for this purpose in the Ignalina NPP D&D projects (Fig. 2). HAZOP is organized in a series of meetings involving different experts related to the planned activities and responsible for the radiation and industrial protection, operational activities, etc. HAZOP involves the application of deﬁned keywords to the design in order to prompt a discussion that will identify principal hazards and operability issues (Hashemi-Tilehnoee et al., 2010).
The ﬁrst such session is organized during the development of the D&D Strategy. At that stage the main purpose of such analysis is mostly related to intercomparisons of several D&D technologies. After that, during the development of D&D Basic design, second hazards analysis session is provided to identify the main hazards for deeper analysis during development of Safety Assessment Report. The occupational dose is the most important safety parameter during implementation of D&D activities, therefore the radiation protection issues are always considered as one of the main factors describing safe implementation of D&D activities.
It is well known that D&D activities, especially with the clean or very low contaminated equipment, mostly generate industrial hazards such as heavy load drops or workers' injuries. Usually any dismantling activity covers a lot of different operations related to cutting and lifting of different pieces of equipment. Dismantled equipment parts are lifted by a crane to transfer to storage or decontamination area. The consequences of an unlikely drop event shall be evaluated in the D&D Safety Assessment Report.
This paper provides an example of hazards scenarios analyzed in the frame of the ﬁrst D&D project at the Ignalina NPP. This project was devoted to the D&D of Emergency Core Cooling System (ECCS) tanks and connected systems in Building 117/1. The drop of one- piece ring of ECCS tank was investigated in details, because this event is a bounding heavy load drop event for the current case. Both structural integrity and radiological consequences' analysis were performed. The analysis of radiological consequences shall justify that the doses for the workers, public and environment during D&D implementation will stay below the acceptable limits. The  main aim of the structural integrity analysis was to check the ability of building construction to maintain its integrity in the case of the mentioned event.
In the structural integrity analysis of this event the impact load was calculated from conservative assumption that one-piece ring of ECCS tank (mass of dropped part 3200 kg (weight of the removed part of vessel, with height of 0.86 m)) is dropped from the height of 14 m. The ﬁnite element method was used extensively to simulate many applications in structural analysis of reinforced concrete structures (Al-Darzi, 2007; Dundulis et al., 2007a). Finite element
Fig. 2. Illustration of the Hazards and Operability Assessment procedure.
codes are able to accurately model the plastic deformation via bending, compression or full collapse of the structures (Dundulis  et al., 2007b; Sugano et al., 1993). The simpliﬁed ﬁnite element model (Fig. 3) of drop was created using ABAQUS/Explicit. Sym- metry conditions are used and only a quarter of ring was modelled. Deformable ring of ECCS hits rigid surface. Initial velocity vector of ring is assumed to be perpendicular to the rigid surface. The friction between ring and rigid surface is assumed to be small. The impact load is obtained as reaction force of rigid surface. Impact force obtained from calculation is 5E 06 N. The maximum stresses in the supporting columns of the  slab  reaches  the  maximum  value  of 14 MPa and are located near the impacted area of the slab. The maximum stresses in I-beam reaches the maximum value of
85 MPa and are located near the impacted area. The received stresses are below that yield  stresses  of  I-beam  steel  which  is  353 MPa.
The analysis results show that the impacted reinforced concrete slab at bottom level of the ECCS building will experience scabbing of concrete in impact place. Damaged area of slab at bottom level is local and the structural integrity of the slab will be maintained in the case of drop of a cut ECCS pressure vessel ring. Such damage is acceptable because the impacted slab does not perform function of conﬁnement; therefore the detailed analysis of slab damage level is not needed. The analysis results show that the structural integrity of the building and supporting columns of building structures will be maintained, it will not collapse and it will not inﬂuence the performance of dismantling and decontamination activities in the building.
Besides the structural integrity assessment, the radiological consequences of the drop of one-piece ring of ECCS vessel were evaluated. The results revealed that the total dose, including in- ternal and external doses, for the workers reaches 6.36 mSv/h and are well below the allowed limits in the case of this event.
Another example is investigation of the mishandling with loads during transportation of one-piece ring of ECCS tank. The conse- quences of mishandling of 3.2 t load, velocity 0.4 m/s in directions X and Y were evaluated.
For the current analysis a ﬁnite element model (see Fig. 4) was created (Al-Darzi, 2007; Dundulis et al., 2007a). The part of the ECCS vessel support was included in the model of ECCS vessels and adjoined systems for structural integrity analysis of the structures in case of mishandling heavy loads.
In the model applied loads are:
Dead        weight        of         modelled         parts; Concentrated forces of mishandling of 3.2 t load, velocity 0.4 m/s in direction X.
Concentrated forces of mishandling of 3.2 t load, velocity 0.4 m/s in direction Y.
The results (see Fig. 5 and Fig. 6) of the above presented analysis show that maximum stresses are located in the boundary condi- tions apply area with a maximum value of 7 MPa (during mishan- dling of load in direction X) or 7.9 MPa (during mishandling of load in direction Y). The static compressive strength limit for concrete is 17 MPa and for tension e 1.5 MPa.
The compressive strength limit of concrete wasn't reached in girder and slab. According to these results it is possible to conclude that the impacted reinforced concrete girder at the bottom level of ECCS building experiences cracking of concrete in tension layers, but the structural integrity of these slab and girder will be main- tained during mishandling of load in both directions e X and Y. All concrete structures are modelled without reinforcing rebar, which shows that the performed analysis is conservative. The maximum stresses are located in the inner webbings and ﬂanges of I-beam near vessel support plate contact with maximum value of 395 MPa. As it was already mentioned, together with the industrial haz- ards all radiation protection issues raised during D&D  work implementation were analyzed in the Safety Assessment Report. All work implemented during D&D shall comply with ALARA
objectives.
The performed analysis demonstrated that all individual and collective doses are below established radiation safety limit for individual dose e 16 mSv per year and 20 mSv per year (taking into account that effective dose limit for workers is 100 mSv in a consecutive 5 year period). This shows that developed technology fully ensure safe implementation of D&D activities in Ignalina NPP for the presented D&D projects. Additionally it needs to be mentioned that the presented projects were successfully imple- mented at Ignalina NPP.
5.Expertise of design for construction works
In accordance with the Law on Construction (Law on Construction, 2006) Expert examination of design documentation of a construction works of exceptional signiﬁcance (nuclear facil- ities belong to this category) are mandatory. However, the same Law clariﬁes that Expert examination of design documentation of the construction works shall be carried out in the cases of con- struction of new construction works, reconstruction of construction works and major repairs. Expert examination of design documen- tation of the construction works is not required if implementation of the proposed D&D Strategy does not include the changing and reinforcing of load-bearing structures of the construction works (in
Fig. 3. Simpliﬁed model for drop load calculation a) Finite element model parts b) Meshed ﬁnite element model and applied velocity.
Fig. 4. The model for ﬁnite element analysis of the ECCS vessel support.
the case of simple repair of construction work) (Law on Construction, 2006).
After the D&D Strategy development, when the scope and im- plications of the design for construction works are deﬁned, the decision should be taken on the following:
the composition of Design for Construction (Basic and Detail Designs, or the Integrated Design, or the Simpliﬁed Design for Construction (Civil) Works);
○the necessity of Permission for the construction;
○the necessity of Expert examination.
In order to reduce the overall duration of project implementa- tion and to optimize the documentation development and licensing process it's preferable to apply the simpliﬁed design approach in the case of simple construction works and/or simple repairs (see Fig. 1). This usually allows to considerable reduce the overall duration of the project. It would be unreasonable in the case of simple repairs (i.e. for activities without changing load-bearing structures, etc.) to apply the full sequence of licensing activities
as for construction of a new nuclear facility. In the case of the above discussed D&D project at the Ignalina NPP the simpliﬁed design approach was successfully applied.
If considerable modiﬁcations of building constructions is required (i.e. not satisfying the deﬁnition of simple repairs), the expert evaluation of Design for Construction is needed.
Additionally, in accordance with (Expert Examination, 2002), the expertise of the structural part of detailed design is obligatory in the case of a building of exceptional signiﬁcance (nuclear facil- ities belong to this category in accordance with STR 1.01.06:2002 (Special buildings, 2002)).
A permit for the construction of a construction works is not required in the following cases (see (Law on Construction, 2006) and (Construction permission, 2002)):
Construction of simple construction works. The list of simple construction works shall be approved by an institution autho- rized by the Government;
○Simple repairs of a construction work
6.General data set on radioactive waste disposal
Article 37 of the Euratom Treaty requires that each EU Member State is to provide the Commission with the General data set relating to any plan for the disposal of radioactive waste in
Fig. 5.   The von Mises stress (Pa) distribution in the model.	Fig. 6. Distribution of von Mises stress (Pa) in the slab at bottom level of ECCS building.
whatever form as will make it possible to determine whether the implementation of such plan is liable to result in the radioactive contamination of the water, soil or airspace of another Member State. The Commission is to deliver its opinion within six months, after consulting the group of experts.
In accordance with (Description of the Procedure, 2007), the General data set on radioactive waste disposal shall be agreed with the Ministry of the Environment, the Fire and Rescue Department under the Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Lithuania, the Radiation Protection Centre and the State Nuclear Power Safety Inspectorate. These institutions (Authorities) should analyze the information according their competence to coordinate and present their remarks.
After receiving comments from the Authorities, the NPP consider all comments and present the updated General data set to the Authorities for reassessment. The Authorities analyze and, ac- cording their competence, approve it or present comments on it (Description of the Procedure, 2007).
Upon receiving the approved General data set and approval letters from the Authorities, the NPP submit this information to the State Nuclear Power Safety Inspectorate (Description of the Procedure, 2007).
The State Nuclear Power Safety Inspectorate submits the approved General data set to the European Commission. This shall be presented to the Commission within 6 months prior to the issue of license for performance of activity, the beginning of equipment operation (when a license is not necessary) or the beginning of dismantling of the equipment (Description of the Procedure, 2007). The Commission recommends that the ‘general data’ be sub- mitted to the Commission whenever possible within one year but not less than six months before any authorization for the disposal of radioactive waste is granted by competent authorities or before start-up of those operations for which no disposal authorization is
foreseen (Euratom Commission, 1999).
7.Authorisation to start D&D works
In accordance with the Final Decommissioning Plan, D&D ac- tivities starts under the license for Unit 1 extended operation. The authorization for D&D activities was issued by VATESI after co- ordination with the Ministry of the Environment or an institution authorized by it, the Radiation Protection Centre and the director of Visaginas municipality administration licensing regulations (Licensing regulations, 1998).
The application for the authorization to start D&D works was provided to VATESI, when all D&D documentation is ready and approved by the authorities as identiﬁed in the previous sections. Usually together with the application for the authorization to start D&D works the following documents are provided to the Authorities:
conclusions of expert evaluation of D& D Basic design and SAR, conclusions of EIA process, o conclusions of GDS process, agreement of the Ministry of the Environment for D&D works authorization,
agreement of the Radiation Protection Centre for D&D works authorization,
agreement of Visaginas municipality administration for D&D works authorization,
other technical and administrative documents as indicated (Licensing regulations, 1998).
As it was already mentioned, the agreement of the detailed design documentation with the Authorities is not required (it may be inspected by VATESI). If Detail design documentation is
developed by the Contractor of Ignalina NPP, then its agreement with the Ignalina NPP is one of the prerequisites to start D&D works and therefore is reﬂected in the scheme presented in Fig. 1.
8.Conclusions
Analysis of decommissioning projects' licensing shows that this is a complex process which requires participation of many different authorities and experts. Due to that, to avoid inﬂuence of the licensing process to the overall project schedule, the detail plan- ning of overall licensing process is necessary in the beginning of any project.
Lithuanian experience shows that early involvement of the au- thorities and review experts in the document development process, using Knowledge transfer sessions and different formal and informal discussion, allow speeding up further review process and leads to low amount of possible comments or suggestions on authorized documentation.
The key document considered in the licensing process is the D&D Safety Assessment Report. It is extremely important to apply a systematic approach in the safety analysis e starting from hazards identiﬁcation in the early phase of project up to detailed conse- quences analysis of all bounding initiating events, including heavy load drop events, operator errors, equipment failures, etc. For some of initiating events (heavy load drop) both structural integrity and radiological consequences analysis is required in order to demon- strate the compliance with acceptance criteria.
Acknowledgment
In the paper referred Dismantling and Decontamination project B9-0 (Contract No.: B9-0/CA12/D1/01) at the Ignalina NPP was funded by a grant from the EBRD-managed Ignalina International Decommissioning Support Fund (IIDSF).