<title>Discharge header design inside a reactor pool for ﬂow stability in a research reactor</title>
<author>Hyungi Yoon*, Yongseok Choi, Kyoungwoo Seo, Seonghoon Kim</author>
<Affiliation>Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, (34057) 111, Daedeok-Daero 989Beon-Gil, Yuseong-Gu, Daejeon, South Korea</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>NUCLEAR ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2020.04.006</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2020.04.006</URL>
ABSTRACT
An open-pool type research reactor is designed and operated considering the accessibility around the pool top area to enhance the reactor utilization. The reactor structure assembly is placed at the bottom of the pool and ﬁlled with water as a primary coolant for the core cooling and radiation shielding.
Most radioactive materials are generated from the fuel assemblies in the reactor core and circulated with the primary coolant. If the primary coolant goes up to the pool surface, the radiation level increases around the working area near the top of the pool. Hence, the hot water layer is designed and formed at the upper part of the pool to suppress the rising of the primary coolant to the pool surface. The tem- perature gradient is established from the hot water layer to the primary coolant. As this temperature gradient suppresses the circulation of the primary coolant at the upper region of the pool, the radioactive primary coolant rising up directly to the pool surface is minimized. Water mixing between these layers is reduced because the hot water layer is formed above the primary coolant with a higher temperature. The radiation level above the pool surface area is maintained as low as reasonably achievable since the radioactive materials in the primary coolant are trapped under the hot water layer. The key to main- taining the stable hot water layer and keeping the radiation level low on the pool surface is to have a stable ﬂow of the primary coolant.
In the research reactor with a downward core ﬂow, the primary coolant is dumped into the reactor pool and goes to the reactor core through the ﬂow guide structure. Flow ﬁelds of the primary coolant at the lower region of the reactor pool are largely affected by the dumped primary coolant. Simple, circular, and duct type discharge headers are designed to control the ﬂow ﬁelds and make the primary coolant ﬂow stable in the reactor pool.
In this research, ﬂow ﬁelds of the primary coolant and hot water layer are numerically simulated in the reactor pool. The heat transfer rate, temperature, and velocity ﬁelds are taken into consideration to determine the formation of the stable hot water layer and primary coolant ﬂow. The bulk Richardson number is used to evaluate the stability of the ﬂow ﬁeld. A duct type discharge header is ﬁnally chosen to dump the primary coolant into the reactor pool. The bulk Richardson number should be higher than 2.7 and the temperature of the hot water layer should be 1 ○C higher than the temperature of the primary coolant to maintain the stability of the stratiﬁed thermal layer.
Keywords: Discharge header Hot water layer Research reactor
Thermal stratiﬁcation Bulk Richardson number
1.Introduction
A research reactor is widely used for many purposes such as education, training, neutron activation analysis, radioisotope pro- duction, transmutation effects, neutron radiography, material structure studies, and neutron capture therapy [1]. In general, the ﬁssion heat generated from the fuel assembly is not used in a research reactor while in a commercial nuclear power plant elec- trical power is produced using this ﬁssion heat of the nuclear fuel. Many research reactors are designed as an open-pool type reactor, and a reactor structure assembly is installed at the bottom of the pool in consideration of radiation shielding and the acces- sibility of the reactor as shown in Fig. 1. A reactor pool is ﬁlled with demineralized water called the primary coolant. The water quality is controlled by the pool water management system [2]. A reactor
Fig. 1.  Reactor pool and cooling  system.
hall is designed as a normal work area, so reactor operators, re- searchers, and engineers can access the reactor pool top area while the reactor is under the normal power operation. The radiation level of this area is an important design parameter in the aspect of protection against radiation.
Metallic materials are detached from the surface of the fuel assemblies and equipment by erosion and corrosion and then
become radioactive in the reactor core region. These ionized nu- clides are circulated with the primary coolant. Even though the ion exchanger continuously captures these materials through the coolant puriﬁcation system, the long-lived products still remain in the coolant, and so the pool top radiation level is too high for the pool top area to be accessed without any constraint. Therefore, many open-pool type research reactors adopt a hot water layer
(HWL) at the upper part of the reactor pool. The design purpose of the HWL is to minimize mixing between the HWL and the primacy coolant by means of a buoyancy force. The HWL functions as ra- diation shielding. This ﬂow ﬁeld should be formed and maintained while the reactor is in the normal operation.
A decrease in the radiation level by the HWL was investigated experimentally on the ETRR-2 research reactor in Egypt. The HWL system was designed to provide a ﬂow rate of 2 kg/s and a rated heat capacity of 100 kW. The primary coolant ﬂows inside the reactor structure in this research reactor. Therefore, the ﬂow ﬁeld is stable at the lower part of the reactor pool [3]. As the thickness of the HWL was increased, the decrease in the radiation level was measured through the experiment on the ETRR-2 [4]. The HWL was also designed and installed on the HANARO research reactor in Korea to reduce the radiation level near the pool top area. A process for ﬁnding the optimum operating point was necessary because the HWL was not designed at the reactor design stage [5]. The ﬂow ﬁeld of the reactor pool was simulated numerically on the HANARO research reactor. However, the simulation of a ﬂow ﬁeld seemed not to be appropriate because the ﬂow ﬁeld was assumed as a laminar ﬂow, and the internal structures in the reactor pool were not considered [6]. The reactor pool of the RMB research reactor in Brazil was also simulated numerically. The ﬂow ﬁeld of the inside of the reactor structure and fuel assembly was the focus rather than the HWL [7].
The ﬂow ﬁeld of the HWL is considered as a kind of thermal stratiﬁcation. Thermal stratiﬁcation has been studied in many research ﬁelds and the Richardson number is used to judge the stability [8e10]. The gradient Richardson number is used to judge  a stable stratiﬁed ﬂow ﬁeld in the atmospheric science [8,11]. This non-dimensional characteristic number is generally used  to analyze test results. Instantaneous turbulent terms are measured   to calculate the gradient Richardson number. Meanwhile, the  mean values of the ﬂow ﬁeld are used to calculate the bulk Richardson number. Therefore, the bulk Richardson number is used rather than the gradient Richardson number  in  some research areas. The bulk Richardson number and the bulk transfer coefﬁcient are used to judge the stability in ocean science [12e14]. The basic approach is the same in the research areas of the at- mospheric and ocean science. The large-eddy simulation (LES) is used to investigate thermal stratiﬁcation and turbulent transports in urban street canons [15]. The cubic shape is modeled for the calculation. The LES is required to accurately analyze a turbulent ﬂow ﬁeld. However, the LES requires signiﬁcant computational resources and time.
Thermal stratiﬁcation is also studied numerically and experi- mentally to design a hot water storage tank in a solar energy sys- tem. The bulk Richardson number and the mixing rate are used to design the storage tank [16,17]. The inlet shape of the cold water is designed to minimize mixing between the stored hot water and the
cold water. The k - ε and k -u turbulence models are generally used
for this thermal stratiﬁcation analysis. The k - ε turbulence model simulates the experimental results well [18].
In the nuclear system design, thermal stratiﬁcation in the surge line was studied experimentally and numerically [19e23]. Un- steady ﬂow ﬁelds and temperature ﬂuctuation are studied in the pipe ﬂow. In addition, the formation and destruction of thermal stratiﬁcation inside the cavity was studied both experimentally and through a numerical simulation. The k - ε turbulence model gave similar results as the experiment [24e26].
Although many research reactors have adopted the HWL, they did not provide general design methods in two forced ﬂow regions to have thermal stratiﬁcation. The thermal stratiﬁcation in a reactor pool is different from previous studies because the HWL and pri- mary coolant have a forced ﬂow.
In this research, we numerically investigated the shape of the discharge header of the primary coolant for the stable ﬂow ﬁeld of the primary coolant in the reactor pool. We also studied the ﬂow ﬁeld in the HWL with various temperatures of the pool inlet hot water. The bulk Richardson number calculated from the numerical analysis results is suggested to judge the stable formation of the HWL.
2.Reactor pool and primary coolant system
The ﬂow direction of the primary coolant through the nuclear fuel assembly is determined from the design of the fuel assembly and the reactor structure assembly. In this study, the primary coolant ﬂows with the downward direction in the fuel assembly region. The primary coolant is dumped into the reactor pool and ﬂows to the reactor core through the ﬂow guide structure as shown in Fig. 1. If the outlet pipe of the primary coolant is con- nected to the reactor structure assembly, the ﬂow ﬁeld of the primary coolant is stable in the pool because the primary coolant is not dumped into the reactor pool directly. From the aspect of the maximum space for the irradiation utilization in the reactor structure assembly, however, the above-mentioned connecting type reactor was not considered as the optimal design in a research reactor design.
The ﬁssion heat generated from the fuel assembly and the re- action heat between the neutron and the reactor structure as- sembly is transferred to the primary coolant, and then the heated primary coolant is pumped to the primary coolant system equip- ment room in order to remove the heat by the heat exchanger in the primary coolant system. Heat of the primary coolant is transferred to the secondary coolant through the heat exchanger. This heat ﬁnally dissipates into the atmosphere by the cooling tower in the secondary cooling system as shown in Fig. 1 [27]. That is, the heat generated from the reactor core is removed continuously by the forced convection.
A signiﬁcant increase in the coolant temperature occurs when the coolant passes through the fuel assemblies in the reactor structure assembly. The temperature of the primary coolant is also increased around the outer surface of the reactor structure as- sembly. The primary coolant near the reactor structure assembly is heated by its metal structure. Fig. 2 shows a schematic diagram of the natural circulation in the reactor pool. The heated primary coolant with the radioactive products can be directly raised up to the pool surface by natural circulation. These radioactive products increase the radiation level on the pool top area. Moreover, forced convection of the primary coolant dominantly affects the ﬂow ﬁeld in the reactor pool. Therefore, the HWL is designed for this reactor pool. The average temperature of the HWL should be higher than that of the primary coolant. The temperature gradient is established from the HWL to the primary coolant when the HWL is formed at the upper part of the reactor pool. This temperature gradient suppresses mixing between the primary coolant and the HWL. The ﬂoating up of the ionized radioactive products with the primary coolant to the pool surface is prevented by this HWL so as to minimize the pool top radiation level.
The design target of the HWL is for the radiation level near the pool top area to be reduced as low as reasonably achievable (ALARA). This is a design principle of radiation protection. The ra- diation protection program restricts the residence time  of personnel in the radiation working area along the radiation level. Physical barriers such as concrete, steel or lead shields are possible options for radiation protection, but such options reduce and restrict the working area. Therefore, the design of the HWL is preferred for access to the pool top area for personnel without protective equipment while the reactor is in the normal operation.
Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of the natural circulation in the reactor pool.
3.Hot water layer system
The HWL system consists of a pump, a heater, interconnecting pipes, valves, and instruments. A schematic diagram and the ge- ometry of the HWL system are shown in Fig. 3. The pump circulates the hot water through the heater into the HWL [28].
A stable ﬂow of both the hot water layer and the primary coolant is necessary to maintain the stable ﬂow ﬁelds in the reactor pool [6,29]. In a previous research, the ﬂow ﬁeld of the HWL was investigated numerically, and the design parameters of the HWLFig. 3. Schematic diagram and geometry of the HWL system including the heat loss and the platform.
system were determined [30]. The ends of the suction and discharge lines were submerged in the reactor pool and located at the same elevation. The end of the discharge line was designed as a T-shape diffuser to distribute the discharge ﬂow uniformly for the stable HWL formation at the upper part of the pool. A normal pipe was used at the end of the suction line because the ﬂow ﬁeld formed near the suction area. Therefore, a special design was not required for the suction line. The pipe extruded from the vertical surface of the reactor pool with a short length.
In this study, the heat load of the heater is calculated based on the heat loss from the HWL. The main heat losses are the evapo- ration and convection from the pool surface into the air in the reactor hall and the convection from the bottom of the HWL to the primary coolant as depicted in Fig. 3. The supplied heat from the heater compensated for these heat losses.
The heater capacity is calculated analytically through the following heat balance equation.
@1
During the initial formation of HWL, the temperature of the HWL is increased because the heater capacity is larger than the heat losses from the HWL. When the HWL is in a steady state, there is no change in temperature. Therefore, the left term of equation (1) becomes zero. Thus, the supplied heat from the heater is described in equation (2).@2
The evaporation heat loss is calculated from the evaporation rate. The evaporation rate in equation (3) comes from the ASRAE handbook, and is derived from the experimental results [31]. The convection heat loss from the pool surface into the air is included in this equation. The evaporation heat loss is primarily affected by the environmental conditions of the atmosphere. The environmental conditions in equation (3) is obtained from the operating condi- tions of the reactor hall. A temperature of 25 ○C and A humidity of 50% are maintained in the reactor hall by the heating, ventilating, and air conditioning (HVAC) system, and the partial pressure of water vapor is calculated as 1600 Pa in these operating conditions. An average HWL temperature of 45 ○C, a latent heat of 2257 kJ/kg, and a pool surface area of 14.5 m2 are used to calculate the evap- oration heat loss. The saturated vapor pressure of 9600 Pa is ob- tained from the HWL temperature. The evaporation  heat  loss  of 10 kW calculated from equation (3) is used as a boundary condition on the pool surface in CFD.@3
The conduction heat loss of 0.5 kW through the pool liner is calculated from the following conduction equation (4). Here, a reactor hall temperature of 25 ○C, an average HWL temperature of 45 ○C, a concrete thickness of 1.5  m, a reactor pool perimeter of     16 m, and an HWL thickness of 1.5 m are used to calculate this conduction heat loss. The pool liner is made of stainless steel and surrounded with concrete. It is assumed that the temperature of  the pool liner and the concrete are the same in the steady state. The conduction heat loss through the reactor concrete is ignored in the CFD because these values are relatively small. The analytical results of this heat loss are about 5% of the evaporation heat loss.
@4
The convection heat loss from the bottom of the HWL to the upper part of the primary coolant is calculated from the following
convection equation (5).25
The convection heat loss cannot be calculated directly using the general convection equation (5) because it is difﬁcult to determine the heat transfer coefﬁcient. Accordingly, in this research this heat loss is calculated based on the heat balance of the primary coolant using CFD results.
4.Reactor pool design and the primary coolant discharge header
The design of the stable ﬂow ﬁeld at the lower region of the reactor pool is necessary because this ﬂow ﬁeld affects the HWL and the radiation level on the pool surface. Essential equipment and the structure such as the reactor structure assembly were already designed and installed in the reactor pool. Therefore, the inﬂuence of these structures on the ﬂow ﬁeld need to be considered to control the ﬂow ﬁeld.
The size of the reactor pool is determined in consideration of the reactor utilization, the reactor structure assembly, primary coolant pipelines, instruments for reactor operation and radiation shield- ing. About a 4 m x 4 m x 9 m (W x D x H) reactor pool size was used in this research reactor. The platform was installed at the middle of the reactor pool as shown in Fig. 3. The main purpose of the plat- form is to provide the working place for workers for maintenance of the reactor pool. During maintenance, the reactor is not in opera- tion and the primary coolant is drained into the pool water storage tank until the pool level is just below the platform. The reactor structure assembly is covered with the primary coolant for radia- tion shielding. Another function of this platform is to conﬁne the main ﬂow ﬁeld of the discharged primary coolant under the plat- form. However, the primary coolant can ﬂow through the platform because there is a square hole in its center for the reactor utilization and a gap between the pool liner and the platform. The 10 cm gap around the platform provides installation space for small pipelines and instrument cables.
In a previous research, ﬂow windows were designed on the ﬂow guide structure in the upper part of the reactor structure assembly as shown in Fig. 4 [32]. These openings induce a ﬂow of the primary coolant into the ﬂow guide structure. A total of eight ﬂow windows were adopted based on the ﬂow distribution and the stable ﬂow ﬁeld near the inlet region of the ﬂow guide structure. Almost 65% of the total ﬂow rate passes through these ﬂow windows. The rest of the primary coolant enters the core region through the top of the ﬂow
guide structure. Therefore, the main inlet ﬂow ﬁeld of the primary coolant forms near the ﬂow windows of the ﬂow guide structure.
In this research, the primary coolant is dumped into the reactor pool directly at a velocity of about 5 m/s. If the velocity of the coolant does not decrease in the reactor pool, the radioactive pri- mary coolant rises to the pool surface directly within several sec- onds and then the radiation level increases. To minimize inﬂuence on a ﬂow ﬁeld, several shapes of discharge header for the primary coolant outlet are considered in a downward ﬂow. A simple type discharge header is designed and simulated to investigate the ve- locity distribution in the reactor pool. This outlet design uses the same dimensions of the primary coolant system piping and adjusts the ﬂow direction in the reactor pool. Circular and duct type discharge headers are designed in consideration of ﬂow stability and the installation area to control the ﬂow direction and velocity. Fig. 5 shows the geometry of a simple type, circular and duct type discharge headers. Many holes are adopted at the outlet surface of the circular and duct type discharge headers to distribute the coolant uniformly and slowly. The shape and dimensions of the discharge header are limited by the pool dimensions, the reactor structure assembly, and its related equipment already installed in the lower region of the reactor pool as shown in Fig. 6 (1). The main line is branched on both sides to reduce the velocity inside the discharge header. The size of each hole is designed in consideration of mechanical integrity, the total ﬂow area, and the ﬂow distribu- tion. Detailed design speciﬁcations of the discharge headers cannot be provided because that information is conﬁdential.
5.Calculation conditions
Heat balance, velocity and temperature ﬁelds are taken into consideration to evaluate the formation of the stable ﬂow ﬁelds in the HWL and the primary coolant based on the numerical results. The commercial CFD tool FLUENT 13 is used for the thermal- hydraulic analysis in the reactor pool. The geometry and bound- ary conditions are shown in Fig. 6 (1). The origin at the coordinate system is the center of the reactor structure assembly on the bot- tom of the reactor pool.
Unsteady 3-D ﬂow ﬁelds are numerically simulated to observe the thermal-hydraulic characteristics. The working ﬂuid is light water. A mass ﬂow rate of 200 kg/s and a temperature of 37 ○C are given at the inlet boundary conditions of the pool inlet primary coolant. These conditions are determined based on the safety analysis results to cool the fuel assembly sufﬁciently. In a previous study, the operating conditions of the HWL system were calculated based on the heat capacity and the required puriﬁcation ﬂow rate
Fig. 4. Flow windows on the ﬂow guide of the reactor structure assembly.
Fig. 5.   Geometry of the primary coolant discharge header.
Fig. 6. Computational domain
(1) Geometry and boundary conditions. (2) Grid system of the reactor pool and the surface mesh of the main components.
[28]. A mass ﬂow rate of 1 kg/s and a temperature of 48 ○C were used at the inlet boundary conditions of the pool inlet hot water to maintain the HWL. Hydrostatic pressure with a ﬂow rate ratio of 0.995 (200 kg/201 kg) and 0.005 (1 kg/201 kg) were used on the outlet conditions of the primary coolant and hot water, respec- tively. A free slip with the heat ﬂux condition was used at the reactor pool surface. A heat ﬂux of 690 W/m2 was calculated from the surface area and the heat loss obtained from equation (3). A non-slip with adiabatic condition was applied to the other regions. A velocity of 0 m/s and a temperature of 37 ○C were set as the initial conditions in the entire reactor pool.
In a previous study, the solver setting, time step, and mesh size were determined by comparing the simulation results with the experimental data [33]. A realizable k - ε turbulence model with the standard wall function was used as an eddy viscosity model. The Boussinesq model is used to solve the thermally stratiﬁed ﬂow. Wall y-plus values were checked to conﬁrm the applicability of the standard wall function. The SIMPLE algorithm was used for the pressure-velocity coupling. A Green-Gauss node based for the gradient, body force weighted for the pressure, second order up- wind for the momentum, turbulence, and energy were applied for the spatial discretization scheme. The time step and mesh size were
determined based on the Courant number, N uDt=Dx. The Cou- rant number varies from about 0.5 to 5 in the calculation domain [34]. The hybrid meshes of 12,000,000 cells are used for the grid system. The surface meshes of the main components and the middle plane of the reactor pool are displayed in Fig. 6 (2). The time step of the unsteady solver is ﬁxed to 1 s which is determined based on the average grid size and velocity.
6.Flow ﬁeld analysis of the reactor pool
6.1.Initial formation of the HWL
In a previous study, the calculated results of the initial formation of the HWL were compared with the experimental data [33]. The inlet and outlet temperatures of the HWL and the heater capacity were calculated. The numerical analysis results agreed well with the experimental results. In this study, the ﬂow ﬁeld of the reactor pool was calculated without the primary coolant ﬂow for 24 h of the simulation to form the HWL at the upper part of the reactor pool. The discharged hot water ﬂows to the pool surface by the buoyancy force as shown in Fig. 7. This ﬂow collides with the opposite wall and then changes its ﬂow direction to the lower region. Consequently, a large circulating ﬂow ﬁeld forms at the upper part of the reactor pool, called the HWL. The average velocity is about 0.03 m/s and the average temperature is about 45 ○C. The temperature at the outlet of the hot water with different types of discharge headers is plotted in Fig. 8. It took about 15 h to form a stable HWL. The same results were obtained from different types of pool inlet discharge headers because there was no ﬂow of the primary coolant.
These results are used as the initial condition to study the effects
of the primary coolant ﬂow with different types of discharge headers in the entire reactor pool. The primary coolant starts to ﬂow while the HWL system operates with the same boundary conditions.
Fig. 8. Temperature at the outlet of the HWL during the formation of the HWL.
6.2.Simple type discharge header
The outlet of the primary coolant is designed for ﬂow deceler- ation in the lower region of the reactor pool in the downward ﬂow direction. The primary coolant ﬂows out through the circular pipe at a height of 3 m from the pool bottom. Fig. 9 shows the velocity and pressure ﬁelds on the middle plane of the lower part of the pool
Fig. 7. Velocity magnitude and temperature contours of the HWL.
after 12 h of simulation. At that time, there was no change in the ﬂow pattern of the reactor pool. The average velocity of the primary coolant was about 1.5 m/s inside the pipe. However, the coolant was accelerated at the outlet region of the pipe due to the ﬂow oriﬁce. The purpose of this oriﬁce is to make the designed static pressure required in the primary coolant system design. A component cooling line is branched from the coolant outlet pipe to the reactor structure assembly to supply the coolant as shown in Fig. 3 [35]. This differential pressure of the static pressure maintains the ﬂow rate for the cooling of the component.
The accelerated coolant ﬂow at about 5 m/s spreads and slows in the reactor pool, but the velocity does not decreased rapidly owing to the short distance between the coolant outlet and the bottom of the reactor pool. The decelerated ﬂow of about 2 m/s collides with the bottom of the reactor pool, and the ﬂow direction then turns toward the horizontal direction along the pool liner at the bottom. The main impinging ﬂow is divided into two paths around the reactor structure assembly as shown on the xz-plane at 0.3 m from the pool bottom in Fig. 10.
The primary coolant is distributed under the platform and ﬂows into the inside of the ﬂow guide structure through the main inlet and the ﬂow windows. In addition, the coolant ﬂows out and in through the gap between the pool liner and the platform. The coolant ﬂow with the upward direction occurs at the front side of the platform because of the ﬂow direction of the main ﬂow as shown in Fig. 10. The coolant ﬂow with the downward direction occurs at the back, left, and right sides of the platform as shown in Fig. 11.
Fig. 12 shows the velocity and temperature ﬁelds on the middle plane as a function of time after the primary coolant starts to be discharged into the reactor pool. The primary coolant goes up to the upper part of the reactor pool with a velocity of about 0.3 m/s in the lower region of the reactor pool. The ﬂow rate and direction across the center of the platform and the gap between the pool liner and the platform are summarized in Table 1. Almost 45% of the dis- charged coolant goes up through the gap at the front side of the platform.
When the primary coolant meets the HWL, the primary coolant penetrates the lower region of the HWL. There is not an interface between the HWL and the primary coolant because the density difference is no longer maintained. The cold primary coolant is mixed with the hot water and then goes down to the lower part of the reactor pool. The mixed coolant spreads over the middle part of the reactor pool. Eventually, the HWL is destroyed and then the primary coolant goes to the pool surface directly. The radiation level increases because the HWL no longer functions as radiation shielding.
6.3.Circular type discharge header
The ﬂow control in the pool is an important design factor for maintaining the HWL at the upper part of the pool and conﬁning the primary coolant at the lower part of the pool. The circular type discharge header is designed to control the ﬂow direction and reduce the velocity. The pipe size is determined by considering the installation space and the nominal pipe size of commercial
Fig. 9. Velocity and pressure ﬁelds on the middle plane of the reactor pool with the simple type discharge header.
Fig. 10. Velocity ﬁelds of the reactor pool with the simple type discharge header.
Fig. 11. Velocity contour and vector on the center of the platform and the gap between the pool liner and the platform with the simple type discharge header.products to avoid the need of a special piping design. The main pipe is split into two pipes at the lower section in the reactor pool. There are no instruments and equipment except the base structure of the reactor structure assembly. Fig. 13 shows the velocity ﬁelds on the middle plane of the lower part of the pool after 12 h of simulation. The primary coolant accelerated through the ﬂow oriﬁce is decel- erated inside the circular type discharge header. The primary coolant at about 2 m/s is split into both the branched pipes at the lower part of the pool. The ﬂow direction is turned toward the horizontal direction along the pipe layout. The primary coolant at about 0.5 m/s is discharged from the holes on the circular type discharge header. The ﬂow direction and pattern are similar to the calculation results with the simple type discharge header. However, the average velocity of the primary coolant is about 0.1 m/s in the lower region of the reactor pool. It is almost one-third times slower than the velocity of the simple type discharge header. The dis- charged primary coolant is spread from each hole of the discharge header and distributed under the platform. The suction ﬂow ﬁeld builds up near the main inlet and ﬂow windows of the ﬂow guide structure on the reactor structure assembly. The gap ﬂow still exists between the pool liner and platform. The ﬂow direction of the gap
ﬂow is similar to that in the results in the simple type discharge header. The ﬂow rate decreases from about 90 kg/s down to about 23 kg/s at the front gap. However, the upward direction ﬂow also occurs at the left side of the gap because the velocity of the main ﬂow decelerates and the ﬂow spreads under the platform. The ﬂow rate and the direction around the gap are summarized in Table 1.
Fig. 14 shows the velocity and temperature ﬁelds on the middle plane as a function of time after the primary coolant starts to be discharged from the circular type discharge header into the reactor pool. The primary coolant goes up to the upper part of the reactor pool with a velocity of about 0.03 m/s. Its value is about 10% of the velocity result in the simple type discharge header. When the pri- mary coolant reaches the HWL, the primary coolant does not permeate the HWL. The interface between the hot water and the primary coolant is maintained owing to the density difference.
6.4.Duct type discharge header
When the circular type discharge header is installed at the bottom of  the reactor pool, the support design should be applied  to the discharge header. In addition, it is difﬁcult to manufactureFig. 12. Velocity and temperature ﬁelds on the middle plane as a function of time with the simple type discharge header.
many holes in the pipe. Hence, the duct type discharge header is designed by considering the simple support and the ﬂow  area. This is an efﬁcient design for the ﬂow control to decelerate the coolant velocity inside the duct before it ﬂows out to the reactor
pool. The duct size is chosen in accordance with the available area for installing the duct type discharge header and its sup- ports. Fig. 15 shows the velocity ﬁelds on the middle plane of the lower part of the pool after 12 h of simulation. The accelerated
Table 1
The outﬂow and inﬂow through the center of the platform and the gap between the pool liner and the platform.Fig. 13. Velocity ﬁelds of the reactor pool with the circular type discharge header.
primary coolant through the ﬂow oriﬁce collides with the inside plate of the duct, and the coolant is then divided to the left and right sides. The split coolant is decelerated through the perfo- rated plate. Velocity ﬁelds of about 0.3 m/s are formed inside the lower part of the duct as shown in Fig. 15. Finally, the primary coolant is discharged from the holes of the duct type discharge header at about 0.1 m/s. The results of the ﬂow direction and pattern were similar to the calculation results in the circular type discharge header design. However, the average velocity of the primary coolant was about 0.05 m/s in the lower region of the reactor pool. It was almost half of the velocity in the circular type discharge header design. However, there was still a gap ﬂow between the pool liner and the platform. The ﬂow direction of the gap ﬂow was similar to the previous studies. The total up- ward ﬂow rate through the gap decreased from about 23 kg/s for the circular type discharge header to about 18 kg/s in this case. Therefore, the primary coolant stays longer at the lower part of the reactor pool in case of the duct type discharge header. The ﬂow rate and the direction around the gap are summarized in Table 1.
Fig. 16 shows the velocity and temperature ﬁelds on the middle plane as a function of time after the primary coolant starts to be discharged from the duct type discharge header into the reactor pool. The primary coolant goes up to the upper part of the reactor pool with a velocity of about 0.02 m/s. When the primary coolant reaches the HWL, the primary coolant does not break the stable HWL.
The results conﬁrmed that the HWL is maintained in the cir- cular and duct type discharge headers although the primary
coolant system is operating. It is important to compare these de- signs in view of the pool top radiation level and the heat loss. The radiation level at the reactor pool top is affected by the ﬂow rate of the upward primary coolant because it has radionuclides. The duct type discharge header design reduces the reactor pool top radia- tion more than the circular type discharge header design. In addition, the velocity ﬁeld of the primary coolant in the duct type discharge header design is formed 0.25 m lower than that in the circular type discharge header design as shown in Fig. 17. Heat loss from the HWL to the primary coolant is also calculated to compare the design of  the discharge headers. The heat transfer rate from  the HWL to the primary coolant is calculated through  the following equation (6).@6
The heat transfer rate is 3.1 kW in the circular type discharge header. On the other hand, the heat transfer rate is 1.1 kW in the duct type discharge header. These values are about 27% and 10% of the evaporation heat loss on the pool surface, respectively.
6.5.Analysis of the thermal stratiﬁcation
The bulk Richardson number is an important factor in deter- mining the conditions under which the stratiﬁed thermal layer is formed through the following equation (7). Numerical analysis results of the duct type discharge header are used to calculate the bulk Richardson number.
Fig. 14. Velocity and temperature ﬁelds on the middle plane as a function of time with the circular type discharge header.
Fig. 15. Flow ﬁelds of the reactor pool with the duct type discharge header.
Fig. 16. Velocity and temperature ﬁelds on the middle plane as a function of time with the duct type discharge header.
Fig. 17. Velocity ﬁelds at the upper region of the reactor pool.@7
The ﬂow velocity of the primary coolant below the stratiﬁedthermal  layer  is  deﬁned  as  the  characteristic  velocity.  The main
ﬂow of the primary coolant is formed at the front side of the pool as
Fig. 18. Analysis of the ﬂow ﬁelds
(1) Velocity and temperature distribution along line 5. (2) Velocity, temperature, turbulent kinetic energy, and turbulent dissipation rate at the upper region of the reactor pool. (3) Position of the sampling lines.
Table 2
Flow characteristic values in the reactor pool with circular and duct type discharge headers.
Table 3
Flow characteristic values with various temperatures of the pool inlet hot water.shown  in  Fig.  17.   The  ﬂow  direction  of   the  primary  coolant  is
changed to the downward direction after colliding with the HWL. Fig. 18 (1) plots the velocity magnitude, the velocity of each di- rection, and the temperature along the line 5 shown in Fig. 18 (3). Here, the velocity and the temperature at a height of 8.4 m are the values in the pipe of the pool inlet hot water and are not the values in the reactor pool. The ﬂow velocity of the primary coolant de- creases along the upward direction after passing through the front gap   of   the   platform.   This   velocity   decrease   is   a   generalphenomenon of a free shear ﬂow as a result of the spread in the ﬂow ﬁeld [36]. The ﬂow velocity starts to decrease sharply and change the ﬂow direction at the region where the primary coolant collides with the HWL. Graphs of the trend of the velocity magni- tude changes in both areas are shown in Fig. 18 (1). A velocity of
0.02 m/s at the point where the two graphs meet is deﬁned as the characteristic velocity. As the characteristic velocity increases, the bulk Richardson number decreases. As seen from the result for the simple type discharge header, in the worst case the HWL was destroyed and no longer existed.
The length scale of the HWL above the stratiﬁed thermal layer is used as the characteristic length [10]. This length scale of the k - ε turbulence model is calculated from equation (8) based on the numerical analysis results [34].
@
Fig. 18 (2) plots the temperature, z-direction velocity, velocity magnitude, turbulent kinetic energy, and turbulent dissipation rate along the ﬁve lines in the center region of the reactor pool as shown in Fig. 18 (3). The temperature decreased from 45 ○C to 37 ○C along the reactor pool height between 7.7 m and 8.2 m. In this region, the velocity is less than 0.005 m/s, and the turbulent kinetic energy and the turbulent dissipation rate are almost zero. This region is called a stable stratiﬁed thermal layer. The turbulent kinetic energy and the turbulent  dissipation  rate  begin  to  decrease  from  a  height of
8.5 m at the lower region of the HWL. The average turbulent kinetic energy and the average turbulent dissipation rate on the reactor pool height between 8.2 m and 8.5 m are used to calculate the length  scale.  It  is  unclear  to  deﬁne  a  region  for  calculating  the length scale in the HWL. However, it is considered that the lower region of the HWL is suitable for this calculation because this region is in contact with the primary coolant.
The HWL and primary coolant temperatures are used for calcu- lating the temperature difference in equation (7). The temperature of the primary coolant is used for the thermal expansion coefﬁcient.
The calculated results are summarized in Table 2 for duct and circular type discharge headers. The same procedure is applied to the circular type discharge header. The average bulk Richardson
Fig. 19. Velocity and temperature distribution with various temperatures of the pool inlet hot water.
Fig. 20. Temperature ﬁelds with various temperatures of the pool inlet hot water.
number is 17.6 and 5.4 in each case. The characteristic length scale in the duct type discharge header is 1.5 times longer than that in the circular type discharge header. In addition, the characteristic velocity in the circular type discharge header is 1.5 times faster. Therefore, the bulk Richardson number of the duct type discharge header is about three times larger than that of the circular type discharge header. The bulk Richardson number is more inﬂuenced by the characteristic velocity than other factors because its value is inversely proportional to the square of the velocity. The duct type discharge header makes the stratiﬁed thermal layer more stable than the circular type discharge header does.
Meanwhile, the bulk Richardson number varies widely from 4 to 28 in the duct type discharge header. In the circular type discharge header, the bulk Richardson number also varies widely from 1 to 9. This means that the ﬂow ﬁeld in the lower region of the HWL is non-uniform as shown in Fig. 17, but the ﬂow ﬁeld is regarded as a well mixed area due to the constant temperature at the vertical direction as shown in the temperature proﬁle in Fig. 18 (2). If the primary coolant collides with the region of the low bulk Richardson number, the HWL thickness might become thinner.
The ﬁgure reveals that the stratiﬁed thermal layer is destroyed and is no longer formed when the characteristic velocity increases like in the simple type discharge header. To investigate the effect of the temperature difference between the HWL and the primary coolant, a numerical analysis is conducted while lowering the tem- perature of the pool inlet hot water. The applied temperature ranges are listed in Table 3. When the temperature of the pool inlet hot water is 39.75 ○C, no HWL is calculated at the upper section of the reactor pool (Case 5). In this calculation, the duct type discharge header is considered and the numerical analysis process and boundary conditions are used with the same method except the temperature of the pool inlet hot water in the case 1 to 5. The temperature distribution along the centerline and the velocity
magnitude along line 5 of Fig. 18 (3) are shown in Fig. 19 at 24 h after the primary coolant starts to ﬂow. The calculated results, such as the average length scale at the lower region of the HWL, the character- istic velocity of the primary coolant, the HWL temperature, the average bulk Richardson number, and the heat transfer rate from the HWL to the primary coolant are summarized in Table 3. The average bulk Richardson number is mainly affected by the temperature dif- ference because the other factors are similar. Table 3 shows that the bulk Richardson number decreases as the temperature of the pool inlet hot water decreases. The HWL became unstable when the temperature difference is less than 0.25 ○C as shown in the velocity magnitude of Fig. 19. The stable stratiﬁed thermal layer no longer exists between 7.7 m and 8.2 m. At this time, the average bulk Richardson number is 0.7. As the average bulk Richardson number decreases, the interface between the HWL and the primary coolant becomes unstable as shown in Fig. 20. Meanwhile, the heat transfer rate is calculated at about 1.1 kW regardless of the temperature of the pool inlet hot water. This means that the heat transfer coefﬁcient increases because the temperature difference decreases. When interface between the HWL and the primary coolant is unstable, the heat transfer coefﬁcient increases. Based on the above results, the temperature of the HWL should be at least 1 ○C higher than the temperature of the primary coolant.
7.Conclusion
The HWL is an important design concept of ALARA in an open- pool type research reactor for minimizing the radiation level in the pool top area. The HWL functions as radiation shielding since the primary coolant, which contains radionuclides, is trapped under the HWL.
When the primary coolant  is dumped  into the reactor pool, the
ﬂow ﬁeld  under the  HWL  is  affected  by the  outlet  design of theprimary coolant.
In this research, the ﬂow ﬁelds of the HWL and the primary coolant ﬂow were simulated in the reactor pool. The reactor pool, reactor structure assembly and platform were taken into consid- eration for the calculation model. The simple type, circular type and duct type discharge headers were compared to determine the outlet design of the primary coolant.
Unsteady 3-D ﬂow ﬁelds were numerically simulated to observe the thermal-hydraulic characteristics using the realizable k - ε turbulence model. As the initial condition, the formation and maintenance of the HWL were simulated without the primary coolant ﬂow for 24 h. After that, the primary coolant began to ﬂow out to the reactor pool with different shapes of discharge headers. The HWL, ﬂow ﬁelds of the reactor pool, heat loss on the bottom of the HWL, and ﬂow rate through the gap between the pool liner and platform were considered to evaluate the appropriate design of the discharge header. The duct type discharge header was determined as the best design of the primary coolant outlet to maintain a stable HWL.
We proposed the bulk Richardson number to judge the stable formation of the HWL by considering the forced ﬂow ﬁelds of the HWL and the primary coolant. To maintain a stable HWL in this research reactor, we recommend that the average bulk Richardson number should be higher than 2.7 and the temperature of the HWL should be 1 ○C higher than the temperature of the primary coolant.
Declaration of competing interest
We certify that there is no conﬂict of interest including any ﬁnancial, personal or other relationships with other people or organizations.
Acknowledgements
This work has been conducted as a part of the Development of Research Reactor Technology project sponsored by Ministry of Science and ICT of Korean government.
