<title>Enhancement of nuclear radiation shielding and mechanical properties of YBiBO3 glasses using La2O3</title>
<author>Shams A.M. Issa a, b, Atif Mossad Ali c, d, H.O. Tekin e, f, *, Y.B. Saddeek b, g, Ali Al-Hajry c,
Hamed Algarni c, G. Susoy h</author>
<Affiliation>a Physics Department, Faculty of Science, University of Tabuk, Saudi Arabia
b Physics Department, Faculty of Science, Al-Azhar University, Assiut, 71452, Egypt
c Physics Department, Faculty of Science, King Khalid University, Abha, 61413, Saudi Arabia
d Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, Assiut University, Assiut, 71516, Egypt
e Uskudar University, Vocational School of Health Services, Radiotherapy Department, Istanbul, 34672, Turkey
f Uskudar University, Medical Radiation Research Center (USMERA), Istanbul, 34672, Turkey
g Department of Physics, College of Science in Zulﬁ, Majmaah University, Al-Majmaah, 11952, Saudi Arabia
h Istanbul University, Faculty of Science, Department of Physics, 34134, Istanbul, Turkey</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>NUCLEAR ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>/10.1016/j.net.2019.11.017</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2019.11.017</URL>
ABSTRACT
In this study, nuclear radiation shielding and rigidity parameters of Y (0.1-x)B0.6Bi1.8O3La2x glassy system were investigated in order to determine it's suitability for use as nuclear radiation shielding materials. Therefore, a group of bismuth borate glass samples with La2O3 additive were synthesized using the technique of melt quenching. According to the results, the increase of the La2O3 additive in- creases the density of the glass samples and the mass attenuation coefﬁcient (mm) values, whereas the half-value layer (HVL) and mean free path (MFP) values decrease. The effective atomic number (Zeff) is also enhanced with an increment of both mass removal cross section for neutron ( R) and absorption neutron scattering cross section (sabs). In addition to the other parameters, rigidity parameter values were theoretically examined. The increase of La2O3 causes some other important magnitudes to increase. These are the average crosslink density, the number of bonds per unit volume, as well as the stretching force constant values of these glass samples. These results are in concordance with the increase of elastic moduli in terms of the Makishima-Mackenzie model. This model showed an increase in the rigidity of the glass samples as a function of La2O3.
Keywords:
Bismuth borate glass La2O3
Radiation shielding properties Mechanical properties
Introduction
The emitted radiations from electrical discharge machines or radioisotopes are perilous to people as well as harm delicate research hardware. Therefore, superior shielding equipment is requested to decrease the radiation to acceptable and safe levels. Conventional radiation attenuators such as ordinary concrete, clay bricks and tiles are preferred shielding materials for radiation protection [1e5]. On the other hand, pellucid alloys such as glass have to be used for radioisotope containers and windows, espe- cially in medical x-ray imaging [6,7]. Recently, glass samples doped with rare earth play an important role and are of interest promisingly for various applications i.e optical ampliﬁers, laser devices and radiation shields [6]. Glasses which have high trans- parency in the visible area are one of the suitable absorbers in terms of radiation shielding properties [8e13]. Generally, glass samples having more bridging oxygens plays an important role in terms of radiation shielding and mechanical properties [8]. Due to their elemental mass fractions in the composition of glass samples, aluminum oxide and yttria act as glassmakers and modiﬁers [9]. Bismuth oxide, on the other hand, has a great advantage in both density   and   refractive   index   [10,11].   Yttria,   a boro-bismuthate
doped material, known as a sort of glass arrange  controller,  is more worthwhile than customary borate or phosphate glass ma- terials [6,12]. In addition, they have outstanding chemical and photochemical stability and have highly developed properties. The previous studies showed that the addition of yttria from rare earth metal   oxides   to   the   glass   sample   affects   the   structure   and properties of the glass. Yttria increases the coefﬁcient of thermal expansion and glass transition temperature, on the other hand it also increases the elastic moduli, density and the rigidity of the glass matrices containing it [6,13,14]. Furthermore, the addition of Yttria to Eu3 doped borosilicate glass samples increases host absorption and excitation at 385 nm [15]. As described above, the yttria contribution to boro-bismuthate glass samples increase the density and radiation shielding properties of the glass sample and improves the rigidity of the glass samples. Saddeek et al. [6] con- ducted pioneering studies examining the presence of yttria doped alumino boro-bismuthate glass samples on rigidity and radiation shielding parameters. However, the extensive literature review has shown that there are only a few studies on the impact of radiation shielding properties on Yttria doped boro-bismuthate glass sam- ples. Therefore, this work has aimed to investigate the nuclear ra- diation shielding properties of different types of Pb-free Ytriya doped boro-bismuthate glass samples. It is also aimed to investi- gate the mechanical properties and evaluate their mechanical properties as a suitable shielding material. Boro-bismuthate was chosen as the basic glass sample in this study because of its unique properties such as excellent shielding properties and high trans- parency. It is to be noted that outcomes from the present investi- gation would be useful for glass literature and in particular for their radiation shielding applications. Furthermore, the obtained results can provide a wide range evaluation opportunity on the nature of Ytriya doped boro-bismuthate glass in recent amorphous structure. The ﬁndings of this study can be useful for a better understanding of the suitability of Ytriya doped boro-bismuthate glass samples as a nuclear shielding material.2.Experimental procedures
2.1.Sample preparation
In this study, different types of glass samples were prepared using the traditional melt quenching technique, with the chemical formula Y(0.1-x)B0.6Bi1.8O3La2x where x ¼ 0 to 0.01. Different chemicals such as La2O3, boric acid, Yttria as well as bismuth oxide were blended and manually grinding with an agate mortar to form the combinations shown in Table 1. Subsequently, the resulting blend was heated at 1373 K with the aid of an electric oven for 4 h. The softened glass material was extinguished in a warmed treated steel round and hollow structure shape noticeable all around and at room temperature and toughened at 623 K. The glass test having a thickness of 0.1  cm was cleaned for thickness just  as for estimating
radiation  protecting  and  mechanical  properties.  Then  again, the bits of glass tests were squashed and comminuted and arranged for
2.2Density&XRD
The thickness estimations of test glasses (r) were researched tentatively with the assistance of the Archimedes method utilizing toluene as inundation ﬂuid. The accompanying condition was utilized to ascertain the thickness of mass glass tests;@1
where wa, wd, are the weight of glass samples in the air and in the immersion liquid, respectively. rd is the density of immersion
liquid. To check the shapeless structure of glasses, Philips X-beam diffractometer was used. The device properties can be listed as XRD-PW/1710      with      nickel/sifted,      copper-Ka     radiation (l 1.542 10—4 mm) (controlled in 40  104  V and 0.03 A. The  acquired outcomes were noted in the angular region (2q) of 200- 300.
3.Computational work
3.1.HVL and MFP
The gamma protecting property of a given material condition is determined by a speciﬁc parameter of the half value layer (HVL). As indicated by this parameter, the force of an occurrence photon was diminished to half of it's root dependent on the announcement [16,17].:@2
The MFP gives the mean distance taken by the gamma between two consecutive collisions with the material atoms, and can be evaluated as:@3
3.2.Effective atomic number (Zeff)
The term of effective atomic number (Zeff) is an important parameter in radiation studies. The characterization of shielding progress in complex materials can be explained by role of effective atomic number. We shall explain the theoretical background of effective atomic number calculations. In this study, the theoretical mass attenuation coefﬁcient (mm) of the samples was calculated by using the weight fraction (wi) and mass attenuation coefﬁcient of each element mm i with the help of XCOM program (see equation
(4)) [18,19]:
@4
In order to determine the total atomic cross-section values (sa),
mm values were also used [20]:
@5
Table 1
Sample code, chemical composition and weight fraction.
In this equation, NA indicates the Avogadro's number and Ai indicates the atomic weight of the individual element. On the other hand, the total electronic cross-section of the element (se) can be ﬁgured out as follows [20]:
@6
fi is the fractional abundance of ith element and Zi is the atomic number of ith element in equation (6). By taking the ratio of sa and se the effective atomic number (Zeff) of the glass samples is ﬁgured out with the help of equation (7) [20].@7
Neutron shielding
Shielding of neutrons is a signiﬁcant issue in nuclear in- stallations. Neutron shielding performance of shielding materials is expected to reduce the intensity of neutron radiation. Therefore, another important nuclear radiation shielding parameters namely effective removal cross sections for fast neutrons (SR) as well as absorption neutron scattering cross section (sabs) values of the investigated glasses have been ﬁgured out with the help of the equations below [21e23]:@8
@9
@10
where ri is the partial density [21,22]. Finally, a KARL DEUTSCH system consisting of X and Y cut transducers and Echograph was used for the stability of the polished glasses so that the measure- ment of ultrasonic speeds was controlled.
4.Results and discussions
The XRD pattern shown in Fig. 1 indicates the amorphous structure of the glass samples. As it is clear from the ﬁgure, the peaks are absent and there is a wide bump between the 2q values of 200 and 300. On the other hand, ratio of elements by weight (wt%), chemical compositions and sample representations of elements are given in Table 1.
4.1.Nuclear radiation shielding parameters
The theoretical shielding parameters such as mm and Zeff of sample  glasses  are  ﬁgured  out  in  the  energy  region  of   0.015e15 MeV. The shielding parameters mentioned above were ﬁgured out with the help of XCOM program [24]. Fig. 2 reﬂects changes in mm values of glass samples in the energy range  0.015e15 MeV. It is clear from Fig. 2 that as the concentration of La2O3 in Y(0.1-x)B0.6Bi1.8O3La2x glass samples increases, the mm values also increase. Also, the mm values are impacted by the photon en- ergy in Y(0.1-x)B0.6Bi1.8O3La2x glasses. When the photon  energy  is less than 1 MeV, the mm values of the Y(0.1-x)B0.6Bi1.8O3La2x glass samples decrease rapidly with increasing photon energy. Studies
Fig. 1. XRD pattern for investigated glass samples.
Fig. 2. XCOM mass attenuation coefﬁcient (mac) values for investigated glass samples against photon energy.
where similar situations are observed are shown by Refs. [7,25e30]. This decreasing is due to that the interaction between atoms in the glasses and gamma radiation is the photoelectric effect. In this energy range, a strong peak might be sighted owing to the double formation effect in the region of the K-absorption edges of Bi core. Compton scattering cross-section (CSP) values are inversely pro- portional to energy values. Therefore, this process is dominant in the range of 1 < E < 8 MeV [31]. That is, mm values of Y(0.1-
x)B0.6Bi1.8O3La2x glass samples slowly reduced with increasing photon energy, and thus the distinction between the mm values returns to almost zero. In the energy range greater than 8 MeV, mm
values increase slightly and become almost constant after a while. This behavior explains that the pair production process (PPP) is predominant in this energy region and that the cross section value is subject to on the square of the number of atoms Z2 [22,32]. This behavior has been also observed in previous studies [33e36].
One of the important armor parameters, HVL and MFP, is often used to interpret the shielding property of samples. The results of these parameters are shown in Figs. 3 and 4 for all the investigated glasses. As it is known, higher HVL and MFP values refer to thicker glass utilized to attenuate gamma-ray photons. So, lower values of the HVL and MFP parameters mean better shielding properties. As La concentration in glass decline, the HVLs for photon energy in- creases. Besides, the HVL and MFP are listed in the following descending order of LYBB1, LYBB2, LYBB3, LYBB4, LYBB5 and LYBB6.
Fig. 5 shows the Zeff values of Y(0.1-x)B0.6Bi1.8O3La2x glasses. These values are in the range of 16.42e53.81. It can be easily seen that the Zeff values increase in the energy region where the energy is less than 0.01 MeV. As observed, there are two sharp pinnacles that might be alluded to retention edges of bismuth, yttrium, and lanthanum. As photon vitality builds, Zeff qualities increment gradually [33], ie the CSP procedure is predominant in this district. At vitality esteems over 10 MeV, Zeff qualities are practically consistent and this is because of the predominance of PPP.
4.2.Neutron shielding
The macroscopic effective removal cross section values ( R) of Y(0.1-x)B0.6Bi1.8O3La2x glasses for fast neutrons are shown in Fig. 6.   As the La additive increases to 0.1 mol%, the values range from 0.1500 to 0.1651 cm—1. The R value of the LYBB6  sample  con- taining the highest La contribution is the highest (1.651 cm—1). sabs values of Y(0.1-x)B0.6Bi1.8O3La2x glasses were shown in Fig. 7. The sabs values are ranging amid 71.581 b and 72.245 b. An ideal neutron protecting glass material is required to have a high value of sabs [23]. Among the investigated samples, LYBB6 has the highest sabs value, indicating that it is beneﬁcial to use the LYBB6 glass sample as a shielding material for neutrons.
4.3.Mechanical studies
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy namely FTIR analysis of
Fig. 4. Variation of mfp for investigated glass samples.
Fig. 5. Variation of Zeff for investigated glass samples.
Fig. 3. Variation of hvl for investigated glass samples.
Y2O3eB2O3eBi2O3 glass samples was performed by Saddeek et al.
[6] and the results indicated that the application of the glass network was higher in the existence of yttria since the bonds among yttria and oxygen molecules are prevalent than those among aluminum and oxygen [37]. In this manner, N4 increases and leads to upgrade the creation of [BO4] basic units. Making of [BO4] is expected to produced spanning oxygens that removed from the trading of positions and coordination round oxygen particles among yttria and Al2O3 [6]. These discussions can be interpreted from the analysis of the mechanical properties of
Y2O3eB2O3eBi2O3 glass samples doped with La2O3. Mechanical
parameters were examined with two basic parameters. These are the bond compression model [38,39] parameter and Makishima- Mackenzie model [40] parameter. The bond compression model can be applied to the structure of glass samples characterized by a uniform bond. Thus, the bulk modulus of a 3D glass network can be calculated with the help of equations (11), (12) and (13) [41,42].
Fig. 6. Fast neutron removal cross sections SR for the selected glass samples.
Fig. 7. Absorption neutron scattering cross section (sabs) values for the selected glass samples.@11
@12
@13
Based on previous studies, the bond length of B2O3, Bi2O3, La2O3 and yttria was evaluated [39,43e45]. These parameters are given in Table 2 considering the La2O3 additives. According to Table 2, glass sample containing 0.1% La2O3 has the biggest number of bonds per unit volume and average cross-link density. This shows the for- mation of more bridging oxygen. Using density data, elastic mod- ules and packaging density can be determined using the following equations according to the Makishima-Mackenzie model [40].
@14
@15
@16
@17
The data in the equation above is listed below;
xi: mole fraction of component i
Gi: dissociation energy per unit volume of component i
RA-RO: Pauling ionic radii of cation and oxygen, respectively for oxide AmOn
Y: Young's modulus K: Bulk modulus The values of packing factors and the partition energies of bound oxides were assessed dependent on crafted by Inaba et al. [46e48]. In Table 2, the physical qualities are likewise recorded, for example, separation vitality, pressing thickness, Young's and mass moduli. As per Table 2, the higher the La2O3 added substance, the higher the pressing thickness, ie the glass test having 0.1 mol percent La2O3 has a progressively minimized structure. The expansion of the conservativeness and therefore, the unbending nature of the considered glasses might be credited to the higher ﬁeld quality and higher concoction bond quality of LaeO than that of YeO, the expansion of the coordination number of the glasses and the crossing over oxygens. These reasons will build the ver- satile moduli of the glass tests examined.
5.Conclusion
This paper investigates the radiation shielding and mechanical features of Y(0.1-x)B0.6Bi1.8O3La2x glasses. The mm values are calcu- lated using XCOM program. Important radiation shielding
Table 2
The density (r), molar volume ×10—6 (Vm), number of bonds per unit volume (NB) × 1028, the average cross-link density (nc), the bulk modulus according to the bond compression model (Kb), the packing density (Vt), the dissociation energy (D) × 106 and computed elastic moduli [bulk (Km) and Young moduli (Ym) according to Makishima- Mackenzie model of the glass system Y0.1-xB0.6Bi1.8O3La2x.parameters such as Zeff, HVL, MFP,	R and sabs are calculated to comprehend the ability of radiation shielding for sample glasses that are doped with La2O3. According to results the values of Zeff, R and sabs increase as the La content increases. As can be seen from Figs. 3 and 4 the LYBB6 glass sample has the lowest HVL value and MFP value, respectively. This study shows that the LYBB6 glass sample exhibits better photon and neutron radiation shielding capabilities than other glass samples. The increase in the La2O3 addition increases the bridging oxygen atoms and consequently increases the cross-link density and the number of coordination. Accordingly, hypothesis of present investigation is approved. Such improvements are accompanied by an enhanced packing density of the mentioned glass samples. Thus, the elastic moduli increase due to the improved rigidity of the glasses. The evaluation of the pa- rameters showed that investigated glasses are powerful candidates
for the purpose of radiation shielding.
Declaration of competing interest
There are no conﬂicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgments
The authors extended their appreciation to the Deanship of Scientiﬁc Research at King Khalid University for funding this work through the research group program under grant number R.G.P.2/ 33/40.
