<title>Assessment of the radiation impact of steam generator dismantling on the workers, public and environment</title>
<author>Martin Horna´ˇcek*, Vladimír Neˇcas</author>
<Affiliation>Slovak University of Technology in Bratislava, Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Information Technology, Institute of Nuclear and Physical Engineering, Ilkovicova 3, 81219 Bratislava, Slovakia</Affiliation>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2016.05.003 </DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2016.05.003  </URL>
ABSTRACT
Prediction of the exposure of workers and the impact on the public and environment is necessary for the planning of the decommissioning tasks. Planning and realisation of the dismantling process have to take into account many factors. This results in the creation of possible dismantling scenarios. Moreover, the input data such as nuclide composition and activity content often vary. In the case of a steam generator, the contamination level can differ even within the same nuclear power plant. The paper describes and applies the methodology used for complex analysis of the steam generator dismantling process in nu- clear power plants using the VVER-440 reactor types.
Keywords:
Decommissioning
Large components dismantling Steam generator
External exposure Internal exposure Collective effective dose
1.Introduction
During decommissioning of nuclear power plants, numerous tasks regarding the dismantling of technological equipment have to be solved. One of the biggest issues represents the dismantling of the so-called large components. In general, these may be deﬁned as any parts of the nuclear facility that may be removed without being cut and conditioned in a non-standard package for disposal or storage and require speciﬁc consideration by the local regulators due to their weight, volume or the extent of their radiological contamination   (Organisation   for    Economic   Co-operation   and
Development  e Nuclear  Energy  Agency,  2012).  According to this
deﬁnition, the following components of the nuclear power plant (NPP) with a pressurized water reactor can be considered as large parts: reactor pressure vessel, reactor internals (core basket, pro- tected tube unit, reactor cavity and reactor cavity bottom), pres- surizer and steam generator. All of these components are parts of the primary circuit of NPP, which results in the high activity level. This is caused by either the neutron activation (reactor pressure vessel  and  reactor  internals)  or  contamination  by  activation and ﬁssion products (steam generator SG and pressurizer).
Currently there is already practical experience with the ﬁnished projects of dismantling and segmentation of SGs:
German NPP Gundremmingen (3 secondary SGs) (Steiner et al., 1997).
German NPP Greifswald (only low contaminated SGs for testing purposes, the other SGs are stored at Interim Storage North) (The Greifswald Decommissionig Project), (Rehs).
●Spanish NPP Jose´ Cabrera (Martín and Rodríguez).
●American NPP Rancho Seco (Hickman).
Detailed analyses regarding the estimation of exposure during dismantling of the contaminated components were also carried out:
Italian NPP Enrico Fermi (the analysis focused on the internal exposure during cutting the SGs, piping and pressurizer) (Bonavigo et al., 2010).
Lithuanian NPP Ignalina (the analyses focused on the calculation of external and internal exposures during cutting different reactor systems (Simonis et al.), (Ragaiˇsis et al., 2015) (Simonis et al., 2015).
However, the following issues can be identiﬁed:
Some of the documents provide general information only, or  the experience and analyses are dealing with different types of components (e.g. vertical construction of SGs or other speciﬁc components).
The above mentioned documents dealing with practical expe- rience or analyses are therefore hard to be applicable in the case of horizontal SGs used in NPPs with VVER-440 reactor type.
In Slovakia, the NPP V1 in Jaslovske´ Bohunice is currently in the
2nd decommissioning stage with planned duration between 2015 and 2025 (National Nuclear Found, 2012). Within this stage, the large components will be cut in-situ and the fragmented parts will be stored and/or conditioned and disposed in the repository (Nuclear and Decommissioning Company). In this NPP, the VVER- 440/230 reactor type (Russian type of pressurized water reactor) was used. This type of pressurized water reactor (PWR) was built in the former Soviet Union (Armenia, Russia and Ukraine), Finland and Eastern Europe countries (former Czechoslovakia, Hungary, former German Democratic Republic and Bulgaria). Each unit of
NPP V1 had a gross electrical output of 440 MW and standard operation was terminated after 28 years (1978e2006 and 1980e2008).
The lack of information regarding the dismantling and seg- mentation of steam generators in NPPs with VVER-440 reactor type can be explained by the following facts (International Atomic Energy Agency, 2015):
Some of the NPPs are still operational (Czech Republic, Finland, Hungary, Russia and Ukraine).
The deferred dismantling applied in some NPPs or the dismantling process is under development (Armenia and Bulgaria).
The different dismantling strategy applied (e.g. in the German NPP Greifswald the SGs were removed as one piece and are stored at the Interim Storage North, direct cutting was only tested on the low contaminated SGs).
The study in this paper therefore presents the proposed steam generator dismantling scenarios and deals with their complex analysis considering external and internal exposures as well as the impact upon the public and environment.
2.Methods
2.1.Technical description of steam generator
The subject of the analysis is the steam generator used in each of the 6 loops of the primary circuit within one unit. The SG is depicted in Fig. 1 and consists of the following main parts:
SG casing e total mass 113.4 tonnes, part of the secondary circuit.
Heat exchange tubes e 5536 U-tubes, total mass 34.7 tonnes,
contaminated  part of  the primary circuit.
2 collectors e total mass of both collectors 25.4 tonnes, contaminated part of the primary circuit.
The total length of SG is 11.8 m, the outer diameter is approx.
3.4 m.
From the construction point of view the vessel is made of carbon steel 22K; the collector material as well as the heat exchanging tube material is titanium stabilized austenitic steel with 0.08% of carbon, 18% of chromium, 10% of nickel and less than 1% of titanium
(International Atomic Energy Agency, 1997).
2.2.General preconditions
To assess the radiation impact of SG dismantling, the knowledge of numerous parameters is crucial (parameters associated with the dismantling scenario of SG, radiological data e level of activity and nuclide composition). However, the nuclide composition (nuclide vector) is mostly set as an average value for the whole group of technological equipment. In the case of radiological characterisa- tion of NPP V1 this vector is the same for the whole primary circuit. Moreover, the level of activity is in many cases only an estimated value based on the in-situ measurements combined with the analysis of the samples. Given the fact that the contamination process is very complex and strongly dependent on the chemical conditions of the coolant, electro-chemical properties of the ma- terial as well as on the chemical properties of the radionuclides (Severa and Ba´r, 1991), the calculation results using these input data would be approximate only. In this case, two approaches can be applied:
Development of the methodology which allows quick recalcu- lation of the results after the radiological parameters are particularised.
Application of the conservative approach e to ensure that the
results will not be underestimated.
Based on these assumptions, the calculation methodology described in the next chapter can be developed and applied.
2.3.Applied methodology
The methodology developed reﬂecting the aforementioned facts comprises the following sequence of steps:
1.Deﬁnition of extensive sets of parameters associated with the material composition and geometric dimensions of SG parts, and of the parameters associated with cutting and fragmenta- tion of the parts of SG including the distance of the workers from the component being cut.
2.Creation of the possible dismantling scenarios considering site- speciﬁc conditions and experience from similar international projects.
3.Development of geometrical, radiological and material models of the considered dismantling scenarios. In each scenario, the activity of all radiation sources is set as 1 Bq of 60Co. This nuclide is one of the most abundant activation products in NPPs with PWR reactors closed after standard operation (International Atomic Energy Agency, 1998). Moreover, this nuclide is easy to measure by g-spectrometry (International Atomic Energy Agency, 1998), (International Atomic Energy Agency, 2009).
4.Calculation of the dose rates and processing of the results e set
of the so-called conversion factors [(mSv/h)/1BqCo-60].
5.Calculation of the dose rates and of the collective effective doses using conversion factors and variable parameters (nuclide vec- tors, activity content, workload).
6.Calculation of internal exposure for each relevant exposure pathway.
7.Assessment of the impact of the dismantling on the environ- ment and public.
8.Overall comparison and evaluation of the considered scenarios.
Fig. 1.  Cross section of the steam generator for VVER-440 reactors (Baraba´ˇs, 1985).
2.4.Basic description of dismantling scenarios
Considering the factors characterized above, three dismantling scenarios were analysed. Before realisation of each scenario, the insulation of SG is removed, the collectors are cut from the primary
circuit piping and the steam collector is removed.
Scenario 1 considers longitudinal cutting of SG casing which enables the removal and further fragmentation of the heat ex- change tubes, Fig. 2. This approach was studied in (The Greifswald Decommissionig Project).
Scenario 2 simulates transversal cutting of the SG and frag- mentation of the resulting segments, Fig. 3. Similar situation was analysed in (Rehs).
In both scenarios the worker group carrying out dismantling and fragmentation consists of 5 workers who are divided into the following groups:
Fig. 2.  Fragmentation of heat exchange tubes  e Scenario 1.	Fig. 3. Fragmentation of heat exchange tubes e Scenario 2.
Cutter and junior technician e realisation of cutting activities e
the distance from the component is 30 cm.
Master and technician e management of workers, control of exposure time (master), control of the cutting techniques, the quality and speed of the cut (technician) e the distance from the component is 100 cm.
Radiation protection technician e monitoring the radiological situation, measuring the dose rate e the distance from the component is 100 cm.
Scenario 3 represents remote dismantling of SG in a hermetic box e Fig. 4. This involves lifting of the whole SG from its original position to the reactor ﬂoor and creation of a special cutting workshop on the place of the lifted SG. The dismantling procedure is similar to Scenario 2, after the lifting to the reactor ﬂoor each segment is fragmented similarly as depicted in Fig. 3. During lifting the segments, the minimal distance between the worker and the segment is approx. 38 cm, the maximal distance is approx. 170 cm. Based on the data from the available technical documentation, the average distance between the girders of the heat exchange tubes is 68.8 cm, thus the width of the fragments is considered to be 70 cm in order to achieve ﬁxation of the heat exchange tubes during
and after cutting.
2.5.Input parameters
Based on the scheme depicted in Fig. 2, the following input parameters are taken into account:
Activity content: The total activity of the SG components including alpha and beta emitters without application of pre- dismantling decontamination e Table 1:
Nuclide composition (nuclide vector): It was derived from the radiological characterisation, consisting of 29 radionuclides, the biggest share of 55Fe, 63Ni and 60Co e Table 2.
Task duration (workload): Duration of each step was derived from the cutting speed of the facility for fragmentation of large components in the Interim Storage North at the Greifswald site which varies from 15 to 80 mm/min (Rohde). Within the conser- vative approach and since the procedure is performed in the controlled area, the lowest speed from the interval was chosen. The issue  of  cutting  duration  was  also  discussed  with  professionals
Fig. 4. Lifting a segment of the steam generator e Scenario 3.
Table 1
Estimated activity content of the contaminated parts of the steam generator.
Table 2
Nuclide vector considered in the analyses.
(Fachtagung).
Distribution factors: In the case of thermal cutting, the radio- nuclides of the material will be distributed to the slag, dust or will remain on the base material. The partitioning factors of the nuclides were taken from (Anigstein et al., 2003).
Filter efﬁciency: Based on the operational experience an efﬁ- ciency of 99.95% is considered.
2.6.Radiological impact assessment
Dismantling of SG will lead to external and internal exposures of the workers and to exposure of the public through discharges.
The external exposure was calculated using codes VISIPLAN 3D ALARA and MATLAB with the following procedure:
Creation of a calculation model in VISIPLAN 3D ALARA code with the activity of each source 1 Bq of 60Co and creation of a set of points in which the dose rate is calculated (the so-called trajectory).
Processing of the data obtained (dose rates from each source). These are the input data for further calculations depicted as f (scalar) in Eq. (1).
●Determination of the so-called conversion vector. This is a set of ratios Gi/GCo. Here, Gi stands for the gamma ray dose constant of
nuclide i depicted as converse (vector) in Eq. (1). The values of Gi and GCo were taken from (Trubey and Unger, 1981).
●Nuclide vector e depicted as share (vector) in Eq. (1).
●The activity content depicted as activity (scalar) in Eq. (1).
Thus the dose rate can be calculated in matrix processing soft- ware (e.g. MATLAB):
@1
Symbol.* means multiplication of an element in the n-th row of the
ﬁrst vector with an element in the n-th row of the second vector.
The speciﬁc gamma-ray dose constants are received from the unshielded gamma-ray dose equivalent rate at a distance of 1 m from a point source (Trubey and Unger, 1981). It is obvious that in the case of SG dismantling the shielded sources are present. For this reason, a comparison was carried out between the above  mentioned methodology and the approach in which the whole activity and nuclide vector are directly entered into VISIPLAN 3D ALARA code. This analysis was published in (Horna´ˇcek and Neˇcas) and the results show that the dose rates obtained using the pre-the case of direct entering all the data into the computer code. Therefore it can be stated that the methodology based on equation
(1) leads to slightly conservative results.The main advantage of this approach is that the vector of the dose rates at 1 Bq of 60Co is calculated only once and in the case of changing the input parameters recalculation can be done easily in MATLAB as shown in Fig. 2.
Calculation of the internal exposure of the workers was per- formed in accordance with documents of IAEA (International Atomic Energy Agency, 2005), European Commission (European Commission, 2000) and of the Slovak authorized document (Statutory Order No. 345/2, 2006). These documents consider 3 internal exposure pathways:
●inhalation,
●ingestion,
●skin contamination.
Within the conditions considered in this paper, skin contami- nation can be neglected due to the fact that all workers in the controlled area of NPP have to wear special clothes. Therefore only inhalation and ingestion are taken into account in the calculations. Since the cutting activities resulting in aerosols generation are carried out by the cutter and junior technician only, internal exposure was calculated only for this group. Moreover, only cutting and fragmentation of the heat exchange tubes and collectors were
taken into account.
Inhalation.
The doses from inhalation are calculated as follows (International Atomic Energy Agency, 2005), (European Commission, 2000), (Statutory Order No. 345/2, 2006):
@2
where:
Einh,C is the yearly committed effective dose from inhalation per unit activity concentration in the material [(mSv/a)/(Bq/g)],
einh is the effective dose coefﬁcient for inhalation [mSv/Bq] based on the data given in (International Atomic Energy Agency, 2005) for each radionuclide,
te is the exposure time [h/a] based on the duration of the rele- vant task,
fd is the dilution factor [-],value of 0.1 (low probability case e
conservative approach),
fc is the concentration factor of speciﬁc activity in the ﬁne fraction [-] based on the data given in (International Atomic Energy Agency, 2005) for each radionuclide,
Cdust is the effective dust concentration in air [g/m3],value of 10—3g/m3 (low probability case e conservative approach),
V is the breathing rate [m /h],value of 1.2m /h,
l is the radioactive decay constant [1/a],
t1 is the decay time before the start of the scenario [a], within the conservative approach its value is considered to be 0,
t2 is the decay time during the scenario [a], within the conser- vative approach its value is considered to be 0.
Ingestion.                                                                                          The doses from ingestion are calculated as follows (International
Atomic Energy Agency, 2005), (European Commission, 2000), (Statutory Order No. 345/2, 2006):
@3
where:
Eing,C is the yearly committed effective dose from ingestion per unit activity concentration in the material [(mSv/a)/(Bq/g)],
eing is the effective dose coefﬁcient for ingestion [mSv/Bq] based on the data given in (International Atomic Energy Agency, 2005) for each radionuclide,
q is the quantity ingested per year [g/a], its value was 50 g/a, however, one has to take into account that this value assumes that the activity will be carried out during the whole year which is in the case of SG dismantling not true, therefore it was divided by a value of 1600 because 400 h out of the average 2000 working hours per year (1.6 h/day) represent breaks, entrance and exit from the controlled area,
fd is the dilution factor [-], its value is 0.1 (low probability case e
conservative approach),
fc is the concentration factor in the ﬁne fraction [-], its value is
2.0 for the particle size fraction that may be subject to direct ingestion,
ft is the root transfer factor [-], its value is 1,
l is the radioactive decay constant [1/a],
t1 is the decay time before the start of the scenario [a],
t2 is the decay time during the scenario [a].
The impact on the public and environment was assessed using ESTE AI code. The source term are the aerosols generated during cutting of SG parts and released from the chimney of V1 NPP.
2.7.Characterisation of used calculation tools
VISIPLAN 3D ALARA: This code was developed in the Belgian company SCK-CEN and it is a suitable calculation tool for prediction of radiation doses within various tasks of the process of decom-
missioning of NPPs as well as in the area of radioactive waste management  (Tatranský  and  Neˇcas,  2009),  (Hrnˇcíˇr  et  al.,  2013), (Hrnˇcíˇr and Neˇcas, 2013). The basic principle is based on dividing
the volume source to a deﬁnite number of points. Each small source is called a kernel and the process in which the contribution of each point to the dose is added up is called “point kernel” integration (Vermeersch, 2005).
ESTE AI (Annual Impacts) was developed in the Slovak company
ABmerit to calculate the radiation doses caused by discharges from the nuclear facilities at Jaslovske´ Bohunice to the atmosphere and hydrosphere. The method used in ESTE AI is based on Lagrange trajectory model describing the movement of the centre of gravity of discrete clouds (puffs e PTM e puff trajectory model). For the calculation of atmospheric diffusion in horizontal direction the Gaussian diffusion model is applied, in the case of atmospheric diffusion in vertical direction the method of numerical solution of a
semi-empiric  equation  is  used  (Cˇarný  et  al.,  2014).  The  code  in-
volves numerous exposure pathways, e.g. inhalation and ingestion by drinking water and consuming agricultural products from the studied region. The results can be visualised in the form of the maps with deﬁned regions (sectors), which allows identiﬁcation of the most  affected  region  as  well  as  individual  and  total  collective
effective doses (Cˇarný et al., 2014).
3.Results
The presented results can be divided into the following groups:
emitters 241Pu and 241Am. This fact is a result of the different dose coefﬁcients (Chapter 2.6) as well as of different share within the nuclide vector (Table 2).
Comparing the results in Tables 8 and 9 it can be stated that internal exposure has a negligible contribution to the total expo- sure. In the models, no personal protection equipment (masks) was considered. Therefore the results are quite conservative and it can be expected that the doses will be lower by at least one order of magnitude depending on the ﬁltration efﬁciency of the mask ﬁlters.
3.3.Radiological impact assessment
In the case of thermal cutting of SG, the generated aerosols are ﬁltered and released through a ventilation stack to the environment as airborne efﬂuents. Statistical data such as the number of in- habitants, wind rose, wind speed, precipitation measured and evaluated every hour as well as the intake of agricultural products are based on the data from 2014.
The results of the calculations made by computer code ESTE AI
●External exposure
●Dose rates related to 1 Bq of
60Co
are depicted in the following ﬁgures and tables. The studied area is a circle with radius of 100 km divided in 16 sectors. The distances of
Estimated collective effective doses
Internal exposure
The impact of the studied activities on the public and environment
3.1.External exposure
The maximum and average values in Tables 3e7 are the result of the different position of the workers with respect to the sources of radiation. For example, in Fig. 2 one can see that at the position in front of the fragment (the biggest number of the dose points) there is a larger area of the sources contributing to the dose rate than in the case of the points at the side of the fragment. A similar situation is also in other tasks and scenarios (Figs. 3 and 4).
Using the data from Tables 1e7, the estimated external exposure
can be calculated. Only the total results are presented in Table 8.
3.2.Internal exposure
Using the formulae described in Chapter 2.6, the internal exposure can be calculated (Table 9). Based on the distance from the component, internal exposure is considered only for the cutter and the junior technician. Within Scenario 3, internal exposure is taken into account only for the fragmentation activities.
The biggest contribution to the ingestion is from 137Cs, 135Cs and
60Co. In the case of inhalation the biggest contribution is from alpha
the sectors are as follows: 0e1 km, 1e2 km, 2e3 km, 3e5 km,  5e7 km, 7e10 km, 10e15 km, 15e20 km, 20e30 km, 30e50 km, 50e75 km and 75e100 km.
From Fig. 5 it is obvious that the studied activity has an inﬂuence on the exposure of the public in Austria, Czech Republic, Hungary and Slovakia. The total results are depicted in Table 10.
The dose inside the 100 km zone means a collective dose by external exposure, inhalation and ingestion of agricultural prod- ucts. In the case of agricultural products, the approach of ESTE AI to calculating the collective doses assumes that 50% of consumption of vegetables is from local production and 50% are clean products from outside. In the case of other products it is assumed that 10% of consumption is from local production and 90% are clean products from outside.
From Fig. 5 and Table 10 it is obvious that the biggest total collective effective dose and committed dose is in Slovakia. A detailed overview is given below (see Fig. 6).
The white regions depict non-inhabited areas. To identify the critical group, the maximal collective effective dose was investi- gated. In order to identify the critical individuals, the individual doses were calculated and analysed in the inhabited regions and hypothetically also in non-inhabited regions. The maximum doses are shown in Table 11.
From the Table 11 it can be seen that the most affected age group is between years 12e17. The more detailed overview of the col- lective and individual doses by age groups in the most impacted sectors is shown in Table 12.
Table 3
Dose rates related to Co-60 e Scenario 1, cutter and junior technician.
Table 4
Dose rates related to Co-60 e Scenario 1, other workers.
Table 5
Dose rates related to Co-60 e Scenario 2, cutter and junior technician.
Table 6
Dose rates related to Co-60 e Scenario 2, other workers.
Table 7
Dose rates related to Co-60 e Scenario 3.
Table 8
Total collective effective dose e external exposure.
factor can be expected at the order of 100 (Topf et al., 2013). In this case, the presented results will be lower by two orders of magnitude. Moreover, in the case of internal exposure and radiological impact assessment on the public and environment, other conservative as- sumptions were considered. For instance, it can be expected that when thermal cutting techniques are applied, the mask ﬁlters are used. Also the values of distribution factors in (Anigstein et al., 2003)
Table 9
Estimated internal exposure of workers.
Fig. 5. The total collective effective dose e general overview.
4.Discussion and conclusion
From the presented results it is obvious that the biggest contri- bution to the total dose stems from the external exposure. It is necessary to emphasize that the considered input activity is without application of pre-dismantling decontamination. This is a very conservative assumption since the pre-dismantling decontamina- tion is in conformity with the ALARA principle. In general, decon- tamination is a complex process (Severa and Ba´r, 1991) but based on the experience with a ﬁnished decontamination project (the same reactor type, comparable electrical output and operation history e without any incidents or accidents) the overall decontamination
are given in intervals. Within the calculations, always the biggest values were chosen (regarding the transfer of the radionuclides to the aerosols). It was also considered that the whole contaminated material is subject to thermal cutting. It obvious that in the real case the area of the affected surface depends on many factors related to the cutting technique used (the number of cuts, the width of each cut). This problem was studied in detail in (Bonavigo et al., 2010). Given the fact that the selection of the cutting techniques is still the subject of analyses, this phenomenon was not taken into account. Therefore the results of internal exposure as well as of the radio- logical impact assessment are conservative but on the other hand they represent the worst case scenario.
Fig. 6. The total collective effective dose e detailed overview.
Table 10
The inter-regional impact of SG dismantling e general overview.
Table 11
The impact on the public e maximal doses.
Table 12
The impact on the public e maximal individual doses in each age group.
The presented calculation methodology is ﬂexible and the calculated dose rates related to 60Co allow fast recalculation when the source term (nuclide vector and activity content) are changed for instance because of in-situ measurements. Moreover, this methodology can be used not only within the current decom- missioning project of NPP V1 in Jaslovske´ Bohunice but also in the case of similar operating or shut-down reactors (Armenian NPP, Bulgarian NPP Kozloduy, Czech NPP Dukovany, Finnish NPP Loviisa, German NPP Greifswald, Hungarian NPP Paks, Russian NPPs Kola and Novovoronezh or Ukrainian NPP Rovno) where the dismantling of SGs will become also a topical issue.
Acknowledgements
This project has been supported by the Slovak Grant Agency for Science through grant VEGA 1/0796/13.
