<title>Simplified virtual reality training system for radiation shielding and measurement in nuclear engineering</title>
<author>Katsumi Hagita⁎, Yuuki Kodama, Masashi Takada</author>
<Affiliation>Department of Applied Physics, National Defense Academy, Kanagawa 239-8686, Japan
</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2019.103127</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2019.103127</URL>
ABSTRACT
We developed a virtual reality implementation with a virtual survey meter for training and other purposes so that general scientists can utilize virtual reality in nuclear engineering. To demonstrate the efficacy of the implementation, we considered a simplified training scenario that enables beginners and non-experts to experience the environment of radiation sources and radiation shielding walls. Although it is a very simple system compared with operations at an actual facility, it provides a starting point for introductory training in radiation shielding. With comprehensive radiation training in mind, we used a commodity virtual-reality device and the software environments HTC VIVE, Unity, and VRTK. Previous studies confirmed the validity of the point kernel approximation to estimate the dose rate from barrels of nuclear deposits of radiation sources. In this study, we introduced the use of steel and concrete walls as shields in order to establish the training scenario. The virtual survey meter, walls, and barrels were
simply created as Unity native objects and could be moved by a hand device through VRTK. Radiation rates were calculated using a short code based on the point kernel method. We verified the r−2 rule and sum rule. As a training scenario, we examined the training to measure the change in radiation dose rate from three barrels when moving the shielding walls. The training scenario
was analyzed to show the validity and future applications of our virtual-reality implementation.
Keywords:
Virtual reality Survey meter
Radiation protection training Point kernel method
HTC VIVE
Unity
1.Introduction
Virtual reality (VR) is considered to be one of the new common technologies along with artificial intelligence (AI) and the internet of things (IoT). VR is thought to be a powerful technology with potential to change our lives unlike any other technology (LaValle, 2016; Shirley, 2016). VR technology has evolved rapidly in recent years. Thus, it is considered to be undesirable to define VR in terms of specific devices that may fall out of use in a few years (LaValle, 2016). In the present study, we considered VR that provides trainees an immersive feeling in a 3D virtual space by using a 3D stereoscopic view that follows the trainee's movement during radiation measurement and protection training. Earlier, expensive equip- ment, such as a cave automatic virtual environment, was required for immersive VR (Cruz-Neira et al., 1993; Febretti et al., 2013). In general, an immersive VR system
consists of a head tracker, stereoscopic display, and computer systems to achieve real-time processing with video frame rates. In a frame time of, for example, 1/60 s, the system should complete two major tasks: obtain the position and direction of viewing from the head tracker, and generate two pictures to present stereoscopic images for both eyes. Previously, to achieve these requirements, high-precision position tracking system using many infrared sensors, high-resolution stereoscopic screens, and high-end parallelized computer system were used. In some CAVE systems, four or six stereoscopic screens of the size of 3 m by 3 m were utilized to make cubic VR space, because it was technically difficult to realize high resolution as a head mounted device. After several years, revolutionary technological ad- vances have been made in the recent years. Consequently, position tracking devices and stereoscopic displays were integrated into one head mounted device. Equip- ment cost has decreased with the advent of VR devices aimed at various forms of
entertainment (Stein, 2015). The price of recent commodity devices, such as HTC VIVE and Oculus Rift, is approximately 500 USD. Hence, these devices are currently affordable and widely used by the consumers of particular games. Immersive VR with head mounted displays (HMDs) provides stereoscopic images that follow the movement of the head in real time. Compared to conventional stereoscopic dis- plays, this VR provides immersive experiences with walk through. That is, VR provides an excellent 3D voyage in cyber space. In addition, the level of technology required by developers has decreased significantly with the evolution of software. We can use Unity and Unreal Engine as integrated tools (game engines) for VR software development. Therefore, scientists who are not VR experts have been able to create VR programs without special knowledge.
VR is an indispensable technology in the nuclear engineering field. VR can contribute to the solution of important problems such as clarifying the public perception of nuclear energy for a clear understanding of its financial and social benefits. Previous studies (Freitas et al., 2014) have emphasized that several new VR applications can be developed, such as for data visualization, training of specialists in the nuclear area, and the integration of radiation monitoring systems with virtual environments. We can use VR for the training of specialists such as preparing teams for security against nuclear facility attacks and real-time radia- tion monitoring in nuclear installations (Freitas et al., 2014). In a previous study (Freitas et al., 2014), Unreal Engine was used as a game engine; however, an HMD was not used. Since 2014, when Oculus Rift DK2 was released for developers, commodity VR devices have been evolving rapidly. Currently, immersive VR can
be easily realized using HTC VIVE and Unity, which are employed for the rapid prototyping of a virtual survey meter (VSM) in the present study.
There have been several reports of VR utilization in nuclear engineering in
this decade. Studies have been performed on immersive VR for nuclear en- gineering using commodity HMDs and game engines. Nash et al. (2018) devel- oped a simulator of master–slave manipulators using HTC VIVE and Unreal En- gine 4. In addition, they summarized related works. Jeong et al. (2014) studied system requirements for worker training at nuclear facilities and showed ex- amples for the installation of a cavity pool seal on a reactor pool. They also stu- died the ergonomic evaluation of various tasks (Jeong et al., 2016). ZHongkun et al. (2017) demonstrated worker training for nuclear fuel reprocessing. Note that the importance of immersive VR was studied using conventional VR equip- ment. These reviews and discussion were provided in the literature (Szoke et al., 2014) based on numerous studies of VR applications such as nuclear power plant design. VR technology is an extremely effective tool in nuclear engineering even
without an HMD. Mól et al. (2009, 2011) performed extensive investigation using Unreal Engine. In addition, they reviewed the use of VR in Brazilian nuclear studies (Silva et al., 2016). In particular, they applied VR to study the ergonomic evaluation of nuclear power plant control rooms and support the physical security of nuclear facilities (Gatto et al., 2013; Silva et al., 2015). Freitas et al. (2014) performed a calibration test between a virtual system and a physical system using a barrel of deposits and a gamma detector in order to apply the kernel point method in a VR based training system. They considered that each barrel contained nuclear materials with different half-lives and stored in the repository of a facility. In this study, we developed a simplified VR based training system and eval- uated a simplified training scenario for beginners and non-experts on radiation shielding in order to demonstrate the validity of the implementation. As the training system, we considered the dose-rate observations in the environment of
radiation sources and radiation shielding walls. The system was implemented based on the development of the barrel and gamma detector by Freitas et al. (2014), and extended to take shielding walls into account. As a simplified training scenario, we examined the training to measure the change in radiation dose rate from three barrels when moving the shielding walls. We considered that this operation corresponds to a model of actual facility operations and/or radiation shielding actions.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: The developed prototype of the VSM is briefly explained in Section 2. The results of the calibration tests conducted without shield walls are presented in Section 3. In addition, examples of the training contents are presented and discussed. Section 4 provides summary and concluding remarks.
2.Methods
2.1.System design
We used HTC VIVE and Unity as the VR device and game engine for the rapid prototyping, respectively. Currently, HTC VIVE is more widely used compared to Oculus Rift from the viewpoint of product purchase. We considered that Unity is beginner-friendly compared to Unreal Engine because of the Unity Asset Store. The DELL G7 gaming laptop with NVIDIA GeForce GTX 1060 was used as the modern high-end note PC.
In rapid prototyping, the key is to design a system with a small number of highly independent and easily constructed modules. In Unity, arbitrary objects can be arranged as a native system. The interactive movement of an object can be easily realized by the grab function in the VRTK asset. If we create point sources and a VSM with only a native object in Unity, the VSM does not depend on assets such as VRTK. Physical quantities based on the positions of the point sources and VSM and their relationships can be processed only with the Unity native system. In the present prototype cases, we considered that the system consists of “a VSM,” “a point source,” and “a wall,” as shown in Fig. 1. The three components were created as the native objects of Unity. For simplicity, we set a unique size for each component, except for the ground floor (4 m × 4 m × 0.1 m). A composite of
a cylinder (0.05 m in diameter  and 0.15 m in length) and a rectangular box   (0.1 m × 0.2 m × 0.05 m) was considered as the VSM, as shown in Fig. 1. We considered a barrel as the point source. The size of the barrel (0.6 m in diameter and 0.75 m in height) was the same as that in a previous paper (Freitas et al., 2014). We used a solid box with a height, width, and depth of 2 m, 1 m, and 0.1 m, respectively, as the wall. Steel and concrete walls were considered in this study. The locations of these objects could be changed by grabbing the object with the VRTK asset. For the simple operability of the grabbing of the barrels and walls, the height of each object was fixed as one surface was always in contact with the ground floor. Fig. 2 shows the three components and an example case.
2.2.Theoretical assumptions of physical processes
All physical quantities were calculated from the positions of the point sources Fig. 1. Snapshots of (a) the virtual survey meter and (b) the barrel and steel and concrete walls on the floor.
and VSM and their relationships. Thus, this simplified calculation, i.e., the point kernel method, ignores the refractions and reflections of gamma rays at the walls. Although calculation of real-time dose rates in response to changes in VR is dif- ficult with highly accurate Monte Carlo calculation, which takes the refractions and reflections into account, calculation with the point kernel method is easy. For the purpose of VR-based training for beginners and non-experts on radiation shielding, it is considered acceptable to ignore the effect of the refractions and reflections of gamma rays. We used approximately simplified processes instead of precise processes; however, the precise processes can be simulated using estab- lished simulators such as EGS5 (Hirayama et al., 2005) and GEANT4 (Agostinelli et al., 2003). The investigation of the real-time connection between the VR system and established simulators is a future task. Moreover, only point sources were considered as the first study, even though volume expressions are required for the precise reproduction of radiation measurements. Thus, we considered that the physical processes consist of “sources,” “dumping” in the air and walls, and “a detector” at the VSM.
In this study, only point sources and a point detector were considered and the scattering of rays was not considered for simplicity. This method is referred to as the point kernel method (Harima, 1983). The observed intensity can be obtained by the sum of the contributions from all point sources. As a reasonable approx- imation, the contribution from a certain point source was determined by the presence of materials on the source and straight lines in the detector. For relative intensity I0 of the source, the detected intensity, C(r), at distance r from the source is given by
@1
where AX and LX are the dumping constant and distance for X = steel, concrete, and air, respectively. Here, L = Lsteel + Lconcrete + Lair, where L is the distance between the point source and point detector. According to a previous study (Sakamoto et al., 2001), the values of AX are given as Asteel = 26.1 [m−1] and Aconcrete = 5.31 [m−1]. In the present work, we assumed Aair = 0 for simplicity.
2.3.Basic implementations by unity and interactive operations using VRTK
In this study, we prepared five Unity objects to create a simulator of the VSM and environments. In practice, the barrels, steel wall, concrete wall, floor, and survey meter were considered.
The barrels were created from the “Cylinder” unity native object.  The walls  and floor were created from the “Cube” unity native object. For the barrels and walls, bitmap pictures were attached as the textures shown in Fig. 1. We applied VRTK assets for the grabbing of the barrels and walls by a hand device. The de- tailed operation of the grabbing of Unity objects using VRTK is  explained  in  Hagita et al. (2019).
2.4.Implementation of virtual survey meter
The appearance of the VSM is shown in Fig. 1. Only a representative point, such as the center of gravity, is considered in the computation of radiation. In this study, the representative point was set as the center of gravity of the cylindrical part of the VSM.
Fig. 2 shows an example code of the VSM for a barrel without a shield. In the standard C# programing of Unity, the position of a unity object, such as the barrels and VSM, can be obtained from the “.position” property in the “Ga- meObject” class, as shown in Fig. 2. The “.magnitude” property is used to obtain distance between the barrels and VSM. Based on equation (1), i.e., the r−2 rule, we can obtain the radiation rate contributed by each barrel.
To implement a virtual survey meter in the VR system, we developed a Unity
Fig. 2. Example code of the VSM for a barrel without a shield. We calculated the distance between the barrel and VSM and presented the calculated radiation rate on the digital meter of the VSM.
script with the assumption of three barrels in the VR space. The developed al- gorithm consisted of the following steps.
Step 1) Recognize the barrels and walls with steel and concrete in VR space. Step 2) Obtain the positions of the VSM.
Step 3) Compute vectors from VSM to barrels and each magnitude of these vectors.
Step 4) Calculate sum of the distance at which gamma rays pass through each kind of wall.
Step 5) Calculate the radiation dose rate based on equation (1) Step 6) Print the calculated value on the VSM in the VR space
In Step 4, we obtained the intersection points of the vector connecting the VSM and Barrel and six surfaces of the rectangular parallelepiped of the wall. It is noted that whether or not the intersection point is within the surface rectangle can be determined from the relationship between the distance to the surface con- sisting of the rectangular side and the distance of the side of the rectangle. When it passes through a wall, the number of intersection points is two, and if it does not pass, the number of intersection points is zero. The distance between the two intersection points is the distance the gamma rays passed through the wall. In the program code, for all three barrels, we tested all the walls for intersection points and calculated the sum of the distances that passed through each kind of the walls. The code is provided in Appendix A.
3.Results and discussion
3.1.Calibration based on previous study
As a basic test, we examined the system consisting of the detector and one or two barrels without walls to calibrate physical parameters for comparison with a
Fig. 4. Reproduced plots of the real and virtual experiments of the measure- ments of radiation rate from the barrel in a previous study (Freitas et al., 2014). The result of fitting to the real experiments is also given.
previous study (Freitas et al., 2014). The first test in the previous study considered one barrel and detector, as shown in Fig. 3(a). The second test examined the sum of the radiation from two barrels, as shown in Fig. 3(b). The aim of the first and second tests was to confirm the r−2 rule and sum rule.
To reproduce these tests, we determined the intensity, I0, of the barrel from the results given by Table 1 (Freitas et al., 2014). Here, I0 was defined as the intensity at zero distance from the point source. Fig. 4 shows the reproduced plots of the real and virtual experiments of the measurements of radiation rate (Freitas et al., 2014). The results are proportional to r−2. We obtained the fitting values for the real experiments. Hereafter, we assumed I0 = 6.8 μSv/h for calculations with the point kernel method. Note that I0 represents the intensity detected at distance r = 1 m without shields. Hereafter, this barrel is named as Barrel-0.
To verify our implementation, we recorded two thousand data points each at distances of 0.30, 0.45, and 0.60 m at a frame rate of 30 frames per second. We allowed errors within a few centimeters. The standard error of the distances was approximately 2 × 10−5. It is expected that measurement variations were derived from actually using the hand device. Note that we did not examine the cases at a distance of 0.15 m because the measurements inside the barrels were out of the scope of our VR simulator. Table 1 shows the measurement results obtained using our implementation. The values of “Real exp.” were taken from a previous study
Fig. 3. Images of (a) the first test and (b) second test performed in a previous study (Freitas et al., 2014).
Fig. 5. (a) Layout and (b) snapshot of the first test environment. The solid circles in the layout denote the measurement points. The positions of Barrel-0, Barrel-1, and Barrel-2 are (1.58, 0.50), (0.83,
−1.58), and (1.58, −1.58), respectively. The posi- tions of points A, B, and C are (−1.00, 0.50), (−0.30, −1.00), and (1.50, 1.50),  respectively. Here, the origin of the coordinate system is set at the center of the floor.
by Freitas et al. (2014) and the same results as those presented in Fig. 4. The values of “This test” were the results observed by the implemented virtual survey meter, as explained above. The values of the “Error bar of this test” were the standard deviation of the observed radiation dose rates. The obtained error was in good agreement with the literature (Freitas et al., 2014). The error in the obtained results is not small because we utilized the point kernel method. Improvement of the calculation of radiation rate is a future task.
To reproduce the second test of the previous study (Freitas et al., 2014), the values of I0 were determined as I0 = 12.9 and 7.9 μSv/h for Barrel-1 and Barrel-2, respectively. Here, we assumed that the value of I0 is proportional to the value at a distance of 0.6 m. The obtained averaged value and error were 57.4 μSv/h each. The relative error was 1.16 × 10−2. The obtained value was almost the same as that of the previous study (58 μSv/h; Freitas et al., 2014). Note that the corre- sponding real experimental value was 61.6 μSv/h.
3.2.Verification by a training scenario
As the first test, we considered three barrels of the deposit shielded with steel and concrete walls, as shown in Fig. 5. This training scenario was geared toward understanding changes in radiation dose rates during the task of moving the wall in order to measure radiation dose rates in the area surrounding the walls. We tested real-time measurements in VR during the following actions of the training scenario.
First action: A steel wall was moved to the back in order to inspect the inside of the area surrounding the walls.
Second action: Two steel walls were placed such that an inspector could enter and exit the area.
To show the change in radiation dose rate, in this paper, we present the ob- servation results for three test environments. Observation points were selected to prevent the problems of volumetric contributions from the sources. In the second
test, the barrels could be viewed directly from point A, as shown in Fig. 6. The precise calculation from volumetric sources in VR is a future task.
We considered the relocation of the steel wall as a test for interactive training. Even though the hand device in the VR space could relocate the steel wall, we set the position of the steel wall using a numerical input to prevent the inaccuracy of hand device operation. Fig. 6 shows the considered layout and snapshot. Fig. 7 shows the environment used for testing the design of radiation protection by setting a new wall.
In this study, we measured the radiation rates at three points for our dis- cussions. The VSM was placed at a height of around 0.45 m using the hand device. Table 2 shows the obtained values. First, we found that the radiation dose rates at point B is significantly higher than at points A and C. This is because point B is close to Barrel-1 and the shielding effect by the concrete walls is smaller than the steel walls. After moving a steel wall behind point A, as the first action of the training scenario, the value at point A in the second environment was con- siderably larger compared to other cases because Barrel-0 can be viewed directly from point A. The value at point A in the third environment is smaller than that in the first environment, because the steel wall placed in the second action of the training scenario reduced the radiation from Barrel-2. For all environments, the values at points B and C are almost the same because refraction and reflection are
not considered. We expected the difference in the radiation rates at point B be- tween the second and third scenarios. It is necessary to perform Monte Carlo si- mulation using simulators such as EGS5 (Hirayama et al., 2005) and GEANT4 (Agostinelli et al., 2003) for accurate evaluation. Adding Monte Carlo simulation to our VR system and enabling real-time computation with parallel computers are future tasks. At point C, the major contribution is from Barrel-0 because it is considerably closer to point C compared to points A and B.
3.3.Interactive training of radiation shielding and measurement
Fig. 8 shows snapshots of the interactive training performed using VR with
Fig. 6. (a) Layout and (b) snapshot of the second test environment after relocating the steel wall. The solid circles in the layout denote the measurement points. The wall at (0.5, 0.5) in Fig. 5 is moved to (−1.5, 0.5).
Fig. 7. (a) Layout and (b) snapshot of the third environment for testing radiation protection by placing a new steel wall. The solid circles in the layout denote the measurement points. The two moved walls are placed at (0.0, 0.0) and (0.0, 1.0).
Table 2
Measurement results in the examined training scenarios.
HTC VIVE. Fig. 8(a) shows a trainee in the training in the real space. Fig. 8(b) shows the VSM grabbed by the hand device in the VR space. In Fig. 8(c), the steel wall is lifted for the movement from the first environment (Fig. 5) to the second environment (Fig. 6). The barrel can be moved by the hand device, as shown in Fig. 8(d).
Fig. 9 presents the results of the walk-through measurements for the three environments. The height of the VSM was fixed at 1.0 m for visualization in two- dimensional maps. The obtained results are considered to be reasonable.
We clarified that the radiation protection and measurement training system can be easily built in the VR space using Unity as shown in Section 2 and Appendix A. From the viewpoints of training on radiation, it is desirable to identify the positive impact on training. One of the great advantages of interactive training with VR is that trainees can train in a realistic VR environment. Fig. 10 shows images of the system installation of our training system into the commer- cial VR model “Office Meeting Room and College Interior” (Bošnjak, 2019) dis- tributed as an asset of Unity. Here, note that the installation procedure of the training system was the same, and there were no difficulties, even when using the asset of such a realistic VR environment. From Fig. 10(c), it can be seen that the shielding by the wall reduced the dose rate of the VSM. With such a desktop
system, a corresponding real system can be created. Studies have comparing cyber and physical systems must be conducted in the future.
We considered that the impact of the quality and realism of environmental VR on receptivity and training effects are not negligible. The quantitative assessment of such issues is a topic for future studies as a pedagogical issue in radiation. From the viewpoint of VR visualization technology, if a 3D spatial distribution of dose
Fig. 8. Snapshots of the interactive training performed using VR with HTC VIVE. (a) Trainee in the training in the real space; (b) VSM grabbed by the hand device in the VR space; (c) lifted steel wall; (d) moved barrel.
Fig. 9. Radiation rates observed via walk-through measurements: (a) First, (b) second, and (c) third environments. The solid circles are observed points, and the color denotes the intensity of the radiation rate.
rate can be presented in the VR space, the understanding of trainees can be im- proved. Currently, three is no definitive knowledge of how the 3D spatial pre- sentation is optimal. That is, it is expected that the proposed VR implementation can be used as a platform for future research and development in these directions.
4.
Conclusions
In this study, we investigated VR implementation through a training system consisting of a VSM, barrels (source), and steel and concrete walls (shields). We
Fig. 10. Images the training model in a realistic VR environment. (a) Overall image in the virtual meeting room, (b) training system on a desk, and (c) images under training to confirm the effect of shielding wall on the measurement.
used a commodity VR device and the software environments HTC VIVE, Unity, and VRTK. Based on the work of Mól et al. (Freitas et al., 2014), barrels were considered as radiation sources. The use of the steel and concrete walls as shields was newly introduced. The VSM, walls, and barrels were simply created using Unity native objects. The calculation of radiation rates was coded in a single file with 160 lines based on the point kernel method. As basic tests, we employed the tests presented in a previous study (Freitas et al., 2014). The r−2 rule and sum rule were confirmed based on the point kernel method. We introduced the steel and concrete walls to build training scenarios. The VRTK asset of Unity was used to achieve the interactive measurements of radiation rates and the movements of barrels and walls. VRTK enabled the movement of Unity objects using a hand device. We confirmed the validity of our VR implementation using the point kernel method in a training scenario. Note that a combination of Monte Carlo simulation and our VR implementation is desired for improving the accuracy of the training. A study in this direction is in progress. Even with the low accuracy calculation with the point kernel method, it can be concluded that our VR
implementation is effective for the initial education of radiation and elementary training.
Author contributions
K. H. designed the research project of virtual survey meter using commodity VR device. The manuscript was written with contributions from K. H. and M. T. The Unity programing was implemented by Y. K. and K. H. All authors have approved the final version of this manuscript.
Acknowledgment
One (K.H.) of the authors is partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI, Japan, grant no.: JP18H04494 for the development of the ground skills for VR pre- sentation of topologically complicated network structures in materials.
