<title>MAPPS: A stochastic computational tool for multi-path analysis of physical protection systems</title>
<author>Yanuar A. Setiawan a,b, Sunil S. Chirayath b,c,⇑, Evans D. Kitcher c</author>
<Affiliation>a Department of Nuclear Engineering and Engineering Physics, Universitas Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta 55281, Indonesia
b Department of Nuclear Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-3133, USA
c Center for Nuclear Security Science & Policy Initiatives, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-3473, USA</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2019.107074 </DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2019.107074  </URL>
ABSTRACT
We present a new stochastic computational tool, Multi-path Analysis of Physical Protection Systems (MAPPS) useful for Physical Protection System (PPS) effectiveness analysis. MAPPS tool can perform multi-path (adversary paths) analysis using an Adversary Sequence  Diagram  (ASD)  and can  determine  the Most Vulnerable Path (MVP). The MVP determination by MAPPS uses  the  concept  of  Critical Detection Point (CDP). Suitability of MAPSS  for PPS  design effectiveness  analysis  is  confirmed through an example. A comparison of MAPPS results with the traditional single path analysis (employing the Estimate of Adversary Sequence Interruption-EASI model) shows the  advantages  of  using  MAPPS. MAPPS correctly predicts the MVP and the distribution of probability of interruption (PI) values for var- ious adversary strategies including collusion with facility insiders. MAPPS results  show  that a  focusing only on mean of PI value distribution may not be appropriate instead, a analyzing the low probability tail     of the PI distribution is important.
Keywords:
Physical Protection System Stochastic
1.Introduction
Terrorist organizations are seeking opportunities to cause mass damage and casualties to attain the highest publicity as possible, such as the 9/11 event in 2001 in the U.S. Considering the hazard and public perception of nuclear material and radiation in general, a nuclear facility containing nuclear or other radiological materials is an attractive target for terrorist attack (Ferguson and Potter, 2004). A robust Physical Protection System (PPS) installed at a nuclear facility after careful evaluation of its vulnerabilities can prevent and minimize malicious criminal and terrorist acts and consequences.
A PPS is an integration of equipment, procedures, and people for prevention, detection and response to any malicious act against criminals, protestors and terrorists. A PPS helps to protect against nuclear material or other radioactive material theft, sabotage or any other type of malevolent adversary attack (Garcia, 2001). A robust PPS should utilize deterrence, detection, delay and response elements to defeat the success of the adversary (U.S. Congress, 1992). A PPS can be designed and evaluated against potential adversaries whose attributes and characteristics are described in the Design Basis Threat (DBT) document, created by the state (country) in which the nuclear facility operates (International Atomic Energy Agency, 2009). The characteristics (intent, motiva- tion and capability) of potential adversaries are contained in the DBT document and its robustness depends on how rigorous the information gathering about the adversary characteristics was by the State intelligence agencies. The state uses the DBT document  for the process of PPS design and evaluation at its facilities. The possibility of adversary collusion with insiders having facility knowledge, access, and authority makes the PPS analysis more dif- ficult and warrants a multi-path adversary analysis instead of a single adversary path analysis. Hence, a stochastic computational tool, named Multi-path Analysis of Physical Protection Systems (MAPPS) is developed and presented.
Section 2 of this paper provides discussion on a PPS design and how to analyze its effectiveness. Section 3 provides a detailed description of the development of the MAPPS tool; explaining the implementation of the traditional single adversary path analysis and novel stochastic multi-path analysis under various adversary strategies with and without the assistance of an insider. Section 4 describes the hypothetical facility along with the adversary attack scenarios used to check the suitability of the MAPPS tool. Section 5 provides a comparison of MAPPS tool results with single adversary path analysis results for the PPS design analysis carried out for the hypothetical facility using the traditional Estimate of Adversary Sequence Interruption (EASI) model approach. Lastly, section 6
summarizes the key findings of the research and presents possible future improvements to the MAPPS tool.
2.Physical protection system design and effectiveness analysis
One simple way to design and evaluate a PPS is by using the standards and features criteria approach, in which the effective- ness measure of the system is determined by the presence or absence of certain required items or procedures (Garcia, 2001). While easier to implement and regulate, the standards and fea- tures approach, unless handled with extreme  care,  is  generally not the preferred approach for the PPS design and evaluation. This is because what matters is the overall performance of the PPS in protecting facility assets, rather than just the presence or absence  of the system features or components. The more preferred approach is a performance-based approach that allows for ‘threat-informed security’ in the PPS design. Under this approach, design and analysis of the PPS effectiveness is based on system per- formance with respect to mitigating the threat posed to a facility. Quantification of the PPS effectiveness in this approach is com- monly done  by assessing the  Risk  (R) minimization capability of  a given PPS design to an acceptable level as agreed upon by the respective stakeholders. Equation (1) is employed to assess the risk value (Garcia, 2001); where PA is the probability of adversary  attack on the facility, PE is the probability of effectiveness of the PPS, and C is the  associated consequence  if  the adversary  attack is successful.@1
The primary functions of a PPS are: (a) to detect the adversary intrusion, (b) to provide barriers that delay or prevent the adver- sary access to the target, which in turn provides more time for the response force and (c) to interrupt and neutralize the adver- sary. The quantity PE (measure of PPS effectiveness) in Eq. (1) can be expressed by Eq. (2) (Garcia, 2001); where PI and PN are the probability of interruption by the PPS and the probability of neu- tralization of the adversary respectively. PI is the probability that the detection and delay elements of the PPS successfully interrupt the adversary so that the response force can timely arrive to neu- tralize the adversary. PN is the probability that the response force successfully neutralizes or defeats the adversary.@2
The traditional EASI model uses a single adversary path PPS analysis method that allows the  security analyst to  calculate the   PI value of a PPS (Garcia, 2001; Bennet, 1977). The EASI model assumes that the response force is timely notified of the adver-  sary’s attempt of theft or sabotage so as to neutralize the adversary (Bennet, 1977). Based on the PPS protection elements (detection and delay elements) encountered by the adversary along the ana- lyzed intrusion path, the EASI model uses Eq. (3) to calculate the PI value. In Eq. (3), PD (probability of detection) is the probability of detecting the adversary by a detection element in the PPS and PC (probability of correct alarm communication) is the probabilitythat the assessed detection alarm regarding the adversary intru- sion into facility is correctly communicated to the response force. From Eq. (3), it can be noticed that PI value takes into consideration the accumulated probability of detection of individual detection elements of the PPS for a given single adversary path. P R A   is  the conditional probability of the response force arrival given that the intrusion alarm has been successfully communicated to them.@3
The EASI model has been used in many PPS effectiveness eval- uation studies. For example, A.A. Wadoud, et al., used the single path analysis of EASI model to calculate the PI value for two sabo- tage scenarios in a hypothetical research reactor facility (Wadoud  et al., 2017). O.D. Oyeyinka et al., also used the EASI model to cal- culate PI value as the PPS effectiveness at the Nuclear Energy Cen- tre (NEC) in Nigeria (Oyeyinka et al., 2014). Hawila et al., used the EASI model in their study of insider’s impact in single path analysis (Hawila and Chirayath, 2016).
Despite its usefulness and many benefits, the EASI model has some limitations. It is a single path analysis model, in which the analyst as the user determines an adversary path to be analyzed one at a time. Thus, it can be hard for the analyst to use the EASI model in the analysis of a large facility with many possible adver- sary paths, which is resolved in our MAPPS tool. Furthermore, the EASI model uses a single value for the probability of detection pro- vided by each protection element within a protection layer, with- out considering the uncertainty of the detection performance. As     a result, the EASI model produces a single value of PI without an associated uncertainty, which is also resolved in our MAPPS tool by including the capability to produce a distribution of PI values and hence an uncertainty quantification by an appropriate stochas- tic sampling from the distribution of PD values. Many single adver- sary paths can be analyzed using the EASI model and a Most Vulnerable Path (MVP) with minimum PI value can be determined. The MVP can also be identified by employing the concept of the Critical Detection Point (CDP). The CDP is defined as the last detec- tion point in the adversary path at which the remaining time for  the adversary to complete their mission is greater than the time needed for the response force to arrive and neutralize the adver- sary. Thus, the CDP is the last point of Timely Detection along an adversary path.
This concept of Timely Detection calculation is used in the Sys- tematic Analysis of Vulnerability to Intrusion (SAVI) and Analytic System and Software for Evaluating Safeguards and Security (ASSESS) codes (Winblad, 1987; McAniff et al., 1987; Al-Ayat    et al., 1989). The CDP is determined by comparing the minimum cumulative delay time along an adversary path and the Response Force Time (RFT). RFT is the total time from the time of intrusion alarm to the time until the response force interrupts the adversary in the facility (Garcia, 2001; Winblad, 1987). Hence, CDP is the point at which the there is a minimum delay time to the target, introduced by the PPS, that is greater than or equal to the RFT. As expressed by Eq. (4), the PI value is found by aggregating all non-detection probabilities from the CDP to the offsite area. The EASI model can perform multi-path analysis by doing each path at a time but even then it does not account for the uncertainties in system effectiveness stemming from real world variations in the performance of protection elements, i.e., the probability of detection and delay time values of each protection element.@4
The Tool for Evaluating Security System (TEES) uses a 2D map of
the facility to consider the distance-related PD uncertainty and also uses the CDP concept in the algorithm to find the MVP and uses Timely Detection to calculate the PI value (Seo et al., 2015). The use of 2D maps to address the distance-related uncertainty is also done by the Systematic Analysis of Physical Protection System Effectiveness (SAPE) code. SAPE uses the EASI model to calculate the  PI  value instead  of  Timely Detection (Jang  et  al.,  2008;   Jang
et al.,  2010, 2009).  By using grid of  meshes, it uses the best-first search algorithm (generalized A* algorithm) to find the MVP. How- ever, there is significant time cost in input preparation when using 2D maps. Also, the non-distance-related uncertainty is notconsidered by the SAPE code. Terao N. and Suzuki M. proposed a quantification method considering general uncertainty and vari- ability for three components in calculating the PD, PC, and P(R|A)      to calculate PI as in Eq. (3) (Terao and Suzuki, 2014). In their work,  a Monte Carlo mathematical approach is implemented to get the uncertainty value for those three components, which in turn, cre- ate a distribution of PI values for a single path analysis shown in their work.
The MAPPS tool presented here is developed to combine the strengths of the aforementioned approaches and tools while also addressing their limitations. Compared to the aforementioned lit- erature on PPS effectiveness evaluations, MAPPS is developed to maintain the familiarity and advantages of the Adversary Sequence Diagram (ASD) approach to multi-path analysis. An ASD is used to succinctly depict all possible adversary paths within a given facil- ity. The ASD also provides a graphical representation of all protec- tion elements (with associated delay times and probability of detection) within each physical area of a facility, which is com- monly used in conjunction with the EASI model to perform adver- sary path analysis. The use of an ASD gives significant reduction in input preparation when compared to using 2D maps. MAPPS pro- vides a way to address the need to quantify the uncertainty asso- ciated with calculating the PI value emanating from the uncertainties in individual probability of detection and delay times of the PPS elements. MAPPS also provides the option in the multi-path analysis to consider various adversary strategies in penetrat- ing the facility and also to analyze the active involvement of an insider to help the outsider adversary.
3.Development of MAPPS
MAPPS has the capability to perform both traditional single path analysis based on specified user input. Furthermore, and more uniquely, MAPPS allows the security analyst to apply a stochastic approach, to randomly sample PD value of a protection element from a normal distribution based on the quoted mean and associ- ated standard deviation value. The result is a distribution of PI val- ues from numerous simulations from which the mean PI value can be calculated. In addition, various adversary strategies can be mod- eled in the simulations through the implementation of the stochas- tic approach such as a ‘‘covert” or ‘‘rushing strategy”, which are explained in section 3.4. Lastly the stochastic approach implemen- tation also enables MAPPS to model the effect of insider involve- ment in actively assisting the adversary in completing the determined task of theft or sabotage.
3.1.The traditional EASI model in MAPPS
The traditional EASI model requires the security analyst to per-form three general calculations. These general calculations are implemented within the MAPPS tool as part of the traditional EASI single path option and adapted to the stochastic multi-path analy- sis options provided in the tool. First, the PD value for each protec- tion layer along the adversary path must be calculated. The PD  value of a protection layer is the probability that the adversary’s intrusion is detected by the protection element in that protection layer, which includes the sensing, transmitting, and assessing pro- cesses. The PD value is often used as a metric to measure the effec- tiveness of the detection function for a given PPS. In addition to the PD value, three other probabilities are calculated; the probability of adversary is not detected in the protection layer of interest. PNDet is the probability that there is no detection in all the previous protec- tion layers. PFDet is the probability that the adversary’s intrusion is detected for the first time at the protection layer of interest, after not being detected in all the previous protection layers. Equations for these probabilities are shown in Eqs. (5), (6), and (7) respectively.@5
@6
@7
Next, the delay provided by the PPS must be determined. The cumulative delay time from the protection layer of interest until the last protection layer along the adversary path is often used as a metric to measure the effectiveness of the delay function of a PPS. The cumulative delay time and its associated variance are cal- culated based on user defined delay time (td) and standard devia- tion  in  delay  time    rtd        values,  as  expressed  by  Eqs.  (8)  and  (9) respectively.@8
@9
The true delay time and true cumulative delay time for a chosen
adversary path is then determined by applying a correction factor (CF) as shown in Eqs. (10) and (11). The CF is used to capture the phenomenon that the true delay time provided by a protection ele- ment depends on when the detection element associated with that delay element is activated. Detection can occur (1) at the beginning of the adversary defeat action (denoted by a ‘B’) as is the case with a vibration sensor on a fence or (2) in the middle of the adversary defeat action (denoted by a ‘M’) as is the case with glass lock in the door of a safe or (3) at the end of the adversary defeat action (denoted by a ‘E’) as is the case with a motion sensor is placed directly behind an entrance. In the last case, since detection occurs only after the adversary has already defeated the delay element, the remaining true cumulative delay time does not include  the time delay provided by the door. The situation dependent correc- tion factors implemented within MAPPS are shown in Eq. (12).   The variance in the true delay time and true cumulative delay time can be calculated as shown in Eqs. (13) and (14).@10
@11
@12
@13
@14
Lastly, calculations are performed with respect to the response function which utilizes the results from the detection function and delay function calculations to calculate the specific PI value for each protection layer by using Eq. (15), and to calculate the total PI value incorporating specific PI values provided by every protection layer along the adversary path as expressed in Eq. (16).@15
@16
PC includes all processes and functions necessary to correctly assess the given alarm and correctly communicate the presence of an intruder to the response force. In most EASI model implemen- tations, the PC is assumed to be constant for all the detection ele- ments in the PPS. P R Ai will be a function of both the RFT and the remaining adversary task time. The conditional probability of response arrival can be determined by sampling from the distribu- tion of RFT using the z-statistic for the true cumulative time delay using Eq. (17), which assumes a normal distribution for RFT. The rRFT is the standard deviation of the distribution of RFT.@17
Then, the probability of response force arrival is calculated by
integrating the RFT probability density function from - to the z-value of the protection layer of interest. Fig. 1a shows a situation where the remaining true cumulative delay time is  greater than  the RFT, resulting in a high probability of response force arrival. Fig. 1b shows a situation where the remaining true cumulative delay time is less than the RFT, resulting in a low probability of response force arrival.
In summary, EASI model is a tool to analyze a single adversary path (along with the PPS elements encountered in the path), deter- mined manually by the analyst for the tool, and calculating PI of that adversary path by using Eqs.  (5)–(17)  as  explained  above.  On the other hand, the MAPPS computational tool that we devel- oped can be used to analyze PPS in a whole facility (instead of path-level in EASI model) through numerous simulation histories. While also using Eqs. (5)–(17) to calculate PI value of the adversary path in each simulation history, MAPPS allows uncertainty model- ing in each simulation history as mentioned at the beginning of Section 3 and explained in detail in Sections 3.2, 3.4, and 3.5. As      a computational tool, MAPPS automatically analyzes the ASD using the CDP concept to determine the MVP of the facility, as explained in section 3.3, in contrast to the method of the analyst determining the MVP manually before using the EASI model to analyze it that could be complicated for a complex facility.3.2.Stochastic sampling of the probability of detection in MAPPS
The option provided in MAPPS allows the security analyst to model the uncertainty and fluctuation of detection performance against the adversary’s intrusion by performing a stochastic sam- pling of the PD value for each detection element along the adver-
sary path. If this stochastic sampling option is not utilized, MAPPS calculates the PND, PNDet, PFDet values based on the original PD values provided by the user in the input file.
If the stochastic sampling option is activated, MAPPS performs several checks on the user provided input of PD values to ensure correct analysis. For example, if the user provides a value of 1 for the probability of detection for a particular detection element, MAPPS does not perform a stochastic process for that path ele- ment. This would be the case if in  the  scenario  being  assessed, the adversary uses explosives to penetrate a particular protection layer and 100% detection probability is assumed as a result of the explosion. If the user input for a PD value of the protection layer     is between 0 and 1, MAPPS will stochastically sample the PD value for that protection element following the procedure as shown in Fig. 2. The procedure is designed to ensure that the sampled PD value is never greater  than or  equal to  1 (which is unphysical)   for a protection element in which the user input for PD is not equal to one. This is achieved by requiring PD + 2rPD    to be less than 1. If this condition is not met, the user defined value for the uncertainty in PD (rPD Þ is decreased by half and the new resulting distribution sampled.
In addition, the sampling procedure devised and implemented in MAPPS tool minimizes the discrepancy between the mean of sampled PD values and the initial PD value provided by the user  for that protection layer. For example, if the initial PD value pro- vided by the user is 0.75 with a standard deviation of 0.075 then 100,000 PD values are sampled assuming they follow a Gaussian distribution and are used in 100,000 different MVP PI calculations. Fig. 3 verifies the correctness of the sampling method by showing that 100,000 samples of PD values followed a Gaussian distribution with 0.7495 as its distribution mean value, which is numerically same as the user supplied value of 0.75.
3.3.Calculating Physical protection effectiveness of the most vulnerable path (MVP)
One measure for the overall effectiveness of a PPS design under the risk formulation is the probability of effective system response, which is the product of PI and PN, as depicted in Eq. (2). Since multi-path analysis is performed after adversary attack scenarios development is completed and adversary characteristics defined,
Fig. 1. Probability of response force arrival given (a) True cumulative td > RFT (b) True cumulative td < RFT.
Fig. 2. Flowchart showing the PD value sampling process in MAPPS.
Fig. 3. Distribution of sampled PD values with initial value 0.75 ± 0.075.
PN should be known and is therefore treated as a constant in this study. As such the worst-case scenario becomes the case where    the adversary knowingly or randomly selects the MVP, by which the adversary minimizes the probability of detection before  the CDP and minimizes time delay after the CDP by devising appropri- ate defeat strategies. With this in mind, the PPS designer and secu- rity analyst should try to increase the detection function before the CDP while also increasing the delay function after the CDP. On the other hand, the adversary might want to avoid being detected until a point at which the remaining time for the adversary’s fastest path to finish the mission is lower than the time for the response force  to arrive (true cumulative delay time < RFT). The PPS designer and the analyst use the CDP as a reference point to determine the MVP. It is possible by choosing the path with the lowest cumulative delay time (td) value from the CDP to the target and by simultane- ously choosing the path with the lowest cumulative PD value from the beginning of adversary action to the CDP.
A brief description about ASD was given in section 2. ASD is use- ful in PPS effectiveness analysis and an example of ASD is shown in Fig. 4. The ASD in Fig. 4 shows the physical area layers (off-site area, limited access area, etc.,) at a facility; protection elements (main gate, outer wall, etc.,); and probability of detection (PD), delay time (td) values for each protection element along  with which the detection happens at the beginning (B), middle (M) or end (E) of the time delay, td provided by the protection element. The fourth entry in these boxes is the user supplied input on insi- der help or not to reduce the td for the adversary denoted by ‘A’ or ‘NA’ respectively.
The ASD in Fig. 4 is developed by using certain assumptions that is explained later in Section 4.1. The protection element perfor- mance values (PD and td) were obtained using Sandia National Lab- oratories reference (Sandia National Laboratories, 2016).
Fig. 5 shows the flow chart of the iterative process used in the MAPPS tool to determine the MVP and how it calculates the PI value for the determined MVP. The iteration process starts from the bottom of the ASD (ref. Fig. 4) and traverses upwards to the  top of the ASD in determining which path element in each protec- tion layer forms part of the MVP by referring it with the RFT value. As the iteration process continues, MAPPS chooses the path ele- ment with the lowest td value until the condition in which the cumulative td value of the previous iteration is equal to or greater than the RFT is met. After this condition is met, MAPPS successively chooses the path element with the lowest PD value in each protec- tion layer until the first protection layer and at that moment  MAPPS calculates the PI value for the MVP.
In this process to determine the MVP, MAPPS tool also determi- nes the CDP, which is needed for modeling certain adversary strategies, described in section 3.4. For every iteration shown in  Fig. 5, MAPPS tool calculates the true cumulative delay time of   the protection layer, which is the time remaining for the adversary to complete the mission given the adversary is detected at this pro- tection layer. If the true cumulative delay time becomes equal to or greater than the RFT mean value, then the corresponding protec- tion layer is the location of the CDP and the true cumulative delay time of that protection layer is the value for Time Remaining (TR).
3.4.Adversary strategies
The first adversary strategy analyzed and presented in this paper is the random strategy, in which the adversary has no partic- ular strategy, mimicking an adversary who chooses path elements randomly without any consideration at the time of intrusion. The MAPPS algorithm for this analysis gives equal probability for every path option to be chosen by the adversary. The second adversary strategy analyzed is the rushing strategy, in which the adversary tends to choose the path elements with the lower td value. For each path element, the algorithm assigns a probability to be chosen by the adversary which is inversely proportional to the path element’s td value. The third adversary strategy analyzed is the covert strat- egy, in which the adversary tends to avoid detection as much as possible. For each path element, the algorithm assigns a probability to be chosen by the adversary which is inversely proportional to  the path element’s PD value. In every case, sampling bins are cre- ated and used to choose a path element in every protection layer until a complete adversary path is made.
The fourth adversary strategy in MAPPS is the deep penetration strategy. This strategy models an adversary with knowledge of the facility layout and its PPS functions, and the concept of CDP in the PPS design. In this algorithm, the adversary uses the covert strat- egy for every protection layer up to the CDP, and then uses the rushing strategy for every protection layer after the CDP.
After analyst selects an adversary strategy to be modeled in a simulation, MAPPS starts constructing an adversary path by select- ing a path element, using a stochastic process, for each protection layer. Fig. 6 shows an example of how this process, for example at
Fig. 4. The Adversary Sequence Diagram (ASD) of a hypothetical facility.
Fig. 5. Overview of MVP analysis process flowchart of MAPPS.
the sixth protection layer of the ASD shown in Fig. 4 is done. This layer consists of three possible path elements and Fig. 6  shows how the adversary strategy affects the probability by which a path element is selected. If the analyst chooses random strategy, MAPPS assigns a random number between 0 and 1 and normalizes them to get the sampling bin width for each path element at the sixth pro- tection layer. If the analyst chooses rushing strategy, MAPPS nor- malizes the td values for the sixth  protection  layer  to  get  0.4,  0.37, and 0.23 respectively, then subtract them from 1 to get 0.6, 0.63, and 0.77 respectively, and  normalizes  them  to  get  0.3,  0.315, and 0.385 respectively. This way, each path element gets a sampling bin width that  is  inversely proportional to its td  value  to be selected in rushing strategy model. If the analyst chooses cov- ert strategy, MAPPS normalizes the PND values to get the sampling bin width for each path element in the sixth protection layer. After sampling bins are created, MAPPS generates a random number
between 0 and 1 and selects path element for the bin in which that selected random number lies. This process is done for every protec- tion layer in completing an adversary path for each simulation history.
3.5.Insider threat
MAPPS is capable of modeling two insider intervention actions. The first insider intervention model offered in MAPPS is the inter- vention of detection function. In this model, a single insider can disable a single detection function at any one of the protection lay- ers in the constructed adversary path. Fig. 7 shows the flowchart of MAPPS in modeling the insider’s intervention to the detection function. Fig. 7 shows that if the analyst chooses to model the detection function intervention, MAPPS randomly chooses which protection layer of the constructed adversary path to be intervened
Fig. 6. Example of bins of sixth protection layer for path selection process.
Fig. 7. Flowchart of modeling the insider’s intervention of detection function of the PPS.
by the insider in that particular simulation history. For example,	selection of a path element in protection layer ‘x’, MAPPS sets
after MAPPS constructed the hth adversary path in the hth simula- tion history based on the adversary strategy chosen by the analyst, MAPPS randomly generates an integer number (from 1 to total number of protection layers in the adversary path) and if the inte- ger generated is ‘60  then MAPPS calculates the PI value by setting the  PD  and  rPD    values  of  the  sixth  protection  layer  to  0  because of the successful insider intervention.
The second insider intervention model offered in MAPPS is the intervention of delay function. In this model, a single insider can disable a single delay function at any one of the protection layers  in the constructed adversary path, in which the delay function is available to be reduced by the insider’s capability as indicated in the input file by the user. Fig. 8 shows the flowchart of MAPPS in modeling the insider’s intervention of the delay function. Upon
the td and rtd   to 0 if and only if the ‘Type of Delay’ of that path ele- ment in protection layer ‘x’ is available for insider action (denoted by A).
The ‘Type of Delay’ is an additional characteristic of path ele- ments to specify whether authorized access can negate the td of the path, in which case the td is set to 0. For example, doors and windows could be unlocked by an insider making their ‘Type of Delay’ characteristic set as Available for insider action (denoted by A) in the input file. Meanwhile, the delay time for a wall or area cannot be reduced by the insider making their ‘Type of Delay’ char- acteristic set as Not Available for insider action (denoted by ‘NA’) in the input file. In the case where the constructed adversary path has no path of protection layer with ‘Type of Delay’ information ‘A’,
simulation continues without reducing any values of td and rtd .
Fig. 8. Flowchart of modeling the insider’s intervention of delay function of the PPS.
4.Verifying the MAPPS operation
We developed a hypothetical facility and postulated adversary in this study to serve as a verification test problem for the MAPPS tool. The hypothetical facility and scenario are analyzed using both the traditional EASI model and then using MAPPS for comparing the results of PI values calculated.
4.1.Postulated Facility, Adversary, and scenario
The hypothetical facility developed for this study is named the National Atomic Research Institute (NARI) facility (Fig. 9), in which there are 3 possible targets for theft or sabotage of special nuclear material; namely the fresh nuclear fuel vault where  highly enriched uranium fuel is stored, the used nuclear fuel assemblies  in a pool which contains plutonium and other radioactive materi- als beside the original highly enriched uranium and the research reactor core itself where irradiation of samples and other experi- ments are conducted.
The postulated scenario for the NARI facility developed in this study is when adversary intends to sabotage the nuclear reactor. The adversary has already acquired the required materials, tools, and human resources to carry out such an attack. The adversary attack consists up to five assailants equipped with  semi-   automatic rifles, small arms, a limited number of explosives (to penetrate hardened walls/doors and ultimately to sabotage the reactor), portable power tools and a two-way radio communication system. The adversary may choose to employ a covert or brute  force attack. The adversary has no sophisticated cyber skills and while very unlikely, the possibility of collusion with an insider can- not be ignored.
The schematic layout of the NARI facility is provided in Fig. 9 while the ASD of the facility is shown in  Fig. 4. The ASD shows   all the possible paths from the off-site area to the target for the adversary. It is seen at the bottom right of Fig. 4 that the given       PC value is 0.95, based on PPS evaluations performed by Sandia
National Laboratory (SNL) (Garcia, 2001). All guards at the facility are posted in a detection and delay capacity. An external neutral- ization response force is located offsite and has a mean RFT equal to 700 s, which is also shown in Fig. 4. The standard deviation in the response force time rRFT is estimated as  30%  of  the  mean value, again as per the conservative approach in PPS evaluation (Garcia,  2001).  For  each  path  option,  the  PD,  td,  location  of  the
detection point (B, M, E) are provided. As an example, from Fig. 4 one can note that for the personnel portal in protection layer 3,       PD = 0.96, td = 198 s, detection occurs at the end of the defeat action
(E) and the type of delay is available for insider action. In this test problem, the rPD   = 10%, while rtd   = 30%.
4.2.EASI results
Single path analysis using EASI model for the MVP in the ASD shown in Fig. 4 was made in MS Excel file based on Appendix B    of reference 2.  The MVP  is obtained by choosing the path with   the cumulative delay time value from the CDP greater than or equal to the RFT and the path with the lowest PD value from the CDP backwards to the first protection layer of the ASD shown in Fig. 4. The manual process to find the MVP for EASI model analysis is shown in Table 1. The RFT value is 700 s. The cumulative delay time (td) of  the  ninth,  eighth,  and  seventh  protection  layers   (600 s + 5 s + 180 s) with the true delay time (truetdi Þ of the sixth protection layer (5 s) is 790 s which is  more  than  RFT  value  of 700 s. Therefore, the sixth protection layer is the CDP of the MVP as shown in Table 1.
The PI calculated is 0.89 for the MVP. In general, a PI value greater than 0.8 is considered as high. The high probability of inter- ruption for the MVP is reasonable considering the importance of the NARI facility to the country’s aspirations, and the relatively limited skill set of the postulated adversary in penetrating such a high-level facility. Nevertheless, the consequences of a successful attack are unacceptable. The MVP assumes the adversary employs
Fig. 9.  Layout of NARI facility.
Table 1
The MVP of the NARI facility.
the optimal defeat strategy. Any mistakes or delays in the adver- sary actions should result in higher PI values.
A balanced PPS design will result in a similar performance from all path elements within the protection layers such that the PPS has similar effectiveness regardless of the adversary strategy. If an adversary attempts to rush through the facility by taking the shortest path, there will be an associated increase in the probabil- ity of detection. Likewise, if the adversary tries to avoid detection, there will be an associated increase in delay time. In both cases the expected probability of interruption should be greater than that calculated for the MVP. If the adversary does not have a predeter- mined or consistent strategy, then there is the chance that they accidentally select the MVP, for all other cases the probability of interruption is expected to be higher.
The involvement of the insider is known to significantly reduce the effectiveness of the PPS. Traditional analysis of the NARI facility using the EASI model would require the security analyst to repeat the analysis countless number of times either reducing the PD or td. For the reduced PD, two significant cases are important when the insider intervenes with the first or third protection layer, resulting in PI values of 0.83 and 0.77 respectively. For the reduced td, PI val- ues are 0.81, 0.82, or 0.85 if the insider intervenes with the sev- enth, fifth or the third protection layers respectively.
5.MAPPS results and discussion
5.1.Probability of interruption distribution
Fig. 10 shows the distribution of PI values obtained for 100,000 path histories simulating the adversary attempt to reach the target using MVP within the NARI facility. In this case the path remains
Fig. 10. The MVP PI distribution of the NARI facility.
constant while the performance of path elements varies stochasti- cally through a sampling process implemented in the MAPPS tool. The selected MVP PI result agrees with the traditional EASI model showing that the concept of CDP is correctly implemented in MAPPS. The resulting distribution of PI has an estimated mean of 0.89; which is also in excellent agreement with the PI value pre- dicted by the traditional EASI model. Additionally, a standard devi- ation can now be computed and is found to be 0.01. To check the sensitivity on the input values, we did three variations to deter- mine the PI value and it distribution. (1) When PD at the first pro- tection layer is changed from 0.5 to 0.4 the total PI value reduces from 0.89 to 0.87. (2) When PD at the third protection layer is changed from 0.8 to 0.7 the total PI value reduces from 0.89 to
0.87 as well. (3) When both of the cases (1) and (2) are combined    in the MAPPS simulation then the total PI value reduced from 0.89 to 0.86. This is an advantage of the MAPPS tool because any sensi- tivities in input can be incorporated easily in MAPPS to analyze the overall sensitivity in the PI value.
This single path MVP distribution is used as a base case to com- pare with the other simulations for various adversary strategies  and insider’s involvement.
Table 2 shows the estimated mean and standard deviation val- ues for the probability of interruption from four simulations of the different adversary strategies without insider action. Each simula- tion has 100,000 path histories. The resulting distributions are depicted in Fig. 11. As expected, the deep penetration strategy results in an estimated mean PI value marginally greater than that for the MVP. This marginal difference is due to the fact that in the deep penetration strategy, the adversary may occasionally fail to correctly select the MVP resulting in a higher PI value in some of the path histories. The random, rushing and covert strategies all result in mean PI values greater than the MVP and deep penetra- tion strategies. An important feature in all cases is that there are   no path histories which results in a PI value that is less than 0.8, which is commonly taken as the threshold of acceptable PI value, regardless of the adversary strategy.
Consideration of the standard deviation values leads to what may be considered a more practical interpretation of the results, which is to conclude that mean PI values for all four simulations are statistically the same to the base MVP case. Nevertheless, inspection of Fig. 11 reveals that while the mean PI value is essen- tially invariable with respect to the choice of adversary strategy,
Table 2
Result of adversary strategies simulations using MAPPS without insider action.
the optimal defeat strategy. Any mistakes or delays in the adver- sary actions should result in higher PI values.
A balanced PPS design will result in a similar performance from all path elements within the protection layers such that the PPS has similar effectiveness regardless of the adversary strategy. If an adversary attempts to rush through the facility by taking the shortest path, there will be an associated increase in the probabil- ity of detection. Likewise, if the adversary tries to avoid detection, there will be an associated increase in delay time. In both cases the expected probability of interruption should be greater than that calculated for the MVP. If the adversary does not have a predeter- mined or consistent strategy, then there is the chance that they accidentally select the MVP, for all other cases the probability of interruption is expected to be higher.
The involvement of the insider is known to significantly reduce the effectiveness of the PPS. Traditional analysis of the NARI facility using the EASI model would require the security analyst to repeat the analysis countless number of times either reducing the PD or td. For the reduced PD, two significant cases are important when the insider intervenes with the first or third protection layer, resulting in PI values of 0.83 and 0.77 respectively. For the reduced td, PI val- ues are 0.81, 0.82, or 0.85 if the insider intervenes with the sev- enth, fifth or the third protection layers respectively.
5.MAPPS results and discussion
5.1.Probability of interruption distribution
Fig. 10 shows the distribution of PI values obtained for 100,000 path histories simulating the adversary attempt to reach the target using MVP within the NARI facility. In this case the path remains
Fig. 10. The MVP PI distribution of the NARI facility.
constant while the performance of path elements varies stochasti- cally through a sampling process implemented in the MAPPS tool. The selected MVP PI result agrees with the traditional EASI model showing that the concept of CDP is correctly implemented in MAPPS. The resulting distribution of PI has an estimated mean of 0.89; which is also in excellent agreement with the PI value pre- dicted by the traditional EASI model. Additionally, a standard devi- ation can now be computed and is found to be 0.01. To check the sensitivity on the input values, we did three variations to deter- mine the PI value and it distribution. (1) When PD at the first pro- tection layer is changed from 0.5 to 0.4 the total PI value reduces from 0.89 to 0.87. (2) When PD at the third protection layer is changed from 0.8 to 0.7 the total PI value reduces from 0.89 to
0.87 as well. (3) When both of the cases (1) and (2) are combined    in the MAPPS simulation then the total PI value reduced from 0.89 to 0.86. This is an advantage of the MAPPS tool because any sensi- tivities in input can be incorporated easily in MAPPS to analyze the overall sensitivity in the PI value.
This single path MVP distribution is used as a base case to com- pare with the other simulations for various adversary strategies  and insider’s involvement.
Table 2 shows the estimated mean and standard deviation val- ues for the probability of interruption from four simulations of the different adversary strategies without insider action. Each simula- tion has 100,000 path histories. The resulting distributions are depicted in Fig. 11. As expected, the deep penetration strategy results in an estimated mean PI value marginally greater than that for the MVP. This marginal difference is due to the fact that in the deep penetration strategy, the adversary may occasionally fail to correctly select the MVP resulting in a higher PI value in some of the path histories. The random, rushing and covert strategies all result in mean PI values greater than the MVP and deep penetra- tion strategies. An important feature in all cases is that there are   no path histories which results in a PI value that is less than 0.8, which is commonly taken as the threshold of acceptable PI value, regardless of the adversary strategy.
Consideration of the standard deviation values leads to what may be considered a more practical interpretation of the results, which is to conclude that mean PI values for all four simulations are statistically the same to the base MVP case. Nevertheless, inspection of Fig. 11 reveals that while the mean PI value is essen- tially invariable with respect to the choice of adversary strategy,
Table 2
Result of adversary strategies simulations using MAPPS without insider action.
Fig. 11. The multi-path PI value distribution of the NARI facility for the random, rushing, covert, and deep penetration adversary strategies.
there are significant perturbations of the distribution of PI values in each case, which have significant implications on the assessment of PPS effectiveness. When compared to the base MVP simulation,
it can be seen that all strategies result in an increase in the number of adversary path histories with a PI value significantly greater than the mean. Of greater concern is that the same is true of the number of adversary path histories with a PI value significantly less than the mean. Also, in the case of the covert and deep penetration strategies and less so in the rushing strategy, the resulting distribu- tions are increasingly bimodal with the appearance of two peaks.
This again indicates that adversary strategies may significantly
reduce system effectiveness for a subset of adversary paths.
Table 3 shows the estimated mean and standard deviation val- ues for the probability of interruption from four simulations of the different adversary strategies, this time with insider action. Each simulation has 100,000 path histories. Once again, the MVP is the most vulnerable path resulting in the lowest mean PI value. In fact, for the MVP scenario where the insider actively intervenes with  the delay function of available elements, the resulting mean value  is now statistically different to the traditional analysis by the EASI model at the 95% confidence level. The deep penetration, covert, random and rushing strategies with insider action all result in lower PI values when compared to the base case, but high com- pared to the MVP strategy with insider action. In all cases, the insi- der action on the delay function of the facilities PPS has a greater negative effect than the insider action on the detection function.
Nevertheless, values for MVP case in Table 3 may lead the ana- lyst to be overconfident and overlook a concerning shift in the dis- tributions from simulations including the insider’s intervention. Although the mean and standard deviation values are commonly
Table 3
Result of adversary strategies simulations with insider involvement.
acceptable, it is clearly seen from Fig. 12 that there are some histo- ries in which the PI value is less than 0.8, either due to insider’s help or PPS low performance or both.
5.2.Probability of interruption frequency analysis
As seen above, key features of the distribution of PI values can be easily overlooked by analyzing only the mean and standard deviation values. To mitigate this, frequency analysis of the distri- bution is proposed and performed. Table 4 shows the frequency for PI values in 6 bins from 100,000 path histories of adversary strat- egy simulations.
The results in Table 4 show that the MVP strategy is of greatest concern followed by the deep penetration strategy in which the adversary attempts to choose the MVP but has random errors in the path selection process. This can be seen by the increased fre- quency of path histories with PI values between 0.8 and 0.9. Mean- while, the rushing strategy is of least concern for the NARI facility.
Fig. 12. PI value distribution of the NARI facility with insider’s intervention of: detection function (PD) and delay function (td).
Table 4
Frequency distribution of PI values for adversary strategy simulations.
This is because although the adversary uses the fastest path to con- duct their mission, early detection by the PPS is likely and will pro- vide enough time for the response force to interrupt the adversary action. The covert strategy is also of lessor concern compared to   the MVP strategy because, once the adversary is detected in a path option with the lowest PD value, there is sufficient probability that the response force will interrupt the adversary in time.
Relative to the rushing strategy, the covert strategy is more effective adversary strategy for penetration of the NARI facility due to the CDP being located in the seventh protection layer, thus there are seven layers that can be exploited by the adversary’s cov- ert strategy compared to only two layers after CDP that can be exploited by the adversary’s rushing strategy. In fact, even the ran- dom strategy is more concerning than the rushing strategy. It is because the adversary has a greater likelihood of selecting a path option with a lower PD value, if not the lowest, in three protection layers before the CDP, thus reduces the probability of early detec- tion and the total PI in the simulation history. Nevertheless, it is reasonable that the simulations result in high PI values for the strengthened facility’s PPS against postulated adversary without insider’s help.
Table 5 shows the percentage of PI value frequency in 6 bins from 100,000 histories of insider’s intervention simulation in NARI facility’s MVP. Insider intervention simulations are matched with the expectation from manual analysis using EASI model. The distri- bution of insider intervention on td value is concentrated in three
expected values of three possible scenarios in the MVP. The distri- bution of insider’s intervention on PD value turned out has a wider range of PI values. While majority of possible intervention of PD value may insignificantly reduce the PI value, few possible scenar- ios may significantly reduce the PI value as shown in Fig. 12. The worst situation is that the PI value may decrease to less than 0.7 when combined with poor PPS performance. In short, for this test problem, the PI value is more likely to decrease if the insider deci- des to intervene with a delay element of the PPS than with the case where the insider intervenes with the detection element of the PPS.
6.Conclusion
A stochastic-based computational tool, MAPPS, is developed to support the analyst in evaluation of physical protection system designs. MAPPS can perform multi-path analysis through the use of an adversary sequence diagram in determining the most vulner- able path, by employing the concept of a critical detection point, and calculating its PI value, by utilizing the EASI model. The imple- mentation of stochastic approach in MAPPS allows the analyst per- form adversary intrusion simulations in measuring PPS effectiveness, with respect to PPS performance, various adversary strategies, and different types of collusion with insider.
We used a hypothetical facility and postulated adversary attack scenario as a test problem to verify MAPPS code results by compar- ing to results from a single path manual analysis using the EASI
Table 5
Frequency distribution of PI values for insider intervention simulations.
model. In the simulations without active insider involvement, the results were as expected with the MVP having the lowest mean      PI value followed by the deep penetration strategy. The other strategies (covert, random, and rushing) resulted in similar PI val- ues. MVP analysis from both tools has the same PI value, CDP, and TR value. Simulations of insider intervention in the MVP also gave expected results in which the effectiveness of PPS is decreased for both types of insider involvement. However, analysis based on the mean and standard deviation values was found to be misleading and did not capture the differences in the distributions between different adversary strategy and insider involvement scenarios. Therefore, a frequency analysis was performed as a solution for better understanding in analyzing the simulation distribution. In addition, through a deeper analysis on the frequency, different characteristics of vulnerabilities due to insider action were found  in the test problem.
Future development work envisaged for MAPPS includes the addition of capabilities to allow analysis of theft scenarios. The cur- rent path selections in MAPPS do not allow transitions that skip protection layers whereas these transition can happen for example through ventilation ducts etc. Uncertainty in several parameters that affect the evolution of a scenario and the distribution of PI val- ues can also be implemented for example the probability of correct communication of alarm assessments similar to the work by Terao and Suzuki (Terao and Suzuki, 2014). Furthermore, the current implementation of insider action has a binary effect whereby a detection or delay element is either available or completely removed. This behavior can be improved to allow for a continuous manipulation in PPS element performance by the insider.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2019.107074.
