<title>Development of the Korean-specific radiation- induced cancer risk model for level 3 probabilistic safety assessment (PSA)</title>
<author>Seung-Hee Lee, Keonmin Kim, Hyejin Kim, Sukhoon Kim, Seokjung Han & Eun-Hee Kim</author>
<Affiliation>aDepartment of Radiation and Environment, FNC Technology Co, Yongin-si, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea; bDepartment of Nuclear Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea; cRisk and Environmental Safety Research Division, Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, Daejeon, Republic of Korea</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2020.1720849</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2020.1720849</URL>
ABSTRACT
As a follow-up measure to improve safety after the Fukushima nuclear disaster in 2011, a level 3 probabilistic safety assessment (PSA) was enacted as a notice in Korea. In this study, as a part of developing a Korean-speciﬁc level 3 PSA code, the radiation-induced cancer risk model for the Korean population was developed for reﬂecting ethnic and regional characteristics. The Korean-speciﬁc risk models of cancer incidence were primarily developed by reference to the biological eﬀects of ionizing radiation (BEIR) VII model for 12 cancer types including leukaemia. For improving the generic limitation in the BEIR VII model, models for leukaemia, thyroid, and breast cancers were newly developed for applying to the Korean population. The uncertainty analysis was also carried out with the Monte-Carlo method. In future, the Korean-speciﬁc cancer risk model is supposed to be installed as a component module in the Korean level 3  PSA code system, and be utilized to estimate cancer eﬀects from nuclear accidents.
KEYWORDS
PSA; oﬀ-site consequence analysis; risk assessment; radiation eﬀect; cancer risk model
1.Introduction
After the Fukushima nuclear disaster in 2011, demand for the oﬀ-site consequence analysis resulting from an accident at  the  nuclear   power   plant,   as   a  part   of  a probabilistic safety assessment (PSA), has been gradu- ally increased around the world. A level 3 PSA is primar- ily carried out to estimate radiation-induced eﬀects from the nuclear accident on the public. It sequentially evalu- ates atmospheric dispersion and deposition in the envir- onment, exposure dose, health eﬀects, and economic consequences considering data on regional characteris- tics and countermeasures. In 2016 in Korea, a level 3 PSA was enacted as a notice [1], and thereupon, it obligated relevant organizations to perform the consequence ana- lysis for ensuring that the safety goal is fulﬁlled in terms of the early and cancer fatality.
For the purpose of supporting a level 3 PSA, various computational codes were developed in many coun- tries. Some of the programs practically used are as follows: MACCS (MELCOR Accident Consequence Code System) from the United States [2], OSCAAR (Oﬀ-Site Consequence Analysis of Atmospheric releases of Radionuclides) from Japan [3], and COSYMA (Code System from MARIA) from the European Commission [4].
In the process of the consequence analysis, it is very important to estimate health eﬀects as an indication of dangerousness and public acceptance. In particular, since cancer which is one of the long-term eﬀects is diﬀerently
revealed depending on individual features as well as exposure dose, it is required to estimate the cancer risk speciﬁcally for an exposed individual or population. Mostly based on Japanese atomic bomb survivor data, the radiation-induced cancer risk models have been developed by various organizations. The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission published the  NUREG/CR- 4214 report in 1993 for updating the cancer risk model due to radiation exposure [5]. And, the U.S. National Academy of Sciences published the biological eﬀects of ionizing radiation (BEIR) VII report and developed a risk model for radiation-induced cancer [6]. In addition, the United Nations Scientiﬁc Committee on the Eﬀects of Atomic Radiation (UNSCEAR), the International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP),  and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) devel- oped cancer risk models in the UNSCEAR 2006 report [7], ICRP 103 [8], and EPA 402 report [9], respectively. In Korea, the majority of a level 3 PSA has been performed with MACCS since there is no Korean- speciﬁc code. However, MACCS has an inherent lim- itation to apply to Korean population, as it includes the (currently outdated) cancer risk model provided in NUREG/CR-4214 and uses risk coeﬃcient (i.e. risk of cancer incidence or mortality per unit dose) derived based on cancer baseline rate and survival fraction of the American population [10]. Thus, it is needed to improve and/or develop the risk model in accordance
with the recent research results.
Accordingly, in this study, the radiation-induced cancer risk model for the Korean population was devel- oped as a part of the Korean-speciﬁc level 3 PSA code development reﬂecting ethnic and regional characteris- tics. Nextly, risk estimation with the model developed was performed using the generic characteristics of the Korean population such as cancer baseline rate, survival fraction, and population distribution. Finally, the uncertainty analysis for the parameters deduced was carried out with the Monte-Carlo method.
2.Materials and methods
2.1.Mathematical modelling
In general, two kinds of mathematical models are adopted to deﬁne radiation eﬀect to human; the one is the multiplicative model and the other is the additive model. As expressed as the underlined term in the fol- lowing equations, the excess risk of radiation-induced cancer in the former and latter models is assumed to be proportional (indicated as excess relative risk (ERR)) to baseline cancer rate and constant increase (represented as excess absolute risk (EAR)) per radiation dose irrele- vant to the baseline cancer rate, respectively.
In the multiplicative model,
@1
In the additive model,
@2
where λe D; e; a; g : Cancer incidence or mortality rate of radiation-exposed population
λu a; g : Baseline cancer incidence or mortality rate of unexposed population.
D: Radiation exposure dose [Gy]
e: Age at exposure
a: Attained age
g: Gender
As shown in the formula below, the ERR and EAR are mathematically deﬁned with the dose–response function  (i.e.   ρ D )   and   eﬀect   modiﬁcation   (i.e.  s X ). ρ D is primarily expressed in a linear, linear- quadratic, or quadratic form, and is calibrated by s X which is a function of variable factors such as age at exposure, attained age, and gender.@3
exp  θ0X   (θ0 Variable factors:).
The  dose–response  relationship  and  model para-
meters are determined based on epidemiological dataof the radiation exposure population [11,12]. However, since most of these are the relatively high- dose exposure data, the cancer risk estimation result- ing from low dose exposure has been modiﬁed with dose and dose-rate eﬀectiveness factor (DDREF).
2.2.Selection of a reference model
For the purpose of developing the Korean model for assessing the late health eﬀect due to radiation expo- sure, the risk models described in the following reports have been reviewed as the reference; BEIR VII, UNSCEAR 2006, ICRP 103, and U.S. EPA 402 [13].
In this review process, the following points were con- sidered: the possibility to reﬂect characteristics of the exposed population, to provide transparent risk mod- els for various cancer types, and to perform the uncer- tainty analysis. From this point of view, the BEIR VII was chosen as the most appropriate reference model, and other models were judged to be inappropriate due to the following reasons.
●UNSCEAR 2006: Mortality models were pre- sented only for leukaemia and solid cancers with- out dividing into various carcinomas. And, distributions for uncertainty were not presented.
●ICRP 103: The uncertainty analysis of the model was not treated.
●U.S. EPA 402: This is a revised version of the BEIR VII and additionally provides models for estimating bone, skin, and kidney cancers. However, the EPA report mentioned that excess incidence of kidney cancer due to radiation rarely occurred according to the Japanese atomic bomb survivor data as well as models for bone and skin cancers were inappropriate for a level 3 PSA since those were derived based on exposure data due to medical treatment not related to the nuclear acci- dent. Thus, the risk of these three cancers could be estimated as a part of other solids not separat- ing as individual models.
The BEIR VII model adjusted cancer risk according to gender, age at exposure, and attained age, and was developed for the following 12 carcinomas: leukaemia, stomach cancer, colon cancer, liver cancer, lung can- cer, breast cancer, prostate cancer, uterine cancer, ovary cancer, bladder cancer, thyroid cancer, and others. These models deﬁne only ERR and EAR of cancer  incidence,  and  cancer  mortality  is estimated from the ratio of the baseline rate of cancer mortality to the incidence of the unexposed population. Model for leukaemia was derived mainly from the Japanese atomic bomb mortality data from the period of 1950 to 2000, and incidence data for establishing  solid  cancer
models  was  from  the  period  of  1958  to  1998. Even
though the leukaemia model was derived based on the
mortality data, it was also regarded as a cancer inci- dence model [6].
3.Results and discussions
3.1.Development of the Korean-speciﬁc cancer risk model
3.1.1. Excess risk model of cancer incidence
As described previously, the Korean-speciﬁc risk mod- els of cancer incidence were primarily developed by reference to the BEIR VII model for 12 cancer types including leukaemia. The ERR and EAR for  solid can- cers have a linear dose–response function with mod- iﬁcation of gender (g), age at exposure (e), and attained age (a). And, the ERR and EAR models for leukaemia have a linear-quadratic dose–response relationship and are modiﬁed by gender (g), age at exposure (e), and time since exposure (t = a - e). In consideration of generic limitation in the BEIR VII model, models for leukaemia, thyroid, and breast cancers were newly developed for applying to the Korean population.
Solid cancers other than thyroid and breast cancers: Incidence models of solid cancers other than thyroid and breast cancers are identical to those of the BEIR
VII models, and the formula is expressed as follows:@4
10	g
coeﬃcients.
Leukaemia: In the BEIR VII, the incidence model for leukaemia was derived from the mortality data of Japanese atomic bomb survivors. To complement this limitation, we developed leukaemia incidence model on the basis of Hsu et al. [14] derived from the recent incidence data (from the period of 1950 to 2001) of the Japanese atomic  bomb  survivor.  In  the  absence  of  a large amount of Korean exposure data, the model derived from only the Japanese atomic bomb survivor data was considered to be appropriate to the Korean population in the aspect of ethnic similarity. In Hsu   et al. [14], the preferred model of ERR and EAR for leukaemia other than chronic lymphocytic leukaemia and adult T-cell leukaemia was shown as follows:@5
where e# ¼ e—30
g: 0 for male and 1 for female
Since the preferred EAR model (i.e. Equation (6)) distinguished city of data source, the weighted arith- metic mean of estimates in the two cities that was assigned to the value of person-years was employed when the EAR model was applied to risk estimation for the Korean population. The weighted mean was calculated as follows:— 0:65c — 0:42g
(6)c: city parameter (i.e. 0 for Hiroshima and 1 for
Nagasaki)
@7
where PYH: Person-Year in Hiroshima data, and PYN : Person-Year in Nagasaki data
Consequently, the Korean-speciﬁc leukaemia inci- dence risk models are summarized as Equations (5) and (8).@8
where e# ¼ e—30 , and g: 0 for male and 1 for femaleThyroid and breast cancers: Based on a pooled analysis
of  seven  studies  from  Ron  et  al.  [15],  the  BEIR  VIIcommittee developed a thyroid cancer risk model only for ERR, which was only dependent on gender, age at exposure and exposure dose. In the last 10 years or so, more recent models by Preston et al. [12], National Council on Radiation Protection (NCRP) [16], U.S.  EPA   [9],   and    Veiga    et    al.    [17]    demonstrated    a relationship between excess risk and time since expo- sure or attained age. However, since the latter three of these recent models were mostly based on data of the United States and European populations including med- ical x-ray, they were judged to be inappropriate to apply to the Korean Level 3 PSA. In contrast, Preston et al. [12] derived ERR and EAR models only on the basis of the Japanese atomic bomb survivor data. Accordingly, it was determined that the thyroid cancer incidence model pro- vided by Preston et al. [12] was selected as the Korean model in terms of consideration for additional inﬂuen- cing factor and ethnic similarity of data sources.Regarding female breast cancer, the BEIR VII com-mittee preferred the incidence and mortality models developed  by Preston  et  al.  [18]  which  were  based on U.S.  and  European  populations,  as  incidence  rate  of
breast    cancer    without    radiation    exposure    of    the
U.S.  population  was much  higher  than that of Japanese
people.  In this  study,  however,  risk  models  for female breast cancer from Preston et al. [12] were determined as
the Korean  model since  these  were derived  from   only
Japanese atomic bomb survivor data expected to be more similar to the Korean population.
In summary, the incidence model of thyroid and breast cancers for the  Korean  population  is  expressed as follows:
@9
Excess risk model of cancer mortality
Table 1 summarizes the Korean-speciﬁc radiation- induced cancer incidence risk model for 12 cancer sites developed in this study. Overall cancer risk is estimated by summing the risk of each cancer to be calculated.
For estimating the excess risk of cancer mortality, the excess risk of cancer incidence is adjusted by multiplying by the ratio (i.e. λm a; g =λi a; g ) of base- line cancer mortality rate to baseline cancer incidence rate for the unexposed population. In the multiplica- tive and additive models, the excess cancer mortality risk is deﬁned as follows, respectively.
In the multiplicative model,@10
In the additive model,
@11
Exceptionally, in Equations  (10)  and  (11),  when λi  a; g is 0, the term enclosed in bracket is assumed  to be 0 because no incidence tends to no mortality.  Moreover, when λiða; gÞ is equal to or smaller than λm a; g , λm a; g =λi a; g is assumed to be 1 for sub- stantiality of the calculation.
Estimation of lifetime risk
LAR is deﬁned as an accumulated risk from age at exposure to a person’s life expectancy and calculated using a survival rate at each attained age. In this calcula- tion, it is assumed that the life expectancy for the Korean population is 100 and latency periods for solid cancers and leukaemia are 5 years and 2 years, respec- tively. The formula for calculating LAR is as below.
@12
where L: Latency period, and S(a): Survival rate of population
In accordance with applying latency periods, EAR or ERR is calculated as follows.
For solid cancers:@13-1
@13-2
@13-3
Leukaemia:
@
whereN: The number of population.
In case of exposure to low dose or low dose rate, DDREF was applied to account for the assumed lower eﬀectiveness than the eﬀect of high dose or high dose rate. When the dose is below 100 mGy or dose rate is below 0.1 mGy·min−1,a DDREF of 1.3 [19] is used in the
estimating risks, and consequently, the excess risk is divided by 1.3 (= DDREF).
3.2.Transfer of radiation-induced risk to the Korean population
For applying ERR (ERRLSS) and EAR (EARLSS) obtained from the life span study (LSS), the cohort of Japanese atomic bomb survivors, to the Korean population (ERRKO and EARKO), it is necessary to introduce the risk transfer method. Typically, two kinds of methods are adopted to convert the LSS data to other population; the one is the multiplicative transfer and the other is the additive transfer. As indicated in the formula below, ERR is assumed to be the same to all populations in the former method, whereas EAR is assumed to be the same to all populations in the latter method [20].
In the multiplicative transfer,@15
In the additive transfer,@16
where ERR
KO—multi
: ERR for the Korean population transferred by the multiplicative method
EARKO—multi: EAR for the Korean population trans- ferred by the multiplicative method
ERRKO—add: ERR for the Korean population trans- ferred by the additive method
EARKO—add: EAR for the Korean population trans- ferred by the additive method
λKO: Baseline cancer incidence rate of the Korean population
Biologically, the additive risk transfer is based on the assumption  that  radiation   aﬀects   to  normal   cells  as a starter of carcinogenesis independent to other factor, and the multiplicative risk transfer presumes radiation as a promotor for cell transformation to malignant cells. Since risk estimates were contributed to both kinds of transfers, the weighted arithmetic mean of two risk trans- fers has generally been used for estimating the risk of target populations [21].
@17
where ω: weighting factor for the multiplicative risk transfer
Similarly, LAR for the Korean population can be estimated in accordance with the formula below. (Here, based on the BEIR VII models, ω is 0.7 for leukaemia and solid cancers other than thyroid, breast, and lung cancers, and 0.3 for lung cancer.)
@18
Even though the risk model of the BEIR VII for thyroid and breast cancers used only ERR and only EAR, respectively, it was determined that both the ERR and EAR for thyroid and breast cancers were used equally with weighting factor of 0.5 in the  Korean model. There are three reasons as below.
Firstly, since ERR of thyroid cancer and EAR of breast cancer were based on a pooled analysis of several cohorts including mainly the U.S. and European populations, it was diﬃcult to directly apply to the Korean population. Especially, Preston et al. [18] mentioned that for breast cancer, EAR was recommended as ERRs of the LSS were approximately four times higher than those of other Caucasian cohorts due to the lower baseline rate of the LSS, whereas EARs of other cohorts were comparable with each other. However, it was not appropriate for the Korean population since the female breast cancer inci- dence rate in Korea was similar to that in Japan.
Secondly, in case of thyroid cancer, as the incidence rate of woman in Korea was approximately 10 times higher than that in Japan recently, using only the ERR
model for the Korean population is likely to overestimate the risk of thyroid cancer resulting from radiation
exposure.
Thirdly, in terms of mechanistic considerations, although the BEIR VII remarked that the preferred risk transfer for breast cancer should be based on the multi- plicative model, EAR based on results of the Caucasian populations was used as a model for breast cancer. This meant that biological and epidemiological data were still insuﬃcient to accurately select the transfer model.
As a result, it was concluded that using only ERR or EAR was not deﬁnitive and consequently, it was more reasonable to apply ERR and EAR models with the same weighting (i.e. 0.5) to estimating the risk of thyroid and breast cancers. The accompanying uncertainty with this application was reﬂected in conﬁdence intervals (CIs) provided in the results of uncertainty analysis.
3.3.Quantitative evaluation of uncertainty
Based on the BEIR VII and EPA 2011 reports, the following factors were selected as signiﬁcant sources of uncertainty: (1) sampling variability, (2) risk trans- fer, (3) DDREF, and (4) other non-sampling sources. For conducting the uncertainty analysis in accordance with the Monte-Carlo method, distribution for each factor was postulated as follows.
First, for sampling variability of parameters in the model, uncertainty distributions for cancer sites other than leukaemia, breast, and thyroid cancers were assigned to be the same with the BEIR VII report. The uncertainty distributions only for the coeﬃcient of dose (β) were considered, without accounting for the uncertainty in other coeﬃcients of age at exposure (γ) and attained age (η). For leukaemia, breast, and thyroid cancers, the uncer- tainty distributions described in Hsu et al. [14] and Preston et al. [12] were used, and  it was  assumed  that all of the coeﬃcients (i.e. β, θ, γ, and η) had uncertainty with Weibull distribution, unlike other solid cancers. Table 2 tabulates the uncertainty distributions for sam- pling variability determined using a median value and 95% CI.
Second, the uncertainty of risk transfer was assumed to be a Bernoulli distribution based on the BEIR  VII  report.  For  each  cancer,  the  presumed   P value reﬂecting the relative strength of belief in the two transfer models was summarized as follows:
Table 2. Uncertainty distribution for parameter coeﬃcients of the Korean cancer risk model.●P(w =0) = 0.3, P(w =1) = 0.7 for cancers other than thyroid, lung, and breast cancers
●P(w =0) = 0.7, P(w =1) = 0.3 for lung cancer
●P(w =0) = 0.5, P(w =1) = 0.5 for thyroid and breast cancers
Third, the uncertainty of DDREF was assumed to be a log-normal distribution with a geometric mean (GM) of 1.31 and geometric standard deviation (GSD) of 1.80, as described in Kocher et al. [19].
Finally, based on the U.S. EPA 2011 report, other non-sampling sources of uncertainty considered here include uncertainties from incomplete follow-up of the LSS, error in disease detection, and selection bias. The uncertainty of each factor is assumed to be as follows:
●Log-normal distribution with GM =1 and GSD
=1.2 for incomplete follow-up of LSS
●Log-normal distribution with GM =1 and GSD
=1.05 for error in disease detection
●Log-normal distribution with GM =1 and GSD =1.1 for selection bias
3.4.Estimates of radiation-induced cancer risk for the Korean population
Radiation-induced cancer risk for the Korean popula-tion was estimated by the Korean-speciﬁc model developed in this study. The 5-year average from the
period of 2012 to 2016 for the following statistical data taken from Korean statistical information service [22] were applied to this estimation: (1) the Korean popu-lation distribution, (2) the cancer incidence rate, (3) the cancer mortality rate, (4) and the survival fraction. Tables 3 and 4 provide the estimated LARs of radia- tion-induced cancer incidence and mortality in accor- dance with the Korean-speciﬁc model, respectively, assuming that 100,000 people were exposed  by  0.1 Gy of radiation at the same time.
As shown in Tables 3 and 4, the estimated LARs were generally decreased with age at exposure. And, the LAR of female was larger than that of the male in cancer incidence   and   mortality,   and   especially    there   was a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in cancer incidence of thyroid cancer between male and female, which was because thyroid cancer baseline rate of female was larger than that of male.
For interpreting the results more speciﬁcally, the population-averaged LAR was compared to the lifetime baseline risk (LBRs) of cancer incidence and mortality.
Figure 1 illustrates LBRs and LARs of cancer inci-dence and mortality for male and female. From this ﬁgure, the additional increase of cancer incidence and mortality resulting from radiation exposure of 0.1 Gy for the Korean population was approximately calculated as follows, based on the estimated LARs.
Table 3. Estimates on lifetime attributable risk (LAR) of radiation-induced cancer incidence for the Koreans in accordance with the Korean cancer risk model.
Table 4. Estimates on lifetime attributable risk (LAR) of radiation-induced cancer mortality for the Koreans in accordance with the Korean cancer risk model.
●Cancer incidence: 1.50% (i.e. averaged value of 1.19% (for male) and 1.81% (for female))
●Cancer mortality: 0.66% (i.e. averaged value of 0.59% (for male) and 0.73% (for female))
Figures 2 and 3 show LBRs and LARs of incidence and mortality by cancer site for male and female, respectively. Except for ‘Other solid cancers’, cancer having the maximum LARs of incidence were colon
and lung cancers (0.18%) for male and breast cancer (0.37%) for female, and it was estimated that lung cancer has the maximum LARs of mortality, 0.15%  for male and 0.26% for female.
Table 5 gives the results of uncertainty analysis (i.e. median and mean values with 95% CIs) by cancer site. From this Table, the lower bounds of 95% CI for prostate cancer of male and uterine cancer of female were found to be negative values, which was analogous with the analyses
Figure 1. Percentage of lifetime risk for all cancers of the Koreans due to radiation based on the Korean cancer risk model.
Figure 2. Percentage of lifetime risk of the Koreans by cancer site and gender due to radiation based on the Korean cancer risk model (1 of 2) – Male.
of the LSS incidence data by Preston et al. [12]. This did not provide a valid evidence of a relationship between 0.1 Gy exposure and the risk of prostate and uterine cancers. The contributions to uncertainties associated with four factors described in Section 3.3 are compared in
Table 6, based on the coeﬃcient of variance indicating the percentage of their contributions. DDREF was mainly the dominant source of uncertainty for most of the cancer sites. And, in case of leukaemia, sampling variability was the most important contributor to
Figure 3. Percentage of lifetime risk of the Koreans by cancer site and gender due to radiation based on the Korean cancer risk model (2 of 2) – Female.
Table 5. Results of uncertainty analysis on lifetime attributable risk (LAR) for the Koreans.
Table 6. Contribution by uncertainty factor.
uncertainty since DDREF was not applied to a low dose exposure scenario. Even though sampling variability was dominant for thyroid cancer, both DDREF and risk transfer uncertainties were also important contributors. And, sampling variability and risk transfer had the largest contribution to the uncertainty of prostate cancer for male and uterine cancer for female, respectively.
In level 3 PSA using MACCS in Korea, the cancer risk has been estimated by multiplying risk coeﬃcient and exposure dose. Since risk coeﬃcients were derived from the U.S. data and were values averaged over the whole population of interest, ethnic characteristics of the Korean population were not reﬂected, and moreover, gender and age of an exposed person was unable to be taken into account in risk estimation. Accordingly, the radiation-induced cancer risk for U.S. and Korean popu- lations was equal to each other given the same exposure dose. In contrast, when using the newly developed Korean-speciﬁc cancer risk model, the statistical charac- teristics of Korean population (e.g. cancer incidence/ mortality rate, population distribution, and survival frac- tion) were applied, and not only that, the calculation of risk estimates were implemented with consideration of personal characteristics (i.e. gender and age), resulting in more speciﬁc and correct estimation.
4.Conclusion
The estimation model of radiation-induced cancer risk for the Korean population was developed in this study. Through the comparative review on the typical cancer models used internationally, the BEIR VII was deter- mined to be the most appropriate reference  model  in the aspect of application feasibility. Among the 12 cancer types included in the BEIR VII model, however, risk models for leukaemia, thyroid, and breast cancers were newly formulated based on Hsu et al. [14] and Preston  et al. [12], respectively, in consideration of ethnic and regional characteristics of the Koreans. These models, herein referred to as the Korean-speciﬁc cancer risk model, allow the regulatory authority and utilities of the nuclear power plant in Korea to evaluate the long-term
health eﬀects due to radiation exposure. Moreover, by applying the model developed in this study, the statistical features and personal characteristics (i.e. gender and age) of the Korean population previously not reﬂected in MACCS can be considered in estimating cancer risk. In this paper, as a case study, radiation-induced cancer risk was estimated for a hypothetical scenario that 100,000 people of the Korean were exposed by 0.1 Gy at the same time using the Korean-speciﬁc model with the ﬁve-year average of statistical data from the period of 2012 to 2016. In addition, uncertainty analysis in accordance with the Monte-Carlo method was performed for sampling varia- bility, risk transfer, DDREF, and other non-sampling sources. In the near future, the Korean-speciﬁc cancer risk   model   is   supposed    to   be   incorporated    into  a component module for the Korean-speciﬁc level  3 PSA code and utilized to estimate the additional increase of cancer incidence and mortality resulting from radia- tion. Ultimately, the Korean-speciﬁc model can be improved and/or revised, provided  that  exposure  data of the Koreans are available through radiation epidemio- logical survey.
Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the authors.
Funding
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korean government (MSIT) (No. 2017M2A8A4015292).
