<title>Assessing radiation protection knowledge in diagnostic radiography in the Republic of Cyprus. A questionnaire survey</title>
<author>C. Zervides, L. Sassis, P. Kefala-Karli, V. Christou, A. Derlagen, P. Papapetrou, A. Heraclides</author>
<Affiliation>University of Nicosia Medical School, Cyprus</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Radiography</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radi.2019.11.0031078-8174</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radi.2019.11.0031078-8174</URL>
ABSTRACT
Introduction: Radiation protection knowledge is essential for medical personnel in ensuring that the possible risks do not outweigh the beneﬁts of diagnostic imaging. This study aimed to assess the radi- ation protection knowledge of radiographers in Cyprus.
Methods: A cross-sectional study was carried out among radiographers in Cyprus through the Cyprus Society of Registered Radiologic Technologists & Radiation Therapy Technologists. The study was a quantitative descriptive analysis, using a questionnaire with 22 multiple-choice questions. Analysis of the data was done using the statistical software Stata, by performing mean knowledge score comparisons by different participants’ characteristics, using t-test and analysis of variance test. Statistical signiﬁcance was assumed as a p-value < 0.05.
Results: The answers provided for each question indicate that some areas of radiation protection are less known compared to others, as there is quite a wide range of correct-to-incorrect ratios. The analysis based on participant  characteristics in relation to overall radiation effects knowledge, identiﬁed important determinants, namely the workplace of the participant (p ¼ 0.006), the type of work licence
the participant held at the time of the questionnaire (p ¼ 0.024), and the years of clinical experience of
the participant (p ¼ 0.021).
Conclusion: The study showed that the levels of knowledge in radiation protection are of a very good standard. However, work is needed to clarify the speciﬁcs of dose limits and the national radiation protection legislation with regards to informing patients about the possible effects of ionising radiation. Implications for practice: The study results indicate the importance of educating radiographers about the requirements of national radiation protection legislation and how this new knowledge can be linked with practise.
Keywords:
Radiation protection Radiation safety Radiation dose Diagnostic radiography Radiation awareness
Introduction
Radiation is deﬁned as an emission and propagation of energy as electromagnetic waves or as particles.1 In case there is adequate energy to detach an orbital electron from an atom, then this type of radiation is described as ionising radiation.2
Medical diagnostic imaging and technologies are the most common human made ionising radiation sources and are respon- sible for the highest amounts of radiation exposure to the general public and environment.3,4 Because of the growth in modern medicine and the continuous development of non-invasive diagnostic techniques, technologies such as X-rays, Computed To- mography (CT), Positron Emission Tomography (PET) and many more advanced diagnostic technologies that utilize ionising radia- tion are now used on a daily basis and are considered as the most powerful diagnostic tools for many diseases and disorders.5,6
Indeed, each year, 3.6 billion radiological examinations, 37 million nuclear medicine, and 7.5 million radiotherapy in- terventions take place worldwide.7 Although CT is responsible for about 15% of the medical imaging procedures, it has a 75% contri- bution of the total collective dose; thus, it accounts for the more signiﬁcant part of radiation dose received by patients'.8 Demon- strably 20% of radiation exposure due to medical purposes is avoidable9; unnecessary exposure is estimated to be responsible for 100e250 cancer deaths that happen in the UK annually.10
Radiographer's deals with ionising radiation daily, and as a consequence, the doses they receive are much higher than the ones of the general public. Thus, they have a higher risk in developing an ionising radiation-induced complication.11e13 Hence their radiation protection knowledge is of utmost importance. The general public is not aware of the consequences of ionising radiation exposure, therefore medical personnel who are directly involved need to take appropriate measures for radiation protection to protect them- selves, the general public and the environment.14
The effects of ionising radiation exposure fall into two cate- gories, stochastic and deterministic. The chance of producing a stochastic effect raises when the radiation dose increases. Sto- chastic effects do not have a dose threshold and characterise a possible outcome in any dose such as cancer; the adverse effects could appear after 10e20 years.15,16 In deterministic effects, the severity of the outcome increases when the radiation dose is higher. Thus, deterministic effects have a dose threshold, and with the threshold exceeded, several harmful outcomes are possible depending on the radiation dose received.14
Several personal protective measures and legislations regarding dose limits were introduced in order to protect medical personnel and patients.14,17 Indeed, one of the most common contributing factor for diminishing the patients’ exposure to unnecessary ion- ising radiation due to medical imaging is the level of knowledge of the practitioners.18,19
Radiographers have to be aware of occupational annual dose limits as well as the most sensitive tissues of the body and the possibilities of an adverse outcome according to different ages. Moreover, more advanced knowledge is required on how to set up the appropriate parameters on an ionising radiation imaging mo- dality in order to avoid high radiation doses.
A poor radiographic technique can lead to poor image quality and as a consequence, repeated examinations will be necessary. Thus, the patient will have to undergo unnecessary exposures to ionising radiation, increasing the received radiation dose.20,21 Tak- ing into account all the adverse outcomes and how unnecessary exposures to ionising radiation increase the received dose, radi- ographers have to be aware and follow the ALARA (As Low As Reasonably Achievable) principle. The ALARA principle helps to minimise the exposure to ionising radiation and to make sure that the beneﬁt to the patient is not outweighed by potential harm.22e24 Radiographers undergo practise as trainees; however, this is not     a factor that will guarantee the safety of themselves and the general public. Theoretical knowledge alongside practical knowledge will achieve the maximum protection from ionising radiation by mini- mising the risk of high exposures and a signiﬁcantly better outcome
in their practise.21
Many studies have raised concerns about the importance of knowledge of radiation protection among radiographers.3,6,20,21,25 The purpose of  the current study, which was the ﬁrst of  its kind  to be performed in the Republic of Cyprus, was to assess the level of knowledge on radiation protection in diagnostic radiography of radiographers in the Republic of Cyprus. By understanding their level of familiarity with the subject, actions that should be taken to improve their education and knowledge to improve practise, such as mandatory seminars and teaching classes throughout their ca- reers can be designed.
Methods
Study setting and sample
A cross-sectional study was carried out anonymously and voluntarily among radiographers in Cyprus through the Cyprus Society of Registered Radiologic Technologists & Radiation Therapy Technologists. This study complied with the ethical guidelines for research, as stated by the European Commission. The descriptive
survey assessed radiographers' radiation protection knowledge and was carried out between September and November 2018. The study sample included 300 radiographers registered in the electronic mailing system of the Cyprus Society of Registered Radiologic Technologists & Radiation Therapy Technologists. However, the total number of 104 responses was received. The participants’ re- sponses were based on their knowledge only, without referring to any other sources.
Radiation knowledge questionnaire
The questionnaire designed in accordance to previous stud- ies,26e32 used Google forms survey and was purposely created to evaluate the knowledge of radiographers in the Republic as per the needs of the Cyprus Society of Registered Radiologic Technologists & Radiation Therapy Technologists. The speciﬁc questions were selected following a focus group with local experts in the ﬁeld. The questionnaire consisted of 30 questions in total, divided into two sections. The ﬁrst section included eight multiple-choice questions regarding the demographic features of the participants, namely gender, age, level of education, the ﬁeld they are working on at this time point (i.e. oncology, interventional radiology) and years of clinical experience.
In the second section, the participants had to answer 22 ques- tions regarding radiation protection. This section focused on gen- eral radiation protection knowledge. Out of these 22 questions, 20 were multiple-choice questions, and 2 had the form of checkboxes so that participants were able to submit more than one answer.
The questions mentioned above were combined in a cumulative score, by scoring answers based on theory correctness and adding them up. This resulted in a knowledge scale or score, which rep- resents the overall knowledge of participants, as regards to radia- tion protection. The higher the score, the higher the knowledge of the participants.
Statistical analysis
Results were analysed statistically using the t-test for binary exposure variables and one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) for exposure variables with >2 categories. The knowledge score was normally distributed; thus, there was no need for the use of non- parametric tests. Mean scores and mean differences were esti- mated with participant characteristics as the independent cate- gorical variables and the knowledge scale as a numeric dependent variable, using ANOVA and the t-test, wherever applicable. For analyses involving >2 categories based on an overall p-value for group differences were estimated by default using ANOVA, fol- lowed by post-hoc estimations using Tukey's HSD, which provided p-values for each group comparison (as compared to the ﬁrst/ reference group). Statistical signiﬁcance was assumed as p-value <
0.05 (5% Signiﬁcance Level). All analyses were conducted using the statistical software Stata/IC (v.15.1).33
Results and discussion
The results show that some areas of radiation protection are less well known compared to others, as there is quite a wide range of correct-to-incorrect ratios.
Radiation protection knowledge
Table 1 shows general knowledge questions asked and provide the percentages of correct, incorrect and do not know responses of the participants.
Table 1
Participant response: General Knowledge.
The average percentage of correctly answered questions in this section was 82.99%, indicating that the levels of general knowledge in radiation protection of radiographers in the Republic of Cyprus are of an excellent standard. The lowest correctly answered score was on the question regarding the percentage of the total exposure to the general population, which is received due to medical expo- sures. Only 9.60% of the participants answered correctly, with 61.60% of the participants answering incorrectly, and 28.80% not knowing. The answer with the highest correct answer was the one asking the participants to specify which age group is the most sensitive to ionising radiation. A total of 98.1% of the participants answered correctly.
Table 2 shows the questions asked regarding patient dose limits and patient communication and provide the percentages of correct, incorrect and do not know responses of the participants.
The results showed that there is a signiﬁcant lack of knowledge or understanding of dose limits. There was an evident confusion between patient-related dose limits and occupational exposure  dose limits as speciﬁed by national and international legislation. 80.8% and 90.4% of the participants did not know that there is no annual total body dose limit for patients or an annual equivalent dose limit to the skin of the patient, respectively.
Moreover, even though it is a legal requirement to discuss with patients the risks associated with CT or any other modality that uses ionising radiation for diagnostic purposes, only 61.5% indi- cated that it should be done and only 18.3% of the participants practise this. That means the majority of patients undergoing a medical diagnostic procedure involving ionising radiation in the Republic of Cyprus are not informed, nor are they aware of the risks associated with the examination they will undergo.
Table 3 shows the questions asking about occupational exposure dose limits and dosimetry and provides the percentages of correct, incorrect and does not know responses of the participants.
The average percentage of correctly answered questions in regards to the dose limits questions was 35.9%, indicating that radiographers in the Republic of Cyprus have a below-average knowledge concerning occupational exposure, with a score of 50% being considered as an average result for our study. The lowest correctly answered score was on the question regarding the newly changed annual equivalent dose limit to the lens of the eye.17 Only 10.60% of the participants correctly answered, with 66.30% of the participants answering incorrectly, and 23.10% not knowing. The answer with the highest correct answer was the one asking the participants what the annual effective dose limit is. A total of 61.5%
Table 2
Participant response: Patient dose limits and communication.
Table 3
Participant response: Occupational exposure dose limits and dosimetry.
of the participants answered correctly, with 31.8.% of the partici- pants answering incorrectly, and 6.7% not knowing.
Regarding the dosimetry related questions, the results indicated excellent knowledge by the participants since the average per- centage of correctly answered questions was 88.9%.
Determinants of knowledge
Answers were subsequently analysed for determining the as- sociation between demographics and other work-related factors concerning the overall radiation effects knowledge score. It appears that the only demographics which showed a statistically signiﬁcant mean score difference (p < 0.05) were (i) the workplace of the participant, (ii) the type of work licence the participant held at the time of the questionnaire, and (iii) years of clinical experience. The others, which include gender, age, highest level of education ob- tained, country of degree, and specialisation, showed no statisti- cally signiﬁcant differences between mean score. However, it is essential to note that two of these demographic groups should be tentatively included to show some form of a trend: age (p 0.15),  and the highest level of education (p 0.18). While they do show sufﬁciently differences, they still have lower p-values than the other categories as can be seen  from  the  data  presented  in  Tables 4e8. This  might  be  because  the  sample  size  was  small (N 104), and therefore it may not have provided sufﬁcient in- formation to determine whether or not these differences are, in  fact, signiﬁcant or not in determining the level of knowledge of radiation safety.
The number of male and female participants was relatively equal, with 45% of participants being male, and 55% being female.
Table 4
Participant gender: radiation effects knowledge score.
Table 5
Participant age-groups: radiation effects knowledge score.
Table 6
Participant educational level: radiation effects knowledge score.
The mean scores between the two genders show an insigniﬁcant difference (male m 16.2; female m 16).  The statistical insigniﬁ- cance is proven further by looking at the p-value (p 0.73). That conﬁrms that, in the study sample, there is no statistically signiﬁ- cant difference in mean scores between genders.
Age groups were determined based on the separations seen in other similar research papers conducted and distributed equally in terms of years in order to minimise any increase or decrease that may be in the number of participants in that group due to the broader potential age range. There is quite a vast difference in the overall number of participants in the different age groups, with most participants (N 59) falling within the  20-29-year-old  category.
Looking at the distribution of the mean scores between the groups (Table 5), there is an increase in radiation protection knowledge with increased age since the mean score increases, even though a dip in the mean score is evident in ages between 30 and
39. This result is not statistically signiﬁcant, though, as can be seen from the p-values indicated in Table 5.
Table 7
Participant country of degree: radiation effects knowledge score.
Table 8
Participant workplace: radiation effects knowledge score.
Table 9
Participant work licence: radiation effects knowledge score.
Table 10
Participant clinical experience: radiation effects knowledge score.
When looking at the difference of means between individuals with undergraduate (m 15.9) and postgraduate (m 16.9) training, some differences can be observed. However, the p-value (p   0.18)  is still not statistically signiﬁcant to an extent which can show that increased training and education do lead to an increase in the un- derstanding of and knowledge on radiation, radiation protection, and safety. Perhaps a larger sample could show a different trend.
In regards to where the participant received his/her education, there is no statistically signiﬁcant difference between the mean score of individuals who have trained in one country compared to another. Moving on, the working environment of the participants showed to inﬂuence their proﬁciency in radiation knowledge. The differences in score, in this case, were showed to be statistically signiﬁcant, with a p-value of 0.006. The groups which scored the highest mean were individuals who worked in private hospitals/ clinics (m ¼  16.8), followed by those who work in public hospital/
clinics (m	16.1). Individuals who work in private labs or diagnostic
centres (similar to outpatient clinics but do not belong to a hospital) scored the lowest (m 14.1). Congruently, the place in which in- dividuals practise makes a difference in their radiation protection knowledge and therefore may serve as a guide of understanding what methods help with ensuring consistent radiation training throughout all types of workplaces.
The area of specialisation shows some differences between  those who practise oncology and nuclear medicine (m ¼ 17.4), and radiographers and individuals not working (both m 15.9). Even
though there is an increase in the average score for those speci- alised in oncology and nuclear medicine, the differences are not shown to be statistically signiﬁcant (p 0.27). Therefore, knowl-  edge of radiation protection does not depend on the area of specialisation, based on the current sample size.
The type of work licences the participants have has shown a statistically signiﬁcant difference in means between the groups
In regards to the demographic characteristics, the ones that showed a statistically signiﬁcant mean score difference (p 0.05) were (i) the workplace of the participant, (ii) the type of work licence the participant held at the time of the questionnaire, and
(iii) the years of clinical experience of the participant, a result that differs from other similar studies.34,40
Although this study is consistent with previous researches,41e46 which showed that there is an increased percentage of radiogra- phers who are not aware of the accurate dose of radiation delivered to the patients, there are several limitations. Firstly, based on the source of information used, some questions regarding the effective dose and cancer risk may have variable answers. Moreover, because the survey was carried out online, there is the possibility that some of the participants searched for the correct answers. These may introduce bias regarding the actual knowledge status of the par- ticipants. Lastly, a signiﬁcant limitation is the sample size which may be due to the 3-months’ time limit. Similar studies with a larger sample size at regular intervals should be carried out.
Conﬂict of interest statement
None.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the Cyprus Society of Registered Radiologic Technologists & Radiation Therapy Technologists and Mr. Photis Kollas for disseminating the questionnaire to the society members and all the radiographers that completed the question- naire forms which made this study possible. This research did not receive any speciﬁc grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-proﬁt sectors.
