<title>Establishing safety goals on radiation protection for a space reactor through a case assessment of a loss-of-coolant accident in the International Space Station</title>
<author>Jiaxin Wang a,b,c, Liguo Zhang a,b,c,⇑, Jingyuan Qu a,b,c, Jiejuan Tong a,b,c</author>
<Affiliation>a Institute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
b Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Nuclear Energy Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
c Key Laboratory of Advanced Reactor Engineering and Safety of Ministry of Education, Beijing 100084, China
</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2019.06.016 </DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2019.06.016 </URL>
ABSTRACT
Power shortages caused by occlusion of solar cell arrays have been a major factor affecting the operation of the International Space Station (ISS). Although nuclear energy is a possible solution to ISS power short- ages, current methods for evaluating nuclear plant safety goals in a space environment do not adequately address safety concerns. Here, we discuss this issue with respect to the SP-100, which is a typical candi- date nuclear power source developed for space applications such as the ISS. An extreme core damage event due to loss of coolant is discussed to determine if the accident consequences are as serious as they would be under terrestrial conditions. An improved mathematical model based on the modified Rosin- Rammler equation, which describes distribution of released NaK coolant, is introduced. Then, the quan- tity and mass distribution of NaK droplets is simulated. The study chose I-131 for simulating short-term radioactive concentrations and Cs-137 for simulating long-term radioactive concentrations. Then, the study analyzed early and late exposure to the ISS crew. Thus, this study provides a new method for eval- uating radioactive leakage applicable to the ISS. The results showed that even a critical core damage acci- dent with loss of coolant would have little effect on the health of crew members aboard the ISS, providing support for the acceptability and justification of using nuclear energy in a space environment. Based on the case study, we discuss a rule for defining safety goals to protect ISS occupants from radiation due to accidents. The rule is that astronauts shall not bear significant additional risk due to a nuclear accident compared with the risks in the space environment where the reactor is operated. Hence, quantitative cri- teria for space reactor design can be deduced according to specific applications. By the results from this case study, we conclude that radioactive consequences due to accidents may not be a prohibitive limita- tion on the design, construction, and operation of space-based nuclear installations, which are different from terrestrial installations. This study may serve to alleviate concerns about reactor accidents in space.
Keywords:
Space nuclear reactor International Space Station NaK droplets
Rosin-Rammler equation Radiation safety goal
1.Introduction
The International Space Station (ISS) is an unprecedented assemblage of technology operating in low earth orbit, and  it  is  the result of years of co-operation between 15 countries (NASA, 2018a). The ISS serves as a microgravity and space environment research laboratory in which crew members conduct experiments, for example, biology, physics, astronomy, and meteorology. Power shortages have always been a major factor in the operation of the ISS (Catchpole, 2008). The reason is not insufficient area of solar cell arrays (i.e., raw power), but rather that the actual output  power is lower than its design value. For example, the American experimental cabin on the ISS encountered such issues  after  its four solar arrays were unfolded. The large surface area of the solar arrays inevitably blocked each other, causing output power to drop below the design value (Zhu, 2009). This problem will be com-  pounded as more electric power supply is required for complex experiments in the future. Thus, nuclear energy may become a compelling option for powering the ISS because it is not affected  by the space environment and it is long-lived, safe, and reliable (Zhang et al., 2013).
A third-generation pressurized water reactor, such as the EPR (European pressurized water reactor), and a fourth-generation nuclear energy system both reinforce the engineered safety
Table 1
Selected ISS operating parameters (Huang, 2002; NASA, 2012, 2018b,c).
Table 2
Selected technical parameters of representative space nuclear reactor technologies (Zhang et al., 2013; Aftergood, 1989; Demuth, 2003).
The SP-100 design is still evolving, so a few additional conse- quences are needed to consider for applying it to the ISS, especially regarding accident scenarios in low earth orbit. Severe core dam- age and a large loss of coolant accident (LOCA) are accident scenar- ios incorporated into its design. In space, these events may release significant amounts of radioactive material into the space environ- ment and the coolant NaK itself would become space debris, which is incompatible with International Cooperation in the Peaceful  Uses of Outer Space (United Nations, 2011; Peng, 2015). Thus, it     is necessary to establish an appropriate model for simulation of droplet distribution in the event of  NaK  coolant  releasing  from an SP-100 aboard the ISS. The model can also evaluate the radia- tion dose in low earth orbit in the event of a large LOCA. The radionuclides inside the droplets mainly cause health hazards to
crew members through c radiation, and c radiation has strong pen-
etrability. The study adopted a conservative estimate which ignored the shielding effect of the cabin walls of ISS, and it assumed that the radiation concentrations inside and outside the ISS are equal under the accident scenarios.
Among the simulation models that can describe the release of NaK coolant and its distribution, a size distribution based on the modified mass Rosin–Rammler (RR) equation fits well with pub- lished measurement data from radar observations of Russian Radar Ocean Reconnaissance Satellites (RORSATs). Sixteen nuclear- powered RORSATs were launched between 1980 and 1988. At mis- sion end, they ejected their reactor cores, mostly between altitudes of 900 and 950 km, which opened the NaK coolant loop (Wiedemann et al., 2009, 2011). The RR equation used in the so- called MASTER-2009 model treats the released NaK as spherical droplets with different diameters. Because NaK droplets from an SP-100 aboard an orbiting ISS have no empirical description, this study chose the RR equation model as a simulation tool.
2.NaK release model and parameters
The RR equation is the most commonly used equation to describe a droplet size distribution (Lefebvre, 1989) in early mod- els. Its form is as follows:
@1
where
Q is the volume ratio of droplets whose size is less than d,
R is the volume ratio of droplets whose size is bigger than d,
q is a distribution constant, is a measure for the span of the spreading of droplet sizes, and
d0.63
is the size parameter.
The European Space Agency’s latest NaK model introduced an
improved version of the RR equation proposed by Itoh et al. (Itoh and Wannibe, 1988; Itoh et al., 1988). Its form is as followed:
@2
wheredmin is the diameter of the smallest NaK droplets,
dmax is the diameter of the largest NaK droplets,
Rmin is the volume ratio of droplets bigger than dmin, and
Rmax is the volume ratio of droplets bigger than dmax.
The model simulated NaK as droplets with different size. We adopt the assumption in the paper  of  Wiedemann,  2011  (Lefebvre, 1989) to describe the distribution NaK droplets released in ISS LOCA accident. The assumption presupposes the volume of the largest droplet is equal to the total volume of the smallest dro- plets (Wiedemann et al., 2011, 2005) and then uses Rayleigh’s cap- illary jet decay as the essential droplet generation process. Because the design of SP100 is still in conceptual stage, it lacks the detailed data of pipe diameter of primary cooling loop and secondary cool- ing loop, so we adopt the same d0 and dmin in Wiedemann’s MASTER-2009 model (Wiedemann et al., 2011). Then, we figure  out a parameterization scheme of q and d0.63. It’s@3
@4
@5
The speed of NaK droplets relative to the parent spacecraft is very slow and would not exceed 30 m/s, with an average value of 15 m/s, so their distribution orbits are very close to the orbit of   the parent spacecraft (Wiedemann et al., 2009).
Decompression of coolant loop is the reason for coolant leaking. The NaK coolant temperature rises to a maximum of 1400 K in the U-tubes within the core during the LOCA (Demuth, 2003), as for the minimum temperature, the melting point of NaK is 260.5 K. So when NaK changes from melting point to this maximum tempera- ture, its density is reduced from 865.5 kg/m3 to 592.9 kg/m3 (Kirillov, 2006). This leads to a 46.01% volume increase. Referring the total NaK coolant mass of 190 kg in SP100, so after heating    up, there will be 59.9 kg NaK leaked droplets.
By using the model and parameters above, we derived the data shown in Table 3 for further simulation.
3.Results
3.1.Distribution of NaK droplets by diameter
Range of diameter is divided into 53 intervals from 0.5 cm to
5.76 cm. The number, mass of NaK droplets in each interval are gotten and then shown in Figs. 1–3.
Based on the model and above assumptions, Fig. 1 shows that the quantity of small droplets is greater than the quantity of large
Fig. 1. Size distribution of the NaK droplets.
Fig. 2. Mass distribution of the NaK droplets.
Table 3
Summary of NaK modeling parameters.
Fig. 3. Cumulative mass of the NaK droplets.
droplets. There are 1042 NaK droplets in the first interval [0.5 cm,
0.6 cm], and 3600 NaK droplets in range [0.5 cm, 1 cm), which occupies 28.14% of the total number. The number of droplets with diameter over 5 cm only occupies 0.18%. This means that small droplets contribute more to space debris in  the ISS  orbit during the early period of release due to the higher probability of collision, and they should be a source of great concern for other spacecraft working in nearby orbits.
Separating from the quantity distribution, Fig. 2 shows that the maximum mass point in the distribution occurs at the diameter range  [3 cm,  3.1 cm),  where  the  corresponding  droplet  mass  is
2.467 kg. Though the quantity of small droplets is higher, they do not contribute greatly to the overall distribution of mass. The mass of NaK droplets in range [0.5 cm, 1 cm) is 0.69 kg, it occupies only 1.15% of the total mass. Detailed proportion in each diameter inter- val is shown in Table 4. Fig. 3 shows the cumulative mass from the
Table 4
Proportion of NaK droplets in diameter intervals.
smallest diameter to certain diameter. It shows that the cumula- tive mass grows slower after diameter 4.5 cm.
3.2.Simulation of radioactive nuclide release into space environment
In this study, data from the Radiological Assessment Systems for Consequence Analysis program for a general nuclear core inventory during operation are used to calculate radionuclide release, and we chose the release fraction as 1 [dataset] (U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 2007). For nuclear power reactor source terms based on core damage, the radionuclide inventories per megawatt assumed to be in the reactor core are shown in Table 5; because noble gases may dissipate quickly in the space environment, they are omitted from the table. These values were multiplied by 2.4 MW (SP-100 thermal power) to obtain radionu- clide inventories for SP-100. Each kind of nuclide would decay with different half-times. Here, we chose I-131 to simulate the short half-time radioactive concentration and Cs-137 to simulate the long half-time radioactive concentration.
The volume of the ISS (in cubic meters) is insignificant in com- parison with the volume of space it is travelling through (or com- pared with the kilometer-scale droplet distribution discussed above). When NaK droplets leak, the ISS is traveling at an altitude of 400 ± 10 km at a speed of 1.8 × 104 km/h. This means that a the NaK coolant and NaK droplets leak uniformly, consequently
forming a uniform spatial distribution of radioactivity.
The initial concentration for I-131 is 1.91E+05 Bq/m3, while for Cs-137 is 2.06E+04 Bq/m3. As shown in Fig. 4, Concentration of I- 131 tends to be zero after 100 days at the orbital altitude range  of 400 ± 10 km due to its short half-life. In contrast, Cs-137 takes a long time to decay. The initial core inventory of I-131 is about 10 times higher than that of Cs-137, but the two curves intersect at 11 days. Fig. 5 shows that the concentration of all nuclides decreases from 5.78E+06 Bq/m3 to 2.14E+05 Bq/m3 in the first year after NaK droplets releasing.
Table 5
Nuclear Power Plant Core Inventory During Operation [dataset] (U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 2007).
Fig. 4. Decay time and decay speed of I-131 (short  half-life  radionuclide)  and  Cs-137 (long half-life radionuclide).
Fig. 5. Total concentration of radionuclide in the first year after NaK droplets releasing.
3.3.Dose evaluation
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) (IAEA, 2001) adopted the semi-infinite cloud model for annual effective dose calculation (under terrestrial conditions). This model assumes that
Table 6
Effective dose coefficients DFi of radionuclides used in dose calculations.
radiation from the cloud is in equilibrium, so that the energy absorbed by a given volume of the cloud is equal to that emitted  by the same element. And due to the assumption ‘uniform spatial distribution of radioactivity’ set above, the semi-infinite cloud model can be used here.
The effective dose from immersion in the discharge plume (semi-infinite cloud model) E (in sievert) is given by@6
@7
Where
i is the radionuclide shown in Table 5,
n is the number of radionuclide species in Table 5,Ci is the average concentration of nuclide i (in becquerel per cubic meter), decreasing with time,
DFi is the effective dose coefficient from immersion (in sievert per second per becquerel per cubic meter), as shown in Table 6, t is the time since release (in seconds), and
Of is the fraction of the year for which a hypothetical critical group member is exposed to this particular pathway, set as 1 here according to IAEA guidelines (IAEA, 2001).
The data in Table 6 were used for simulation of the long-term (annual) dose. However, accidental exposure in  the  short  term can often determine whether the radiation will cause  serious effects because initially there is insufficient time to acquire or pro- vide adequate protection. Thus, short-term accidental exposure should be considered in any hypothesized nuclear accident. Table 7 lists the effective dose increment in 24-h interval at an orbital alti- tude of 400 ± 10 km, for up to 30 days after the  accident. Fig. 6 plots the long-term exposure over time at the same altitude range. Comparison of the doses in Table 7 with the limits in Table 8 shows that the dose absorbed in the first days is many orders of magnitude lower than the annual dose limit suggested by the U.
S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). Further- more, the dose  decreases  rapidly over  time; for  example, the dose during the third day is half of that during the first day. For the long term, Fig. 6 shows that the effective dose per day after 1 yr drops to around 10% of that in the first day, and after 10 yr, it drops to 0.1% of that in the first day. This reveals that exposure decreases quickly due to the decay of short-lived radionuclides, but radionuclides with long half-lives will contribute to an effective dose for decades. Fig. 7 reveals the growth trend of the cumulative effective dose during the first year after NaK coolant leakage, with a cumulative
Table 7
Effective daily dose during the first 30 days after radionuclide release.
Fig. 6. Effective daily dose over the long term (altitude of 400 ± 10 km).
Table 8
NASA career effective dose limits (age and gender specific) for a 1 year mission (Lawlor, 2014).
Fig. 7. Growth trend of cumulative effective dose during the first year after leakage.
effective dose in the first week of 6.73E 08 mSv. The curve further shows a small slope after 50 days. The accumulated effective dose in the first year is 6.37E 07 mSv, and it’s the highest annual value compared with any future year. Hereafter, this maximum value is referred to as Emax.
4.Discussion
4.1.Dose consequence analysis
The simulation disclosed the number-diameter and mass- diameter distribution of NaK droplets and showed the distribution development over time. The resulting Emax is far lower than any intervention levels for urgent protective  action  (for  example, 10 mSv for sheltering and 50 mSv for evacuation) and even far lower than the annual limit of public dose caused by radiation  (1 mSv) in normal operation (IAEA, 2011). The analysis here con- firms that the dose from leaked NaK droplets will not affect the health of crew members in the ISS.
4.2.Safety goal for a space reactor
Conclusion above establishes a framework for systematically evaluating the risk of a space reactor from the perspective of radi- ation protection against a severe reactor accident in space. Here, safety goal process for nuclear plants under terrestrial conditions (It was established by the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC)) (U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 2007) is used to pro- pose similar safety objectives based on our simulation of a radioac- tive accident in a space reactor.
4.2.1.Safety goals for a terrestrial nuclear power plant
The NRC uses risk evaluation to ensure that a terrestrial nuclear installation is acceptable for public use, and it has established quantitative safety objectives, commonly called the ‘‘two 0.1%” (U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 1986):
─The risk of prompt fatality to an average individual in the vicinity of a nuclear power plant that might result from reac- tor accidents should not exceed 0.1% of the sum of prompt fatality risks from other accidents to which the U.S. popula- tion is generally exposed.
─The risk of fatal cancer to the population near a nuclear power plant should not exceed 0.1% of the sum of cancer fatality risks resulting from all other causes.
These objectives support two corresponding qualitative safety goals:
─Individual members of the public should be provided with a level of protection from the consequences of nuclear power plant operation such that individuals bear no significant addi- tional risk to life and health.
─Societal risks to life and health from nuclear power plant operation should be comparable to or less than the risks of generating electricity by viable competing technologies and should not significantly add to other societal risks.
Clearly, the rules are intended to ensure that risks from new practices associated with nuclear reactors will not significantly increase the risk to stakeholders.
To meet this requirement, the NRC has recommended auxiliary indicators for each nuclear core, such that core damage frequency (CDF) cannot surpass 1.0E 04/yr and the large early release fre- quency cannot exceed 1.0E 05/yr. The new generation of pressur- ized water reactors reinforce the system to a minimum CDF, for instance, EPR’s CDF is set as 1.0E 06/yr, while the AP1000 has an even lower CDF of 4.0E 07/yr. The acceptable level of conse- quences has a relationship with the acceptable occurrence fre- quency. In other words, if the consequences  of  an  accident  are less harmful to humans, then a higher occurrence frequency is allowed for that accident scenario.
4.2.2.Proposed safety goal for a space reactor
By referring to the requirements for terrestrial facilities, for which the risk from nuclear operations are not permitted to con- tribute significantly to societal risk, we can propose a similar rule for space reactors. Specifically, space reactor accidents should not contribute to a significant proportion of the total risk to astronauts during their mission career. In other words, our proposed radiation exposure safety goal for a space reactor is that astronauts shall not bear significant additional risk due to accidents compared with those in the space environment where the reactor is operated.
Regarding current radiation exposure aboard the ISS, El-Jaby (Jaby et al., 2014) concluded that the daily dose for crews on the  ISS is 0.6 mSv/d. Recently, NASA has assigned career effective dose limits to its male and female astronauts for a 1-yr mission (or less) (see Table 8) (Lawlor, 2014).
This study selected the career effective dose limits for a 30- year-old female (0.6 Sv/yr) and also retained the limiting ratio of 0.1% from the policy statement of the NRC. By assuming that the risk has a linear relationship with the dose received by crew mem- bers, we assumed that the dose caused by a nuclear power plant accident aboard the ISS should not exceed 6E 04 Sv/yr (0.6 mSv/ yr) as an acceptable goal used in space.
The Emax derived above is 106 times smaller than our proposed safety goal of 0.6 mSv/yr, which means that it satisfies our pro- posed objectives. The study assumed a release fraction of 1, imply- ing that all radionuclides in the reactor core coolant are released in an extreme accident; however, real conditions will not be as seri- ous as that represented by the obtained value of Emax. Our NaK release model predicted that even critical core damage with LOCA has little health impact on the people working aboard the ISS. In other words, increased consequences and frequencies of accidents might be acceptable.
4.3.Effect of proposed safety goal on reactor design for the ISS
Safety has always been a priority for mission designers and engineers, it’s also a subject of public discussion and concern (Summerer et al., 2015), so we set stringent criteria for EPR,  AP1000 and other reactor types. These relatively high goals are supported by an abundance of safety features built inside these nuclear power stations. These features are balanced against the optimization of performance and economic considerations.  In  other words, performance and cost objectives sometimes have  to be compromised to meet safety goals. Setting strict safety goals       is necessary because an accident at a terrestrial nuclear station often does great harm to human health and the environment. Thus, designers must ensure sufficient safety features to decrease the probability of any accident as much as possible. However, accord- ing to the results from the NaK dispersion model, even a core dam- age accident with LOCA has little effect on people aboard the ISS, which means that the consequences of any accident is not as seri- ous as under terrestrial conditions. Thus, designers of space reac- tors can focus more on performance optimization and economic factors instead of the dose from accidents, which is a huge differ- ence compared with the safety evaluations required for terrestrial nuclear applications.
5.
Conclusions
This study used the SP-100 reactor design as the basis for pro- viding nuclear power on the ISS. Then, we applied the RR equation to simulate the distribution of a NaK coolant release from the reac- tor during a severe core-damage accident. In terms of the droplet distribution, results showed that the cumulative number of small droplets is greater than the cumulative number of large droplets. However, small droplets do not contribute much to the cumulative mass.
With regard to radionuclides, the initial concentration for I-131 is 1.91E+05 Bq/m3 at an orbital altitude range of 400 ± 10 km, and concentration of I-131 tends to be zero after 100 days. In contrast, the initial concentration for Cs-137 is 2.06E+04 Bq/m3, it takes a long time to decay.
This study evaluated the consequence of NaK leakage from the ISS. The dose from NaK leakage in the short term (the first week) is 6.73E   08 mSv and 6.37E   07 mSv in the long term (the first year).  It means the risk from nuclear accidents of space reactor SP-100  is such a low level that it can be negligible even comparing to the radi- ation caused by cosmos rays only. We further discuss possible safety goals for radiation protection in accidents of a space reactor design by comparing the difference between space reactors and terrestrial nuclear power plants, by referring to NRC safety goals for station- ary nuclear power plants. The proposed qualitative safety goal may be expressed as astronauts shall not bear significant additional risk due to accident compared with those in the space environment where the reactor is operated. In this study, we choose a fraction of 0.1% as a threshold of significant or not significant. Then, we deduced a dose criterion for radioactive accident aboard the ISS to assess acceptability.
Although the qualitative radiation safety goal proposed here is based on a single scenario, we think it  has  potential applicability to other situations. In other words, the  quantitative  safety  goal can be applied to other specific circumstances. This qualitative safety goal illustrates the substantial difference between space ver- sus terrestrial reactors and may help designers focus more on per- formance and economics rather than unnecessary safety requirements.
Of course, derivative quantitative safety goals may rely more on design features and user requirements. Further research on the methodology for consequence assessment and environmental fea- tures for reactor operations in space is needed. Until then, these issues will remain open.
Acknowledgment
This work was supported by the National Science and Technol- ogy Major Project (Grant No. ZX06901).
