<title>Thermal tests of a CP5.2 packaging system: Prototype and experimental test description</title>
<author>Rosa Lo Frano∗, Daniele Del Serra, Donato Aquaro</author>
<Affiliation>Department  of  Industrial  and  Civil  Engineering  (DICI),  University  of  Pisa,  Pisa,  Italy
</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2018.02.004</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2018.02.004</URL>
ABSTRACT
Managing radioactive waste must be carried out within a strict framework and with a constant requirement to protect human beings and the environment. A safety management of the radioactive material or waste (RAM or RW) unavoidably involves transportation activities by using robust safe and reliable packaging system. The integrity is a crucial aspect in the design of these systems; to certify it packages should demonstrate to withstand loads, that could occur under normal and accident conditions, and to meet the safety requirements in terms of performances of containment and radiation protection, like the IAEA ones.
This study deals with the thermal performances of an Italian CP5.2 packaging system aimed at the trans- portation of bituminised wastes, which have been evaluated by executing experimental tests in the ﬁre scenario   as speciﬁed in the IAEA regulations (i.e. engulﬁng ﬁre of 800 °C for 30 min).
To the purpose a dedicated small scale mock-up has been designed and built at the Dept. DICI of the University of Pisa. The experimental test allowed to set up the test procedure to be adopted for the ﬁre tests of a large scale system in consideration of risk related to the stowed bituminised wastes.
The results of the thermal test are presented and discussed. They showed that after half an hour of exposure at 800 °C the temperature in the bituminised waste package is about 100 °C (below that of auto-ignition), and the maximum temperature at the cement mortar is below 400 °C.
Analysing the measured temperatures and caused eﬀects it is possible to conclude that the overall integrity of the packaging system is assured.
Keywords:
Fire test
CP5.2 packaging system Experiments
Accident transport condition
1.Introduction
About 20 million consignments of radioactive material take place around the world each year (IAEA, 2012); in doing that an essential component is a robust safe and reliable packaging system that is con- stituted, in general, by a relatively massive sealed steel structure.
The waste package, made from metals, concrete, polymers or composite materials, in which the waste form is placed for transport and/or storage, has key roles to play in the several stages of the waste management process. To safely transport radioactive materials it is required that the packaging system must be able to guarantee the containment and the conﬁnement (integrity assurance) of the radio- active material or waste (RAM or RW) avoiding any additional dose exposure (respect of ALARA principle).
The packaging (Fig. 1) must be designed according to the activity, and the physical and chemical form of the waste material (e.g., raw solid wastes, wastes immobilized in cement or bitumen and compacted pellets immobilized by grouting).
Waste containers may be designed for relatively short or long lives, depending on the role they will have in disposal: in the ﬁrst case, packaging can be classiﬁed as non-durable (life of a few tens of years) and would play no role as a barrier to radionuclide release. In the second case, the container has to guarantee the conﬁnement of radio- nuclides.
This study has the main objectives of verifying the main require- ments for the design of waste containers, in which wastes are im- mobilized in bitumen, and to provide advice/recommendations con- cerning the design and testing (qualiﬁcation process).
Due to the peculiarity of the waste form used to immobilise RW, whose variation can signiﬁcantly aﬀect the properties of the overall Italian CP5.2 package, in this study the emphasis is on the evaluation of its thermal performance in order to ensure that the containment is as eﬀective as possible. In this framework, the design requirements set forth by the National Safety Authority and, in general, by International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in (IAEA, 2012) (in Italy (UNI, 2011) and (ENEA, 1987)) are considered.
Fig. 1. Overview of package types.
The proposed study is structured in four main sections. Section 2 provides a short description of the requirements to be fulﬁlled to meet the CP 5.2 packaging design criteria. Section 3 provides a description of the characteristics of the dedicated mock-up designed and built at the DICI of the University of Pisa Italian CP5.2 packaging system. Section 4 describes the procedures of the performed experimental ﬁre test, as speciﬁed in the 2012, IAEA SSR-6 regulations (i.e. engulﬁng ﬁre of    800 °C for 30 min), and a discussion of the results obtained.
It is ﬁnally worthy to note that the economic feasibility of the CP5.2 packaging system is not provided in the following since that it is out of the scope of the study.
1.1.Literature summary
The integrity of packaging is crucial for a safe disposal, storage and transport of RAM/RW: to certify it the manufactures or “applicant for approval” are required to demonstrate that these packaging systems can withstand loads, that could occur under normal operation and accident
Table 1
Prismatic Package dimensions.
conditions (Lo Frano et al., 2011; Rains D.J., 1999; Lo Frano and Sanﬁorenzo, 2016), and meet the safety requirements in terms of con- ﬁnement, containment, and radiation protection.
Lo Frano et al., 2011 and Pugliese et al., 2010 investigated the thermo-mechanical behaviour of a cask undergoing respectively in normal condition of transport (for dry and wet storage condition) and in accidental one. He focused on ﬁre test and post-accident cooling phase and described the induced eﬀects of such a type of accident scenario. Kim et al., 2010 studied the performance of an IP-2 prismatic package designed to contain up to eight 200-L steel drums so to provide a mid- step in demonstrating the package performance and predict the package behaviour during the drop tests. Rains, 1999 provided a technical evaluation of a spent nuclear fuel multi-canister overpack; however, this work focused only on the overpack performance undergoing free drop test. Lo Frano et al. (2014) presented and brieﬂy described the IAEA (2012) test procedure for demonstration numerically of the structural performance of an Italian IP2 package (qualiﬁcation and reliability) packaging for ILLW.
Despite to immobilise RWs in bitumen was a treatment technique used in the past, it is worthy to remark that this investigation is quite new in the nuclear ﬁeld because of the lack of the studies concerning the issues evolving during the normal and accident transport/storage conditions.
2.Requirements for packagings and packages
Before packages were ﬁrstly used, qualiﬁcation tests or corre- sponding validated numerical simulations, covering normal and acci- dent situations, which can be realistically envisaged in order to guar- antee safety throughout the package lifetime, must be done to demonstrate their ability to withstand such conditions of transport. In particular, the accident conditions (Fig. 2) to be taken into account are:
1)Mechanical test, that consists of the three diﬀerent drop tests:
1.1)horizontal, slap down, vertical, and oblique 9 m drop tests onto
Fig. 2. Sequence of possible accident conditions according to IAEA requirements.
Fig. 3. a, b. Isometric views of the 3D model of: a) one-sixth of the CP-5.2 packaging system; in the conﬁguration with the drums; b) 1/6 of the overall packaging system used for ﬁre test.
a ﬂat and unyielding surface;
1.2)puncture test onto a bar (of solid mild steel of 15.0 ± 0.5 cm diameter and 20 cm long) from 1 m height;
1.3)dynamic crush test by 9 m drop of 500 kg mass (solid mild steel plate 1 × 1 m).
2)Thermal test that consists of 2.1 followed by 2.2:
2.1)exposure of a specimen for a period of 30 min to a thermal environment that provides a heat ﬂux at least equivalent to that of a hydrocarbon fuel-air ﬁre in suﬃciently quiescent ambient conditions to give a minimum average ﬂame emissivity coef- ﬁcient of 0.9 and an average temperature of at least 800 °C, fully engulﬁng the specimen, with a surface absorptivity coef- ﬁcient of 0.8 or that value the package demonstrated to possess if exposed to the ﬁre speciﬁed.
2.2)exposure of the specimen to an ambient temperature of 38 °C, subject to the solar insulation conditions, as  speciﬁed  in Table 12 of (IAEA, 2012), and to the design maximum rate of internal heat generation within the package by the radioactive contents for a suﬃcient period to ensure that temperatures in
the specimen are everywhere decreasing and/or are ap- proaching initial steady state conditions.
3)Water immersion test, under a head of water of at least 15 m for a period of not less than 8 h in the attitude that will lead to maximum damage, following the mechanical and thermal ones.
The thermal test on the mock-up of the container CP.5.2 aimed to demonstrate that no combustion phenomena of the bitumen would occur during the furnace test at high temperature. It is worthy to note that the auto-ignition of the bitumen may occur for temperatures higher than 250 °C.
3.Description of the mock-up of the CP- 5.2 packaging
The main design characteristics and the geometrical and material properties of such a type of packaging are deﬁned accordingly to the UNI 11196 (UNI, 2011), which represents the Italian reference standard (National requirements). In addition, this standard classiﬁes the packaging types on the basis of the geometry and main dimensions as:
Fig. 4. Drawings of the packaging mock-up.
Fig. 5. Thermocouples position  schemes.
-cylindrical packaging system [CC];
-prismatic packaging system [CP] (main geometrical dimensions are given in Table 1);
-modular packaging system [CM];
-special packaging system [CS].
In consideration of the high potential risk related to the stowed bituminised wastes (almost six packages of them are inserted in a CP
5.2 packaging) undergoing engulﬁng ﬁre conditions, 800 °C for 30 min, it was decided to ﬁrstly execute the ﬁre test on a mock-up (Fig. 3) of this system. The mockup consists of a steel packaging, inside which is po- sitioned one bituminised wastes package, of cement matrix and a clo- sure lid with suitable gasket.
The choice of the prototype size and shape (representative of 1/6 portion of the overall packaging) was dictated by the fact that inside the
CP 5.2 packaging are stored six bituminised packages. This not-sym- metric system, that was entirely designed and built at the Dept. DICI of the University of Pisa, guaranteed the respect of the thicknesses of ce- ment mortar surrounding the bituminised wastes (similar to those of the entire CP5.2 storage conﬁguration). As evidenced in the design draw- ings in Fig. 4, the mock-up is about 1 m wide, 1 m length, and 1 m  height.
To correctly represent the CP5.2 packaging behaviour, two of the four outside surfaces have been  thermally  insulated  by  means  of 150 mm mineral wool, so to represent the adiabatic condition (null heat ﬂux). In addition, a ﬂange is present onto the cover lid; it allowed not only to grout cement inside the system but also behave as a ﬁltering system during the test execution.
It was equipped with four to facilitate the handling and lifting during the execution of furnace test. Moreover the simulacrum has been
Fig. 6. Mock-up construction  phase.
Fig. 7. Electric furnace for ﬁre test at Lab B. Guerrini.
instrumented with several thermocouples (TC), type K duly calibrated, immersed in the concrete, connected to the walls of the package of bitumen and to the packaging walls so as to measure the temperature distribution during the heating phase, control the temperatures reached by the furnace and, mainly by the bitumen, and the subsequent cooling in air.
In Fig. 5 is shown the positioning of the thermocouples:
-T1 = TC16, TC17, TC18 and TC20 on the packaging surface;
-T2 = TC1, TC2, TC3, TC4, TC5, TC6, TC8, TC9, TC10 and TC19 at
half thickness of the cement mortar;
-T4 and T5 = TC7, TC11 on the bottom of the bituminised package;
-
T3 = TC12, TC13, TC14, TC15 on the lateral surface of the bitu- minised package.
The positioning of T2 has been realized with a sump, inside which the thermocouple was placed.
4.Experimental ﬁre test: procedure and results
Firstly the mock-up system was realized by inserting the cylindrical package with bituminised waste into the steel outer packaging and by grouting the cement as shown in Fig. 6 (all the components were of course instrumented how abovementioned).
Fig. 8. a, b. Positioning of the mock-up on the slide of the oven (a) and its extraction at the end of test (b).
Fig. 9. Temperature behaviour in the cement matrix.
Fig. 10. Temperature behaviour on the lateral surface of the bituminised package.
After waiting 28 days for the maturation of the cement, the thermal test was performed at the laboratory B. Guerrini (IAEA certiﬁed test facility (IAEA, 1987)) according to the following procedure:
a)heating of the electric furnace (Fig. 7) until about 900 °C: this highest value in respect to 800 °C foreseen by the IAEA requirements is because of the decrease in temperature expected to occur during
Fig. 11. Temperature behaviour on the mock-up outer surfaces.
the time interval between the opening and closure of the oven hatch for the positioning of the simulacrum (about 100 °C);
b)opening of the oven tailgate and extraction of the slide (movable carriage of 1.5 × 1.5 m2 section and 3 m length);
c)placement of the mock-up (Fig. 8 a);
d)lowering of the tailgate and closing of the oven;
e)execution of the thermal test at 800 °C for 30 min: the temperatures of the oven and of the package were measured by TC (guaranteeing that the thermal test is correctly ﬁring thoroughly the section) and monitored by means of an adequate data acquisition system (DAS). The interface with PC is obtained via Labview©;
f)lifting the tailgate and opening of the oven to extract the simula- crum;
h) handling of the simulacrum for the post-test cooling phase (Fig. 8 b and Fig. 12).
The temperature of the electric oven, increased during the start-up and kept constant during the test execution, is adequately controlled through a PID system (GEFRAN© GF Promer): the use of electric oven avoid in addition any problem due to the unstable heat transfer of the ﬂame, which could be encountered with real ﬁre. GEFRAN system is a Microprocessor Controller that supports thermocouple conﬁguration via the complete operator faceplate. It is equipped with a Lexan© membrane faceplate to provide a frontal IP65 rating (Lo Frano et al., 2017).
Fig. 12. a, b. Overview of the mock-up during cooling in air after the ﬁre test. In a) the  two side walls to the left in the picture are those containing layer 150 mm of mineral  wool. The representative edge of CP-5.2 container is that right in the picture. The circular ﬂange is aligned with the stem bituminised. b) The ﬁgure shows the oxidation progression and the plastic deformation, caused by the instability process (diﬀerential thermal ex- pansions).
During and after the ﬁre test, the specimen shall not be artiﬁcially cooled and any combustion of materials of the system is permitted to proceed naturally in order to fulﬁl IAEA requirements.
4.1.Results of thermal test
Analysing the measured temperature values, it is possible to note that, after half an hour of ﬁre exposure at 800 °C, the temperature distribution in the bituminised waste was about seven times lower than that on the outer mock-up surface; the same trend has been observed for the cement matrix, which resulted four time lower.
The temperature behaviours for all the heating period are shown from Figs. 9–11: these values resulted not suﬃcient to determine severe structural damages.
The maximum temperature at the cement mortar resulted also below the 400 °C, limit value beyond which shortly degradation of material appears. The maximum temperature value in the bitumen re- sulted instead about 100 °C (Fig. 10) well below the limit temperature
of 250 °C that represents the temperature in correspondence of which auto-ignition of the bitumen occurs. This demonstrated that no com- bustion phenomena or vapour formation occurred also for a furnace test of a full CP 5.2 prismatic packaging.
As for the outer surfaces of the mock-up, it was observed that the maximum temperature was about 650 °C: no loss of structural integrity was observed even if in presence of outward bulging deformation and oxidation of the surface (Fig. 12).
5.Conclusion
This study presented and discussed the thermal performances of a one-sixth system representative of an Italian CP5.2 packaging system aimed at the transportation of bituminised wastes. The mock-up was designed and built at the Dept. DICI of the University of Pisa.
Taking into account the risk connected with the bitumen matrix, used to immobilise wastes, the experimental test simulating the ﬁre scenario as speciﬁed in the IAEA regulations allowed to set up the test procedure to be adopted for the ﬁre tests of real CP5.2 packaging system.
A brief description of the 1/6 system (also the material and geo- metrical properties) has been presented as well as the procedure to execute the test (800 °C for 30 min).
The results after half an hour of ﬁre exposure at 800 °C, highlighted that the temperature in the bituminised  waste  package  was  about 100 °C: this value is below 250 °C that represents the temperature be- yond which auto-ignition of the bitumen occurs.
These temperature values resulted, anyway, not suﬃcient to attain a reduction of bearing capability or to determine severe structural da- mages although some outward bulging deformation and oxidation ap- peared on the outer mock-up surface.
Finally, it was shown that the design of mock-up of the CP 5.2 packaging is able to withstand the accident conditions of transport; and demonstrated that no cliﬀ eﬀects or failure occurred.
Nomenclature
CC	cylindrical packaging system CM	modular packaging system CP	prismatic packaging system CS	special packaging system DAS	Data Acquisition System
IAEA	International Atomic Energy Agency RAM	Radioactive material
RW	Radioactive waste
TC	Thermocouple
