<title>A review on thermohydraulic and mechanical-physical properties of SiC, FeCrAl and Ti3SiC2 for ATF cladding</title>
<author>Adebena Oluwasegun, Jae-Cheon Jung*</author>
<Affiliation>KEPCO International Nuclear Graduate School (KINGS), 658-91 Haemaji-ro, Seosaeng-myeon, Ulju-gun, Ulsan, 45014, Republic of Korea</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>NUCLEAR ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2020.03.028</URL></DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2020.03.028</URL>
ABSTRACT
Digital twin technology can provide signiﬁcant value for the prognostics and health management (PHM) of critical plant components by improving insight into system design and operating conditions. Digital twinning of systems can be utilized for anomaly detection, diagnosis and the estimation of the system's remaining useful life in order to optimize operations and maintenance processes in a nuclear plant. In this regard, a conceptual framework for the application of digital twin technology for the prognosis of Control Element Drive Mechanism (CEDM), and a data-driven approach to anomaly detection using coil current proﬁle are presented in this study. Health management of plant components can capitalize on the data and signals that are already recorded as part of the monitored parameters of the plant's instrumentation and control systems. This work is focused on the development of machine learning algorithm and workﬂow for the analysis of the CEDM using the recorded coil current data. The workﬂow involves features extraction from the coil-current proﬁle and consequently performing both clustering and classiﬁcation algorithms. This approach provides an opportunity for health monitoring in support of condition-based predictive maintenance optimization and in the development of the CEDM digital twin model for improved plant safety and availability.Keywords: Digital twin PHM
Machine learning Nuclear power plant
1.Introduction
One of the most important components of the pressurized water reactor is the Control Element Drive Mechanism (CEDM). Control rods and drive mechanisms are essential for the safe and reliable operation of a nuclear power plant. A control rod contains neutron absorbing material to control reactivity in the reactor core. The Advanced Power Reactor (APR 1400) relies on the operation of the CEDM for reactivity control during startup and shutdown modes, as well as for power balance and maneuverability during normal operation. The APR1400 CEDM is of the magnetic jack type and provides controlled linear motion to the Control Element Assembly (CEA) for reactivity insertion. A magnetic jack type mechanism is basically a system consisting of mechanical and electrical compo- nents that are arranged in such a way that magnetic ﬂux ﬁelds are applied to cause the motion or stationary position of the control element assembly.
Based on its importance to reactor safety, the control rod drive system is subjected to the Maintenance Rule and must undergo periodic surveillance and testing [1]. Thus, plant engineers and maintainers perform detailed measurements of the CEDM param- eters during plant scheduled outage periods. Even with this in place, the control rod drive system is susceptible to failures that are not easily foreseen by the planned maintenance work. The United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission (USNRC) event notiﬁcation reports for 2007e2014 recorded several cases of related failure events. These events include CEA drop, CEA position deviation (group & bank), CEA slippage, CEA insertion delay, and CEA full insertion failure during scram. One reason for the inability to foresee a failure event during the planned maintenance period is that failure phenomenon during plant operational state is quite different from observed behavior when maintenance work is being performed; usually during cold shutdown mode of the plant. This is because of the difference in the strength of stressors experienced by the system in the different plant modes. Therefore, this triggers the need for a means of online health monitoring of the system during the operational state of the plant.
Furthermore, in the event of a failure such as a CEA drop acci- dent, the activities to investigate the root cause and re-establish normal operation can signiﬁcantly impact  plant  resources.  Various operating experiences of light water reactors indicate that
control rod system failures have led to signiﬁcant effects including unplanned shutdowns, power reductions, loss of revenue, and have unnecessarily challenged plant protection systems as well as have created psychological burdens for maintenance crew who have to plan repair work in a high radiation zone. In addition, detailed studies conducted at the Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL) on three kinds of control rod drive systems for light water reactors, concluded that they are vulnerable to age-related degradation due to the operating and environmental stressors to which they are exposed over their design life [2,3]. Also, the operating experience of the Korean Standard Nuclear Plant (KSNP) indicates that control rod drive and associated systems failures contributed an average reactor shutdown time of approximately 25 h per failure as of 2002 [4]. This contributed to lost revenue due to unplanned outages. This further necessitates the need for an online CEDM health monitoring system that can improve insight into anomalies and failure trends, increase prognostic capabilities, reduce unplanned outages, and improve the overall plant safety, availability and reliability.
A data-driven approach to fault detection and diagnostics pro- vides a solution for implementing prognostics and health moni- toring (PHM) of control rod drive systems. It is possible to analyze the CEDM coil current proﬁle for the purpose of extracting useful features that may indicate the electrical and mechanical behavior and condition of the drive system. With the extraction of useful
features, a machine learning (ML) algorithm can be trained based on clustering, classiﬁcation or regression methods for early degradation or anomaly detection. Generally, the effectiveness of a well-trained machine learning algorithm for health monitoring tasks is an informed and efﬁcient decision on the requisite pre- dictive maintenance actions. In order to take advantage of the full scope of opportunities offered by data-driven methodology for PHM, a digital twin model can be developed. A digital twin model of the CEDM is an up-to-date representation of the CEDM in opera- tion. The digital twin can aggregate all information relating to the CEDM for an accurate representation of the CEDM's operation. Typically, to realize this, additional measurements such as vibration and coil temperature may be required for the full spectrum of representation.
2.Framework for digital twin technology
This work primarily focuses on the development of ML algo- rithm for health monitoring of CEDM using coil current proﬁle. The development of detailed CEDM digital twin model is not the im- mediate focus of this research as it involves the collection of various kinds of data. However, a conceptual framework for CEDM digital twin development is presented in this section.
Fig. 1 depicts the top-level conceptual application of digital twin
Fig. 2.  Framework for model development.
technology to the CEDM. It comprises the integration of physical layer with digital layer via data communication platform. At the physical layer, sensor data such as coil current data, CEDM position data, CEDM step counter data, vibration, temperature, etc. can be collected via sensor platform that includes the use of smart sensor technology. The information collected by the sensors is transmitted via communication platform such as wireless and IoT infrastructure and can be integrated into the digital layer. At the digital layer, sensor data can be aggregated with design information, technical speciﬁcations and plant condition data to develop a twin model. During operation, the data from the CEDM sensors will constantly update the model to reﬂect the state of the CEDM operation. In this way, an anomaly can be detected and the historic data can be used to estimate its future state. Also, the technical speciﬁcations for the
control rod drive system and the information regarding the Limiting Conditions for Operation (LCO) can be incorporated into the digital twin design in form of an expert system. This provides support for scenario-based analysis such as what-if-scenario when dealing with plant conditions concurrent with LCO violation. The digital twin analytics output based on the system's prognosis can provide a logical path for a remedial action to support operator's decision in restoring LCO within stated completion time. The model can also be provided with a transfer learning platform through which it can learn from data of other similar systems in advance before the physical twin approaches the same condition. Thus, the resulting analytics of the digital twin model can support the deci- sion processes in relation to plant safety, plant sustainability, and management of accident conditions.
Fig. 3. Timing sequence and current waveform for withdrawal and insertion motion.
Fig. 4. Features extraction points.
3.
Development of algorithm for fault detection
The concept of data-driven prognostics and the use of AI tech- niques such as Artiﬁcial Neural Network (ANN) for fault detection and diagnosis are not new. The concept has been extensively researched in many areas such as in sensor validation, instrument calibration, reactor surveillance for loose part monitoring and transient identiﬁcation [5e8]. Recent research works have also demonstrated the use of deep learning methods for fault identiﬁ- cation and the estimation of RUL [9,10]. ANN is becoming the de- facto method for prediction and pattern recognition in highly complex systems. Many attempts have been made to comprehen- sively review the differences in methods and techniques used in fault detection and diagnostics (FDD) and PHM [11e20]. However, the few literature that exists for online monitoring of a control drive system [4,21e23] describe methods that are based on expert sys- tems and require deep domain knowledge. This work represents an alternative that uses machine learning techniques for anomaly detection. In order to achieve this, the CEDM coil current data is utilized.
Many of the subtle condition indicators on the coil current
proﬁle that can be used for health monitoring of the CEDM pass undetectably through the instrumentation systems. One reason for this is that the objective of the control instrumentation is not to monitor the health of the system but rather to control the system within predeﬁned setpoints. The methodology discussed in this work attempts to extract these condition indicators for the purpose of deﬁning health index for the control rod motion.
Fig. 2 shows the workﬂow for PHM algorithm development. It
Table 1
Failure mode analysis of control rod system.Fig. 5. Smoothening and derivative techniques for features extraction.
adopts the PHM framework proposed by IEEE Std. 1856 [24] and involves three PHM functional elements, namely: acquisition and preprocessing, data manipulation, and state detection. Acquisition of coil current data, which is normally recorded during plant maintenance work, is accomplished via a hall-effect sensor con- nected to each coil's supply line. The CEDM data for this research was acquired from OPR1000 plant type which uses 73 CEDMs. The data were collected during three separate rod exercising mainte- nance work. The control rods were exercised at different heights with different motion sequences. Thus, each CEDM data consists of
a series of withdrawal and insertion step motion sequences. The coil current signal was acquired at the sampling frequency of 2 kHz. The time duration for a single step motion cycle is 1.5s. This implies that the number of samples for a single step motion cycle is 3000. Also, data preprocessing was performed to remove noise and biases from data.
The data manipulation process involves the use of signal pro- cessing and data analytics techniques to organize, segment and split each CEDM motion sequence into individual step motion cycle. By analyzing each step motion, deviation in motion behavior can easily be detected during CEDM operation. The data manipulation process also groups the CEDM data according to the three CEDM types namely: 4 ﬁngers full strength, 12 ﬁngers full strength, and 4 ﬁngers part strength. This research utilizes the 4 ﬁngers full strength type because it has the largest data representation. It is also assumed that the CEDMs in the group have similar character- istics and operate under the same stress regime.
The state detection functional element involves the extraction of features from each step motion data. A step motion data contains information about the current ﬂowing through each of the four coils during a step cycle. Time-domain feature extraction is per- formed on each coil in order to obtain the full representation of the condition of each step motion. Usually, when the feature space is too big to be fed into a machine learning model, techniques for dimension reduction are employed. In this case, a principal component analysis (PCA) method is utilized for dimension reduction. State detection also includes clustering algorithm for the purpose of ﬁnding the initial natural grouping of data and the assignment of health classes based on normal, mid-normal and off- normal grouping. This step is necessary because the condition of each step motion waveform is unknown a priori. The cluster as- signments are utilized as class deﬁnitions for training the ﬁnal classiﬁcation model.
3.1.Description of the control element drive mechanism
The mechanism operates on the principle of applying localized electromagnetic ﬂux ﬁelds, via a set of coils around the internal components made of magnetic material. This causes the operation of internal latching devices for the gripping, lifting and releasing of the drive shaft connected to the CEA. A step-wise motion of the CEA occurs when power is applied to the electrical coils of the mecha- nism in a sequential manner. Holding of the control rods in a sta- tionary position occurs when power is continuously applied to the coils. Rapid insertion of the CEA for negative reactivity insertion during scram occurs when the set of coils are de-energized and the internal latching devices are released. This action allows the CEAs to fall by gravity into the reactor core in a fully inserted position.
The control rod drive mechanism is basically made up of a motor assembly, an extension shaft assembly (ESA) and a coil stack as- sembly. The motor assembly consists of the latching devices which are used to perform the step motion of the CEA and to perform a load transfer function. The latching devices are grouped into upper and lower latches.
The ESA is essentially a long drive shaft with grooves around its circumference. The ESA connects the CEDM to the CEA and acts as gear for engaging with the CEDM latches.
The coil stack assembly consists of four large direct current (DC) magnetic coils that are mounted on the motor housing assembly. The coils are the upper lift (UL), upper gripper (UG), lower lift (LL) and lower gripper (LG) coils. When energized, the coils supply magneto-motive force to the internal latching devices for engaging and moving the ESA and the CEA.
Table 2
Description of features.3.2.Current proﬁle analysis and features extraction
The withdrawal or insertion of the CEA into the reactor core is accomplished by a step-wise motion sequence of the CEDM ac- cording to the timing constraint of the  control  signal  shown  in Fig. 3a and Fig. 3b. The CEDM coils operate on three voltage levels: high, low and zero. The coil is energized such that a low voltage is applied via the gripper coils to hold the ESA in a stationary position.
To initiate motion, a high voltage of 150 Vdc is initially applied to the lift coils to initiate the motion of the internal magnetic com- ponents. This initial motion causes the closure of the internal gap between the magnetic components thereby lifting the ESA. A low voltage of 45 Vdc is then applied to the coil to maintain the closure of the gap to allow for the latching devices to be engaged. The current is removed from the coil to allow for gap opening and load transfer to the latching devices. This sequence allows the CEDM to
Table 3
Normalized Step motion(insertion) data.Fig. 6.  UL cluster analysis (insertion  step motion).
Fig. 7.   UL cluster analysis (Withdrawal step motion).
Table 4
Mean silhouette value.
Table 5
Final class deﬁnition for the coil health index.
move the CEA in both withdrawal and insertion motion. The cor- responding coil current proﬁles for the timing sequence are shown in Fig. 3c and d.
The condition and operation of the CEDM can be determined by analyzing these waveforms. The current level and time that mark the internal component actions are important criteria in the se- lection of features from the coil current proﬁle. Fig. 4 shows the regions of interest in the extraction of features. The ﬁgure indicates the current and time at the position where the CEDM internal magnet is pulled and released.
The point that marks the closure of the gap between the mag- netic components is indicated as the glitch. The point that marks the transfer of load from one magnet to the other during motion sequence is indicated as the bump. The features that can be extracted from the current waveform include:
●The glitch peak and time
●The peak current and time
●The transfer bump and time
Fig. 8. Distribution of training and testing dataset.
●The average holding current
●The release bump and time
●Ripple harmonics
●Signal mean
The frequency and magnitude of switching noise around these peaks can also be extracted as condition indicators.
There is a correlation between the shape of the peaks and the operation of the CEDM. This relationship can be established by evaluating the failure mode of the CEDM shown in Table 1 [25]. The table identiﬁes the various detection methods for different failure modes and is used as the basis for feature selection. For instance, mechanical motion failure and safety scram failure can be detected through the glitch and release bump on the waveform.
The coil current signal contains ripple from the alternating current power source. The frequency of the ripple on the dc voltage, in this case, is 180 Hz since the coil is ﬁred from a set of silicon-controlled
Table 6
Coil proﬁle data for SVM classiﬁcation.Fig. 9.  Confusion matrix for training  dataset.
rectiﬁer (SCR) devices that are connected to a 3-phase supply. By analyzing the ripple harmonics, it is possible to getan indication of the performance of the switching power supply to the coils.
In order to extract useful features from the region of interest as       indicated in Fig. 4, segmented smoothening and noise reduction techniques were used. A combination of simple moving average smoothening technique, locally estimated scatterplot smoothening
(LOESS), and the derivative function of the signal was utilized. The basic moving average function is given as:
@
Where K is the number of elements in a moving window. The basic
expression of the numerical ﬁrst-order derivative function for data of equal sample distance (t) is given as:
Fig. 10.  Confusion matrix for test  dataset.
Fig. 11. Cluster evaluation of coil proﬁle.
representing normal, off-normal and mid-normal were predeﬁned for this analysis. The algorithm maximizes the similarity of data points to the cluster centroids that deﬁnes the cluster cohesion. By using the cosine distance metrics, the total cohesion of a cluster can be expressed as:
K
cosineðx; ciÞ
i¼1  x2Ci
Where ci is the ith cluster centroid. The cosine distance metric is expressed as:
@
Table 7
Performance result for SVM classiﬁer model.
@Where Dt is a unit sample interval. To estimate the inﬂection points on the waveform, the ﬁrst-order derivative was applied twice. Fig. 5 shows the plot of the segments of a signal and its derivative func- tions. The LOESS smoothening function is essentially a SavitzkyeGolay ﬁlter that can be applied to a set of digital data points in order to smoothen the data without distorting the waveform. The ﬁltering process is achieved by ﬁtting successive data points with a low-degree polynomial using the linear least- squares method. For instance, to detect the  zero-crossing  time  in  a noisy signal shown in Fig. 5a or the valley of the glitch in Fig. 5b, a combination of the signal smoothening and derivative function were computed. The resulting curve shows a signal peak at the maximum inﬂection point of the signal. Thus, the zero cross point and the glitch valley were detected. Similarly, Fig. 5c indicate the same concept for extracting the release bump. A total of 40 features as shown in Table 2 were extracted from each CEDM step motion. Table 3 shows the sample step motion data for the case of insertion motion after data normalization.
3.3.Clustering model
The concept of clustering employed in this work is to ﬁnd nat- ural clusters of the data and based on the clusters, assign a health index to each coil proﬁle. Finding the natural clusters of the signal can help separate coil proﬁles that show signiﬁcant dissimilarity. For this, a segmented clustering analysis using PCA and K-means methods is implemented. Segmented analysis means that clus- tering analysis is performed separately and iteratively on each coil proﬁle (i.e. UL, UG, LL, LG). This process is iterated for both insertion and withdrawal motion and the corresponding cluster assignments are evaluated.
The k-Means algorithm is a hard clustering method that assigns data objects to a pre-determined number of clusters. Three clustersrepresenting normal, off-normal and mid-normal were predeﬁned for this analysis. The algorithm maximizes the similarity of data points to the cluster centroids that deﬁnes the cluster cohesion. By using the cosine distance metrics, the total cohesion of a cluster can be expressed as:@
Where ci is the ith cluster centroid. The cosine distance metric is expressed as:@
Each centroid is the mean of the points in that cluster, after normalization to unit Euclidean length.
PCA is utilized for dimension reduction of the feature vector
space and to ﬁnd the correlation between the features. The central idea of PCA is to reduce the dimension of interrelated featurevectors onto a new set of variables called principal components. The principal components are orthogonal (uncorrelated) and are
while preserving the variance in the data by projecting the feature
arranged in such a way that the ﬁrst few principal components retain most of the variability in the dataset. For the analysis of each coil current proﬁle, the set of principal components that cumula- tively explains 90% of the variability in the dataset is used as an input to the K-means algorithm.
The plots in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 show the analysis that represent the case of insertion and withdrawal of UL coil. In each ﬁgure, the Pareto chart in (a) shows the percentage of  the variance in the  data that is explained by the principal components. The silhouette plot in (b) shows the evaluation of the cluster assignments. The scatterplot in (c) shows the pattern for the cluster assignments of the coil current waveforms. The waveform plot in (d) shows the visual evaluation and comparison of the coil current proﬁle from each cluster. In Fig. 6a, for instance, the ﬁrst four principal com- ponents explain about 90% of the variability in the data. In this case, the ﬁrst four components are used as inputs to the K-means algorithm.
The result of the clustering algorithm can be evaluated by considering the clusters mean silhouette values. Table 4 summa- rizes the computed silhouette value for each coil clustering anal- ysis. Except for the withdrawal motion waveform of the UG coil which has very low value, the average value is about 0.6. This in- dicates that the algorithm found clusters that are good enough based on their similarity. The low silhouette value of the UG coil indicates that the data points cannot be explicitly separated into three hard clusters.
3.4.Classiﬁcation model
One of the objectives of this work is to be able to detect anomalies in control rod systems using the coil current proﬁle. To do this, a classiﬁer model is to be trained based on  the  health index classes that were determined from  the  clustering  model. The operation of the ﬁnal classiﬁer is such that it can detect anomaly in any of the four coil proﬁles. Thus, the classiﬁer model should accurately classify based on motion type labels (insert/ withdraw), coil type labels (UL/UG/LL/LG), and the health index class  (normal/off-normal/mid-normal).  Since  a  coil  proﬁle  will have a combination of these labels, the problem becomes a clas- sical multi-label classiﬁcation problem where multiple labels  can be assigned to each proﬁle. One way to deal with the multi-label
classiﬁcation problem is to transform it into a multiclass classiﬁ- cation problem using the Label Powerset (LP) technique. LP as- signs a unique class to every possible label combination that is present in the dataset. Table 5 deﬁnes the unique classes that are possible from the dataset. such that each coil can be deﬁned by the categorical ﬁnal class that represents the combination of the motion type, the coil type, and the health index. Thus, a coil proﬁle with a ﬁnal class deﬁned as 213 implies that: 2 e insertion motion, 1 - UL coil, and 3 e off-normal waveform.
The classiﬁcation model is based on the Support Vector Machine (SVM). The choice of SVM is based on its performance over other models trained for this application. An SVM is a supervised ML method that constructs a separating hyperplane in an n-dimen- sional space that distinctly classiﬁes data points. For linearly separable data, the optimal separating hyperplane is one that maximizes the margin between the support vectors. The notion of a hyperplane can be formally deﬁned as:
f ðxÞ¼ b0 þ w$x
Where w is the weight vector and b0 is the bias. From a geometrical viewpoint, calculating these parameters means looking for a hy- perplane that best separates the data points.
In order to perform multiclass classiﬁcation with SVM, an Error- Correcting Output Codes (ECOC) model that contains an ensemble of binary SVM classiﬁers is used. The ECOC model reduces the problem of multiclass problem to a set of binary classiﬁcation problems. This is achieved by using a coding matrix that maps the classes that the binary learners train on and a decoding scheme that determines how the prediction result of the binary learners are aggregated. The model is based on a one-versus-one coding design. This implies that each binary SVM classiﬁer handles a pair of output classes such that one class is positive, one class is negative and the remaining classes are ignored. Hence, for n output classes, the number of binary SVM classiﬁers is determined as:
nðn — 1Þ
2
With n 24 in this case, the number of binary learners in the ECOC ensemble is 276.
Table 6 shows the sample of the training data set for the clas- siﬁer model. The data is arranged based on coil proﬁle and updated with the index as determined in Table 5 such that each value in the index column is the response variable for each sample of coil pro- ﬁle. Fig. 8 shows the distribution of training and testing data set in which 80% was allocated for training while 20% was allocated for testing. The training of the SVM model was performed using 5-fold validation with an accuracy of 98.4%. Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 show the confusion charts for training and testing the model with the numbers at the diagonal being the numbers of correct classiﬁcation while off-diagonal numbers are misclassiﬁcations. The charts also indicate the model performance for true positive and false negative rates for each class on the vertical axis. On the horizontal axis, the chart indicates the positive predictive and the false discovery rates. For this classiﬁcation model, the false negative and the false dis- covery rates represent missed alarm and false alarm respectively.
4.Result
Table 4 shows the mean Silhouette values for the evaluation of each of the clustering analysis performed for the coil current pro- ﬁles. The silhouette value is a measure of cluster cohesion that indicates how similar a coil proﬁle is to its cluster centroid and how dissimilar it is to other clusters. A high silhouette value is an
indication of good cluster assignment. A low value is indicative of poor cluster assignment. Fig. 11 shows the comparison of the silhouette values for the cluster assignments. The UG coil proﬁle has the lowest values which indicate that the three clusters deﬁned for this proﬁle may not be well separated.
Similarly, the result of the classiﬁcation model is  shown  in  Figs. 9 and 10. The performance measures for the training and testing of the SVM model can be estimated from the mean values of the true positive rate, positive predictive rate, false negative rate, and the false discovery rate as shown on the confusion charts. These measures are given in Table 7.
5.Discussion
This work is focused on the analysis of time domain features. This study uses a small set of data collected during maintenance overhaul period of the drive system and does not represent the full scope of representation of the stressors experienced during actual operations. Also, because NPPs predominantly operate in baseload condition, full stroke motion of the CEDMs are not always needed during power production except for startup and shutdown modes. This limits the degree of system dynamics that can be captured in the operational data.
In addition, this work utilized the data for a full strength 4 ﬁn- gers CEDM because it has the largest data representation compared to the 12 ﬁngers shutdown bank and the 4 ﬁngers part strength. In using this data, the underlying assumption is that the behavior of same group CEDMs would be similar since they experience the same operating regime and are by design similar.
6.Conclusion
In this research, a conceptual framework for the application of digital twin technology to CEDM prognosis and maintenance process is proposed. This will reduce the potential of failures that could impact plant operations. Also, the development of machine learning algorithms for health monitoring of the control rod drive using the coil current proﬁle is presented. Since no prior knowl- edge of the health condition of the CEDM is known, a clustering model was ﬁrst developed for the purpose of assigning health index to a small set of data. Afterwards, a classiﬁcation model is designed using the result of the cluster assignments to test new data for the purpose of fault detection. The use of coil current proﬁle in the development of machine learning algorithm dem- onstrates the capability and possibility of application in  digital twin technology.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
