<title>Monte Carlo Simulation and Experimental Validation for    Radiation Protection with Multiple Complex Source Terms and Deep Penetration for a Radioactive Liquid Waste    Cementation Facility</title>
<author>Wenqian Li   ,1 Xuegang Liu,1 Sheng Fang   ,1 Xueliang Fu,2 and Kaiqiang Guo2</author>
<Affiliation>1Institute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology, Collaborative Innovation Centre of Advanced Nuclear Energy Technology, Key Laboratory of Advanced Reactor Engineering and Safety, Ministry of Education, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
2 CNNC Everclean Environmental Engineering Co., Ltd., Beijing 100037, China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral> Science and Technology of Nuclear Installation</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Hindawi</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1155/2020/8819794</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/8819794</URL>
A new radioactive liquid waste cementation facility was under commissioning recently in the Institute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology of Tsinghua University, which is designed to simultaneously process multiple intermediate-level radioactive waste drums. +erefore, the multiple volume sources and the scattering eﬀect becomes a key issue in its radiation protection. For this purpose, the Monte Carlo program FLUKA code and experimental measurement were both adopted. In the FLUKA simulation, ﬁve diﬀerent scenarios were considered, i.e., one drum, two drums, four drums, six drums, and eight drums. For the multiple volume sources, the source subroutine code of FLUKA was rewritten to realize the sampling. +e complex shielding also leads to a deep penetration problem; hence, the  optimization  algorithm  and variance  reduction techniques were  adopted.  During the measurement, two scenarios, outdoor and indoor, were carried out separately representing the dose ﬁeld when only one drum is considered and when the scattering eﬀect is considered. A comparison between the experiments and calculations shows very good agreement. From both of the Monte Carlo simulation and the experimental measurement, it can be drawn that, in the horizontal direction, with the increase of the drum number, the dose rate increases very little, while in the vertical direction, the increase of the  dose  rate  is very obvious with the  increase  of the  drum  number.  +e  complicated  source term  sampling  methods, the optimization algorithm and variance reduction techniques, and the experimental veriﬁcation can provide valuable references for the similar scattering problem in radiation protection and shielding design.
1. Introduction
For  a  room  with  walls,  roof,  and  other  structures,  when considering the dose from a gamma radiation source to the point of interest, if the scattering eﬀect is ignored, the dose may be  underestimated.  In  addition,  when  several  radio- active  sources  exist,  the  total  dose  contribution  of these radioactive sources to the point of interest should be con- sidered. However, it will be extremely diﬃcult to accurately predict the dose distribution when each gamma  source is covered  with  multiple  shielding  layers  so  that  the  dose outside the shielding is very low.
In this work, the radiation protection of a radioactive liquid waste cementation facility is investigated, which meets the above scenario. +is facility is located at the Institute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology (INET) [1] of Tsinghua University,  China.  +e  facility  is  a  room  for  processing radioactive waste storage drums, with a sliding track and an iron  shielding,  as  shown in  Figure 1. In  actual operation, there may be multiple intermediate-level radioactive waste (ILW) drums in the room. Every drum contains about 2E10 Bq of Cs-137, and the surface dose rate for one drum may exceed  3 mSv/h  [2].  +ese  drums  will  be  placed  on  the sliding track. Although there is an iron shielding of 12 cm Figure 1: Photos for the radioactive liquid waste cementation facility shows (a) the roof, the walls, and the shielding, (b) the sliding track, and (c) the intermediate radioactive waste storage drum when it was uncovered.
thickness which can be remotely controlled to move up and down, from Figure 1(a), it can be seen that when multiple drums exist behind the shielding, the photons reﬂected by the roof to the front of the shielding may greatly increase the dose  in the  operation  area.  For the  safety of the  staﬀ,  an accurate  assessment  of the  dose  ﬁeld  from  the  multiple complex source term will be very necessary.
However, each ILW drums contains multiple shielding layers, as shown in Figure 1(c), which is to ensure the dose rate on the drum surface meets the requirements of national regulations [3–6]. However, this kind of design also brings a deep penetration problem  in the Monte  Carlo  simulation [7–9], that is, when the shielding layers are too thick or the shielding structures are very complicated, if the number of simulated particles is low, the statistical result will be zero or obviously lower than the true value. Only when the number of simulated particles is large enough, the accurate result can be obtained. So, when multiple ILW drums coexist, this deep penetration problem will be very apparent.
+e  purpose  of this  work  is  to  research  the  accurate calculation method of the dose ﬁeld distribution under this kind of multiple source term and deep penetration condi- tion.  Traditional  theoretical  formula  prediction  methods, such as the QAD program [10–13] which is based on point- kernel integration technology [14–16], can quickly perform the shielding calculation, but usually, the calculation results are too conservative. Currently, there are many Monte Carlo programs  widely  used,  such  as  MCNP  [17–19],  FLUKA (http://www.ﬂuka.org/ﬂuka.php)      [20],     and     GEANT4 [21, 22], which have been veriﬁed, can provide very accurate simulation results  [23].
For the multiple-source term problem, whether adopting the empirical formula method or the Monte Carlo method, the dose ﬁeld distribution corresponding to each source can be  calculated  one  by  one  then  summed.  However,  this method is time consuming for successive data processing. +is work attempts to adopt the FLUKA program and re- write the source subroutine code to realize the sampling of multiple volume sources in one calculation routine and give
the   total   dose   ﬁeld   results,   which   greatly   reduces   the workload for the data processing.
For  the  deep  penetration  problem,  diﬀerent  variance reduction techniques can be adopted. Based on the previous work  [2],  this  work  comprehensively  considers  the  room walls,  roof,  internal  structures,  and  all  drums.  +en,  the optimization algorithm and variance reduction techniques proposed in  [2] were  adopted to complete the simulation calculation.
Furthermore, to verify the accuracy of the above method, an experiment was carried out and the measurement results were compared with the calculation result. +e experiment was  carried  out  under  two  scenarios:  one  is  the  outdoor measurement, which represents the dose ﬁeld when only one drum  is  considered;  another  is  the  indoor  measurement, which represents the dose ﬁeld when the scattering eﬀect is considered.  In this way, the accuracy of the Monte  Carlo calculation is veriﬁed by the actual measurement.
+e  complicated  source  term  sampling  methods,  the optimization algorithm and variance reduction techniques, and  the   experimental  veriﬁcation   can  provide  valuable references for similar problems in radiation protection and shielding design.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Monte Carlo Simulation
2.1.1. Geometry Models and Material
(1) /e ILW Drum. +e detailed description of the geometry structure and materials compositions for one ILW drum can be found in previous work [2]. From outside to inside, one ILW  drum  consists  of  the  following  four  parts:  (1)  the standard 200L  steel drum,  (2) the  cement inner  shielding layer, (3) the auxiliary support structure, and (4) the cement solidiﬁed radioactive waste. +e standard 200L steel drum is
56 cm in diameter and 85 cm in height. +e cement inner shielding layer is 6 cm of thickness. +e auxiliary support
structure is specially designed with stainless steel of 1.0 mm thickness.  +e  radioactive  waste  in  the  solidiﬁed  cement form was ﬁlled in the inside. Figure 2 shows the geometry model of one ILW storage drum.
(2)  Room  and  Shielding  Structure.  In  the  real  operating environment, multiple ILW storage drums will be placed in the room. Figure 3 shows the geometry model of the room and shielding structures. +e room is 11 m of length, 2.6 m of width,  and  3.5 m  of height.  Walls  are  made  of ordinary concrete   with   50 cm   of  thickness.   +e   drums   will   be
transported on an iron sliding track with 8 m of length, 0.8 m of width,  and  17 cm  of thickness. An  iron  shielding with 12 cm of thickness and 1.5 m of height is set to separate the high  dose  area  and  the  operating  area.  In  the  calculation model, it was assumed that the center axis distance of two adjacent drums is 82 cm. +e sliding track can hold up to eight ILW storage drums.
2.1.2.   Source   Term.  +e   radioactive   source   is  homoge- neously distributed in the solidiﬁed cement  (i.e., part 4 in Figure 2).  As  described  in the  previous work  [2], the  ra- dioactive waste is from the spent nuclear fuel reprocessing process, and dominant includes Cs-137 and Sr-90 (>95% of the total activity). In the simulation calculation, only Cs-137 was  taken  into  account.  And  only the  gamma  ray  of the highest energy (661.6 keV with a branching ratio of 85.1%) was considered, while the gamma rays of lower energies were ignored.
Diﬀerent from previous work [2], the actual total activity of Cs-137 was detected in this work. +e measured gamma intensity was 2.05E10 c/s, which is 0.87-fold of the designed highest total activity.
Based on the above, the source shape should be a cyl- inder  that  exists  inside  each  ILW  drum.  When  multiple drums   exist   simultaneously,  there   are  multiple  volume sources. In this work, the “source.f” source ﬁle in the FLUKA
program was rewritten to achieve the Monte Carlo sampling of  multiple  volume  sources.  +e  detailed  method  is  as follows.
First, sample the drum that the volume source should belong to. Assuming there are m numbers of drums. Figure 4 shows  the  ﬂowchart  to  sample  which  drum  the  source particle comes from, where randn represents the nth random number.
+en, sample the source particle position (x, y, z) by Eqs.
(1)–(4):@1
@2
@3
@4
where R is the radius of the cylinder; dm  is the horizontal distance from the central axis of the drum to the origin of theFigure 2: Geometry model of an ILW storage drum.
x-axis;  and  h1   and  h2   are  the  height  coordinates  of the bottom and top  surfaces of the cylinder respectively. Eqs. (1)–(4) realize homogeneous sampling in a cylinder.
+ird,  sample  the  emission  direction  (u,  v,  w)  of the source particles by equations (5)–(9):@5
@6
@7
@8
@9
Eqs. (5)–(9) realize isotropic sampling.
Finally,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  calculated  result should be multiplied by a normalization factor that takes the number  of  drums  into  account  to  obtain  the  ﬁnal  dose matrix.
2.1.3.   Cutoﬀ Energy  and   Variance  Reduction   Technique.
+e  cutoﬀ  energy  is  under  the  assumption  that  if  the transported particle  cannot go out from the current layer with enough energy, its contribution to the ﬁnal statistical result is negligible. So, if the particle energy is lower than the cutoﬀ energy, the  particle will be killed.  +e variance  re- duction  technique  adopted  in  this  work  is  based  on  the Russian Splitting skill: if a transported particle goes into the region with splitting number N, the particle will split into N particles  and  every  split  particle  will  weight  1/N.  In  the previous work  [2],  it  has been veriﬁed that  proper  cutoﬀ energy and variance reduction technique  settings can im- prove the calculation eﬃciency more than 20 times, while the deviation of the calculation results is ignorable.
Figure 3: Geometry model of the room and shielding structures: (a) three-dimensional view, (b) front view, and (c) top view.Figure 4: Flowchart to sample which drum the source particle comes from.
+erefore, in the Monte Carlo simulation of this work, the cutoﬀ energy setting and variance reduction technique similarly as in previous work [2] were also adopted. For the new geometry structures, including the surrounding walls, the roof, the sliding track, and the iron shielding, to reduce the inﬂuence on the accuracy of the calculation result, the cutoﬀ energies were set very low and no variance reduction technique was set. +e cutoﬀ energy and variance reduction technique settings are summarized in Table 1.
2.1.4. Dose and Error.  In the FLUKA simulation, the am- bient dose equivalent, H∗(10), were scored for ﬁve scenarios: one  drum,  two  drums,  four  drums,  six  drums,  and  eight
drums. +e conversion coeﬃcients are taken from the ICRP
Publication 74  [24, 25]. +e FLUKA program provides the three-dimensional  dose  matrix.  +e  software  SimpleGEO (http://www.ﬂuka.org/ﬂuka.php) can read and process the dose matrix and give a 3D display.
+ree interesting lines are drawn out in Figures 3(b) and 3(c).  Line  1  and  line  2  are  along  the  X-axis  and  Y-axis, respectively, representing the distance to the side surface of the ﬁrst drum. Line 3 is along the Z-axis, representing the distance to the top of the ﬁrst drum. Dose comparisons along these three lines were made to evaluate the scattering eﬀects and dose distribution in the operating area.
Corresponding with the three-dimensional dose matrix results in the  FLUKA calculation, an error matrix will be given. By increasing the number of simulated particles, the statistical errors can be reduced. Also, it can be seen from the 3D dose display ﬁgure that smoother the color transition, the smaller the error. In this work, the error is controlled less than 3% by adopting enough transported particle number and  parallel  calculation.  +e  total  numbers  of  transport particles were more than 2e9.
However, the use of the variance reduction method may bring  other  errors.  In  this  regard,  the  experimental  mea- surement method was adopted for comparison, which shows that the simulation calculation results are in good agreement with the measurement results (see Section 3.3). So, it can be believed  that  the  error  caused  by  the  variance  reduction method is negligible.
2.2. Experimental Measurement
2.2.1.  Measurement  Equipment.  +e  measurement  equip- ment  is the  ambient  dose  rate  meter  (9DP),  as  shown  in Figure 5. In addition, the measurement props also include a lead apron, two rulers, and a telemeter rod.
2.2.2.  Measurement  Scenarios.  During  measurement,  two scenarios, outdoor and indoor, were adopted, representing the    cases    without    and    with    scattering    considered, respectively.
Table 1: +e cutoﬀ energy and variance reduction technique settings.Figure 5: Photos of the ambient dose rate meter (9DP).
(1)  Scenario  1  (outdoor).  +e  outdoor  measurement  can reﬂect  the  dose  ﬁeld  distributions  with  no  aﬀection  by scattering.
Before measurement, a ruler was ﬁxed vertically to the outside of the drum, and another ruler was placed hor- izontally on the ground  along the  symmetry axis of the drum, as shown in Figure 6(a). +en, the surveyor held a telemeter  rod  and the monitor  and measured  along the horizontal ruler, as shown in Figure 6(b). +e horizontal measured positions include  1/2/3/4/5 meters to the out- side of the drum. +e vertical measurement only includes a height of 50 cm above the ground.
(2) Scenario 2 (indoor). +e indoor measurement can reﬂect the  dose  ﬁeld  distributions  under  the  scattering  eﬀect. During  measurement,  eight  drums  were  all  put  on  the sliding track, in which, seven drums were behind the iron shielding, and one was out of the shielding. Figure 7 was taken  during  the  measurement.  +e  horizontal  measured positions include 10 cm/50 cm/1 m/2 m to the outside of the drum.  +e  vertically  measured  position  was  at  the  half- height of the drum.
Uncertainty Estimation  of Measurement.  +e  statis- tical uncertainties (Type A) and the systematic uncertainties (Type B) were considered for the experimental error.
+e statistical uncertainty can be calculated by @10
where UA  is the statistical uncertainty of the samples, X is the mean value of the replicate measurement, and N is the number of the replicate measurements, which is in the range
of 5 to  10.
+e systematic ucerainty can be calculated by
@11
where UB is the systematic uncertainty, Δi is the instrument error,  Δe   is  the  estimation  error  which  comes  from  the measurement object, environment, and human factors, etc., and E and V are the relative inherent error and the mea- surement standard deviation, respectively. According to the equipment veriﬁcation certiﬁcate, E  11.4% and  V  2.3%.
Figure 6: Photos during the outdoor measurement.
Figure 7: Photos during the indoor measurement.
+en, the combined uncertainty of measurement ( U) can
be calculated by@12
Results and Discussion
3.1. FLUKA Simulation Results.  In the previous work [2], only
the dose distribution within 15 cm from the drum surface was
calculated.  +is  work mainly focuses  on  the  real  dose  ﬁeld distribution when there are several drums in the room, and the scattering eﬀect from other structures such as the walls should
also be concerned. +e size of the dose ﬁeld considered is 11 m of length, 2.6 m of width, and 3.5 m of height.
3.1.1. 3D Dose Rate Distribution.  Figure 8 gives the results of three-dimensional dose distribution for the ﬁve scenarios: one drum, two drums, four drums, six drums, and eight drums. For each scenario, the 3D view shows the three plans intersect at the center point of the ﬁrst drum. +en, the front view and the top view, respectively, correspond to the section position in the 3D view.
For  the  scenario  of one  drum,  the  FLUKA  simulated results indicate that the dose rates on the other side of the iron shielding are rather low, generally lower than 10 μSv/h. As  the  number  of  drums  increases,  the  dose  rates  also
increased signiﬁcantly on the other side of the iron shielding. And  the  dose  rates  directly  above  the  drums  are  usually higher. When there are eight drums on the sliding track, the dose rates on the inside (right side in the front view) of the iron shielding generally range from 76 μSv/h to 5 mSv/h, and this area will be forbidden entrance during operation.
3.1.2. Dose Rate Distribution along the /ree Lines of Interest.
It was observed that, with the increase of the drum number, the
dose rates outside iron shielding would also increase. Since the iron shielding is designed to be liftable and the area above iron shielding is unshielded, the gamma rays may enter the work area by scattering of the walls and roofs. +is kind of physical mechanism was not considered in the previous design for one drum. To compare the eﬀect of scattering on the dose rate in the working area, the dose rates on the three lines of interest shown in  Figures  3(b)  and  3(c)  were  extracted  from  the  three-di- mensional dose matrix and plotted in Figure 9.
It  can  be  seen  from  Figures  9(a)  and  9(b)  that,  in  the horizontal direction (Line 1 and Line 2), with the increase of the drum number, the dose rate increases very little. In line1, at a position of 2.5 m from the ﬁrst drum surface was quite near the wall, the dose rate is 79 ± 2μSv/h for one drum scenario, while the dose rate is 84 ± 3μSv/h for eight drums scenario. Similarly, in line 2, at a position of 1.1 m from the ﬁrst drum surface, the corresponding dose rates are 269 ± 8 and 274 ± 8μSv/h for one drum and eight drums’ scenario, respectively.
It can be seen from Figure 9(c) that, in the vertical di- rection (Line 3), the increase of the dose rate is very obvious
with the  increase  of the  drum  number.  In the  case  of one
drum and eight drums, at  1 m from the top surface of the ﬁrst  drum,  the  corresponding  dose  rates  are  112 ± 3  and 195 ± 6μSv/h, respectively. And at 1.5 m, the two values were 62 ± 2  and  177 ± 5μSv/h, which  increased by nearly three times. At 2.5 m, the two values were 31 ± 1 and 140 ± 4μSv/h, which increased more than four times.
In summary, in the horizontal direction corresponding to the middle of the drum, the increase of the dose rate is not obvious, while in the vertical direction, the dose rate increase by scattering is signiﬁcant and unneglectable.
Figure 8: +e front views, the top views, and the 3D views for the ﬁve scenarios: one drum, two drums, four drums, six drums, and eight drums.Figure 9: +e dose rate distribution along the three lines of interest for the ﬁve scenarios. (a) Line  1. (b) Line 2. (c) Line 3.
3.2. Experimental Measurement Results
3.2.1. Measurement Results for  Outdoor.  Table  2  lists  the outdoor measured ambient dose equivalent results which can reﬂect the dose ﬁeld distributions with no aﬀection by
scattering. +e horizontal measured positions include 1/2/ 3/4/5 meters  to  the  outside  of  the  drum.  +e  vertical measurement was at a height of 50 cm above the ground. +e  corresponding  FLUKA  simulation  results  are  also listed in Table 2. From the ratio of the FLUKA calculated
and measured H∗(10) (F/M value), which ranges from 1.4
to  1.5,  it  can  be  seen  that  the  diﬀerences  between  the measurement and the FLUKA simulation are within two
times.
3.2.2.  Measurement  Results for  Indoor.  Table  3  lists  the indoor measured ambient dose equivalent results which can  reﬂect  the  dose  ﬁeld  distributions  aﬀected  by  scat- tering. In this scenario, seven drums were behind the iron shielding  on  the  sliding  track,  and  one  was  out  of the shielding.   +e   horizontal   measured   positions   include
Table 2: +e outdoor measured H∗(10) compared with the FLUKA calculated results.
Table
3: +e indoor measured H∗(10) compared with the
FLUKA calculated results.10 cm/50 cm/1 m/2 m  to  the  outside  of  the  drum.  +e vertically measured position was at the half-height of the drum. +e corresponding FLUKA simulation results are also listed in Table 3. From the F/M value, it can be seen that  the  FLUKA  simulation  results  are  about  1.8 to  2.6 times higher than the measurement results.
3.3. Comparison and Discussion.  +is work mainly focuses on the eﬀect of scattering when there are several ILW drums in the operation room. From the above data and analysis, it can be seen that the calculated and measured results are in good agreement. +erefore, although the experimental data is  relatively  limited,  it  can  be  believed  that  the  FLUKA simulation calculation can give very accurate results.
From the measurement results, at a distance of 1 meter from  the  drum,  the  H∗(10)  for  outdoor  and  indoor  are 170 ± 10μSv/h  and  180 ± 10μSv/h,  respectively.  And  at  a distance   of  2   meters,   outdoor   and   indoor   results   are 60 ± 4μSv/h  and  58 ± 4μSv/h,  respectively.  +ese  results show that, in the horizontal direction corresponding to the middle of the drum, the eﬀect of scattering is not obvious,
which is also consistent with the FLUKA calculated results.
From the FLUKA simulation results, which is also discussed in detail in Section 3.1, it is pointed out that, at a distance of more than  1 m from the top surface of the drum, as the height in- creases, the dose rate increases by scattering is signiﬁcant.
4. Conclusions
In this work, the Monte Carlo program FLUKA was adopted to calculate the dose ﬁeld distribution in a radioactive liquid waste cementation facility. +e main emphasis was put on the eﬀect of scattering when several ILW drums exist in the room. And measurement was made to verify the accuracy of the simulation calculation.
In the FLUKA simulation, by rewriting the source ﬁle, complex  source  sampling  is  realized  when  several  ILW drums coexist. And the optimization algorithm and variance reduction techniques are adopted to improve the calculation
eﬃciency. +e  above method  can greatly reduce the time cost  of calculation  and  results processing.  +e  simulation was performed for the ﬁve scenarios: one drum, two drums, four  drums,  six  drums,  and  eight  drums  exist.  For  each scenario, the three-dimensional dose ﬁeld distribution was calculated and the corresponding 3D view, front view, and top view were given. +e dose rate distributions along the three lines of interest were also analyzed.
+e  FLUKA  simulation  shows  that,  in  the  horizontal direction, with the increase of the drum number, the dose rate  increases very little.  Typically,  at  a  position  of 2.5 m away from the outside drum, the dose rate is 79 ± 2μSv/h for one drum scenario and  84 ± 3μSv/h for eight drums’ sce- nario. While in the vertical direction, the increase of the dose rate is very obvious with the increase of the drum number. Typically, at 1.5 m from the top surface of the outside drum, the dose rates are 62 ± 2 and  177 ± 5μSv/h for one drum’s and eight drums’ scenario, which increased by nearly three times. At 2.5 m, the two values were 31 ± 1 and 140 ± 4μSv/h, which increased more than four times.
+e  measurement  was  performed  for  the  two  sce- narios,   outdoor   and   indoor,   representing   the   cases without   and   with   scattering   considered,   respectively. From  the  measurement  results,  at  a  distance  of  1 meter from the  drum, the H∗(10)  for  outdoor  and  indoor  are 170 ± 10μSv/h  and  180 ± 10μSv/h,  respectively.  A  com- parison between the experiments and calculations shows very  good  agreement.  For  the  outdoor  scenarios,  the
diﬀerences  between  the  measurement  and  the  FLUKA simulation  are  within  two  times.  And  for  the  indoor
scenarios, the FLUKA simulation results are about 1.8 to 2.6 times higher than the measurement results. +erefore, although  the  experimental  data  is  limited,  the  FLUKA calculation  results  for  the whole  dose  ﬁeld  are  accurate enough.
+e  complicated  source  term  sampling  methods,  the optimization algorithm and variance reduction techniques, and  the   experimental  veriﬁcation   can  provide  valuable references for the scattering problem in radiation protection and shielding design.
Abbreviations
ILW:  Intermediate-level radioactive waste.
Data Availability
+e  data  used  to  support  the  ﬁndings  of this  study  are available from the corresponding author upon request.
Conflicts of Interest
+e authors declare that they have no conﬂicts of interest.
Authors’ Contributions
Data curation, formal analysis, software calculation, and writing of the original draft were carried out by Wenqian Li. Experi- ment supervision, data analysis, and funding acquisition were carried out by Xuegang Liu. Conceptualization, methodology, supervision,  writing—review  and  editing—and  funding  ac- quisition were carried out by Sheng Fang. Experiment execution was carried out by Xueliang FU and Kaiqiang GUO.
Acknowledgments
+is work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundations of China (Grant nos. 11875037 and 11475100) and  foundation  of Key  Laboratory  of Advanced  Reactor Engineering and Safety, Ministry of Education  (Grant no. ARES-2018-08). +is work was partially supported by the Nuclear Facility Decommissioning and Radioactive Waste Treatment Foundation of China Atomic Energy Authority (Project no. 20134602025).
