<title>Reprint of “Occupational exposure in nuclear medicine and interventional cardiology departments in Sudan: Are they following radiation protection standards?”</title>
<author>Ibrahim I. Suliman, Lamia H. Saliha, Dua M. Ali, Abdulaziz S. Alaamer, M.A. Al-Rajhi,
M. Alkhorayef, D.A. Bradley</author>
<Affiliation>a.Sudan Atomic Energy Commission, Radiation Safety Institute, P.O. Box, 3001, Khartoum, Sudan;b.Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud Islamic University (IMSIU), College of Science, Physics Department, Committee on Radiation and Environmental Pollution Protection, Riyadh 11642, Saudi Arabia;c.Department of Radiological Sciences, College of Applied Medical Sciences, King Saud University, Saudi Arabia
d.Department of Physics, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey GU2 7XH, UK;e.Sunway University, Centre for Biomedical Physics, Jalan Universiti, 46150 PJ, Malaysia/Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radphyschem.2019.108556</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2019.108556 </URL>
ABSTRACT
Monitoring of staff's radiation exposure in medicine is an important radiation protection task. This study aimed to measure the staff doses in the nuclear medicine (NM) and interventional cardiology (IC) departments in Sudan and assess whether the measured doses fall within the recommended radiation protection standards. 37 members of staff involved in the NM and IC procedures were monitored using electronic personal dosimeters (EPDs). In IC, the average monthly Hp (10) values ranged from 30.0 to 38.9 µSv (to cardiologists), from 3.6 to 13.5 µSv (to nurses), and from 3.5 to 8.9 µSv (to technologists). The annual effective dose ranged from 1.95 to 2.53 mSv (to cardiologists), from 0.23 to 0.88 mSv (to nurses), and from 0.23 to 0.56 mSv (to technologists). In NM, the monthly Hp (10) values ranged between 83.0 and 84.0 µSv (to nurses), 38.8 and 54.0 µSv (to pharmacists), 16.9 and 70.2 µSv (to technologists), 40.2 and 76.6 µSv (to physicists). The annual effective doses ranged from 0.91 to
0.92 mSv (to nurses), 0.43–0.59 mSv (to pharmacists), 0.19–0.77 mSv (to technologists), and 0.44–0.84 mSv (to physicists). The estimated doses fall below the recommended annual dose limit. However, the lack of a radiation surveillance program and use of occupational exposure control tools are of concern in both the IC and NM departments.
Keywords:
Occupation exposure monitoring   Staff doses    Radiation Protection    Nuclear Medicine    Interventional cardiology
1.Introduction
Radiation workers in nuclear medicine (NM) and interventional cardiology (IC) personnel are occupationally exposed to a considerable amount of radiation dose during the course of their work. Monitoring staff doses is important for the purposes of controlling doses to in- dividuals and demonstrating compliance with adopted exposure limits. In interventional cardiology, a significant amount of staff doses come from scattered radiation from the patient. Patients and staff in digital cardiovascular angiography and intervention receive high doses that often exceed the threshold of tissue reactions (Vano, 2006; ICRP, 2012; Vanhavere et al., 2012; Al-Jabri et al., 2018). As interventional
procedures mainly focus on the quality of patient care, the radiological risks to the staff involved in these procedures have received less at- tention (Vanhavere et al., 2012; IAEA, 2013). This has resulted in the effects of radiation exposure and risk being underestimated.
In the NM department, during the preparation of the radio- pharmaceutical, the workers are involved in the elution of 99 mTc (from the 99Mo-99 mTc generator) and the preparation of 99 mTc-labeled com- pounds for diagnostic procedures. They usually use a vial shielded with 6 mm lead, but not always. From these vials, syringes with appropriate activities are prepared for use in examinations. Those syringes are al- ways handled without any shield. Nurses manipulate these syringes to inject radiopharmaceuticals in patients. In the nuclear medicine departments, personnel working with radiopharmaceuticals are subject to whole body and extremity radiation exposure. The external irradia- tion received by the hands of workers is higher due to the direct handling of the radionuclides. The protection of nuclear medicine personnel from radiation hazards depends mainly on time, distance, and shielding.
Empirically established values for the potential staff doses scattered from patients at different conditions (distance, time, and typical pro- cedures) provide information about the radiation exposure on workers in the medical field. It can promote radiation safety, allowing health- care professionals to apply necessary radiation protection measures needed to comply with the requirements for a good practice.
In Sudan, ionizing radiation is used in medicine for different pur- poses and in a steadily increasing number of applications. Patient doses in medical X-ray procedures are well documented (Bashier and Suliman, 2018; Suliman and Abdelgadir, 2018). At the time of this study in 2016, there were no radiation surveillance programme for radiation workers in Sudan, and information about staff doses, in- cluding about those working in the medical field, are not well known. Thus, it was the aim of this study to measure the radiation dose to staff involved in interventional cardiology and nuclear medicine procedures in Sudan and evaluate the overall radiation protection practice in re- spect of the current IAEA and ICRP safety standards (IAEA, 2014; ICRP, 2007).
2.Methods and methods
2.1.The study design
Doses to 37 radiation workers involved in the nuclear medicine and interventional radiology procedures in five hospitals in Sudan were presented. Radiation doses for 22 IC workers were estimated, which included 8 cardiologists, 10 nurses, and 4 technologists. These staff were directly involved in 100 interventional cardiology procedures, mainly diagnostic cardiac angiography (CA), therapeutic percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), and percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA).
Radiation doses for 15 NM workers, including pharmacists, physi- cists, technologists and nurses, were estimated. This study was carried out in three hospitals that provide diagnostic and therapeutic nuclear medicine procedures in Sudan: Elmek Nimer University Hospital (ENH), Royal Care International Hospital (RCH), and Radiation & Isotopes Center of Khartoum (RICK).
2.2.Calibration of EPD dosimeters
These dosimeters were calibrated to measure the personnel dose equivalent, Hp(10). Hp(10) is defined as a dose equivalent in soft tissue below the specified point in the body at a depth of 10 mm. An assess- ment of Hp(10) is meant to give a reasonable estimate of the limiting radiation protection quantity effective dose from penetrating external radiation (IEC, 1998). EPDs were calibrated to measure the personal equivalent whole body dose at the Secondary Standard Dosimetry Laboratory (SSDL) in Sudan.
All measurements were performed using the four dosimeters at- tached to the ICRU slab phantom in its normal position of use, with the source of radiation in the reference direction for calibration purposes specified by the manufacturer. The reading in this position was noted. In the horizontal plane, the dosimeter and the phantom were rotated to angles of ± 20°, ± 40°, and ± 60°. The dosimeter readings were taken at all these orientations. The combined energy and angular response was determined as (IAEA, 1999):
@1
where RE, , the ratio of true to measured dose equivalent, is the relative Fig. 1. The digital display of EPD type GRAETZ.
response at energy and incident angle . Here, RE, is the response at  energy E and incident angle obtained from
@2
where the measured dose is (HE, )m and conventional true value is
(HE, )t .
2.3.Radiation measurements
Measurements were done using the EPDs worn on the chest above the lead apron and read immediately after the procedure. In NM practice, the EPDs were worn on the chest by the staff and read at the end of the day. The EPDs were then reset to monitor staff doses. This was done in each hospital for a period of four weeks. 10 EPDs type GRAETZ were deployed for the measurements (GPD150G) (GRAETZ GmbH, Altena, Germany). The digital display of the EPD type GRAETZ used for the measurements is shown in Fig. 1.
2.4.Effective dose calculations
Algorithms for a single dosimeter to derive an effective dose from the reading of a single personal dosimeter comprises a simple conver- sion factor. The shielded dosimeter reading should be multiplied by a factor M1:
E	Hs M1
Values for parameters M1 = 6.5 was reported in Reference (NCRP, 1995). In nuclear Medicine, the staff were not wearing lead aprons; therefore, the dosimeter reading was multiplied by a factor M1 = 1.0. This is consistent with the Hp (10) definition of a reasonable estimate of the radiation protection quantity effective dose.
3.Results
3.1.Calibration of EPD dosimeters
Table 1 shows the energy and angular response for electronic per- sonal dosimeters type Gratez used in the IC and NM staff dose mea-surements. The results show that the angular response increased with an incident angle, indicatively with a minimum response at 0° and highest response at 60°. Additionally, the energy response increased
Table 1
Energy and angular response factors for electronic personal dosimeters type GRAETZ.
Table 2
Monthly and annual Hp(10) values and annual effectives doses to staff in two cardiology centers in Sudan.
with the energy with the minimum response at 65 keV and highest response at 60Co energy (McCaffrey et al., 2008).
3.2.Staff doses in Interventional cardiology
Table 2 shows the monthly and annual Hp (10) values and annual effectives doses to staff in two cardiology centers in Sudan. The cardi- ologist  received  the  highest  doses  while  nurses  and  technologist  re- ceived comparable doses. The average monthly Hp (10) values to staff in  the  two  hospitals  ranged  from  30.0  to  38.9 µSv  (to  cardiologists), from  3.6 to  13.5 µSv (to nurses),  and from  3.5 to 8.9 µSv (to technol- ogists).   The   estimated   annual   effective   dose   ranged   from   1.95   to
2.53 mSv (to cardiologists), from 0.23 to 0.88 mSv (to nurses), and from
0.23 to 0.56 mSv (to technologists).
Current doses are well below the annual effective dose limit of     20 mSv proposed by ICRP and IAEA to control occupation exposure and radiation risk during work. In general, staffs in hospital B received higher doses than their counterparts in hospital B, which could be due to a higher number of procedures performed per month.
3.3.Staff doses in nuclear medicine
The radiation doses on 15 staff working in three nuclear medicine departments was monitored during one month. The study subjects were 3 pharmacists, 2 nurses, 7 technologists, and 3 physicists. Among all the staffs, nurses received the highest doses followed by the technologists, pharmacists, and then the physicists.
Table 3 shows the monthly Hp (10) and annual effective doses on staff in the three NM departments in Sudan. Hp (10) values ranged between 83.0 and 84.0 µSv (to nurses), 38.8 and 54.0 µSv (to pharma-
cists), 16.9 and 70.2 µSv (to technologists), and 40.2 and 76.6 µSv (to physicists). The annual effective doses ranged from 0.91 to 0.92 mSv (to nurses), 0.43–0.59 mSv (to pharmacists), 0.19–0.77 mSv (to technolo- gists), and 0.44–0.84 mSv (to physicists). The differences in the nature and workload are responsible for the variability in individual staff doses.
Table 3
Monthly Hp(10) and annual effective doses to staff in three NM departments in Sudan.
4.Discussion
4.1.Calibration of EPD dosimeters
Dosimeters used for staff dose measurements should exhibit a linear energy and dose rate response and isotropic angular response (IAEA,degree of energy and angular dependency. As shown in Table 1, the overall response decreases with energy. In the typical photon energy encountered in the IC and NM departments, the overall response of an EPD is of particular concern.
4.2.Staff doses in interventional cardiology
Fig. 2 shows the boxplot distribution of monthly doses to staff in the interventional cardiology departments in Sudan. The distribution shows small interquartile range and dose outliers among cardiologists and nurses. Table 4 shows a comparison of the annual effective dose re- ceived by the staff at the NM and IC departments obtained in this work with the literature. The annual doses to cardiologists, nurses, and technologists were in the range of 1.95–2.53, 0.23–0.88  and 0.23–0.58 mSv, respectively. These doses are comparable to those re- ported by Chida et al. (2013) in Japan and Vano et al. (2006) in Spain. The results showed that the annual dose to staff in the IC procedures were within the recommended limit of 20 mSv. Thus they are far below doses known to cause lens opacities. Despite the fact that the annual doses measured in Sudan are below or comparable to those reported in the literature, it is important for ALARA principles to be exercised (IAEA, 2014; ICRP, 2007). It is important that the radiation doses on both patients and staff be monitored on a regular basis to ensure that the radiation protection practices conform to the international norms of
Fig. 2. Boxplot distribution of monthly Hp(10) values to staff in two Interventional cardiology departments in Sudan.
Table 4
Comparisons of  annual effective dose (mSv)  received by  staf f in NM  & IC  departments obtained in  this work with  the literature.
Fig. 3. Boxplot distribution of monthly Hp(10) values to staff in three nuclear medicine departments in Sudan.
radiation protection practice. Occupational exposure control tools were suggested to reduce the dose to staff in IC. These included wearing lead aprons, lead equivalent eye lens glass, thyroid shield, and ceiling screens (ICRP, 2000; IEC, 2010). Occupational exposure control tools used at the departments under study are summarized in Table 4. As seen, only lead aprons were available to staff, which was of concern. Both IAEA and ICRP recommend that the staff's occupational exposure to ionizing radiation in the medical field is covered under a suitable radiation protection surveillance program (ICRP, 2007; IAEA, 2014).
4.3.Staff dose in nuclear medicine
In a typical nuclear medicine, radiation protection interest is related to the fact that nurses are involved in every NM workload step of di- agnosis and therapeutic treatment. The pharmacists are involved in the elution of the radionuclide from generator and prepared radio- pharmaceuticals, whereas technologists are responsible for in imaging the patient.
Fig. 3 shows the boxplot distribution of monthly Hp (10) values to the staff in three nuclear medicine departments in Sudan. The dis- tribution shows a non-uniform distribution of the measured doses with large interquartile ranges. The results showed that the dose to staff in the NM departments under study were below the recommended dose of 20 mSv (ICRP, 2007).
As seen in Table 4, current results were not much different when compared to the doses report for nuclear medicine staff in Kuwait by AL-Abdulsalam and Brindhaban (2014) who reported annual Hp (10) values ranging between 1.05 and 1.06 mSv.y−1. A study by Szewczak et al. (2013) in Poland reported an annual dose of 4.22 mSv.y−1 for a particular worker in NM practice. Despite the fact that the annual dose measured in Sudan were below or comparable to those reported in the literature, it is important for ALARA principles to be exercised. This is
Table 5
tools for occupational exposure control at the IC and NM department.
mainly in relation to the linear non-threshold model that states that the induction of cancer has no threshold dose. As seen in Table 4, staff in the nuclear medicine department in Sudan do not wear lead aprons during work and were not covered under the radiation protection sur- veillance program. These departments fall short with regard to the ra- diation protection and safety standards (IAEA, 2014; ICRP, 2007) Table 5.
5.Conclusions
Doses to 37 radiation workers involved in the nuclear medicine and interventional radiology procedures in five hospitals in Sudan are pre- sented. The estimated doses fall below the recommended annual dose limit. However, the lack of a radiation surveillance program and use of tools for limiting occupational exposures such as lead aprons are among issues of concern in NM. In addition, thyroid shields and lead glasses should be considered to enhance the staff protection in IC. As shown in the experiment, EPD responses dropped at low energies in radiology and nuclear medicine, which is of concern. These data provide a starting point for institutional evaluation in order to promote the good practice of radiation protection at workplaces. It is recommended that the staff dose measurement in radiology and NM be made using dosi- meters with less energy and angular dependence such as thermo- luminescence dosimetry (TLD) and optical luminescence dosimetry (OLD).
Acknowledgments
Authors are grateful to hospital staff for their collaboration. The authors extend their appreciation to the College of Applied Medical Sciences Research Centre and Deanship of Scientific Research at King Saud University for funding this study.
Conflict of interest
The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
