<title>Methodology to optimize radiation protection in radioactive waste disposal after closure of a disposal facility based on probabilistic approach</title>
<author>Ryo Nakabayashi and Daisuke Sugiyama</author>
<Affiliation>Radiation Safety Research Center, Nuclear Technology Research Laboratory, Central Research Institute of Electric Power Industry, Tokyo, Japan</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2017.1397561</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/:10.1080/00223131.2017.1397561</URL>
ABSTRACT
We propose a methodology to optimize radiation protection in radioactive waste disposal after the closure of a disposal facility based on a probabilistic approach. In this methodology, a set  of alternative options of the disposal system design with the associated uncertainties estimated through a probabilistic approach are developed. Then, the methodology evaluates the advan- tages and disadvantages of each option for the optimization of radiation protection, in which it is possible to determine the compliance with a dose constraint of 0.3 mSv/y and to collect infor- mation for making a decision on the optimization. In particular, the obtained information on the exposure, which is the mode and width of the dose distribution, can be converted into informa- tion on engineering measures and site conditions for the options. This process allows us to discuss which option should be selected as the optimal option by considering the balance between the exposure and the engineering, economic, and social feasibility of the option. This methodology is helpful for providing clear reasons why an optimal disposal system design is selected by com- bining quantitative information on the exposure and the feasibility of each option.
KEYWORDS
Radioactive waste management; radiation protection; optimization; probabilistic approach
1.Introduction
International Atomic Energy Agency has established a safety objective for the protection of people and the environment after the closure of a disposal facility [1]. The safety objective is to site, design, construct, operate, and close a disposal facility so that protection after its closure is optimized, while taking social and economic factors into account.
From international documents [1–7], the principle of the optimization of radiation protection in radioac- tive waste disposal after the closure of a disposal facility can be recognized as the process of determining mea- sures for protection and safety to make the probability and magnitude of exposure as low as reasonably achiev- able, taking economic and social factors into account. In addition, it can be recognized that optimization of the long-term safety of a disposal facility should mainly be achieved through the decision of the disposal sys- tem design (a combination of the site and the design of the facility), and the uncertainties inherent in long- term safety assessment should be considered in the opti- mization of radiation protection. This implies that it is necessary to select an optimal option of disposal sys- tem design while taking the uncertainties into account. It could be reasonable to emphasize the optimization of a disposal system design as a whole system constructed of elements (the site or the facility design), while taking into consideration the performance of each element in the disposal system to reduce radionuclide migration.
Furthermore, to show that radiation protection can be considered optimized, it should be demonstrated that the disposal system design option in consideration of the associated uncertainties complies with a radiation constraint of 0.3 mSv/y and that the optimal option has been chosen by a well-defined, rational procedure.
On the basis of the above, we can conclude that it  is essential to (i) develop a set of alternative options of the disposal system design while taking the associated uncertainties into account, (ii) evaluate the options, and
(iii) make a decision on the optimization of radiation protection. In other words, we need to make a compar- ative evaluation of the alternative options in the opti- mization of radiation protection. We consider that the safety objective of optimizing radiation protection in radioactive waste disposal will be achieved by carry- ing out the above series of processes. However, how the probability and magnitude of exposure, which are considered to be the most important information for making a decision, should be obtained has not yet been described in detail in international guidelines [1–7].
To obtain information on the probability and mag- nitude of exposure, our previous methodology [8] can be considered to be applicable. The methodology can obtain a maximum annual dose distribution of a cer- tain radionuclide. Our previous paper only focused on the mode and the 50th and 95th percentiles of the dose distribution to determine the compliance with Japanese regulatory requirements [9]. On the other hand, the mode and width of the dose distribution can
Figure . Flowchart of a methodology to optimize radiation pro- tection in radioactive waste disposal based on a probabilistic approach.
be considered to be important information for making a decision on the optimization of radiation protection. Therefore, in this paper, we propose a methodology  to optimize radiation protection in radioactive waste disposal based on our previous methodology [8]. The methodology proposed in this study contains the pro- cesses of (i) developing a set of alternative options of the disposal system design while taking the associ- ated uncertainties into account and (ii) evaluating the options to achieve the safety objective of optimizing radiation protection.
2.Methodology to optimize radiation protection based on probabilistic approach
A methodology to optimize radiation protection in radioactive waste disposal based on a probabilistic approach is proposed in this section. A flowchart of the proposed methodology is shown in Figure 1. This methodology is divided into six steps and can examine the optimization of a disposal system design while tak- ing the associated uncertainties into account. In addi- tion, this methodology can be iteratively performed as necessary.
In general, it is considered that disposal facilities for radioactive waste are developed and evaluated through step-by-step and iterative processes. At an early stage
of the development, it is necessary to narrow down  many possible site and disposal facility designs to sev- eral options. The uncertainties of each disposal system design could be large because sufficient data are not expected to be available for the safety assessment. In this case, the proposed methodology can help us to narrow down the options of site and disposal facility designs and to consider which uncertainties of each disposal system design should be preferentially reduced. Note that it is essential to take into account not only the expo- sure but also the engineering, economic, and social fea- sibility of each disposal system design at this time. On the basis of the obtained information, a detailed inves- tigation of the characteristics of the candidate sites and the detailed design of the candidate disposal facilities is carried out. After that, the methodology can be used to further narrow down the options of the site and dis- posal facility design and to consider which uncertain- ties should be preferentially reduced. As the site inves- tigation and the design of the disposal facility are based on information obtained by previous examination, it is possible to eventually select the optimal option of the disposal system design. In the optimization, this series of examinations should be performed with trans- parency and traceability. Details of each step in Figure 1 are described in the following.
2.1.Develop a set of alternative options
In steps 1–4, a set of alternative options of disposal sys- tem designs are developed while taking the associated uncertainties into account. This methodology develops disposal system designs in step 1 followed by the devel- opment of scenarios, models, and parameter sets for each disposal system design in steps 2–4.
... Develop disposal system designs (step )
In step 1, disposal system designs are developed. These designs are composed of a combination of one or more site(s) and/or design(s) of the facility... Develop scenarios, models, and parameter sets (steps –)
In steps 2–4, scenarios, models, and parameter sets are developed for each disposal system design developed in step 1. In general, there are several sources of uncer- tainty in safety assessment, which can be broadly cate- gorized as scenario uncertainty, model uncertainty, and data and/or parameter uncertainty [3]. Scenario uncer- tainty refers to uncertainty in the future states of the disposal system. It includes uncertainty in the evolution of the disposal system, human use of the environment, and geological and other long-term processes, as well as human intrusion. Model uncertainty is derived from an imperfect knowledge or lack of understanding of the behavior of natural and engineered systems and phys- ical processes, which leads to an imperfect conceptual model. Data and/or parameter uncertainty is associated with the values of the parameters used in the imple- mented assessment models since data may be incom- plete, unable to be measured accurately or not available. The uncertainties of the scenario, model, data, and/or parameters are clearly different for each disposal system design. Thus, scenarios, models, and parameter sets are developed for each disposal system design, and the optimal disposal system design should be selected taking into account the effect of the uncertainties inher- ent in the safety assessment of the magnitude and the probability of exposure. For example, the uncertainty of the deterioration process of an engineered barrier (i.e. scenario uncertainty) will depend on the facility design. This uncertainty may be ignored by signifi- cantly increasing the thickness of the engineered bar- rier (i.e. developing an alternative facility design). This means that the ratio of the degraded part to the intact part decreases and the effect of the deterioration of the engineered barrier on the performance of the over- all engineered barrier can be ignored. Consequently, this option with a thick engineered barrier may make the magnitude and probability of exposure lower than those with a thin engineered barrier. However, the opti- mal option has to be determined by considering infor- mation on not only exposure but also other factors such as economic, engineering, and social feasibility. By increasing the thickness of the engineered barrier, the cost may be increased and it may be difficult to con- struct an engineered barrier so that the expected per-
formance can be ensured.
Furthermore, it is considered that scenario, model, data and/or parameter uncertainties are large, particu- larly at the early stages of the development of options of the disposal system design. Efforts to reduce the  uncertainties by obtaining more data and controlling the quality of data may be important in terms of reduc- ing the magnitude and probability of exposure. How- ever, reducing all uncertainties may not necessarily be optimal considering the economic and engineering fea- sibility. There may be options that can ensure suffi- cient long-term safety without avoiding or reducing the uncertainties inherent in the safety assessment. Con- sidering the above, the optimal option that can make  a reasonable reduction in the magnitude and probabil- ity of exposure achievable has to be selected, taking into account not only the disposal system design but also the associated uncertainties.
2.2.Evaluate the options
In steps 5 and 6, a probabilistic safety assessment of each option of the disposal system design with consid- eration of the uncertainties developed in steps 1–4 is performed on the basis of the methodology developed in our previous study [8]. Specifically, the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the maximum annual
dose of a certain radionuclide is calculated by using the radionuclide migration program with a Monte Carlo simulation. In addition, the probability density function (PDF) is calculated by using the kernel density estimation. This calculation procedure was developed and described in detail in [8]. Using the obtained CDF and PDF, it is determined whether each option complies with a radiation criterion. In addition, information for making a decision on the optimization of radiation protection can be collected.
... Determine the compliance with dose constraint (step )
In this step, it is determined whether the options devel- oped in the previous steps comply with a dose con- straint of 0.3 mSv/y. Our previous methodology [8] is used in this paper without modification, in which it is possible to demonstrate the compliance with the dose constraint by comparing the 95th percentile of the CDF of the maximum annual dose with 0.3 mSv/y based on the concept of the ‘representative person’ [10].
When the 95th percentile of the CDF is less than the dose constraint, it is demonstrated that the options comply with the radiation criterion. The options for which the 95th percentile of the CDF exceeds 0.3 mSv/y must be excluded. Furthermore, if all options are excluded at this step, it will be necessary to recon- sider the options (i.e. go back to step 1). For the options whose 95th percentiles are less than 0.3 mSv/y, informa- tion for making a decision on optimization is collected in the next step.
... Collect information for making a decision on optimization of radiation protection (step )
In this step, for the options that comply with the dose constraint of 0.3 mSv/y, information for making a decision on the optimization of radiation protection is collected. In the methodology proposed in this study, the mode and width of the dose distribution are used as information on the probability and magnitude of exposure, although our previous methodology used the mode of the PDF and the 50th percentile of the CDF to determine the compliance with the radiation criterion of 0.01 mSv/y and used the 95th percentile of the CDF to determine the compliance with the radiation crite- rion of 0.3 mSv/y in Japan. The mode can be obtained from the PDF, which is calculated by kernel density esti- mation. The mode is the most likely dose that the public will be exposed to. The width of the dose distribution can be obtained from the CDF, which can be quanti- tatively expressed as various percentiles (e.g. 1st, 5th, 50th, 95th, and 99th percentiles). The width of the dose distribution indicates the propagation of uncertainty inherent in the safety assessment. Efforts to reduce the mode and width of the dose distribution lead to the increased safety of a disposal system and to increased confidence in the safety assessment, respectively.
Figure . Conceptual diagrams explaining how to examine radi- ation protection optimization. Dose distributions A to F were cal- culated by probabilistic safety assessment of options A to F. am to fm are the modes of dose distributions A to F and a to f are their th percentiles.
Figure 2 shows two examples of how radiation dose distributions, which were calculated by the probabilis- tic safety assessment of a certain option, should be used to examine the optimization of radiation protection.
In Figure 2(a), three dose distributions that were cal- culated by the probabilistic safety assessment of options A, B, and C are shown. It is assumed that the widths  of the distributions are the same.  Option  C  has  to be excluded from the examination of the optimization since its 95th percentile of the dose distribution exceeds the dose criterion of 0.3 mSv/y. Therefore, informa- tion should be collected from options A and B, which comply with the radiation criterion. It can be seen that
the mode and distribution tail (e.g. 95th, 99th, and  99.9th percentiles) of dose distribution A are smaller than those of dose distribution B. Thus, option A is the best option from the viewpoint of enhancing long-term safety. However, it is necessary to discuss the engineer- ing, economic, and social feasibility of options A and
B. If the feasibility of option A is greater than that of option B (e.g. option A can be constructed with low cost and high public acceptance), option A should clearly be selected as the optimal option. On the other hand, if the feasibility of optionA is lower than that of option B, we need to select the optimal option by considering the bal- ance between the exposure and feasibility of options A and B.
In Figure 2(b), three dose distributions that were cal- culated by the probabilistic safety assessment of options D, E, and F are shown. Since the 95th percentile of dose distribution D is larger than the dose constraint of 0.3 mSv/y, information should be collected for options E and F. In this case, whether to reduce the mode or width of the dose distribution (particularly the distribution tail such as the 95th, 99th, and 99.9th percentiles) is  an issue to be examined in the optimization. From the viewpoint of reducing radiation exposure, option E is the best option. However, option F is the best option from the viewpoint of reducing uncertainty in the safety assessment. Here, let us consider the case of selecting bentonite as an engineered barrier material as an exam- ple. In general, bentonite with a low-permeability coef- ficient is used for the engineered barrier to delay the migration of radionuclides via the groundwater path- way from the disposal facility to the biosphere. Selecting bentonite with a lower permeability coefficient reduces the mode of the dose distribution (i.e. it enhances the safety of the disposal system). On the other hand, its permeability coefficient has some degree of uncertainty that may originate from quality control during the con- struction of the bentonite layer and/or from lack of data of the permeability coefficient. The uncertainty can be reduced by increasing the level of the quality control and/or obtaining more data. This leads to a reduction in the width of the dose distribution (i.e. increased con- fidence in the safety assessment).
Note that these two aspects may be contrary to each other. Although a material with a lower permeability coefficient is expected to lead to higher safety, its quality during the construction will be more difficult to con- trol, reducing the confidence in its safety (this option corresponds to option E). To increase the confidence, advanced techniques should be employed, resulting in increased cost, to increase the level of quality control. On the contrary, although a material with a higher per- meability coefficient is not expected to lead to higher safety, its quality during the construction will be eas- ier to control, increasing the confidence in its safety (this option corresponds to option F). It is apparent that the engineering and economic feasibility of the option Figure . Cross-sectional view of sub-surface disposal system drawn with reference to [].
using the material with the higher permeability coef- ficient is better in this case. Ultimately, it is necessary to select the optimal option by considering the balance between the achievable level of safety (the mode and width of the dose distribution) and the feasibility.
As explained above, our methodology can collect and organize quantitative information on exposure such as the mode and width of the dose distribution in association with the engineering, economic, and social feasibility of each option. Only after referring to this information in the decision-making step is it possible to determine the optimal option and to give clear rea- sons for its selection. Even at the early or middle stage of the development of options, it is possible to nar- row down the possible site and disposal facility designs and identify which uncertainties should be preferen- tially reduced, taking into account the feasibility. How- ever, to determine the optimal option or narrow down the options, a decision-aiding technique such as cost- benefit analysis or multiattribute utility analysis must be used. The use of decision-aiding techniques is consid- ered to be an effective means of formalizing and quanti- fying the selection of the best option in an optimization process [11]. This implementation will make it possible to demonstrate that the selected option has been cho- sen by a well-defined, rational procedure in comparison with alternative options.
3.Application of methodology to optimizing radiation protection
In this section, we will discuss the applicability of the methodology proposed in Section 2 by considering a sub-surface disposal system in Japan as an example. The maximum annual dose from 14C, which is a key radionuclide in the safety assessment of sub-surface dis- posal systems [12], is calculated in this example. It is assumed that the initial inventory is 4.4 × 1015 Bq [13]. A cross-sectional view of the sub-surface disposal facility is shown in Figure 3 [13]. The waste has a rela- tively high radioactivity, such as parts of a nuclear reac- tor structure, used control rods, and channel boxes. The waste package layer is covered with engineered barriers anda natural barrier. In particular, the low-permeability
and low-diffusivity layers of the engineered barriers and the host rock of the natural barrier are expected to prevent or delay the migration of radionuclides via the groundwater pathway from the disposal facility to the biosphere. Regarding the low-permeability and low- diffusivity layers, the thickness and type of material of each layer affect the performance. Regarding the host rock, the type of host rock (which will differ with the site) affects the performance. To ensure long-term safety in a disposal system design, a disposal system design with a high-performance site and facility design should be selected. However, the optimization of protection is not equivalent to minimization of the dose [14]. The thicker the engineered barrier layer in the design or the higher the performance of the material used, the lower the feasibility is considered to be (e.g. because of the increased cost). In the site selection, it is also neces- sary to consider the feasibility (e.g. public acceptabil- ity). In the optimization, we need to select the disposal system design by considering the balance between the exposure and the feasibility. Furthermore, as described in Section 2.1.2, not only the disposal system design but also the associated uncertainties of the scenario, model, data, and/or parameters have to be considered in the optimization.
On the basis of the above, to demonstrate that our methodology is useful for selecting the optimal disposal system design option from multiple options while tak- ing the associated uncertainties into account, we will assume in this example that multiple sites (i.e. host rock with different permeability coefficients) and multiple disposal facility designs with different materials used for the low-permeability and low-diffusivity layers (i.e. materials with different permeability coefficients and effective diffusion coefficients, respectively) are con- sidered as candidates. In addition, we will consider  the parameter uncertainties, particularly uncertainties of the permeability coefficient of the low-permeability layer and the effective diffusion coefficient of the low- diffusivity layer, which originate from quality control during the construction of these layers, of each disposal system design. As described in Section 2.2.2, it could be more difficult to control the quality of a material with higher performance (i.e. lower permeability and effective diffusion coefficients) during the construction, leading to large uncertainty. To reduce the uncertainty, advanced techniques should be employed, increasing the cost. In this example, we will also clearly indicate the impact of a change in the uncertainty upon chang- ing the level of the quality control on the examination of optimization.
Note that this is only an example used to discuss the applicability of the proposed methodology in this paper. For simplicity when discussing the applicability, we will not consider other types of disposal facility design (e.g. a disposal facility design with a different thick- ness of the engineered barrier). In addition, regarding
Figure . Options considered in our example.
Table . Siting options considered in our example.
scenarios and models, we consider one of each of them in this example.
3.1.Develop a set of alternative options
In this example, we attempted to develop the 12 options (including 6 disposal system designs, 1 scenario, 1 model, and 12 parameter sets) shown in Figure 4 and compare these options to optimize radiation protection.
... Develop disposal system designs (step )
In step 1, we developed six disposal system designs, which are composed of combinations of two sites and three facility designs. A reference site and a lower- performance site, i.e. two types of host rock with dif- ferent permeability coefficients, were selected as can- didates (Table 1). The permeability coefficient of the reference site was set to that of the sub-surface dis-  posal facility design in [13]. The permeability coeffi- cient of the lower-performance site was set to 10 times that of the reference site. Regarding facility designs, the reference facility design, a lower-performance facility
design, and a higher-performance facility design were selected as candidates (Table 2). These facility designs have different materials for the low-permeability and low-diffusivity layers. In this example, it was assumed that the materials were changed by changing the effec- tive diffusion coefficient of the low-diffusivity layer and the permeability coefficient of the low-permeability layer. The effective diffusion coefficient and permeabil- ity coefficient of the reference facility design were set to those of the sub-surface disposal site in [13]. The effec- tive diffusion coefficient and permeability coefficient of the lower-performance and higher-performance facility designs were set to 10 and 0.1 times those of the refer- ence facility design, respectively.
Furthermore, it is important to organize information on the engineering, economic, and social feasibility to select the site and the disposal facility design. However, the purpose of conducting this example is to discuss the applicability of this methodology, not to select the optimal option. Therefore, we did not set quantitative or qualitative information on the feasibility of each dis- posal system design.
... Develop scenarios, models, and parameter sets (steps –)
In step 2, we developed a scenario, which is the so-  called groundwater migration scenario [13], through the disposal system designs developed in step 1. In the
Table . Disposal facility design options considered in our example.
Figure . Schematic diagram of the radionuclide model considered in this example.
scenario, it is assumed that a representative person is exposed as a result of radionuclides being released to  a river via the groundwater pathway. Although sev- eral exposure pathways can be considered in the sce- nario, this example treats the exposure pathway due to the ingestion of fishery products because preliminary calculations indicate that this exposure pathway is the most critical for the dose assessment of 14C. Note that this example does not consider the natural evolution of the disposal system (e.g. alterations to engineered and natural barriers and the transitions due to tectonic uplift and denudation).
In step 3, we developed a dose assessment model through the disposal system designs developed in step 1 and the scenario developed in step 2. A radionuclide migration model was established with reference to the concept of sub-surface disposal in [13] using Gold- Sim [15]. Figure 5 shows a schematic diagram of the radionuclide migration model considered in this exam- ple. 14C is assumed to be instantaneously released from the waste to the waste package layer. In the waste pack- age layer, it is assumed that the mixing and sorption of the 14C occur instantaneously. The transport in the con- crete pit, the low-diffusivity layer, the low-permeability layer, and the host rock is assumed to be by diffusion and advection. In these regions, the mixing and sorp- tion of 14C are also assumed to occur instantaneously. Finally, 14C is released to the biosphere and the max- imum annual dose that the representative person is exposed to is calculated. Note that a no-flux bound- ary condition is set at the boundary between the low- permeability layer and host rock and between the host rock and biosphere so as not to underestimate the release rate of 14C from the low-permeability layer and host rock. While in the model in [13], the concrete   pit and low-diffusivity layer were composed of both
degraded and intact parts, in the present model, the concrete pit and low-diffusivity layer only consist of a degraded part and an intact part, respectively. Details of the numerical model concerning radionuclide migra- tion and radiation exposure are based on the model given in [13].
In step 4, we developed 12 parameter sets as shown in Table 3. First, we performed sensitivity analysis to identify the relative importance of each input parame- ter, which is described in [13], to the maximum annual dose of 14C for the ingestion of fishery products. In this example, the layout of the engineered barrier, the model and the scenario were assumed to be common among the disposal system designs, indicating that the input parameters are common. Therefore, a common sensitivity analysis was performed among the disposal system designs. As a result, the parameters shown in Table  3 were found to have relatively high sensitiv-  ity to the maximum annual dose of 14C. On the basis of the result, to examine which uncertainties should be preferentially reduced considering the engineering, economic, and social feasibility, we should develop various parameter sets. However, in this example, we focused on the effect of increasing the level of quality control during the construction of the engineered bar- rier on the maximum annual dose of 14C for simplicity when discussing the applicability of the methodology.
The decreases in uncertainties concerning the per- meability and the effective diffusion coefficients were quantitatively expressed by changing them from a log- uniform distribution to a log-normal distribution in this example. Depending on the disposal facility design (i.e. the types of materials composing the engineered barrier) developed in Section 3.1.1, statistical values such as the medians of the log-uniform and log-normal distributions were set to be consistent with the values
Table . Parameter sets considered in our example.
Table . (Continued).
shown in Table 2. The lower limit and upper limit of the log-uniform distribution and the standard deviation of the log-normal distribution were set to have the same logarithmic width among the parameter sets. Similarly, the median of the permeability coefficient of the host rock was set to be consistent with the value shown in Table 1. The other parameters, such as the ratio to the
distribution coefficient of the host rock and the ratios to the distribution coefficient of the low-diffusivity layer in Table 3, were assumed to have a common distribution for each parameter among the disposal system designs. The medians of the assumed distributions were set to the same value as in [13] and the widths were set so that the width of the maximum annual dose of 14C was
Figure . Result of probabilistic safety assessment for each option in our example.
generated. The values used in each parameter set in Table 3 are shown in Table 4. Values of the other param- eters such as the thicknesses of engineered barriers, which are not listed in Tables 3 and 4, are set to those in [13], and these values are common among all the parameter sets.
As described in Section 3.1.1, the purpose of con- ducting this example is to discuss the applicability of this methodology. Therefore, we did not set quantitative or qualitative information on the feasibility of increas- ing the level of the quality control.
3.2.Evaluate the options
In this section, we evaluate the options developed in steps 1–4. We performed a probabilistic safety assess- ment of each option. In this example, the number of realizations was set to 5000 in consideration of the con- vergence of the assessment result based on a prelimi- nary calculation. Figure 6 shows the result of the prob- abilistic dose assessment of each option for 14C. The 95th percentile was obtained from the CDFs of the max- imum annual dose of 14C for the critical exposure path- way. The modes were obtained from the PDFs of the maximum annual dose of 14C for the critical expo-  sure pathway. The widths were obtained from the CDFs of the maximum annual dose of 14C for the critical  exposure pathway. In this example, the 95th and 99th percentiles of the CDF are shown as quantitative infor- mation on the distribution width in Figure 6. Using the obtained results, we determined whether each option
complies with the dose constraint of 0.3 mSv/y and col- lected information for making a decision on the opti- mization of radiation protection.
... Determine the compliance with a dose constraint (step )
In step 5, we determined whether each option com- plies with the dose constraint by comparing the 95th percentile of the CDF and 0.3 mSv/y. Among the  95th percentiles of the maximum annual dose of 14C for each option (Figure 6), the 95th percentiles of options 3 and 4 with the reference site and the lower- performance design of the facility, option 7 with the lower-performance site and the reference design of the facility, and options 9 and 10 with the lower- performance site and the lower-performance design of the facility exceed 0.3 mSv/y. Even if the parameter uncertainties of the engineered barrier are reduced (i.e. the levels of quality control are increased), the options with the lower-performance design of the facility can- not comply with the dose constraint in this example. On the other hand, even if the lower-performance site is selected as a candidate site, it can comply with the radiation criterion by decreasing the uncertainty of the parameters related to the engineered barrier (see options 7 and 8). On this basis, we excluded options 3, 4, 7, 9, and 10.
... Collect information for making a decision on optimization of radiation protection
In step 6, we collected information, particularly the mode and width of the dose distribution in Figure 6, for making a decision on the optimization of radiation pro- tection in radioactive waste disposal from the options whose 95th percentiles were less than 0.3 mSv/y (i.e. options 1, 2, 5, 6, 8, 11, and 12). If the information on the feasibility of each option has been organized in pre- vious steps, it is possible to associate the information on the exposure with that on the feasibility of each option. On the basis of the obtained information, it is possible to determine the optimal option in a decision-making step. To discuss the applicability of this methodology, an example of how to examine the optimization on the basis of the obtained information is described below.
From the viewpoint of the safety of the disposal sys- tem, options 5 and 6 with the reference site and higher- performance facility design are better than the other options. In particular, option 6 is better than option 5 from the viewpoint of not only the safety but also the confidence in the safety assessment. However, we have to discuss the feasibility of options 5 and 6 in the exam- ination of the optimization. These options adopted the disposal facility design with the higher-performance materials for the low-permeability and low-diffusivity layers, indicating that the feasibility may be lower than that of the options with the reference materials. In addi- tion, it may be more difficult to control the quality of
Table . Values used in the parameter sets in Table .
the higher-performance materials than the reference materials, meaning that it costs more to increase the level of quality control. If the feasibility of options 5 and 6 is much greater than that of the other options, options 5 and 6 should be selected as the candidate opti- mal options. After that, we can determine the optimal option from options 5 and 6 depending on the feasibil- ity of increasing the level of quality control. On the other hand, if the feasibility of options 5 and 6 is not much greater than that of the other options, we next have to compare options 11 and 12 from the viewpoint of the safety of the disposal facility design.
The mode and width of the dose distribution of options 11 and 12, with the lower-performance site and higher-performance facility design, are similar to those of options 5 and 6, respectively. If the feasibility of options 11 and 12 is much greater than that of the other options, options 11 and 12 should be selected as the candidate optimal options. In addition, we determine the optimal option from options 11 and 12 depending on the feasibility of increasing the level of quality con- trol. In this case, because the feasibility of selecting the lower-performance site is higher than that of selecting the reference site, it is more affordable to increase the level of quality control in option 11 than in option 5.
On the other hand, if the feasibility of options 11 and 12 is not much greater than that of the other options, we next have to compare options 1, 2, and 8 from the viewpoint of the safety of the disposal facility design.
From the viewpoint of the  safety  of  the  dis-   posal system, options 1 and 2 with the reference site and reference facility design and option 8 with the lower-performance site and reference facility design are inferior to the other options. However, these options adopted the reference materials for the low- permeability and low-diffusivity layers, meaning that the feasibility of options 1, 2, and 8 may be much greater than that of the other options with the higher- performance materials. Furthermore, it may be easier to control the quality of the reference materials than the higher-performance materials, meaning that it can cost less to increase the level of quality control. Therefore, these options may be selected as the candidate optimal options. However, since the safety of these options is lower than that of the other options (5, 6, 11, and 12), we ultimately have to select the optimal option by consid- ering the balance between the exposure and feasibility of each option.
As described above, it was demonstrated that quan- titative information on the magnitude and probability
of exposure (i.e. the mode and width of the dose distri- bution) for each option including the associated uncer- tainty can be obtained by using the methodology pro- posed in this paper. The example also demonstrated that use of the information on the mode and width of the dose distribution and the feasibility of each option can allow us to examine the optimization of radioactive waste disposal. These facts indicate that the methodol- ogy proposed in this paper is applicable to the exam- ination of optimization. We should consider the bal- ance between the exposure and feasibility of options and how to select the optimal option by a decision-aiding technique such as cost-benefit analysis or multiattribute utility analysis, which are future research issues.
4.Conclusion
In this paper, we developed a methodology to optimize the radiation protection in radioactive waste disposal after the closure of a facility based on a probabilistic approach. To demonstrate that the radiation protection is optimized, it is necessary to carry out the follow- ing series of processes: (i) develop a set of alternative options of the disposal system design while taking the associated uncertainties into account; (ii) evaluate the options; and (iii) make a decision. This methodology allows us to carry out processes (i) and (ii). In pro-  cess (i), disposal system designs (a combination of one or more site(s) and design(s) of the facility) are devel- oped along with scenarios, models and parameter sets for each disposal system design. In process (ii), the com- pliance with a radiation constraint of 0.3 mSv/y is deter- mined and information is collected for making a deci- sion on the optimization.
The applicability of the proposed methodology was demonstrated by considering a sub-surface disposal system in Japan as an example. This example consid- ered six disposal system designs and the effective dif- fusion coefficient of the low-diffusivity layer and the permeability coefficient of the low-permeability layer as the parameter uncertainties associated with the disposal system design. In this example, it was demonstrated that use of the mode and width of the dose distribution, which were obtained by probabilistic safety assessment, and the feasibility of each option can allow us to exam- ine the optimization of radioactive waste disposal.
Note that not only the optimization of disposal sys- tem design but also that of each element constituting the disposal system design should be examined in the future. The essence of the optimization of radioactive waste disposal is to evaluate and rationally enhance the performance of disposal system design as a whole sys- tem composed of elements (the site or facility design); however, it is also necessary to evaluate and rationally enhance the performance of the elements. In the frame- work of the proposed methodology for the optimiza- tion of disposal system design, we are continuing to
discuss how to evaluate and reasonably enhance the performance of each element.
The ultimate goal of our study is to propose a com- prehensive methodology to optimize radiation protec- tion in radioactive waste disposal after the closure of a disposal facility. Therefore, in future, we will develop a methodology to carry out process (iii). Specifically, we will propose a methodology for comparing the obtained information, such as the exposure and feasibility of each option, by decision-aiding techniques and select the optimal option, making it possible to compare options by a well-defined, rational procedure.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
ORCID
Ryo Nakabayashi http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4909-5613