<title>Are radiographers an inﬂuencing factor in the radiation protection practices of speech-language therapists performing videoﬂuoroscopic swallowing studies?</title>
<author>H. Parsotam, H. Warren-Forward, M. Shields, J. McNulty, H. Shaw Bonilha,
C. O'Toole, B. Mathisen, R. Unicomb, A. Hearne, S. Pownall</author>
<Affiliation>a.University of  Newcastle, Australia;b.University College Dublin,  Ireland
c.Medical University of South Carolina, USA;d.University College Cork, Cork County Cork, Ireland
e.Southern Cross University, Bilinga, QLD, Australia;f.Massey University, New Zealand
g.Shefﬁeld Teaching Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, United Kingdom</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Radiography</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radi.2020.03.0031078-8174</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radi.2020.03.0031078-8174</URL>
ABSTRACT
Introduction: A videoﬂuoroscopic swallowing study (VFSS) is a ﬂuoroscopic examination conducted by radiographers and speech-language therapists (SLTs) to assess dysphagia. Given the potential of SLTs to feed patients during the procedure, they may be exposed to radiation. The research aimed to assess radiation protection practices utilised by SLTs to determine if radiographers have a role in providing ongoing practical education.
Methods: An online questionnaire was distributed to SLTs from six countries (Australia, Canada, Ireland, New Zealand, United Kingdom and United States of America). Responses were analysed quantitatively using frequencies and chi-square analysis (p ¼ 0.05) and supported by written comments.
Results: A total of 224 responses were analysed. Thyroid shields (94%) were used more frequently than
full aprons (72%). Differences (p < 0.0001) were seen between Australian and USA participants regarding the use and position of radiation monitors; 43% of Australian participants stating they always used a monitor, compared to 75% of USA participants. Nearly all Australian SLTs wore monitors under shielding (92%) and at waist level (69%), while USA participants reported wearing them outside shielding (97%) and at thyroid level (94%). Participants’ radiation practice was inﬂuenced primarily by other SLTs (64%), followed by radiographers (57%). However, written comments revealed the signiﬁcance of the radiog- rapher in providing training as “radiographers are excellent at ensuring we [use] right equipment, stand in the right places and use exposure monitoring”.
Conclusion: SLTs did not always adopt the ICRP principle of shielding and there were inconsistencies with regards to the use and placement of radiation monitors. Radiographers are well positioned to provide advice with regards to safe practice.
Implications for practice: Opportunities to enhance radiation protection practices are evident, as is the advising role of radiographers.
Keywords:
Videoﬂuoroscopic swallowing study   Dysphagia  Speech-language therapists   Radiation protection Practice
Introduction
The videoﬂuoroscopic swallowing study (VFSS) is an examina- tion, which assesses oral-pharyngeal dysphagia in children and adults. The examination involves imaging barium-coated foods and liquids travelling from the oral cavity to the cervical oesophagus.1,2 Images determine the underlying cause(s) of dysphagia, allowing interventional recommendations to be made.1 Traditionally per- formed with a radiologist and a speech-language therapist (SLT),3 today in many countries the role of the radiologist  has  largely been reduced and the examination is a collaboration between a radiographer1 and the SLT.2 The radiographer is responsible for all technical aspects of the study (kVp, mAs, ﬁltration, collimation and magniﬁcation),1 while the SLT determines the study protocol and assesses swallowing physiology and function.1 Depending on pa- tient presentation, SLTs may be required to assist in positioning and feeding the patient during the procedure and thus be exposed to radiation.4,5
While the x-ray tube is being activated the ﬂuoroscopy room is classiﬁed as a “controlled area”, and requirements exist for any personnel entering this area; these include being subjected to in- dividual dose assessment; being provided with and be trained to use personal protective equipment (PPE) and that they must have received any speciﬁc training required to ensure dose mini- misation.6 Part 7 of the UK Ionising Radiation Regulations state that “An employee who is engaged in work with ionising radiation must not knowingly expose themselves or any other person to ionising radiation to an extent greater than is reasonably necessary … and must exercise reasonable care while carrying out such work”, thus, it is important to ensure that actions are taken to keep radiation exposures As Low As Reasonably Practicable (ALARP).6,7
In 2006, an Australian SLT successfully sued her local health authority after developing thyroid cancer believed to be induced through work-related activities.8 Following this, a study was commissioned to investigate thyroid doses to SLTs and this revealed that while doses are very low, there were large variations in the doses between SLTs performing VFSSs in the three hospitals monitored.8 The study concluded that it is good radiation practice for those involved in VFSS to use PPE such as lead equivalent aprons and thyroid shields and to be educated in appropriate aspects of radiation safety.8
Radiation safety relies on the basics of formal education, continuous professional development and operator competence. Radiographers are formally educated in radiation protection at university level and are required to receive ongoing education and are mandated to have radiation safety of all staff and patients as a primary concern. While it should also be the responsibility of SLTs who perform VFSS to be aware of and understand the guidelines, recommendations and preventative measures to reduce radiation to themselves and others9 this is not possible unless radiation safety is a core component in their knowledge base. Given the collaborative role of the radiographer and SLT in performing VFSS, the radiographer is well placed to provide “on the job” advice to SLTs to ensure that they have safe radiation protection practices.
A number of studies exist investigating SLTs knowledge and practice of radiation protection. One study conducted in 2004 with 121 American SLTs established that SLTs perform VFSSs without adequate awareness of the risks.10 Protective measures such as increasing distance from the radiation were reported as being disregarded.10 A 2008 Australian study conducted with 69 SLTs concluded that while SLTs self-reported sufﬁcient theoretical knowledge of radiation safety, this was not reﬂected in their clinical practice.11 A 2013 American study reported ﬁndings similar to the Australian study in that participants self-reported adequate knowledge, however they could not successfully translate theo- retical knowledge into optimal clinical practice.11,12
The research conducted on SLT practice is sparse, outdated, conducted on a small number of participants and limited to American and Australian SLTs. Having said that, the ﬁndings of the research formed the foundation for SLT regulating organisations to update their clinical practice guidelines (CPGs) to incorporate more advice on the risks of radiation exposure and the methods of dose
reduction.1,2,4,13,14 The impact of the revised guidelines on SLT ra- diation protection practices has not been addressed, though a recent systematic review has reported inadequacies in the quality of information on radiation safety in the CPGs.15
It seems reasonable to re-evaluate whether SLTs have adequate radiation protection practices, or if further education and training and day-to-day advice from radiographers is required. As such, the aim of this research was to explore radiation safety practices and inﬂuencing factors of SLTs performing VFSSs. To direct  the research a series of questions were developed using existing research, the ICRP principles of radiation protection and a ques- tion seeking information about whether SLTs consider the radi- ographer as an inﬂuence in their radiation protection practice. The guiding questions were:
Are SLTs knowledgeable of the ICRP principles of time, distance and shielding?
What distances do SLTs stand from their patients during
ﬂuoroscopy?
●What types of shielding do SLTs use?
●Are SLTs regularly monitored for radiation dose?
●What factors inﬂuence SLTs radiation protection practices?
Methods
Research ethics
Ethics approval was granted by The University of Newcastle Human Research Ethics Committee (H-2018-0481).
Research participants
Participants in this study were SLTs from Australia, Canada, Ireland, New Zealand, United Kingdom (UK) and the United States of America (USA) performing VFSSs or who had conducted VFSSs in the last two years. No distinction was made to the role of the SLT, thus could include both those operating within or outside the controlled area.
Participant recruitment
Recruitment was through professional organisations and special interest groups. Invitation to participate was through member newsletters, national conferences and social media.
Research tool
As the research sought to deﬁne working practices of SLTs per- forming VFSSs, descriptive research methodology using online surveying was used. To allow unique insights into responses, open- ended questions were utilised to supplement the predominantly multiple-response questions. The questionnaire was assessed for face and content validity by a panel of two physics academics (knowledgeable in radiation protection and safety), three radiog- raphy academics and nine SLTs (mix of academics and clinical practitioners). The academics have responsibility for educating students though not speciﬁcally in VFSSs, and the six SLT practi- tioners regularly perform VFSS examinations. The survey was then beta-tested on 10 potential participants before launch.
The questionnaire, hosted by SurveyMonkey (SurveyMonkey. com) contained 96 questions divided into ﬁve sections: de- mographics (7 questions); VFSS education and training (14 ques- tions); VFSS practice (23 questions); radiation protection education (14 questions); radiation protection knowledge and practice (37
questions). The questionnaire was navigated using skip logic, tailoring it to each participant.
Data analysis
Quantitative data from closed questions was analysed using basic summary statistics. Statistical differences were analysed using Chi-Square at the 5% (p 0.05) level. Responses from open-ended questions were stratiﬁed by response and used to supplement quantitative analysis. Direct quotes have been annotated with participant number and country, for example (P4,Aus) represents Participant 4 practicing in Australia. Any author clariﬁcation to quotes have been underlined for distinction.
Results
This article presents the results from the sections on participant demographics and radiation protection knowledge and practice. Data from other sections will be reported separately. While re- sponses by country are presented, it was only statistically viable to compare responses between Australian and USA participants.
Participant demographics
A total of 231 participants responded; seven did not identify their country and were excluded leaving 224 participants. Of these, 111 (50%) were from the USA, 71 (32%) from Australia, 15 (7%) from
the UK, 10 (4%) from Canada, 10 (4%) from Ireland, and 7 (3%) from New Zealand. Key participant demographics are reported in Table 1. Of note was the relatively young age group (65% under the age of 40 years) and the predominantly female (96%) participant group. Both of these are typical of the SLT demographic in the countries surveyed.16e19
Self-reported adequacy
Sixty-one percent of participants reported that their radiation protection practice as adequate, the remainder stated inadequate (21%) or unsure (18%). Typical responses from those indicating their practice was adequate were:
“I ensure that myself (or the Team Assistant) wear our exposure meters, thyroid guards, and leaden vest plus leaden skirt We
stand away from the actuator (assumed to be the radiation control panel) and behind the leaden Perspex shield. If assistance to feed is required, we ensure we are outside the ﬁeld” (P34,Aus).
Comments from participants indicating unsure indicated it's
“hard to know what you don't know would like more training to  ensure I'm covering all bases” (P17,Aus).
Participants reporting inadequate practice tended to comment on not being provided with adequate protection “We do not have correct sized lead, not adequate thyroid coverage” (P98,USA) and that “No dosimetry badges are issued to SLPs” (P145,USA). Many reported “I haven't had any ‘training’, something would be better than nothing” (P182,Aus) and those who received training commented that it may be insufﬁcient “My hospital does have a computer learning module that I have to take every year, but I don't feel like it equips me with a thorough understanding of the topic” (P54,USA).
Principles of time, distance and shielding
Fig. 1 presents responses to the question “Which of these are valid methods of radiation protection?” Participants supported wearing a thyroid collar (98%), standing behind a screen (86%), wearing a full body lead equivalent apron (86%) ahead of increasing distance (83%) and decreasing time (78%).
While increasing distance from the radiation was recognised as a valid method of protection, most participants (60%) stood 1 m or less from the patient while X-rays were being generated (Fig. 2). A highly signiﬁcant difference (p 0.005) existed between Australia and USA with 72% of participants from USA standing one metre or less compared to 58% of Australian participants standing two or more metres from the patient.
Participants were asked to indicate how often they used six PPE items with frequencies offered as never (0%), infrequently (25%), sometimes (50%), often (75%), very often (80e95%) and always (100%). The thyroid shield was the most widely used (93% stating always) PPE, followed by full lead equivalent aprons (68% stating always) (Table 2). All other types of PPE were mainly never used
Table 1
Summary of participant demographics.Population Australia (n ¼ 71) Canada (n ¼ 10) Ireland (n ¼ 10) New Zealand (n ¼ 7) United Kingdom (n ¼ 15) USA (n ¼ 111) ALL (n ¼ 224)
Figure 1. Percentage of participant selecting methods as a valid means of radiation protection.
Figure 2. Histogram representing the distance that participants usually stand from the patient when the x-rays are being activated.
(glasses (67%); gloves (80%); vests (half aprons) (63%) and portable shields (70%).
Radiation monitoring
Fifty eight percent of SLTs reported that they always wore per- sonal dosimeters. One personal dosimeter was commonly used, though 6% of participants reported wearing two personal dosime- ters and four participants also reported wearing ﬁnger dosimeters. Almost half (41%) of Australian SLTs reported never wearing a personal dosimeter while 75% of USA participants reported always wearing personal dosimeters (Table 2). This difference was highly signiﬁcant (p < 0.0001). Responses from Australian participants indicated recent changes towards a decline in use “When I ﬁrst arrived to my hospital we had radiation monitoring badges but these were later stopped due to cost” (P66, Aus) and “there are some recent
studies regarding the necessity of radiation monitoring for SP, due to low dosages” (P186, Aus).
When only one personal dosimeter was worn, highly signiﬁcant differences were noted in position worn between Australian and USA participants (p < 0.0001). Nearly all USA participants wore them outside of shielding (97%) at the thyroid (94%) compared with Australian participants who wore them under shielding (92%) at waist level (69%) (Fig. 3).
Inﬂuencing factors and the role of the radiographer
Most participants (64%) reported that other SLTs had the largest contribution in inﬂuencing their radiation protection  practice (Table 3). The radiographer (57%), radiologist (56%) and self- education (54%) followed closely. It is worthwhile noting that in  all countries (except the USA) the radiographer was seen as either
Table 2
Frequency of use of protective devices and radiation monitoring.
the most inﬂuential authority (Canada and Ireland) or as inﬂuential as other SLTs (Australia and UK).
Many written statements clearly identiﬁed radiographers as having an active role in SLT radiation safety practices as “protec- tion and safety is directed by the radiographers ... If we're doing something unsafely we would be told. I can't think of any time where I've been pulled up on safety by radiographers…” (P31,Aus). Some participants had been “individually instructed  by  a  radiographer how the process of radiation safety works” (P107,USA) and that “The radiographers are excellent at ensuring we [use] right  equipment, stand in the right places and use exposer monitoring (personal do- simeters)” (P229,UK).
Availability of educational resources
Less than half (47%) of the participants considered availability of educational resources regarding radiation protection within their department as adequate; 32% considered it as inadequate and 23% were unsure.
Those responding ‘Yes’ were provided with “Written and recent literature” (P69, USA) and e-learning “have an online e-learning module available” (P88, Can). However, most participants saw other personnel as their main resource as the “radiography dept is very proactive in giving advice and support” (P67,Ire).
Those answering unsure, reported there was “no information provided as a formality. I am not sure where this exists” (P28,Aus). Responses from those reporting resources were not readily available indicated that they needed to “look outside of  work  to learn …” (P181,USA), and that information was “Deﬁnitely not "readily available" it might be available somewhere ..  I'm  sure  the  ﬁrst ﬁve people I would ask wouldn't know where” (P54,USA).
Desired future changes
When asked what future changes they would like, participants responded with “increased education” (85%), “greater access to ra- diation protection devices” (52%) and “more radiation monitoring”
Figure 3. Histogram representing the placement of radiation monitors.
Table 3
Participant inﬂuencing factors with regards to radiation protection practice.
(45%) (Table 4). Only 8% of participants stated that they would require no changes.
Discussion
Principles of time, distance and shielding
The fundamental principles of radiation protection: time, dis- tance and shielding were correctly noted by most participants (78%, 83%, 86% respectively) as methods of protection. These responses indicated less knowledge about the impact of time and distance than previously reported in an Australian study (96%, 96%, 69%)11 but an increased knowledge of PPE.
The wearing of PPE has seen a shift towards increased use of thyroid shields and decrease in full lead equivalent aprons. Results show that 93% of SLTs always wore thyroid shields compared with previous studies reporting between 73% and 83%.10e12 Only 68% of participants always reported wearing full lead equivalent aprons, compared to previous studies reporting 83%e97%.10e12
Given that other organs are more radiosensitive than the thy- roid, wearing a thyroid shield and not a lead equivalent apron is poor practice and in fact contravenes radiation regulations for the countries included in this study. For example, Canadian guidelines state “All persons… required to be in the room for radioscopy… must wear protective aprons”20 (reference); USA guidelines indi- cate that “all personnel … should be protected from scatter radia- tion by either protective aprons or whole body shields”.21 UK regulations similarly advise that “any personnel entering this (controlled) area should be provided with and be trained to use any PPE”.22
While the survey did not ask on the speciﬁc role of the partic- ipant with regards to whether or not they are within the controlled area, the discrepancy between always using a thyroid shield and a lead equivalent full apron could imply that some SLTs are present within the controlled area without adequate use of PPE. As such, radiographers should ensure that SLTs always wear full lead equivalent aprons while in the controlled area. Alternatively, there may be some misinterpretation in the question and speciﬁc response, with those SLT's reporting to not always using a lead equivalent being located outside the controlled area during radia- tion activation.
It is recommended that SLTs should not stand in the direction of the primary X-ray beam, and should increase their distance from both the X-ray tube and the patient.23 This practice does not appear to be reﬂected in clinical practice with 60% of participants standing 1 m or less from the patient during generation of radiation. If SLTs wear lead equivalent aprons then increasing distance can be waived, however only 68% of participants always reported wearing full lead equivalent aprons. The signiﬁcant difference in compliance between Australian and USA participants may be explained by the explicit use of a 2 m minimum distance reported in the Australian CPGs1 and not in USA CPGs.4 It should be noted that a 2 m distance can be impractical for some patient presentations and small im- aging rooms. The Australian data reported in this study is compa- rable to earlier Australian research.11
Radiation monitoring
Use of personal dosimeters
The use of personal dosimeters by Australian SLTs (43% always wore, 41% never wore) was signiﬁcantly lower than USA partici- pants (75% always wore, 7% never wore), however were higher than the 36% reported in an earlier study.11 Following guidelines from the Australian Radiation Protection and Nuclear Safety Agency,24 Speech Pathology Australia VFSS CPG state that “The service pro- vider is responsible for providing an approved personal monitoring device to each occupationally exposed person who is likely to  be  exposed to ionizing radiation in excess of 1 mSv in any one year” and that the “monitoring of radiation dose may not be  necessary  for  speech pathologists”1, page 24. While there may be no legal requirement for Australian SLTs to wear a dosimeter, many com- mented on their lack of availability and it is assumed their use would make this cohort more at ease. Despite American guidelines stating that SLTs must always wear personal dosimeters,21 only 75% of USA participants always reported wearing one.
Placement of personal dosimeters
Signiﬁcant differences were noted between where participants wore their personal dosimeters. Australian SLTs reported wearing them under shielding at waist level compared to over shielding at thyroid level by USA participants. This is consistent with respective legislations of these countries. Australian regulations state that “a
Table 4
Changes participants would like to see in the future in regards to radiation protection and training.
dosimeter must not be worn outside the apron unless it is additional to one worn underneath”25, page 5. This complies with international guidelines stating that “personal dosimeter should be worn below the lead apron”21 though “a second dosimeter may be worn outside and above the apron at the neck level”26, page; 63. This is contradictory to USA regulations stating that “When a radiation protective apron is worn, a dosimeter should be worn at the collar outside the apron. A second dosimeter may be worn on the abdomen under the apron.”.21 Therefore respective CPGs are providing advice in line with relevant country legislations and SLTs are following the CPGs.
Inﬂuencing factors and role of radiographers
Unlike earlier studies,11,12 where participants indicated  that other SLTs were the main inﬂuencing factor in their radiation protection practice, this study identiﬁed that the radiographer was either the most inﬂuential ﬁgure or equal to other SLTs in providing radiation protection advice, the exception was USA participants who reported other SLTs as being their main inﬂuencing factor. The explicit role of the radiographer in ensuring that SLTs perform their duties with adequate radiation protection was highlighted through many written comments provided throughout the survey.
The ﬁndings of this research have highlighted that while placement of dosimeters appear appropriate for each countries legislation their overall use together with the use of PPE in underutilised. Many participants reported reliance on the radiog- rapher to inform them of safe practice, and assumed their practice was adequate unless instructed otherwise. As such radiographers need to ensure that all SLTs entering the controlled area wear full lead equivalent gowns together with appropriate placement of personal dosimeters. This is speciﬁcally necessary given the higher tissue weighting factor of the breast (0.12) compared to the thyroid (0.04) and that around 96% of the SLT profession are female.
Availability of educational resources
While nearly half of participants reported a wide range of educational resources being readily available, it was disappointing to note that advice was not always forthcoming even when requested. A predominant theme in response to these questions was that radiographers would inform them if their practice was inappropriate. The lack of formal education and readily available resources may account for the reason why SLTs are reliant on the radiation protection advice and knowledge of the radiographer. It is recommended that CPGs be updated to include detailed, explicit and uniform advice on radiation protection and that certiﬁcation and continual professional education be mandated for SLTs involved in undertaking VFSSs.
Desired future changes
The greatest change that participants would like to see in the future was an increased level of education. Despite earlier studies recommending greater levels of formal education and continual professional development provided by medical physicists and/or radiation safety ofﬁcers, the results showed that SLTs are still not getting education and information about radiation protection from appropriate sources.8,11,12 Increasing the amount of radiation edu- cation provided to SLTs would enable them to be better equipped and more conﬁdent to identify radiation risks and manage them whilst utilising appropriate protective measures. This education needs to be provided via SLT professional organisations, either through undergraduate education or increased vigilance at regis- tration and continual professional education.
The second change requested was greater access to radiation protection devices, with many written responses indicating either a lack of shielding or old, incorrectly ﬁtting lead equivalent aprons. This should be the role of the radiographer to ensure that SLTs are provided with appropriately ﬁtting PPE. The third response was greater access to personal dosimeters. This is assumed important as many services are now removing this service without any rationale being provided to SLTs. As part of the formal education provided, it would be beneﬁcial to inform SLTs of the low level of doses received during each procedure. If monitored SLTs should also be provided with their dose reports to provide reassurance that their doses are below threshold levels.
Strengths and weaknesses
The questionnaire was designed by a medical physicist knowl- edgeable in radiation protection and revised in consultation with appropriate stakeholders (medical physicists, SLTs and radiogra- phers) to ensure that it accommodated the target participant group. While mainly quantitative in nature the addition of open-ended questions allowed participants the opportunity to provide a ratio- nale for their responses greatly adding to the interpretation of results.
The international comparison between six countries aimed to provide a holistic evaluation of SLTs radiation practices, however due to the varied response rates the results are biased towards Australian and USA participants. Having said that, the recommen- dations made from the research can be used by SLTs from many countries as a foundation for their own practice.
The questionnaire was lengthy as it sought to gather in-depth data about SLT demographics, education (graduate, post-graduate and continual professional education) and radiation safety (knowledge, inﬂuencing factors and practice). The time advertised in the recruitment material to complete the questionnaire may have resulted in the small number of responses. A personal invi- tation to all SLTs performing VFSS may have increased the response rate, however this was not possible as the authors were restricted in recruitment methodology imposed by the various SLT organi- sations (advertisement via monthly newsletters).
The recruitment material clearly indicated the assessment of radiation safety knowledge and practice, leading to a possible positive bias in outcome with those SLTs being conﬁdent in their skills being more likely to participate.
Conclusion and recommendations
Similar to other studies, this current research identiﬁed  that SLTs were knowledgeable in the principles of time, distance and shielding though did not always adopt these principles in practice. Of particular note, participants may not always wear lead equiva- lent aprons in the controlled area and most stood less than 1 m from the patient during ﬂuoroscopy activation. Radiographers have a role in ensuring that SLTs are provided with and wear full lead equivalent aprons and that personal dosimeters are appropriately positioned.
Future recommendations for SLTs radiation protection practice include:
Increased formal education and annual in-service refresher courses provided by appropriately qualiﬁed professionals Compulsory use of full protective lead equivalent aprons in addition to wearing thyroid shields for those within the controlled area
Use of personal dosimeters for SLTs expected to enter the controlled area
Personal dosimeters should be worn in positions according to appropriate country legislation
Internationally, CPGs should be regularly updated and provide explicit and uniform information on the safety requirements for SLTs. Additionally, the CPGs should direct SLTs to appropriate national radiation regulations and guidelines.
Conﬂict of interest statement
None.
Acknowledgements
This research did not receive any speciﬁc grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-proﬁt sectors.