<title>Neurochemical insights into the radiation protection of astronauts: Distinction between low- and moderate-LET radiation components</title>
<author>Oleg V. Belova,⁎, Ksenia V. Belokopytovaa,b, Vladimir S. Kudrinc, Aleksandr G. Molokanova,
Andrey S. Shtembergd, Ara S. Bazyane</author>
<Affiliation>a Joint Institute for Nuclear Research, Dubna
b Academy of Sciences of Moldova, Chișinău, Moldavia
c Research Zakusov Institute of Pharmacology, Moscow, Russia
d Institute of Biomedical Problems, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
e Institute of Higher Nervous Activity and Neurophysiology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia
</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Physica Medica</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.ejmp.2018.12.003</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmp.2018.12.003</URL>
ABSTRACT
Radiation protection of astronauts remains an ongoing challenge in preparation of deep space exploratory missions. Exposure to space radiation consisting of multiple radiation components is associated with a signiﬁcant risk of experiencing central nervous system (CNS) detriments, potentially inﬂuencing the crew operational de- cisions. Developing of countermeasures protecting CNS from the deleterious exposure requires understanding  the mechanistic nature of cognitive impairments induced by diﬀerent components of  space  radiation.  The  current study was designed to identify diﬀerences in neurochemical modiﬁcations caused by exposure to low-  and moderate-LET radiations and to elucidate a distinction between the observed outcomes. We exposed rats to accelerated protons (170 MeV; 0.5 keV/μm) or to carbon ions (12C; 500 MeV/u; 10.5 keV/μm) delivered at the same dose of 1 Gy. Neurochemical alterations were evaluated 1, 30, and 90 days after exposure via indices of the monoamine metabolism measured in ﬁve brain structures, including prefrontal cortex, hypothalamus, nucleus
accumbens, hippocampus and striatum. We obtained the detailed patterns of neurochemical modiﬁcations after exposure to the mentioned radiation modalities. Our data show that the enhancement in the radiation LET from relatively low to moderate values leads to diﬀerent neurochemical outcomes and that a particular eﬀect depends on the irradiated brain structure. We also hypothesized that exposure to the moderate-LET radiations can induce  a hyperactivation of feedback neurochemical mechanisms, which blur metabolic deviations and lead to the delayed impairments in brain functions. Based on our ﬁndings we discuss possible contribution of the observed changes to behavioural impairments.
Keywords:
Radiation protection Space radiation
Central nervous system Protons
Carbon ions
1.Introduction
Radiation damage to the central nervous system (CNS) has become an ongoing health challenge of last decades largely due to the issues of radiation hazards of human missions to other planets and asteroids [1–4]. In such a mission, for example to Mars, the crew would be ex- posed to continuous Galactic Cosmic Rays (GCRs), and potentially large bursts of Solar Energetic Particles (SEPs) [5,6]. These components of space radiation both include a fraction of high-energy particles capable to disrupt normal functioning of the brain.
GCRs are high energy particles composed of roughly 89–90% pro- tons, ∼10–13% helium ions, ∼1% of electrons and ∼1% heavier nu-  clei [7,8]. Because of their high energies, GCRs are diﬃcult to shield
against, both during a Mars cruise and at the Martian surface. SEPs are dominantly protons with fractions of helium ions and heavier nuclei, which spectra may vary signiﬁcantly in individual SEP event both with time and with energy [9]. Most of the SEPs are potentially risking mainly during a Mars cruise, however, in “hard spectrum” events, ions can be accelerated to energies well above 150 MeV/u with substantial ﬂuxes reaching the Martian surface.
Ground-based simulation of CNS eﬀects, which can be induced by components of space radiation shows that the exposure to high-energy particle beams leads to a variety of neural malfunctions in laboratory animals, including both acute and late outcomes. The most reported eﬀects being observed within a relatively short period after irradiation embrace altered cognitive function, manifesting via detriments in short-
term memory, reduced motor function and behavioural changes related to motor behaviour, amphetamine-mediated test of aversive learning, and operant conditioning [10]. Late alterations may be represented by a number of CNS disorders such as prolonged deﬁcits in long-term memory, degenerative changes stimulating the aging and other cogni- tive impairments [1–3,11,12]. Despite an intensive study of these ab- normalities at the levels of behaviour, cognition and speciﬁc cellular responses, the neurochemical mechanisms and the most relevant brain regions associated with the observed alterations have not been clearly identiﬁed.
Evaluation of the brain biogenic amines’ metabolism provides an important information on the current neurochemical state of CNS. Dopamine- (DA), serotonin- (or 5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) and nor- adrenaline (NA)-ergic systems [13–18] are the brain pathways essential for the formation of emotional and motivational states and behaviour control through the hierarchical neural networks [19]. Most of the neurological disorders are connected with deviations in DA-, 5-HT- or NA-ergic regulation.
Available evidences link radiation-induced CNS impairments with damage to some structures of the brain mesolimbic and mesocortical dopaminergic systems, which have been recognized for their central role in motivated behaviours, various types of reward, emotional state, as well as in cognitive processes and executive functions [20,21]. We and other authors have reported radiation-induced alterations in the prefrontal cortex, nucleus accumbens, striatum, hippocampus, and hy- pothalamus [13–15], the structures controlling the behaviour of ani- mals via modiﬁcation of the activities of the NA, DA, and 5-HT systems [20–22]. The prefrontal cortex is known to play a key role in learning as well as short-term and long-term memory processes [23,24]; the hy- pothalamus contains the centres of food, drink, and sexual behaviour [25–27]; the striatum performs motor control and determines complex behaviour [28,29]; the hippocampus is the functional centre of  the brain responsible for learning and memory [11,30–32], cognitive map of brain [33,34], spatial orientation [35–37], and the context of the environment [19]; the nucleus accumbens is the center of integration of information between the prefrontal cortex, hypothalamus, amygdala, habenula, and the hippocampus [25,38]. Despite the observations re- porting disruption in the activity of these structures, additional pieces of data are needed to conclude on the role of each of them in a parti- cular physiology outcome of radiation exposure.
Clinically signiﬁcant CNS risks and their dependences on the dose, dose-rate and radiation quality are also poorly understood at this time. This contributes to uncertainties in predicting the total radiation risk to the crew in Martian mission as well as creates diﬃculties for developing potential medical countermeasures.
An eﬀective dose of 1 Gy is found to be a total mission dose equivalent for a round trip Mars surface mission with 180 days (each way) cruise, and 500 days on the Mars [39]. On the other hand, 1 Gy is a career limit dose for astronauts being used by several space agencies, including Russian Space Agency (Roscosmos), European Space Agency (ESA), and Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA), while NASA uses an individual risk-based system for radiation protection assuming even lower dose limits [40,41]. This motivates for a more detailed in- vestigation of health eﬀects caused by doses of about 1 Gy, especially for prediction of the health injury at diﬀerent phases of the mission as well as in the case if a large SEP burst occurred during a transit and the crew received a suﬃcient dose [42].
Protons and heavy ions of a high linear energy transfer (LET) are widely discussed in connection with the radiation protection of space travellers. Among the heavy ions, Fe particles of around 150–170 keV/ μm are frequently used in ground-based experiments to simulate the hard spectrum component of space radiation. At the same time, a cu- mulative health eﬀect of high-energy ions comprising the C-O group with LET of about 10s keV/μm could also be signiﬁcant due to their even higher abundance in the GCR ﬂux than is observed for Fe particles [7]. In this context, the energy range of 102–103 MeV/u is of interest
because it corresponds to the maximal diﬀerential ﬂux of particles in cosmic rays spectra.
To date, few data are available in literature about the mechanistic nature of brain disorders induced by particles of a moderate and low LET, especially in the context of CNS-related space radiation risk. Thus, this study was designed to evaluate speciﬁc brain responses to irra- diation with 10.6 keV/μm carbon ions (500 MeV/u) and 0.5 keV/μm proton (170 MeV), attempting to identify the brain regions and neuro- chemical mechanisms vulnerable to these radiation modalities.
2.Materials and methods
2.1.Animals
Sixty   male   Sprague-Dawley   rats   (HSD:SD;   certiﬁed   by   Harlan Sprague  Dawley,  Inc.)  weighing  195–200 g  were  delivered  from  the Pushchino  Animal  Breeding  Facility  of  the  Institute  of  Bioorganic Chemistry (Pushchino, Russia). The rats were placed to the animal fa- cility  of  the  Joint  Institute  for  Nuclear  Research  (JINR)  and  acclima- tized for 7 days prior to irradiation. All the animals were maintained in plastic cages (maximum ﬁve rats per cage) under constant temperature conditions  (20  ±  2 °C),  fed  with  autoclaved  rat  chow  and  water  by bottle  ad  libitum  and  kept  under  a  12-h  light/12-h  dark  cycle.  At  the time of irradiation the rats were 7.5–8.0 weeks old.
In order to evaluate the eﬀects of exposure to protons and  12C particles, two groups of animals (30 rats each) were used. 15 animals of each group were irradiated with protons or 12C ions, while the re- maining 15 rats were used as controls, i.e. each of the irradiated groups had its own sham-irradiated control. Neurochemical analyses were performed 24 h, 30 days and 90 days after exposures. For each of these three testing periods 5 irradiated and 5 control animals were examined. All animal procedures were performed in accordance with the reg- ulations and principles expressed in the Russian Guidelines for Animal Experiments [43] and Sanitary Regulations for the Organization, Equipment, and Maintenance of Animal Facilities for Experimental Biology (Vivaria) [44], which meet the basic requirements of EU Di- rective 2010/63/EU for animal experiments. All protocols were em- ployed in compliance with the rules approved by the bioethical com- mittees of the Institute of Biomedical Problems and the Institute of Higher Nervous Activity and Neurophysiology of the Russian Academy
of Sciences.
2.2.Irradiation procedure
All irradiated animals were exposed to a single dose of 1 Gy of protons or 12C particles in order to have a total Martian mission dose [39]. The exposure to 170 MeV protons occurred at the Phasotron fa- cility of the Medical and Technical Complex of JINR’s Dzhelepov La- boratory of Nuclear Problems. The animals were ﬁxed in well-venti- lated 8.5 × 8.5 × 20-cm irradiation jigs made of mouldable plastic and adapted for simultaneous keeping of 4 animals. Each jig was placed at the centre of a 9.0 × 9.0-cm squared proton beam having a track- averaged LET of 0.5 keV/μm. No any materials were located between the beamline output and the target. The rats received a total body ir- radiation at a nominal dose rate of 1 Gy/min. The LET variation through the rat brain was less than 5%. The beam dosimetry calibration was performed using a clinical dosimeter PTW UNIDOS-E according to guidelines of the International Atomic Energy Agency [45]. The uni- formity of the dose cross-section and energy of the proton beam was online controlled with multiwire ionization chambers and Si detectors [46]. The beam uniformity was also visually controlled with the Gaf- chromic RTQA-1010P dosimetry ﬁlm which was placed behind the ir-
radiated animals. The total error of the absorbed dose measurements did not exceed 10%. The control rats were sham-irradiated by being placed in irradiation jigs and kept the same time in the preparation room of the Phasotron facility without exposure to protons.
The irradiation with 500 MeV/u 12C particles was performed at the Nuclotron facility of JINR’s Veksler and Baldin Laboratory of High Energy Physics. The rats were ﬁxed in 6.5 × 6.5 × 16.5-cm acrylic ir- radiation jigs with multiple ventilation holes and placed sequentially per 2 jigs at the centre of a 5-cm-diameter circle 12C ion beam with a particles’ LET of 10.6 keV/μm. The absorbed dose was measured by a free-air ionization chamber with a 4.5 × 4.5-cm sensitive area placed upstream of the target. No other materials were located before the target. A quasi-uniform radiation ﬁeld was created by defocusing of the ion beam with a magnetic lens before the point of exposure. The in- homogeneity of the ﬁeld along the X and Y axes did not exceed ± 5% within the exposure area. The total error of the absorbed dose mea- surements did not exceed 10%. The LET variation through the rat brain was less than 6%. The control rats were taken to the Nuclotron facility but were not exposed to the beam. The jigs with control rats were sham- irradiated by remaining in the preparation room, while their counter- parts were taken into the irradiation vault of the accelerator.
After all the exposures are completed, the rats were returned to the animal facility of JINR and maintained until the neurochemical studies. The animal work procedures and other parameters of the experi- ment, except the radiation modality used, were kept as close as possible
between all the groups of rats.
2.3.Analysis of neuromodulator concentrations
At the day of testing the rats were decapitated and their brains were removed and placed onto an ice-cold surface. The prefrontal cortex, nucleus accumbens, hypothalamus, hippocampus and striatum were dissected, rapidly frozen in the liquid nitrogen, and weighed. The pieces of dissected brain structures were then homogenized at +4 °C in the glass tube of a Schuett homgenplus semi-automatic homogenizer (Schuett-biotec, GmbH, Göttingen, Germany) with a Teﬂon pestle (clearance between the pestle and tube 0.2 mm) at the pestle rotation rate of 3000 rpm. Homogenization and extraction were done in a 0.1 M HClO4 solution supplemented with the internal standard DOBA (3,4- dioxybenzylamine, a catecholamine drug which is absent in the native tissue; the concentration was 0.5 nmol/mL). Tissues from the nucleus accumbens were homogenized in 40-fold volumes, while the pieces of remaining brain areas were processed in a 20-fold volume of the ex- traction medium. The homogenates were then centrifuged at +4 °C and 10,000g for 15 min. Supernatants were collected and used for mea- suring the contents of NA, DA with its metabolites 3,4-dioxyphenyla- cetic acid (DOPAC), homovanillic acid (HVA) and 3-methoxytyramine (3-MT), and 5-HT with its metabolite 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5- HIAA). Concentrations of these substances were then used for evalua- tion of the DOPAC/DA, HVA/DA, and 5-HIAA/5-HT ratios, character- izing the monoamine turnover.
The concentrations of the substances (in nmol/mg of tissue) were measured with the LC304T high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Bioanalytical Systems, Inc., West Lafayette, IN, USA) with a Rheodyne 7125 syringe loading injector and a 20 μL loop for the application of samples. The investigated substances were separated on a ReproSil-Pur ODS−3 reversed-phase column, 3 μm, 100 × 4 mm (Dr.
Maisch  HPLC  GmbH,  Ammerbuch-Entringen,  Germany).  A PM−80
pump (Bioanalytical Systems, Inc., West Lafayette, IN, USA) with the mobile phase elution rate of 1.0 mL/min at a pressure of 200 atm (20.265 MPa) was used. The mobile phase was a 0.1 M citrate–pho- sphate buﬀer, which contained 1.1 mM octanesulfonic acid, 0.1 mM EDTA, and 9% acetonitrile (pH 3.0). The ﬂow rate was 1 mL/min. The measurements were performed using an LC−4B electrochemical de- tector (Bioanalytical Systems, Inc., West Lafayette, IN, USA) with a glassy carbon electrode (+0.85 V) and an Ag/AgCl reference electrode. The data recording was performed with the MULTICHROM 1.5 hard- ware-software complex (Ampersand Ltd., Moscow, Russia). The chro- matography system was calibrated using a standard solution of mea- sured substances at the concentration of 500 pM/mL.
Two datasets concerned 30- and 90-day results of the neurochemical study following the exposure to 12C ions were obtained in our previous work and reused in the current study to provide the reference data for the moderate-LET radiation [13]. Other data sets were not shown be- fore.
2.4.Statistical analysis
The concentrations of all substances were normalized to the sham- irradiation values, which were set to 100%. The data were expressed as the normalized mean ± the standard error of the mean (SEM). The results of the measurements were analysed using a one-way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) [47]. Post-hoc comparisons were performed with Fisher's least signiﬁcant diﬀerence (LSD) test [48]. To establish the general direction of changes, a two-tailed Wilcoxon matched pairs test was used [49]. All statistical analyses were performed using STATIST- ICA software (StatSoft, Inc., Tulsa, OK). Results were considered sig- niﬁcant if the signiﬁcance level was p < 0.05. If the observed level was p < 0.1, a trend toward statistical signiﬁcance was noted. A special assessment of neurochemical diﬀerences between sham-irradiated groups in proton and 12C-ion experiments was made, and no signiﬁcant diﬀerences or trends toward statistical signiﬁcance were found.
3.Results
3.1.Overall map of brain neuromodulator alterations
The brain regions, where the neuromodulator metabolism was af- fected by radiation exposures, are summarized in Fig. 1. In the acute period (24 h) after proton irradiation, statistically signiﬁcant alterations were observed in the prefrontal cortex, nucleus accumbens, hippo- campus and striatum. At that time the ﬁrst three of the regions were also aﬀected by 12C particles while no considerable changes were ob- served in the striatum.
30 days after exposure, the patterns of radiation-aﬀected sites of the brain were equivalent for both types of exposure. In this period the changes persisted in the nucleus accumbens and hippocampus, and they were also detected in the striatum. 90-day analysis revealed statistically signiﬁcant eﬀects of both radiations in the nucleus accumbens and hypothalamus and the eﬀect of the proton exposure in the hippo- campus.
Overall, the mapping in Fig. 1 suggests that in some brain areas both radiation modalities can induce neuromodulator alterations in a time- dependent manner. The prefrontal cortex, in particular, is shown to be associated with the acute outcomes while the hypothalamus exhibits signiﬁcant changes in late periods. At the same time, there are regions, which hold early metabolic changes through the months. In the present study such manner of alterations was observed in the nucleus ac- cumbens and hippocampus. In the former structure the changes per- sisted up to 90 days in all irradiated groups; in the latter one, metabolic deviations were also detected in all exposed animals with the exception of 90-day group irradiated with 12C particles.
Finally, although the same brain regions were eventually aﬀected by both radiations, the exact metabolic changes in them varied con- siderably depending on the type of exposure.
3.2.Prefrontal cortex
Neurochemical studies revealed diﬀerences in the acute response of the prefrontal cortex to proton and 12C-ion irradiation. 24 h after ex- posure, protons were found to induce changes in the metabolism of DA and 5-HT (Fig. 2a). There was a signiﬁcant increase in the concentra- tions of DA and DOPAC to 177.2 and 144.8%, respectively (the corre- sponding p-values are 0.035 and 0.018), relative to sham-irradiated controls. There were also trends to the reduction of the HVA/DA ratio to 51.8% (p = 0.062) and to the increase of the 5-HT level to 116.0%
Fig. 1. The overall map of brain neuromodulator alterations observed after exposure to 170 MeV protons and 500 MeV/u 12C particles at the dose of 1 Gy. Each particular graph depicts the brain regions where statistically signiﬁcant changes and trends toward statistical signiﬁcance were detected.
(p = 0.082), revealed simultaneously.
These endpoints of the proton exposure were compared to 24-h results of irradiation with 12C ions (Fig. 2b). The comparison revealed a diﬀerence between metabolic patterns of the two types of exposure. Irradiation with 12C ions resulted in a signiﬁcant decrease in the con- centrations of DOPAC, 5-HT and 5-HIAA to 69.2, 68.6 and 75.3%, re-0.050). There was also a trend to reduction in the level of NA to 70.6% spectively  (the  corresponding  p-values  were  0.015,  0.018,  0.021 and
(p = 0.050). Furthermore, the Wilcoxon matched pairs test indicated a
tabolism, the observed changes are likely caused by inhibition of the
DACO→MT	M→AOHVA.
dices after irradiation with 12C particles (p = 0.028). The observed metabolic alterations most probably suggest that the
DAMAODOPACCOMTHVA in this period. A simultaneous increase in DA and DOPAC levels together with the reduction of HVA/DA ratio in- dicates possible inhibition of the reaction dependent on the catechol-O- methyl transferase (COMT) activity and shift in the DA metabolism towards the transformation associated with the monoamine oxidase (MAO). The irradiation with 12C particles, in contrast to this, induces a deﬁcit in DA synthesis rather than in DA metabolism. This evidence is supported by the simultaneous decrease in the concentrations of DA and NA, parallel to unidirectional reduction in the majority of the evaluated metabolic parameters. Regarding alterations in the DA me- reaction	DA  M→AO	,	but	not	CO→MT  HVA	or tabolism, the observed changes are likely caused by inhibition of the
DACO→MT	M→AOHVA.
place in relation to the 5-HT metabolism. An elevated level of 5-HT
following the proton irradiation presumably indicates an inhibition in
5 - HTMAO5 - HIALALDR25 - HIAA, where 5-HIAL is the 5-hydroxyindole acetaldehyde and ALDR2 is the aldehyde dehydrogenase (type 2). Alternatively, the exposure to 12C particles apparently causes a deﬁcit
Fig.  2. Eﬀects  of  170 MeV  protons  (a)  and 500 MeV/u  12C  particles  (b)  on  the  mono- amine metabolism in the rat prefrontal cortex,    as    measured    24 h,    30 days, and 90 days postirradiation. The columns in- dicate   the   concentrations   of monoamines and their metabolites scaled per levels of these substances in sham-irradiated con- trols. The data is only presented for sub- stances that demonstrate statistically sig- niﬁcant changes and trends towards the signiﬁcance. The error bars represent the standard errors of the mean. (*) p <  0.05 and (#) p < 0.1 between the exposed and sham-irradiated rats. The inner plot desig- nates a general direction of changes in sets  of the indices after radiation exposure (in- dices demonstrating decrease vs. indices demonstrating increase). “PW-test” indicates the statistical signiﬁcance of diﬀerences between sets of neuromodulator indices measured in irradiated and control animals (according to the Wilcoxon matched pairs test).
500 MeV/u   12C  particles   (b)   on the  mono-  amine metabolism in the rat  hypothalamus, as    measured    24 h,    30 days,    and 90 days   postirradiation. The columns indicate the concentrations    of    monoamines    and  their  postirradiation. The columns indicate the concentrations    of    monoamines    and  their  metabolites scaled per levels of these sub- stances in sham-irradiated controls. The data is only presented for substances that demon- strate statistically signiﬁcant changes and trends towards the signiﬁcance. The error bars represent the standard errors of the mean. (**) p < 0.01 and (#) p < 0.1 be- tween the exposed and sham-irradiated rats. The inner plot designates a general direction of changes in sets of the indices after radia- tion exposure (indices demonstrating de- crease vs. indices demonstrating increase). “PW-test” indicates the statistical signiﬁcance of diﬀerences between sets of neuromodu-
lator indices measured in irradiated and control animals (according to the Wilcoxon matched pairs test).
in 5-HT synthesis that results in a simultaneous reduction in the con- centrations of 5-HT and 5-HIAA.
At 30th and 90th days, no signiﬁcant diﬀerences between control and irradiated rats were observed for any of the two types of exposure.
The results indicate that proton irradiation leads mainly to increase in DA and 5-HT metabolic indices, while the exposure to 12C particles results in DA and 5-HT depletion. These diﬀerences may explain an absence of strong alterations in the elaboration and recall of the passive avoidance reﬂex after the exposure to protons [50] and the presence of such impairments after irradiation with high-LET particles like 56Fe, 48Ti, and 28Si [3].
3.3.Hypothalamus
In contrast to the prefrontal cortex, signiﬁcant changes in the hy- pothalamus were observed only 90 days following  the  exposures.  Fig. 3a shows that the irradiation with protons induced a signiﬁcant decrease in the level of 5-HT to 82.8% (p = 0.009). A diﬀerent pattern of alterations was found after the exposure to 12C particles, although there was no signiﬁcant reduction in the levels of particular substances, a trend towards the unidirectional decrease of the measured indices was detected (p = 0.059) (Fig. 3b). In this case, 9 of 10 evaluated metabolic parameters were shown to decrease, compared to the controls. In the earlier periods (24 h and 30 days) after irradiation, no signiﬁcant changes were observed in the hypothalamic monoamine metabolism.
The ﬁndings illustrate an exacerbated reduction in overall hy- pothalamic monoamine metabolism after the exposure to 12C particles that is not observed following irradiation with protons. Assuming that the decrease in 5-HT concentration can be associated with depletion of either 5-HT precursor or 5-HT transporter, proton irradiation may in- hibit, in particular, the release of glucocorticoids, such as corticos- terone/cortisol, into the bloodstream [51–54]. The irradiation with 12C particles, associated with an overall decrease in the 5-HT and DA me- tabolic indices, apparently leads to a more pronounced eﬀect on the neuroendocrine regulation, potentially relevant to behavioural dis- orders observed in our previous study [13].
3.4.Nucleus accumbens
In the nucleus accumbens, the levels of the monoamine neuromo- dulators and their metabolites showed a manifold pattern of changes following both radiation exposures; in both cases, diﬀerent periods after irradiation were associated with alterations in diﬀerent
neuromodulator pathways (Fig. 4). After exposure to protons, early changes (24 h postirradiation) were found in the metabolism of 5-HT (Fig. 4a). It was shown that the levels of 5-HIAA and 5-HIAA/5-HT increased to 137.5 and 139.3% respectively (the corresponding p values are 0.027 and 0.098) in irradiated rats compared to controls. Late re- sponses of the nucleus accumbens were associated with alterations in the metabolism of DA and NA. At 30 days postirradiation, there was a signiﬁcant (p = 0.021) reduction in the HVA/DA ratio, an index of DA turnover, to 71.0% and a trend towards signiﬁcant decrease in the HVA level (to 66.4%, p = 0.098). The Wilcoxon matched pairs test also re- vealed a signiﬁcant (p = 0.028) unidirectionality of reduction in levels of the assessed metabolic indices after irradiation, which is represented by simultaneous decrease in all evaluated values except the con- centration of 5-HT. At 90 days postirradiation, there was a slight in- crease in the concentration of NA to 136.5% (p = 0.070) and a trend towards   the   unidirectional   elevation   of   the   metabolic    indices (p = 0.093 in the Wilcoxon matched pairs test). At large, the observed pattern of changes suggests that the most pronounced eﬀect of proton irradiation is associated with 30-day period.
Compared to proton irradiation, the exposure to 12C particles was found to induce a diﬀerent pattern of  time-depending  alterations  (Fig. 4b). 24 h after exposure, rats irradiated with carbon ions showed a signiﬁcant (p = 0.048) decrease in the concentration of DA to 45.3%. The measurements performed at 30th day revealed a pronounced re- duction in the level of 5-HIAA to 72.8% (p = 0.049). In these periods, none of other neuromodulator indices showed a statistically signiﬁcant change. At 90 days postirradiation, there was a pronounced decrease in the concentration of NA to 25.5% (p = 0.018). Moreover, the Wilcoxon matched pairs test showed a statistically signiﬁcant (p = 0.013) dif- ference between the sets of neuromodulator indices measured in 12C- exposed and control rats. In this case, most of the assessed metabolic parameters, except HVA, DOPAC/DA and HVA/DA, decreased in irra- diated animals. The overall patterns of changes observed in the nucleus accumbens shows that, in contrast to protons, the most apparent eﬀect of 12C particles occurs at 90 day postirradiation.
All these ﬁndings suggest that exposure to protons results in a fast hyperactivation of 5-HT-pathways of the nucleus accumbens with the following overall slowdown in monoamine metabolism (mostly in DA turnover) and subsequent general enhancement in the neurochemical machinery of this brain structure. The moderate-LET 12C particles in- duces, perhaps, a delayed neurochemical response in this brain area that results in an overall decrease in monoamine indices shifted towards 90 days. In this case, a general enhancement in neurochemical activity
Fig. 3. Effects of 170 MeV protons (a) and 500 MeV/u    12C    particles    (b) on   the 	and 90 days postirradiation. The columns indicate the concentrations of mono- amines and their metabolites scaled per levels of these substances in sham-irra- diated controls. The data is only presented
for substances that demonstrate statisti- cally signiﬁcant changes and trends to- wards the  signiﬁcance. The error bars re-
present  the  standard  errors  of  the mean.
(*) p < 0.05 and (#) p  < 0.1  between  the exposed and sham-irradiated rats. The inner plots designate general directions of changes in sets of the indices after radia- tion exposure (indices demonstrating de-
crease vs. indices demonstrating in- crease). “PW-test” indicates the statistical signiﬁcance  of diﬀerences  between  sets of neuromodulator indices measured in ir- radiated and control animals  (according to the Wilcoxon matched pairs test).
Fig. 4. Effects of 170 MeV protons (a) and
500 MeV/u 12C particles (b) on the
monoamine metabolism in the rat nucleus
accumbens, as measured 24 h, 30 days,
and 90 days postirradiation. The columns
indicate the concentrations of monoamines and their metabolites scaled per
levels of these substances in sham-irradiated controls. The data is only presented
for substances that demonstrate statistically significant changes and trends towards the significance. The error bars represent the standard errors of the mean.
(*) p < 0.05 and (#) p < 0.1 between
the exposed and sham-irradiated rats. The
inner plots designate general directions of
changes in sets of the indices after radiation exposure (indices demonstrating decrease vs. indices demonstrating increase). “PW-test” indicates the statistical
significance of differences between sets of
neuromodulator indices measured in irradiated and control animals (according
to the Wilcoxon matched pairs test).
of the nucleus accumbens should be expected beyond this period.
3.5.Hippocampus
In the hippocampal neuromodulator metabolism, there were also diﬀerences between the eﬀects induced by proton and 12C particle ir- radiations. After exposure to protons, early outcomes (24 h post- irradiation) included a signiﬁcant reduction in the concentrations of NA (to 72.9%, p = 0.021) and 5-HT (to 63.7%, p = 0.011), and pronounced increase in 5-HT turnover rate 5-HIAA/5-HT (to 136.0%, p = 0.021) (Fig. 4a). Results of the 30-day measurements showed only a signiﬁcant
decrease  in  the  concentration  of  hippocampal  DA  (to  41.7%,     p = 0.018). 90 days after exposure signiﬁcant alterations were observed only in the metabolism of 5-HT that was reﬂected in considerable in- crease in the level of 5-HT itself (to 125.6%, p = 0.040) and a pro- nounced reduction in the 5-HIAA/5-HT ratio (to 76.3%, p = 0.029).
In contrast with the proton irradiation, the exposure to 12C particles did not result in any change in the 24-h-levels of particular metabolic indices. In this period, the Wilcoxon matched pairs test only revealed a trend towards a statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerence between sets of me- tabolic parameters in irradiated and control rats (p = 0.086). The mentioned diﬀerence in this case consisted in reduction in the majority
Fig. 5. Effects of 170 MeV protons (a) and
500 MeV/u 12C particles (b) on the monoamine metabolism in the rat hippocampus,
as measured 24 h, 30 days, and 90 days
postirradiation. The columns indicate the
concentrations of monoamines and their
metabolites scaled per levels of these substances in sham-irradiated controls. The
data is only presented for indices that demonstrate statistically significant changes
and trends towards the significance. The
error bars represent the standard errors of
the mean. (*) p < 0.05 and (#) p < 0.1
between the exposed and sham-irradiated
rats. The inner plot designates a general
direction of changes in sets of the indices
after radiation exposure (indices demonstrating decrease vs. indices demonstrating
increase). “PW-test” indicates the statistical
significance of differences between sets of
neuromodulator indices measured in irradiated and control animals (according to
the Wilcoxon matched pairs test)
of the assessed indices, except DOPAC/DA and HVA/DA, after ex- posure. At 30 days postirradiation, there was only a slight decrease in the 5-HIAA/5-HT ratio (to 74.6%, p = 0.074), which characterizes turnover of 5-HT (Fig. 5b). At 90 days postirradiation, no statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences between irradiated and control rats were de- tected.
These results generally suggest that early eﬀects of the proton ex- posure are associated with reduction in synthesis of NA, probably due to a lower yield of the reaction DA DBH NA, where DBH is the dopamine beta-hydroxylase, and enhanced metabolism of 5-HT, assuming an unchanged synthesis of this neuromodulator. Later on, the alterations touch the DA level and, ﬁnally, lead to a slowdown in the metabolism of 5-HT upon its unaltered synthesis. Contrary to low-LET protons, mod- erate-LET 12C particles most likely induce a fast overall reduction in monoamine exchange with the earlier slowdown in 5-HT metabolism and faster recovery due to more stimulated compensatory processes.
The hippocampus is densely innervated by serotonergic ﬁbres making it sensitive to changes in 5-HT-dependent metabolic pathways. Although reaction of the hippocampus to the presence of 5-HT is complicated and depends on many factors, like local 5-HT concentra- tion, the ratio of diﬀerent 5-HT receptor subtypes expressed, and the density of 5-HT receptors in a particular population of cells, most of the
present day data suggest an inhibitory function of 5-HT [28]. To this extent, elevated 5-HT level observed at 90th day after proton irradia- tion may suggest inhibition of pyramidal neurons’ function by hy- perpolarizing their membrane potential and increasing local GABA transmission [55–59]. On the other hand, decrease in 5-HT level and enhancement of 5-HT turnover revealed 24 h following the proton ex- posure most probably indicates an acute stress reaction on irradiation. This change, however, may not result in considerable behavioural im- pairment, since 5-HT released from the projecting neurons in the raphe nuclei cell body can attenuate stress-induced activation by an auto-in- hibitory feedback loop [60,61]. In contrast to proton irradiation, gen- eral decline in metabolic indices observed after 12C particle exposure brings to the conclusion that the increase in damaging capacity of ra- diation leads to a more complex hippocampal metabolic proﬁle, making diﬃcult the identiﬁcation of particular outcomes related to individual neuromodulators. The same metabolic pattern in the prefrontal cortex and hypothalamus suggests that in all these structures the moderate- LET radiations induce mixed metabolic impairments rather than par- ticular ones.
Fig.  6. Eﬀects  of  170 MeV  protons  (a)  and 500 MeV/u  12C  particles  (b)  on  the  mono- amine  metabolism  in  the  rat  striatum,  as measured  24 h,  30 days,  and  90 days  post- irradiation.  The  columns  indicate  the  con- centrations of monoamines and their meta- bolites scaled per levels of these substances in sham-irradiated controls. The data is only presented for indices that demonstrate sta- tistically  signiﬁcant  changes  and  trends  to- wards the signiﬁcance. The error bars re- present the standard errors of the mean. (*) p < 0.05 and (#) p < 0.1 between the ex- posed and sham-irradiated rats.
3.6.Striatum
After exposure to protons, acute striatal alterations observed 24 h postirradiation included only a slight increase in the DA turnover (to 126.2%, p = 0.068) assessed as the DOPAC/DA ratio (Fig. 6a). By the 30th day, the changes in the metabolism of DA persisted in the form of the increased concentration of 3-MT (to 192.4%, p = 0.031). Finally, 90-day measurements revealed no statistically signiﬁcant metabolic alterations in irradiated rats.
The exposure to 12C particles was proven to induce only a slight decrease in the HVA/DA ratio (to 86.6%, p = 0.081) at the 30th day postirradiation (Fig. 6b). No other striatal alterations were detected in 12C-exposed animals.
In general, the changes induced by protons point to a switching
gaining in identiﬁcation of radiation eﬀects in such brain systems as DA, 5-HT, and NA, oﬀer potentially new opportunities for preventing neurodegenerative disorders via application of pharmaceutical sub- stances relevant to these systems. Concentrating on examining the speciﬁcity of CNS response to low- and moderate-LET radiation ex- posures, the current study also provides an analysis of changes induced in DA-, 5-HT-, and NA-related processes, which play crucial role in controlling numerous cognitive functions [62].
Overall comparison of the outcomes induced by protons and 12C particles suggests a diﬀerent sensitivity of DA, 5-HT, and NA systems to low- and moderate-LET radiations. Moreover, these diﬀerences are shown to be coupled with the variability of brain regions in their re- sponse to irradiation. This may suggest that potential pharmaceutical countermeasures for prevention of radiation-induced memory deﬁcits
occurring	in	the	respective	reactions     DA  M→AO  DOPAC	and
stances having a combined activity on DA-, 5-HT-, and NA-related brain
between hyperactivation of MAO- and COMT-dependent DA oxidation
DA COMT 3 - MT with time. This pattern is not observed after exposure to 12C particles which leads only to an overall slight decrease in the DA metabolism aﬀecting probably all pathways of DA degradation.
4.Discussion
Radiation protection in deep space journeys remains an important scientiﬁc issue of the present-day space medicine. One of the forefront challenge in the ﬁeld is the radiation-induced alterations in CNS, which may became an origin of a behaviour dysfunction impeding the safe operation of crewmembers. The majority of the recent studies, at- tempting to elucidate the known behaviour impairments, are focused mainly on morphometric and structural alterations to neurons, while little is known about the neurochemical nature for radiation-induced neurocognitive outcomes as well as on the earliest stages of radiation interaction with neural cells [1–3,13]. Meanwhile, the insights being
during space missions should probably include application of sub-
mechanisms.
The present study indicated that low-LET protons induce changes presumably in particular indices of the brain monoamine metabolism, while 12C particles of the moderate LET tend to stimulate more general alterations aﬀecting metabolic parameters unidirectionally. Such pat- tern was clearly seen at least in the prefrontal cortex, hypothalamus, and hippocampus suggesting an enhanced sensitivity of these brain regions to moderate-LET radiations than to low-LET ones. These ob- servations further imply that therapeutic countermeasures protecting astronauts from the space radiation should diﬀer at particular mission stages due to a diversity in the composition of the radiation environ- ment.
Obtained results show that some brain structures demonstrate a delayed metabolic response to moderate-LET irradiations comparing to low-LET ones. In the present study such eﬀect is most evident in the nucleus accumbens and partially in the striatum. These ﬁndings support the notion that the delay in response to moderate-LET irradiation may occur via enhanced feedback reaction of certain compensatory me- chanisms, which do not allow stable metabolic changes be formed immediately after exposure. In terms of therapeutic countermeasures, this fact indicates that potential substances be suggested as radio- protectors for CNS should demonstrate a speciﬁc dynamics of action, which corresponds to the time-course of development of the delayed neurochemical outcomes.
In the current study, an overall map of radiation-induced neuro- chemical modiﬁcations in the brain was obtained for the ﬁst time. This map provides a clear comparison between zones aﬀected by low- and moderate-LET exposures. In contrast to our previous work [13], the current study demonstrates an original option for investigation of ra- diation injury to integrative brain pathways linking several brain structures at once. Our current results bring to a conclusion that the phenomenon of radiation damage to CNS, in parallel with identiﬁcation of the local impairments in particular brain structures, also needs to be examined at the level of larger systems responsible for interconnecting pathways in the brain. This may uncover potentially new patterns of CNS reaction to radiation exposure.
Up to date, most of the data on radiation-induced CNS disorders have obtained following the exposure to particles with relatively high LET of about 150–170 keV/μm. Fewer amounts of data exist on mod-
erate LET values in the area of tens of keV/μm. At the same time, the
exposure to particle radiations of very low LET and LET close to the demarcation value between low and high LET, which is accepted to be 10 keV/µm [63], helps one to identify whether the absence of neuro- chemical alterations sometimes observed after heavy ion exposure is caused by insensibility of a brain region to ionizing radiation or it is a result of hyper-activation of feedback mechanisms which blur meta- bolic deviations. The present study provides an evidence for both of these possibilities depending on the particular brain structure under consideration. With regards to the space radiation hazard, these pat- terns of brain reaction may be an origin of complication in diagnosing CNS disorder at early stages after exposure, when application of pro- tective measures is expected to be still possible. It is especially make sense when the irradiation is concentrated within a particular period of time much shorter than the duration of a deep space mission, for ex- ample, during the SEP events, when a signiﬁcant fraction of the ex- posure can occur over a period of a few hours.
5.Conclusion
In the deep space travel, diﬀerent mission phases imply exposure of a crew to diﬀerent radiation modalities. Considering the data reported in the current study, this fact may additionally contribute to the variability of the astronauts’ CNS state together with other stressing space-travel factors.
Our ﬁndings suggest that there is an enough noticeable diﬀerence between neurochemical alterations induced by protons and 12C ions. The proton irradiation impairs only particular brain metabolic indices, while exposure to 12C ions leads to an overall change in the monoamine metabolism process. The change in the quality of radiation via en- hancement of its LET from relatively low (about 0.5 keV/μm) to mod-
erate values (about 10 keV/μm) is therefore expected to stimulate dif-
ferent patterns of functional outcomes in CNS.
These observations, together with a detailed analysis of neuro- chemical mechanisms altered by diﬀerent radiation modalities motivate for the development of a more precise radiation protection policy for the deep space missions, on the one hand, and provide a basis for creating additional options for therapeutic countermeasures on the other hand.
Conﬂict of interest
The authors disclose any actual or potential conﬂict of interest, in- cluding ﬁnancial, personal, or other issues.
Acknowledgement
The study was supported by the RFBR (Russia) grant 17-29-01005 OFI_M.
