<title>Estimation of the radiation dose of 107Pd in palladium products and preliminary proposal of appropriate clearance level</title>
<author>Sentaro Takahashi, Momoyo Ikeda, Kayoko Iwata, Sota Tanaka, Rui Akayama & Tomoyuki Takahashi</author>
<Affiliation>a.Institute for Integrated Radiation and Nuclear Science, Kyoto University, Osaka, Japan; b.Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2018.1516580</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2018.1516580</URL>
ABSTRACT
The eﬀective radiation dose of palladium under the assumption that it is contaminated with 107Pd (1 Bq/g) is estimated through four exposure pathways: the inhalation of airborne particles emitted from an automobile exhaust control catalyst, ingestion via food or drinking water, ingestion of palladium in saliva after release from a dental application, and inhalation exposure of dust in the work place. The highest dose (3.17 × 10−9 μSv/y) was  estimated in  adult workers manufacturing palladium products. Considering variations in parameters and possible exposure pathways, it is concluded that this is the critical group for determining the clearance level of 107Pd. The clearance level, which is deﬁned as a 107Pd concentration  providing less than 10 μSv/y in any exposure pathway, is calculated as 3.16 × 103 Bq/g.
KEYWORDS
Palladium; Pd-107; high- level radioactive waste; HLW; recycle; reuse; clearance level; radiation dose
1.Introduction
The safe and eﬃcient processing of high-level radio- active waste (HLW) from spent nuclear fuels used in light-water cooling reactors is an important issue in the nuclear industry. A research and development program regarding the partitioning and transmuta- tion technology for reduction of HLW, and the resource recycling of useful elements from  such waste, has recently been progressing in Japan [1–3]. Palladium is a precious metal of the platinum group, occurring rarely in nature, and has signiﬁcant com- mercial importance. One ton of HLW contains approximately 1 kg of palladium, and  it  is  one  of  the target elements to be recovered and recycled in this R&D program.
However, recovered palladium contains 17%
control catalysts, (2) ingestion of palladium in food  or drinking water, (3) ingestion of palladium released from a dental application, and (4) inhalation of dust or aerosol in industrial or dental processes using palladium products. The ﬁrst three routes are expo- sure situations for the public, and the last route is an inhalation exposure at working environment.
In the present study, eﬀective radiation doses are estimated for each of the above routes using pre- viously reported parameters. The variation and relia- bility of parameters are then validated and the clearance level of  107Pd  is  determined  with  respect to releasing palladium products into the public environment.
2.Materials and methods
107Pd, a long-lived ﬁssion product (LLFP) with a  half-life of 6.5 × 106 years [4]. Although 107Pd can
2.1.
Inhalation of
107
Pd in particulate matter
be removed from recovered palladium using a separa- tion process such as odd-mass-selective ionization, a small amount of 107Pd contamination is unavoidable [5]. Prior to releasing this element into the environ- ment, it is therefore necessary to evaluate its radiation dose and determine the so-called clearance levels.
The lifecycle of palladium (namely, the material ﬂow from production, commercial distribution, and utilization, to disposal or recycling), as well as its behavior in the natural environment have been pre- viously reported [6]. The study identiﬁed four major routes through which humans may be exposed to palladium: (1) the inhalation of airborne particles containing palladium from automobile emission
emitted from automotive exhaust catalysts
The necessary parameters for estimating radiation doses through this pathway are the concentration of palladium in the air, respiratory volume, duration of inhalation, and the dose coeﬃcient (conversion fac- tors, from inhaled 107Pd activities to the eﬀective dose). A calculus equation to  estimate  exposure doses is presented in Equation (A1).
Many studies have reported the concentrations of palladium in air, and reports written before  2004  were collected and reviewed by Ravindra et al.  [7]. The Pd concentration in the air increased between 1970s and 1990s with the increase in the use of Pd as automobile catalysts, and were correlated with traﬃc
conditions (e.g. the number of passing cars) [8–18]. For example, in an urban roadside area with heavy  car traﬃc in Frankfurt, Germany, the air concentra- tion of palladium was found to be 1.2–683 (43.9 on average) pg/m3, whereas it was found to be 0.2–10.9 (2.6 on average) pg/m3 in a rural area in Neuglobsow, Germany [17]. Previously reported palladium con- centrations are summarized in Table 1. The measured value of 683 pg/m3 is the highest among previous data, and this value is used for conservative dose estimations.
The respiratory volume and dose coeﬃcient for diﬀerent age groups are those recommended by the International Commission of Radiation Protection (ICRP) [19,20]. Therefore, the nominal age groups were set as 3 months, 1, 5, 10, and 15 yrs of age, and adults, in accordance with ICRP publications [19]. As the target population is the public, the duration of inhalation and the period of activity were set as 24 h under rest conditions. The ranges of actual ages in  the nominal age groups, dose coeﬃcients, and respiratory volumes under rest conditions for  each age group are presented in Table 2.
2.2.Ingestion of 107Pd contained in food and drinking water
The necessary parameters for estimating radiation doses from 107Pd in food and water were as follows:
(1) the concentration of palladium in food ingredi- ents   and   drinking   water,   (2)   the   total   amount
ingested, and (3) the dose coeﬃcients. Calculus equa- tions to estimate exposure doses are presented in Equations (A2) and (A3) for the food and drinking water, respectively.
Regarding the concentrations in food and daily uptake, only one total dietary study  was  available for palladium concentration in food, which was car- ried out by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries, and Food in the UK, once in 1994 and again in 2006 [21]. In the study, multi-element analyses for 30 elements (including palladium) were conducted using ICP-MS in the major items of the national diet, which were combined into 20 groups of similar food categories. According to the report, there was little change in the concentration of palladium in food between 1994 and 2006, and the dietary exposure of the population was estimated to be 0.7 μg/d for palladium. The World Health Organization (WHO) further analyzed these data and reported that the population average and 97.5th percentile of the total dietary intake for palla- dium were 1 and 2 μg/d for adults, respectively [22]. In the present study, we used a value of 2 µg/d for an estimation of the radiation dose in adults. No data were available regarding age diﬀerences relating to the daily intake of palladium, and the rates of change with age were assumed to be the same as the average intake of other minerals (Zn, Cu, and Fe). Table 3 shows the yearly intake of these minerals in Japan, and the ratio of intake for each age group to that of adults [23]. To compensate for the age diﬀerence, daily intakes of pal- ladium in the 1- and 5-year age groups were assumed to
Table 1. Previously reported atmospheric concentrations of Pd.
Table 2. Dose coeﬃcient for 107Pd recommended by ICRP for inhalation and ingestion, and respiration volume for each age group*.
Table 3. Average intake of iron, zinc, and copper from food in Japan.
be 61.7% that of adults, 95.7% for the 10-year age group, and 102.5% for the 15-year age group.
The daily intake of water is reported as 1.65 L/d for adults in the ICRP Reference Man [24]. For the other age groups, the amount are assumed to be 35%, 46%, 65%, and 89% of the adult intake for 1-, 5-, 10- and 15-year age groups, respectively, according to a report by the Food and Nutrition Board, Institute of Medicine of the National Academies [25]. The WHO repots the concen- tration of palladium in the drinking water to be within the range of 0–24 ng/L [22], and the highest value of 24 ng/L was used in the present study.
The dose was not estimated for the 3-month age group, because the food intake of this group is very diﬀerent from that of the other age groups, and no data on the Pd concentrations in maternal milk have been reported.
2.3.Ingestion of dissolved 107 Pd from dental applications
The use of gold-silver-palladium alloys in dentistry for application in both crowns and ﬁllings is very common, particularly in Japan. There have been no comprehensive reviews conducted on the  amount  and dissolution ratios of palladium in the mouth. Therefore, in the present study, a survey on these points was conducted using mainly sporadically pub- lished research papers.
The dissolution ratios of palladium from palladium- containing dental restorations showed substantial indivi- dual variations depending on the dental condition, the material involved, and personal habits (e.g. gum chew- ing). Japanese researchers reported such ratios to be within the range of 0.00006–0.00059 ppm/d [26]. This means that a person using a dental crown made of 10 g of alloy (20% palladium) ingests 1.2 µg of palladium per day at maximum. The WHO reported a daily mean intake of
<1.5–15 µg/d in adults, in consideration of the number of palladium-containing dental restorations and volume of saliva ingested [22]. In this study, as a conservative assumption, 15 µg/d is used for ICRP age groups of adults, and no estimations was made for the other younger age groups. A calculus equation to estimate the committed eﬀective doses in this scenario is presented in Equation (A4).
2.4.Inhalation of particulate matter-containing
107Pd by industrial workers or dental technicians
The concentration of palladium in the air and dust, the work duration (in hours), and the dose coeﬃcient for inhalation are parameters required for estimating the radiation doses. An equation to calculate the committed  eﬀective  doses  is  presented   in   Equation (A5).
The palladium concentrations in a variety of work places are summarized in Table 4. The concentrations are at relatively low levels, because ventilation is gen- erally applied in the work place [8,22,27]. The occu- pational exposure limit for mineral dust (2 mg/m3),  as regulated by the law in Japan, is used in the present study as the concentration of palladium in the air  [28]. The other parameters applied are 2,400 h/y for the work duration, and 1.2 m3/h for the respiratory volume under labor conditions. The annual working time for full time workers in Japan is reported to be 1,972 h on average, and 2,400 h for 95.0th percentile value [29].
3.Results and discussion
3.1.Estimated radiation dose for each exposure route
The committed eﬀective doses were calculated for the four exposure routes using the parameters described above. The speciﬁc activity was assumed to be 1 Bq/g. As the energy of gamma rays emitted from 107Pd is  very low, external exposure does not provide a signiﬁ- cant radiation dose, and only an estimation of the internal dose is required. Table 5 shows the committed eﬀective doses after inhaling of airborne palladium particles containing 1 Bq/g of 107Pd for the diﬀerent age groups. Estimated doses are not very large and are within the range of 1.38 × 10−16 to 3.27 × 10−15 Sv/y. A higher radiation dose was estimated to occur within the adult age group as compared with the other age
Table 5. Committed eﬀective doses by inhalation of airborne particles released from automotive emission control catalysts.
Table 6. Committed eﬀective doses for ingestion of 107Pd in food and drinking water and for ingestion of dissolved 107Pd from dental applications.
groups, and for the class S particles (slow clearance from the respiratory tract). This ﬁnding may be attri- butable to the higher dose coeﬃcient and larger respiratory volume in the adult age group.
The estimated radiation doses from ingesting palla- dium in food and drinking water are presented in Table 6. The highest dose was estimated for the 1-year age group for both food and drinking water because the dose coeﬃcient for ingestion is approximately 8 times higher in the younger age groups, whereas the total amount of Pd ingested in 1- and 5-year age groups is 61.7% that of adults [20,23]. The radiation doses of
107Pd via ingestion from dissolved metal in dental appli-
ances are also shown in Table 6. With an intake of palladium from dental appliances of 15 µg/person per day, the eﬀective dose was calculated as 2.03 × 10−13 Sv/ y for adults. Table 7 shows the radiation doses for inhalation of airborne dust in work areas where palla- dium metal alloys or chemical compounds are handled. In these cases, the doses were estimated only for adults (Table 7). Radiation doses were calculated not only for diameters of 1 µm but also for 5 µm, because it is a possible that the particle size in the working places may be larger than the particle size in a public space (1 µm in
Table 7. Committed eﬀective doses for inhalation of airborne dust in the work place.
Table 8. Highest eﬀective doses for each of the four exposure pathways and concentrations of 107Pd (Bq/g) providing a total exposure of 10 µSv/y.
diameter), The eﬀective doses were estimated to be relatively higher than those for the other exposure routes, namely, 3.17 × 10−9 Sv/y and 1.67 × 10−9 Sv/y for particles with diameters of 1 and 5 µm, respectively, This is because the concentration of palladium in the air within the work place was assumed to be 2 mg/m3, which is much higher than that in the atmosphere for the general public [28]. However, the actual air concen- tration may be lower, as indicated in Table 4.
3.2.Consideration of clearance level
The highest doses within the four exposure routes are summarized in Table 8. The doses for the public from inhalation of airborne particles originating from automobile exhaust catalysts are not very large, although the total anthropogenic emissions of palla- dium into the natural environment are the highest through this route [30]. Workers may receive a rela- tively high radiation dose if the concentration of dust in the air reaches the maximum level regulated by the law in Japan (2 mg/m3) [28], and all dust particles consist of palladium. However, it is necessary to note that the actual (measured) air concentration of palla- dium in diﬀerent work areas is not very high, as indicated in Table 4.
Materials used in a radiation-controlled area can  be transferred to and used in a non-radiation-con-  trolled area if they are not (or are only slightly) contaminated by radioactive isotopes. The radioactive concentration (Bq/g) for a speciﬁc  radionuclide  under which such materials can be used outside of a
radiation-controlled area is called the clearance level. The clearance levels for solid materials released from nuclear reactor facilities were determined by the for- mer Nuclear Safety Commission in 1999 in Japan,  and the eﬀective dose should not  exceed  10  µSv/y  for any type of exposure pathway. The concentrations of 107Pd (Bq/g) that may result in an exposure level of 10 µSv/y are presented in Table 8. The lowest con- centration was estimated within the route of occupa- tion inhalation exposure (3,160 Bq/g), which means that if the palladium is contaminated with 107Pd  at this concentration, and the concentration of dust in the work environment is higher than 2 mg/m3, the workers will receive an annual eﬀective radiation dose of 10 µSv.
A few other exposure pathways also exist, for exam- ple, from jewelry, electrical devices, and coins [28]. However, it is unlikely that more palladium is taken in from these sources than from the pathways evaluated herein. Therefore, the estimated concentration of 3,160 Bq/g may be a preliminary clearance level at present. Finally, it is important to note that all palladium con- sidered in the dose estimation was assumed to be con- taminated evenly by 107Pd (1 Bq/g), which is a very conservative (safe) assumption. If palladium-containing 107Pd at the proposed clearance level (3,160 Bq/g) was released into a public environment, it would take a long time until all the palladium used in the work place reaches the same concentration as the clearance level.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by ImPACT Program of Council for Science, Technology and Innovation (Cabinet Oﬃce, Government of Japan).
