<title>Study of radiation dose reduction of buildings of different sizes and materials</title>
<author>Takuya Furuta∗ and Fumiaki Takahashi</author>
<Affiliation>Japan Atomic Energy Agency, Shirakata-Shirane 2-4, Tokai-mura, Ibaraki 319-1195, Japan</Affiliation>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2014.990939</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2014.990939</URL>
The dependence of radiation dose reduction on the sizes and materials of buildings was studied by nu- merical analyses using the Monte Carlo simulation code, PHITS. The dose rates inside the buildings were calculated by simulating gamma-ray transport from radioactive cesium deposited at the ground surface. Three building models were developed: the wooden house, the open-space concrete building, and the thin- wall building, to study the effect of building size and construction material on dose reduction inside these structures. Here the floor-area sizes of the building models were varied to clarify the influence of building configuration on dose reduction. The results demonstrated that the dose rates inside the buildings linearly decreased with increasing floor area on a logarithmic scale for all types of buildings considered. The calcu- lated dose distribution inside a building indicated that the distance from the outer walls was a determining factor for the dose rate at each position in the building. The obtained tendency was verified by comparison with data reflecting the dose reduction of typical buildings in Japan.
Keywords: radiation protection; radiation shielding; radiation dose reduction; Monte Carlo calculation; PHITS; indoor; wooden house; concrete building; radioactive cesium
1.Introduction
Radionuclides were discharged into the environment because of the accident at the Fukushima Daiichi nu- clear power station caused by the tsunami that occurred as a consequence of the Great East Japan Earthquake on 11March 2011. According to estimates obtained by coupling atmospheric and oceanic dispersion simula- tions [1], the total amounts of 131I and 137Cs discharged into the atmosphere from 12 to 20 March were esti-  mated to be 2.0 1017 and 1.3 1016 Bq, respectively. Among the released radionuclides, radioactive cesium persists in the environment even three years after the ac- cident. Therefore, estimation of radiation dose exposure is essential to ensure public health in the contaminated regions.
Environmental radiation doses have been measured by various radiation monitoring programs such as vehicle-borne surveys, airborne surveys, and real-time monitoring posts. The summarized data are presently available through an official website [2]. For future plan- ning that enables evacuees to return to their homes [3], detailed dose assessments are required along with con- sideration of the lifestyles of the individual residents. Be- cause the monitoring data indicate radiation dose levels in open air, it is very important to consider the radiation
dose reduction inside buildings. Radiation dose reduc- tion factors (RFs) of some types of buildings are avail- able from the literature such as the technical documents of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) [4] and the articles published by members of the National Research Center for Environment and Health in Ger- many [5]. These data were derived from research con- ducted in the United States of America and European countries.
In our previous report written in Japanese [6], we studied the radiation dose reduction factors of several typical buildings in Japan. The selection of the build- ings and the construction of their three-dimensional (3-D) models with consideration for their internal struc- ture were conducted according to surveys in coopera- tion with architectural experts. The radiation dose rates inside these buildings were calculated by computing the transport of gamma-rays emitted from radioactive ce- sium distributed over the ground surface external to the buildings using the particle and heavy ion transport code system, PHITS [7] (version 2.524). The features of the selected buildings and range of the obtained RFs for each room in those buildings on the first floor are sum- marized in Table 1. It was found that the dose rates in- side buildings depend on the materials and structures of
Table 1. Features and the obtained reduction factors of the selected buildings in our previous report [6].
the buildings, and the buildings can be categorized into four groups according to their configurations: wooden houses, thin-wall buildings, concrete buildings with in- ner structure, and open-space concrete buildings. The shielding effect of the wooden walls was no greater than that of windows, and therefore, the characteristics of wooden houses, such as the location of windows and room compartments, were not significant. The absence of radiation sources beneath the house was the main cause of the dose reduction obtained in wooden houses. Similarly, for the thin-wall buildings, whose outer walls provide minimal shielding, the size of the ground area beneath the buildings was a significant factor of the ob- tained dose reduction. On the other hand, the shielding effect of the concrete buildings was considerably greater than that of windows; thus, the sizes and locations of windows affected the RFs in concrete buildings. The concrete inner walls were sufficiently thick such that the gamma-rays injected from the windows in a room did not influence the dose rates in adjacent rooms; thus, the dependence on the building size was minor for concrete buildings with inner structure, whereas the RFs strongly
depended on the sizes of the buildings in addition to the sizes and locations of the windows for open-space con- crete buildings.
According to the above-mentioned study, the size  of the building is an important factor for establishing the dose reduction within buildings for wooden houses, open-space concrete buildings, and thin-wall buildings. However, it was difficult to verify the suspected depen- dence from the analyses conducted on the limited num- ber of selected buildings. Therefore, in this paper, the de- pendence of the dose reduction on the sizes and mate- rials of buildings was studied by further analyses using three different types of size-adjustable building models consisting of wooden houses, open-space concrete build- ings, and thin-wall buildings.
2.Materials and methods
2.1.Radiation dose simulation in buildings
The transport of gamma-rays emitted from radioac- tive cesium was simulated using PHITS [7] together with
the photon data library MCPLIB04 [8]. For each build- ing considered, the air kerma dose rates of each room were computed by observing the gamma-ray flux in the inside volume of the room, which was converted using the dose conversion coefficients adopted by the Interna- tional Commission on Radiological Protection publica- tions 74 [9] and 116 [10].
In the simulations, the radiation dose reductions of the buildings were analyzed by placing the 3-D building models in environments contaminated by radioactive ce- sium. To this end, an isolated building was positioned on top of the ground, and the ground plane was homoge- neously contaminated by radioactive cesium, except the ground area beneath the building. The contamination of the building, such as in the roofs, walls, and so on, was not considered in this paper, where the state of con- tamination differs according to individual buildings de- pending on many factors, such as the building materials, differences in weathering effects, and so on [11]. In prin- ciple, the changing concentrations with respect to time of two radioactive isotopes of cesium: 134Cs and 137Cs, should be considered according to their different half- lives (134Cs: 2.0648 years and 137Cs: 30.1671 years [12]). However, the mean gamma-ray energy weighted by the emission rates from 134Cs (0.694 MeV) is close to the gamma-ray energy from 137Cs (0.662 MeV) [12]. Thus, considering the effects of both isotopes does not produce significantly different dose reduction characteristics for the interiors of buildings; therefore, the results obtained with 137Cs alone were given in this paper.
A wide ground area, enclosed within a margin as
much as 200 m from the outer walls of the buildings, was prepared in our previous report [6] to ensure that the gamma-ray contributions from the exterior could be neglected. However, achieving reasonable statistics in this manner made the computation very inefficient and time-consuming because most of the computational time was devoted to the transport of gamma-rays that had missed the building placed at the center. As a result, another approach introduced in our recent paper [13] was employed for this study. In this new approach, gamma-rays far from the building are effectively con- sidered by surrounding the computational area with reflection boundaries, resulting in a computational area only slightly larger than the building. The positions and momenta of the gamma-rays were recorded at each reflection and, in turn, utilized as sources to simulate gamma-rays entering from the exterior region of the computational area. It was confirmed that the results of the new approach agreed within the statistical errors of the simulation with those of the conventional approach utilizing a very large computational area while the required computational time of the new approach was approximately two orders of magnitude less than that  of the conventional approach.
The atmosphere above the ground was considered up to a height of 100 m from the ground surface. The ground soil was considered up to 20 cm below the
ground surface. A 137Cs plane with an activity concen- tration of 1 Bq/cm2 was set at the depth of the ground corresponding to a mass area density of 0.5 g/cm2 to partly consider the effects of surface roughness and mi- gration of radionuclides in the ground [14]. The radia- tion dose RF was defined by normalizing the dose rate for each room of a building with respect to the dose rate at a height of 1 m from the ground surface of a large open ground area according to the definition in the IAEA documents [4]. This factor can be recognized as the dose ratio between the inside and outside of the building and was found to be insensitive to the detailed conditions of the ground source. This was because the dose rates both inside and outside the buildings were affected in a simi- lar manner regardless of variations in the ground source. The reference air kerma dose rate on the ground sur- face was calculated by converting the gamma-ray flux detected in a 10 cm layer of air at a 1 m height from  the ground surface and a value of 0.0174 μGy/h was obtained, which is reasonably consistent with the value of 0.0171 μGy/h deduced from the tabulated values re- ported previously [15,16].
2.2.Size-adjustable building models
We constructed three size-adjustable building mod- els, as depicted in Figure 1. These buildings were de- veloped in accordance with the models of the wooden house, open-space concrete building, and thin-wall building listed in Table 1 [6]. The figures to the left-hand side in Figure 1 represent the 3-D outside appearance of the models, and those to the right-hand side show the sectional layouts perpendicular to the ground surface. The parameters for the materials and thicknesses of the building walls, floor, and roof are indicated in Table 2. The density and elemental compositions of the materi- als used in this article are summarized in Table 3.
Model (a), shown at the top of Figure 1, represents a two-story wooden house. Because theinner walls and windows did not significantly affect the dose distribu- tions in wooden houses, only the roof, floors, and outer walls were considered in this model. For the roof, a flat
Table 2. Thickness parameters of the building models in Figure 1.
Figure 1. 3-D outside appearance (left-hand side) and sectional layouts (right-hand side) of the three building models: (a) the two-story wooden house model, (b) the three-story open-space concrete building model, and (c) the thin-wall building model. The list of thickness parameters indicated by Roman numerals is given in Table 2.
roof with clay tiles was adopted in this model to facilitate the free adjustment of the size of the house, although, in reality, a gabled-style roof is more common for wooden houses. For ground contamination, the style of the roof was not crucial for the evaluation of the dose reduction of buildings, which is confirmed by the data given in
Table 1 [6]. Furthermore, the wooden building materi- als denoted by (i), the outer walls, floors, and roof base, are capable of being modified in terms of their thickness and material to evaluate the influence of their shield- ing effect on the dose reduction of buildings. Model (b), shown in the middle of Figure 1, is a three-story
Table 3. Density and elemental compositions of materials adopted from our previous report [6].
open-space concrete building with windows on all four outer walls. Large windows of 2 m height were placed on each floor at a distance of 70 cm between the floor and the bottom of the window, and the width was adjusted such that the edges were located 1 m away from the cor- ners. Model (c), shown at the bottom of Figure 1, rep- resents a thin-wall building constructed in accordance with the large-factory model ‘bf1’ given in Table 1 [6].
In this paper, the ground area beneath the building is given as the size of the floor area including the thickness of the outer walls. All thethree models (a), (b), and (c), were prepared with a square-shaped floor area and made adjustable to study different floor-area sizes.  However,
the floor-area shape can influence the dose rates  inside
1
0.1
0.01
0	5	10	15	20	25	30	35
Mass thickness [g/cm2]
a building because the outer surface area of the build- ing facing the external radiation field can be increased by adopting a rectangular-shaped floor with an equiv- alent floor area. Thus, the length-to-width ratio of the floor area was also adjusted while maintaining an equiv- alent floor area to analyze the dependence of the radia- tion dose RFs on the floor-area shape.
In addition to the dose rates for each room, one- dimensional dose distribution was computed in the di- rection parallel to the ground surface along the direc- tion of length with a step-size of 50 cm for each build- ing model shown in Figure 1 to evaluate the influence of the building structure on the variation in the dose distri- bution inside buildings. The flux was detected and con- verted to the dose rates in rectangular volumes with a length of 50 cm, a height of 100 cm centered at a height of 1 m from the floor, and a width of a half size of the building width centered in the middle of the building.
3.Results and discussion
3.1.Dependence on wall thickness
The filled-circles shown in Figure 2 represent the ra- diation dose RF on the first floor of building model (a) as a function of the thickness of the wooden building material, denoted on the abscissa by the unit of mass thickness in g/cm2 while maintaining the size of the floor
Figure 2. Radiation dose reduction factors in the inside vol- ume of the room at the first floor of the building model (a) varying the thickness and material of the outer walls, floors, and roof base. The filled-circles were obtained changing the thickness of the wooden building materials denoted by (i) in Figure 1(a). The squares and triangles were obtained by re- placing the wooden building materials with concrete and sid- ing, respectively, and changing their thickness. The floor area was kept constant as 80 m2 for all the calculations. Abscissa denotes the thickness of the building materials by the unit of mass thickness.
area to be 80 m2. The RF exponentially decreases with increasing wall thickness, as expected from the depen- dence of the shielding effect on the material thickness [21]. The gamma-rays injected from outside the building were attenuated by the outer walls, floors, and roof base, and the dose levels inside the building were lowered by incorporating thicker building materials.
The squares and the triangles employed in Figure 2 represent the RFs obtained by replacing the wooden building materials with those composed of concrete and siding, respectively. The RFs for both building materials lie nearly on the line obtained for wood. Thus, the mass thickness of the building materials is decisive whereas the different materials produce only minor discrepan- cies. This is also expected from the dependence of the shielding effect on the material thickness [21].
Figure 3. Radiation dose reduction factors in the inside volume of the room at the first floor of the three building models: (a),  (b), and (c), as a function of increasing floor area (the dashed lines). The wooden building materials of 2 cm thickness was used in the calculation of the building model (a). The symbols represent the reduction factors listed in Table 1 [6] and the bars of the symbols indicate the range of the reduction factors of rooms. The arrows in (a) and (b) point the reduction factors for the wooden apartment and the public hall in Table 1 [6], respectively.
3.2.Dependence on floor-area size
Figure 3 shows the influence of the building floor- area size on the radiation dose RFs. The dashed lines  in Figure 3 are the factors on the first floor of (a) the wooden house model, (b) the open-space concrete build- ing model, and (c) the thin-wall building model. The fac- tors decrease almost linearly as a function of the increas- ing floor area plotted on a logarithmic scale. The ab- sence of radiation sources on the ground area beneath the building is the main cause of the dose reduction ob- tained for models (a) and (c); hence, the dose rates inside the buildings are reduced by an expanding floor area. The dose rates inside thebuilding model (b) are mainly
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1	1.5	2	2.5	3
Length-to-width ratio of the floor
the result of gamma-rays injected from windows at the outer walls. Thus, the dose rate is lowered by an increas- ing floor area due to a reduced overlap between the con- tributions from windows.
The symbols in Figure 3 represent the RFs listed in Table 1 [6]. These symbols follow the trends given by the lines reasonably well except for a few cases. The tri- angles and squares in Figure 3(a) represent the RFs of the houses composed of prefab board walls and LWC walls, respectively. The mass thicknesses of these walls are slightly larger than those of the wooden walls, and the gamma-rays entering inside the buildings are more attenuated. The right-most triangle in Figure 3(a) repre- sents the RF for the two-story wooden apartment house listed in Table 1 [6] with four aligned dwelling units. A large variation is found in the RFs of the individual rooms because the rooms in the central unit exhibited   a lower RF than those in the corner unit because of   the existence of relatively thick partitioning walls (gyp- sum 4.4 cm) between the dwelling units. In Figure 3(b), the line represents the RFs for the open-space concrete building model where windows are located on all four walls. The RFs for buildings with four-side windows de- noted by squares are found to follow the line, whereas those with two-side windows denoted by crosses reside below the line. This is because the gamma-rays are sig-
Figure 4. Variations  of the radiation dose reduction factors in the inside volume of the room at the first floor of the three building models by changing the length-to-width ratio of the floor maintaining the equivalent floor area indicated in the fig- ure on the top. The wooden building materials of 2 cm thick- ness was used in the calculation of the building model (a).
nificantly attenuated at the outer walls without windows. The cross symbol at the right is a plot for the public hall listed in Table 1 [6], which has small windows on only two walls. In Figure 3(c), only small deviations of the plotted symbols from the line are found because of the different building materials used in the models. The size of the ground areas beneath the buildings is decisive for the obtained dose reduction in thin-wall buildings, whereas the shielding effect of the outer walls is only a minor factor.
The floor shapes of the three building models, (a), (b), and (c), were originally square, but here, in Figure 4, the length-to-width ratio of the floor was modified while maintaining an equivalent floor area for each type of building to study the dependence of the radiation dose RF on the length-to-width ratio of the floor. A slight in- crease in the RF was found with an increasing length-to- width ratio of the floor, which is due to a corresponding
Figure 5. Variations of the radiation dose reduction factors of the three building models: (a), (b) and (c), as a function of the distance from the outer walls. The wooden building materials of 2 cm thickness was used in the calculation of the building model (a). The dashed vertical lines indicate the position at the outer surface of the outer walls. The different lines correspond to distributions of the reduction factors inside the buildings of the various sizes denoted at the upper-right corner in the figures.
increase in the outer surface area of the building facing the external radiation field. The variation is small even for a length-to-width ratio equal to three for all build- ing models considered; therefore, the dependence on the building shape can be considered to be negligible relative to the effect of floor-area size for the small variations of the length-to-width ratio considered here.
3.3.Dependence on the distance from outer walls
Figure 5 shows the relations between the radiation dose RFs and the distance from the outer walls for each building model, (a), (b), and (c), obtained along the building length, as explained earlier. The lines terminate at the center of the buildings because the RFs then be- gin to increase toward the other side of the building due to their symmetrical distributions. The ground area be- neath the buildings is not contaminated by radioactive cesium such that the outdoor dose rates near the build- ings are less than the dose rates of large open ground areas, i.e., the RF immediately outside a building does not suddenly recover to unity.
The RFs inside the buildings decrease toward the center of the buildings owing to the increasing distance from the radioactive sources located at the building ex- teriors. A steep drop in the RF is found at the location of the outer wall in (b), whereas only a minor drop is found in (a) and (c). This is due to differences in the at- tenuation effects of the outer walls. The RFs more or less flatten out a few meters away from the outer walls for all the models considered, and the RFs at the inside volume of the rooms given in Figure 3 were about equal to the RFs a few meters away from the outer walls.
For model (b), the wall that exhibits the largest shielding effect, the RF rapidly reduces to as low as 0.2 several meters away from the outer walls (particularly, windows), even for the smallest building (100 m2). The RFs for models (a) and (c) with equivalent floor areas (100 and 200 m2) behave similarly, and decrease grad-
ually toward the center of the building. The behaviors of the RFs are similar because the shielding effect of the outer walls is minor for both models (a) and (c). Because of this small shielding effect, larger differences are found for the RFs at the building centers with variations in floor-area size for models (a) and (c) than for the model (b). The reduction factor obtained at the center can be as low as 0.1 for very large floor-area ( 3000 m2) buildings, even with walls that present minimal shielding.
4.Summary
Our previous report [6] clarified that building size was one of the most influential factors for radiation dose reduction inside buildings. Thus, we constructed a wooden house model, an open-space concrete building model, and a thin-wall building model that were size- adjustable. Additionally, the wooden house model was constructed such that its building materials were modi- fiable. The dependence of the radiation dose reduction factors on the building configurations was studied in de- tail by numerical analyses that computed the dose rates inside these model buildings with PHITS code.
The reduction factor was found to exponentially de- crease with increasing material mass thickness. Different building materials demonstrated a similar shielding ef- fect for an equivalent mass thickness. The dependence of the reduction factors on the building size was studied by varying the floor-area size. The factors decreased almost linearly as a function of increasing floor-area size given on a logarithmic scale for all three building models. The reduction factors of the buildings obtained in our previ- ous report were found to reasonably follow these trends. The dose distribution inside the buildings was studied by computing the reduction factors as a function of the dis- tance from the outer walls. The reduction factors, which were high near the outer walls, were found to decrease toward the center of the buildings until they flattened out a few meters away from the outer walls.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the cooperation and important information obtained from the architectural experts of the Shimizu Corporation. Some of the computations utilized in this article were performed using the JAEA supercomputer PRIMERGY BX900.