<title>Radiological protection of foetuses and breast-fed children of occupationally exposed women in nuclear medicine – Challenges for hospitals</title>
<author>A. Almén , S. Mattsson </author>
<Affiliation>a.Medical Radiation Physics, Department of Translational Medicine, Lund University, SE-205 02 Malmö, Sweden;b.Radiation Physics, Department of Haematology, Oncology and Radiation Physics, Skåne University Hospital, SE-221 85 Lund, Sweden</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Physica Medica</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.ejmp.2017.08.0101120-1797</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmp.2017.08.0101120-1797</URL>
abstract
This paper describes issues of concern for protecting foetuses and breast-fed children of occupationally exposed women in nuclear medicine from unnecessary exposure of ionising radiation. The protection principle is to ensure the same level of protection for the foetus and child as for the general public. Therefore international radiation protection standards recommend a dose constraint of 1 mSv to a foetus during the remaining time of pregnancy after it is known/declared and a yearly dose constraint of 1 mSv to a breast-fed child. It is not self-evident how to guarantee this level of radiation protection.
The exposure situation in nuclear medicine is complex. Exploring existing reported occupational expo- sure levels suggests great variability between work tasks and facilities. The standards and guidelines found give no detailed advice. Therefore each facility needs to systematically review external and internal exposure levels in order to plan appropriate protection measures and issue their own guidelines and rules. One strategy might be that each facility defines tasks that do not require any restrictions and lists such duties that are not suitable to do when pregnant or breastfeeding, taking also potential exposure levels into consideration. This paper gives examples of such types of work.
Information to the staff about the necessity of declaring pregnancy or breastfeeding is of fundamental importance. The internal policies issued by the hospital management should make clear the basis for tak- ing care of pregnant and breastfeeding employees.
Keywords:
Occupational exposure   Pregnancy    Breast-feeding     Radiation workers    Nuclear medicine   Radiation protection
1.Introduction
Radiological protection of foetuses and breast-fed children of occupationally exposed women in nuclear medicine continues to  be a topical issue due to the continuous change and advances of nuclear medicine. This is illustrated by continuing expansion of imaging technologies, such as positron emission tomography  (PET) and hybrid imaging (PET/CT). Such changes create new chal- lenges in radiological protection. The high proportion of female workers in healthcare; among technologists, radiographers, physi- cians, medical physicists, and biomedical engineers, emphasizes the need for a robust strategy regarding  protection  of  foetuses and breastfed children in the healthcare sector.
Nuclear medicine uses a broad range of radiopharmaceuticals and radionuclides, including gamma- and beta-emitters with a wide range of electron and photon energies as well as alpha- emitters. The most prominent radiopharmaceuticals for diagnostic procedures are 99mTc-labelled substances (141 keV photons). Other radionuclides frequently used for planar imaging and single pho- ton emission computed tomography (SPECT) are 123I  (153 keV)  and 111In (171; 245 keV). Hybrid imaging, using SPECT/CT and PET/CT, is now used on a large scale, having introduced X-rays into the nuclear medicine departments. Medical cyclotrons inside the hospitals are increasingly used for the production of short lived radionuclides (18F, 11C, 13N, 15O). The protons accelerated in the cyclotrons generate photons as well as neutrons due to nuclear reactions in different parts of the accelerator and a number of acti- vation products are created. Well-established radioiodine treat- ments (using 131I-iodide) for different benign metabolic thyroid disorders and for thyroid cancer are frequently performed. 89Sr- chloride, and 153Sm-EDTMP are used for treatment of metastatic bone disease. Radionuclide therapy using 177Lu-octreotate is a rou- tine treatment option for neuroendocrine tumours [1]. The alpha emitting radiopharmaceutical 223Ra-chloride [2] is used for treat-ment of bone metastases and emergent therapy methods using other alpha-emitting radionuclides, such as 227Th and 211At, are also present in some hospitals. The spectrum of radionuclides in use gives rise to a variety of radiation protection and occupational dosimetry challenges.
The work of the nuclear medicine staff includes a number of tasks such as preparing the radiopharmaceuticals, administering the activity, escorting patients, carrying out the examination and handling waste, sometimes also managing a cyclotron and working in a radiochemistry laboratory. The division of tasks between staff members differs between departments as well. Specific radiation protection measures in departments may also differ. Thus, individ- ual exposure levels for workers can be expected to vary. It is obvi- ous that the varying tasks are associated with different levels of external as well as internal exposure of  the  female  worker  and her possible foetus. The risk for the breastfed child to ingest radionuclides from breast milk is also significantly different, but the risk is low if appropriate radiation protection practises are observed when handling unsealed radionuclides. The management of appropriate radiological protection of foetuses and breastfed children of occupationally exposed women in nuclear medicine is challenging as the recommended dose constraint of 1 mSv for the foetus and child is significantly lower than the dose limits for workers with 20 mSv as a mean value for a 5-year period with a maximum of 50 mSv during one year [3].
This paper aims to critically review some issues of concern for protecting foetuses and breast-fed children of an occupationally exposed woman from unnecessary exposure of ionising radiation in nuclear medicine. The paper addresses the following;
a)Does reported staff dose data indicate work that is safe to carry out while pregnant or work that should be prohibited?
b)Which consideration should be given to potential exposure levels?
c)To what extent do radiation protection standards and avail- able guidelines provide advice on how to practically arrange for proper and optimised protection in the clinic?
The paper also out-lines possible strategies and key issues when setting up local guidelines in the hospital.
The paper includes occupational dose data from three hospitals in Sweden during a 3 year period 2014–2016 as well as examples   of published data. Information in international standards and pub- lished national standards and guidance documents has been included in the review.
2.Occupational radiation doses in nuclear medicine and implications on the assessment of foetal dose
Dose constraints for foetuses are given in dose equivalent (mSv)
[4] in the United States [5] and in equivalent dose (mSv) [3] in the European Union [6]. In most cases in medicine both dose equiva- lent and equivalent dose is equal to mean absorbed dose as both the radiation weighting factor wR and the Q-value are equal to 1  for photons and electrons.
2.1.Methods used for dose estimates
The mean absorbed dose to a foetus is related to the exposure of the woman. External exposure to the pregnant woman is charac- terised using the radiation protection quantity personal dose equivalent, Hp(10), providing a conservative estimate of the effec- tive dose to the exposed worker and also a conservative estimate of the mean absorbed dose to a foetus. The uncertainty of personal dose equivalent is significant and exceeds 50% at low dose levels
[7].  For  a  month’s  measurement  period,  a  value  below  about
0.1 mSv must be accurately measured, considering the dose con- straint of 1 mSv. It is doubtful whether conventional personnel dosimeters meet that demand. Assessing the dose to the  foetus only through measurements with personal dosimetry is thus diffi- cult. Moreover, an assessment of the dose to the foetus in compar- ison to the workers’ dose must be performed. Such assessments depend on depth dose measurements. Published data show that
1.3 mSv measured at  the surface of  the  abdomen from 99mTc  or 131I is equivalent to approximately 1 mSv to the foetus [8]. For higher energy photons, such as those from positron emitting radionuclides, the dose to the foetus may be more similar to the dose measured at the surface of the abdomen. These assessments assume that surface dose and an estimated personal dose equiva- lent are equal, this is of course not true, but given the large uncer- tainties in personal dosimetry such simplifications may be acceptable.
The internal exposure of the pregnant woman and her foetus can be assessed by using whole body counters or through measure- ments on urine samples. However, whole body counters are only available in some hospitals. Possible inhalation, ingestion or uptakes through the skin could be assessed from environmental measurements, e.g. through measurements by portable or personal air samplers with carbon filters, or assessing contaminations in the localities, using wipe tests. However, the substances differ in chemical form and biokinetic behaviour and this influences possi- ble internal exposure levels. The transfer across the placenta to the foetus and the excretion in breast milk has also to be known. The aspects to consider when assessing intake are many [9] and overall there is a need to set up guidelines for monitoring of individuals from intake of radionuclides [10]. The uncertainties regarding internal exposure to the workers and possible doses to the foetus and breast-fed child are therefore high.
Due to limitations in measurements of occupational exposure, the uncertainty in reported external dose values is considerable. This is also the case for the rare internal exposure data for occupa- tionally exposed women. The assessment of foetal dose or the dose to the breast-fed child is even more uncertain. The need to improve methodology in assessments of foetal dose is apparent.
2.2.Available occupational exposure levels for different work activities
A worldwide mean annual occupational dose in nuclear medi- cine below 0.7 mSv has been reported [11], and the reported mean annual dose in different facilities is around this level. However, mean values do not reflect the dose distribution and more detailed dose data is needed for evaluating possible dose to a foetus. The more detailed description of dose data found are presented as: whole body dose per year or per procedure to workers, possible dose rates at different distances  from  the  workplace  or  patient, or assessed dose per amount of activity administered. Such values have to be weighted together in order to assess a possible foetal dose.
In order to get a comprehensive view of occupational exposure levels due to external irradiation, data for the time period 2014– 2016 regarding a larger healthcare region in Sweden was gathered and data from three hospitals was analyzed. For this period a total of 307 annual doses were registered. The data suggests substantial variation between different tasks. A summary of reported external whole body doses for this time period is presented in Fig. 1. All data on   measured   annual   personal   dose   equivalent,   Hp(10) above
0.1mSv is presented as a box plot giving median values, the third and first quartile, maximum and minimum values for different types of work. Group I consists of all personnel engaged. This group exhibits a median dose and a mean dose of 0.4 and 0.8 mSv per year, respectively. The  interquartile distance is large. Group II con-
Fig. 1. Occupational exposure, measured personal dose equivalent, during 2014 to 2016 at three different hospitals in Sweden. Personnel working with: I - nuclear medicine (in total 307 during the three year period), II – diagnostic nuclear medicine other than PET procedures, III – radioiodine therapy, IV – cyclotron and radiochemistry work, V – PET examinations.
stitutes personnel exclusively working with diagnostic nuclear medicine examinations other than PET examination. Group III con- stitutes technicians and medical physicists working with iodine therapy and different laboratory work. Group IV constitutes medi- cal physicists, engineers and technicians working with a cyclotron and associated radiochemistry. Group V constitutes technicians also working with PET examinations. There is a substantial differ- ence in radiation dose to the different groups of staff. No standard- ized measurements of internal doses are performed in this particular county and therefore not included.
Published data provides additional advice on possible exposure levels. Data regarding diagnostic procedures using 99mTc and 18F is available and approximate figures of whole body dose could be derived. The radiation dose to workers when performing examina- tions using 99mTc is around 1 nSv per MBq administered activity [8,12,13].  Investigations with 18F give a dose contribution of 10–   30 nSv per MBq of administered activity [14–19]. A realistic assumption is that this  corresponds to  an  annual staff  exposure of 1 mSv for 99mTc-based nuclear  medicine  and  3 mSv  per  year for 18F (PET) investigations. However as  previously  mentioned, the occupational dose differs due to e.g. clinical workload, localities and radiation protection measures. The latter have shown to affect radiation dose substantially. For example, the use of automatic dis- pensing and injection during PET-procedures has shown to reduce the whole body staff doses for the entire patient study to 50% [20] or 62% [21] compared to the levels associated with manual  administration.
Published data concerning therapeutic procedures, using 131I and other radionuclides are rare. The radiation dose to workers is approximately 2–10 nSv per MBq administered activity from external exposure [8,13], suggesting an annual dose of 2–3 mSv. When performing therapy with 131I-MIBG the reported value is around 20 nSv per MBq [22].
The above mentioned data relate to external exposure. Compre- hensive data about intake are even more rare. Reported data for internal dose when administrating 131I under normal working con- ditions show low values [23,24]. However, the risk of accidents is obvious and together with the rather high amount of activity han-
dled in each stage of work, the risk due to internal contamination is not negligible.
The laboratory work includes a number of radionuclides, also pure beta or alpha emitting radionuclides, and work tasks. Reported comprehensive staff doses are rare. Reported exposure indicates moderate annual doses [22] and assessment of internal exposure from work with 125I indicate low doses [25]. The uptake through skin in connection with contamination has been investi- gated for a number of radionuclides [26]. Contamination of the skin may give rise to high skin doses, but contributes insignificantly to the dose of the foetus.
Today the number of staff operating and maintaining medical cyclotron, including chemistry lab work increases and it could be anticipated that more occupational dose data will be available in the future. Calculations and assessments of radiation dose to staff working with medical cyclotrons show an annual dose in the range between 0.3 and 3 mSv [27,28]. Radiation dose rates are very high inside the vault and in case of an accident, high doses cannot be excluded [29]. Activation products, mostly in the target, are sources for intake during maintenance work. However, assess- ments concerning normal work situation give dose levels below some 0.1 mSv per year [30–32].
The following general observations were made. The existing exposure situation in nuclear medicine is complex and occupa- tional doses vary between departments. Our own data  indicate that the dose is moderate compared with doses in other depart- ments. The reason for this is not obvious. The information on both exposure levels for specific tasks and dose rates during those tasks varies. It is, for example essential to know dose rates when han- dling large amounts of radiopharmaceuticals in order to estimate potential exposure in the event of an accident. The local occupa- tional doses, including workplace monitoring, needs to be system- atically reviewed in order to plan appropriate protection measures for the foetus and breastfed child. When analysing personal dose data in the context of pregnant workers, it should be remembered that the measured value depends on several issues, e.g. workload during the measurement period and work  performance  specific for that person. That is, the value for the same worker fluctuates over time and there are differences between workers. The difficul- ties in assessing radiation dose from internal exposure and the risk of internal exposure in the event of an accident have to be consid- ered as well. The higher uncertainties in assessed radiation dose, the more stringent protection measures are required. The protec- tion of the foetus and breastfed child cannot be based on registered occupational doses only.
3.Legal requirements and national guidelines and its implications on protection of foetuses and breastfed children
The aim of radiological protection, as stated by ICRP, is to limit the radiation risk to as low as reasonably achievable (ALARA) levels and this general recommendation also apply for radiological pro- tection of the foetus and of the breastfed child. Specifically, the protection principle is to provide the same level of protection for the foetus and the child as for the public [3]. The International Atomic Energy Agency has adopted this recommendation and addresses the topic and sets out some generic basic safety stan- dards [33]. The standards specify special arrangements for female workers, including information about risks and the importance of declaring pregnancy or breastfeeding.
Many countries, e.g. countries within the European Union [6], have adopted this criterion as the legal restriction for the exposure of the foetus and breastfed child. In the Swedish legislation this is for example formulated as ‘‘the work shall be planned in such a way that the equivalent dose to the foetus is as low as reasonably achievable and so that it is unlikely that the dose to the foetus will exceed 1 mSv during the remaining time of pregnancy provided pregnancy has been established” [34]. In Sweden no further guide- lines exist on how to provide for the safety of pregnant women in the hospitals. From a review of guidance from difference nations available online, it is apparent that the differences between coun- tries are substantial. Norway gives fairly strong advice, based on the maximum amount of activity handled per week, for refraining pregnant and breastfeeding women of working with ionising radi- ation [35]. Health and Safety Executive of the United Kingdom has issued some direct advice in ‘‘Working safely with ionising radia- tion – Guidelines for expectant or breastfeeding mothers” [36]. These guidelines and others available online are not very specific and some guidelines only repeat the general radiation protection instructions.
The United States differs from those countries mentioned above as it implements a dose constraint of 5 mSv [5] instead of 1 mSv. For the foetuses, 5 mSv concerns the entire duration of the preg- nancy, thus also dose acquired before declaration of pregnancy have to be estimated and taken into consideration.
The observed range of external occupational doses presented above shows that the risk of exceeding constraints for the foetus  for many work activities is apparent and the dose constraints set  for foetuses are so low that general optimisation of radiological protection for the staff will not automatically provide proper pro- tection for the foetuses. The reported internal exposure indicate quite low doses however, the risks in connection to accidents have to be taken into account. For example, internal contamination from iodine and the direct transit to the thyroid of the foetus should sug- gest that any work with radioactive iodine is inappropriate. The large uncertainties and knowledge gaps regarding nuclide transfer to foetus or to breast milk indicates that great care when allowing pregnant or breastfeeding staff working with task were risk for internal contamination exits. For breast milk it is reasonable to assume that the same transfer coefficients and dose coefficients could be used for radiation workers as for patients [37].
Unfortunately, the legal requirements and national guidelines that we have found do not give any comprehensive advice on work
activities that are safe to perform when pregnant and do not give unambiguous definition of work activities that is  not  allowed.  The need for deciding on local unambiguous rules in the hospital in many countries is apparent.
4.Developing local rules – some considerations and suggestions
One strategy when setting up local policies is first to identify tasks that need no restrictions and those tasks that is not suitable  to do when pregnant or breastfeeding. General radiation protection requirements could serve as a basis for the decision. The European Directive [6] gives some indication. If the worker has been classi- fied as category A, i.e. there is a risk of exceeding an annual effec- tive dose of 6 mSv, women could no longer perform such work during pregnancy.
Analysis of dose records and results of other measurements per- formed at the facility are also useful together with risk analysis referring to potential exposure levels to staff. Published  values may also be useful, particularly for new tasks to be performed at the facility. The following is a discussion about different work activities and their appropriateness, starting with the few work activities for which possibly no restrictions have to be made.
4.1.Suggested work with no restriction
Work including examination with 99mTc substances only. The level   of exposure registered by personal monitoring indicate that for these types of diagnostic procedures, there is no need for pregnant workers or women who are breastfeeding to take any additional precautions other than those appropriate for radiation protection  in general.
4.2.Suggested work that should be considered unsuitable
Work including examination with PET-substances. It can be con- cluded that, in a nuclear medicine facility using PET substances, the annual doses indicate that foetal dose constraints could be exceeded. The possible doses in the event of accidents are  also high. In all, this indicate that work including PET substances should not be performed by pregnant or breastfeeding workers.
Work including treatments and laboratory work involving iodine radionuclides. Pregnant and breast-feeding workers should refrain from tasks in connection with treatments using 131I. Not only there are relatively high external exposures associated with the adminis- tration of 131I, but also because iodide is volatile, increasing, the potential for internal uptake. Iodide belongs to the substances which freely cross the placenta barrier and is extensively excreted in breast milk. Even low activities can give high thyroid doses to the foetus and to the breastfed child. Laboratory work with radioactive iodine is not appropriate.
Work including treatments and laboratory work involving alpha and beta emitting radiopharmaceuticals and large amounts of activity. Work with dispensing and administration of alpha and beta emitting radiopharmaceuticals for treatment purposes is not associated with greatly elevated whole body doses, but it is an apparent risk that if accidents happen during the treatment, intake could be significant. The possible doses in the event of accidents indicate that these tasks should not be performed by pregnant workers or workers who are breast-feeding.
Work including radiochemical tasks, operating and maintenance of cyclotrons. Both planned maintenance work and emergency mea- sures can give rise to situations with highly varying exposure to ionizing radiation. The time spent near  the  radiation  source  is  not easy to foresee. The possible dose rate is also high around a cyclotron and doses received could be high in an event of a mishap
or an accident. The staff at the cyclotron handles PET pharmaceu- ticals in large activities. The possible doses in the event of acci- dents indicate that these tasks should not be performed by pregnant or breastfeeding workers.
Emergency work including cleaning up after major contaminations. This type of job assignments is typically not suitable to be per- formed by a pregnant or breastfeeding worker. This could require careful planning to see to that pregnant or breastfeeding staff is not compelled to perform such work.
4.3.Work where general recommendations are hard to set
In cases where there is doubt, the advice is not to let pregnant women or nursing mothers do the work. Pressure from manage- ment or  from the woman itself should not  affect the decision. If  the decision still is to let the woman work, there is a need to care- fully monitor the particular workers’ exposure level. Active dosimeters have to be used in order to get continuous information of the dose to the abdomen. It is also warranted to regularly revise the work situation for the persons performing these job assign- ments, e.g. assuring that all protective gears could be worn or used throughout the pregnancy. This supervision may need substantial amount of work and it could be more efficient to give the worker other duties.
4.4.Key issues to make efficient local policies and guidelines
One key issue when setting up guidelines is good radiation pro- tection at the facility in general. This includes a running program were occupational doses and exposure levels in the work environ- ment are measured and documented and risk assessments, includ- ing the risk of internal exposure, are performed. With a poor system of protection, the risk is imminent that the protection mea- sures regarding pregnant or breastfeeding women either become unnecessarily strict or not providing the necessary protection for the foetus or breastfed child. It is also important that the local guidelines are harmonized with other types of work using ionising radiation; in diagnostic radiology, image guided interventions and radiotherapy. There may be legal requirements or local agreements supporting that the pregnant women can choose not to work with ionising radiation during pregnancy. This is the case in Sweden, were women have the legal right to refrain from any work involv- ing ionising radiation.
Finally, the most important prerequisite is that pregnancies and breastfeeding are known and declared in the facility. In some gen- eral advice found it is also recommended that the woman perform this declaration in writing as soon as she knows she is pregnant [36]. However, such a declaration could be a delicate issue and in some countries pregnancy is also considered a private matter even when pregnancy is apparent. Management and radiation protec- tion staff has to be aware of this and deal with the situation with discretion. Clear and firm rules may be helpful. It could be expected that straight forward and accessible information about hospital policy, why it is important to declare pregnancy and what happens when pregnant or breast-feeding, could encourage the willingness to declare pregnancy.
5.Summary and conclusions
In order to properly protect a foetus and a breastfed child from unnecessary exposure of ionising radiation an efficient system of protection in each facility is required. General legal  requirements or guidelines do not usually give specific advice directly applicable in the clinic. There are no simple rules to guarantee the widely accepted dose limit of 1 mSv for the foetus during the remaining period of pregnancy after its declaration and for the  yearly  dose  to a breastfed child. Great variations and uncertainties regarding the occupational dose levels and potential exposure due to acci- dents, makes it difficult to set up these rules. Therefore a some- what cautious approach is necessary. The occupational dose depends on several facility-specific parameters and reported expo- sure levels, e.g. those mentioned in this paper, vary between work- ers and work tasks.
It is apparent that the issue of internal exposure needs further attention regarding both assessment methods and strategy when setting up guidelines. The great uncertainties and knowledge gaps motivate further research efforts.
It is advised that each facility sets up local guidelines and defines work activities that can be done without restrictions and those tasks that are not suitable to perform when pregnant or breastfeeding. This is a better alternative than making decisions   for each individual worker, which may result in unjustified differ- ences of level protection.
Information about the necessity of declaring pregnancy or breastfeeding is one fundamental issue. This information has to    be accompanied with information about what happens if declaring pregnancy or breastfeeding. In order to properly protect a foetus and a breastfed child, it should be made clear by management that workers will not be punished and that the facility is prepared to handle this important issue professionally.
Funding sources
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
