<title>A procedure for solving transient nonlinear thermal problems of high burn-up nuclear fuel rods in a light water reactor</title>
<author>1,JiannanTang,2,MeiHuang,3,MenglingYang,4,YuanyuanZhao,5,YuanyuanZhao</author>
<Affiliation>1,North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, China;2,Northwest Institute of Nuclear Technology, Xi’an 71002, China</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Applied Thermal Engineering</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier Ltd.</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2018.04.134</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1359431117351839</URL>
A procedure for solving transient nonlinear thermal problems of high burn-up nuclear fuel rods in a light water reactor
JiannanTang,MeiHuang,MenglingYang,YuanyuanZhao,YuanyuanZhao
North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, China
Northwest Institute of Nuclear Technology, Xi’an 71002, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Half boundary method is applied to thermal problems of high burn-up fuel rods.
Thermal responses of nuclear fuel rods under heat-up, RIA and LOCA are simulated.
Nonlinear material properties are involved in the calculation below 3500 K.
Thermal behaviors of nuclear fuel rods with and without central hole are compared.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
To ensure the safety of the high burn-up nuclear fuel rods (NFRs) in existing reactors, thermal behaviors of NFRs have been analyzed extensively. In this paper, an accurate and efficient procedure, called half-boundary method (HBM), is applied to solve the one-dimensional transient heat conduction problems of high burn-up NFRs with temperature-dependent material properties. HBM saves computation cost since it only needs to calculate the second-order matrix in the simulation. Compared with the low burn-up condition, the conductivity drops significantly in the rim zone of the high burn-up NFR. The huge temperature gradient in the radial direction render the nonlinear material properties affecting the temperature distribution greatly. In addition, the model contains a helium layer, so the radiation heat transfers are considered in this paper. The heating up process of a low burn-up nuclear fuel is first simulated, and these results are compared with those from reference to verify the accuracy of HBM in transient thermal problems of NFR. The high burn-up NFRs with and without central hole in heat-up process, reactivity initiated accidents (RIAs) and loss of coolant accidents (LOCAs) are then simulated. The results show that the NFR with the central hole (NFRCH) is safer than the NFR without the central hole (NFRWCH), and the temperature distribution of high burn-up NFR is higher than that of low burn-up NFR. The pellet, which is near the central axis, is going to melt when a critical RIA happens, while the inner surface of the cladding will melt first when serious LOCA happens.
Keywords:Half-boundary method;Nuclear fuel rod;High burn-up;LOCARIA
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The nuclear power is one of the most important sources of energy, and because of its inherent radioactivity, the safety of the nuclear power plant is critical. The NFR is the heat source of the reactor in a nuclear plant and acts as the first shield of radiation protection. Some existing NFRs have been changed to high burn-up. To obtain the results of the steady-state and transient-state heat transfer responses of the high burn-up NFRs in the water cooling reactor, many experimental tests and numerical simulations have been carried out. The NFR with a central hole has been used in VVER-1000. Su et al. [1], [2], [3] analyzed one-dimensional transient heat conduction problems of high burn-up NFRs and simulated the thermos-hydraulic behaviors of a NFR of a pressurized water reactor during insertion and partial loss-of-flow by improved lumped parameter formulation, where Hermite approximation was used in both works. Soba and Kudryashov et al. [4], [5] presented the temperature distribution in high burn-up NFRs. Some numerical simulation codes, such as FRAPTRAN [6], SCANAIR [7], [8], FROBA [9] and THEATRe [10], have been developed to analyze the thermal behaviors of NFRs with nonlinear material properties in response to accidents like RIAs and LOCAs. Besides, kinds of commercial simulation software were also developed, for example, ABAQUS was used to study the temperature and heat flux changes in a NFR [11], and ANSYS was used to analyze the thermal-mechanical behaviors of NFRs [12].
In this paper, the HBM [13], [14], [15] is used to simulate the thermal responses of NFRs to RIAs and LOCAs. HBM handles the first-order derivatives as independent variables, then derives the relationship between arbitrary node in domain and the nodes on half-number boundaries. In this way, the matrix order of HBM is not determined by the element numbers in the domain but only one order larger than the dimensional number of the model. For instance, in a one-dimensional problem, a second-order matrix is built in the calculation processes of HBM. Therefore, the builds of huge-order matrices and the arduous matrix inversion that are required in finite volume method (FVM) and finite element method (FEM) are avoided. Besides, two variables such as temperature and heat flux are calculated synchronously in computation. Variables at any node within the domain could be associated with both temperature and heat flux on only half of the boundaries, rendering the name of half-boundary method. In addition, no uniform grid or constant grid size is required. This method looks like the boundary type method, but no Green function is needed, and thus HBM has a better applicability. To consider the actual operation situations of NFRs in response to accidents, nonlinear material properties are included.
<Section>2. Physical and mathematical models</Section>
The NFR model (shown in Fig. 1(a)) consists of a uranium dioxide (UO2) pellet which is used to produce heat, a zirconium alloy cladding and a gap located between the pellet and the cladding. The gap is filled with helium as a thermal conductivity gas to protect the fuel rod. Also, the pellet has a rim (dash line area in Fig. 1) since it is a high burn-up NFR. Due to the axisymmetric temperature distribution and the neglected axial heat transfer behavior, the numerical model is simplified to a one-dimensional problem. Benefit from the advanced manufacturing [16], [17], [18], an improved NFR model with a hole in the center of the pellet is possible which is displayed in Fig. 1(b). The hole is also filled with helium.
Fig. 1. Geometric sketches for the high burn-up NFR models with rims (the dash line area).
2.1. Physical models
The ability to calculate accurately the performance of light-water reactor (LWR) fuel with high burn-up condition in response to accidents depends on both physical models and numerical simulation methods. Besides, the heat conductivity coefficients of most materials are varied. The inconsistent material properties will dramatically influence the results particularly for a big temperature gradient. Therefore, the current work considers the material properties as nonlinear and the material properties for different parts of the NFR are presented in detail in this section. In this paper, the nonlinear material properties of pellet and cladding are referenced from Ref. [19].
2.1.1. Pellet
Pellet is made up of UO2 whose melting temperature is 3120 K, and it generates heat by fission of uranium atoms. The heat generation rate was assumed to be constant in some papers [12], [20]. The coefficient of heat conductivity, the specific heat capacity and the density of pellet are temperature-dependent, and are calculated using the following equations, respectively:
@(1)
@(2)
@(3)
where , @ and @ are the thermal conductivity coefficient (unit: W/(m·K)), the specific heat capacity (unit: J/(kg·K)) and the density (unit: kg/m3) of the fuel pellet, respectively. They are dependent on . Where @ is the temperature of the fuel pellet in a range of , and , @ for @ and @ for @ .
2.1.2. Helium layer
The heat transfer behavior in the helium layer was assumed as a pure conduction process in some papers [20]. However, radiation and convection also happen in the helium layer [21]. The convective heat transfer has the smallest influence on the thermal behavior because the helium barely flows in the gap. In order to investigate the effect of the convective heat transfer in the helium layer, commercial numerical software ANSYS is used to calculate the thermal results of the helium layer with and without buoyant and they are shown in Fig. 2. From Fig. 2 it can be seen that there is no much difference between them. Thus, the convection is ignored in this paper. Compared with convection, radiation has a more signification effect on the thermal behavior due to the high temperature difference between the outer surface of the pellet and the inner surface of the cladding. The helium is assumed transparent, and the helium layer surfaces are assumed to be grey diffuse and the temperature of each surface is assumed to be uniform [22]. The material properties expressions are presented below:
@(4)
@(5)
@(6)
where , @ and @ are the thermal conductivity coefficient (unit: W/(m·K)), the specific heat capacity (unit: J/(kg·K)) and the density (unit: kg/m3) of the helium layer, respectively. They are dependent on . Where @ is the temperature of the helium layer for . In addition, because the specific heat capacity of the helium is insensitive to the temperature [23], the maximum difference of helium’s specific heat between possible temperature range is 0.033%, and it is ignorable. Thus we chose a constant value as @ in this paper.
Fig. 2. Temperature distribution of the helium layer with and without the impact of the buoyant.
Besides, the total gap conductivity includes three terms [6]:
@(7)
where @ (unit: W/m2⋅K) is conductance through helium gas, @ (unit: W/m2⋅K) is conductance by radiation from the outer surface of pellet to the inner surface of the cladding and @ (unit: W/m2⋅K) is conductance by pellet-cladding solid-solid contact.
The @ is defined as:
@(8)
where @ is the width (unit: m) of the helium gas layer and @ is the combined pellet and cladding temperature jump distance. @ term is calculated by the equation below:
@(9)
where @ is a constant number equal to 0.024688, @ is the temperature of the helium layer, @ is the pressure of the gas in the helium layer, @ is the mole fraction of i-th gas component, @ is the accommodation coefficient of the i-th gas component, @ is the molecular weight of i-th gas component. In this paper, the helium layer is assumed to only have the helium gas and the impact from fission gas is ignored, .
The radiation heat conductance () is defined by Kreith correlation as:
@(10)
where @ is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant, @ is the emissivity factor, @ is the configuration factor, @ is the temperature of pellet outer surface (K), and @ is the temperature of cladding inner surface.
The @ is calculated by the modified Mikic–Todreas model, and it is defined by the following equation:
@(11)
where @ and , @ is the ratio of interfacial pressure to cladding Meyer hardness. @ is the mean thermal conductivity of fuel pellet and cladding, where @ and @ are the pellet and cladding thermal conductivities, respectively. , where @ and @ are the fuel pellet and cladding surface roughness (unit: m), respectively. Besides, , where .
2.1.3. Cladding
The cladding consists of zirconium alloy whose melting temperature is 2150 K. The expressions of the coefficient of heat conductivity, specific heat capacity and density of cladding are listed below:
@(12)
@(13)
@(14)
where , @ and @ are the thermal conductivity coefficient (unit: W/(m·K)), the specific heat capacity (unit: J/(kg·K)) and the density (unit: kg/m3) of cladding, respectively. They are dependent on . Where @ is the temperature of cladding,.
Notice that: the @ is complex and uncertain at 1800–2150 K, but in this paper @ is calculated using Eq. (12) for simplification.
2.1.4. High burn-up material properties
After discussing the effects of the varied thermal material properties, the influence of high burn-up condition on thermal conductivity coefficient of pellet is going to be considered in this section. The temperature distribution in the fuel rod is related to the fuel microstructure change induced by the irradiation. The fuel properties will change if the burn-up increases, for example, the recrystallization and coarsening will happen to the microstructure of rim, an obvious decrease in thermal conductivity coefficient will occur in the rim, and the composition in the helium layer will change because of the released fission gas. In this paper, only the decrease in the thermal conductivity coefficient of rim is considered for the high burn-up NFR model.
The heat conductivity coefficient of the rim-layer in the high burn-up NFR is assumed two times less than that in the low burn-up NFR according to Ref. [5], and the thickness of the rim-layer which is located outside the pellet is 0.2 mm with a burn-up level of around 100 MWd/kgU.
The improper operation will cause two typical accidents, which are RIAs and LOCAs. The RIAs are the accidents mainly caused by the rod ejection, overcool coolant water and uncontrolled boron dilution, which will result in an obvious increase in the core thermal power. In this paper, an extra range of thermal powers with an interval of 100% are added to the normal reactor power until the produced highest temperature of the fuel rod reaches the melting temperature. The occurrence of LOCA is caused due to the break of the primary loop, leading to the sharp runoff of the reactor pressure. As a result, massive coolant water will evaporate into steam, and the convective heat transfer coefficient will drop dramatically. To investigate the actual accident situations, the transient thermal responses of the high burn-up NFRs to RIAs and LOCAs are studied in this paper.
2.2. Mathematical formulation
As indicated before, heat conduction and radiation play main roles in thermal behaviors but convection affects little since the helium barely flows in the gap. To simplify the calculation, the radiation of the helium layer is simplified as the conductivity of the helium layer. The one-dimensional transient-state heat conduction equation with temperature-dependent material properties is shown below.
@(15)
where @ is the temperature (unit: K), @ is the space coordinate (unit: m), @ is the specific heat (unit: J/(kg·K)), @ is the density (kg/m3), @ is the time (unit: s), @ is the coefficient of heat conductivity (unit: W/(m·K)) and g(r,t) is the volumetric heat generation rate (unit is W/m3).
To solve the conduction equation, the HBM is used to discretize Eq. (15). HBM handles the first-order derivatives as independent variables and the calculations March from one side to the other. In this paper, we set @ which is the heat flux to decrease the order of Eq. (15), and Eq. (15) is then simplified as:
(16)
For transient problems, the following initial and boundary conditions are adopted:
@(17)
@(18)
@(19)
@(20)
where f1(x) and f2(x) are known. Eq. (17) indicates the initial condition, and Eq. (18) is the first kind boundary condition where @ is the coolant temperature. Eq. (19) is the second kind boundary condition where @ is the heat flux on the NFR axis. Eq. (20) is the third kind boundary condition where @ is the convective heat transfer coefficient between the outside of the cladding of the fuel rod and the coolant.
Integrating Eq. (16) from arbitrary node i to the adjacent node i + 1 and from time m to m + 1, the following expression is obtained:
@(21)
where @ is the distance between the node i and node i + 1, @ is the location of node i and @ is the central position between node i and node i + 1.
The one-dimensional model is discretized as shown in Fig. 3. The derivatives are integrated as , @ and . So, , @ indicate the temperature and heat flux of node i at t(m+1) moment (next time step), respectively, while @ and @ are that at current time step. In Eq. (21), @ and @ are functions of time. A weighted interpolation of variables at two adjacent time moments is adopted to approximate the average values as: , , where . Therefore, the integral of @ and @ over time can be written as:
@(22)
@(23)
where @ is the long of the time step between time m and time m + 1.
Fig. 3. Schematic of the discretized model.
The different values of @ account for the different weights of @ and @ moments. When , the average variables only depend on current moment @ which is called pure explicit Euler method. While for , the average variables equal to the values at next time moment @ which is called pure implicit Euler method. While for @ it is the Crank-Nicolson method [24]. The explicit Euler method has strict time step restriction [25], while implicit Euler method has no time step restriction. Substituting Eq. (22) and Eq. (23) into Eq. (21), and discretizing Eq. (21) we can get:
@(24)
where , @ and @ are the density, the specific heat capacity and thermal conductivity between node i and node (i + 1), respectively, they are variable and depend on temperature.
By rearranging the variables at node i + 1 at next step to the left side of Eq. (24), Eq. (24) becomes:
@(25)
Further simplify Eq. (25) into a matrix form:
@(26)
where @,@,@ .
In this paper, the relationship between node @ and node @ at next time step m + 1 is expressed as below:
@(27)
where ,@ ,@ , @ .
Based on Eq. (27), we can also obtain the relationship between the arbitrary node i and the adjacent node i − 1 as well as the relationship between node i − 1 and node i − 2. By iteration, we can get the relationship between node i and node i − 2. By repeating this process, the relationship between the boundary node 1 and the arbitrary node i can be obtained as below:
@(28)
where @, @.
To solve nonlinearity, the physical properties at a trial temperature solution are first evaluated, and then the ensued linearized equations for new temperatures are solved. The physical properties are updated at each iteration with the latest solution until the convergence is achieved. The flow chart for solving the one-dimensional temperature distributions with nonlinear material properties using HBM is illustrated in Fig. 4. In Fig. 4, the variable n is the number of iterations when the calculations are converged. The relative error of temperature is calculated using the equation below:
@(29)
where ,@ .
Fig. 4. Flow chart for HBM calculation procedure with nonlinear material properties.
Similar with FVM, both of FVM and HBM require matrix inversion in the calculation process. However, from Eq. (28), it can be noted that only two-order matrixes are calculated in HBM in one-dimensional problems. On the contrary, with the increasing number of nodes or control volumes, the matrix order of FVM keeps the same as the control volume number. So, the CPU and memory cost needed for building the complex matrix and for solving the inverse matrix increase correspondingly. On the contrary, the calculation time and memory requirement of HBM are much less since its matrix order is constant 2. This indicates that the computation time of HBM does not increase in each inverse matrix calculation. Therefore the order number of the matrix we need to solve is free from the divided number of the numerical model. The building of complex matrix and arduous matrix inversion that are required in FVM [26], [27], [28], [29] are hence avoided. In addition, although some method could solve the big scale matrix by iteration such as the Gauss-Seidel method, in order to obtain acceptable results, more than one iteration step is needed. However, no matter how many parts the one-dimensional geometrical model is divided into, only two-order matrices are involved in HBM, and these thermal problems can be solved directly even for big scale problems. Also, the temperature and heat flux fields can be solved simultaneously by HBM. Therefore, HBM provides much higher calculation efficiency as compared with FVM and FDM.
<Section>3. Results and discussions</Section>
In this section, HBM is applied to simulate the transient responses of the high burn-up NFRs in heat-up process, RIAs and LOCAs conditions, respectively.
To compare the thermal behaviors of the NFRs with and without the central hole, the total generated heat of the whole pellet is controlled equal. In other words, the NFR which has the central hole will generate more heat in unit volume than that without the central hole.
3.1. Transient heat conduction in the NFR heat-up process
The geometrical parameters, numerical model parameters, thermal generation rate and convective heat transfer coefficient between the outer surface of the cladding and the coolant of the typical fuel rod are presented in Table 1. In addition, the constant thermal material properties in Ref. [20] are shown in Table 2. In order to choose the appropriate node number and time step, the discretization errors of the HBM are estimated. The temperature results of NFR in Rrim, Rp, Rci, Rco in stable state with different node number are shown in Table 3. As it is shown in Table 3, when the number of the nodes is equal or greater than 60, the temperature distribution won’t change anymore, thus we choose 60 as the number of nodes (node number of the pellet is 40, node number of the helium layer is 10 and node number of the cladding is 10). Furthermore, Table 4 shows us that when the time step is less than or equal to 0.1 s the results would be stable, thus we choose 0.1 s as the time step.
Table 1. Parameters of a typical fuel rod in a pressure water reactor.
Table 2. The material properties of the NFR in heat-up process in Ref. [20].
Table 3. The temperature of NFR in Rrim, Rp, Rci, Rco in stable state with different node number.
Table 4. The temperature of NFR during heat-up process in Rrim, Rp, Rci, Rco at 5 s, 10 s and 20 s with different time steps.
Before analyzing the transient responses of the high burn-up NFR to accidents, the accuracy of the HBM is first verified by simulating a normal nuclear core heat-up operating with the convective heat transfer coefficient h∞0 = 34 kW/(m2 K). The fuel rod does not have rim or central hole, and the NFR is heated up by the pellet with a normal thermal generation rate from an initial temperature of the coolant (578 K) until to be stable. The stable temperature distribution is considered as the initial condition of RIA and LOCA. To verify the accuracy of the HBM further, Fig. 5 illustrates the temperature history of the NFR obtained by HBM at the positions of R0 (r = 0 mm), Rp, Rci and Rco during the heat-up process. In order to verify the accuracy of the HBM, the results from HBM and FVM are compared with those from Ref. [20], and the datum are summarized in Table 5. Both of the HBM or FVM have the same numerical model. As it is shown in Table 5, the HBM is accurate, even better than FVM. In order to compare the efficiency of the HBM against that of FVM, HBM and FVM are used to solve the same problem with different divided number by the programming language Python which is installed in a computer has i 7 processor and 8 G memory, and the computation times are recorded in Table 6. It is shown in Table 6, as the node number increases, the computation time ratio decreases significantly, it means HBM has better efficiency than FVM, especially in the problem which has massive divided parts. Because, as the number of divided parts increasing, the matrix order of FVM keeps the same as the volume number, and the CPU cost needed for solving the inverse matrix increases exponentially as the order of matrix increases. On the contrary, the CPU cost doesn’t increase so greatly in HBM for one-dimensional problems since its matrix order is only 2, and does not change. Therefore, HBM shows greater potential than FVM in complex numerical calculation with huge grids since it requires much cheaper calculation. At the same time, the HBM could solve the huge grids problem with very small computational memory which isn’t even enough to store all variables in FVM.
Fig. 5. The temperature history of the NFR obtained by HBM at the positions of R0, Rp, Rci and Rco during the heat-up process as compared with Ref. [20].
Table 5. The temperature history of NFR obtained by HBM and FVM at the positions of R0, Rp, Rci and Rco during the heat-up process as compared with Ref. [20].
Table 6. The computation time and the matrix order number of the HBM and FVM with different number of nodes or volumes.
3.1.1. Low burn-up NFR with linear and nonlinear material properties
Fig. 5 presents the temperature history of the NFR at different locations obtained by HBM, and the results was compared with that in Ref. [20]. The steady-state temperatures are achieved at around time = 40 s in both HBM and Ref. [20]. The accuracy of HBM in solving transient thermal problems of the NFR is verified. According to Eq. (1). The nonlinear material properties are quite different from the constant properties. The nonlinear @ is about two times larger than the value in Table 2, and the nonlinear , , @ are much smaller than that in Table 2, and the density and heat capacity of helium layer are ignored in Ref. [20]. The nonlinear material properties will result in the quick achievement of the steady-state condition and a smaller temperature value in the pellet.
The recalculated steady-state temperature distributions obtained by using the nonlinear thermal material properties compared with the constant material properties are displayed in Fig. 6. The results from Fig. 6(a) confirm our viewpoints that (1) It only costs about 32 s to achieve the steady-state, more quickly than the reference due to the smaller density and heat capacity values. (2) The highest temperature in steady-state is 1065.2 K, 124 K lower than the linear material properties results. This is attributed to the higher heat conductivity coefficient value of pellet. Fig. 6(b) presents an obvious temperature difference between the nonlinear material properties model and the linear material properties one. These phenomena mean that nonlinear material properties play an important role in the thermal behaviors of the NFR. Therefore, the nonlinear material properties are considered in this paper.
Fig. 6. (a) Temperature history during the heat-up process and (b) temperature distribution at steady-state of the NFR with nonlinear and constant material properties.
3.1.2. NFR with the nonlinear material properties in low and high burn-up conditions
Different from low burn-up NFR, the heat conductivity drop significantly in the region which near the outside surface of the pellet in the high burn-up NFRs. Therefore, the heat-up process of a high burn-up NFR with a rim in the pellet is simulated in this section. The converged time is 30 s, and the temperature distribution at steady-state is illustrated in Fig. 7, and the data which include average temperature and the temperature difference between the high and low burn-up NFR are given in Table 7. As can be seen from Fig. 7 that the highest temperature of the high burn-up NFR is 37.3 K higher than that in the low burn-up NFR. The higher temperature distribution means that the high burn-up NFR is more dangerous than the low burn-up one. In addition, there is an abnormal high temperature gradient in the rim area (from r = 3.9 mm to r = 4.1 mm), because the rim has a higher thermal resistance. Therefore, we should pay more attentions on the thermal behavior of the high burn-up NFRs.
Fig. 7. Steady-state temperature distributions of the low burn-up and high burn-up NFRs.
Table 7. Average temperatures at different zones of NFRs with and without rim under nonlinear material properties condition.
3.1.3. High burn-up NFR with and without central hole
We have proved that the high burn-up NFR has a higher temperature distribution than the low burn-up NFR. In this section, the central holes (shown in Fig. 1(b)) with varied sizes are applied in the heat-up simulation of the high burn-up NFR. The heat-up temperature history and the steady-state temperature distributions of the high burn-up NFR with different geometric models where the value of Rcen ranges from 0% Rp to 80% Rp are simulated, and the results are shown in Fig. 8 and Table 8. As the results shown that the temperatures keep constant at the central hole, and then drop in the radial direction to the outer surface of the cladding. The highest temperature decreases as the size of the central hole grows. The central temperature decreases from 1082.5 K to 758.8 K when Rcen changes from 0% Rp to 80% Rp. This means that the NFR with the central hole is safer than that without the central hole. However, if Rcen is equal to 80% Rp, the volumetric heat generation rate is 2.7 times larger than that when Rcen is 0. In order to balance the highest temperature and the operation period, the size of the central hole cannot be very large. In this paper, Rcen equalling to 20% Rp is studied, which has been applied in VVER-1000.
Fig. 8. Temperature distribution of the high burn-up NFR with different size central hole.
Table 8. The change of convergence time, highest temperature and volumetric heat generation rate in the heat-up process with the increase of central hole sizes.
3.2. Thermal responses to RIAs and LOCAs
RIA and LOCA are two common Design Base Accidents (DBA) which require regularly examinations to avoid severe core damage. Therefore, in this section, the thermal responses of the high burn-up NFR with and without central hole to RIAs and LOCAs are analyzed.
3.2.1. High burn-up NFR with and without central hole in RIAs
The happen of RIAs affects the heat generation rate of the NFR directly. Generally, the increase of the generation rate will cause safety issues. Therefore, in the current work, we increase the heat generation rate to simulate the RIA conditions. An increased heat generation rate based on the initial value of g0 = 318121 kW/m3 is applied in the calculation until the melting of the pellet occurs. Fig. 9 presents the temperature histories of the high burn-up NFR with and without the central hole in different RIAs conditions. The results show that both of the NFRs with and without central hole have higher temperature distributions when higher heat generation rates are used. Compared with the NFRCH, the NFRWCH needs less time to achieve the steady state. It can be seen form Fig. 9(a), at position R0, the NFRCH has the highest temperature, which is 208.29 K lower than NFRWCH. It costs 17 s for the NFRWCH to melt while 31 s is needed for the NFRCH when fourfold initial generation rate is applied. Fig. 9(b)–(d) shows that the temperature history and distribution at positions of Rp, Rci and Rco are similar. The temperature distributions of two NFRs at different time moments in response to fourfold heat generation rate are illustrated in Fig. 10. The highest temperatures in the NFRCH are a little higher than NFRWCH. However, away from the center, the situations are on the contrary.
Fig. 9. Temperature histories of the NFRs with and without central holes at the positions of R0, Rp, Rci and Rco obtained with different heat generation rates under RIA conditions. (C. H. means Central Hole).
Fig. 10. Temperature distributions in the NFRs with and without central holes at 5 s, 15 s and 30 s in responds to the fourfold heat generation rate under RIA conditions.
3.2.2. High burn-up NFR with and without central hole in LOCAs
Different from RIA, the LOCA occurs when the primary loop breaks down. In LOCAs, the coolant loses from the primary loop and the pressure in the primary loop reduces sharply. This phenomenon may cause the evaporation of the coolant around the NFR. The heat transfer coefficient of steam is much lower than that of the liquid [30], [31]. The temperature of the NFR hence increases. In order to simulate different LOCAs, changed convective coefficients (10%h∞0, 2%h∞0, 0.8%h∞) are adopted in this paper. Fig. 11 presents the temperature history of the high burn-up NFR with and without central hole at the positons of R0, Rp, Rci and Rco under different LOCAs. The temperature of the high burn-up NFR increases as the h∞ diminishes. Fig. 11(b)–(d) shows that the temperature histories and distributions at Rp, Rci and Rco are similar no matter the NFR has the central hole or not. Fig. 11(c) and (d) shows that the cladding melts at 65 s and 62 s for NFRCH and NFRWCH under h∞ = 0.8% h∞0 LOCA situations. Fig. 11(a) presents that the highest temperature at the central axis is still below the pellet melting temperature. However, in RIAs, the pellet is the first part to melt (Fig. 9(a)). Besides, not only the temperature at R0, the temperatures at Rp, Rci and Rco also rise dramatically in LOCAs, but in RIAs temperatures barely increase.
Fig. 11. Temperature histories of the NFRs with and without central holes at the positons of R0, Rp, Rci and Rco obtained with different heat generation rates under LOCA conditions.
The temperature distributions in NFRCH and NFRWCH at 10 s, 40 s and 60 s under h∞ = 0.8% h∞0 condition are illustrated in Fig. 12. It is shown that the cladding temperatures of NFRCH and NFRWCH are just 18.3 K and 3.2 K lower than the 2150 K at 60 s. Compared with Fig. 10, Fig. 12 shows that NFRs in LOCAs have a much lower temperature gradient than those in RIAs. The high temperature gradient will cause a large thermal stress which will threaten the safety of the NFR.
Fig. 12. Temperature distributions in the NFRs with and without central holes at 10 s, 40 s and 70 s under LOCA conditions.
<Section>4. Conclusion</Section>
In this paper, the transient-state heat conduction equations of HBM are presented with detailed derivation. In the process of calculating the one-dimensional heat conduction problems, only two-order matrixes are involved in HBM. Therefore, HBM can save calculation memory, especially when the numerical models are discretized with fine meshing. Then, HBM is applied to solve the transient thermal problems of NFRs in different conditions, they are heat-up process, RIAs and LOCAs. The NFRs with linear and nonlinear material properties are comparatively calculated using HBM, and the results show that the NFRs with nonlinear thermal properties have lower temperature distribution than those with the linear properties.
The results show that the temperature distribution of the high burn-up NFR is higher than that of the low burn-up counterpart, because the rim section has a much lower conductivity coefficient. The NFR with the central hole is safer than that without the central hole. Besides, the RIAs and LOCAs with and without rim are simulated respectively, and the results show that the NFR has totally different thermal behaviors in RIAs and LOCAs. In a fourfold RIA, the central temperatures of NFR with and without central hole reach the melting temperature of pellet at 17 s and 31 s, respectively. However, under LOCA conditions, the initial melting position is the inner surface of the cladding. When the LOCA with h∞ = 0.8%h∞0 happens, the NFRs with and without central hole melt at 65 s and 62 s, respectively. Besides, the NFRs in LOCAs have low temperature gradients than those in RIAs. Compared with the thermal behavior in LOCAs, the temperatures at Rp, Rci and Rco barely increase in RIAs. Overall, the high burn-up NFRs have higher temperature distribution in the pellet than the lower burn-up counterparts. In addition, the central hole can make the NFR safer, particularly in RIAs.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
The authors would like to appreciate the financial support from the NCEPU “Double First-Class” Graduate Talent Cultivation Program and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2018ZD10), and the State Key Laboratory of Intense Pulsed Radiation Simulation and Effect (No. SKLIPR1402X) of China. The authors would like to acknowledge for the financial supports from National Natural Science Foundation of China (51506003) to the research.
<Section>References</Section>
[1]
J. Su
Improved lumped models for asymmetric cooling of a long slab by heat convection
Int. Comm. Heat Mass Transfer, 28 (2001), pp. 973-983
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[2]
J. Su, R.M. Cotta
Improved lumped parameter formulation for simplified LWR thermohydraulic analysis
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 28 (2001), pp. 1019-1031
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[3]
A.C. Pontedeiro, R.M. Cotta, J. Su
Improved lumped model for thermal analysis of high burn-up nuclear fuel rods
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 50 (2008), pp. 767-773
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[4]
A. Soba, M. Lemes, M.E. González, A. Denis, L. Romero
Simulation of the behaviour of nuclear fuel under high burnup conditions
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 70 (2004), pp. 147-156
Google Scholar
[5]
N.A. Kudryashov, A.V. Khlunov, M.A. Chmykhov
Thermal regimes of high burn-up nuclear fuel rod
Commun. Nonlinear Sci. Numer. Simulat., 15 (2010), pp. 1240-1252
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[6]
K.J. Geelhood, W.G. Luscher, J.M. Cuta, FRAPTRAN-1.5: A Computer Code for the Transient Analysis of Oxide Fuel Rods, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 2014.
Google Scholar
[7]
V. Georgenthum, A. Moal, O. Marchand
SCANAIR a transient fuel performance code part two: assessment of modelling capabilities
Nucl. Eng. Des., 280 (2014), pp. 172-180
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[8]
A. Moal, V. Georgenthum, O. Marchand
SCANAIR: a transient fuel performance code part one: general modelling description
Nucl. Eng. Des., 280 (2014), pp. 150-171
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[9]
H. Yu, W. Tian, Z. Yang, G.H. Su, S. Qiu
Development of fuel rod behavior analysis code (FROBA) and its application to AP1000
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 50 (2012), pp. 8-17
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[10]
A. Nawaz, Y. Hidekazu, M. Yang, A. Hussain
Comparative analysis of RIA and LOCA with and without fuel rod behavior modeling in THEATRe code
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 93 (2016), pp. 133-145
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[11]
Bavandi, Eskandari, Mihandoost
Studies on nuclear fuel rod thermal performance
Energy Proc., 14 (2012), pp. 142-147
Google Scholar
[12]
Y. Jiang, Y. Cui, Y. Huo, S. Ding
Three-dimensional FE analysis of the thermal–mechanical behaviors in the nuclear fuel rods
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 38 (2011), pp. 2581-2593
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[13]
J. Tang, M. Huang, Y. Zhao, X. Ouyang, J. Huang
A new procedure for solving steady-state and transient-state nonlinear radial conduction problems of nuclear fuel rods
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 110 (2017), pp. 492-500
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[14]
M. Huang, J. Tang, Y. Zhao, X. Ouyang
A new procedure for efficient and accurate solving heat conduction problems
Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 111 (2017), pp. 508-519
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[15]
M. Haung, J. Ma, J.N. Tang, H. Yuan
Mixed boundary node method for free vibration analysis of rectangular plates with variable thickness and general boundary conditions
WIT Trans. Modell. Simul., 56 (2013), pp. 127-137
Google Scholar
[16]
Shunyu Liu, Y.C. Shin
The influences of melting degree of TiC reinforcements on microstructure and mechanical properties of laser direct deposited Ti6Al4V-TiC composites
Mater. Des., 136 (2017), pp. 185-195
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[17]
G. Yang, M. Mohammadpour, N. Yazdian, J. Ma, B. Carlson, H. Wang, R. Kovacevic
Cross-beam laser joining of AA 6111 to galvanized steel in a coach peel configuration
Lasers Manuf. Mater. Process., 4 (2017), pp. 1-15
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[18]
G. Yang, J. Ma, B. Carlson, H.-P. Wang, R. Kovacevic
Effect of laser beam configuration on microstructure evolution and joint performance in laser joining AA 6111 panels
Mater. Des., 123 (2017), pp. 197-210
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[19]
IAEA, Thermophysical properties database of materials for light water reactors and heavy water reactors, International Atomic Energy Agency, 2006.
Google Scholar
[20]
C. An, F.C. Moreira, J. Su
Thermal analysis of the melting process in a nuclear fuel rod
Appl. Therm. Eng., 68 (2014), pp. 133-143
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[21]
D.D. Lanning, C.R. Hann, Review of methods applicable to the calculation of gap conductionce in zircaloy-clad uo2 fuel rods, Battelle, 1975.
Google Scholar
[22]
K.E. Gilchrist
Thermal property measurements on Zircaloy-2 and associated oxide layers upto 1200 °C
J. Nucl. Mater., 62 (1976), pp. 257-264
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[23]
N.C. WebBook, [online] Available at: <https://webbook.nist.gov/cgi/cbook.cgi?Name=Helium&Units=SI&cTG=on>, [Accessed 19 March 2018].
Google Scholar
[24]
J. Crank, P. Nicolson
A practical method for numerical evaluation of solutions of partial differential equations of the heat-conduction type
Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc., 43 (1) (1947), pp. 50-67
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[25]
Y. He, J. Li
A penalty finite element method based on the Euler implicit/explicit scheme for the time-dependent Navier-Stokes equations
J. Comput. Appl. Math., 235 (2010), pp. 708-725
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[26]
P.R.M. Lyra, R.d.C.F.d. Lima, D.K.E.d. Carvalho, G.M.L.L.d. Silva
An axisymmetric finite volume formulation for the solution of heat conduction problems using unstructured meshes
J. Braz. Soc. of Mech. Sci. & Eng., XXVII (2005), pp. 407-414
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[27]
Z. Chen, C. He, B. Wu
High order finite volume methods for singular perturbation problems
Sci. China Ser. A: Math, 51 (2008), pp. 1391-1400
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[28]
R.S. Todd, J. He, P.A. Webley, C. Beh, S. Wilson, M.A. Lloyd
Fast finite-volume method for PSA/VSA cycle simulations experimental validation
Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 40 (2001), pp. 3217-3224
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[29]
C.K. Krishnaprakas, K.B. Narayana
Use of GCG methods for the efficient solution of matrix problems arising from the FVM formulation of radiative transfer
Numerical Heat Transfer, 40 (2001), pp. 515-533
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[30]
D. Ma, T. Zhou, J. Chen, S. Qi, M.A. Shahzad, Z. Xiao
Supercritical water heat transfer coefficient prediction analysis based on BP neural network
Nucl. Eng. Des., 320 (2017), pp. 400-408
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[31]
M. Dongliang, Z. Tao, L. Bing, M.A. Shahzad, H. Yanping
An improved correlation on the onset of heat transfer deterioration in supercritical water
Nucl. Eng. Des., 326 (2018), pp. 290-300
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar