<title>Thermo-mechanical assessment of the optimized CFETR water cooled ceramic breeder blanket</title>
<author>1,XuebinMa,2,XiaomanCheng,3,SonglinLiu,4,KaiHuang</author>
<Affiliation>1, Advanced Energy Research Center, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, People’s Republic of China;2,Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Devices and Systems of Ministry of Education and Guangdong Province, College of Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, People’s Republic of China;3,Institute of Plasma Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, 330031, People’s Republic of China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Fusion Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.fusengdes.2020.111798</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S092037962030346X</URL>
Thermo-mechanical assessment of the optimized CFETR water cooled ceramic breeder blanket
XuebinMa,XiaomanCheng,SonglinLiu,KaiHuang
Advanced Energy Research Center, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, People’s Republic of China
Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Devices and Systems of Ministry of Education and Guangdong Province, College of Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, People’s Republic of China
Institute of Plasma Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, 330031, People’s Republic of China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Optimization of the WCCB blanket for CFETR was carried out to deal with the potential drawbacks identified in the last iteration of blanket design.
Thermal-hydraulic and thermo-mechanical performances of the optimized blanket under different fusion power levels and different operation scenarios are investigated and reported.
Structural feasibility of the optimized blanket is further verified.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The Water Cooled Ceramic Breeder (WCCB) blanket is one of the candidates for Chinese Fusion Engineering Test Reactor (CFETR). Within the framework of the engineering design of CFETR, an updated design of WCCB blanket was proposed corresponding to the latest core parameters (major radius=7.2 m, minus radius=2.2 m). Thermal-hydraulic analyses preliminarily showed the feasibility of the previous blanket design. However, the flow distribution of the blanket was unsatisfactory. Thus, optimization of cooling systems of the blanket was performed accordingly. The optimized blanket design as well as the hydraulic analysis results are presented. Then, in order to investigate the thermal-hydraulic and thermo-mechanical behaviors of the optimized WCCB blanket under normal and accidental operation scenarios, thermo-mechanical analyses were performed following a computational approach based on the Finite Element Method (FEM), using the ANSYS commercial FEM code. The obtained results were assessed in order to verify the compliance with the blanket design criteria ITER SDC-IC code. Structural feasibility of the optimized blanket design was verified.
Keywords:Thermal-hydraulic analysis;Thermo-mechanical analysis;WCCB blanket;CFETR
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
As one of the Chinese Fusion Engineering Test Reactor (CFETR) breeding blanket candidates, the Water Cooled Ceramic Breeder (WCCB) blanket is being developed at Institute of Plasma Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ASIPP). Corresponding to the latest core parameters (major radius = 7.2 m, minus radius = 2.2 m) [1], an updated design of the WCCB blanket was proposed [2]. The blanket design aims at covering the CFETR multiple fusion powers (including 200 MW, 500 MW, 1 GW and 1.5 GW) while satisfying the tritium self-sufficiency. Three independent cooling systems were proposed to control the temperature of blanket under different fusion powers [3]. Cooling System (CS) 1 is used to cool the structural components including the first wall (FW), stiffening plates (SPs) and covers. CS 2 and CS 3 are used to cool the breeding zone (BZ). When CFETR operates at a higher fusion power (≥ 500 MW), all of the three cooling systems are put into use. When CFETR operates at the fusion power of 200 MW, only CS 1 and CS 2 are put into use to raise temperature of the breeder zone for a better tritium release performance.
Previous thermal hydraulic analyses showed the feasibility of the thermal-hydraulic design of the WCCB blanket [3]. However, the flow distribution of the blanket was unsatisfactory. Also, it is difficult to control the mass flow rate of paralleled structural components (FW, SP and covers) under different fusion powers. According to the latest design requirements, the fusion power of 200 MW would not be taken into account for the blanket design due to the very short operation time at this stage. Hence, in this paper, a more ideal blanket cooling scheme was proposed. Accordingly, hydraulic analyses of the blanket under different fusion powers were performed, following a computational approach using the Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) code Fluent [4]. The analysis results show satisfactory hydraulic performance of the blanket.
Subsequently, analyses were performed to investigate the thermo-mechanical behavior of the current WCCB blanket design under normal operation and accidental scenarios, e.g. in-box loss of coolant accident (LOCA). A computational approach based on the Finite Element Method (FEM) was adopted. The commercial FEM code ANSYS was used in this study. The obtained results were assessed in order to verify the compliance with the blanket design criteria ITER SDC-IC [5]. The feasibility of the structural design of the blanket was verified.
<Section>2. Optimization of the WCCB blanket module</Section>
The WCCB blanket uses Oxide Dispersion Strengthened (ODS) steel as structural material. Tungsten armor acts as a plasma facing component to protect the FW from plasma thermal exposure, corrosion and erosion. The mixed pebble bed of Li2TiO3 and Be12Ti is selected as the tritium breeder and neutron multiplier, respectively. The blanket employs pressurized water (15.5 MPa) as coolant, with 285 °C inlet temperature and 325 °C outlet temperature.
The CFETR machine has 16 sectors, each with two inboard and three outboard blanket segments in the toroidal direction (see Fig. 1(a)). Each inboard and outboard segment has five and six modules, respectively. The equatorial outboard blanket module (module 3#) is taken as a typical example to show the detailed design of the WCCB blanket, as shown in Fig. 1(b). The typical blanket is a steel box enclosed by a U-shaped FW, upper and lower cover plates and a back plate (BP). Each cover plate contains four rectangular (7 mm × 7 mm) cooling channels. Three SPs are arranged inside the box to improve structural strength of the blanket and divide the module into 4 sub-modules. The blanket box is filled with a mixed pebble bed of Li2TiO3 and Be12Ti. In each sub-module, 23 cooling tube assemblies (CTA) are embedded in the mixed pebble bed to remove the nuclear heat and control the temperature therein. Each CTA consists of 3 cooling tubes with multiple bends in the radial and toroidal directions. The distance between toroidal cooling tubes is increasing along the radial direction according to nuclear heat distribution. Referring to the EU-WCLL cooling tube parameters [6], the WCCB blanket's cooling tube utilizes a dual-wall pressurized tube (DWT) with the external diameter of 13.5 mm, internal diameter of 8 mm and thickness of 1.25 mm. The purge gas system is integrated in the cover plates. Purge gas (0.2 MPa) is distributed in the lower cover plate and flows through the breeding pebble bed upward along the poloidal direction to remove tritium through isotopic exchanges. Finally, purge gas is collected in the upper cover plates.
Fig. 1
Fig. 1. Structure of the equatorial outboard blanket module 3.
(a) Configuration of CFETR blanket sector (b) Detailed structure of blanket 3.
The WCCB blanket showed feasibility of the thermal-hydraulic design [3]. Nevertheless, drawbacks were identified through multiple thermal-hydraulic and thermo-mechanical analyses. The main issues are: (1) Three independent cooling systems are adopted, which makes the cooling system of the blanket very complicated; (2) Different paralleled structural components (FW, SP and covers) make it difficult to control the flow distribution under different fusion power; (3) A large amount of ribs are used to connect cooling tubes, which makes the welding of cooling tubes and ribs very difficult. It is also unfavorable to increase the tritium breeding ratio (TBR); (4) The structural strength of the manifolds is weak.
According to the latest design requirements, the operation condition of 200 MW fusion power can be excluded for the blanket design due to the very short operation time at this low power stage. Thus, a more ideal cooling scheme of the blanket was proposed. Compared with the previous blanket design in reference [1], the following structural optimization is made: (1) Two independent cooling systems are employed in the optimized blanket design instead of three in the previous design. CS 1 is used to cool the FW. CS 2 is used to cool the mixed pebble bed and cover plates. The cooling scheme is illustrated in Fig. 2; (2) The built-in cooling channels of SP are removed, and the cooling channels in the cover plates are re-arranged to simplify CS1; (3) The radial ribs and toroidal ribs in the front zone of blanket are removed to improve the TBR; (4) The welding between the cooling tubes and ribs is removed; (5) Structural strength of the manifold is improved by adding 7 reinforcing plates.
Fig. 2
Fig. 2. Cooling scheme of the optimized WCCB blanket.
<Section>3. Hydraulic analysis of the optimized WCCB blanket</Section>
The hydraulic analysis of the full module under different fusion powers was performed to obtain the flow distribution of each cooling channels in the blanket. The analysis was carried out using the commercial CFD code ANSYS Fluent. Only fluid region was modelled for the analysis to simplify the calculation. Since the blanket module is cooled by two independent cooling systems (CS1 and CS2), the hydraulic analysis of CS1 and CS2 was performed separately. The obtained flow distribution provides data for the thermo-mechanical analyses on the slice model in the next section.
3.1. Computational modeling
The CS1 model of hydraulic analysis is shown in Fig. 3(a). CS1 model consists of a supplying manifold, a collecting manifold and 99 FW cooling channels. Each channel has a square cross section of 8 mm × 8 mm, and the pitch between two adjacent channels is 22 mm. To obtain a more uniformly distributed temperature field of FW, the coolant in two adjacent cooling channels flows in counter-current directions. The CS2 model is shown in Fig. 3(b). CS2 model consists of a supplying manifold, a collecting manifold and 276 cooling channels. CS2 cooling channels consist of two parts, including 268 cooling tubes located in BZ and 8 cooling channels in cover plates. Cooling tubes are separated into 4 groups by three SPs, which are named as CT1, CT2, CT3 and CT4. Each group contains 67 cooling tubes. The customary velocity inlet boundary condition and pressure outlet boundary condition were adopted for both of the simulations. The hydraulic parameters of CS1 and CS2 are summarized in Table 1.
Fig. 3
Fig. 3. Models for the hydraulic analysis.
Table 1. Hydraulic parameters of CFD simulation under different fusion powers.
In both of the CFD simulations, the realizable k-ε model is selected as turbulence model, and the standard wall function is adopted for the near-wall treatment. In order to improve the convergence ability, structured meshes are generated for the CS1 and CS2 models. 32,255,298 elements and 35,715,670 elements are generated for the CS1 CFD model and CS2 CFD model, respectively. The cases are solved on a parallel computing cluster with 24 cores.
3.2. Computational results
According to the hydraulic analysis of CS1, the flow distribution of FW cooling channels is shown in Fig. 4. Among the 99 cooling channels, the maximum relative deviation of mass flow rate in the FW is 3.3 %. A uniform flow distribution of CS1 is obtained in the optimized blanket design. The total coolant pressure drop of CS1 is 38,452 Pa.
Fig. 4
Fig. 4. The flow distribution of FW cooling channels.
The flow distribution of CS2 cooling tubes is shown in Fig. 5. The maximum relative deviation of mass flow rate of CT1, CT2, CT3 and CT4 is 2.6 %, 6.8 %, 5.6 % and 1.3 %, respectively. A uniform flow distribution of CS2 cooling tubes is obtained in the optimized blanket design. However, compared with the average mass flow rate of all the CS2 cooling channels, the relative deviation of mass flow rate of cover cooling channels reaches up to 19.6 %. The mass flow rate of cover cooling channels is not shown in Fig. 5. Each cover plate contains four square (7 mm × 7 mm) cooling channels. The cooling channel of the cover plate and cooling tube (φ8 mm) located in the BZ have the same cross-sectional area and central axis. However, their flow paths are different. As shown in Fig. 3(b), there is an extra sharp turn in the flow path of cover cooling channel. So the flow resistance of these cooling channels is much greater than the cooling tube. Accordingly, the mass flow rate of the cover cooling channel is much less than the cooling tube. To obtain a more ideal flow distribution in the cover cooling channels, the cross-sectional area of cover cooling channel should be increased. The coolant pressure drop of CS2 is 44,020 Pa.
Fig. 5
Fig. 5. The flow distribution of CS2 cooling tubes.
<Section>4. Thermo-mechanical analysis of the optimized WCCB blanket</Section>
Simulation analyses were carried out in order to investigate the thermal and thermo-mechanical performance of the optimized WCCB blanket. The loading conditions relevant to the normal operation scenario and in-box LOCA accidental scenario were investigated. An indirect coupling method was adopted in the thermo-mechanical analyses. First, the thermal-hydraulic performance of blanket was assessed through ANSYS Fluent CFD simulations. Then the thermo-mechanical performance of blanket was assessed through finite element (FE) thermal stress analysis, using the ANSYS static structural module. The temperature field obtained from the thermal-hydraulic analysis was imported as one of the loads for the mechanical analysis.
4.1. Computational modeling
The thermo-mechanical analysis under different fusion powers was carried out using the commercial ANSYS Fluent-static structural coupling module. Hence, the thermal-hydraulic analysis and thermo-mechanical analysis of a radial-toroidal slice model were conducted in succession.
As for the thermal-hydraulic analysis, the CFD model consists of solid domains and fluid domains (Fig. 6). The size of model is 1249 mm (Toroidal)×1200 mm (Radial)×88 mm (Poloidal). The solid domains include FW, SP, manifold (MF), back supporting system (BSS), ribs, cooling tubes and BZ. The pebble bed is assumed as a solid block and the purge gas in the pebble bed is not considered. The fluid domains include 4 FW coolant domains and 12 CT coolant domains. In order to improve accuracy, the mesh near channel walls is specifically arranged to ensure the first node from wall is located in the law area, namely, y+ is in the range of 30–100 over the entire fluid zone. The total element number of the model is 52,683,886. The realizable k-ε model is selected as turbulence model and standard wall function is adopted for near-wall treatment. The cases are solved on a parallel computing cluster with 24 cores.
Fig. 6
Fig. 6. Computational model for the thermal-hydraulic analysis.
As for the thermo-mechanical analysis, the FE model consists of FW, SP, MF, BSS, ribs and CT. (Fig. 7). The coolant and pebble bed are not included. Most parts of the model are meshed with brick elements, and only some irregular regions are meshed with tetrahedral elements. The total element number of the model is 10,232,330.
Fig. 7
Fig. 7. Computational model for the thermo-mechanical analysis.
4.2. Thermal loads and boundary conditions
As the core parameters of CFETR were just updated in 2018, accurate assessment results for the heat flux from plasma are yet available. Thus, a uniform heat flux of 0.5 MW/m2 [7] was applied to the FW for the purpose of preliminary assessment. A non-uniform spatial distribution of heat power density [2] was applied to the model, as shown in Fig. 8. In view of the symmetry of the analytical model along the poloidal direction, a periodic boundary condition was applied to the Lower face and Upper face of the model (Fig. 6). The velocity inlet and pressure outlet boundary conditions were adopted for the CFD calculation. The detailed parameters of inlet velocity of each cooling channel are listed in Table 2. In this paper, the WCCB blanket adopts ODS steel as the structural material for performance assessment. The physical properties of materials referred to Ref. [[8], [9], [10], [11]].
Fig. 8
Fig. 8. Nuclear heat power density of blanket.
Table 2. Parameters of inlet velocity under different fusion powers.
4.3. Mechanical loads and boundary conditions
4.3.1. Normal operation scenario
In the thermo-mechanical analysis of WCCB blanket under normal operation scenario, the mechanical interaction between the water coolant and cooling channel walls was modelled by imposing the 15.5 MPa coolant pressure on all wetted surfaces. In addition, 0.2 MPa pressure was imposed to the internal surfaces of the purge gas channels. The non-uniform thermal deformation field arising within the structure as a consequence of its temperature field calculated from thermal-hydraulic analysis and its isotropic coefficient of thermal expansion has been applied to the FE model. As shown in Fig.7, periodic boundary condition was applied on Lower face and Upper face due to the symmetry of the slice model along the poloidal direction. Displacement constraints are applied on the back wall. The nodes located on the red line was constrained to have zero radial displacement while the nodes located on the blue line has zero toroidal displacement.
4.3.2. In-box LOCA accidental scenario
To verify if the blanket can maintain structural integrity during the in-box LOCA accident, the thermo-mechanical analysis was carried out to assess the mechanical performance of the blanket. 17.2 MPa coolant pressure (design pressure for the pressurized water reactor) was imposed on allwetted surfaces of cooling channel walls and the interface between the pebble bed and structural components. In addition, 0.2 MPa pressure was imposed to the internal surfaces of the purge gas channels. The temperature field of blanket under in-box LOCA was assumed the same as the temperature field under normal operation scenario. The thermal field obtained from the thermal hydraulic analysis of the slice blanket model was imported as one of the mechanical loads, as shown in Fig.7. The periodic boundary condition and displacement constraints are the same as the temperature field under normal operation scenario.
4.4. Computational results
4.4.1. Thermal results
Fig. 9 shows the temperature field of WCCB components under different fusion powers. The detailed thermal analysis results are summarized in Table 3. The temperature limit of pebble bed and ODS steel is 900 °C and 650 °C, respectively. The peak temperature of the BZ and structural components are all below the corresponding material allowable temperature under different fusion powers. In general, the temperature of WCCB component rises as the fusion power increases. The temperature of BZ rises significantly due to its low thermal conductivity, which is beneficial to the tritium releasing under higher fusion power. Due to the counter-current direction coolant flows in FW, a relatively uniform temperature distribution of FW is obtained. More importantly, the temperature margin of FW reaches up to 150 °C. The independent cooling system of FW makes it feasible to deal with higher heat flux without affecting BZ temperature significantly. The temperature of SP is relatively high because the built-in cooling channels are removed. However, the temperature margin of SP still reaches up to 100 °C. Fig. 10 shows the temperature distribution along the radial direction under different fusion powers. It can be observed that the temperature of most of the BZ is above 400 °C, which is the minimum tritium releasing temperature of Li2TiO3. In conclusion, a satisfactory thermal-hydraulic performance of the optimized blanket is obtained.
Fig. 9
Fig. 9. Temperature fields of blanket components under different fusion powers.
Table 3. Summary of the temperature results.
Fig. 10
Fig. 10. Temperature distribution along the radial direction under different fusion powers.
4.4.2. Thermo-mechanical results
Regarding the thermo-mechanical analysis results under normal operation scenario, the von Mises stress field of structural components are shown in Fig. 11. Results suggest the highest stress appears at the corners of collecting manifold of cooling tubes, which is the closest manifold to the BZ. The high stress is caused by the unilateral 15.5 MPa coolant pressure on the wall of the manifold, namely, 15.5 MPa coolant pressure load is applied on the coolant-wall interface and no pressure load is applied on the wall–BZ interface. To improve the structural strength of manifold, 7 reinforcing plates are added to the manifold. Stress linearization was performed along the paths (Fig. 12) where the peak stress of each component appears. Detailed stress verification was performed to verify if the stress under normal operation scenario complies with requirements prescribed by the SDC-IC code level A criteria [5]. The stress limits of ODS steel are summarized in Table 4, and Table 5 summarizes the stress verification results of each structural component. The most critical areas are located at the FW corners and forepart of SPs, where the criterion against plastic flow localization is not fulfilled. This is probably due to the high secondary stress, corresponding to the high temperature gradient in these areas. The cirteria against other damage are fulfilled.
Fig. 11
Fig. 11. Stress field of structural components under normal operation scenario.
Fig. 12
Fig. 12. Stress linearization path under normal operation scenario.
Table 4. Stress limits of ODS steel.
Table 5. Design rule verifications under normal operation scenario.
Regarding the thermo-mechanical analysis results under in-box LOCA accidental scenario, the von Mises stress is shown in Fig. 13. Results suggest the highest stress appears at the joint between the ribs and side wall of FW due to relatively weak structural strength of ribs. Detailed stress verification was performed to verify if the stress under in-box LOCA accidental scenario complies with requirements prescribed by the SDC-IC code level D criteria [5]. Stress linearization was performed along the paths shown in Fig. 14. Table 6 summarizes the stress verification results of each structural component. Like the normal operation scenario, the most critical areas are located at the FW corners and forepart of SPs. The cirteria against other damage are fulfilled.
Fig. 13
Fig. 13. Stress field of structural components under in-box LOCA accidental scenario.
Fig. 14
Fig. 14. Stress linearization path under in-box LOCA accidental scenario.
Table 6. Design rule verifications under in-box LOCA accidental scenario.
<Section>5. Summary</Section>
Within the framework of the engineering design of CFETR, optimization of the WCCB blanket was performed to deal with the drawbacks identified in the previous blanket design. The thermal-hydraulic and thermo-mechanical performance of the optimized blanket under different fusion power and operation scenarios were investigated. The hydraulic analysis of the full module of the optimized blanket was performed using the commercial CFD code ANSYS Fluent. The analysis results demonstrate a uniform mass flow rate distribution of the full blanket module. The feasibility of hydraulic design of the optimized blanket was verified. The thermo-mechanical analyses of the optimized blanket were carried out using the ANSYS code. The thermal analysis results show that the temperature of blanket components are below the allowable temperature of the corresponding materials. Since relatively high temperature values are reached in the Li2TiO3 (> 400 °C), a satisfactory tritium releasing is predicted for the breeder material. From the mechanical point of view, the results obtained from normal operation scenario and in-box LOCA accidental scenario show that the most critical areas are located at the FW corners and forepart of SPs. An optimization of the FW and SPs has to be performed in order to avoid their failure due to immediate plastic flow localization.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
This work was supported by National Key R&D Program of China [No. 2017YFE0300502] and the National Natural Science Foundation of China [No. 11775256].
<Section>References</Section>
[1]
Yuanxi Wan, Jiangang Li, et al.
Present progresses and activities on the Chinese fusion engineering test reactor
Presented in the SOFT 2018 Conference (2018)
Google Scholar
[2]
Songlin Liu, et al.
Updated design of water-cooled breeder blanket for CFETR
Fusion Eng. Des., 146 (2019), pp. 1716-1720
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[3]
Xuebin Ma, et al.
Thermal hydraulic design and analysis of updated CFETR water cooled ceramic breeder blanket
Fusion Eng. Des., 148 (2019), Article 111317
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
[4]
ANSYS Fluent-12 User Manual, ANSYS-Fluent
(2009)
Google Scholar
[5]
ITER Structural Design Criteria for In-Vessel Components (SDC-IC) Code
(2012)
(G 74 MA 8 01-05-28 W 0.2, September)
Google Scholar
[6]
A. Del Nevo, et al.
WCLL breeding blanket design and integration for DEMO 2015: status and perspectives
Fusion Eng. Des. (2017)
Google Scholar
[7]
Mohamed Abdou, et al.
Blanket/first wall challenges and required R&D on the pathway to DEMO
Fusion Eng. Des., 100 (2015), pp. 2-43
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[8]
G. Pintsuk, et al.
High heat flux testing of 12–14Cr ODS ferritic steels
J. Nucl. Mater., 396 (2010), pp. 20-25
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[9]
Haiying Fu, et al.
Plastic deformation behavior and bonding strength of an EBW jointbetween 9Cr-ODS and JLF-1 estimated by symmetric four-point bendtests combined with FEM analysis
Fusion Eng. Des., 102 (2016), pp. 88-93
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[10]
T. Muroga, et al.
Fabrication and characterization of reference 9Cr and 12Cr-ODS lowactivation ferritic/martensitic steels
Fusion Eng. Des., 89 (2014), pp. 1717-1722
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[11]
R. Lindau, et al.
ODS-EUROFER - a reduced activation ferritic martensitic ODS-steels for application in advanced blanket concepts
Presented in EUROMAT (2005)
Google Scholar