<title>Assessment of new severe accident mitigation systems on containment pressure of the WWER1000/V446</title>
<author>1,R.Gharari, 2, H.Kazeminejad,3,N.Mataji Kojouri,4,A.Hedayat,5,M.Hassan Vand</author>
<Affiliation>1,Nuclear Science and Technology Research Institute (NSTRI), P.O. Box 11365-3486, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan,HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107691</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454920303893</URL>
Fission product release tests with uranium dioxide fuel and lead under conditions related to reactor accidents for lead-cooled reactors
R.Gharari, H.Kazeminejad,N.Mataji Kojouri,A.Hedayat,M.Hassan Vand
Nuclear Science and Technology Research Institute (NSTRI), P.O. Box 11365-3486, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Containment pressure and hydrogen distribution are evaluated by the MELCOR code during SBO, SBO-LBLOCA and SBO-SBLOCA.
The minimum number of required HARs is predicted to reduce the hydrogen concentration below the ignition limit.
The possibility of the hydrogen ignition by HARs is also investigated.
A new spray system with optimized characteristics and HARs are proposed for the mitigation systems during a severe accident.
The containment pressure during the SBO accident is more than the other accidents.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Investigation of Severe Accidents (SAs) to manage containment pressure and hydrogen production are the objectives of the present work. A novel SA management (SAM) strategy for containment pressure management is evaluated during Station Black-Out (SBO), Station Black-Out with Large Break Loss of Coolant Accident (SBO-LBLOCA) and Station Black-Out with Small Break Loss of Coolant Accident (SBO-SBLOCA) in the WWER1000/V446 nuclear reactor by tuning the spray parameters using MELCOR1.8.6 code and CONTAIN2.0 code for validation. Results show that the spray system with 0.44 m3/s flow rate, droplet temperature of 55 °C and duration about 7955 s associated with 49 Hydrogen Auto-catalyst Recombiners (HARs) can keep the containment integrity against overpressure during the course of the SAs. The peak containment pressure during the SBO, SBO-LBLOCA and SBO-SBLOCA decreased from 0.92, 0.52, 0.66 MPa to 0.43, 0.38, and 0.37 MPa by the proposed mitigation strategy, respectively.
Keywords：Severe accident；HAR；Spray system；MELCOR code；CONTAIN code
<Section>Nomenclature</Section>
CV
Control Volume
DBA
Design Basis Accident
DCH
Direct Containment Heating
ECCS
Emergency Core Cooling System
ERVC
External Reactor Vessel Cooling
FL
Flow Path
FSAR
Final Safety Analysis Report
HAR
Hydrogen Autocatalytic Recombiner
HS
Heat Structure
HVCS
Hard Venting Containment System
IVR
In-vessel Melt Retention
LBLOCA
Large Break Loss of Coolant Accident
LHS
Latin Hypercube Sampling
MCCI
Molten Core Concrete Interaction
NPP
Nuclear Power Plant
PRZ
Pressurizer
PSD
Pulse Safety Device
PWR
Pressurized Water Reactor
RPV
Reactor Pressure Vessel
SA
Severe Accident
SAM
Severe Accident Management
SBO
Station Blackout
SG
Steam Generator
SNL
Sandia National Laboratory
WWER
Water-Water Energetic Reactor
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
A combination of a series of uncontrolled initiating events can lead to SAs and eventually core meltdown in nuclear reactors. After the in-vessel phase, the accident may proceed to the ex-vessel phase until the last physical barrier of the defense-in-depth, i.e. the loss of reactor containment. In this way, lessons learned from the Fukushima Daiichi Accident confirms that undoubtedly one of these major possible SAs is an SBO with the failure of all active safety systems and emergency diesel generators in the Nuclear Power Plant (NPP) usually called a complete SBO. Reactor core temperature is increased due to the failure of the heat transfer system and therefore, large quantities of flammable mixtures (especially hydrogen) are generated due to the oxidation of the metallic components and other materials with steam and oxygen during the SA. Consequently, containment pressure is increased due to the pressure loads originated by hydrogen deflagration or detonation and steam production (Gharari et al., 2018). Therefore, one of the most intractable problems related to nuclear safety is how to deal with such a SA to guarantee safety and stability of the containment and reducing the radiological effects of radioactive materials on human health issues and environment (Lonergan et al., 1990, Dong and Pan, 2018). Different SAs management strategies have been considered for various reactors particularly in Europe. The lessons learned from the three major nuclear disasters (i.e. Three-Mile Islands, Chernobyl, and Fukushima Daiichi Accidents) confirm that a SA can be very unpredictable, uncontrollable, and irrecoverable. In other words, there is still a long way to get a reliable action plan against such a disastrous SA. Some of the efforts could be categorized as follows (Hermsmeyer et al., 2015):
Stage 1: To Maintain the integrity of the reactor cooling system:
1) Water injection into the reactor cooling circuit and pressure vessel,
2) Water injection into Steam Generator (SG),
3) External core cooling.
Stage 2: To Maintain containment integrity:
1) Reactor cooling system depressurization to prevent direct containment heating,
2) Containment atmosphere venting,
3) Containment heat removal,
4) Water injection to the cavity,
5) Controlling the produced hydrogen.
Intensive studies have been carried out on SA management (SAM) in recent years. In 2010, Chatterjee et al. (2010a) verified water injection in the primary and secondary circuits as a SAM strategy in the WWER1000/V320 reactor during high-pressure transient (SBO) and low-pressure transient (LOCA) using ASTEC1.3 code. They analyzed SG and core re-flooding approaches during SBO, SBO-SBLOCA, and SBO-LBLOCA transients. According to their results, SG flooding is effective during SBO and SBO-SBLOCA to prevent core degradation. However, these approaches are not effective during SBO-LBLOCA. Also, Chatterjee et al. (2010b) analyzed the spectrum of the break sizes along with SBO for VVER1000/V320. According to their results, 385 and 249 kg of hydrogen were produced during SBO-SBLOCA and SBO-LBLOCA, respectively. Park and Ahn (2015) evaluated emergency water injection by fire engines for SGs and reactor cooling systems for the OPR1000 reactor using MAAP4.0 code during Short-Term SBO (STSBO) and Long-Term SBO (LTSBO). The results showed that this method is ineffective for STSBO. Ahn et al. (2018) assessed the emergency water injections to manage the LOCA in a spent fuel pool of a typical Pressurized Water Reactor (PWR) using the MELCOR code. The results showed that the emergency water injection system could control the loss of water inventory in the fuel pool. The amount of hydrogen produced during a SA was calculated using the MELCOR and GASFLOW codes by Gómez-Torres et al. (2015). According to the available results, Hard Venting Containment System (HVCS) reduces containment pressure. Dehjourian et al. (2016) showed that the spray systems have both negative (i.e. concerning increasing the local hydrogen concentration) and positive (i.e. for reducing the containment pressure) effects on hydrogen distribution during LB-LOCA for Beznau reactor using MELCOR code. They proposed using the HARs and spray system for SAM. Li et al. (2014) presented a SAM strategy in 2014 for the PWR reactor by MELCOR code. Groudev et al. (2013) conducted another important analysis on the WWER1000 reactor during a SA. Their results showed that the elliptic lower head provides a longer collapse time than the spherical lower head. Scobel et al. (1998) performed a SAM analysis for the AP600 reactor. Their work aimed to analyze the defense in depth in the AP600 reactor during a SA. Different applications have been employed for the SAM analyses by now. The in-vessel Melt Retention-External Reactor Vessel Cooling (IVR-ERVC) is one of these applications. Jin et al. (2015) analyzed this method for a PWR reactor during a SA using MELCOR. According to their results, this method was feasible for this reactor and the lower head heat flux remains below the Critical Heat Flux (CHF). Ruščák et al., (2019) analyzed VVER 1000 severe accident using the MELCOR code. Their results showed that the amount of the produced hydrogen during SBO, SBO-SBLOCA, and SBO-LBLOCA is 560, 380, and 300 kg, respectively. In addition, the maximum and minimum pressure and temperature of the containment during these accidents were 450 kPa-180 °C, 410 kPa-160 °C, and 400 kPa-200 °C, respectively.
Salehi and Jahanfarnia (2020), using RELAP-SCDAP and CONTAIN codes, analyzed the complete SBO with large break loss of coolant accident (SBO-LBLOCA) in WWER1000/v446 reactor. They showed that 322.5 kg of hydrogen is produced during the accident. In addition, according to their works, maximum containment pressure and temperature were about 0.61 MPa and 145 °C, respectively. For more information, a comprehensive review of the available literature on the SA is presented by Gharari et al. (2018).
Concisely, extensive researches have been carried out to study the hydrogen behavior in SAs. The main purpose of these studies is to examine and provide the necessary information and data for the development of models and codes which is required for much more reliable, accurate simulations and analyses. MELCOR and CONTAIN2.0 are widely used codes to model the analysis of SA in nuclear power plants. MELCOR was developed by Sandia National Laboratory (SNL). A wide range of SAs phenomena are covered within the MELCOR code (Gharari et al., 2018, Gauntt, 2005, Humphries et al., 2017). These phenomena are the thermal-hydraulic responses of the reactor cooling system and containment, the reactor core heat-up, Direct Containment Heating (DCH), the reactor core degradation, core displacement and the radioactive release of the materials and the Molten Core Concrete Interaction (MCCI) which is simulated by the MELCOR code. Moreover, the MELCOR code solves six conservation equations including mass, energy, and momentum for two phases. It can define more than one flow path between the two Control Volumes (CVs) for the two phases. This code linearizes the conservation equations and produces a system of equations that are a function of the fluid velocity. The system of equations is solved by the standard reverse matrix methods to obtain the new velocities. These equations are solved iteratively until the nonlinear terms of the velocities converge. Then, density and temperature are calculated from these velocities. The calculated pressure from the state equations is compared with the calculated pressure by the conservation equations. If the pressure values do not match with the user input tolerance, calculations are repeated.
The CONTAIN code is a thermal-hydraulic code for the containment analysis which is developed by SNL in 1997 (Murata et al., 1997). This code is designed to assess the thermal-hydraulic response under physical, chemical, and radiological conditions in the containment. The CONTAIN code solves only three conservation equations: the general mass conservation equation for each phase, the energy equation for combining two phases, and the momentum conservation equation for the vapor phase. In the CONTAIN code only a flow path between the two CVs are defined (Murata et al., 1997, Gauntt, 2005). The approximation of the pressure and temperature by CONTAIN code has two iterations based on the Secant method (the derivative is approximated by the finite difference method). The internal iteration loop is for the CV temperature convergence, and the external iteration loop is for the pressure convergence. This code is especially suitable and compatible with those tools that only model the in-vessel phase (i.e. such as the RELAP-SCDAP code) for ex-vessel simulations. In this paper, we use this code for a code-to-code verification and to benchmark the modeling. Furthermore, the capabilities and limitations of these two codes have been highlighted in the current investigation.
The main objective of the present study is to evaluate and develop a new SAM strategy during a complete SBO, SBO-LBLOCA, and SBO-SBLOCA for the WWER1000/V446 by proposing a new spray system configuration associated with the HARs. According to the PSA results of the reference PWR and the criterion for selecting important SA sequences in 10 CFR 50.54(f), three accident scenarios, SBO, SBO-SBLOCA, and SBO-LBLOCA are selected for the analysis. These scenarios largely contributed to the core damage frequency (CDF) (Birkhofer, 1980, USNRC, 1988).
Various studies have been performed to analyze the effects of the spray system on various accidents during the past years. However, since all the active safety systems, especially the spray system, fail during a SA, it is assumed that the spray system is available with an independent power generator. With this assumption, the operating conditions of the spray system and its parameters were examined by considering the hydrogen production in detail for the reactor. In addition, uncertainty analysis for the reactor has been studied using the LHS method. Also, using the uncertainty analysis, the minimum and maximum amounts of the produced hydrogen are estimated.
To deploy a suitable model for accurate simulation, first, the containment with different nodalization (3 cells, 10 cells, 23 cells, and 27 cells) is analyzed with both MELCOR and CONTAIN codes to evaluate the optimum containment nodalization. Due to the lack of experimental data for the SAs in the Final Safety Analysis Report (FSAR) of the WWER1000/V446 reactor, the results of the two codes (MELCOR/CONTAIN) were examined and compared in terms of accuracy and precision. This is a normal practice in the NPP simulation (See Tills et al., 2009, Gromov et al., 2002, Silde and Lindholm, 1997). Results are double-checked to verify and validate the modeling for further analysis. Next, the containment pressure and hydrogen distribution are evaluated using the MELCOR code. Then, the effects of the spray system and HARs on containment integrity are investigated. Results can be used to develop practical emergency planning during such a SA.
<Section>2. Methods analysis</Section>
There are two major parameters related to the SA as the containment pressure and produced hydrogen distribution that should be particularly taken into account and traced very accurately (Gharari et al., 2018). In 2.1 Hydrogen production management, 2.2 Containment pressure management, hydrogen production and containment pressure management are briefly discussed.
2.1. Hydrogen production management
Generally, hydrogen is produced during both in-vessel and ex-vessel phases of the SAs. The rapid and initial stage of hydrogen production is related to oxidation of metallic components and other materials in the Reactor Pressure Vessel (RPV) by steam. Furthermore, hydrogen is generated by the reaction of the MCCI and oxidation of metallic materials in the cavity by steam (Gharari et al., 2018). In addition, carbon monoxide is also produced due to MCCI. The combination of hydrogen and carbon monoxide creates a combustible mixture. To prevent hydrogen combustion, it is necessary to keep the hydrogen volume fraction limit below 4.1%. Produced gases such as carbon dioxide and steam reduce the flammability limit, mainly because these gases have an inert role in a flammable mixture. For hydrogen management and reduction, different systems in NPPs have been implemented such as:
1) The pre-inertization method by CO2 and N2 as inert gases.
2) Post-accident dilution by adding diluent gases such as CO2 and N2.
3) Early controlled venting of the flammable mixture.
4) Igniters: these devices ignite the flammable mixture and decrease their concentrations.
5) HAR: these devices use Pt-Pd catalysts for hydrogen recombining with oxygen. Some of the most important design features of the HAR are shown in Table 1 (Gharari et al., 2018, Tarasov et al., 2017).
Table 1. Different type of the hydrogen auto catalytic recombiner.
2.2. Containment pressure management
The containment pressure is increased due to the steam production or pressure loads by hydrogen deflagration or even detonation following the supersonic resonant shuck wave. To preserve the containment integrity during the SAs, it is necessary to keep the containment pressure below the design pressure. Engineering safety systems are designed to control the containment pressure. Some of these safety systems are ice condensers, spray systems, fan coolers, and controlled venting. Depending on the accident type, some of these safety systems are disabled or impossible to use for the conventional operating NPPs. For example during the total SBO, almost all of the emergency ex-vessel safety systems of conventional NPPs (i.e. such as BNPP but not advanced Gen III + reactors) such as containment spray system fails. As a result, containment pressure goes beyond the maximum design value and fails. Nowadays, a new approach to control the total SBO accident is the controlled discharge of the containment atmosphere (i.e. throughout strong enough radioactive filters) to prevent excessive pressure. This method has also some potential disadvantages such as leakage of radioactive substances into the environment as well as required further researches and development in this field of study (Gharari et al., 2018). Therefore, it is necessary to propose a new method to prevent any leakage of the radioactive material into the environment especially for conventional and operational NPPs.
<Section>3. Theory and calculations</Section>
In this paper, the containment pressure and hydrogen distribution of the WWER1000/V446 are analyzed during the SBO, SBO-LBLOCA, and SBO-SBLOCA. The main features of the WWER1000/446 are shown in Table 2 (AEOI, 2007). Active safety systems fail during the SBO. The reactor core temperature increases and steam is produced. Then, hydrogen produces due to the metallic components oxidation by steam. Furthermore, with the failure of the RPV, hydrogen is also produced by the MCCI and released into the containment atmosphere. The containment pressure increases due to the produced steam and pressure loads due to the hydrogen deflagration or detonation.
Table 2. Main characteristics of the containment.
The containment pressure and hydrogen concentration should be controlled. One of the containment safety systems is the spray system (TJ system). The main characteristics of the spray system are shown in Table 3 (AEOI, 2007). The spray can reduce the containment pressure by steam condensation. But this system also fails during a complete SBO. Based on the lessons learned from the Fukushima Daiichi accident, nuclear safety experts believe that some additional batteries or remote diesel generators must be provided for emergencies (Gharari et al., 2018, Hermsmeyer et al., 2015, AEOI, 2007). In this way, a small independent power supply or a passive driven system is assumed for containment spray system activation for the WWER1000/V446. In the following, spray parameters (i.e. onset time, time duration, droplets temperature, flow rate, and droplet size) are tuned as a new SAM strategy. Also, it should be noted that the spray system can even have some negative effects on hydrogen distribution. The spray system can disrupt the hydrogen distribution and increase its possibility of combustion. In other words, it could be an additional source for hydrogen deflagration without fair enough number and distribution of HARs. Therefore, in this paper, the effects of the HAR on hydrogen management are analyzed to obtain the minimum number of the required HARs.
Table 3. Main characteristics of the containment spray system.
3.1. Modeling by MELCOR and CONTAIN codes
3.1.1. Containment modeling
According to the standard approach of the modeling adopted by these codes, the containment should be divided into CVs to determine the optimal and proper number of CVs for the modeling. Containment is divided into 3, 10, 23, and 27 cells by the MELCOR and CONTAIN codes to determine, how many cells are sufficient for the containment modeling. The containment compartments are modeled as CVs and cells using MELCOR and CONTAIN, respectively (Gauntt, 2005, Murata et al., 1997). These cells are connected by the flow path (FL) in the MELCOR and engineering vent (ENGVENT) in the CONTAIN codes. Some valves are also involved in the flow paths. According to the Final Safety Analysis Report (FSAR), these valves will open when the pressure difference between the two connected cells reaches 0.01 MPa (AEOI, 2007).
Other important parameters during the modeling are Heat Structures (HSs). Concrete and steel walls are considered as HSs. HSs could be either cylindrical, hemispherical, or slab. Table 4, Table 5 show the main important modeling parameters by the two codes. Also, leakage to the environment is considered when the containment pressure reaches 0.46 MPa. Fig. 1, Fig. 2, Fig. 3, Fig. 4, Fig. 5, Fig. 6, Fig. 7, Fig. 8 depict the containment nodalizations. Furthermore, Fig. 1 shows a systematic view of the three cell containment nodalization. Three cell containment nodalization is shown in more detail in Fig. 2. In Fig. 1, reactor vessel shaft and cavity are considered as unattended zones. These zones are unreachable during the reactor operation. According to the FSAR, the initial temperature of these zones and other zones are assumed about 333 and 303 K, respectively (AEOI, 2007). Fig. 2, shows a schematic view of the containment spray system and a leakage from the containment to the environment (AEOI, 2007). The effect of different numbers of CVs in the containment nodalization (i.e. 10, 23, 27) is depicted in Fig. 3, Fig. 4, Fig. 5, Fig. 6, Fig. 7, Fig. 8, respectively. Although, increasing the number of cells improves the accuracy of the calculation, but the calculation time also increases. Therefore, it is necessary to obtain an optimum number of containment cells for the modeling.
Table 4. MELCOR code parameters.
Table 5. CONTAIN code parameters.
Fig. 1. Containment nodalization with three cells.
Fig. 2. Schematic view of the containment nodalization with three cells.
Fig. 3. Containment nodalization with ten cells.
Fig. 4. Schematic view of the containment nodalization with ten cells.
Fig. 5. Containment nodalization with twenty three cells.
Fig. 6. Schematic view of the containment nodalization with twenty three cells.
Fig. 7. Containment nodalization with twenty seven cells.
Fig. 8. Schematic view of the containment nodalization with twenty seven cells.
3.1.2. Reactor first loop modeling using MELCOR
Fig. 9a depicts the MELCOR nodalization of the reactor's first loop. The first and second loops were modeled by 99 CVs and 104 FLs. The reactor core was divided into four concentric radial rings and twenty axial levels. Axial levels from 9 to 19 and radial rings from first to third rings are related to the active core region. Fig. 9b depicts the radial rings and axial levels of the reactor core from the front view. The wall of the lower head is divided into five segments. The thickness of the lower headwall is also divided into three mesh volumes for each segment. Fig. 9c illustrates the modeling of the reactor cavity in detail. The 95 body points were considered to model the body shape of the cavity.
Fig. 9. a – MELCOR1.8.6 nodalization of the first loop and the reactor core, b – Radial rings and axial levels of the reactor core and, c – Cavity modeling by the MELCOR.
3.1.3. Spray and HARs modeling
The SPR package in the MELCOR code is used to model the spray system. This package includes parameters such as the control volume number containing spray nozzles, spray nozzles height, pressure, and temperature, spray tank volume number, spray system opening pressure, spray droplet diameter, spray volumetric flow rate, a fraction of the spray water that reaches to different control volumes and the volume number of the sump.
The ESFPAR package in the MELCOR code is used to model the hydrogen recombiners. Parameters such as the control volume number that recombiner has been located, the minimum hydrogen and oxygen volume fraction for recombiner shutdown (0.5%), minimum hydrogen volume fraction for recombiner startup (2%) and minimum oxygen volume fraction for recombiner startup (3%) are entered in this package. The control function is used to model the hydrogen recombiner flow model. The WWER1000/V446 recombiner type is RVK-500 (AEOI, 2007). It should be noted that there are not any igniters in the WWER1000/V446 according to FSAR and these systems have not been modeled using MELCOR (AEOI, 2007).
<Section>4. Results and discussion</Section>
4.1. Containment pressure management during SAs
In the first stage of the modeling, it is necessary to determine the optimum number of CVs for the reactor containment modeling. In the FSAR of WWER1000/V446, the prediction of hydrogen distribution is carried out assuming 23 cells. To find the optimum number and location of recombiners, more control volumes are needed to model the containment. By increasing the number of control volumes, the average distribution of hydrogen in a control volume will be closer to local distribution in each control volume. However, from the thermal-hydraulic point of view, a case study is performed to determine how the thermal-hydraulic parameters (such as temperature and pressure) are affected by changing the control volume numbers. Furthermore, MELCOR results showed that the effects of the nodalization on the hydraulic parameters are insignificant. The analysis results of the different chosen cell numbers (i.e. the 3, 10, 23, and 27 respectively) are shown in Table 6. As shown, the results of 23 and 27 cells are quite close together. This indicates that it is sufficient to consider 23 cells for the modeling. If more cells are selected, the execution time of the program will also increase. Therefore, it is necessary to select an optimal number to reduce computational time. Furthermore, the results of both CONTAIN and MELCOR codes are in good agreement. The similarity of the results with the two codes confirms the required verification and justification of the modeling and results.
Table 6. Comparison of MELCOR and CONTAIN for maximum containment pressure and temperature for different containment nodalization.
It is also necessary to evaluate how much hydrogen is produced during the SAs. Three SAs (SBO, SBO-LBLOCA, and SBO-SBLOCA) are analyzed. During the SBO, the total power of the NPP along with the safety systems fail, during the SBO-LBLOCA, a double-ended hot leg break occurs in loop 4 and for the SBO-SBLOCA, it is assumed that Pressurizer Pulse Safety Device (PRZ-PSD) valves fail and get stuck in the open position. Figs. 10a and 10b show the amount of the produced hydrogen during the in-vessel and the ex-vessel phases of the SAs, respectively. The amount of the produced hydrogen is about 525, 400, and 450 kg during the in-vessel phase of the SBO, SBO-LBLOCA, and SBO-SBLOCA, respectively. Also, the amount of the produced hydrogen is about 1650, 1434, and 1100 kg during the ex-vessel phase of the SBO, SBO-LBLOCA, and SBO-SBLOCA, respectively. According to Fig. 10a, the amount of the produced hydrogen during the SBO-SBLOCA accident is higher than the SBO-LBLOCA accident. This is due to the fact that during the SBO-SBLOCA accident the vapor retention time and its amount is higher than the SBO-LBLOCA accident leading to a higher oxidation rate. As a result, hydrogen production will also be higher. Fig. 10C shows that the steam remaining time and its average amount in the reactor core are 79,800 and 60 kg during SBO-LBLOCA, respectively. During the SBO accident, the steam remaining time and its average amount are 75,000 s and 1300 kg, respectively. In addition according to Fig. 10c, the steam remaining time and its average amount in the reactor core are 59,000 s and 110 kg, respectively. Based on Fig. 10c, it can be concluded that the highest and lowest amount of steam is related to SBO and SBO-LBLOCA, respectively. High amounts of steam increase oxidation and, as a result, more hydrogen is produced. Fig. 10d shows the steam partial pressure in the reactor core during the SAs. As shown, steam partial pressure in the core during the SBO is more than the SBO-SBLOCA, and during the SBO-SBLOCA is more than the SBO-LBLOCA. The increase in the steam partial pressure increases the oxidation rate and, as a result, the production of hydrogen increases. This finding is consistent with the results of Ruščák et al., 2019, Chatterjee et al., 2010b.
Fig. 10. a – Hydrogen production during the in-vessel phase, b –Hydrogen production during the ex-vessel phase, c – Steam mass in the core and , d – Steam partial pressure in the core versus time during different SAs.
The important point to be drawn from Fig. 10 is that the amount of hydrogen is qualitatively higher for SBO compared to the other two SAs. It is concluded that a complete SBO could be more progressive and hazardous compared to other SAs concerning the final huge amount of the produced hydrogen.
The application of SA codes for accident analysis of nuclear power plants needs to be used along with the uncertainty analysis to quantify the expected errors and their acceptability, D’Auria (2019). In this investigation, uncertainty analysis based on Latin Hypercube Sampling (LHS) is used to evaluate the range of hydrogen production during the SBO accident. This method uses a stratified sampling scheme to generate random numbers that cover a wide range of input data within a specified range for each variable and their distribution functions. The vertical and horizontal axis of the distribution function's graph is divided into non-overlapping intervals for each variable. In the next step, the random numbers are selected from created intervals on the graph without any repetition based on the distribution function for each parameter (Grabaskas et al., 2016, Iman, 2014, Wilks, 1941). These variables are oxidation correlation, Zr melt breakout temperature, fuel rod collapse temperature, fractional local dissolution of UO2 in molten Zr, candling heat transfer coefficients, particulate debris characteristics, debris porosity, falling debris heat transfer coefficient, radiation exchange factors and pool heat transfer coefficient. These parameters along with their ranges and distribution functions have been shown in Table 7.
Table 7. The range of the effective parameters on hydrogen generation.
The graph of the distribution function is stratified by specifying the number of executions. In this way, the number of code execution depends on the user’s request probability, confidence level, and the statistical tolerance limit. The minimum number of code execution is obtained by Wilks formula.
@(1)
In Eq. (1), a and b are user-defined probability and confidence level, respectively. 0.95 are acceptable for values of two parameters a and b. By putting these values in Eq. (1), the minimum code execution value (n) of 93 is obtained (Wilks, 1941). This means that 93 runs are needed to ensure that the results are predicted with a 95% confidence level.
As Fig. 11 shows, the range of the produced H2 is between 255 and 525 kg during the in-vessel phase of the SA with a 95% confidence level. Therefore the maximum amount of the produced hydrogen used in the prediction of the containment pressure, spray system parameters, and the minimum number of HARs is about 525 kg.
Fig. 11. Amount of the produced hydrogen uncertainty during in-vessel phase of the SBO accident.
4.1.1. Complete SBO analysis
4.1.1.1. The minimum spray time duration for minimum and maximum spray flow rate
The minimum required spray time duration for minimum and maximum spray flow rate (i.e. between the minimum and maximum volumetric spray flow rates according to Table 3) is presented in Table 8. The volumetric flow rate of the WWER1000/V446 reactor spray is between 0.17 and 0.44 m3/s (AEOI, 2007). Table 8 shows that the minimum required spray time duration is about 7955 and 47,000 s for 0.44 and 0.17 m3/s flow rates, respectively. Results show that due to increasing spray time duration, hydrogen deflagration occurs. For more detail, the local concentration of hydrogen increases because of steam condensation. Therefore, a rapid increase in the containment pressure is observed due to the pressure loads by hydrogen combustion.
Table 8. Minimum required spray duration for different spray flow rates during SBO.
Assuming an adaptive spray flow rate, we propose the following time-dependent characteristics:
•
0.44 m3/s flow rate with at least 7955 s spray time duration keeps the containment pressure at near 0.42 MPa;
•
0.17 m3/s flow rate with at least 47,000 s spray time duration keeps the containment pressure at near 0.43 MPa.
As a result, the containment pressure does not reach its threshold. In this way, the main goal is that the pressure loads and especially sharp peaks will be reduced and cut due to the elimination of the hydrogen deflagration by reducing the hydrogen volume fraction. Spray system with 0.44 m3/s flow rate and 7955 s time duration is chosen for further investigations in the next sections.
4.1.1.2. Effect of spray droplets temperature on the containment pressure
Another important parameter is the temperature of spray droplets. Fig. 12 shows the effects of the droplet temperature on the containment pressure. By decreasing the droplet temperature, the containment pressure decreases due to the increase in the temperature difference between the steam and the spray droplets. Therefore, the total amount of heat transfer from steam to droplet increases and more steam condenses (see Fig. 12). By reducing steam, the pressure is also reduced. On the other hand, steam condensation has some negative effects on hydrogen distribution. As seen in Fig. 12, when spray droplets temperature reaches 283 K, hydrogen deflagration occurs twice, and for spray droplets temperature more than 283 K and less than 328 K, hydrogen deflagration occurs only once. It is concluded that the spray droplets temperature should be between 283 and 328 K to control the containment pressure by the proposed spray system to remove the unwanted pressure load peaks by the HARs due to the hydrogen deflagration.
Fig. 12. Average containment pressure versus time at different spray droplet temperature during SBO.
4.1.1.3. Minimum number of required HARs
It is necessary to keep the hydrogen volume fraction below the deflagration limit (4.1%). Fig. 13 presents the effects of HARS on different containment cells. According to Fig. 13, at least 49 (RVK-500 type) HARs are needed to keep the hydrogen concentration below 4.1%. Moreover, in Fig. 13a, the hydrogen volume fractions in cell 1 are shown. Two HARs are needed in this cell. In Fig. 13b, for cells 2, 6, 16, 18, 20, 21, 22, and 23, three HARs are to be utilized. Since hydrogen distribution in each cell is the same, only the results of one cell are depicted. Fig. 13c shows hydrogen distribution in cell 3 with three HARs. Hydrogen distribution in cell 4 is shown in Fig. 13d. Three HARs are needed to reduce and keep the hydrogen concentration below 4.1%. Also, Figs. 13e–i, show hydrogen distribution for other cells. It can be concluded that the spray system affects the hydrogen distribution in all of the cells in the containment. However, hydrogen concentration can decrease and be kept below the flammable limit with 49 HARs. Finally in Fig. 14, average containment pressure with and without the spray system is shown. As shown in Fig. 14, the proposed method with 49 HARs could control a complete SBO accident by keeping the containment integrity against hydrogen deflagration and detonation. For these adaptive spray conditions (i.e. 0.44 m3/s, 7955 s, 328 K, and 49 HARs), the minimum power requirement of a centrifugal pump can be calculated. For a centrifugal pump power, the following equations are used (Pump, 2010; Karassik et al., 2001):
@(1)
@(2)
Fig. 13. Hydrogen volume fraction in a – Cell 1, b – Cells 2,6,16,18,20,21,22,23, c – Cell 3, d – Cell 4, e – Cells 7,8, 9, f – Cell 10, g – Cell 11, h – Cell 12 and, i – Cell 19 during SBO.
Fig. 14. Proposed SAM strategy effect on average containment pressure during SBO.
The  @  and ηT are presented in Table 9 (Pump, 2010; Karassik et al., 2001). Water density at 328 K is about 985.8 kg/m3. Also, according to the FSAR (AEOI, 2007), pumping head, ambient temperature, the height of the pump from the sea level, and pump efficiency are about 48.5–49 m, −6 m and 80%, respectively (AEOI, 2007). By inserting these values in Eqs. (1)–(2), the minimum pumping power calculated is 296 kW. This means that at least one generator with a power of 296 kW is required for the sophisticated spray system. The proposed method for the SBO management strategy with specific characteristics is shown schematically in Fig. 15.
Table 9. A centrifugal pump constants.
Fig. 15. Schematic design of the proposed spray system and 49 recombiners.
4.1.1.4. Effects of spray droplet size on the containment pressure
The effect of spray droplet size based on the chosen conditions (i.e. the volumetric flow rate of 0.44 m3/s, time duration of 7955 s, and temperature of 328 K) associated with 49 HARs on the containment pressure is analyzed and presented in Fig. 16. This figure shows that the effect of droplet size on the containment pressure and temperature is rather small (the maximum effect of droplet diameter on temperature is approximately 3% and on pressure 5%). The curves almost overlap but, there are some small differences between them. The small differences can be attributed to the small increase in the mass transfer coefficient between the liquid and gas layers as droplet size decreases. As a result, the absorption efficiency increases, and the total amount of steam in the containment decreases. Due to the steam mass reduction, the containment pressure also decreases (see Figs. 16a and b).
Fig. 16. SBO a – Average containment pressure versus time and, b – Containment temperature in cell 23 versus time for different spray droplet size.
4.1.1.5. Minimum spray flow rate with infinite spray time duration
For further investigation, it is assumed that the spray time duration is infinite (i.e. sustainable for a long time). Based on this assumption, the minimum spray flow rate that keeps the containment pressure below the design limit is about 0.03 m3/s. Table 10 indicates that this minimum volumetric spray flow rate is sufficient to decrease the containment pressure below its design limit. However, the hydrogen deflagration phenomenon can rapidly and significantly increase the containment pressure by the overpressure loads. Therefore, it is necessary to use HARs to reduce the hydrogen volume fraction.
Table 10. Minimum required spray flow rate with infinite spray duration during SBO.
4.1.1.6. Spray onset time
According to the FSAR, the spray onset time is when the containment pressure rises to 3% (AEOI, 2007). When the containment pressure reaches 0.13 MPa, the spray system is activated. In this section, it is assumed that the spray system actives at different containment pressure. Table 11 shows the results of this study. As seen in Table 11, the spray system must be activated before the containment pressure reaches 0.46 MPa. On the other hand, concerning this accident scenario, the spray system must be activated after the SA initiation (i.e. at 200 S) and before 7500 s (when the containment pressure reaches 0.46 MPa).
Table 11. Effects of spray activation at different pressures on final containment pressure during SBO.
4.1.2. Evaluation of the proposed SAM strategy during SBO-LBLOCA
In this paper, the effect of the designed spray system and 49 HARs during SBO-LBLOCA has also been investigated. During the SBO-LBLOCA, the containment pressure increases faster than the SBO accident due to the coolant flashing at the breakpoint. From the breakpoint, the coolant enters the containment and quickly evaporates due to the pressure change, and, as a result, the pressure of the containment rises rapidly. According to the results shown in Fig. 17, the proposed method can also manage the containment pressure during the SBO-LBLOCA without hydrogen deflagration. During the first 50 s after the SA started, the containment pressure increases sharply up to 0.41 and 0.38 MPa with and without the spray system, respectively. Moreover, during the ex-vessel phase of the SA, the containment pressure reaches 0.52 and 0.38 MPa without and with the spray system, respectively.
Fig. 17. Average containment pressure during SBO-LBLOCA.
4.1.3. The effect of the proposed SAM strategy on the evaluation of SBO-SBLOCA
The proposed method has been also evaluated for SBO-SBLOCA. It is assumed that the PRZ PSD valves get stuck in the fully open position (i.e. the same accident as the Three-Mile-Island). Then, coolant decreases due to the failure of the PRZ PSD valves. Fig. 18 shows that the proposed SAM method could keep the containment pressure below 0.46 MPa. The containment pressure reaches about 0.66 and 0.37 MPa with and without the spray, respectively. In addition, Fig. 19 depicts the hydrogen volume fraction in different containment cells. The 49 HARs could keep the hydrogen volume fraction below the flammability limit in different containment cells.
Fig. 18. Average containment pressure during SBO-SBLOCA.
Fig. 19. SBO-SBLOCA (hydrogen volume fraction in) a – Cell 1,12, b – Cells 2,6,7,16,18,20,21,22,23, c – Cell 3, d – Cell 4, e – Cells 8,9,10,11, and f – Cell 19.
Spray system increases the hydrogen volume fraction, but the HARs effectively decreases the hydrogen volume fraction. As shown in Figs. 19b and 19c, hydrogen volume fraction increases in some intervals despite the hydrogen recombination. This is because the hydrogen production rate is more than the hydrogen recombination rate in these time intervals. Figs. 19a, 19e, and 19f show that when hydrogen volume fraction reaches 0.5%, the HARs switch off.
4.1.4. Analysis of the HARS ignition
Another important issue related to the HARs is the hydrogen ignition by HARs. Overheating of the HARs catalysts due to the recombination can locally ignite the hydrogen. Thermal hydraulic characteristics (i.e. temperature, steam amount, and atmosphere displacement) change rapidly in the containment during the SA. Therefore, it is important to analyze HARs behaviors during SA conditions. According to the OECD THAI project (Alonso et al., 2017), flammability limits by the HARs for hydrogen must be higher than 6.9% in dry air and at least a mixture of 8.8% hydrogen with 45% steam in wet air. Also, the minimum excess oxygen required for hydrogen ignition with HAR is about 2.3%. Fig. 20 shows the HARs ignition area (marked area with blue lines). The hydrogen concentration (i.e. which is estimated at 6%) is below 6.9% in the compartments according to Fig. 13, Fig. 19. In addition, Fig. 20 shows different containment cells that have HARs as yellow points. None of the containment cells are in the hydrogen combustion area by HARs. Finally, it is concluded that the HARs don't reach flammability conditions due to the high steam concentration and low hydrogen concentration.
Fig. 20. HARs ignition risk on the H2-Air-Steam ternary diagram (yellow points depict containment cells conditions at the end of the SBO accident). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
<Section>5. Conclusions</Section>
In this paper, containment pressure and produced hydrogen during the complete SBO, SBO-LBLOCA, and SBO-SBLOCA in the WWER1000/V446 nuclear reactor were studied using MELCOR and CONTAIN codes. All of the active safety systems, including the spray system, are disabled during the chosen accident scenarios because of the complete SBO. However, it is assumed that the power of the spraying system can be supplied by an independent diesel generator during the total SBO accident. From the results obtained, it can be concluded that:
•
A spray system with a tuned operational condition (i.e. with a flow rate of 0.44 m3/s, droplet diameter of 1.2 mm, spray temperature between 283 and 328 K, and minimum spray time of at least 7955 s) associated with 49 HARs can reduce and keep the containment pressure below the maximum design pressure of 0.46 MPa.
•
The produced hydrogen during a complete SBO (525 kg) is more than SBO-LBLOCA (400 kg) and SBO-SBLOCA (450 kg). The vapor retention time and its amount during the complete SBO are higher than the SBO-LBLOCA and SBO-SBLOCA. As a result, much more hydrogen is produced during SBO than the other two SAs due to a large amount of steam oxidation.
•
The peak containment pressure during the SBO, SBO-LBLOCA, and SBO-SBLOCA decreased from 0.92, 0.52, 0.66 MPa to 0.42, 0.38, and 0.37 MPa by the proposed mitigation systems, respectively.
•
The fastest increase in the containment pressure occurs during the SBO-LBLOCA due to the rapid steam entering the containment vessel from the breaking point. Hence, the maximum containment pressure occurs during the complete SBO due to more steam and other gas generation.
•
Larger amounts of hydrogen are produced during the ex-vessel phase of the SAs than the in-vessel phase. In other words, the pressure vessel retention against the SA is very important to mitigate the accident and the radiological health hazards to public and the environment.
•
Despite differences between the results of the MELCOR and CONTAIN codes, the general trends of the NPP behavior during the accident are in a good agreement. Discrepancies related to the accident simulation and containment pressure are observed and discussed.
•
Based on the uncertainty analysis, the maximum and minimum of produced H2 are between 255 and 525 kg during the in-vessel phase of the SBO accident. In this study, a conservative approach is chosen to fulfill the criterion for a reliable SAM strategy according to the maximum amount of produced hydrogen.
•
The proposed mitigation system can keep the containment integrity against overpressure during the SAs. The results can be used for SAM strategy evaluation and guidelines of the BNPP.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
R. Gharari: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing - original draft, Visualization. H. Kazeminejad: Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing - review & editing, Project administration. N. Mataji Kojouri: Conceptualization, Supervision, Project administration, Resources. A. Hedayat: Supervision, Writing - review & editing. M. Hassan Vand: Supervision, Writing - review & editing.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Appendix A. Supplementary data</Section>
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:
Supplementary data 1.
<Section>Research data for this article</Section>
Data not available / Data will be made available on request
<Section>References</Section>
Ahn et al., 2018
K. Ahn, Y.H. Jung, J.K. Shin, W.T. Kim
Evaluation of an accident management strategy using an emergency water injection in a reference PWR SFP
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 13 (2018), pp. 353-379
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Alonso et al., 2017
E.L. Alonso, D. Papini, G. Jimeneza
Hydrogen distribution and Passive Autocatalytic Recombiner (PAR) mitigation in a PWR-KWU containment type
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 109 (2017), pp. 600-611
Google Scholar
AEOI, 2007
AEOI, 2007. Final Safety Analysis Report of BNPP-1, Moscow.
Google Scholar
Birkhofer, 1980
A. Birkhofer
The German risk study for nuclear power plants
IAEA Bull., 22 (5/6) (1980), pp. 23-33
Google Scholar
Chatterjee et al., 2010a
B. Chatterjee, D. Mukhopadhyay, H.G. Lele, B. Atanasova, P. Groudev
Verification of Severe Accident Management strategies for VVER 1000 (V320) reactor
2010 2nd International Conference on Reliability, Safety and Hazard-Risk-Based Technologies and Physics-of-Failure Methods (ICRESH), IEEE (2010), pp. 280-287
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chatterjee et al., 2010b
B. Chatterjee, D. Mukhopadhyay, H.G. Lele, A.K. Ghosh, H.S. Kushwaha, P. Groudev, et al.
Analyses for VVER-1000/320 reactor for spectrum of break sizes along with SBO
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 37 (2010), pp. 359-370
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
D’Auria, 2019
F. D’Auria
Best estimate plus uncertainty (BEPU): status and perspectives
Nucl. Eng. Des., 352 (2019), Article 110190
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Dehjourian et al., 2016
M. Dehjourian, R. Sayareh, M. Rahgoshay, G. Jahanfarnia, A.S. Shirani
Investigation of a hydrogen mitigation system during large break loss-of-coolant accident for a two-loop pressurized water reactor
Nucl. Eng. Technol., 48 (2016), pp. 1174-1183
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Dong and Pan, 2018
Z. Dong, Y. Pan
A lumped-parameter dynamical model of a nuclear heating reactor cogeneration plant
J. Energy, 145 (2018), pp. 638-656
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Grabaskas et al., 2016
D. Grabaskas, M.K. Nakayama, R. Denning, T. Aldemir
Advantages of variance reduction techniques in establishing confidence intervals for quantiles
Reliab. Eng. Sys. Saf., 149 (2016), pp. 187-203
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gauntt, 2005
Gauntt, R.O., 2005. Uncertainty analyses using the MELCOR severe accident analysis code. In SNL, OECD Workshop Proceeding, Aix-en-Provence.
Google Scholar
Gharari et al., 2018
R. Gharari, H. Kazeminejad, N. Mataji Kojouri, A. Hedayat
A review on hydrogen generation, explosion, and mitigation during severe accidents in light water nuclear reactors
Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 43 (2018), pp. 1939-1965
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gómez-Torres et al., 2015
A.M. Gómez-Torres, E. Sáinz-Mejía, J.V. Xolocostli-Munguía, R. López-Morones, C. Filio-López, P. Royl
CFD analysis of hydrogen volumetric concentrations in a Hard Venting Containment System of a Mark II BWR
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 85 (2015), pp. 552-565
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gromov et al., 2002
Gromov, G., Lola, I., Sholomitsky, S., Gumenyuk, D., Shikhabutinov, V., Alekseev, Y., et al., 2002. VVER-440 containment thermal hydraulic analyses with MELCOR and CONTAIN codes. In: 10th Int. Conf. Nucl. Eng. American Society of Mechanical Engineers Digital Collection, 447–454.
Google Scholar
Groudev et al., 2013
Groudev, P., Stefanova, A., Gencheva, R., 2013. Investigation of VVER 1000 Core Degradation During SBO Accident Scenario in Case of Pressurizer SV Stuck in Open Position. Fuel behavior and modelling under severe transient and loss of coolant accident (LOCA) conditions. Proceedings of a Technical Meeting, 367.
Google Scholar
Hermsmeyer et al., 2015
Hermsmeyer, S., Herranz, L.E, Iglesias, R., 2015. Review of current severe accident management approaches in Europe and identification of related modelling requirements for the computer code ASTEC V2. 1. Atw. Internationale Zeitschrift fuer Kernenergie, 60 (7), 461–466.
Google Scholar
Humphries et al., 2017
Humphries, L.L., Beeny, B.A., Gelbard, F., Louie, D.L., Phillips, J., 2017. MELCOR Computer Code Manuals, Vol. 2: Reference Manual–Version 2.2. 9541. SAND2017-0876 O.
Google Scholar
Iman, 2014
Iman, R.L., 2014. Latin Hypercube Sampling, Wiley Stats Ref: Statistics Reference Online. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118445112.stat03803.
Google Scholar
Jin et al., 2015
Y. Jin, W. Xu, X. Liu, X. Cheng
In and ex-vessel coupled analysis of IVR-ERVC phenomenon for large scale PWR
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 80 (2015), pp. 322-337
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Karassik et al., 2001
I.J. Karassik, J.P. Messina, P. Cooper, C.C. Heald
Pump handbook, 3, McGraw-Hill (2001)
Google Scholar
Li et al., 2014
L. Li, M. Wang, W. Tian, G. Su, S. Qiu
Severe accident analysis for a typical PWR using the MELCOR code
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 71 (2014), pp. 30-38
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lonergan et al., 1990
S.C. Lonergan, R.L. Goble, C. Cororaton
Estimating the financial consequences of a severe nuclear accident in Canada
J. Energy, 15 (1990), pp. 507-522
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Murata et al., 1997
Murata, K.K., Williams, D.C., Griffith, R.O., Gido, R.G., Tadios, E.L., Davis, F.J., et al., 1997. Code manual for CONTAIN 2.0: a computer code for nuclear reactor containment analysis.
Google Scholar
Park and Ahn, 2015
S.Y. Park, K. Ahn
Evaluation of an accident management strategy of emergency water injection using fire engines in a typical pressurized water reactor
Nucl. Eng. Technol., 47 (2015), pp. 719-728
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Pump, 2010
S. Pump
Centrifugal Pump Handbook
(third ed.), Butterworth-Heinemann (2010)
Google Scholar
Ruščák et al., 2019
M. Ruščák, G. Mazzini, M. Kynčl, S. Savanyuk, M. Hrehor, A. Musa, et al.
VVER 1000 severe accident analyses using MELCOR code
J. Nucl. Eng. Rad. Sci., 5 (3) (2019), pp. 30913-30919
Google Scholar
Salehi and Jahanfarnia, 2020
M. Salehi, G. Jahanfarnia
Investigation of LBLOCA in VVER-1000 NPP using RELAP5/SCDAP and CONTAIN codes
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 139 (2020), Article 107229
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Scobel et al., 1998
J.H. Scobel, T.G. Theofanous, S.W. Sorrell
Application of the risk oriented accident analysis methodology (ROAAM) to severe accident management in the AP600 advanced light water reactor
Reliability Eng. System Saf., 62 (1998), pp. 51-58
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Silde and Lindholm, 1997
Silde, A., Lindholm, I., 1997. Parametric studies on containment thermal hydraulic loads during high pressure melt ejection in a BWR. Nordisk Kernesikkerhedsforskning, (No. NKS-RAK--2 (97) TR-A5).
Google Scholar
Tarasov et al., 2017
O.V. Tarasov, A.E. Kiselev, A.S. Filippov, T.A. Yudina, D.G. Grigoruk, D.E. Koshmanov
Development and verification of a model of RVK-500, -1000 recombiners for modeling the containment shells of NPP with VVER by computational hydrodynamics
J. Energy, 121 (2017), pp. 166-172
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tills et al., 2009
Tills, J., Notafrancesco, A., Phillips, J., 2009. Application of the MELCOR code to design basis PWR large dry containment analysis. Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico, SAND2009-2858.
Google Scholar
USNRC, 1988
USNRC. 1988. Individual plant examination for severe accident vulnerabilities 10 CFR 50.54(f). Tech. Rep., NRC, Washington, DC, USA.
Google Scholar
Wilks, 1941
S.S. Wilks
Determination of sample sizes for setting tolerance limits
Ann. Math. Stat., 12 (1941), pp. 91-96
CrossRefGoogle Scholar