<title>Hydrostatic pressure test of the ITER lower port stub extension for factory acceptance</title>
<author>1,HokyuMoon,2,Hyun-SooKim,2,Yu-GyeongKim,3,ChulkyuPark,4,Seok GeunKang,5,JihoenLee</author>
<Affiliation>1, National Fusion Research Institute, 169-148 Gwahak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 34133, Republic of Korea;2,Hyundai Heavy Industries Co. Ltd., Ulsan 682-792, Republic of Korea</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Fusion Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.fusengdes.2020.111929</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0920379620304774</URL>
Hydrostatic pressure test of the ITER lower port stub extension for factory acceptance
HokyuMoon,Hyun-SooKim,Yu-GyeongKim,ChulkyuPark,Seok GeunKang,JihoenLee
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, 400076, India
National Fusion Research Institute, 169-148 Gwahak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 34133, Republic of Korea
Hyundai Heavy Industries Co. Ltd., Ulsan 682-792, Republic of Korea
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Method of pressure test for ITER vacuum vessel port is introduced.
Actual deformation is verified using 3D metrology method.
Numerical simulation and actual 3D measurement result are compared.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
To check the structural integrity of the ITER Lower Port Stub Extension (LPSE), the hydrostatic pressure test has been conducted as part of the Factory Acceptance Test (FAT). The test is conducted as complying with the RCC-MR 2007 code and the French regulations of nuclear pressure equipment (ESPN) because the LPSE is classified as a nuclear pressure equipment. Because the LPSE is double wall structure with inner shell, ribs and outer shell, the inside coolant passage is filled with water for test. Pressurization is kept until 37.8 bar using the certified deionized water. During the test, before-after pressurization, and relief the pressure, the permanent deformation is checked. To verify permanent deformation, the actual displacement is measured as applying 3D metrology method using a laser tracker on the 18 locations of the LPSE, which are specified by the structural analysis results. As a result, there is no leakage on the welded and any interface area. Especially, after pressurization, the measured displacement is appeared similar to the numerically estimated value, the maximum is 0.39 mm. Finally, after relief the pressure, no permanent deformation is occurred, so that the structural integrity of the LPSE is confirmed through the selected hydrostatic pressure test.
Keywords:Hydrostatic pressure test;3D metrology;Factory acceptance test;Vacuum vessel ;Port
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
After completion of fabrication on ITER components, the FAT should be performed to demonstrate that the component is manufactured as fulfilled the given requirements [1,2].
The main goal of the FAT is to verify compliance of functional requirements, and all activities for the FAT should be complied with the requirements of RCC-MR 2007 code and French regulation of nuclear pressure equipment [3,4]. The FAT for the LPSE is including that visual test (replaced to the flow test), pressure test, baking, vacuum leak test, and final dimensional inspection [4,5]. Among them, the pressure test is necessary to be performed to verify any visual leakage and permanent deformation when exposed given pressure condition [4]. The LPSE is consisting of inner shell, outer shell, and ribs to make double wall box structure with stainless steel 316 L(N)-IG. The coolant passage is made between the double wall, total thickness is 200 mm with 60 mm of each single material, and the test medium is filled and pressurized for the test. For the test, the water channel of LPSE should be opened, so that this is confirmed through the visual test prior to the pressure. Because the given test condition is 37.8 bar, pneumatic test method is quiet difficult with safety issue. Thus, hydrostatic pressure test is selected to check the structural integrity of LPSE.
Among the 9 LPSEs (#2, #4, #6, #8, #10, #12, #14, #16, #18) for the ITER vacuum vessel [4], the result of all FAT are completed successfully. Aforementioned, the pressure test gives verification of structural integrity on the LPSE as a nuclear pressure equipment, so that it is one of the critical test.
In this paper, the hydrostatic pressure test method, 3D metrology method for deformation check, and the results on hydrostatic pressure test for LPSE#12 has been explained.
<Section>2. Test method and sequence</Section>
2.1. Facility for hydrostatic pressure test
Fig. 1 shows the specification of the hydrostatic pressure test facility. The location of each equipment is set based on the geometry of the LPSE. Because actual coolant inlet pipe is locating on the bottom of the LPSE, this pipe is considered as a test inlet. On the test inlet, an extension pipe (5 inch, schedule 40) with a CF flange and inlet nozzle are installed. A digital pressure gauge (Dwyer Instruments, DPG-109), and a valve are also equipped to control the water inlet. Through this inlet, the water pump is connected. The outlet is located on the top area of cover plate with the digital pressure gauge and the vale. Actually, the cover plate is temporary welded for the test (including leak test). The vent and
Fig. 1
Fig. 1. Hydrostatic pressure test facility: (a) picture of the LPSE#12 with test facilities; (b) schematic diagram of the hydrostatic pressure test. drain is set on the bottom area of the cover plate with a pressure relief valve for safety.
2.2. Deformation check using 3D metrology
To verify any permanent deformation during the test, the 18 selected locations are measured using the 3D metrology system including a laser tracker (Leica Absolute Tracker AT402) and a 3D metrology software (SpatialAnalyzer) [6]. When conducting 3D measurement with the laser tracker, two face check, scale bar check, probe check, and drift check are performed as a calibration. Especially, the drift check, which should be performed before and after instrument re-location, is essential on the uncertainty of the measurement.
The 3D measurement is conducted three times: before pressurization; after full pressurization; and relief the pressure. The 18 measuring locations (P1∼P18) are set, and then fiducial posts are welded to confirm exact location of measurement as shown in Fig. 2. The 18 measuring locations are selected based on the structural analysis result on full pressure condition. The detail of analysis is explained in the chapter 3.1. Eventually, using the 3D metrology method, the deviations from the first measurement are evaluated in the absolute coordinate system, and then compared with the structural analysis result.
Fig. 2
Fig. 2. 18 locations of fiducial post for deformation check.
2.3. Test preparation and sequence
According to the RCC-MR 2007 code, before starting the test, certified De-Ionized (DI) water (Grade B) is prepared to avoid oxidation on the component [3]. The test pressure is 37.8 bar as listed in Table 1. This given value is based on the design pressure of LPSE, plus safety margin from the RCC-MR 2007 code and several uncertainties.
Table 1. Pressure test criteria.
After confirmed the composition analysis result of DI water, pressurizing as follows:
1st step: before pressurizing, 3D measurement is performed on 18 measuring locations. Pressurization until 15 bar and then checking the pressure is stable with checking any leakage during 5 min;
2nd step: pressurization until 23 bar and then checking the pressure is stable with checking any leakage during 5 min;
3rd step: pressurization until 30 bar and then checking the pressure is stable with checking any leakage during 5 min;
4th step: pressurization until 37.8 bar and then hold 30- minutes. In this step, the 3D measurement is performed on 18 measuring locations to check the displacement.
Final step: relief the pressure and then the 3D measurement is conducted on 18 measuring locations. The permanent deformation is verified using 3D measurement result on before pressurization, after full pressurization, and relief the pressure step.
<Section>3. Results</Section>
3.1. Structural analysis and deformation check result
For the structural analysis, the analysis condition is set to 38.7 bar (full pressure) as a conservative condition. This is because the real pressure on the component can be higher than the value which is read on the manometer due to the uncertainty and pressure head. Thus, the uncertainty of the manometer, 0.4 bar, and uncertainty of the reading, 0.2 bar, are additionally considered as a conservative point of view. In addition, the difference of pressure at the top and bottom on LPSE should be occurred due to the height difference on the water channel (2.2 m) as shown in Fig. 1. The estimated pressure difference is about 0.3 bar. As considering those values, analysis condition is set to 38.7 bar as the full pressure load.
The FEM analysis is conducted using commercial code, ANSYS ver.17.2. The shell181 is applied as an element type, and number of elements and nodes are set to 18,540 and 17,596, respectively [5]. The gravity effect is also considered to vertical downward of the LPSE. The fixed conditions are applied on the bottom surface and side surface of supporting pad which are actually supported by support jig as shown in Fig. 1 [7]. The full pressure load, 38.7 bar, is applied as surface loads on the inside shells of the double wall part of the LPSE including the cover plate.
The maximum and minimum displacements by full pressure load are estimated by the analysis as shown in Fig. 3. Because relatively large displacement is occurring on the y and z direction, the displacement of both direction on outer shell and inner shell surface are depicted. The maximum displacement, 0.40 mm, and the minimum displacement, -0.63 mm, are occurred on the outer shell of near cover plate area as shown in Fig. 3 (c). Likewise the outer shell result, the value (max: 0.39 mm, min: -0.62 mm) and position (near cover plate area) of displacement are appeared similarly as shown in Fig. 3 (d).
Fig. 3
Fig. 3. Estimated displacement on full pressure condition by structural analysis: (a) Y-displacement on Outer shell; (b) Y-displacement on Inner shell; (c) Z-displacement on Outer shell; (d) Z-displacement on Inner shell.
Especially, the result comparison on full pressure condition is the critical. The actually measured displacements on the full pressure condition, are compared with the analysis result as shown in Table 2. As depicted in Fig. 2, the measuring result of 18 locations (P1∼P18) are compared. To compare the analysis result and the 3D measurement result, the magnitude of displacement is estimated using the root sum square on x-y-z values.
Table 2. Comparison of displacement magnitude between analysis and measured result on 18 locations.
Based on the magnitude by measured (Table 2), the maximum displacement of 0.39 mm is occurred on the P10 and P17, respectively. These positions are shown the similar values on the structural analysis result. Thus, it can be considered that the actual displacement on full pressure condition is appeared with reasonable range on the expected area by the structural analysis.
3.2. Hydrostatic pressure test result
To get the acceptance of the test, it is necessary confirmed that there is no visual leaks and no deformation on the LPSE#12. Thus, the test result is concluded after checked that result of the visual check on every pressurizing step and deformation verification.
Based on the visual check result by certified inspectors, there is no leakage on all welded area and any interface on the LPSE#12 during the test. Actually, the visual check is conducted until just before the drain. Moreover, the permanent deformation is verified through the 3D measurement result on after relief the pressure. The measured values are appeared under 0.1 mm, it means that there is little difference from the first measurement which was performed before pressurization.
Therefore, it is concluded that there is no permanent deformation on the fabricated LPSE#12 through the selected hydrostatic pressure test.
<Section>4. Summary</Section>
The hydrostatic pressure test has been conducted to verify the structural integrity of the fabricated LPSE#12. The test is performed as complying with the RCC-MR 2007 code and the French regulations of nuclear pressure equipment. The full pressure condition is 37.8 bar, and it is being pressurized with the certified DI water. The acceptance criteria of the test is that there are no visual leaks and no deformation during the test. Thus, the visual check and deformation verification are conducted as following the given sequence.
As a result, firstly, there is no leakage on the welded and any interface area of the LPSE#12 during the test.
Secondly, no permanent deformation is verified. To verify permanent deformation, the actual displacement is measured at selected 18 locations applying the 3D metrology method. To select the location of the measurement, structural analysis is conducted with the full pressure condition. Based on the analysis, the area of large displacement is collected and compared the value of the actual measurement on full pressure condition during the test. From the measurement result, the maximum displacement of 0.39 mm is occurred on the location which is predicted by analysis, and the value is similar with the analysis. In addition, the actual displacement is measured after relief the pressure. It is confirmed that there is no difference from the first measurement which was performed before pressurization.
Thus, it is concluded that there is no permanent deformation on the fabricated LPSE#12 through the selected hydrostatic pressure test.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Hokyu Moon: Writing - original draft. Hyun-Soo Kim: Supervision. Yu-Gyeong Kim: Software. Chulkyu Park: Supervision. Seok Geun Kang: Data curation. Jihoen Lee: Investigation.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgments</Section>
This work was supported by the National R&D Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science & ICT (No. 2007-2006981, Development and Procurement of ITER Vacuum Vessel Port).
<Section>References</Section>
[1]
S. Banetta, B. Bellin, P. Lorenzetto, F. Zacchia, B. Boireau, I. Bobin, P. Boiffard, A. Cottin, P. Nogue, R. Mitteau, R. Eaton, R. Raffray, A. Burger, J. Du, J. Linke, G. Pintsuk, T. Weber
Manufacturing and testing of a ITER first wall semi-prototype for EUDA pre-qualification
Fusion Eng. Des., 98-99 (2015), pp. 1211-1215
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[2]
B. Bigot
ITER construction and manufacturing progress toward first plasma
Fusion Eng. Des., 146 (PartA) (2019), pp. 124-129
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[3]
Design and Construction Rules for Mechanical Components of Nuclear Installation, RCC-MR, French Association for the Design, Construction and Operating Supervision of the Equipment for Electro-Nuclear Boilers (AFCEN), edition 2007.
Google Scholar
[4]
H. Moon, C. Park, G.H. Kim, H.S. Kim, Y.G. Kim, K.H. Hong, H.K. Kim, J.W. Sa, W.H. Chung
Detail procedure of pressure and baking test for ITER vacuum vessel lower port stub extension
Fusion Eng. Des., 136 (Part B) (2018), pp. 1514-1517
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[5]
H. Moon, H.K. Kim, H.S. Kim, Y.G. Kim, C. Park, J. Cheon, G.H. Kim, W.H. Chung, J. Lee, B.G. Kang, J.W. Sa
Convective baking test of the ITER lower port for factory acceptance
Fusion Eng. Des., 146 (Part A) (2019), pp. 598-602
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
[6]
G. Cai, K. Man, S. Wang, W. Chen, J. Yuan
A combined application of laser tracker and spatialanalyzer in alignment of accelerator, applied mechanical and materials
Trans Tech Publication, 333 (2013), pp. 58-61
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[7]
H. Moon, K.M. Kim, J.S. Park, B.S. Kim, H.H. Cho
Thermo-mechanical analysis of an internal cooling system with various configurations of a combustion liner after shell
Heat Mass Transf., 51 (2015), pp. 1779-1790
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar