<title>Experimental study on air-water countercurrent flow limitation in a vertical tube based on measurement of film thickness behavior</title>
<author>1,JieWan,2,WanSun,3,JianDeng,4,Liang-mingPan,5,Shu-huaDing</author>
<Affiliation>1,Key Laboratory of Low-Grade Energy Utilization Technologies and Systems, Ministry of Education, Chongqing University, Chongqing, 400044, PR China;2,Science and Technology on Reactor System Design Technology Laboratory, NPIC, Chengdu, 610041, PR China</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2020.12.019</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1738573320309876</URL>
Experimental study on air-water countercurrent flow limitation in a vertical tube based on measurement of film thickness behavior
JieWan,WanSun,JianDeng,Liang-mingPan,Shu-huaDing
Key Laboratory of Low-Grade Energy Utilization Technologies and Systems, Ministry of Education, Chongqing University, Chongqing, 400044, PR China
Science and Technology on Reactor System Design Technology Laboratory, NPIC, Chengdu, 610041, PR China
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The gas-liquid counter-current flow limitation (CCFL) is closely related to efficient and safety operation of many equipment in industrial cycle. Air-water countercurrent flow experiments were performed in a tube with diameter of 25 mm to understand the triggering mechanism of CCFL. A parallel electrode probe was utilized to measure film thickness whereby the time domain and frequency domain characteristics of liquid film was obtained. The amplitude of the interface wave is small at low liquid flow rate while it becomes large at high liquid flow rate after being disturbed by the airflow. The spectral characteristic curve shows a peak-shaped distribution. The crest exists between 0 and 10 Hz and the amplitude decreases with the frequency increase. The analysis of visual observation and characteristic of film thickness indicate that two flooding mechanisms were identified at low and high liquid flow rate, respectively. At low liquid flow rate, the interfacial waves upward propagation is responsible for the formation of CCFL onset. While flooding at high liquid flow rate takes place as a direct consequence of the liquid bridging in tube due to the turbulent flow pattern. Moreover, it is believed that there is a transition region between the low and high liquid flow rate.
Keywords:Flooding;Interface wave;Film thickness;Experimental results
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Counter-current two-phase flow in vertical tubes has many applications in a diverse range of process industries. The phenomenon of flooding is of considerable technological importance, as flooding can be a limiting factor in the operation of equipment. For example, in a pressurized water reactor (PWR), the countercurrent flow of steam (upward) and injected cold water (downward) may take place in downcomer when the emergency core cooling (ECC) water is injected into the reactor vessel. Understanding the CCFL characteristics is therefore of great importance in evaluation of the flow rate of the cooling water flowing into the core. Meanwhile, knowledge on the gas-liquid interfacial interaction is significant for the development of accurate two-phase flow model [[23], [24]].
In an effort to develop better predictive models, many simple mechanism have been proposed in public literature [[1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8]]. Most of works can be divided into two model categories, namely, (1) upward flow due to waves, and (2) upward flow within the film. The waves models also subdivided into two mechanisms. Firstly, waves grow large enough to block the tube. The liquid in these waves is then accelerated upwards above the feed, either as a liquid slug or as a dispersed phase of entrained droplets. Some examples of models showing such instabilities can be found in the works by Shearer et al. [9], Cetinbudaklar et al. [10] and Zvirin et al. [11]. Secondly, waves propagate upward carrying mass above the feed inlet. As waves are seen to propagate downward below the flooding transition, flooding is assumed to occur when the gas flow is just sufficient for the waves to become stationary. Then, an incremental increase in the gas rate would cause these waves to flow upward above the feed to initiate flooding. Examples of this approach can be found in Ueda et al. [12] and Mcquillan et al. [13]. As for the film model, in published models the existence of waves, their instability and growth are assumed to cause increasing interfacial shear stress and form drag. Examples of these approaches can be found in Semenov [14], Taitel et al. [15] and Maron et al. [5].
Deendarlianto et al. [16] observed the liquid film behavior upon flooding of an adiabatic counter-current two-phase flow in an inclined tube by using the combination of time variation measurements of liquid hold-up taken along the tube and visual observation. Two mechanisms were identified to control the flooding in lower flooding and upper flooding, respectively. The lower flooding occurred at lower liquid flow rate and high pipe inclination angle. The upper flooding occurred at higher liquid flow rate and low pipe inclination angle. Their experiment data indicated that there was no upward motion of the air-water interfacial waves upon flooding occurrence. Observations on the liquid film behavior after flooding occurred suggest that the entrainment of liquid droplets plays an important role in the upward transport of liquid.
Wu et al. [17] completed an experimental study on the characterization of flow regimes during counter-current two-phase flows in an annular geometry, including an analysis of the associated pressure signal data in the time and frequency domains and a visual analysis of the flow regimes to verify the fast Fourier transform (FFT) results using a high-speed camera. Their experimental findings support that flooding initiates in the proximity of the liquid inlet point due to the formation of large waves and their upward propagation. During the onset of flooding, no upward liquid movement was observed in the form of waves nor droplets.
Vijayan et al. [18] described an experimental study on the effect of tube diameter on the mechanism of flooding, with three different tube inner diameters, namely, 25, 67 and 99 mm. They found that flooding in the 25 mm diameter section occurred essentially by the upward movement of large waves created near the liquid outlet, while flooding occurred by droplets carryover or by an unstable, churn-like motion in the liquid film in the 67, 99 mm diameter test section.
Badarudin et al. [19] experimentally studied the flooding and deflooding phenomena of air-water counter-current flow in a hot-leg of 1/30 scale of Pressurized Water Reactor (PWR). The interfacial characteristics and liquid film behavior under various superficial liquid velocities were explained by visualization analysis using high-speed camera.
Issa et al. [20] performed experimental investigations of CCFL in large-diameter PWR hot-leg geometry. The air/water interface and flow patterns were recorded using high-speed photography. Two mechanisms accounting for the onset of CCFL at low and medium liquid flow rates were identified and explained. With a review on the experiments in small diameter geometries the effect of scale and geometry of the test section on onset and characteristics of CCFL was analyzed.
In a word, many researches on flooding mechanism have been carried out. However, how the film thickness changes with the gas or liquid flow rate and works on the flooding phenomenon is not clear. Meanwhile, the occurrence of flooding is related to the flow pattern transition. The time domain and frequency domain analysis of the film thickness under different flow pattern present different characteristic. In present paper, the local characteristics of flooding were paid close attention. To investigate the local characteristics of flooding, a parallel electrode probe was used to measure the instantaneous liquid film thickness and a high-speed camera for visual observations. From the instantaneous liquid film thickness, the time domain and frequency domain characteristics of the liquid film thickness by FFT were obtained. Based on the visual observations and the film thickness analysis, two mechanisms were identified at different liquid flow rate. Moreover, a transition region between low and high liquid flow rate was observed and analyzed.
<Section>2. Experimental setup</Section>
2.1. Experimental apparatus
The experimental setup used in present study is shown schematically in Fig. 1(a). The water pumped through the filter and the flow rate was measured by a HONEYWELL electromagnetic flow meter with an accuracy of ±0.5%. Water was introduced uniformly near the top of the test tube, through a specially machined porous water injection segment, which is made of stainless steel material substituting a tubular section and fitted flash with the inner tube surface in order to facilitate smooth liquid entry to avoid the inlet effects on the CCFL phenomena. Water flowed downward in a steady film way along the axial direction because of the porous water injection segment. On the other hand, the air was measured by a OMEGA gas mass flow meter with an accuracy of ±(0.8% RDG+0.2% FS). Then air entered at the bottom and formed counter-current flow with the water.
Fig. 1. (a) Schematic diagram of experimental flow loop; (b) geometric sizes of the test section; (c) Porous water injection device.
The test tube was made of transparent acrylic plastic material, which can observe the flow pattern in the test section, with inner diameter 25 mm and has a total length of 1800 mm as shown in Fig. 1(b). Observations of the flow pattern were facilitated by high-speed video recordings. To ensure the intensity of the light, a light source was positioned in front of the high-speed camera. And there was a light diffuser between the light source and the high speed camera, which can improve even lighting on the main channel, aiming at better image quality of the growing waves. The position of high-speed camera shooting is shown in Fig. 1(b). The frame rate is 1000 frames per second. The shooting duration is 4 s at each run.
The configuration of the porous wall of water injection is shown in Fig. 1(c), which could minimize the disturbances at the liquid inlet section. The porous water injection device consist of the outer plenum which has three water inlets spacing 120° along the circumference, porous wall and inner tube. The gas flow out from the top of the inner tube, and is believed to has little influence on the film. The porous wall and inner tube formed an annular channel and provided a steady liquid film flow.
To measure the film thickness, a pair of parallel electrode probes was used as shown in Fig. 1(b). One ring serves as the emitter electrode and another serves as the receiver. The thickness of the ring is 9.53 mm and the distance between two electrodes is 10 mm. The original signal was obtained with the sampling rate of 10 kHz and acquisition time of 30 s. The voltage signal varied with film thickness since different film thickness correspond to different conductivity. Two electrodes were located in the lower half of the channel where incipient flooding is observed to occur. The transformation of the voltage signal into film thickness was achieved by the calibration of parallel electrode probe. For the purpose of film thickness calibration, acrylic plugs with different diameters were used as shown in Fig. 2. The voltage signal was recorded by a NI acquisition board at a given film thickness. There are total 10 group of calibration experiments including the film thickness of 1.2, 1.4, 1.6, 1.8, 2.0, 2.2, 2.7, 2.9, 3.1 and 3.3 mm. The fitting curve of calibration is presented in Fig. 3. Where δ is the liquid film thickness, V∗ is dimensionless voltage signal, Vmin is the voltage signal at full gas phase condition, Vmax is the voltage signal at full liquid phase condition. The uncertainty of liquid film thickness is composed of three parts: voltage measurement error (2.00%), calibration plug measurement error (1.86%) and curve fitting error (1.63%). The maximum uncertainty of liquid film thickness can be calculated as 3.18% according to the error transfer law.
Fig. 2. Calibration of parallel electrode probe.
Fig. 3. Calibration of parallel electrode probe.
Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 give the visual graph of flow pattern and variation of free falling liquid film thickness at jl = 0.028 m/s and jl = 0.121 m/s, respectively. At low liquid inlet flow rate, it is believed that the porous injection device in this study benefits for stabilizing the liquid film flow and making the liquid film flow evenly. At high liquid inlet flow rate, the significant ripples appear even when liquid film flows freely down (Fig. 5(a)). The variation of liquid film thickness also fluctuates (Fig. 5(b)).
Fig. 4. The sensitivity of liquid film to the entrance configuration at jl = 0.028 m/s.
Fig. 5. The sensitivity of liquid film to the entrance configuration at jl = 0.121 m/s.
2.2. Experimental conditions and procedures
Studies were conducted with an initial continuous annular flow. In each run, the water flow rate was set at a specified level, and the air flow rate was increased in small increments from a pure falling film case. After each increment in the air flow rate, the flow was allowed to settle for a few minutes and the flow rate of each phase and the voltage signal of film thickness was recorded. The flow pattern was observed by naked eye and recorded by the high-speed camera. After one run was over, the air flow rate was further increased at a small increment. These measurements and observations were made at several air flow rate right up to and beyond the onset of flooding. After that, changing the liquid flow rate and repeating the above steps.
The experimental conditions were as follows: the range of water superficial velocity: jl = 0.028–0.121 m/s, namely, 0.028, 0.039, 0.052, 0.056, 0.075, 0.087, 0.099, 0.108, 0.121 m/s and that of air jg = 0–9.6 m/s. Correspondingly, the uncertainties of the jl and jg are ±0.5% and 2.27%, respectively. At each run, the increment in the air flow rate is 20 L/min (jg = 0.85 m/s) before onset of flooding and 10 L/min (jg = 0.42 m/s) after onset of flooding. Air and water were at ambient temperature (approx.20 °C) and pressure. At different conditions, the conductivity of water was measured three times by conductivity meter before and after each run. Then the correction for conductivity change resulting from uncertainty of temperature was carried out based on the calibration curve.
<Section>3. Results and discussions</Section>
3.1. Visual observation
Fig. 6 gives the development of flow pattern with increase in gas flow rate at low liquid flow rate. The flow pattern in the tube is laminar at no or low gas flow rate (seen in Fig. 6(a)). The film thickness is thin and uniformly flows down. With the step increase of gas flow rate, the liquid film is gradually disturbed (Fig. 6(b)) until a strong disturbance appears at the onset of flooding as shown in Fig. 6(c). As the gas flow rate further increases, the distortion of the interface becomes more pronounced and the wave amplitude also increase tremendously (Fig. 6(d)).
Fig. 6. Flow pattern at different gas flow rate when jl = 0.028 m/s.
Fig. 7 gives the time-series photos of flooding at jl = 0.028 m/s. The liquid film is subject to gravity, wall and interfacial shear stress by the inner wall and gas flow, surface tension and the pressure of gas flow caused by the reduction of the gas flow cross-sectional area when the liquid film thickens. The gravity and surface tension play a key role in stabilizing the liquid film flow. On the contrary, the interfacial shear stress and pressure of gas flow promote the liquid film disturbance, which increase the instability of the liquid film. The interfacial shear stress increases with the increase of the gas flow rate and the liquid film is torn by the gas flow resulting in a partially liquid ligament clusters appearing in the tube (Fig. 7(a)). At the same time, the gas has a dragging effect on the injected water, resulting in an increase in the film thickness on the cross section (Fig. 7(b)). Therefore, the film thickness increases overall. When the gas flow rate increases to a critical value close to flooding condition, the disturbed liquid film gradually formed at the gas inlet and moves upward forming an annular rising liquid film (Fig. 7(c)). With the increase of gas flow rate, the annular rising liquid film propagate upward and finally fills the entire test section (Fig. 7(d)). The rising velocity of the ascending liquid film increases with the increase of gas flow rate. There is no bridging of liquid film under low liquid flow rate. The main mechanism of flooding under this condition is the interfacial waves on the surface of the liquid film and the propagation of the annular liquid film.
Fig. 7. Time-series photos of flooding at jl = 0.028 m/s.
Fig. 8 gives the development of flow pattern with increase in gas flow rate at high liquid flow rate. Similarly, the liquid film flows downward uniformly at no or low gas flow rate (seen in Fig. 8(a). In the falling liquid film flow, the stability of liquid film decreases at high liquid flow rate compared with that in low liquid flow rate (Fig. 6(a)). It can be found from Fig. 8(a) that significant ripples appear when liquid film flows down. As the gas flow rate increases, the wave interface appears unstable and the large waves are formed (Fig. 8(b)). When the flooding velocity is approached, the large waves will bridge to form the water seal and block the gas flow. Then the flooding takes place and the churn flow appears periodically (Fig. 8(c)). At higher gas flow rate, this churning motion presents more violent (Fig. 8(d)).
Fig. 8. Flow pattern at different gas flow rate when jl = 0.121 m/s.
Fig. 9 gives the time-series photos of flooding at jl = 0.121 m/s. At high gas flow rate, there is an obvious liquid film blocking in the tube and bridge is formed (Fig. 9(a)). The gas flow is accumulated in the tube by the water seal, which causes the pressure to increase. As the gas flow replenishes, the bridge moves upward and encounters the downward flowing liquid film (Fig. 9(b)). Subsequently, downward flowing water is difficult to enter into downstream region of flooding position for a short time (Fig. 9(c)). Then the pressure increases to a certain value and a lot of liquid on the cross section is pushed up by gas flow (Fig. 9(d)). After that, the pressure in the tube suddenly decreases, the water continues to inject into flooding region in a way of uniform liquid film (Fig. 9(e)). This process of large wave formation, bridge to water seal, being pushed up and breaking up, is repeated periodically, leads to the appearance of churn-like flow of the liquid. Generally, the liquid film thickness increases with the gas flow rate and then it bridges in the tube, finally, the film thickness flushes out with the gas flow and continues to fill the tube again. The whole process is periodic. Since the liquid film is easy to bridge in the tube under high liquid flow rate, the liquid film becomes unstable and transforms to churn flow. So there is no obvious phenomenon of an annular rising liquid film. The liquid is not continuous when it is carried out of the test section by the gas flow. When the gas flow rate increases to a certain value, the liquid film at the gas inlet is disturbed, which is different from the low liquid flow rate condition. After the liquid film in the gas inlet is disturbed under the high liquid flow rate, the disturbance quickly spreads upward and fills up the test section.
Fig. 9. Time-series photos of flooding at jl = 0.121 m/s.
3.2. Film thickness characteristics
3.2.1. Low liquid flow rate
Fig. 10 describes the comparison of the liquid film thickness at different liquid flow rate, jl = 0.028–0.075 m/s. At low gas flow rate, as the gas flow rate increases gradually, the liquid film thickness remains basically unchanged. Meanwhile, the liquid film thickness increases with the liquid flow rate while the film flow is steady. That is, the liquid film thickness is proportional to liquid flow rate. When the gas flow rate increases to a critical value, the liquid film thickness suddenly increases. This trend is similar to the results of Zabaras et al. [21] and Drosos et al. [22]. Under critical gas flow rate, the steady liquid film is hindered by the gas phase and the surface of the liquid film becomes unstable (Fig. 7(a)). The force exerted by airflow overcome the surface tension and gravity of the liquid film. Then the interfacial waves formed (Fig. 7(b)). Gas phase has a dragging effect on the flowing downward liquid, which decelerate the downward liquid flow. Considering any interface wave as a control volume, and the injected liquid continuously enters the control volume. The dragging effect of the gas flow on the control volume make the interfacial wave develop continuously in the axial and radial directions until the maximum amplitude of the interfacial wave is reached. The large interfacial wave moves in a reverse direction and flooding phenomena forms (Fig. 7(c) and (d)).
Fig. 10. Variation of average film thickness with gas velocity at low liquid flow rate.
It also can be inferred from Fig. 10 that the lower the liquid flow rate, the greater the critical gas flow rate will be when the liquid film thickness changes abruptly. It means that the lower the liquid flow rate, the more stable the film flow. At low liquid flow rate, after the flooding occurring, the liquid film thickness decreases with the increase of the gas flow rate. Since the liquid film thickness increases, the gas phase cross-sectional area becomes smaller and then the gas flow obtains an acceleration. Therefore, as the gas flow rate continues to increase, the interfacial shear stress is stronger and the interface wave is deformed. The wave crest of the interface wave is stretched in the direction of the airflow. Finally, the crest of the liquid film on the surface is torn to droplets and flow out of the test section with the air.
3.2.2. High liquid flow rate
As shown in Fig. 11, the variation of film thickness at the low gas flow rate is similar to that at low liquid flow rate. When the gas flow rate increases to a critical value, the film thickness suddenly becomes lower. As the gas flow rate increases, the interfacial waves on the surface of liquid film are formed on the cross section due to the disturbance, and the wave amplitude increases with the increase of gas flow rate (Fig. 8(a)–(b)). Therefore, the liquid film thickens on the cross section and the gas flow cross-sectional area becomes smaller. The interface amplitude even increases to form a liquid bridge in the tube (Fig. 9(a)). After the gas flow being sealed by the liquid bridge, pressure in the tube increases continuously since the gas flow continuously introduces (Fig. 9(b)). After the pressure reaches a certain level, the blocking liquid flow directly flushes out of the test section (Fig. 9(c)–(e)), which makes the film thickness on the cross section decreases sharply. The film thickness under this liquid flow rate is large enough so it is easier to make the liquid flow overlaps in the tube after the interface amplitude being disturbed, which occurs almost simultaneously as the liquid film flushes out of the test section. Therefore, the time-averaged value of the film thickness tends to decrease, and there is no obvious thickening stage. The profile in Fig. 11 suggests that the film thickness continues to increase as the gas flow rate increases. When the gas flow flushes the blocking liquid out of the test section, the film thickness in the tube becomes smaller and the gas flow cross-sectional area becomes larger. After the liquid flow continuously replenishes, film thickness increase again.
Fig. 11. Variation of average film thickness with gas velocity at high liquid flow rate.
3.2.3. Transition region
Based on the analysis of film thickness measurements, it is also believed that a narrow flow range between low and high liquid flow rates is present where the development of flow pattern near flooding point is different from the above two cases. For jl = 0.087–0.099 m/s displayed in Fig. 12, when the gas flow rate increases to a critical value, the liquid film thickness has a small increase firstly, which is because the liquid film thickness increases with the liquid flow rate as mentioned in previous section. And then the film thickness has a significantly decrease. When the gas flow rate increases, the surface of the liquid film in the tube is disturbed so that the liquid film thickens. After that, the gas phase cross-sectional area becomes smaller so that the gas flow rate is accelerated. The liquid film easily forms a bridge in the tube and water seal is formed consequently. The gas in the tube accumulates because of the water seal and the pressure increases. As the gas is continuously introduced, the blocking liquid film is instantly flushed out of the test section when the pressure increases to a certain level. Hence, the liquid film thickness decreases sharply.
Fig. 12. Variation of average film thickness with gas velocity at high liquid flow rate.
As present in Fig. 12, the film thickness has an increase trend after a rapid decrease. As the gas flow rate increases, the liquid film is not so thick to form a bridge in the cross section. When the gas flow rate increases to a certain value, the film thickness tend to increase similar to that of low liquid flow rate. However, the trend of increase does not last too long. When the gas flow rate further increase, the film thickness is large enough to form a liquid bridge. The water seal makes the pressure in the tube increase until the liquid phase is flushed out of the tube and then there is a sharp decrease in the film thickness. Therefore, the medium liquid flow rate can be considered as a transition region. After flooding occurring, as the gas flow rate further increases, the film thickness continues to increase. When the gas flow flushes the blocking liquid out of the test section, the film thickness in the test section becomes thinner and the gas flow cross-sectional area becomes larger. After the liquid flow continuously replenishes, the film thickness increase again.
3.3. Liquid film fluctuation characteristic
3.3.1. Time domain analysis
Fig. 13 supplies the fluctuation characteristics of the liquid film with time when the liquid flooding occurs under the condition of small liquid velocity. The fluctuation of the liquid film can be obtained according to the characteristic of liquid film thickness. When flooding occurs under the low liquid flow rate, since the liquid flow rate is low, the amplitude of the interface wave is small after being disturbed by the airflow. And the fraction of liquid phase entering the interface wave is small. Thus the overall film thickness and its fluctuation are small. The sharp crest in Fig. 13 can be regarded as a large interface wave. The interface wave appears when the surface of the liquid film disturbed by the gas flow. The interface wave is subjected to the interfacial shear stress, gravity, surface tension etc. The interfacial shear stress increases with the gas flow rate. Hence, when the gas flow rate increase to a certain value, the interfacial wave finally reaches equilibrium, which means the interfacial wave forms a maximum amplitude, namely, the sharp crest shown in Fig. 13. There is a significant rectangular trough or some waves with small amplitude between the large crest, which is the liquid film that is slightly disturbed. It shows that the interfacial wave are some steady ripples under the low liquid flow rate. Due to the dragging effect of the gas phase, the ripples move upward with the gas phase. In this way, the flow pattern in the tube is the annular flow which gas and liquid flowing upward simultaneously observed by naked eyes.
Fig. 13. Fluctuation characteristics at low liquid flow rate.
As shown in Fig. 14, due to the increase of the liquid Reynolds number at the high liquid flow rate, the stability of the liquid film decreases, and there are some slight ripples on the surface of the liquid film. Therefore, the interfacial wave grows rapidly and the disturbance of the liquid film becomes strong under the disturbance of the gas phase. Hence, the fluctuation amplitude of the liquid film increases significantly and the fluctuation frequency becomes large. The liquid film thickness becomes thick overall. In the early stage of flooding, since the test-section has a considerable length and there is resistance along the tube, so there is a partial loss of the gas flow rate flowing upward along the test section. The gas flow rate decreases when the gas flows in a distance. When the gas flow rate reaches the flooding condition, the interfacial wave rapidly increases at the entrance and the flow is disturbed. The disturbance in the upward propagation process is difficult to continue even disappears due to gradual dissipation of the disturbance and the reduction of the gas flow rate. Under high liquid flow rate, it is easy to overlap in the tube when the surface of the liquid film is disturbed. The impact of the gas phase causes the overlapped liquid film in the tube to partially break up and form a turbulent flow. The churn flow is periodic. The frequency of the liquid film shown in Fig. 14 increases significantly with time. As the gas flow rate further increases, the gas replenishes at the same time, and the distance of the upward propagation of the disturbance becomes longer until it fills the entire test section, that is the flooding occurred.
Fig. 14. Fluctuation characteristics at high liquid flow rate.
It can be seen from Fig. 14 that under high liquid flow rate, with the increase of gas flow rate, it tends to form a turbulent flow in the tube and flooding occurs, which also indicates that the mechanism of flooding under high liquid flow rate is related to the mechanism of churn flow. Fluctuation of the liquid film is more irregular and drastic.
3.3.2. Frequency domain analysis
3.3.2.1. Effect of liquid flow rate
Frequency domain of film thickness was processed using FFT (Fast Fourier transformation) method. Fig. 15 exhibits the several fluctuations at different liquid flow rates with different frequencies. The spectral characteristic curve shows a peak-shaped distribution. The crest exists between frequency of 0–10 Hz and the amplitude decreases with the increase of frequency. When jl = 0.028 m/s, there are several crest with almost the same amplitude between 2.0 and 7.5 Hz. The maximum amplitude is 0.01244 dB at 2.23 Hz. Then the amplitude basically attenuates to 0 when the frequency reaches 60 Hz. When jl = 0.052 m/s, the amplitude reaches a peak when the frequency is about 3.67 Hz with the peak about 0.03054 dB. The amplitude basically attenuates to 0 when the frequency reaches 80 Hz. When jl = 0.121 m/s, the amplitude reaches a peak when the frequency is about 5 Hz with the peak about 0.03526 dB. The amplitude basically attenuates to 0 when the frequency reaches 100 Hz. In summary, the fluctuation amplitude of the film thickness and the domain frequency increases with the increase of liquid flow rate causing the interfacial wave increases rapidly with the increase of the liquid flow rate. It also shows that the fluctuations of the liquid film increase with the liquid flow rate at the onset of flooding.
Fig. 15. FFT analysis of liquid film at different liquid flow rate.
3.3.2.2. Effect of gas flow rate
Fig. 16 is the spectral characteristic curve of the liquid film when jl = 0.052 m/s. The gas flow rate in Fig. 16(a)–(d) are: 0.302, 5.026, 5.312, 6.156 m/s, respectively. When the gas flow rate is low, the liquid film fluctuation spectrum curve shows a peak-type distribution. The maximum amplitude corresponds to a frequency between 0 and 10 Hz. When the frequency is around 70 Hz, the amplitude basically decays to 0. When the gas flow rate increases to 5.319 m/s, i.e. the flooding point, the peak of the spectrum characteristic curve moves to a smaller frequency. When the gas flow rate is greater (such as jg = 6.156 m/s), the peak disappears and the spectral characteristics has a trend of decay. The amplitude attenuates to 0 when the frequency reaches 70 Hz.
Fig. 16. FFT analysis of liquid film at different gas flow rate.
<Section>4. Conclusion</Section>
The phenomenon of flooding plays a very important role in the safety and economy of practical application of industrial systems, especially for the safety of the reactor core after the loss of coolant accident occurring which the counter-current flow forms in the annular. In this paper, based on the experiment of air-water counter-current flow in a tube with diameter of 25 mm at ambient temperature and pressure, the flooding mechanism was obtained at different liquid flow rate.
1)
Combining the variation characteristics of the liquid film thickness measured by the parallel electrode probe and the flow pattern in the tube photographed by the high-speed camera, the flooding mechanism was obtained at different liquid flow rate. One is the interfacial waves upward propagation mechanism at low liquid flow rate. And the other is the turbulent flow pattern after the liquid bridging in the tube at high liquid flow rate. It is believed that there is a transition region between the low and high liquid flow rate.
2)
From the instantaneous liquid film thickness, the time domain characteristics of the liquid film thickness were obtained. At the low liquid flow rate, the amplitude of the interface wave is small after being disturbed by the airflow. The fluctuation amplitude of the liquid film increases significantly and the fluctuation frequency becomes large at high liquid flow rate.
3)
Frequency domain characteristics of the liquid film thickness by FFT were obtained based on the instantaneous liquid film thickness. The spectral characteristic curve shows a peak-shaped distribution. The crest exists between frequency of 0–10 Hz and the amplitude decreases with the increase of frequency. The fluctuation amplitude of the film thickness and the domain frequency increases with the increase of liquid flow rate causing the interfacial wave increases rapidly with the increase of the liquid flow rate. When the gas flow rate is high enough, the peak disappears and the spectral characteristics has a trend of decay.
<Section>Declaration of competing interest</Section>
The authors declared that they have no conflicts of interest to the enclosed manuscript entitled “Study on air-water countercurrent flow limitation in a vertical tube -Part I: Experiment”. We declare that we do not have any commercial or associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in connection with the work submitted.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
The authors are grateful for the support of National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFB1900400).
<Section>References</Section>
[1]
O.L. Pushkina, Y.L. Sorokin
Breakdown of liquid film motion in vertical tubes
Heat Tran. Sov. Res., 1 (1969), pp. 56-64
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[2]
E.A. Dukler, L. Smith
Two Phase Interactions in Counter-current Flow: Studies of the Flooding Mechanism
University of Houston, TX (USA) (1977)
NUREG/CR--0617
Google Scholar
[3]
K.S. Chung, C.P. Liu, C.L. Tien
Looding in two-phase counter-current flows-II: experimental investigation
Physico Chemical Hydrodynamics, 1 (1980), pp. 209-220
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[4]
D.M. Maron, A.E. Dukler
New concepts on the mechanisms of flooding and flow reversal phenomena
Lett. Heat Mass Tran., 8 (6) (1981), pp. 453-463
Google Scholar
[5]
D.M. Maron, A.E. Dukler
Flooding and upward film flow in vertical tubes—II. Speculations on film flow mechanisms
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 10 (5) (1984), pp. 599-621
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[6]
C.E. Lacy, A.E. Dukler
Flooding in vertical tubes—I. Experimental studies of the entry region
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 20 (2) (1994), pp. 219-233
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[7]
Y. Sudo
Mechanism and effects of predominant parameters regarding limitation of falling water in vertical countercurrent two-phase flow
J. Heat Tran., 118 (3) (1996), p. 715
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[8]
J.C. Sacramento, P.J. Heggs
The role of flooding in the design of vent and reflux condensers
Appl. Therm. Eng., 29 (7) (2009), pp. 1338-1345
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[9]
C.J. Shearer, J.F. Davidson
The investigation of a standing wave due to gas blowing upwards over a liquid film; its relation to flooding in wetted-wall columns
J. Fluid Mech., 22 (2) (1965), pp. 321-335
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[10]
A.G. Cetinbudaklar, G.J. Jamson
The mechanism of flooding in vertical countercurrent two-phase flow
Chem. Eng. Sci., 24 (1969), pp. 1669-1680
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[11]
Y. Zvirin, R.B. Duffey, K.H. Sun
On the derivation of a countercurrent flooding theory
ASME Winter Annual Meeting, New York (1979)
Google Scholar
[12]
T. Ueda, S. Suzuki
Behavior of liquid films and flooding in counter-current two-phase flow : 2nd report, flow in annuli and rod bundles
Transactions of the Japan Society of Mechanical Engineers, 44 (377) (1978), pp. 174-182
CrossRefGoogle Scholar
[13]
K.W. Mcquillan, P.B. Whalley, G.F. Hewitt
Flooding in vertical two-phase flow
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 11 (6) (1985), pp. 741-760
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[14]
A.S.E.P. Semenov
Hydraulic resistance in two-phase flow
Int. Chem. Eng., 7 (1967), pp. 59-63
Google Scholar
[15]
Y. Taitel, D. Barrnea, A.E. Dukler
A film model for the prediction of flooding and flow reversal for gas-liquid flow in vertical tubes
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 8 (1) (1982), pp. 1-10
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[16]
Deendarlianto, A. Ousaka, A. Kariyasaki, T. Fukano
Investigation of liquid film behavior at the onset of flooding during adiabatic counter-current air-water two-phase flow in an inclined pipe
Nucl. Eng. Des., 235 (21) (2005), pp. 2281-2294
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[17]
B. Wu, M. Firouzi, T.E. Rufford, B. Towler
Characteristics of counter-current gas-liquid two-phase flow and its limitations in vertical annuli
Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci., 109 (2019), p. 109899
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[18]
M. Vijayan, S. Jayanti, A.R. Balakrishnan
Effect of tube diameter on flooding
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 27 (2001), pp. 797-816
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[19]
A. Badarudin, Deendarlianto Indarto, A. ASetyawan
Characteristics of the air-water counter current two-phase flow in a 1/30 scale of pressurized water reactor (PWR): interfacial behavior and CCFL data
AIP Conference Proceedings, 1737 (2016), Article 040015
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[20]
S. Al Issa, R. Macian-Juan
Experimental investigation and CFD validation of countercurrent flow limitation (CCFL) in a large-diameter PWR hot-leg geometry
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 53 (5) (2016), pp. 647-655
Google Scholar
[21]
G. Zabaras, A.E. Dukler, D. Moalem-Maron
Vertical upward cocurrent gas-liquid annular flow
AIChE J., 32 (5) (1986), pp. 829-843
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[22]
E.I.P. Drosos, S.V. Paras, A.J. Karabelas
Counter-current gas-liquid flow in a vertical narrow channel-Liquid film characteristics and flooding phenomena
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 32 (1) (2006), pp. 214-224
Google Scholar
[23]
Irfan Khan, Mingjun Wang, Yapei Zhang, Wenxi Tian, Guanghui Su, Suizheng Qiu
Two-phase bubbly flow simulation using CFD method: a review of models for interfacial forces
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 125 (2020), p. 103360
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[24]
C. Peña-Monferrer, G. Monrós-Andreu, S. Chiva, R. Martínez-Cuenca, J.L. Muñoz-Cobo
A CFD-DEM solver to model bubbly flow. Part I: model development and assessment in upward vertical pipes
Chem. Eng. Sci., 176 (2018), pp. 524-545
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar