<title>Experimental study for critical heat flux in 2x2 rod bundles at high pressure conditions</title>
<author>1,KathleenLyons,2,DonghwiLee,3,MarkAnderson</author>
<Affiliation>1,Department of Engineering Physics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1500 Engineering Drive, Madison, WI 53706, United States;2,Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1500 Engineering Drive, Madison, WI 53706, United States</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nucengdes.2020.110730</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029549320302247</URL>
Experimental study for critical heat flux in 2x2 rod bundles at high pressure conditions
KathleenLyons,DonghwiLee,MarkAnderson
Department of Engineering Physics, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1500 Engineering Drive, Madison, WI 53706, United States
Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1500 Engineering Drive, Madison, WI 53706, United States
<Section>Highlights</Section>
CHFs were obtained in a 2x2 rod bundle at high pressure conditions for PWR.
CHFs were evaluated in various subcooling, mass flux, and pressure conditions.
The effects of subcooling, mass flux, and pressure on CHF were analyzed.
CHF prediction shows good agreement CHF data within 20% of experimental values.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Critical heat flux (CHF) phenomena has been a topic of study for over fifty years yet remains a serious concern across industries and especially in water-cooled nuclear reactor design. CHF data in the high-pressure range is limited, and the effects of bundle geometry and non-uniform heat flux profile are challenging to quantify. In this study, CHF experiments were performed in upward flowing water in a 2 × 2 rod bundle with a cosine profile heat flux. Data were collected between 16.5 and 18 MPa at two mass flux conditions with three inlet subcooling conditions. Under these conditions, average CHF was shown to decrease with increasing pressure. However, pressure had less of an effect than decreasing the inlet subcooling or the mass flux, both of which reduce the CHF value considerably. Interestingly, correlations that have been developed for lower pressure continued to predict CHF occurrences with moderate accuracy outside their ranges of validity. Nearly all predicted values were within 20% of experimental values.
Keywords:Heat transfer;Water-cooled nuclear reactor;Pressurized water reactor;Rod bundle;CHF correlation
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
For over fifty years, researchers have been combining experimentation with advancing thermal hydraulic theory to better understand the complex phenomenon known as critical heat flux (CHF). Investigation has taken a multi-pronged approach. Researchers have carried out experiments to simulate CHF and quantify the variables of interest. There has also been development of thermal hydraulic theory to understand the driving characteristics at a fundamental level. When used to assess a transient and unstable phenomenon, both approaches have their limitations. When encountered during operation, CHF can cause system failure in a range of industries. The effects are especially detrimental in the nuclear industry where a high safety margin is necessary, and affected components are inaccessible during operation In water-cooled nuclear reactor design, the peak fuel rod temperature remains a key design parameter. The reduction in heat transfer due to a departure from nucleate boiling (DNB) or liquid film dry out can both cause sudden and potentially extreme temperature excursions within the fuel rod bundle.
1.1. Mechanisms
Due to its complexity, an exact theory to explain the occurrence of CHF continues to elude scientists. Mechanistic models continue to be developed, such as the recent model by Ding (Ding et al., 2018), in hopes to more adequately explain the phenomena and improve prediction. At high thermodynamic qualities, the generally accepted initiator of CHF is total evaporation, or dryout, of the liquid film on the heated surface. In general, the liquid film can be increased by the addition of droplets from the core flow, however, entrainment can also shear off some liquid (Todreas and Kazimi, 2012, Weisman, 1992). Depending on the incident heat flux, vapor bubbles may continue to form, and the liquid film may evaporate. It has been hypothesized that the thermocapillary effect may promote the deterioration of the liquid film (International Atomic Energy Agency, 2001). As heat is conducted through the liquid film, the surface can become wavy and the highest temperatures are located in the valleys of the film. Due to surface tension gradients, liquid is drawn away from these high temperature areas and the liquid film dries out in a valley within the film. CHF will occur first in this valley area. Another hypothesis suggests that bubble nucleation itself can break the film layer if the bubble size is near the film thickness and the heat flux is large enough to prevent rewetting (International Atomic Energy Agency, 2001). The understanding of CHF phenomena at low quality, more commonly termed DNB, is a topic of more contention. Currently, there is no consensus on causal mechanism for DNB. Many researchers have proposed mechanistic models that have been met with varying levels of success when compared to experimental data. Models include hydrodynamic instability types, similar to that presented originally by Zuber (1985), liquid sublayer dryout types (Haramura and Katto, 1983), vapor blanket (Lee and Mudawar, 1988), and bubble crowding models. There is general agreement that a thin bubbly layer forms adjacent to the heat wall. At DNB, the bubbly layer is replaced by thin vapor clots. The mechanism for this transition has been attributed to several different initiators as presented by Weisman (Weisman, 1992). The two most popular hypotheses are bubble coalescence and liquid sublayer dryout. Proponents of the liquid sublayer dryout model (Katto, 1990, Lee and Mudawar, 1988), suggest that small bubbles pile up to form a vapor blanket while a thin sublayer of liquid remains underneath. The length of the vapor blanket is limited by the critical Helmholtz wavelength. Dry out of this liquid sublayer ultimately leads to DNB. According to the bubble coalescence model (Weisman and Pei, 1983), liquid from the core and the vapor from the wall flow through the bubbly layer until the void fraction in the bubbly layer becomes so high that it reaches a “critical void fraction”. At this time, there is no longer enough room for bubbles to exist in the layer without contacting one another. Therefore, the bubbles coalesce and prevent liquid from reaching the wall. Progress to increase understanding of CHF mechanisms continues to be made as optical technology advances and experimental visualization becomes clearer. However, causation and system characteristic interactions still remain convoluted.
1.2. Prediction
Despite extensive research efforts, the nature of CHF remains challenging to conceptualize and model. However, prediction of CHF, including location and intensity, is necessary for water-cooled nuclear reactor design as well as in other industries where boiling heat transfer may occur. Due to the lack of fundamental understanding, much research has focused on experimentation to obtain data for specific conditions. These experiments have taken place in various fluids and geometries. Unfortunately, much data has been collected under corporate supervision and therefore remains proprietary. Furthermore, experiments have primarily focused on flow in uniformly heated single tubes operated under narrow experimental operating conditions, limiting their applicability to other system designs (Hall and Mudawar, 2000). Currently, most CHF predictions rely on the application of correlations or comparison to tabulated values (International Atomic Energy Agency, 2001). Due to the complexity of the phenomenon, these correlations have met with limited success when compared with experimental data. The literature agrees that many variables can influence CHF and therefore a single experiment may or may not be applicable to other situations. The generally accepted dominant variables are mass flux, pressure, and local quality. However, many other variables have been shown to be relevant as well, such as surface roughness, wettability, axial heat flux profile, and flow geometry. Katto (1994) provides a detailed summary of the most important variables and their investigation. In the nuclear industry, it has become common practice to use data and correlations from uniform profile experiments and apply a correction factor to account for the non-uniformity. However, using this method may lead to a misunderstanding of the CHF phenomenon. In channels with a uniform heat flux, CHF will always occur at the end, where the quality is highest. When non-uniform heat flux profiles are applied, CHF events rarely occur at the exit. These events are therefore, a result of the interaction of local quality and heat flux conditions and uniform profile CHF experiments are unable to capture these complex interactions (Yang et al., 2014). Unfortunately, the nuclear industry faces further difficulty due to the irregular geometry of the reactor core. Most correlations are constructed from experiments performed using a single heated tube. These values must then be adjusted for the heated rod bundle geometry of a reactor core.
1.3. Correlations
Regardless of their shortcomings, correlations and tabulated values remain useful prediction methods for assessing new flow systems. A few of the most common methods for CHF prediction are presented here. One correlation of interest is the Biasi correlation (Biasi et al., 1874), developed from uniformly heated tube experimental data. Although it does not include any modifications for rod bundle geometry or non-uniform power profile, the nuclear industry continues to use it as a consistent reference point. L. S. Tong with the Westinghouse Electric Corporation developed the W-3 correlation for the purpose of predicting CHF in pressurized water reactors (PWRs) (Tong, 1967). The correlation incorporates the so-called Tong F-factor to correct for non-uniform heat flux distributions. However, the correlation is limited to high mass flux and low local quality conditions. Thus, it is best suited for prediction of DNB type CHF events rather than dryout phenomena. In response to nuclear industry needs, the EPRI correlation (Reddy and Fighetti, 1983) was developed at Columbia University based on rod bundle CHF data. Although this correlation intrinsically accounts for rod bundle geometry effects, its applicable range is limited to less than 17 MPa. More recently, Groeneveld has gathered worldwide data and organized it into a look-up table format. The table was last updated in the 2006 CHF Look-Up Table (LUT) (Groeneveld et al., 2007). The table uses local conditions to predict the occurrence of CHF, and has been shown to predict many CHF cases relatively well (Lee, 2000, Moon et al., 2005). The LUT remains valid across a wide range of operating conditions as it was constructed from many experimental data sets. However, the LUT is subject to higher error in certain regions due to the limited number of data samples used to compose the table in these regions. Both the low and high pressure ranges are represented by a smaller number of experiments (International Atomic Energy Agency, 2001). Similar to the previously described correlations, multiplicative factors, so called K-Factors, are used to adjust the results of the values given by the LUT in order to account for various differences in configuration (diameter, heated length, flow orientation, etc.). A table summarizing the applicable ranges of pressure, mass flux, and quality for the LUT and the discussed correlations is shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Validated ranges for CHF prediction correlations.
1.4. Current data
In the nuclear industry currently, several pressure ranges are of interest for CHF phenomena study. Boiling water reactors (BWRs) operate at lower pressure (~7MPa) and nucleate boiling in the core assists with high heat transfer between the fuel and the coolant. However, operation at too high of a heat flux will result in dryout due to the high-quality core fluid. PWRs operate at higher pressure (~15 MPa) where some subcooled nucleate boiling can occur. Looking to the future, new designs require data in higher pressure regions. The GenIV design for the supercritical water reactor (SCWR) operates above 22 MPa (Oka and Koshizuka, 2001). Operation above the critical pressure eliminates CHF events during regular operation as the fluid remains in a single phase regardless of further heat input. However, during startup, shutdown, or accident scenarios, the reactor coolant traverses through a range of lower pressures where CHF occurrence is again possible (Mawatari and Mori, 2016). Currently, the availability of data in this high pressure range is limited. Much data from CHF tube experiments have been compiled jointly by The Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd (AECL) and The Institute of Physics and Power Engineering (IPPE) to develop prediction methods, including the EPRI and Greoneveld’s LUT. This experimental data as tabulated by the IAEA (IAEA, 2001) was mapped by pressure and mass flux in Fig. 1 to allow for a clearer view of current data availability. Each red dot shows average value for the experimental condition (mass flux and pressure) and error bars indicate covering range of the experimental data for the references (IAEA, 2001). As can be seen in the Fig. 1, much research has taken place near the BWR operating conditions. However, few data points are available in the pressure range required for SCWR design. The SCWR design requires further research for both normal and accident scenarios (Wolf, 2011). The scarcity of CHF data in the high pressure region limits the ability to analyze safety margin and implement design improvements. In addition, as previously mentioned, the data that is available continues to be almost entirely from heated tube experiments with little data on other geometries such as rod bundles or grid spacers. Furthermore, the effects of nonuniform power profiles are insufficiently captured by most current correlations. Therefore, acquiring CHF data for rod bundles at high pressure is required to support SCWR development.
Fig. 1. Summary of CHF Test Conditions Compiled by AECL and IPPE. Each red dot shows average value for the experimental condition (mass flux and pressure) and error bars indicate covering range of the experimental data for the references.
In previous papers, most of the experiments were conducted in the pressure region of BWR. In this study, the flow boiling heat transfer experiment in high-pressure conditions from 16.5 MPa to 18 MPa close to the critical pressure for securing the CHF data for the development of SCWR. CHF was measured simulated fuel pins with heated length of 2 m in a 2 × 2 heated rod bundle, with flow channel, rod diameter and cosine heat flux profile similar to operating operating and proposed (i.e., small modular reactors (SMR)). Although there has been a lot of work on CHF test, which is proprietary, this work adds significant data to a region that has not been extensively studied. In addition, this resulted in more accurate CHF than conventional experiments. Thus, the CHF data in the high-pressure range can then be added to the LUT data to increase future prediction accuracy.
<Section>2. Experimental apparatus</Section>
2.1. Flow loop
The University of Wisconsin – Madison high-pressure heat transfer test facility is located in Stoughton, Wisconsin. The system consists of a primary testing flow loop and a secondary flow loop used for heat removal. A picture of both flow loops can be seen in Fig. 2. The red arrows highlight the path of the primary flow while the blue arrows designate the secondary loop flow. The two loops interface at the main heat exchanger. A schematic of the primary loop can be seen in Fig. 3. Water is moved through the test section or through an unheated recirculation branch fitted with an orifice plate. The flow recombines after the test section and a portion of this flow is cooled by travelling through the heat exchanger. The remaining flow bypasses the heat exchanger. The amount of flow through the heat exchanger is controlled by the heat exchanger bypass valve. The flow from the heat exchanger recombines with any bypass flow and re-enters the pump. An accumulator tank located behind the flow loop accommodates any thermal expansion of the fluid and a cylinder of argon gas is connected to pressurize the system. The system can reach 25 MPa and 400 °C with a maximum achievable mass flux of 1500 kg/m2s. The test section itself has a square cross-section and encloses a 2-by-2 bundle of heater rods, each capable of providing 100 kW. Each rod in the test section provides a cosine axial heat flux to simulate the heat flux distribution created during fission within a fuel rod. The power profile is described by Eq. (1).
@(1)
where  = 0.8187458177,  = 0.6812541823,   = 2.436354311 and LLH = Total heated length (2 m). Each rod contains an electrically heated Inconel 718 filament. A helical cut through fully annealed seamless Inconel tubing enables the filament to produce the cosine heat flux profile (VanLochem, 2012). Grade AX05 boron nitride provides insulation for the filament and a sheath of Monel K500 encloses the filament and insulation. Grooves cut into this sheath allow for embedded thermocouples. Finally, a cladding of Monel K500 is swaged onto the entire assembly to ensure good thermal conductivity. The dimensions of the heater rod are shown in Fig. 4. Although four embedded thermocouples are shown in this figure, actual thermocouple locations vary by rod. The heater bundle resides inside a square flow channel to mimic a square fuel rod array. The dimensions of the channel and the rod bundle are shown in Fig. 5 and parameters of importance are listed in Table 2. In this experimental setup, the walls of the square channel were fabricated from 316 stainless steel and the inner corners were milled to limit the corner inner radius of the square to 0.3 mm or less. In terms of dimension of the channel and rod bundles, the pitch to diameter ratio, rod gap ratio (rod-rod gap (hgap)/rod-wall gap (Ggap)), and the flow area are 1.33, 0.62 and 4.32 cm2. Especially, the rod gap ratio (hgap/Ggap) was optimized by numerical simulation in the previous study (Greenwood et al., 2017). In detail, the optimal hgap was determined to occur the CHF event not on the outer periphery of the heating elements but on the center subchannel, minimizing the hgap/Ggap ratio. When calculating an optimal hgap, the hgap/Ggap was changed from 0.5 to 1 through simulation to examine the temperature distribution on the subchannel cross section, assuming adiabatic wall condition. As a result, the gap ratio of 0.62 satisfies all boundary requirements, generating CHF event on the center subchannel. As shown in Fig. 6(a) and (b), grid spacers were designed to provide alignment for the heater rods. Many articles have been published on the grid spacers’ effects on the heat transfer coefficient (HTC). Previous researches show the HTC enhancement effect of grid spacers owing to its high turbulence intensity generated by its vane or fin shape structures (Jayanti and Reddy, 2013). On the contrary, our group didn’t set up the grid spacer to improve HTC, so we designed these without the vanes or fins. These are expected to result in no significant variation of the overall HTC w/ or w/o grid spacers, either. In detail, in order to confirm the effect of grid spacers on the thermal-fluidic characteristics, we conducted a simple numerical simulation for investigating the grid spacer effect in the subchannel geometry using the ANSYS program. In our simulation results, we confirmed that it resulted in a significant enhancement of turbulence intensity (TI) owing to the turbulence mixing of the grid spacers. That is, as the fluid passes through the grid spacer, it improves the angular temperature uniformity and reduces the unstable temperature peak at the rod surface due to the enhanced turbulence mixing. As a further study, we plan to conduct the thermo-fluidic experiments for evaluating the effect of grid spacers on temperature uniformity of the heater rods. In terms of the flow area, because the grid spacer wall has the same form factor as the adjacent square channel, the reduction in flow area is minimal when compared to other grid spacer designs. The nominal reduction due to this design is calculated to be 17%. The grid spacer design can be seen in Fig. 6(a) and (b). Each grid spacer was welded to a small piece of the square flow section. Subsequently, five of these pieces were welded together to create the full-length flow channel. The grid spacers have been shown to successfully align the four heater rods without axial slipping of the spacers. Within the square channel, a length of more than ten hydraulic diameters allows the flow to hydrodynamically develop before heating begins. To complete the assembly, the square flow channel fits snugly inside a two-inch schedule 160 SS316 pipe which provides the pressure boundary for the system.
Fig. 2. University of Wisconsin High-Pressure Heat Transfer Facility.
Fig. 3. Primary loop schematic.
Fig. 4. Cross-section of heater rod (dimensions in millimeters).
Fig. 5. Cross-section of square flow channel (dimensions in centimeters).
Table 2. Parameters for square flow channel.
Fig. 6. Grid spacer design. (a) The photograph and (b) schematics for detailed dimensions of the for the grid spacer.
2.2. Instrumentation
Each heater rod has ten imbedded Type K thermocouples located at various angular and axial positions. The angular distribution of the thermocouples varies between two types. Rods 1 and 2 are similar and rods 3 and 4 are similar. However, each set of thermocouples end at the same axial location. The angular position and the heater orientation in the square channel are shown in Fig. 7. The location of the heater rod thermocouples with respect to the grid spacers and the power profile is shown in Fig. 8. The bulk fluid temperature is monitored by thermocouples that extend through the external pipe, through the wall of the square flow channel, and into the fluid flow. These measurements are taken at six different axial locations as listed in Table 3. The last axial location is monitored by three thermocouples, each 90° apart. The inlet and outlet temperature are measured by thermocouples located before and after the test section respectively. Fig. 9 shows the location of the bulk thermocouples on the layout of the test section. This diagram also makes note of the locations of the inlet and outlet elbows and the locations of the transition from round pipe to square flow channel.
Fig. 7. Heater rod and thermocouple orientation in flow channel.
Fig. 8. Heater rod thermocouples and grid spacers with respect to power profile.
Table 3. Bulk thermocouple locations.
Fig. 9. Piping layout diagram for the test section (upward flow, dimensions in millimeters).
2.3. Testing procedures
Experiments were performed at two mass fluxes (795 and 1257 kg/m2*s) with three inlet subcooling conditions (430, 506, 600 kJ/kg) for pressures from 16.5 MPa through 18 MPa. For each experimental condition, the critical power resulting in CHF was determined by a temperature excursion of one or more thermocouples above a set point. A set point was chosen ~ 100 °C above the highest steady state temperature reading. During each test, the inlet pressure, subcooling, and mass flux were held constant and the power of each heater rod was increased in increments of 1 kW. After each power increase, the system was carefully monitored as it resumed steady state before increasing the power again. Using this method, the pressure was maintained to within ± 1% across experiments and the inlet subcooling deviation was ± 2%. Due to the unstable nature of CHF phenomena, the mass flux was seen to fluctuate when nearing the CHF event and a constant mass flux condition was more challenging to ensure. Therefore, the estimated deviation in mass flux across each test was ± 4%. Power input to the test section was calculated from voltage and current measurements across each heater element. This process and power calculation method is consistent with recommendations in the literature as described by Hall and Mudawar (Hall and Mudawar, 2000). Power of the heater increased about 1 kW/rod for each step to reach a steady-state and continually increased the power of the heater until CHF was detected. The trip temperature of the system indicating CHF was set at about 150 °C above the saturation point (i.e. ~ 75–100 °C) than the embedded TC measurement). The Labview program was set to automatically reduce the power by a small percentage (~5%) when the maximum TC measurement value was reached the specified trip setting value. The power was automatically reduced until the TC showed complete rewetting to prevent any damage to the heater rods The CHF was recorded as the power level that resulted in the abrupt temperature rise. An example of one test is shown in Fig. 10. The rod power is plotted in the top portion of Fig. 11. Below, two thermocouple temperature traces are plotted as a result of the increase in overall power.
Fig. 10. Trace of heater power and thermocouple temperature for a single test case.
Fig. 11. Tally of CHF occurrence locations.
2.4. Uncertainty analysis
Error propagation was calculated by summing errors for several variables. As shown in Table 4, the uncertainty of the K-type thermocouples and pressure transducers were 1.1 °C/0.4% and 1% as in previous studies (Greenwood et al., 2017, Zhang et al., 2019). Based on those, the relative uncertainty of inlet subcooling (Tin) and pressure (P) are 3.1% and 1.3%, respectively. The cosine profile heat flux (Eq. (2)) was generated in the heater rod via Joule heating. In Eq. (3), relative uncertainty of heat flux was determined by considering the partial derivatives of Eq. (2) related to the measured values curret (I), voltage (V), diameter of heater rod (dhtr), and heater length (L). Mass flux (Eq. (4)) was obtained by dividing the mass flow rate m by the cross-sectional flow area of the center subchannel. In Eq. (5), the uncertainty of mass flux was calculated by evaluating the partial derivatives of Eq. (4). The calculated uncertainties were found to be 1.7% for heat flux and 1.9% for mass flux.
@(2)
@(3)
@(4)
@(5)
Table 4. Uncertainties for the experimental variables.
Heat loss was estimated by heat balance equation in the previous study (Duarte et al., 2018) and it was 6% of total power. In Eq. (6), the uncertainties of local CHF for the heater rods were 16%.
@(6)
The large uncertainty associated with the local CHF is due to the large uncertainty of the CHF location (zchf), generated by the large spacing between the thermocouples at each heater rod (Duarte et al., 2018, Zhao et al., 2019).
<Section>3. Results and discussion</Section>
3.1. CHF occurrences
As described, the critical power at which a CHF event occurred was determined via a temperature excursion of one or more of the embedded thermocouples in any of the four heater rods. The tally of all CHF event locations can be seen in Fig. 11. If more than one thermocouple was tripped, it is counted in Fig. 12 as well. Generally, more CHF events occurred towards the outside of the channel and in between the rods rather than in the center of the channel. These locations are not unexpected as the flow tends to be slower along the edges of the channel than in the center due to the so called cold-wall effect (Lee, 2000). The occurrence count was expected to be similar between rods 1 and 2 as well as rods 3 and 4. Although the CHF sensing patterns are similar, the increased frequency with which some thermocouples triggered suggests a lack of perfect symmetry in the experimental setup. It is also of note that almost all CHF events were sensed at thermocouples 5, 6, and 7. These thermocouples are located at an axial location towards the second half of the test section, but still a considerable distance from the end as can be seen in Fig. 12. This axial location is typical for systems with a cosine power profile as the local enthalpy continues to increase along the channel but the heat flux begins to decrease in the second half of the axial length. Thus, the optimal CHF location occurs just after the midpoint along the channel. Due to the spacing of the thermocouples, it is not possible to know the exact location of the initiating event as it may take place between measurement positions. There are some occurrences recognized at thermocouple number 10 as well. In these instances, the events were typically accompanied by at least one other CHF event upstream. The CHF event occurring upstream may have spread or triggered the event further along the heated length. However, as this phenomenon was observed infrequently, it is clear that flow conditions can significantly affect the onset and suppression of CHF.
Fig. 12. CHF events by axial location.
3.2. Experimental trends
The local quality of each CHF event was determined by a heat balance calculation at the tripped thermocouple axial location. The local bulk enthalpy h(z) and thermodynamic quality X(z) are calculated from Eq. (7), (8). Here, h0 is the inlet enthalpy,  is the mass flow rate, and q′(z) is the linear power profile with respect to the axial length z. hf and hg are the saturated liquid and saturated gas enthalpies respectively.
@(7)
@(8)
Water properties from the IAPWS formulation (Wagner and Pruß, 2002) were used in all calculations. The local CHF and the local quality are shown in Fig. 13. Due to the limited number of fixed thermocouples along the axial length, there is a significant amount of error in determining local characteristics. Therefore, error bars are added to this data based on the propagation of experimental uncertainties, where the distance between thermocouples has the largest influence. Regardless of the large uncertainty, the trend of decreasing local CHF with increasing local quality can be clearly distinguished. Similar trends have been shown in the literature at various pressures (Chun et al., 2007, Moon et al., 2005). Local quality trended towards lower values as higher pressures were reached. This trend can be seen in Fig. 14. Again, these local values are accompanied by large error bars. This decrease of local quality at higher pressures suggests DNB type CHF. Chun (Chun et al., 2007) hypothesize that this change is due to the decrease in the latent heat value as the fluid nears the critical point. Temperature limited CHF, as described by Wesiman (Weisman, 1992) may also limit CHF values at high pressures when the surface temperature cannot maintain a liquid phase. Due to the large error introduced when using local values, it is perhaps more useful to look at average CHF values to assess trends. The average CHF,  CHF, is defined as the critical power divided by the heated surface area as described in Eq. (2) (see the uncertainty section) where Qelectric is the critical power and dhtr and L are the diameter and length of the heated rod respectively. When plotted against pressure, the average CHF values decrease with increasing pressure between 16.5 and 18 MPa as seen in Fig. 15. This trend confirms that put forth in the LUT values and other correlations. The effect of mass flux can also easily be seen in Fig. 15. Generally considered one of the principle factors affecting CHF, an increase in mass flux significantly increases the CHF value when other inlet conditions are held constant. At the pressures tested, the effect of mass flux is much greater than that of increasing pressure. Likewise, the effect of inlet subcooling is more significant than the pressure trend. The effect of inlet subcooling can more easily be observed in Fig. 16 where the average CHF is plotted versus inlet subcooling. The average CHF consistently increases with higher inlet subcooling. The effect of mass flux and subcooling are consistent with those seen at lower pressures (Moon et al., 2005).
Fig. 13. Local CHF vs local quality for all data points.
Fig. 14. Effect of pressure on local quality (at 795 kg/m2s).
Fig. 15. Average CHF pressure trends plotted by inlet subcooling.
Fig. 16. Average CHF versus inlet subcooling.
3.3. Comparison to correlations
The heat balance method was used to predict the CHF critical power using the correlations previously described and the 2006 LUT. This method was chosen rather than direct substitution due to the uncertainty in local quality at CHF occurrence. Prediction of CHF in rod bundles in this way is consistent with the recommendations of Groeneveld and the guidelines determined by the IAEA (Groeneveld, 1996, International Atomic Energy Agency, 2001). To predict each CHF value, inlet conditions (pressure, subcooling, and mass flux) and power were used to calculate local conditions along the axial length. The pressure, mass flux, and quality values were supplied to each correlation to obtain an estimate of the local CHF. The experimental heat flux value based on the power profile was compared to the predicted CHF values at each axial location. The inlet conditions were held constant and the power was increased until the experimental heat flux value matched the predicted CHF value. An example of these two curves can be seen in Fig. 17. As the power is increased, the experimental heat flux curve shifts upwards and the correlation curve shifts downward. The input power where these two curves become equal at one or more locations is the critical power. The present study references the Biasi, W3, and EPRI correlations as well as the 2006 LUT. When applying the W3 correlation, the Tong F-factor was included to correct for the non-uniform power profile. Similarly, a correction factor was applied to the EPRI correlation to account for the profile. Values from the LUT were multiplied by the appropriate K factors to adjust for diameter, non-uniform power profile, and bundle effects (Lee, 2000). Of these correlations, EPRI, Biasi and W-3 correlations were applied outside of the accepted range in order to evaluate their predictive nature whereas the LUT contains data that covers the conditions. It was found that despite applying the models outside of their typical range most experimental data fell within 20% of the estimated correlation or LUT value. The predicted average CHF versus the experimental value is shown in Fig. 18. In many cases, the correlations tend to under-predict the CHF. In terms of estimating safety margin, the underprediction is perhaps preferred as it gives a more conservative estimate of the actual CHF. The Biasi correlation generated several data points with higher error within the higher heat flux range (greater than 1400 kw/m2). These points correspond with low local quality (X less than 0.1) CHF events. The Biasi correlation claims validity in the local quality range from 0 to 1 and is the only correlation reviewed here that does not include subcooled CHF predictions. It is possible that the correlation begins to fail in this low quality region at high pressures. The failure of this correlation has been noted elsewhere for limited ranges (Yoder Jr. et al., 1985). When plotted with respect to pressure, the experimental data follows the same trend as predicted by the correlations and LUT data. This comparison can be seen in Fig. 19. Of course, these data were obtained over a relatively small experimental range of pressures. While the authors believe that it is possible that there is a shift of the secondary maximum with respect to changes in the inlet subcooling and mass flux there is insufficient data to prove this hypothesis and further studies over wider range of conditions are needed. The data does however provide useful data over the range studied. Here, the performance of the various prediction methods can easily be seen. The Biasi correlation is the only correlation that over predicts the experimental values. The other prediction methods under predict, but nevertheless remain within 20% of the experimental values. In this study, although thermocouples are densely installed on the heater rod with longitudinal and azimuthal direction, it is hard to detect the exact CHF location due to its limitation of spatial resolution. So the recorded CHFs are considerably upper bound values. As a short-term follow-up study, we will measure the temperature of the fuel rod bundle surfaces by using distributed optical fiber, along with thermocouples, to detect the exact point of CHF and provide high spatial resolution data (Weathered et al., 2017). We expect that these measurements will be able to determine the exact CHF location and value. As a long-term study, based on the exact CHF values obtained with short term ones, we plan to conduct a validation with the CFD and sub-channel thermal–hydraulic codes (Moorthi et al., 2018), which is appropriate to our experimental conditions.
Fig. 17. Curves of experimental heat flux and CHF prediction based on input power.
Fig. 18. Comparison of CHF predictions versus experimental data.
Fig. 19. Experimental data and correlation trends (795 kg/m2s, 600 kJ/kg subcooling).
<Section>4. Conclusion</Section>
CHF data in the high pressure range is limited. Moreover, the effects of bundle geometry and non-uniform heat flux profiles are challenging to quantify based on the limited data available. Correlations that do exist for prediction of CHF have been developed from experiments at specific conditions such as BWR operating conditions. Many of these correlations remain proprietary and those that do not, have a limited range of validity. In the present study, CHF experiments performed between 16.5 and 18 MPa provide data that support trends seen at lower pressures An analysis of local values shows that local CHF decreases with local quality as seen at other pressures. Local quality tends to decrease with increasing pressure in this range, pointing to DNB or temperature limiting effect. Average CHF decreases with increasing pressure. However, pressure has less of an effect than decreasing the inlet subcooling or the mass flux, both of which reduce the CHF value considerably. Correlations that have been developed for lower pressure ranges and notably different geometries, continued to predict CHF occurrences with moderate accuracy outside their ranges of validity. Nearly all predicted values were within 20% of experimental values and most were within 15%. The experimental data gathered in this study matches well with that already included in the 2006 LUT and can be included as further supportive samples. In future experiments, it will be informative to conducttests from 18 MPa up to the critical point (~22 MPa). In addition a numerical study that looks at the sensitivity of the size of the bundle array on CHF with a subchannel code approach would be interesting. This would allow a more rigorous extrapolation from smaller scale tests to larger bundle arrays. (e.g., 2x2, 5x5, 17x17bundle array).
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Kathleen Lyons: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Writing - original draft. Donghwi Lee: Investigation, Formal analysis, Writing - review & editing. Mark Anderson: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Project administration, Writing - review & editing.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
This material is based upon work supported by U.S. Department of Energy Office of Nuclear Energy's Nuclear Energy University Program.
<Section>References</Section>
Ding et al., 2018
W. Ding, E. Krepper, U. Hampel
Quantitative prediction of critical heat flux initiation in pool and flow boiling
Int. J. Therm. Sci., 125 (2018), pp. 121-131, 10.1016/j.ijthermalsci.2017.11.022
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Todreas and Kazimi, 2012
Todreas, N.E., Kazimi, M.S., 2012. Nuclear Systems: Thermal Hydraulic Fundamentals, 2nd ed. Taylor & Francis Group, LLC, Boca Raton, FL.
Google Scholar
Weisman, 1992
J. Weisman
The Current Status of Theoretically Based Approaches to the Prediction of the Critical Heat Flux in Flow Boiling
Nucl. Technol., 99 (1992), pp. 1-21
https://doi.org/10.13182/NT92-A34699
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
International Atomic Energy Agency, 2001
International Atomic Energy Agency, 2001. Thermohydraulic Relationships for Advanced Water Cooled Reactors (Co-ordinated Research Project No. IAEA-TECDOC-1203). IAEA, Vienna, Austria.
Google Scholar
Zuber, 1958
N. Zuber Further remarks on the stability of boiling heat transfer / 1958 Technical Information Service Extension Oak Ridge, Tenn.
Google Scholar
Haramura and Katto, 1983
Y. Haramura, Y. Katto
A new hydrodynamic model of critical heat flux, applicable widely to both pool and forced convection boiling on submerged bodies in saturated liquids
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 26 (1983), pp. 389-399, 10.1016/0017-9310(83)90043-1
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lee, 2000
M. Lee
A critical heat flux approach for square rod bundles using the 1995 Groeneveld CHF table and bundle data of heat transfer research facility
Nucl. Eng. Des., 197 (2000), pp. 357-374, 10.1016/S0029-5493(99)00294-0
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lee and Mudawar, 1988
C.H. Lee, I. Mudawar
A mechanistic critical heat flux model for subcooled flow boiling based on local bulk flow conditions
Int. J. Multiph. Flow, 14 (1988), pp. 711-728, 10.1016/0301-9322(88)90070-5
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Katto, 1990
Katto, Y., 1990. Prediction of critical heat flux of subcooled flow boiling in round tubes. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 33, 1921–1928. https://doi.org/10.1016/0017-9310(90)90223-H.
Google Scholar
Weisman and Pei, 1983
J. Weisman, B.S. Pei
Prediction of Critical Heat Flux in Flow Boiling at Low Qualities
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 26 (1983), pp. 1463-1477
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hall and Mudawar, 2000
Hall, D.D., Mudawar, I., 2000. Critical heat flux (CHF) for water flow in tubes-I. Compilation and assessment of world CHF data. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 43, 2573–2604. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0017-9310(99)00191-X.
Google Scholar
Katto, 1994
Y. Katto
Critical heat flux
Int. J. Multiph. Flow, 20 (1994), pp. 53-90, 10.1016/0301-9322(94)90070-1
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yang et al., 2014
B. Yang, J. Shan, J. Gou, H. Zhang, A. Liu, H. Mao
Uniform versus Nonuniform Axial Power Distribution in Rod Bundle CHF Experiments [WWW Document]
Sci. Technol. Nucl. Install. (2014), 10.1155/2014/462460
Google Scholar
Biasi et al., 1874
Biasi, L., Clerici, G.C., Garriba, S., Sala, R., Tozzi, A., 1967. A New Correlation for Round Duct and Uniform Heating - Comparison with World Data (EURAEC Report No. 1874), EURATOM/US Agreement for Cooperation. ARS, SpA, Societa Applicazioni Ricerche Scientifiche.
Google Scholar
Tong, 1967
L.S. Tong
Prediction of Departure from Nucleate Boiling for an Axially Non-Uniform Heat Flux Distribution
J. Nucl. Eng., 21 (1967), pp. 241-248
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Reddy and Fighetti, 1983
Reddy, D.G., Fighetti, C.F., 1983. Parametric Study of CHF Data, Volume 2: A Generalized Subchannel CHF Correlation for PWR and BWR Fuel Assemblies (Project Report No. NP-2609, Vol 2). Electric Power Research Institute, New York, New York.
Google Scholar
Groeneveld, 1996
D.C. Groeneveld
On the definition of critical heat flux margin
Nucl. Eng. Des., 163 (1996), pp. 245-247, 10.1016/0029-5493(95)01173-0
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Groeneveld et al., 2007
D.C. Groeneveld, J.Q. Shan, A.Z. Vasić, L.K.H. Leung, A. Durmayaz, J. Yang, S.C. Cheng, A. Tanase
The 2006 CHF look-up table
Nucl. Eng. Des., 237 (NURETH-11) (2007), pp. 1909-1922, 10.1016/j.nucengdes.2007.02.014
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Moon et al., 2005
S.-K. Moon, S.-Y. Chun, S. Cho, W.-P. Baek
An experimental study on the critical heat flux for low flow of water in a non-uniformly heated vertical rod bundle over a wide range of pressure conditions
Nucl. Eng. Des., 235 (2005), pp. 2295-2309, 10.1016/j.nucengdes.2005.04.004
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Oka and Koshizuka, 2001
Y. Oka, S. Koshizuka
Supercritical-pressure, Once-through Cycle Light Water Cooled Reactor Concept
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 38 (2001), pp. 1081-1089, 10.1080/18811248.2001.9715139
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Mawatari and Mori, 2016
Mawatari, T., Mori, H., 2016. An experimental study on characteristics of post-CHF heat transfer in the high subcritical pressure region near to the critical pressure. JTST 11, JTST0006–JTST0006. https://doi.org/10.1299/jtst.2016jtst0006.
Google Scholar
Wolf, 2011
Wolf, J.R., 2011. Supercritical Water Reactor, in: Krivit, S.B., Lehr, J.H., Kingery, T.B. (Eds.), Nuclear Energy Encyclopedia. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., pp. 305–308. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118043493.ch27.
Google Scholar
VanLochem, 2012
VanLochem, R., 2012. TECHNICAL SPECIFICATION FOR 9.5 mm OD FUEL SIMULATORS WITH A COSINE AXIAL POWER PROFILE FOR THE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN (Technical Specification No. SLTS-76). Stern Laboratories, Inc., Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
Google Scholar
Jayanti and Reddy, 2013
S. Jayanti, K. Reddy
Effect of spacer grids on CHF in nuclear rod bundles
Nucl. Eng. Des., 261 (2013), pp. 66-75, 10.1016/j.nucengdes.2013.03.044
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Greenwood et al., 2017
M.S. Greenwood, J.P. Duarte, M. Corradini
Presentation and comparison of experimental critical heat flux data at conditions prototypical of light water small modular reactors
Nucl. Eng. Des., 317 (2017), pp. 220-231, 10.1016/j.nucengdes.2016.12.030
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhao et al., 2019
D. Zhao, J.P. Duarte, W. Liu, M.L. Corradini, J. Wang, J. Bi
DNB type critical heat flux prediction in rod bundles with simplified grid spacer based on Liquid Sublayer Dryout model
Nucl. Eng. Des., 351 (2019), pp. 94-105, 10.1016/j.nucengdes.2019.05.012
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Duarte et al., 2018
J.P. Duarte, D. Zhao, H. Jo, M.L. Corradini
Critical heat flux experiments and a post- CHF heat transfer analysis using 2D inverse heat transfer
Nucl. Eng. Des., 337 (2018), pp. 17-26, 10.1016/j.nucengdes.2018.06.011
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhang et al., 2019
R. Zhang, J.P. Duarte, T. Cong, M.L. Corradini
Investigation on the critical heat flux in a 2 by 2 fuel assembly under low flow rate and high pressure with a CFD methodology
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 124 (2019), pp. 69-79, 10.1016/j.anucene.2018.09.033
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wagner and Pruß, 2002
W. Wagner, A. Pruß
The IAPWS Formulation 1995 for the Thermodynamic Properties of Ordinary Water Substance for General and Scientific Use
J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 31 (2002), 10.1063/1.1461829
Google Scholar
Chun et al., 2007
Chun, S.-Y., Hong, S.-D., Kikura, H., Aritomi, M., 2007. Critical Heat Flux in a Heater Rod Bundle Cooled by R-134a Fluid near the Critical Pressure. Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology 44, 1189–1198. https://doi.org/10.1080/18811248.2007.9711362.
Google Scholar
Yoder et al., 1985
G.L. Yoder Jr., D.G. Morris, C.B. Mullins
Rod Bundle Burnout Data and Correlation Comparisons
Nucl. Technol., 68 (1985), pp. 355-369
https://doi.org/10.13182/NT85-A33581
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Weathered et al., 2017
M. Weathered, J. Rein, M. Anderson, P. Brooks, B. Coddington
Characterization of thermal striping in liquid sodium with optical fiber sensors
Journal of Nuclear Engineering and Radiation Science, 3 (4) (2017), Article 041003, 10.1115/1.4037118
Google Scholar
Moorthi et al., 2018
A. Moorthi, A. Sharma, K. Velusamy
A review of sub-channel thermal hydraulic codes for nuclear reactor core and future direction
Nucl. Eng. Des., 332 (2018), pp. 329-344330, 10.1016/j.nucengdes.2018.03.012
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar