<title>Experimental and numerical investigation on heat transfer of supercritical water flowing upward in 2 × 2 rod bundles</title>
<author>1,M.Zhao,2,H.Y.Gu</author>
<Affiliation>1,Institute for Applied Thermofluidics (IATF), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Karlsruhe 76131, Germany;2,School of Nuclear Science and Engineering (SNSE), Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SJTU), Shanghai 200240, China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nucengdes.2020.110903</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029549320303976</URL>
Experimental and numerical investigation on heat transfer of supercritical water flowing upward in 2 × 2 rod bundles
M.Zhao,H.Y.Gu
Institute for Applied Thermofluidics (IATF), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Karlsruhe 76131, Germany
School of Nuclear Science and Engineering (SNSE), Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SJTU), Shanghai 200240, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
We conducted a heat transfer experiment of SC water flowing upward in 2 × 2 rod bundles.
We used 3 different methods to calculate the HTC of sub-channels of rod bundles.
Spacer effects on heat transfer was observed and CFD simulation of spacer effect was also investigated.
HTCs in 2 × 2 rod bundles were compared with the annuli and circular tube of the same equivalent hydraulic diameter.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
This paper presents the investigation of heat transfer of supercritical water flowing upward in 2 × 2 rod bundles, both experimentally and numerically. The experiment conditions are as follows: pressures from 22.9 MPa to 26.1 MPa, mass fluxes ranging from 450 kg/m2/s to 1500 kg/m2/s and heat fluxes ranging from 0.4 MW/m2 to 1.5 MW/m2. Four heated-rods of 8 mm outer diameter formed 2 set of experiment sections with pitch to diameter ratio (P/D ratio) 1.18 and 1.3. Heat transfer coefficients between the heated rod and fluid were conducted by 3 different methods and the effect of spacer grids was clearly observed. The experiment results show that heat transfer to supercritical water in rod bundles is strongly affected by flow channels and spacer grids. Moreover, a large database of heat transfer in rod bundles was carried out and HTC were compared with tube and annuli with the equivalent hydraulic diameter. The phenomenon of heat transfer difference in rod bundle circumferential direction and enhancement heat transfer in downstream of spacer grids were observed and investigated. In addition, Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) method was applied to give a deep insight of velocity profile, spacer effect and heat transfer enhancement in this research.
Keywords:Supercritical water;Heat transfer;2 × 2 rod bundles;Spacer grids;CFD
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The Supercritical Water-Cooled Reactor (SCWR) is the only light-water reactor (LWR) of six candidates of Generation IV (U.S. DOE 2002) innovational nuclear reactors recommended for further development. The SCWR has both advantages of higher thermal efficiency and system simplification (Cheng et al., 2008). However, in the frame of SCWR design, there are still many technical problems to solve, especially in the field of thermal hydraulics. In the vicinity of critical point of water (374.3 °C, 22.1 MPa), the thermo-physical properties of water show very strong variations. Such variations of specific heat, dynamics viscosity, density and thermal conductivity may lead to a complex flow pattern change in the near wall region and finally result in abnormal heat transfer behavior compared to subcritical conditions.
The investigations of heat transfer of supercritical fluid began in early 1950 s, based on the design of supercritical fossil fired power plants. Up to now, more than 400 articles are focus on heat transfer in supercritical water and these studies have been well reviewed by Cheng and Schulenberg, 2001, Pioro et al., 2004. In the recent 20 years, SCWR concepts (Oka and Koshizuka, 2000, Schulenberg et al., 2008, Cheng et al., 2008) with various geometries of fuel assembly and different kinds of spacer grids were proposed. However, the reference articles for supercritical fluid heat transfer are mostly based on supercritical boiler. So that experiment of tube geometries are widely studied while only very few for rod bundles.
Most of the experiment of rod bundles were carried out by the investigators in former Soviet Union and mainly focused on LWR running at supercritical condition. Dyadyakin and Popov (1977) published the first open literature about a tight-lattice with 7-rod bundles. In their experiment, the heat transfer coefficient (HTC) was measured with a movable thermocouple installed inside the central rod. He observed significant pressure oscillations at large mass fluxes and high heat fluxes. Silin et al. (1993) investigated the water flowing in large bundles at supercritical pressures and they noticed that no heat transfer deterioration was observed in the experiments of supercritical water flow inside multi-rod bundles within the test parameters range at which heat transfer deterioration occurred in circular tubes. Razumovskiy et al. (2008) investigated heat transfer of supercritical water flowing upward in vertical 3-rod and 7-rod bundles, as shown in Fig. 1. The heat transfer deterioration was observed at certain heat flux, and the temperature peak moved to the entrance part of the rod as the heat flux increased.
Fig. 1. 3-rod bundles and 7-rod bundles test section design (Razumovskiy et al., 2008).
In most of the SCWR design concepts, spacer grids (Cheng et al., 2008, Squarer et al., 2001, Dobashi et al., 1998) or wires (Schulenberg et al., 2008, McDonald et al., 2005, Bae et al., 2004) are proposed to positioning the fuel pins. In addition, position spacers are also used to improve heat transfer. In spite of the significant effect of spacers on heat transfer was observed, investigation on spacer effect is still very limited, especially in rod bundles at supercritical pressure conditions.
Based on the background of present SCWR concept, Zhao et al. (2013 and 2015) and his team in Shanghai Jiao Tong University carried out the first experimental results on the heat transfer of supercritical water in a 2 × 2 rod bundle. The research team observed that the grid spacer had a strong effect on heat transfer and a non-uniform circumferential wall temperature distribution was observed. Later year, the research team in Shanghai Jiao Tong University carried out the experiment of 3 rod bundles (Chen et al., 2020), 4 rod bundles with bare rod (Gu et al., 2015) and with wrapped wire spacer (Gu et al., 2016). Another research team from Xi’an Jiao Tong University performed heat transfer experiments based on High Performance Light Water Reactor (HPLWR) fuel assembles with supercritical pressure water flowing upward in a 2 × 2 rod bundle (Wang et al., 2016). The inner wall temperatures were measured by a movable thermocouple. Furthermore, they assessed eleven heat transfer correlations against their experimental databank and found that the correlations of Jackson, 2002, Krasnoshchekov and Protopopov, 1964 give the best predictions on average Nusselt number.
Different from the tube geometries, rod bundles need to keep the right position of fuel pins. There are two kind of spacers that are mostly used in rod bundles, spacer wire and spacer grid. Due to the turbulent mixing of wrapped wire in the axial direction, the spacer effect always exists. Alternatively, the spacer grid effect is a local effect and the influence is quite similar to entrance effect or shrink tube. However, the studies focused on spacer grid at supercritical conditions are quite limited and only a few experiment were carried out on sub-critical conditions.
Yao et al. (1982) investigated the heat transfer of rod bundles in subcritical condition and developed a correlation to describe the heat transfer enhancement and its decay behavior downstream of spacer grids. Miller et al. (2013) conducted experiments of heat transfer in 7 × 7 rod bundle under subcritical conditions. He observed that heat transfer enhancement reaches highest level just at the exit of the spacer and the heat transfer enhancement downstream the spacer decays along with downstream distance. Moon et al. (2013) conducted heat transfer experiments in a 6 × 6 rod bundle of single-phase steam flow. Heat transfer enhancement was found in both upstream and downstream of spacer grids. In the downstream of the spacer, heat transfer enhancement decays exponentially with the distance from the spacer grid.
Due to the high technology requirement of rod bundles experiment on supercritical pressure, experiment data from the present investigations are quite few. Among the previous investigations, the studies of spacer grid at supercritical pressure are even fewer. Therefore, further experimental investigations on heat transfer characteristics of supercritical water flowing in rod bundles with spacers are expected. This paper presents detail experimental and numerical studies on heat transfer of supercritical water flowing upward in 2 × 2 rod bundles with spacer grids. The geometric parameters of test section, e.g. heated rod diameter, hydraulic diameter and P/D ratio, is correspond to the concept of SCWR-M (Cheng et al., 2008) fuel assemble design. Spacer grids with distance up to 400 mm are applied. These distances are sufficiently large for the redevelopment of flow and heat transfer downstream the spacers, so that the heat transfer data without or with very small influence of spacers can be obtained.
<Section>2. Experimental facility and test section</Section>
The experiments of heat transfer in 2 × 2 rod bundles were performed at the SWAMUP test facility in Shanghai Jiao Tong University, as shown in Fig. 2. The SWAMUP facility is a closed circulation loop and consists of a main test loop, a cooling water loop, a water purification loop, and a high speed data acquisition system by National Instruments. The main test loop, consisting of a circulating pump, pre-heater, mixing chamber, two heat exchangers, accumulator and maximum two test sections, is constructed for system pressure up to 30 MPa, fluid temperature up to 550 °C, mass flow rate up to 1.3 kg/s and electrical heated power up to 1.2 MW. The deionized water was firstly heated by the electrical pre-heater to approach the required inlet temperature of test sections. Heated water flows vertically through the test sections and flow directions can be set to upward or downward. From the outlet of test section, heated water is mixed by water of lower temperature from bypass in the mixing chamber and then cooled by the heat exchangers. Finally, the ‘‘exhausted’’ water was pumped to the inlet of the pre-heater by the circulation pump.
Fig. 2. Schematic of the SWAMUP test facility.
The test section, as shown in Fig. 3, is consisted in four Inconel 718 heated tubes (8 mm outer diameter and 1.5 mm thickness) and two ceramic square tubes (20.32 mm × 20.32 mm and 23.2 mm × 23.2 mm width), forming hydraulics diameters of 4.6 mm and 7.6 mm. The length of the channel is 1328 mm and is separated by 5–6 spacer grids. The first 150 mm of the heated tube was made of copper because the none-heated region was used at the entrance of heated tube. The insides of heated tubes are installed with a sliding thermocouple system to measure the tube inner wall temperature. The outer square tube is unheated and covered with fiberglass insulation to minimize heating loss.
Fig. 3. Schematic view of test section.
The 4 sliding thermocouples can move axially or circumferentially. The measurement positions of thermocouples in the experiment are shown in Fig. 4.
Fig. 4. Schematic view of sliding thermocouples.
Based on the most common concept of SCWR (Schulenberg et al., 2008, Cheng et al., 2008), experimental conditions of 2 × 2 rod bundles were arranged within the parameter range of Table 1. In addition, the test parameters are also similar to the conditions of circular tube and annuli of the existing databank.
Table 1. Test parameter of 2 × 2 rod bundles.
Fig. 5 shows the experimental points of heat flux to mass flux in 2 × 2 rod bundles. The rod bundle experiment was first mentioned in ISSCWR-6 conference in 2013 (Zhao et al., 2013) and the first preliminary results with about 1000 data points were published in NURETH-16 conference in 2015 (Zhao et al., 2015). In the next several years, further experiments of different parameters were done and up to 2019, the research team obtained more than 9000 data points. As shown in Fig. 5, each point represents a set of experiment case. In a set of experiment case, more than 120 data points of different axial position and circumferential location were record. The experimental parameters were selected according to the Yamagata’s proposal (1972) about heat transfer deterioration. When the q/G ratio is above the line, heat transfer deterioration (HTD) occurs. Due to the limitation of experiment data, HTD in rod bundle was not clearly proved. Therefore, in the later experiments, most of the experimental cases of this investigation are located on both sides of Yamagata line in order to study the possibility and the intensive of heat transfer deterioration of supercritical water in rod bundles.
Fig. 5. Experimental points of heat flux to mass flux (2 × 2 rod bundles).
<Section>3. Data reduction and uncertainty</Section>
The experimental setup measured DC voltage U, current I, mass flux G, fluid temperature, tube inner wall temperature and thermal efficiencyη. The detailed uncertainties of measurement parameters were shown in Table 2.
Table 2. Uncertainties of primary parameters.
The heat flux on the surface of the heated rod can be calculated as following:
(1)@
According to the conservation of energy, the bulk specific enthalpy can be calculated with the inlet fluid enthalpy, Hin, and mass flow rate, G.
(2)@
The outside wall temperature is iteratively calculated from the inside wall temperature
(3)@
(4)@
Finally, the heat transfer coefficient at an axial position can be calculated with
(5)@
The average heat transfer coefficients are based on the cross section bulk fluid temperature and it is quite hard to measure the fluid temperature representing every sub-channel. According to the definition of heat transfer coefficient, fluid temperatures should be the local temperature and average bulk fluid can no longer represent the local fluid. Alternatively, the average temperature of sub channels in cross section will be more physically meaningful. However, the average temperature of the sub channel is also difficult to be measured directly through the experiment. To overcome the difficulty of experimental measurement, three ways of getting HTCs of rod bundles based on bulk fluid temperature, CFD sub-channel average or sub-channel code MATRA (Yoo et al., 1999) were provided below.
1)
Based on the average bulk fluid temperature at the cross section
By assuming, the fluid temperature of cross section is the same
(6)@
2)
Based on average fluid temperature of each sub-channel of CFD
This method calculates the average temperature of the fluid in the central sub-channel (SC-Centre), wall sub-channel (SC-Wall) and corner sub-channel (SC-Corner).
(7)@
3)
Based on average fluid temperature of the sub-channel program MATRA
This method calculates the average fluid temperature in the central sub-channel (SC-Centre), wall sub-channel (SC-Wall), and corner sub-channel (SC-Corner) by using the sub-channel program MATRA,
(8)@
<Section>4. CFD simulation</Section>
To obtain the average fluid temperature in sub-channels and investigate the mechanism of spacer effect, ANSYS-2019R1 with its component of CFX were used to simulate the heat transfer behavior of super-critical water for three different sub-channels. As shown in Fig. 6, the computational domain is defined as 1/4 of the bundle due to symmetry. For the axial direction, the computational domain includes 150 mm unheated part at the fluid entrance and the heated length of the test section matches the real experiment case. Meshes in spacer grids were also created at both the fluid sub-domain and the solid sub-domain, as shown in Fig. 6(b). The near wall meshes were refined so that in all the simulation zone y+ are smaller than 15, shown in Fig. 6(a). The convergence criterion for normalized residual of each individual equation is set to be less than 10−5 and the mesh independence were carefully checked. The Reynolds stress model of Speziale (SSG) (Speziale, 1991) was used in the present simulation. This is because that SSG models with scalable wall function were found to be capable of predicting the cross flow pattern as well as secondary flow structures in non-circular flow channel (Zhang et al., 2014, Xiong et al., 2015).
Fig. 6. (a). Mesh for cross section (b). Mesh for space grid.
<Section>5. Results and discussion</Section>
5.1. Spacer effect
The spacer grid blocks part of the cross section so that the fluid disturbance in the sub-channel is strengthened. On the other hand, the thermal boundary layer can be destroyed by spacer grid just downstream of the spacer and the heat transfer beneath the thermal boundary layers switch from thermal conduction to forced convection. Due to these two factors, the heat transfer downstream the spacer is significantly enhanced. Fig. 7(a) shows the experimental HTCs obtained by correlation (6) versus the axial position of heated tubes. Fig. 7(b) investigates the heat transfer between the first and the second spacers. It can be seen that just downstream of the spacer grid, the heat transfer coefficient of each sub-channel increases significantly. With the distance from the grid x/Dh increases, the heat transfer coefficient shows a gradual downward trend until the position x/Dh reaches about 40. It can be referred that when x/Dh is more than 40, the heat transfer enhancement by the spacer effect is gradually eliminated.
Fig. 7. Average heat transfer coefficient along axial position (P = 23 MPa, G = 900 kg/m2/s and q = 1.2 MW/m2).
It is generally believed that the heat transfer enhancement of the positioning grid is caused by the turbulent effect on the frame to destroy the thermal boundary layer (Yao et al., 1982, Miller et al., 2013). CFD simulation gives a good approach to investigate the heat transfer mechanism near spacer grid. Therefore, a direct insight of velocity profile and turbulent kinetic energy profile, fluid cross flow are shown in CFD, which can be hardly measured in experiment. Fig. 8 shows the velocity profile upstream and downstream to the spacer grid 1 of Fig. 7(b). The axial distance between the two investigated cross sections is very short, so that the properties of fluid changes very little. However, comparing with Fig. 8(a) and (b), the velocity difference between upstream and downstream of the spacer grid is significant. When the cross section is far from the spacer grid (x/Dh = 40), the velocity difference is quite large and the maximum velocity occurs at the central sub-channel. In Fig. 8(b), due to the spacer effect, the velocity difference is significantly reduced, so that the velocity at the cross section of x/Dh = 1.5 is much more uniform than that in Fig. 8(a).
Fig. 8. Velocity profile at spacer upstream and downstream.
Fig. 9 shows profile of turbulent kinetic energy upstream and downstream spacer to spacer grid 1 of Fig. 7(b). Comparing Fig. 9(a) and (b), it can be seen that the turbulent kinetic energy downstream of the spacer grid increases significantly. With the increase of turbulent kinetic energy, the convective heat transfer downstream of the spacer grid is increased intensity. When compared with different sub-channel, the largest turbulent kinetic energy occurs in central sub-channel and rather smaller turbulent kinetic energy in wall and corner sub-channel. This is due to the central channel has a large hydraulic diameter, a large flow Reynolds number, and a high flow velocity, so that the turbulent kinetic energy is the largest.
Fig. 9. Turbulent kinetic energy profile upstream and downstream spacer.
Fig. 10 describes the secondary flow velocity distribution on the cross section upstream and downstream to spacer grid 1 of Fig. 7(b). In the upstream of the positioning grid, the secondary flow velocity is smaller and the distribution is uniform. In the downstream of the spacer grid, the secondary flow on the plane perpendicular to the mainstream velocity is significantly increased and the turbulence effect is strengthened. It can be seen that the secondary flow between the narrow gap of two heated rod in neighbor and the sub-channel center is stronger. The intensive of the secondary flow in cross section is related to the fluid density change of the supercritical fluid. The temperature difference between the fluid in cross section produces difference in density, which facilitates the mixing of the fluid vertical to the mainstream fluid. Due to the smaller temperature difference in the region between the heated tube and none-heated square wall, the secondary flow is relatively smaller among the entire cross section. In the corner sub-channel, the wall temperature is the highest and the secondary flow is the weakest. At the central sub-channel, the fluid temperature is lower and fluid density is higher, which facilitates the fluid flow in the narrow gap and central sub-channel. The secondary flow is stronger at the wall near the central area, the narrow gap and the central sub-channel. As the fluid flow along the axial directions after spacer grid, the movement of the strong secondary flow near the wall of the sub-channel center weakens.
Fig. 10. Velocity profile at upstream and downstream spacer.
5.2. Heat transfer coefficient by three methods
As shown in formula (6), (7), (8), HTC can be obtained by average bulk fluid temperature, sub-channel average temperature of CFD or sub-channel average temperature by MATRA code. Table 3 shows the comparison of these three method of experimental case at the condition of pressure = 25 MPa, mass flux = 810.4 kg/m2/s and heat flux = 0.786 MW/m2.
Table 3. Fluid temperature and velocity with 3 methods.
It can be seen from Table 3, at the position of just downstream of the spacer grid (x/Dh = 1.5) or a longer distance from spacer grid (x/Dh = 40), the fluid temperature difference predicted by the three methods in central sub-channel, the wall sub-channel, and the corner sub-channel are not large. In detail, the fluid in central sub-channel has the highest average temperature, and the corner sub-channel fluid has the lowest average temperature. This is because the central sub-channel has the smallest heated equivalent diameter, while the cold square wall seriously affects the heat transfer in corner channel. Due to the higher hydraulic diameter, the mass flux in central sub-channel is significantly higher than in wall and corner sub-channel. Based on the fluid temperature obtained from Table 3 and the experimental data of wall temperature, HTC of experimental points without spacer effect (x/Dh ≥ 40) is shown in Fig. 11.
Fig. 11. HTC of central sub-channels by the 3 methods.
It can be seen from Fig. 11, the heat transfer coefficient obtained by the cross section average method is slightly larger than that obtained by the CFD method and sub-channel code method. However, since the fluid temperature difference obtained by the three methods is not large and the tube surface temperature is completely the same from the experimental measurement, the difference in HTCs obtained by the three methods is also small and the trend of change is nearly the same.
5.3. Parameter effects
Similar to the heat transfer in circular tube and annuli, parameter effects of pressure, mass flux and heat flux still exists in 2 × 2 rod bundles. However, such parameter effects should be discussed without spacer effect; otherwise, it is hard to distinguish the effect from spacer grid or thermal hydraulic parameters. So all the data of parameter effects are selected by x/Dh ≥ 40, so-called none-spacer effect.
Fig. 12 shows the averaged HTCs in central sub-channel versus bulk temperature at two different pressures, at the condition of the same mass flux and heat flux. At the lower pressure, the peaks of HTC are slightly higher. This is because of the higher peak of Prandtl number in lower pressure.
Fig. 12. Effect of pressure on HTC (P/D = 1.3, G = 800 kg/m2/s, q = 0.8 MW/m2).
Fig. 13 shows the average heat transfer coefficient in central sub-channel versus the bulk temperature at various heat fluxes. The pressure is 25 MPa, mass flux 800 kg/m2/s. The bulk temperature ranges from 340 °C up to 385 °C. The effect of heat flux on heat transfer coefficient is small, which is quite different to the result of circular tube. From Fig. 12, Fig. 13, it can be concluded that compared with circular tube, effect of heat flux to rod bundles are quite small. In circular tube, thermal boundary layers near wall developed with the axial direction of the fluid. At the bottom of the thermal boundary layer, heat was conducted to the near-wall fluid. By this conduction of heat, the temperature difference is proportional to the heat flux. However, the cross flow or secondary flow in rod bundle geometries flows in vertical direction of the main stream may destroy the development of thermal boundary layer. Thus, the heat flux of the rod bundle surface is not so sensitive to local heat transfer, even at the position without spacer effect.
Fig. 13. Effect of mass flux on HTC (P/D = 1.3, P = 25 MPa, G = 800 kg/m2/s).
5.4. Comparison with other channels
Heat transfer in different flow channel sometimes shows quite a different behavior, e.g. so-called heat transfer deterioration can be hardly find in rod bundles geometry and is clearly showed in circular tubes. Based on the reactor safety research in KIT, large numbers of experimental cases about heat transfer in tube, annuli and rod bundles are collected. The comparison of 2 × 2 rod bundles with circular tube, annuli and rod bundles with the approximate hydraulic diameter are carried out. However, most of the experimental data of annuli and rod bundles in databank are with spacer grid. The comparison of different channels should separate the local effect such as spacer grid effect and entrance effect. Thus, data of rod bundles and annuli with spacer grid are selected with the databank with x/Dh larger than 40 to minimize the influence of spacers as possible. In addition, because the difference of heat transfer coefficient with three methods can be neglected, average fluid temperature by the cross section is considered as the fluid temperature.
Fig. 14 shows the comparison of HTC without spacer effect to annuli and circular tube with the approximate hydraulic diameter. The wall temperature of heated tube was selected with TW1 in Fig. 7(a) of central sub-channel. It can be seen that the tendency of heat transfer is similar and HTC of rod bundles is slightly smaller than the circular tube. Compared with annuli, the flow in rod bundle has complicated secondary flow and flow turbulence, and the heat transfer coefficient is much larger than the annular channel of equivalent diameter.
Fig. 14. HTC comparison of 3 different test sections (P/D = 1.3, P = 25 MPa, G = 800 kg/m2/s, q = 0.8 MW/m2).
It can be seen that heat transfer deterioration occurs in circular tube when q/G is in large value. However, it is controversial whether the heat transfer deterioration also exists in the rod bundles. Some research group (Kirillov et al., 2006, Razumovskiy et al., 2008, Razumovskiy et al., 2009) reported the deterioration of the measured rod bundle by experimental methods, but other researchers (Mori et al., 2012) believed that the thermal boundary layer was encountered in rod bundle because of the spacer mixing, so that no heat transfer deterioration should occur in rod bundles.
Fig. 15 shows the comparison of HTC and HTC ratio of 2 × 2 rod bundles with the circular tube of the same hydraulic diameter. The heat transfer ratio is defined as the HTC by experimental case to the HTC by Dittus-Boelter. It is normally believed that when the HTC ratio smaller than 0.3, heat transfer is deteriorated (Yamagata et al., 1972, Koshizuka et al., 1995). All the experiment data in Fig. 15 of rod bundles is selected without spacer effect and the HTC is conducted by the average cross section fluid temperature. It can be seen that when the fluid temperature is close to the pseudo-critical point, the heat transfer coefficient of the circular tube has a peak. However, such peak is not so obvious in the rod bundle channel. Heat transfer deterioration can be found in circular tube with the HTC ratio lower than 0.2 and in the same condition, lowest HTC ratio in 2 × 2 rod bundles is around 0.4.
Fig. 15. Comparison of tube and rod bundles for HTC and HTC ratio (P = 23 MPa, G = 450 kg/m2/s, q = 0.6 MW/m2).
<Section>6. Conclusions and outlook</Section>
Experimental and numerical studies on heat transfer of supercritical water flowing in 2 × 2 rod bundles with spacer grids with a large number of databank were collected. Three calculation methods of HTC were proposed in this research. The test data were analyzed related to the spacer grid effect, parameter effects and compared with HTC of tube and annuli at the similar hydraulic diameter and experimental condition. The difference of HTCs by the cross section average, CFD simulation and sub-channel code MATRA is very small because the fluid temperature difference in each sub-channel is not large. Thus, in future work, average temperature at the cross section is possible to be used to represent the fluid temperature and the difference of fluid temperature in sub-channels can be neglected. Spacer effect makes the HTC just downstream of the spacer significantly increased and decays with the increasing of x/Dh. Compared with the HTC of circular tube at heat transfer deterioration region, heat transfer of 2 × 2 rod bundles improved significantly due to the strong effect of spacer grid and cross flow in sub-channels.
Future work of heat transfer research work are focus on the developing a new heat transfer model for rod bundles and spacer effect. This work is still going in the frame of reactor safety research of the Institute for Applied Thermofluidics (IATF) of KIT.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
M. Zhao: Conceptualization, Data curation, Investigation, Writing - original draft. H.Y. Gu: Methodology, Writing - review & editing.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgement</Section>
The authors would like to thank the Nuclear Thermal Hydraulic Research (NUTHRE) Lab of Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SJTU) for technical support. The authors are also thankful to the reviewers for their valuable suggestions and comments.
<Section>References</Section>
Bae et al., 2004
Bae, Y.Y., Joo ,H.K., Jang, J., et al., 2004, Research of a Supercritical Pressure Water Cooled Reactor in Korea. In: Proc. of ICAPP’04, June 13–17(2004), Pittsburgh, Pa, USA.
Google Scholar
Chen et al., 2020
S. Chen, H.Y. Gu, M.L. Liu, et al.
Experimental investigation on heat transfer to supercritical water in a three-rod bundle with spacer grids
Appl. Therm. Eng., 164 (2020), Article 114466
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Cheng and Schulenberg, 2001
Cheng X., Schulenberg T., 2001, Heat Transfer at Supercritical Pressure – Literature Review and Application to an HPLWR, Wissenschaftliche Berichte FZKA 6609, Forschungszentrum Karlsuhe.
Google Scholar
Cheng et al., 2008
X. Cheng, X.J. Liu, Y.H. Yang
A mixed core for supercritical water-cooled reactor
Nucl. Eng. Technol., 40 (2008), pp. 117-126
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Dobashi et al., 1998
Dobashi, K., Oka, Y., Koshizuka, S., 1998, Conceptual design of a high temperature power reactor cooled and moderated by supercritical light water. In: ICONE6, May 10–15, 1998.
Google Scholar
Dyadyakin and Popov, 1977
B.V. Dyadyakin, A.S. Popov
Heat transfer and thermal resistance of tight seven-rod bundle, cooled with water flow at supercritical pressures
Trans. VTI, 11 (1977), pp. 244-253
(in Russian)
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gu et al., 2015
H.Y. Gu, H.B. Li, Z.X. Hu, et al.
Heat transfer to supercritical water in a 2 x 2 rod bundle
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 83 (2015), pp. 114-124
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gu et al., 2016
H.Y. Gu, Z.X. Hu, D. Liu, et al.
Experimental study on heat transfer to supercritical water in 2 x 2 rod bundle with wire wraps
Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci., 70 (2016), pp. 17-28
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jackson, 2002
Jackson, J.D., 2002, Consideration of the heat transfer properties of supercritical pressure water in connection with the cooling of advanced nuclear reactors. In: Proceedings of the 13th Pacific Basin Nuclear Conference, 21–25 October (2002), Shenzhen City, China.
Google Scholar
Kirillov et al., 2006
Kirillov, P.L., Opanasenko, A.N., Pometko, R.S., et al., 2006, Experimental study of heat transfer on rod bundle at supercritical parameters of Freon-12. Federal Agency for Atomic Energy State scientific center of RF-Institute for physics and power engineering, FEI-3075, Obninsk, Russian.
Google Scholar
Koshizuka et al., 1995
S. Koshizuka, N. Takano, Y. Oka
Numerical analysis of deterioration phenomena in heat transfer to supercritical water
Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 38 (1995), pp. 3077-3084
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Krasnoshchekov and Protopopov, 1964
E.A. Krasnoshchekov, V.S. Protopopov
Experimental investigation of heat transfer for carbon dioxide in supercritical region
Proceedings of the 2nd All-soviet Union Conference on Heat and Mass Transfer (1964), pp. 26-35
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
McDonald et al., 2005
McDonald, P., Buongiorno, J., Sterbentz, J.W., et al., 2005, Feasibility Study of Supercritical Light Water Cooled Reactors for Electric Power Production. In: INEEL/EXT-04-02530, INEEL, January 2005.
Google Scholar
Miller et al., 2013
Miller, D.J., Cheung, F.B., Bajorek, S.M., 2013, On the development of a grid-enhanced single-phase convective heat transfer correlation. Nucl. Eng. Des. 264, 56–60.
Google Scholar
Mori et al., 2012
H. Mori, T. Kaida, M. Ohno, et al.
Heat transfer to a supercritical pressure fluid flowing in sub-bundle channels
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 49 (2012), pp. 373-383
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Moon et al., 2013
Moon, S.K., Cho, S., Kim, J., et al., 2013, Enhancement of single-phase convective heat transfer in rod bundles near spacer grids. In: The 15th International Topical Meeting on Nuclear Reactor Thermal – Hydraulics, NURETH-15 NURETH15-505, Pisa, Italy, May 12-17, 2013.
Google Scholar
Oka and Koshizuka, 2000
Oka, Y., Koshizuka, S., 2000, Design concept of once-through cycle supercritical pressure light water cooled reactors. In: Proc. of SCR-2000, Nov.6-8, Tokyo, pp. 1–22.
Google Scholar
Pioro et al., 2004
I.L. Pioro, H.F. Khartbil, R.B. Duffey
Heat transfer to supercritical fluids flowing in channels—empirical correlations (survey)
Nucl. Eng. Des., 230 (2004), pp. 69-91
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Razumovskiy et al., 2008
Razumovskiy, V.G., Pis’mennyy, E.N., Koloskov, A.E., et al., 2008, Heat Transfer to Supercritical Water in Vertical 7-Rod Bundles. In: 16th International Conference on Nuclear Engineering (ICONE-16), Paper 48954, May 11-15(2008), Orlando, Florida, USA.
Google Scholar
Razumovskiy et al., 2009
Razumovskiy, V.G., Pis’mennyy, E.N., Koloskov, A.E., et al., 2009, Heat transfer to supercritical water in vertical annuli channel and 3 rod bundles. In: 17th International Conference on Nuclear Engineering (ICONE-17), Paper 75212, July 12–16, 2009, Brussels, Belgium.
Google Scholar
Schulenberg et al., 2008
T. Schulenberg, J. Starflinger, J. Heneche
Three pass core design proposal for a high performance light water reactor
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 50 (2008), pp. 526-531
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Silin et al., 1993
V.A. Silin, V.A. Voznesensky, A.M. Afrov
The light water integral reactor with natural circulation of the coolant at supercritical pressure B-500 SKDI
Nucl. Eng. Des., 144 (1993), pp. 327-336
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Speziale, 1991
Speziale, C., 1991, Modelling the pressure–strain correlation of turbulence: an invari-ant dynamical systems approach. J. Fluid Mech. 277, 245–272.
Google Scholar
Squarer et al., 2001
Squarer D., Oka Y., Bittermann D., et al, 2001, High Performance Light Water Reactor (HPLWR) FISA-2001 EU Research in Reactor Safety, European Commission, Luxembourg, November 12-14, 2001, pp. 620–630.
Google Scholar
Wang et al., 2016
H. Wang, Q.C. Bi, L. Leung
Heat transfer from a 2 × 2 wire-wrapped rod bundle to supercritical pressure water
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf. (2016)
Google Scholar
Xiong et al., 2015
J.B. Xiong, X. Cheng, Y. Yang
Numerical analysis on supercritical water heat transfer in a 2 x 2 rod bundle
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 80 (2015), pp. 123-134
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yamagata et al., 1972
K. Yamagata, K. Nishikawa, S. Hasegawa, et al.
Forced convection heat transfer to supercritical water flowing in tubes
Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 15 (1972), pp. 2575-2593
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yao et al., 1982
S. Yao, L. Hochreiter, W. Leech
Heat transfer augmentation in rod bundles near grid spacers
J. Heat Transfer, 104 (1982), pp. 76-81
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yoo et al., 1999
Y.J. Yoo, D.H. Hwang, D.S. Sohn, et al.
Development of a subchannal analysis code MATRA applicable to PWRs and ALMRs
J. Korean Nucl. Soc., 31 (1999), p. 314
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhao et al., 2013
Zhao, M., Li H.B., Yang, J., et al., 2013, Experimental study on heat transfer to supercritical water flowing through circle tubes and 2×2 rod bundles. In” The 6th International Symposium on Supercritical Water-Cooled Reactors (ISSCWR-6), March 2–6, 2013 Shenzhen, China.
Google Scholar
Zhao et al., 2015
Zhao, M., Gu, H.Y., Cheng, X., et al., 2015, Experimental and Numerical study on heat transfer of supercritical water flowing upward in 2×2 rod bundles. In: 16th International Topical Meeting on Nuclear Reactor Thermal Hydraulics (NURETH-16), August 30-September 4, 2015, Chicago, USA.
Google Scholar
Zhang et al., 2014
S.Y. Zhang, H.Y. Gu, Z.Q. Xiong
Numerical investigation on heat transfer of supercritical fluid in a vertical 7-rod bundle
J. Supercrit. Fluids, 92 (2014), pp. 8-15
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar