<title>Microchannel steam generators for design for integral inherently safe light water reactors</title>
<author>1,DanielKromerSriram,2,Chandrasekaran,3,SrinivasGarimella</author>
<Affiliation>1,George W. Woodruff School of Mechanical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, 30332, United States</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nucengdes.2020.110867</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029549320303617</URL>
Microchannel steam generators for design for integral inherently safe light water reactors
DanielKromerSriram,Chandrasekaran,SrinivasGarimella
George W. Woodruff School of Mechanical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, 30332, United States
<Section>Highlights</Section>
High power density microchannel steam generator for Integral Inherently Safe LWRs.
Efficiency of ~ 39% achieved for Rankine cycle with once-through steam generation.
Exergy analysis illustrates advantages of once-through steam generator.
Microchannel design shown to be superior to tube bundle steam generator.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
A steam generator design for the Integral Inherently Safe Light Water Reactor (I2S-LWR) based on microchannel heat exchanger (MCHX) technology is discussed. An experimentally validated heat transfer and pressure drop model is applied to the development of steam generator design for this LWR. The potential of MCHX technology to provide compact, high power density steam generators for integral inherently safe reactors is demonstrated. A Rankine cycle model for a system with a once-through MCHX steam generator is developed and the plant thermal efficiency is quantified. Heat transfer and pressure drop in the MCHX steam generator design for I2S-LWR is compared with those in a conventional tubular steam generator design. A simple exergy analysis is performed for two alternative I2S-LWR power cycles, the flash Rankine cycle and a Rankine cycle with once-through steam generation, to demonstrate the advantages of using an integral steam generator.
Keywords:Light water reactor;Integral steam generator;Microchannel
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The Integral Inherently Safe Light Water Reactor (I2S-LWR) (Petrovic et al., 2017b) is a large (~1000 MWe) pressurized water reactor (PWR) with improved safety and economics beyond generation III + designs. To accomplish this, the I2S-LWR design takes advantage of an integral configuration while also maintaining economies of scale. The entire primary cooling system loop, including the primary-to-secondary heat exchangers, is placed inside the reactor pressure vessel (RPV), thus eliminating the possibility of a large loss of coolant accident (LOCA). In the I2S-LWR, the heat exchangers are placed in the annulus between the core barrel and the RPV wall, referred to as the downcomer region. Fig. 1 shows a schematic and model of the I2S-LWR. The design includes an integral control rod drive mechanism (CRDM) and a pressurizer integrated into the RPV head (Petrovic et al., 2017a). The primary coolant flows up through the core and core barrel. Primary-to-secondary and decay heat removal heat exchangers share space in the downcomer.
Fig. 1. I2S-LWR pressure vessel (Petrovic et al. 2017a).
The primary-to-secondary heat exchanger design for I2S-LWR has to satisfy several requirements to enable the key advantages of this reactor design. The size of the heat exchanger should allow for its placement in the downcomer region, between the core with an OD of 3 m and the RPV with an ID of 4.9 m, along with a maximum height of 7 m, which is also shared by four helical-coil heat exchangers that are part of the decay heat removal system (DHRS) (Fig. 2). For primary coolant inlet conditions of 330 °C, 16.3 MPa, and a flow rate of 15,498 kg s−1, the primary-to-secondary heat exchanger must provide a total heat duty of 2850 MW. In addition to the size and heat duty requirements, the heat exchanger design must also satisfy plant thermal efficiency (>32%), primary coolant pressure drop (<500 kPa), and mechanical integrity requirements. These requirements are discussed in more detail in Kromer, 2019, Kromer et al., 2017. A primary-to-secondary heat exchanger design based on microchannel technology has the potential to meet these I2S-LWR design requirements. The microchannel heat exchanger (MCHX) design consists of sheets with small hydraulic diameter channels and header geometries that are typically photochemically etched into their surface. Stacking the sheets and diffusion bonding them together produces a heat exchanger with a large surface area-to-volume ratio that also possesses high structural integrity. Additionally, the small diameter channels provide high heat transfer coefficients, further decreasing the heat transfer resistance between the two heat exchanging fluids.
Fig. 2. I2S-LWR RPV cross-section.
Two concepts have been proposed for power conversion system in the I2S-LWR (Fig. 3). The first is a flash Rankine cycle that does not require steam generation in the MCHX, as proposed by Memmott et al. (2017). The flash Rankine cycle operates in a manner similar to that of conventional PWR Rankine cycles, except that saturated steam is produced in a flashing drum instead of a steam generator. The secondary coolant is heated in the MCHX under high-pressure, subcooled conditions before entering a flashing drum where the pressure is reduced, producing saturated steam and saturated liquid water. The MCHX design accompanying this scheme is referred to as the liquid–liquid design because primary and secondary coolant remain as subcooled liquids over the length of the heat exchanger. The development of the liquid–liquid MCHX design for the I2S-LWR with flash Rankine cycle, along with experimental validation of the heat transfer and pressure drop model on a representative test section is discussed in Kromer et al. (2017). A design using the MCHX as a once-through steam generator offers several advantages over the liquid–liquid, flash Rankine cycle. The most obvious is the avoidance of the capital cost associated with flash drums. Additionally, the large heat of vaporization of water results in reduced secondary coolant flow rate through the MCHX for a given reactor power. This reduces the capital cost and parasitic power losses of the large secondary coolant pumps required in the flash Rankine cycle. Finally, this design provides superheated steam at temperatures and pressures higher than those generated in the flashing drum, resulting in increased thermal efficiency of the power cycle. This final point also avoids the exergy destruction in the flashing process. This MCHX design is referred to as liquid-boiling because of the boiling secondary coolant.
Fig. 3. Simplified I2S-LWR power cycles.
The liquid-boiling MCHX design for integral steam generation is developed here. The heat transfer and pressure drop model validated on a representative liquid-boiling MCHX test section (Kromer, 2019) is applied to size a steam generator to match the heat duty and other requirements for the I2S-LWR. A power cycle model with this steam generator is developed and the corresponding cycle efficiency is reported. A simple exergy analysis is also performed to quantify and analyze the various exergetic losses in both the flash Rankine as well as the once-through steam generation cycles. The performance of this MCHX steam generator design and that of a conventional tubular steam generator design are compared.
<Section>2. I2S-LWR MCHX geometry and layout</Section>
Photo-chemical etching is used to create features in the stainless steel sheets of the MCHX. Channels produced in this process have semi-circular cross-sections with widths at least twice that of the depth or channel height (Nageswara and Deepak, 2007). An approximate cross-section of channels in a MCHX created with this process is shown in Fig. 4. Individual MCHX blocks consist of a series of microchannel etched sheets, alternating between primary and secondary coolant sheets that direct the two fluids in a counterflow orientation as shown in Fig. 5, Fig. 6. The 316 stainless sheets are designed such that the primary coolant enters and exits in the radial direction, while the secondary coolant enters and exits in the azimuthal direction on the sides of the sheets (Fig. 2.) Primary coolant channels span the full radial length of the sheet. The secondary coolant sheets contain triangular headers that redirect the coolant 90° into channels counterflow to those in the primary coolant sheets. Another triangular header at the far end of the channel redirects the secondary coolant flow 90° to the side opposite that of the entrance location. The triangular headers on the secondary sheets result in channels that are shorter than those on the primary coolant sheets. The span in which the two streams are in counterflow is referred to as the active channel length. Sets of these sheets are joined in a high-temperature, high-pressure diffusion bonding process.
Fig. 4. MCHX channel cross-section.
Fig. 5. Primary and secondary coolant sheets.
Fig. 6. MCHX coolant flow path.
MCHX blocks are stacked in eight azimuthal positions in the downcomer. The MCHX stacks, associated headers, and the DHRS heat exchangers are distributed around the core as shown in Fig. 2. Eleven individual MCHX blocks are placed on top of each other to create a 6.6 m high stack. This height (<7 m) allows the stack to be located sufficiently above the core to avoid neutron activation of 59Co in the stainless steel (Matijević et al., 2016). Activation would make the removal of the MCHXs for maintenance or replacement difficult because of the high energy gamma decay of 60Co. Penetrations of the RPV for secondary coolant can also be kept above the height of the core, allowing coolant to continue to cover the core in the unlikely event of a primary coolant leak through one of these penetrations. Each stack has its own primary coolant headers, and adjacent stacks share common secondary coolant headers. Examples of an MCHX block and an MCHX stack pair are shown in Fig. 7. Additional details of the primary-to-secondary MCHX, including the flow paths for the primary and secondary coolants are provided in Kromer, 2019, Kromer et al., 2017.
Fig. 7. I2S-LWR MCHX and MCHX stack.
<Section>3. MCHX modeling</Section>
3.1. Assumptions
The heat transfer in the header regions is ignored and all heat transfer is conservatively assumed to occur in the active channel regions in which the primary and secondary coolant are in counterflow. A fouling build-up of 10 μm with thermal conductivity of kfoul = 1.3 W m−1 K−1 (@=7.7 × 10-6 m2 K W−1) and a surface roughness of 2 μm are assumed on both the primary and secondary sides of the heat exchanger. Axial heat transfer in the fluid and conjugate, multi-dimensional heat transfer in the MCHX material are neglected. This assumption was validated by the good agreement between the measured and predicted heat duty in both single-phase and two-phase experimental study on a representative MCHX test section (Kromer, 2019). Therefore, heat transfer is assumed to be one-dimensional, allowing for the use of a thermal resistance network. A uniform flow distribution between all heat exchanger channels is assumed based on the parallel flow path model developed in Kromer et al. (2017). The secondary coolant distribution is more complex in the liquid-boiling design because of the high-density subcooled-liquid state in the inlet header and the low-density superheated-vapor state in the outlet header. If not properly accounted for in the header design, this can result in a non-uniform pressures differential across the parallel channels, leading to maldistribution. This phenomenon is discussed in Section 3.4. Both fluids are assumed to be fully-developed upon entry into the active channel region, and channel flow rates are assumed to be steady with no boiling-related flow instabilities. The assumption of no flow boiling instabilities on the secondary-side is supported by the results from lab-scale testing of a representative MCHX steam generator. The testing data showed no significant impact of flow instabilities on the heat duty of the MCHX steam generator. However, additional qualification testing at scale will be necessary before the MCHX steam generators can be adopted and commissioned.
3.2. Liquid-Boiling MCHX design
The important dimensions of the MCHX design are presented in Fig. 8 and Table 1. The total radial length of the MCHX stack, 0.85 m, and azimuthal width, 1.0 m, were dictated by the size of the downcomer. The radial length includes the active channel length as well as lengths required for primary inlet/outlet headers and triangular headers in the secondary coolant sheets. The azimuthal width is divided between the width of MCHX blocks and secondary plenums on the sides of the stack. The volume of the MCHX can be thought of as being split between fluid distribution and heat transfer regions. This presents a tradeoff as reducing pressure drop and increasing heat transfer both require additional volume. Table 2 shows channel and sheet dimensions of the design depicted in Fig. 4. The overall channel sizes and values for the dimensions discussed above were determined through parametric analyses. Sheet and fin thickness were dictated by pressure vessel requirements to ensure the mechanical integrity of the MCHX. Table 3 shows important fluid properties of a single liquid-boiling MCHX block and values for all 88 MCHX blocks in parentheses. The core power as well as the overall primary coolant flow rate and temperatures were determined through core safety analysis. The primary coolant conditions for the liquid-boiling MCHX design are similar to those of the liquid–liquid MCHX design of Kromer et al. (2017) due to the I2S-LWR primary-to-secondary heat exchanger design requirements. Therefore, the same channel and primary-coolant header dimensions as the liquid–liquid design were used for the liquid-boiling MCHX. This ensured that primary-coolant pressure drop requirements were met and provided a means of directly comparing the two MCHX designs. Channel pressure vessel requirements, which establish the mechanical integrity of the MCHX, were also met by these dimensions. Compared to the liquid–liquid MCHX design, the secondary coolant sheets in the liquid-boiling design were slightly modified to ensure an even flow distribution. From Fig. 8, it can be noted that the secondary coolant inlet and outlet headers are asymmetric, due to a wedge section at the secondary coolant inlet header. This wedge section results in a radial length of 0.035 m at the inlet of the sheet instead of 0.15 m, and was introduced to increase the pressure drop in the inlet header and produce a uniform pressure differential between the inlet and outlet headers (discussed in Section 3.4).
Fig. 8. Liquid-boiling MCHX dimensions.
Table 1. Liquid-boiling MCHX dimensions.
Table 2. Liquid-boiling MCHX channel and sheet dimensions.
Table 3. Liquid-boiling MCHX operating parameters.
The secondary coolant conditions to meet heat transfer (2850 MWth) and power generation requirements were determined after the dimensions of the MCHX were selected. The secondary-coolant flow rate, 1711 kg s−1 is significantly lower than the 13,016 kg s−1 for the liquid–liquid MCHX due to the high enthalpy of vaporization of water, allowing a relatively small flow rate to remove the required heat duty. With these secondary-coolant conditions, the associated Rankine power cycle achieved a thermal efficiency of 39.0%, representing a significant increase in the power generation of the I2S-LWR compared with the 34.58% efficiency of the flash Rankine cycle that uses the liquid–liquid MCHX. The liquid-boiling MCHX is able to achieve higher efficiency in part because it does not require a flashing drum, a major source of exergy destruction in the flash Rankine cycle used with the liquid–liquid design (discussed in Section 5).
Fig. 9 shows the temperature profile over the active channel length of the liquid-boiling MCHX design. The locations of different heat transfer regimes are also displayed. Fig. 10 shows the heat transfer coefficient for both coolants as well as the quality. Correlations and modeling techniques used to predicted MCHX performance are discussed in Section 3.3. The secondary-side wall temperature exceeds the saturation temperature shortly after entering the channel and an increase in the heat transfer coefficient occurs due to subcooled nucleate boiling. The secondary coolant reaches saturation 0.0625 m from the channel inlet. Dryout occurs 0.3325 m from the inlet at a quality of 0.86, marking a sharp drop in the transfer coefficient. At 0.4425 m from the inlet, the quality exceeds one and the fluid enters the vapor convection heat transfer regime.
Fig. 9. Liquid-boiling MCHX temperature profile.
Fig. 10. Liquid-boiling MCHX heat transfer coefficients and quality.
The relative thermal resistance along the channel length of the liquid-boiling MCHX is shown in Fig. 11. The thermal resistance is dominated by the secondary coolant in most of the heat transfer regimes. At the inlet, the relative resistance of the secondary coolant is ~ 80%, but decreases as subcooled nucleate boiling occurs. During saturated boiling, the heat transfer coefficient increases significantly, decreasing the thermal resistance of the secondary coolant. In the post-dryout and vapor convective regimes, the secondary coolant again represents ~ 80% of the total thermal resistance. The thermal resistance of the stainless steel sheet, fouling build-up, and primary coolant are relatively constant across the length of the heat exchanger, and are much smaller than that of the secondary coolant, except in the saturated boiling region.
Fig. 11. Liquid-boiling MCHX relative resistance.
Fig. 12 shows the pressure gradient of the two coolants across the active channel length of the MCHX, as well as the secondary-coolant quality. The primary coolant pressure gradient is due to friction, and is relatively constant across the channel length, increasing only slightly due to changes in fluid properties. The secondary-coolant pressure gradient remains constant in the liquid convection and subcooled boiling regimes. The onset of significant void (OSV) is not reached until the fluid is nearly at saturation. As a result, the pressure gradient remains small and was calculated as though the secondary coolant remained in a single-phase liquid state. In the saturated-boiling heat transfer regime, the pressure gradient increases along the length of the channel as the quality increases. In the two-phase regimes (saturated boiling and post-dryout), the pressure gradient has frictional and acceleration components. The frictional pressure gradient increases as the quality and velocity of the fluid increases. The acceleration component is a function of the rate of vapor generation. The pressure gradient in the post-dryout regime is slightly lower than that of the saturated boiling regime due to a smaller contribution from acceleration, as a result of the low heat flux. The pressure gradient remains constant in the single-phase vapor convection regime, and due to the low mass flux of the secondary coolant, is significantly lower than that of the primary coolant. In the liquid–liquid MCHX (G = 1757 kg m−2 s−1), the secondary coolant frictional pressure gradient is nearly constant over the length of the channel with an average value of 84 kPa m−1. The secondary-coolant pressure gradient in the two-phase liquid-boiling MCHX is in fact less than that in the single-phase liquid–liquid design. This is due to the low mass flux (230.9 kg m−2 s−1) and relatively high reduced pressure (~0.34) operating conditions of the liquid-boiling MCHX. At higher pressure, the vapor density is larger, resulting in lower velocity and decreased shear. Eq. (1) shows representative calculations of the secondary-coolant pressure gradient in the liquid–liquid and liquid-boiling MCHX at average channel conditions. The homogenous equilibrium model (HEM) is used to calculate the two-phase liquid-boiling pressure drop, and the McAdams et al. (1942) viscosity is used to calculate the two-phase Reynolds number (Retp = 5933). The friction factors are calculated using the correlation of Churchill (1977b). This straight forward calculation shows that increasing the vapor (and two-phase) density and decreasing the mass flux both result in lower pressure drop. The liquid-boiling two-phase pressure gradient calculated using the correlation of Chisholm (1967) at a quality of 0.5 is shown in Eq. (2). Similar trends are seen for the effect of mass flux and vapor density on the pressure gradient.
(1)@
(2)@
Fig. 12. Liquid-boiling MCHX pressure gradients and heat flux.
3.3. Heat transfer model
The heat transfer model is implemented on the Engineering Equations Solver (EES) platform (Klein, 2017). The active channel length of the liquid-boiling MCHX was segmented into one hundred control volumes (lseg = lch/100 = 5 mm). A grid independence study showed no significant changes in the heat duty (<0.1%) as a result of increasing the number of control-volume segments beyond one hundred. The appropriate cross-sectionally averaged 1-D conservation equations for single-phase and two-phase flow are applied to the primary and secondary coolant control volumes, respectively. Segment fluid states and the heat duty were determined by solving the energy balance equations and the UA-ΔTlm equation, as shown in Eq. (3). Simultaneously, the momentum conservation equations for both fluids were solved, allowing the outlet temperature to be evaluated from the pressure and specific enthalpy of the fluid: T = T(P,i). The thermal resistance and UA of each segment were calculated using a one-dimensional resistance network as shown in Fig. 13, where the upper path represents heat transfer from the top half of a primary channel to the bottom half of a secondary channel, and the bottom path represents heat transfer from bottom half of a primary channel to top half of a secondary channel. This resistance network considers the convection resistance from both the primary and secondary coolants, as well as the resistance due to fouling on the channel walls and the conduction resistance of the 316 SS wall between the primary and secondary channels. The regions between the channels on the same sheet were treated as fins, and the efficiency of the fin and overall surface efficiency were calculated using the expressions for an adiabatically tipped fin. The convective, wall and fouling resistances were calculated using Eq. (4). The resistance network in Fig. 13 represents heat transfer from a one complete primary coolant channel to a one complete secondary channel, and is representative of all pairs of channels due to the assumption of uniform coolant flow distribution. Therefore, by accounting for the total number of channels per sheet nch,ps, and pairs of sheets in the MCHX block nsheet, the overall thermal resistance for one axial segment can be calculated as shown in Eq. (5). The heat transfer coefficient, frictional pressure gradient, and other correlations were evaluated using the average enthalpy, pressure, and quality in the segment. The acceleration component of the two-phase momentum equation was evaluated using the void fraction and quality at the inlet and outlet of each segment.
(3)@
(4)@
(5)@
Fig. 13. MCHX resistance network (Kromer et al., 2017).
Table 4 shows a summary of the transition criteria and heat transfer and pressure drop correlations used for the secondary-coolant in the liquid-boiling MCHX model. These correlations resulted in the best agreement between model predictions and experimentally measured heat transfer and pressure drop for a representative liquid-boiling MCHX test section (Kromer, 2019). If the transition criteria shown in Table 4 are satisfied within a segment, the correlations for the next heat transfer regime are implemented in the next downstream segment. Detailed discussion on both the correlations shown in Table 4, as well as the other candidate correlations considered for this MCHX configuration are discussed elsewhere (Kromer, 2019).
Table 4. Liquid-boiling model transition and correlation summary.
3.4. Pressure drop and flow distribution model
A parallel flow path model was applied to the secondary coolant sheets of the liquid-boiling MCHX design to determine the pressure drop and flow distribution. In this model, the secondary-coolant sheets were split into ten segments equal in length in the azimuthal direction (containing 44 or 45 channels). Each segment contains a flow path passing from the inlet header to the outlet header, as shown in Fig. 14. A mechanical energy balance, shown in Eq. (6) was applied to the single-phase portion of flow paths along the inlet and outlet headers to determine the pressure change.
(6)@
Fig. 14. Secondary coolant flow paths.
Channel pressure drop was determined using the segmented heat transfer model discussed in Section 3.3. The primary and secondary coolant inlet temperatures and pressures were held constant at the values listed in Table 3 and the primary coolant mass flow rate was held constant at the evenly distributed value, @ = 1.493 g s−1. The mass flow rate of each flow path was calculated iteratively in EES by requiring all flow paths to have the same total pressure drop calculated in Eq. (7).
(7)@
The parallel flow model was first applied to a secondary sheet with equal inlet and outlet header dimensions. This symmetric sheet had the dimensions shown in Fig. 8, except that both inlet and outlet headers occupied the entire available area (the wedge section blocking part of the inlet header was removed). Fig. 15 shows the resulting pressure in the headers and the flow distribution. The inlet header pressure drop was comparatively small because of the high-density, low-velocity subcooled liquid conditions. After vaporization, the low-density, high-velocity conditions in the outlet header lead to a significantly larger pressure drop. As a result, the flow paths traveling short lengths in the outlet header (the higher numbered paths) had significantly higher flow rates. From this analysis, it is evident that maldistribution could occur with this header configuration.
Fig. 15. Symmetric sheet header pressure and flow distribution.
By increasing the pressure drop in the inlet header, a more uniform pressure differential between channels was achieved. This was accomplished by adding a wedge section, shown in Fig. 8, decreasing the radial length at the inlet to the header from 0.150 m to 0.035 m. Fig. 16 shows the resulting pressure in the headers and flow distribution in an asymmetric sheet. All flow paths were within ± 5% of the evenly distributed value and resulted in superheated vapor states at the outlet of channels.
Fig. 16. Asymmetric sheet header pressure and flow distribution.
<Section>4. I2S-LWR Rankine cycle with liquid-boiling MCHX</Section>
A Rankine power cycle model was developed for the liquid-boiling MCHX. A design similar to the flash Rankine cycle with liquid–liquid MCHX (Kromer et al., 2017) was selected to determine the impact of using the MCHX as a steam generator on the thermal efficiency of the I2S-LWR plant. Otherwise, it would be unclear whether improvements in performance were attributable to the use of the liquid-boiling MCHX or the modified power cycle. A schematic of the cycle is shown in Fig. 17. It should be noted that incremental improvements in the thermal efficiency are still possible by adding additional turbine bleed streams and feedwater heaters. Several pumps may also be removed by using closed feedwater heaters (CFWH) instead of open feedwater heaters (OFWH), with minimal effect on thermal efficiency. A high-temperature reheater (RH 2) and a closed feedwater heater (CFWH) were added to the flash Rankine cycle design. Utilizing superheated steam from the MCHX, the high-temperature reheater (RH 2) serves to further superheat the high-pressure turbine exhaust and decrease moisture in downstream turbines. This configuration is common in PWR Rankine cycles (Steam, 2005) and eliminates the need for a lower temperature reheater in the flash Rankine cycle (Kromer, 2019). The CFWH, which condenses the high-pressure steam from RH 2, allows the feedwater to be heated to temperatures above that of the high-pressure turbine bleed stream (state 4).
Fig. 17. I2S-LWR Rankine cycle.
4.1. Rankine cycle model
A steady-state thermodynamic model of the Rankine cycle in Fig. 17 was developed in EES. Thermodynamic properties of water were evaluated using the built-in EES routines (Wagner and Pruß, 2002). Key assumptions (such as isentropic component efficiencies and the condenser temperature) used to develop the model were the same as those in the flash Rankine cycle and are listed in Table 5. All OFWH outlets (states 19, 21, 23, and 25) were assumed to be saturated liquids. Superheated steam exiting on the cold-side of the reheaters (state 8 and 10) were 10 °C below the saturation temperature of steam on the hot side, consistent with the 10 °C heat exchanger approach temperature assumption. These two requirements dictate the turbine bleed stream flow rates (state 4 and 12) as well as the enthalpy of the streams from the moisture separators to the OFWHs (states 7 and 15). The inlet and outlet of the MCHX (states 1 and 27) were determined using the liquid-boiling MCHX model and were inputs to the cycle model. The flow rate of diverted high-pressure steam from the MCHX (state 2) was determined by requiring that the hot-side outlet of the CFWH (state 28) be in the saturated liquid state, and the cold-side outlet (state 27) be at the specified MCHX inlet state. Additionally, all piping and heat exchangers were assumed to have negligible pressure drop. The above requirements allowed four independent variables to be varied to determine the maximum efficiency of the cycle: the outlet pressures and bleed stream pressures of the high and intermediate turbines (states 4, 5, 12, 13).
Table 5. Rankine cycle assumptions.
4.2. Secondary coolant conditions and Rankine cycle optimization
The lower the secondary-coolant pressure, the larger the difference between the primary coolant temperature and saturation temperature of the secondary coolant, increasing the heat duty of the liquid-boiling MCHX. However, a larger temperature difference also leads to larger exergy destruction rate and a reduced thermal efficiency of the accompanying power cycle. Therefore, the MCHX should operate at the maximum possible pressure at which MCHXs can remove the required 2850 MWth. Two additional constraints were placed on secondary-coolant conditions for the operation of the liquid-boiling MCHX and the accompanying Rankine cycle. First, the inlet to the MCHX (state 27) should be at least 20 °C below the saturation temperature, ensuring that vapor generation does not occur before the secondary coolant enters MCHX channels. Further subcooling at the inlet would result in longer liquid convection and subcooled boiling lengths, both of which are less efficient than the saturated boiling heat transfer regime. Additionally, the secondary coolant should exit the MCHX (state 1) as a superheated vapor at least 20 °C above the saturation temperature. This limits moisture in the high-pressure turbines as the coolant expands and ensures superheated conditions in the secondary-coolant outlet header. However, heat transfer in the vapor convection regime is poor, and the secondary-coolant outlet temperature should therefore not exceed the above requirement to limit the length of this regime. For a given secondary-coolant inlet pressure, the above requirements dictate the inlet temperature @ and outlet temperature @. The approximate secondary-coolant mass flow rate can be calculated using Eq. (8). A range of potential secondary-coolant inlet conditions (Tin, Pin, and @) were calculated in this manner and were used as inputs to the MCHX heat transfer model to determine the heat duty. The model predicted a heat duty of 2850 MWth at a secondary-coolant inlet pressure of 7.666 MPa, representing the highest pressure at which the MCHXs can satisfy the above requirements.
(8)@
The secondary-coolant conditions, shown in Table 3, were used as the inlet and outlet of the MCHX (states 1 and 27) in the Rankine cycle model. The four independent variables in the cycle model were then optimized to determine the maximum cycle efficiency. These included the intermediate system pressures at the outlet and bleed streams of the high and intermediate pressure turbine. The Conjugate Direction search method that uses numeric derivatives to determine minimum or maximum values was used here to determine the maximum thermal cycle efficiency. This resulted in an overall cycle efficiency of 39.03% and electrical power output of 1112.4 MWe. A T-s diagram of the cycle is shown in Fig. 18. For comparison, the liquid–liquid MCHX design and accompanying Flash Rankine cycle had a thermal efficiency of 34.58% and produced 985.5 MWe. In addition to the improved electric power, the liquid-boiling MCHX and accompanying Rankine cycle eliminate the need for flashing drums and large secondary coolant pumps.
Fig. 18. Rankine cycle T-s diagram.
<Section>5. Exergy analysis</Section>
The flow exergy associated with a mass input into a control volume is defined as follows: @, where the subscript zero refers to properties evaluated at the temperature (T0) and pressure (P0) of the surroundings. In both the liquid–liquid and liquid-boiling MCHX designs, the primary coolant conditions are the same, resulting in an equivalent exergy input into the two associated power cycles. The liquid–liquid MCHX requires the use of a flashing drum to create steam, a significant source of exergy destruction. A simple comparison of the two MCHX designs was made by determining the exergy destruction rate in both the liquid–liquid and liquid-boiling MCHX designs as well as the flashing drum in the flash Rankine cycle. Eq. (9) shows the steady-state exergy balance for an open, adiabatic control volume with no work inputs and is used here to determine the exergy destruction rate. The temperature and pressure of the surroundings (environment) were assumed to be 30 °C and 101.325 kPa (1 atm).
(9)@
Fig. 19 shows the exergy destruction rates and the flow exergy for the liquid–liquid and liquid-boiling MCHX designs. The difference between the inlet and outlet flow exergy of the primary coolant (states 1 and 2) shows that 1386 MW of work could be generated if there were no irreversibilities within the power cycles, resulting in a thermal efficiency of 48.63%. However, significant exergy destruction occurs within components, including the MCHX and flashing drum. The liquid–liquid MCHX design was slightly more efficient than the liquid-boiling MCHX, with exergy destruction rates of 56.1 MW and 69.62 MW, respectively. In the liquid–liquid design, the temperature of the secondary coolant increases while that of the primary coolant falls, leading to a consistent temperature difference between 10 °C and 20 °C. In the liquid-boiling design, there is a larger temperature difference between the two coolant streams because the secondary coolant temperature remains constant during the boiling process, leading to significant exergy destruction and irreversibility. However, the flashing drum had an exergy destruction rate of 84.0 MW. The liquid–liquid MCHX and flashing drum had a combined exergy destruction rate of 140 MW as compared with only 69.6 MW in the liquid-boiling design. This accounts for much of the difference in thermal efficiency between the two power cycle designs. Additionally, 119.5 MW was required to pump the secondary coolant (13,016 kg s−1) from the flashing pressure (6.96 MPa) to conditions at the inlet of the MCHX (12.88 MPa) in the flash Rankine cycle. Significant exergy destruction is associated with the turbine inefficiency required to generate power for the pumps, as well as the inefficiencies of the pumps themselves. For comparison, only 14.8 MW of pumping power is required in the liquid-boiling Rankine power cycle. The capital cost of these high flow-rate, high differential-pressure pumps may also be significant.
Fig. 19. Exergy destruction analysis.
<Section>6. Alternative tube-bundle heat exchanger design</Section>
An alternative design using a tube-bundle heat exchanger (TBHX) was also investigated, as shown in Fig. 20 without the accompanying shell. The primary coolant flows axially down the length of the tubes on the shell side while the secondary coolant on the inside of the tubes flows upward in a counterflow orientation. Circular headers at either end of the tube array distribute and collect the secondary coolant. The TBHXs are located in the same eight rectangular locations in the downcomer as the MCHX stacks shown in Fig. 2. The flow paths of the two coolants are shown in Fig. 21. There are no baffles on the primary coolant shell sides to limit pressure drop. Instead, the thermal resistance of both fluids is minimized by the small diameter of tubes, the small pitch between tubes, and highly turbulent conditions. The small tubes and tight square pitch also result in a large surface-area-to-volume ratio, further increasing heat transfer. Spacer grids are located throughout the length of the tubes to reduce flow-induced vibrations and provide structural support. The TBHX design has the advantage of using near-conventional nuclear technology, being similar to existing once-through steam generators. It is therefore subject to more familiar regulatory scrutiny and less uncertainty than the MCHX design. However, the larger number of small welds connecting the tubes and headers may prove difficult to fabricate. To meet the heat transfer requirement, tubes substantially smaller than other once-through nuclear steam generators designs are required. Additionally, this tubular design would be subject to the same flow-induced-vibration fretting and stress-corrosion cracking issues observed in current PWR steam generators (Steam, 2005). They would therefore be subject to the inspection and plugging campaigns required for each tube in existing steam generator designs. This may prove difficult as each of the eight TBHX would have to be removed from the RPV and require thousands of individual inspections. Finally, the TBHX design has less heat transfer area and a higher overall thermal resistance than the MCHX design. Therefore, a larger temperature difference is necessary to remove the required 2850 MWth from the primary coolant. This is accomplished through lower secondary coolant temperatures, which decrease the thermal efficiency of the plant power cycle.
Fig. 20. Tube-bundle heat exchanger CAD image.
Fig. 21. Tube-bundle heat exchanger schematic.
Dimensions of the tube-bundle heat exchanger are shown in Table 6. The shells of the eight TBHXs occupy the same rectangular cross-sectional areas in the downcomer as the MCHX stacks shown in Fig. 2. These regions are filled with 316 stainless steel tubes arranged in a square lattice. Tubes span the same axial height as the MCHX stack, 6.6 m. A small tube diameter (OD = 8 mm) and pitch-to-diameter ratio (PDR = 1.25) were required to meet heat transfer requirements within the limited volume of the I2S-LWR downcomer. As a result, the TBHX tubes are significantly smaller than those used in other once-through nuclear steam generators. For example, Babcock and Wilcox steam generators tubes have an outer dimeter of 15.875 mm and are distributed at a pitch of 22.225 mm (Steam, 2005). IRIS helical-coil steam generator tubes have an outside dimeter of 17.24 mm and inside dimeter of 14.24 (Cioncolini et al., 2003). The tube thickness is based on the collapsing pressure applied on the outside of the tube by the primary coolant and an appropriate safety factor. The heat transfer performance of the TBHX improves as the diameter of the tubes decreases. Similar to the MCHX, smaller tubes result in larger heat transfer coefficients. Additionally, a larger number of tubes can be fit within the shell, increasing the heat transfer area. The thickness required is also lower for smaller dimeter tubes, decreasing conduction resistance. Therefore, heat transfer performance can be further improved in the TBHX by decreasing the tube diameter, although fabrication may become increasingly difficult. The spacer grids are placed roughly 1 m apart in the axial direction and have a thickness equal to half of the distance between tubes (0.5 mm), consistent with spacer grids in Babcock and Wilcox once-through steam generators (Steam, 2005). The six spacer grids provide structural support to the tube array and protect against flow-induced vibrations.
Table 6. Tube-bundle heat exchanger dimensions.
The development of heat transfer and pressure drop model for the liquid-boiling TBHX is similar to that of the liquid-boiling MCHX and is detailed in Kromer (2019). The TBHX was able to meet I2S-LWR primary-to-secondary heat exchanger requirements. Key fluid properties and operation parameters of a liquid-boiling TBHX are shown in Table 7. The secondary coolant inlet temperature was required to be 20 °C below the saturation temperature at the inlet pressure and the outlet temperature was required to be 20 °C above the saturation temperature. These conditions were achieved by adjusting the secondary coolant inlet pressure and flow rate as described in Section 4.2. The secondary-coolant operating conditions were used as input to the Rankine cycle model (described in Section 4.2). The maximum thermal efficiency of the cycle was found to be 37.85% compared to 39.03% for the liquid-boiling MCHX. This is explained by the lower secondary-coolant outlet temperature and pressure of the liquid-boiling TBHX as compared to those of the MCHX, as shown in Table 3.
Table 7. Liquid-boiling TBHX operating parameters.
Fig. 22 shows the temperature profile and heat transfer regimes along the tube length of the TBHX. The relative thermal resistances are shown in Fig. 23. A major difference between the MCHX and the TBHX is the large thermal resistance of the metal tubes. This is most prominent in the saturated-boiling heat transfer regime, where the resistance of the stainless steel tube accounts for ~ 50% of the total resistance compared to ~ 28% in the liquid-boiling MCHX. Tubes in the IRIS steam generator also account for a large fraction of the total thermal resistance. This is due to the relatively thick walls required by the ASME boiler and pressure vessel code based on the primary coolant pressure on the outside of the tubes (Luzzi and Di Marcello, 2011).
Fig. 22. Liquid-boiling TBHX temperature profile.
Fig. 23. Liquid-boiling TBHX relative resistance.
The TBHX design represents a practical alternative to the MCHX in the I2S-LWR. The TBHX design is similar to the once-through steam generators already employed in third-generation nuclear plants and therefore has the advantage of both regulatory and operational familiarity. Additionally, relatively short secondary coolant headers and primary coolant flow on the shell side of the TBHX promote a uniform flow distribution. Pressure drop through the TBHX is also less than that in the MCHX. However, the TBHX results in decreased thermal efficiency both in the liquid–liquid and liquid-boiling options as compared to the MCHX. This is largely due to the significantly higher area-to-volume ratio of the MCHX. The TBHX requires a larger number of tubes with approximately half the diameter of existing steam generator designs. This may lead to both manufacturing and inspection difficulties.
<Section>7. Conclusions</Section>
A novel integral steam generator for inherently safe reactors was developed in this study. These liquid-boiling MCHX designs could meet the unique design requirements of the I2S-LWR. A Rankine power cycle model was developed for a system with this liquid-boiling MCHX design and yielded a thermal efficiency of ~ 39%, which is substantially higher than the 34.58% efficiency of the flash Rankine cycle. A simple exergy analysis was performed to quantify and analyze the exergy destruction rate in the liquid–liquid and liquid-boiling MCHX designs as well as the flashing drum in the flash Rankine cycle. While the liquid–liquid MCHX with an exergy destruction of 56.1 MW performed slightly better than the liquid-boiling design with an exergy destruction of 69.6 MW, the combined exergy destruction of the liquid–liquid MCHX and the flashing drum was ~ 140 MW, due to the substantial destruction of exergy in the flashing process. This difference in exergy destruction accounts for much of the difference in thermal efficiency between the two power cycles. A tube-bundle heat exchanger (TBHX), similar to the tubular steam generators used in existing PWRs, was analyzed as an alternative primary-to-secondary heat exchanger of the I2S-LWR. The liquid-boiling TBHX design was also able to meet the unique design requirements of the I2S-LWR. However, the TBHX required larger temperature differences between coolant streams to meet the 2850 MWth heat duty requirement compared to the MCHX design. This resulted in lower thermal efficiency and electrical output in the associated power cycles.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Daniel Kromer: Methodology, Investigation, Writing - original draft. Sriram Chandrasekaran: Writing - original draft. Srinivas Garimella: Conceptualization, Supervision.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
This research was funded by the US Department of Energy, Office of Nuclear Energy’s Nuclear Energy University Program Integrated Research Project (DE-AC07-05ID14517).
<Section>References</Section>
Baroczy, 1963
C. Baroczy
Correlation of liquid fraction in two-phase flow with application to liquid metals
Atom. Int. (1963), 10.2172/4742622
Google Scholar
Bergles and Rohsenow, 1964
Bergles, A.E., Rohsenow, W.M., 1964. The determination of forced-convection surface-boiling heat transfer. J. Heat Trans. 86, 365–372, https://doi.org/10.1115/1.3688697.
Google Scholar
Chisholm, 1967
D. Chisholm
A theoretical basis for the Lockhart-Martinelli correlation for two-phase flow
Int. J. Heat Mass Trans., 10 (1967), pp. 1767-1778, 10.1016/0017-9310(67)90047-6
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Churchill, 1977a
S.W. Churchill
Comprehensive correlating equations for heat, mass and momentum transfer in fully developed flow in smooth tubes
Ind. Eng. Chem. Fund., 16 (1) (1977), pp. 109-116
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Churchill, 1977b
S.W. Churchill
Friction-factor equation spans all fluid-flow regimes
Chem. Eng., 84 (1977), pp. 91-92
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Cioncolini et al., 2003
Cioncolini, A., Cammi, A., Lombardi, C., Luzzi, L., Ricotti, M., Cinotti, L., Castelli, G., 2003. Thermal hydraulic analysis of IRIS reactor coiled tube steam generator. American Nuclear Society Topical Meeting in Mathematics and Computations.
Google Scholar
Dougall and Rohsenow, 1963
Dougall, R.S., Rohsenow, W.M., Film boiling on the inside of vertical tubes with upward flow of the fluid at low qualities. Massachusets Insitute of Technology Technical Report 9079-26, 1963.
Google Scholar
Gungor and Winterton, 1986
K.E. Gungor, R.H.S. Winterton
A general correlation for flow boiling in tubes and annuli
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 29 (3) (1986), pp. 351-358, 10.1016/0017- 9310(86)90205-X
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kim and Mudawar, 2013
S.-M. Kim, I. Mudawar
Universal approach to predicting saturated flow boiling heat transfer in mini/micro-channels – Part I. Dryout incipience quality
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 64 (2013), pp. 1226-1238, 10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2013.04.016
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Klein, 2017
Klein, S.A., 2017. Engineering equation solver. Academic Professional V9.721-3D ed. F-Chart Software.
Google Scholar
Kromer, 2019
Kromer, D.A., Microchannel heat exchangers for integral light water reactors, Georgia Institute of Technology, PhD Dissertation, 2019.
Google Scholar
Kromer et al., 2017
D.A. Kromer, A.J. Huning, S. Garimella
I2S-LWR microchannel heat exchanger design and experimental validation
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 145 (2017), p. 105710, 10.1016/j.anucene.2017.08.043
Google Scholar
Luzzi and Di Marcello, 2011
Luzzi, L., Di Marcello, V., 2011. Collapse of nuclear reactor SG tubes pressurized from outside: The influence of imperfections. J. Press. Vessel Technol. 133, https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4002769.
Google Scholar
Matijević et al., 2016
Matijević, M., Pevec, D., Ječmenica, R., 2016. I2S-LWR activation analysis of heat exchangers using hybrid shielding methodology with SCALE6. 1. J. Energy 65, 138–150.
Google Scholar
McAdams et al., 1942
W. McAdams, W. Woods, L. Heroman
Vaporization inside horizontal tubes-II, benzene-oil mixtures
Trans. ASME, 64 (1942), pp. 193-200
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Memmott et al., 2017
M.J. Memmott, P.R. Wilding, B. Petrovic
An optimized power conversion system concept of the integral, inherently-safe light water reactor
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 100 (2017), pp. 42-52, 10.1016/j.anucene.2016.08.015
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Nageswara and Deepak, 2007
R. Nageswara, K. Deepak
Fabrication of microchannels on stainless steel by wet chemical etching
J. Micromech. Microeng., 17 (12) (2007), pp. N99-N106, 10.1088/0960-1317/17/12/N01
Google Scholar
Petrovic et al., 2017a
Petrovic, B., Memmott, M., Boy, G., Charit, I., Manera, A., Downar, T., Lee, J., Muldrow, L., Upadhyaya, B., Hines, W., Haghighat, A., Integral inherently safe light water reactor (I2S-LWR), Georgia Institute of Technology, DOE/NEUP-12-4733, 2017a.
Google Scholar
Petrovic et al., 2017b
B. Petrovic, F. Rahnema, C. Deo, S. Garimella, P. Singh, K. Oh, C. Yi, D. Zhang, A. Manera, J. Lee, T. Downar, A. Ward, P. Ferroni, F. Franceschini, D. Salazar, B. Upadhyaya, M. Lish, I. Charit, A. Haghighat, M. Memmott, G. Boy, A. Ougouag, G. Parks, D. Kotlyar, M. Ricotti, N. Čavlina, D. Grgić, D. Pevec, M. Matijević, N. Irvin
I2S-LWR Concept Update
Springer Singapore, Singapore (2017), pp. 153-167
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Saha and Zuber, 1974
Saha, P., Zuber, N., 1974. Point of net vapor generation and vapor void fraction in subcooled boiling. The International Heat Transfer Conference, Tokyo, Japan.
Google Scholar
Steam, 2005
Steam, 2005. Steam - Its Generation and Use, 41 ed, Barberton. Ohio, USA.
Google Scholar
Wagner and Pruß, 2002
W. Wagner, A. Pruß
The IAPWS formulation 1995 for the thermodynamic properties of ordinary water substance for general and scientific use
J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 31 (2) (2002), pp. 387-535, 10.1063/1.1461829
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar