<title>Non-linear dynamics of single phase rectangular natural circulation loop</title>
<author>1,VishalGoyal,2,VishalGoyal,3,VikasPandey,4,SuneetSingh</author>
<Affiliation>1,Mechanical Engineering Department, Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, India;2,Department of Energy Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, India;3,David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, USA</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2020.103530</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S014919702030278X</URL>
Non-linear dynamics of single phase rectangular natural circulation loop
VishalGoyal,VishalGoyal,VikasPandey,SuneetSingh
Mechanical Engineering Department, Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi, India
Department of Energy Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, India
David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, USA
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Non-linear stability analysis for a natural circulation loop.
Stability analysis for small as well as large perturbations.
Identification of the subcritical Hopf bifurcation.
Depiction of regions of unstable limit cycle, stable limit cycle and chaos.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The future nuclear reactors are being engineered to function completely on the phenomena of thermosiphoning. These reactors are equipped with various natural circulation-based systems which offer several benefits. The linear stability analysis examines the stability for such systems for small perturbations. If perturbations are slightly large, linear stability fails to fathom the stability of the system. In such cases, it becomes imperative to perform non-linear stability analysis. In the present work, a rectangular natural circulation loop has been simulated for small as well as large perturbations to underscore the importance of non-linear stability analysis. The key objectives of the present work include identification of the subcritical Hopf bifurcation and unravelling the repercussions of larger perturbation on the system in each region of the parametric space. The unfolding of dynamics from unstable limit cycles to chaos and then back to stable fixed points have been investigated through numerical simulations.
Graphical abstract
Keywords:Natural circulation systems;Stability analysis;Non-linear analysis;Hopf bifurcation;System dynamics
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
In recent years, people are more concerned about the impact of burning the fossil fuels on the climate. To reduce the emissions of greenhouse gases, fuels attributed to less CO2 emissions are drawing significant attention by humankind. Nuclear is one of the cleanest source of energy but there are safety concerns associated with nuclear power generation. Heat removal systems based on the phenomena of natural circulation are considered indispensable for addressing the key safety issue of heat removal from the nuclear reactors. The future nuclear reactors like Molten Salt Reactor (MSR), Advanced Heavy Water Reactor (AHWR), Economic Simplified Boiling Water Reactor (ESBWR) are being engineered to function entirely on the phenomena of thermos siphoning. However, it is imperative to carry out a performance assessment of natural circulation based systems before finalizing them into the design of the plant. The inherent passiveness and reliable driving force in single-phase natural circulation loop makes them suitable for many other practical applications like solar water heating, geothermal energy, electronic chipset cooling, etc (Basu et al., 2014).
Substantial literature is available dealing with the Single Phase Natural Circulation Loop (SPNCL). Many studies have also been reported dealing with tortuous and rectangular shape NCL. The earlier studies mainly focussed on toroidal shape NCL. Nevertheless, since the shape is less useful from the viewpoint of practical application, due to its, complicated construction, the subsequent studies focused on rectangular SPNCL. In both types of geometries, the main concern is the unstable dynamic behaviour due to buoyancy-driven flow. It has also been observed that under certain conditions, the mass flow rate in the loop not only fluctuates but also changes its flow direction. The studies (Basu et al., 2013a, 2012; Muscato and Xibilia, 2003; Saha et al., 2015; Vijayan and Austregesilo, 1994; Vijayan, 2002) have predicted the dynamic behaviour of rectangular SPNCL through various experiments and theoretical models. Many researchers (Desrayaud et al., 2013; Kudariyawar et al., 2016; Luzzi et al., 2017; Vijayan et al., 2007, 1995) have also used CFD and other simulation tools to predict the dynamic behaviour of NCL. Effect of various physical parameter of the loop on its stability has also been studied in detail by several researchers (Basu et al., 2013b; Devia and Misale, 2012; Goudarzi and Talebi, 2015; Misale, 2016; Misale et al., 2011; Misale and Frogheri, 2001).
Typically, the linear stability analysis is used to obtain a basic understanding of the dynamics of the system. It identifies the stable and unstable regions in the parameter space for small perturbations induced into the system. In case the nonlinear behaviour of a system is dominant, it may exhibit a variety of behaviours like limit cycles, subcritical, and supercritical Hopf bifurcation, chaos etc. The linear stability analysis fails to accurately predict the system stability due to the presence of unstable limit cycles in the linearly stable region for subcritical Hopf bifurcation. It is to be noted that a system may exhibit unstable dynamic behaviour when finite perturbation is given to the system if it is operating in the subcritical (linearly) stable region. In such a case, the system settles to a stable focus for small perturbation as it gets repelled by unstable limit cycle, whereas in case of relatively larger perturbations, the system starts moving away from the unstable limit cycle. Therefore, it is very crucial to identify the regions of subcritical Hopf bifurcation in the parameter space. The aforementioned reason renders it imperative to perform non-linear stability analysis for a nonlinear system. It is to be noted that some work related to the nonlinear analysis has been reported in the literature. Subcritical behaviour of torus SPNCL has been theoretically and experimentally examined in (Gorman et al., 1986; Widmann et al., 1989). Several other researchers (Ehrhard and Muller, 1990; Sano, 1991, 1991) have also discussed the non-linear behaviour exhibited by torous SPNCL. Some preliminary study regarding non-linear behaviour of rectangular SPNCL has been conducted by Cammarata et al. (2000). Chaos has also been reported by several researchers (Garilaldi, 2008; Muscato and Xibilia, 2003; Vijayan et al., 2007) but a detailed discussion is missing.
It is to be noted that in the open literature no one has discussed the effect of large perturbations on such NCL or similar systems. Hence so far, the regions with subcritical Hopf bifurcations have not been identified in the parameter space. In the present work, one dimensional model, which was developed by Vijayan and Austregesilo (1994) and further used by Vijayan (2002), has been taken up to simulate the transient behaviour of rectangular single-phase natural circulation loop for simulating small as well as large perturbations to investigate the system stability. It is also to be noted that in a real system due to practical constraints, it is almost impossible to eliminate fluctuations or perturbations. Hence, it is imperative to study the system stability behaviour for small as well as large perturbations under various operating conditions. In the present work, while dynamically simulating the system with consideration of variation in physical parameters, subcritical Hopf bifurcation and chaos have been observed. The stability map has also been plotted which depicts regions of all sorts of behaviour that the system exhibits for various values of different parameters. The regions of stable, unstable limit cycles and chaos have also been clearly presented on the parametric map.
<Section>2. Theoretical model</Section>
A rectangular NCL can be arranged in any of the following four different configurations based on the arrangement of heater and cooler.
i)
Vertical heater with vertical cooler (VHVC)
ii)
Vertical heater with horizontal cooler (VHHC)
iii)
Horizontal heater with vertical cooler (HHVC), and
iv)
Horizontal heater with horizontal cooler (HHHC)
Vijayan et al. (2007) shown that vertical heater configurations are not only immune to flow reversals but are also inherently more stable. The issue of flow reversal is only encountered in horizontal heater setup, especially instabilities on account of flow reversals are severe cause of concern in horizontal heater with horizontal cooler configuration (HHHC). The configuration offers the maximum mass flow rate for the same heater power amongst the four aforementioned configurations but is inherently least stable. Hence, the present work is focussed towards unravelling the non-linear dynamics of the HHHC configuration NCL.
The one-dimensional flow model has been adopted to analyse the dynamic behaviour of NCL. This is in compliance with the observation made by Pilkhwal et al. (2007). They compared the performance and predictability of one-dimensional model with respect to the multi-dimensional computational fluid dynamic (CFD) approach. Their work revealed that one-dimensional model can effectively simulate both steady-state as well as transient behaviour of NCL for HHHC configuration. The CFD also predicted the same behaviour, but with the drawback of increased computational cost and time.
2.1. Governing equations
The schematic diagram of a rectangular NCL with horizontal heater and horizontal cooler is shown in Fig. 1. This figure represents the loop as used by Mousavian et al. (2004), Loop#1 experimental setup at Genoa. The loop is made of a constant diameter pipe. A Nichrome heating wire is coiled around heater to provide constant heat flux input. The cooler is coaxial pipe-in-pipe heat exchanger where the loop primary fluid flows through the inner pipe and secondary coolant fluid flows through the outer annulus which is maintained at constant inlet temperature along with the constant mass flow rate. The following assumptions have been considered for developing the mathematical model of the aforementioned loop:
a)
The fluid is taken as incompressible.
b)
The fluid flow in the loop is taken as one dimensional
c)
Axial conduction in fluid and pipe thermal conductivity is neglected
d)
Pipe walls are taken to be perfectly insulated
e)
Viscous heat dissipation is neglected
f)
The Boussinesq approximation is assumed for the density term in the momentum equation
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of experimental setup by Mousavian et al. (Mousavian et al., 2004) Loop#1 at Genoa.
The governing equations for the single phase rectangular NCL with consideration of the aforementioned assumptions are presented by Eqns. (1), (2), (3)).
Continuity:
@(1)
Momentum:
@(2)
Energy:
@(3)
Where C is the source or sink term which is@for heater section,@for cooler section and zero for the adiabatic section. The density variations, as considered in the buoyancy term of the momentum equation are given by Eqn. (4) in the body force term.
Density
@(4)
The momentum equation can be integrated along the axial direction of the loop. This transforms equation (2) into Eqn. (5).
@(5)
where, the friction factor@is given by Eqn. (6).
@(6)
The value of coefficients as appearing in the friction factor expression for all three regions have been taken from by Swapnalee et al. (Swapnalee and Vijayan, 2011), which has also been verified by Wang et al. (2013). Values of@and@are:
(for laminar flow) ;
(for transition flow) ;
(for turbulent flow using Blasius equation) ;
The transformation of the governing equations into non-dimensional form has been performed through the instrumentality of following non-dimensional parameters.
where ,@and@represent the non-dimensional value of mass flow rate, elevation from datum, time and temperature, respectively. Mass flow rate has been non-dimensionalized in such a manner that at steady state, value of@is always equals to one . After incorporating the aforementioned nondimensional parameters, the momentum and energy conservation equations can be re-written as Eqns. (7), (8), (9), (10), (11)).
Continuity
@(7)
Momentum
@(8)
Energy
@(9)
@(10)
@(11)
Where:@
It is apparent from the obtained non-dimensional numbers that the@is directly proportional to the heater input power ( and@is directly proportional to@number, which in turn depends upon the overall heat transfer coefficient. Hence, the dynamic behaviour of rectangular single phase natural circulation loop is governed by these two key parameters.
2.2. Hopf Bifurcation and chaos
Consider a dynamical system whose governing equations can be represented by a set of coupled ordinary differential equations with dependent variables , ,@…. . as follows:
where.
@
The nature of equilibrium point changes from the spiral sink (all nearby trajectories reaching towards equilibrium point) to spiral source (all nearby trajectories repelling away from the equilibrium point) as independent variable@varies. As the system changes its behaviour, there comes point i.e. , at which the system is in neutral equilibrium condition. This critical point is called the Hopf bifurcation point and locus of this point defines the stability boundary. At the point of Hopf bifurcation, a pair of complex eigen values becomes purely imaginary.
The linear dynamics of a system is categorized as either stable or unstable, but non-linear dynamics is not only limited to the aforementioned types. A non-linear system may exhibit some other phenomena like limit cycles, chaos, etc. In general, limit cycles are closed trajectories in the phase space. These trajectories either attract or repel the nearby trajectories based on the nature of the limit cycle i.e. stable or unstable. Depending upon the stability of the limit cycles, Hopf bifurcation can be categorized as either “supercritical Hopf” or “subcritical Hopf” bifurcations.
The subcritical Hopf bifurcation is considered as hard and dangerous because a stable system can become unstable for large perturbations. Therefore, the regions of parametric space which are linearly stable can exhibit instability for large perturbations. In contrast, the supercritical Hopf bifurcation is considered as soft and safe because it exhibits stable limit cycles in the linearly unstable regions. The large and small perturbations settle onto the stable limit cycles in the linearly unstable regions. Moreover, the perturbations in the linearly stable region converge to stable fixed points.
As one moves along the stability boundary by varying the system parameters, it undergoes a change from subcritical to supercritical or vice versa. The point on the stability boundary at which unstable and stable limit cycles around stable focus die out is the point of transition from subcritical to supercritical behaviour. This point is known as the Generalized Hopf Bifurcation (GH) point.
2.3. Linear stability analysis
For single-phase natural circulation loop governing equations are partial differential equations. These equations can be changed into the ordinary differential equations (ODEs) in time by partial discretization in space coordinate. The discretization of the equations is carried out by dividing the loop into ‘n’ number of nodes, which yields a set of n+1 equations, as specified below.
Momentum conservation equation is expressed by Eqn. (12).
@(12)
Periodic boundary condition is expressed by Eqn. 13
@(13)
For heater
@
, Eqn. (14) has been obtained where j = i+2.
@(14)
For Adiabatic section 1
@
, Eqn. (15) has been obtained.
@(15)
For cooler section
@
, Eqn. (16) is obtained.
@(16)
For adiabatic section 2
@
, Eqn. (17) is obtained.
(17)
To investigate the nature of equilibrium point, at first, the Jacobian matrix is obtained from equations (12)–(17) as presented by Eqn. (18).
@(18)
Subsequently, Hopf bifurcation line (stability map) has been obtained by estimating the eigen values of Jacobian matrix as specified by Eqn. (18). The governing parameters are varied and stability boundary has been plotted by joining all the points for which the real part of eigen value with the largest value equals to zero. Therefore, the stability boundary separates the unstable and stable regions. In accordance with the present approach, the stability map has been generated for the NCL setup at BARC for the HHHC configuration and compared against the original results as obtained by Vijayan et al. (2007) as depicted in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2. Stability map for natural circulation loop setup at BARC in HHHC configuration. the results are compared with the previously published results by Vijayan et al. (Vijayan et al., 2007).
Vijayan et al. (2007) plotted two separate stability boundaries for laminar and turbulent regions. These two separate plots should ideally be merged together for realistic results as depicted by Pini et al. (2016). After merging both the regions, the complete stability map for HHHC configuration is exemplified in Fig. 3. In the present study, instead of making two different stability maps for laminar and turbulent behaviour, single stability map has been plotted, considering the loop behaviour as the flow through the loop changes from laminar to transition and from transition to turbulent with the change in Grashof number.
Fig. 3. Stability map for natural circulation loop setup at BARC, including laminar as well as turbulent region.
<Section>3. Results and discussion</Section>
3.1. Hopf Bifurcation
The non-linear stability analysis has been performed for the single-phase natural circulation loop as represented for the experimental setup (Loop#1) at Genoa and specified by Mousavian et al. (2004). The stability map has been obtained for the loop in accordance with the method as discussed in the previous section. The stability map has been found to be dependent upon the “number of nodes in the loop” as indicated by the studies conducted on the Welander's problem by Ambrosini et al. (Ambrosini and Ferreri, 1998). In order to understand the importance of node length, the stability map has been plotted for two different node lengths as presented in Fig. 4. The observed variation in the plots in case of 1090 nodes (s = 5 mm) and 2180 nodes (s = 2.5 mm), is found to be extremely trivial. Hence, a node length of has been taken as the reference.
Fig. 4. Stability map for loop#1 with node length s = 5 mm and s = 2.5 mm. Area enclosed by curve showing unstable region and area outside the curve showing stable area.
It can be noticed in Fig. 4, that at two places, the sudden jumps are taking place. These discontinuities are attributed to the change in flow behaviour from laminar to transition and from transition to turbulent respectively. The obtained stability map has been verified with the one as obtained by Mousavian et al. (2004) for Loop#1. It is to be noted that Mousavian et al. (2004) considered the flow to be only laminar for estimating the stability boundary.
The results as obtained by stability map have been verified by plotting the transient variation of@(non-dimensional mass flow rate). Table 1 lists down six largest eigen values in unstable and in stable region respectively. It can be observed in Fig. 5 (c) and (d) that “” asymptotically reaches towards the equilibrium point@when all the eigen values have negative real part, whereas “” moves away from the equilibrium point in the unstable region, where a pair of eigen values have positive real part as depicted in Fig. 5 (a) and (b).
Table 1. Six Eigen values of largest real part at point Unstable point X and Stable point Y.
Fig. 5. Numerical simulation at unstable point “X” (a) 2-D phase plot, (b) transient variation of ω and at stable point “Y” (c) 2-D phase plot, (d) transient variation of ω at stable point.
3.2. Subcritical behaviour
The governing equations (Eqns. (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6))) of the NC loop considered in the present study are ODEs in time. The finite difference method can be adopted for solving the same as exemplified by Vijayan et al. (2007) and Mousavien (Mousavian et al., 2004). The finite difference approach reduces the differential equations to algebraic form as represented by Eqns.(19), (20), (21), (22)).
@(19)
@(20)
@(21)
@(22)
Here the index “@” represents the time, while the index “@” has been used to denote the space domain. The numerical solution has been obtained by solving the energy equations explicitly with a time step of 0.0001 along with the implicit approach for the momentum equation using the Newton-Raphson method. Initially, the temperature in the entire loop is taken to be at steady-state condition and the mass flow rate is perturbed from the steady-state to perform the non-linear stability analysis. It is noteworthy to be pointed that the initial condition for the mass flow rate in the loop depends upon the magnitude of perturbation to be induced in the system.
To understand the dynamics of the system, an arbitrary point@has been taken on the stability map as depicted in Fig. 6 and transient simulations have been performed in the adjacent regions since non-linear effects are dominant only near the stability boundary. The results of simulation for points@are shown in Fig. 7, where variation of non-dimensional mass flow rate () with respect to non-dimensional time@has been clearly depicted. The points@are in unstable region and, the variation of@in unstable region is presented in Fig. 7 (a) and (d). At these points, even the small perturbation grows and the system diverges from the steady-state. This behaviour of the system indicates that, in linearly unstable region, equilibrium point () is the unstable focus.
Fig. 6. Point O on stability map and its nearby points A, B, C, and D. Point A & D are in unstable region, point C & B are in stable region.
Fig. 7. Transient variation of ω in subcritical region at points (a) AO in unstable region, (b) BO in stable region at small perturbation, (c) BO in stable region at large perturbation, (d) DO in unstable region, (e) BO in stable region at small perturbation, and (f) CO in stable region at large perturbation.
Simulations have also been performed in stable region at points , as apparent in Fig. 7 (b), (c), (e), and (f). When small perturbations are induced in the system then it attains equilibrium state as depicted in Fig. 7 (b) and (e), but for large perturbations from steady-state () as witnessed in Fig. 7 (c) and (f), perturbations grow and start moving away from the steady-state. The observed behaviour is unusual from its expected behaviour in the stable region and till date has not been reported in the open literature. These points are in stable region but still exhibit unstable dynamical behaviour for higher perturbations. This is possibly due to the presence of an unstable limit cycle around the stable equilibrium point. In case of low deviations from the initial condition as apparent from Fig. 7 (b) and (e) perturbations are within the unstable limit cycle so they get attracted towards the equilibrium point, but in case of large perturbation as depicted in Fig. 7 (c) and (f) amplitude of perturbations lies outside the unstable limit cycle, hence they get repelled by the unstable limit cycle and the perturbations grow. This dynamical behaviour of the system is similar to the behaviour of a system under subcritical Hopf condition as discussed in Pandey and Singh (2015). This unstable dynamical behaviour of system cannot be predicted by linear stability method, which underscores the importance of non-linear analysis.
The carried out simulations also revealed that growth in perturbation is not infinite either in unstable region, as depicted in Fig. 7 (a) and (d), or in the stable region, as apparent from Fig. 7 (c) and (f). The perturbation grows up to some higher value and subsequently starts oscillating with the same magnitude. Fig. 7 (a) and (d) indicate the presence of a stable limit cycle outside an unstable focus in stable. However, in Fig. 7 (c) and (f) presence of stable limit cycle outside an unstable limit cycle is seen. The stable limit cycle is possibly due to the saddle-node bifurcation of the limit cycle or limit point of cycles (LPC). This is a type of bifurcation in limit cycles as reported by Pandey and Singh (2017). The values of the parameters for the points at which simulations are carried out are presented in Table 2. Moreover, the stability characteristics at each point are also specified in the same table.
Table 2. Summary table of dynamical behaviour of the system in subcritical Hopf region.
It should be noted that subcritical Hopf bifurcations are present in the parametric space. The unstable limit cycles have also been observed in the linearly unstable region which means, the smaller perturbations are repelled towards the stable fixed points and the perturbations larger than that of the unstable limit cycles are repelled by them. These perturbations settle to a stable limit cycle of the large amplitudes. These stable limit cycles can be found in the linear unstable regions as the parameters are changed. It is observed from Fig. 7 that the perturbations for AO and DO points settle to limit cycles of larger amplitude. It is also apparent from the figure that the perturbations for BO, CO finally settle to the limit cycles of the larger perturbations. These stable limit cycles do not stop in the stable region. The origin of the limit point bifurcation of the limit cycles is Generalized Hopf bifurcation point. The GH point divides the stability boundary into supercritical and subcritical Hopf points. In the present study, the supercritical Hopf Bifurcation points do not exist in the range of the feasible parameters. Since, the whole stability boundary is only subcritical therefore no GH point has been found.
3.3. Chaotic behaviour
Once the subcritical Hopf bifurcation points have been located, system simulations have been carried out by increasing Grm, i.e. in the unstable region. The dynamics of the system near the boundary has been observed to be similar to that of the dynamics at points A and D as represented in Fig. 6 and explained in the previous section. However, beyond a certain value of Grm, system exhibits chaotic behaviour. This behaviour has already been reported in some of the literature as discussed in the introduction section. The phenomenon of chaos and strange attracters in chaotic region has been first explained by Lorenz (1963). Due to the symmetry in the geometry, system has two equilibrium solutions for each of the operating conditions. Hence, flow can be stable in either clockwise or anticlockwise direction with the same magnitude. In chaotic region, flow direction changes repeatedly, without any prior indication. The pattern of flow never repeats itself. Vijayan et al. (2007) have observed the similar behaviour for many operating conditions. They termed this behaviour as “chaotic switching”. Devia et al. (2012) have also observed similar dynamical behaviour through numerical simulations and experiments but failed to properly fathom and predict it.
The prediction of chaotic behaviour is almost impossible through simulation. This is attributed to the sensitive dependency of chaos on the initial condition. In chaotic region, if initial condition of the system differs even by a very small amount, the dynamics of the system undergoes exponential divergence from each other. This behaviour of system has been simulated and represented in Fig. 8, where perturbations differ only by@but their transient variation reveals that the path traced by@is quite different. This testifies that in chaotic conditions, long term prediction of system behaviour is almost impossible, because even a little deviation in initial condition from theoretical conditions can result in significant variation in system behaviour. The fractal dimension has also been evaluated to further verify the observations as obtained from the numerical simulations. The estimated fractal dimensions for both the cases as presented by Fig. 8, i.e. for@(0) = 1.0000001 and 1.0000002 are 1.7707 and 1.8008 respectively (The calculation of fractal dimensions for these two cases is elaborated in Appendix A). These fractal dimensions are non-integer, which confirms strange attractors and attractors are chaotic in nature. The chaotic nature has been further demonstrated in Fig. 8 with respect to the sensitivity to initial conditions.
Fig. 8. Transient variation of@at two different initial conditions which are very close to each other but showing different transient behaviour (Sensitive dependency on initial condition).
Along with the above phenomenon, the system is found to exhibit one more strange behaviour near the upper region of the stability boundary in stable region. In this region system is found to exhibit stable behaviour for small perturbation, but for large perturbations, system initially shows chaotic behaviour. It is interesting to note that due to the symmetry in the system, there are two equilibriums in the system. These equilibriums are manifested as flow in opposite directions in the loop. After the aforementioned initial chaotic flow reversals, the system settles to one of the equilibrium points as represented in Fig. 9. Hence in this region, system is stable for only small perturbations. In case of very large perturbations, system undergoes chaotic flow reversals before attaining one of the two steady states. This initial chaotic behaviour as observed in the system is due to the fact that the point where simulations are carried out in the parametric space is near a strange attractor. The flow reverals as observed in Fig. 9 (b) are transient and the flow finally settles to a steady value. This is similar to the bifurcations as observed in Lorenz system. There, since the system is stable in linear region, it is not chaotic and returns to a stable state. It is observed from Fig. 9 (b) and 9 (d) that the system finally settles to a steady state representing a flow in the opposite direction with respect to the initial flow. However, these transient flow reversals are unacceptable for efficient and safe operation of the loops.
Fig. 9. (a), (c) Stable behaviour of system for small perturbation, (b), and (d) Initial chaotic behaviour of system for large perturbation at same operating parameter, respectively.
3.4. Dynamic behaviour with system parameters
Vijayan et al. (2007) found that the system becomes more chaotic with the increase in the heater power, while the opposite has been observed by Garilaldi (2008). They also made the observation that instability of the system at first increases with the heater power then all of a sudden system becomes stable and remains the same for the increase in the heater power with the condition that other parameters are maintained constant. To avoid such contradiction, and for reliable operational, it is imperative to examine the variation in system dynamical behaviour for all physical parameters and identify the region in the parameter space where system demonstrates varied dynamic behaviour. Therefore in the present work, the dynamic behaviour of system has been investigated across the stability map in the laminar region by varying the system parameter, and the results are depicted in Fig. 10. The figure brings out different types of behaviours, which system can exhibit, in various regions of the parameter space. The subcritical Hopf region is found near the lower side of the stability boundary, therefore in this region, stable equilibrium point is surrounded by the unstable limit cycles. These unstable limit cycles gain stability via limit point bifurcation of limit cycles and stable limit cycles of large amplitude envelopes the unstable limit cycles. In the unstable region near the lower stability boundary, the unstable equilibrium point is surrounded by the stable limit cycle. As parameter,@increases, system starts exhibiting chaotic nature in unstable region. The@is found to have no significant impact on the chaotic nature of the system. The chaotic nature appears at lower@for higher . After crossing the upper part of stability boundary, system again shows stable behaviour for small perturbations. However, for higher perturbations, the system initially exhibits chaotic behaviour, but after some time again attains one of the equilibrium conditions. The observed nature of the rectangular system is in compliance with the behaviour of the torus system as reported by Widmann et al. (1989).
Fig. 10. Stability map along with the different dynamical behaviour region at different operating points.
<Section>4. Conclusion</Section>
In the present work, the linear stability boundary has been obtained for a NCL system in the parameter space using a one-dimensional mathematical model. Subsequently, the numerical simulations have been carried out in different regions of the parametric space including linearly unstable and stable regions. The simulations have been carried out for both small as well as large initial perturbations from the equilibrium state. It has been found that the system exhibits complex behaviour and comprises of regions with unstable limit cycles and chaos. The existence of chaos has been also reported in the earlier works. It has been observed that system may diverge for slightly large magnitude of perturbations for the regions identified as stable through linear stability analysis. The presence of these instabilities indicates the existence of subcritical Hopf bifurcation. This type of bifurcation is typically identified by the unstable limit cycles in the linearly stable regions. This condition is dangerous for the real-world application of NCL, as fluctuations cannot be completely removed from the practical systems. It is absolutely imperative for practical applicability that a system must be stable for small as well as relatively some large magnitude of fluctuations. One way to deal with such situations is to operate the system far away from the stability boundary. In the present work, based upon the numerical simulations, the parametric space is divided into different regions indicating different behaviour of the system.
A system undergoes different bifurcations before changing its dynamical behaviour like stable to unstable by Hopf bifurcation, but how it changes its behaviour from supercritical Hopf to chaos remains a mystery. Vijayan et al. (2007) experimentally plotted the limit cycle and proposed period-doubling route for changing its behaviour from stable to chaos. However, in the present work, such period-doubling has not been observed during the simulations. Moreover, the system follows the behaviour similar to the Lorenz system. Chaotic strange attractors have also been noticed in the some regions of the parameter space.
The results as obtained from the present work indicate that the rectangular single-phase NCL can exhibit various non-linear behaviours like subcritical Hopf bifurcations, chaos etc. It also exemplifies the inadequacy of the linear analysis to comprehend the dynamics of the system completely. Therefore, it necessitates the pursuance of non-linear analysis to understand the system stability for every operating condition.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Vishal Goyal: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Writing - original draft, Formal analysis. Varun Hassija: Writing - original draft. Vikas Pandey: Conceptualization, Supervision, Formal analysis, Writing - review & editing. Suneet Singh: Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing - review & editing.
<Section>Declaration of competing interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Appendix A.</Section>
Fractal Dimension
Fractals are common in nature, and fractal dimensions estimate the complexity present in the patterns of the fractals. The box-counting method is one of the techniques to calculate the fractal dimensions of the fractals (Mandelbrot, 2004). The non-integer fractal dimension refers to a stranger attractor. The fractal dimensions for the two cases as presented by Fig. 8 have been estimated. A non-integer fractal dimension confirms the presence of strange attractors and these attractors are sensitive to the initial conditions and therefore chaotic. These strange chaotic attractors are shown in Fig. A1 & A2. The case is the same as presented in Fig. 8. The estimated fractal dimensions are 1.7707 and 1.8008 for ω0 = 1.000001 and ω0 = 1.000002 respectively, which thereby confirms the presence of strange attractors. These strange attractors are chaotic in nature (Fig. 8) and they are strongly dependent on the initial conditions.
To estimate the fractal dimensiom, at first 3-D phase space is plotted, and subsequentally it is divided into 3-D cubical boxes such that all the results are covered with boxes. Next, the number of boxes in which the trajectories lie are counted. This process is repeated till box sizes approaches to zero. In the present analysis the boxes of sizes 0.6, 0.36, 0.216, 0.1296, and 0.07776, have been chosen and subsequentally the number of the boxes are calculated. The slope of the curve between number of boxes defines the fractal dimensions.
Fig. A1. Case 1. A) Chaotic strange attractor for the case presented in Fig. 8 is shown in three dimensional space for ω0 = 1.000001. Here the variables HL Tavg and CL Tavg are the average temperature in the hot and cold leg of the loop, respectively. B) Fractal dimension for this case is 1.7707. Box counting method has been used, different number of boxes and corresponding size of the box are used to estimate the fractal dimension.
Fig. A2. Case 2. A) Chaotic strange attractor for the case presented in Fig. 8 is shown in three dimensional space for ω0 = 1.000002. Here, the variables HL Tavg and CL Tavg are the average temperature in the hot and cold leg of the loop, respectively. B) Fractal dimension for this case is 1.8008. Box counting method has been used, different number of boxes and corresponding size of the box are used to estimate the fractal dimension.
<Section>Appendix B. Supplementary data</Section>
The following is the Supplementary data to this article:
Multimedia component 1.
<Section>Research data for this article</Section>
Data not available / Data will be made available on request
About research data
References
Ambrosini and Ferreri, 1998
W. Ambrosini, J.C. Ferreri
The effect of truncation error on the numerical prediction of linear stability boundaries in a natural circulation single-phase loop
Nucl. Eng. Des., 183 (1998), pp. 53-76, 10.1016/s0029-5493(98)00157-5
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Basu et al., 2012
D.N. Basu, S. Bhattacharyya, P.K. Das
Performance comparison of rectangular and toroidal natural circulation loops under steady and transient conditions
Int. J. Therm. Sci., 57 (2012), pp. 142-151, 10.1016/j.ijthermalsci.2012.02.011
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Basu et al., 2013a
D.N. Basu, S. Bhattacharyya, P.K. Das
Development of a unified model for the steady-state operation of single-phase natural circulation loops
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 62 (2013), pp. 452-462, 10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2013.03.009
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Basu et al., 2013b
D.N. Basu, S. Bhattacharyya, P.K. Das
Influence of geometry and operating parameters on the stability response of single-phase natural circulation loop
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 58 (2013), pp. 322-334, 10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2012.11.063
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Basu et al., 2014
D.N. Basu, S. Bhattacharyya, P.K. Das
A review of modern advances in analyses and applications of single-phase natural circulation loop in nuclear thermal hydraulics
Nucl. Eng. Des., 280 (2014), pp. 326-348, 10.1016/j.nucengdes.2014.09.011
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Cammarata et al., 2000
G. Cammarata, A. Fichera, A. Pagano
Nonlinear analysis of a rectangular natural circulation loop
Int. Commun. Heat Mass Tran., 27 (2000), pp. 1077-1089, 10.1016/S0735-1933(00)00195-0
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Desrayaud et al., 2013
G. Desrayaud, A. Fichera, G. Lauriat
Two-dimensional numerical analysis of a rectangular closed-loop thermosiphon
Applied Thermal Engineering (2013), pp. 187-196, 10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2012.06.003
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Devia and Misale, 2012
F. Devia, M. Misale
Analysis of the effects of heat sink temperature on single-phase natural circulation loops behaviour
Int. J. Therm. Sci., 59 (2012), pp. 195-202, 10.1016/j.ijthermalsci.2012.03.006
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ehrhard and Muller, 1990
P. Ehrhard, U. Muller
Dynamical behaviour of natural convection in a single-phase loop
J. Fluid Mech., 217 (1990), pp. 487-518
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Garilaldi, 2008
I. Garilaldi
Single-phase natural circulation loops: effects of geometry and heat sink temperature on dynamic behavior and stability
Ph. D. Thesis. (2008)
Google Scholar
Gorman et al., 1986
M. Gorman, P.J. Widmann, K.A. Robbins
Nonlinear dynamics of a convection loop: a quantitative comparison of experiment with theory
Phys. Nonlinear Phenom., 19 (1986), pp. 255-267, 10.1016/0167-2789(86)90022-9
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Goudarzi and Talebi, 2015
N. Goudarzi, S. Talebi
An approach to stability analysis and entropy generation minimization in the single-phase natural circulation loops
Energy, 80 (2015), pp. 213-226, 10.1016/j.energy.2014.11.064
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kudariyawar et al., 2016
J.Y. Kudariyawar, A.M. Vaidya, N.K. Maheshwari, P. Satyamurthy
Computational study of instabilities in a rectangular natural circulation loop using 3D CFD simulation
Int. J. Therm. Sci., 101 (2016), pp. 193-206, 10.1016/j.ijthermalsci.2015.11.003
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lorenz, 1963
E.N. Lorenz
Deterministic nonperiodic flow
J. Atmos. Sci., 20 (1963), pp. 130-141, 10.1175/1520-0469(1963)020<0130:dnf>2.0.co;2
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Luzzi et al., 2017
L. Luzzi, M. Misale, F. Devia, A. Pini, M.T. Cauzzi, F. Fanale, A. Cammi
Assessment of analytical and numerical models on experimental data for the study of single-phase natural circulation dynamics in a vertical loop
Chem. Eng. Sci., 162 (2017), pp. 262-283, 10.1016/j.ces.2016.12.058
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Mandelbrot, 2004
B.B. Mandelbrot
Fractals and Chaos: the Mandelbrot Set and beyond
Springer, New York, NY (2004), 10.1007/978-1-4757-4017-2
Google Scholar
Misale, 2016
M. Misale
Experimental study on the influence of power steps on the thermohydraulic behavior of a natural circulation loop
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran. (2016), 10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2016.04.036
Google Scholar
Misale and Frogheri, 2001
M. Misale, M. Frogheri
Stabilization of a single-phase natural circulation loop by pressure drops
Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci., 25 (2001), pp. 277-282, 10.1016/S0894-1777(01)00075-9
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Misale et al., 2011
M. Misale, P. Garibaldi, L. Tarozzi, G.S. Barozzi
Influence of thermal boundary conditions on the dynamic behaviour of a rectangular single-phase natural circulation loop
Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow, 32 (2011), pp. 413-423, 10.1016/j.ijheatfluidflow.2010.12.003
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Mousavian et al., 2004
S.K. Mousavian, M. Misale, F. D'Auria, M.A. Salehi
Transient and stability analysis in single-phase natural circulation
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 31 (2004), pp. 1177-1198, 10.1016/j.anucene.2004.01.005
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Muscato and Xibilia, 2003
G. Muscato, M.G. Xibilia
Modeling and control of a natural circulation loop
J. Process Contr. (2003), pp. 239-251, 10.1016/S0959-1524(02)00029-X
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Pandey and Singh, 2015
V. Pandey, S. Singh
Detailed bifurcation analysis with a simplified model for advance heavy water reactor system
Commun. Nonlinear Sci. Numer. Simulat., 20 (2015), pp. 186-198, 10.1016/j.cnsns.2014.05.019
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Pandey and Singh, 2017
V. Pandey, S. Singh
Bifurcation analysis of the simplified models of boiling water reactor and identification of global stability boundary
Nucl. Eng. Des., 315 (2017), pp. 93-103, 10.1016/j.nucengdes.2017.01.033
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Pilkhwal et al., 2007
D.S. Pilkhwal, W. Ambrosini, N. Forgione, P.K. Vijayan, D. Saha, J.C. Ferreri
Analysis of the unstable behaviour of a single-phase natural circulation loop with one-dimensional and computational fluid-dynamic models
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 34 (2007), pp. 339-355, 10.1016/j.anucene.2007.01.012
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Pini et al., 2016
A. Pini, A. Cammi, L. Luzzi
Analytical and numerical investigation of the heat exchange effect on the dynamic behaviour of natural circulation with internally heated fluids
Chem. Eng. Sci., 145 (2016), pp. 108-125, 10.1016/j.ces.2016.01.014
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Saha et al., 2015
R. Saha, S. Sen, S. Mookherjee, K. Ghosh, A. Mukhopadhyay, D. Sanyal
Experimental and numerical investigation of a single-phase square natural circulation loop
J. Heat Tran., 137 (2015), pp. 121010-121018
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Sano, 1991
O. Sano
Cellular structure in a natural convection loop and its chaotic behaviour. I. Experiment
Fluid Dynam. Res., 8 (1991), pp. 189-204, 10.1016/0169-5983(91)90042-H
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Swapnalee and Vijayan, 2011
B.T. Swapnalee, P.K. Vijayan
A generalized flow equation for single phase natural circulation loops obeying multiple friction laws
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 54 (2011), pp. 2618-2629, 10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2011.01.023
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Vijayan, 2002
P.K. Vijayan
Experimental observations on the general trends of the steady state and stability behaviour of single-phase natural circulation loops
Nucl. Eng. Des., 215 (2002), pp. 139-152, 10.1016/S0029-5493(02)00047-X
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Vijayan and Austregesilo, 1994
P. Vijayan, H. Austregesilo
Scaling laws for single-phase natural circulation loops
Nucl. Eng. Des., 152 (1994), pp. 331-347, 10.1016/0029-5493(94)90095-7
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Vijayan et al., 1995
P.K. Vijayan, H. Austregesilo, V. Teschendorff
Simulation of the unstable oscillatory behavior of single-phase natural circulation with repetitive flow reversals in a rectangular loop using the computer code athlet
Nucl. Eng. Des., 155 (1995), pp. 623-641, 10.1016/0029-5493(94)00972-2
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Vijayan et al., 2007
P.K. Vijayan, M. Sharma, D. Saha
Steady state and stability characteristics of single-phase natural circulation in a rectangular loop with different heater and cooler orientations
Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci., 31 (2007), pp. 925-945, 10.1016/j.expthermflusci.2006.10.003
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2013
J.Y. Wang, T.J. Chuang, Y.M. Ferng
CFD investigating flow and heat transfer characteristics in a natural circulation loop
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 58 (2013), pp. 65-71, 10.1016/j.anucene.2013.01.015
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Widmann et al., 1989
P.J. Widmann, M. Gorman, K.A. Robbins
Nonlinear dynamics of a convection loop II. Chaos in laminar and turbulent flows
Phys. Nonlinear Phenom., 36 (1989), pp. 157-166, 10.1016/0167-2789(89)90254-6
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar