<title>Hot and average fuel sub-channel thermal hydraulic study in a generation III+ IPWR based on neutronic simulation</title>
<author>1,RaminGholamalishahi,2,HamidrezaVanaie,3,EbrahimHeidari,4,RouhollahGheisari</author>
<Affiliation>1,Department of Nuclear Engineering, Bushehr Branch, Islamic Azad University, Bushehr, Iran;2,Department of Sciences, Bushehr Branch, Islamic Azad University, Bushehr, Iran;3,Physics Department, Persian Gulf University, Bushehr, 75169, Iran</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2020.11.027</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1738573320309426</URL>
Hot and average fuel sub-channel thermal hydraulic study in a generation III+ IPWR based on neutronic simulation
RaminGholamalishahi,HamidrezaVanaie,EbrahimHeidari,RouhollahGheisari
Department of Nuclear Engineering, Bushehr Branch, Islamic Azad University, Bushehr, Iran
Department of Sciences, Bushehr Branch, Islamic Azad University, Bushehr, Iran
Physics Department, Persian Gulf University, Bushehr, 75169, Iran
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The Integral Pressurized Water Reactors (IPWRs) as the innovative advanced and generation-III + reactors are under study and developments in a lot of countries. This paper is aimed at the thermal hydraulic study of the hot and average fuel sub-channel in a Generation III + IPWR by loose external coupling to the neutronic simulation. The power produced in fuel pins is calculated by the neutronic simulation via MCNPX2.6 then fuel and coolant temperature changes along fuel sub-channels evaluated by computational fluid dynamic thermal hydraulic calculation through an iterative coupling. The relative power densities along the fuel pin in hot and average fuel sub-channel are calculated in sixteen equal divisions. The highest centerline temperature of the hottest and the average fuel pin are calculated as 633 K (359.85 °C) and 596 K (322.85 °C), respectively. The coolant enters the sub-channel with a temperature of 557.15 K (284 °C) and leaves the hot sub-channel and the average sub-channel with a temperature of 596 K (322.85 °C) and 579 K (305.85 °C), respectively.
It is shown that the spacer grids result in the enhancement of turbulence kinetic energy, convection heat transfer coefficient along the fuel sub-channels so that there is an increase in heat transfer coefficient about 40%. The local fuel pin temperature reduction in the place and downstream the space grids due to heat transfer coefficient enhancement is depicted via a graph through six iterations of neutronic and thermal hydraulic coupling calculations. Working in a low fuel temperature and keeping a significant gap below the melting point of fuel, make the IPWR as a safe type of generation –III + nuclear reactor.
Keywords:Hot fuel sub-channel;Thermal hydraulic;Heat transfer coefficient;IPWR
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The Integral Pressurized Water Reactors (IPWRs) as the innovative advanced and generation-III + reactors are under study and developments in a lot of countries. Several modules can be utilized during the lifetime an IPWR. Modules are constructed and packed in the factory, transported and installed in the plant station incrementally over time, so there is no on-site refueling. The IPWRs are provided with different inherent and passive safety features which in turn improve the defense in depth and reduce the intervention of personnel which results in fewer human error and unsafe actions [1].
In a IPWR all components of the main cooling system of the first circuit such as, control rod mechanism, steam generators, pressurizer and piping are integrated into a compact pressure vessel, this eliminate long and numerous pipes which in turn results in elimination of an accident such as loss of coolant accident [[2], [3], [4], [5]].
Compare with the large size commercial reactors, IPWRs have small-sized reactor core, which in turn provide the plant with lower amount of radioactive materials and source terms. Because of small size reactor core and in turn it’s reduced power density, there will be a high surface to volume ratio, which facilitates decay heat removal even by single phase coolant and natural circulation flow.
Regardless of more attention dedicated to IPWRs, there is few available operating experience and published research about them. Therefore, it seems stimulating to study IPWRs to expand the present level of their performance.
Fundamentally, the main purpose of nuclear reactor is the safe and permanent generating heat energy from nuclear fission reaction in fuel elements. The generated heat from fission transfer to the coolant flows in the fuel sub-channels along fuel rods. In order to not violate the safety margins of normal utilization of nuclear reactor, the power generation in fuel rods and fuel assemblies must be monitored permanently during core lifetime. The hottest fuel sub-channel, the fuel rod with highest power generation in the core and its ambient coolant, is important and demonstrate vital and critical data about neutronic and thermal hydraulic state of the core [[6], [7], [8]].
Hottest fuel sub-channel in the reactor core is the one of the key indices to monitor the reactor safety. Thermal-hydraulic analysis of the hottest sub-channel in the reactor core can determine the safety margins.
The main purpose of this paper is hot and average fuel sub-channel analysis of an IPWR which is designated as a generation III + reactor. By using ANSYS CFX code [9], fully three-dimensional Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) and thermal hydraulics simulation of the fuel sub-channel is carried out. In order to predict steady-state and transient coolant flow and temperature distribution in nuclear reactors, three-dimensional CFD codes such as ANSYS CFX was increasingly used worldwide. CFD codes have models for simulating and calculating turbulence, heat transfer, multiphase flows, and chemical reactions. ANSYS CFX calculations use the “finite volume theory” and “finite element interpolation”, with “saved amounts in computing nodes”. The reader can find several examples of using ANSYS CFX in the nuclear reactor in literature such as [10,11].
CFD calculations are coupled with neutronic calculations which are performed by Monte Carlo simulation via MCNPX2.6 code [12,13].
As a worldwide known code, the MCNP code is used for investigating the transport of the reactor nuclear particles based on the Monte Carlo calculations. It has been utilized frequently and benchmarked by experimental parameters of nuclear reactors [[14], [15], [16]].
The fuel sub-channel study aims at the calculation of the temperature distribution of coolant and fuel along the hot and average fuel sub-channels. CAREM-25, an under construction prototype IPWR by Argentina National Atomic Energy Commission, is selected as the reference for whole simulations [[2], [3], [4], [5]].
<Section>2. Neutronic and thermal hydraulic simulations</Section>
With the intention of thermal hydraulic study of hot and average fuel sub-channel in a IPWR, in the first step, the hot and average fuel sub-channel is determined in the reactor core. By simulating the whole IPWR core via using MCNPX2.6 code and performing Monte - Carlo neutronic calculations, the power generated and distribution along the fuel elements are computed [17]. The hottest and the average fuel sub-channel are determined by assessment of relative power generated in fuel assemblies and fuel rods in the throughout core. The axial changing profile of power along the fuel rod elevation is calculated.
In the second step, the fuel sub-channel, including fuel element and its ambient flowing coolant are simulated by using ANSYS CFX 15.0 as fully 3D Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) software.
The axial changing profile of power along the fuel rod elevation results from neutronic simulation is used to simulate the heat source of fuel element in the thermal hydraulic study during a loose external neutronic and thermal hydraulic coupling. In this loose external neutronic and thermal hydraulic coupling, neutronic calculations and thermal hydraulic calculations are carried out separately. By manipulating the computed power achieved from neutronic calculations as the heat source in thermal hydraulic calculation, the new fuel and coolant temperature distribution are evaluated along the fuel sub-channels. In the next iteration, the new fuel and coolant temperature distribution along the fuel sub-channels are used to modify a MCNP input deck and new power calculating is performed. Ultimate distribution of power as well as fuel and coolant temperature are nominated base on good convergence.
Fig. 1 shows the general trend in this study, schematically.
Fig. 1. The general trend in this study.
As a proposed approach in this article, two calculations were separately conducted such as one coupling under average rod condition and the other coupling under the hot rod condition. In order to do coupling calculations for the hot rod, it was assumed that the core is just filled with hot rod and neutronic simulation was performed by MCNPX and the temperature distribution along the hot channel was calculated by CFX. For coupling calculations of the average rod, it was assumed that the core is just filled with average rod and neutronic simulation was performed by MCNPX. In order to access to every fuel assembly and fuel rod as well as having better 3D insight of entire core, whole core was modeled by MCNPX.
2.1. IPWR core simulation and monte- carlo neutronic calculations
The Monte- Carlo neutronic simulation of the IPWR core makes it possible to calculate the power generated in fuel rod and fuel assemblies due to fission of fissile isotopes. MCNPX as a worldwide, accurate and benchmarked Monte-Carlo code is used to solving the neutron transport equation to recognize the neutron behavior in complicated geometries such as detailed nuclear reactor cores [[17], [18], [19]].
In this research, an IPWR core is simulated in detail based on extracted useful data from the design data of CAREM-25. The design data of CAREM-25 can be found in the few recently published research papers [1,[20], [21], [22], [23]]. Table 1 demonstrates the essential design information which is used to simulate the IPWR core by preparing detailed MCNPX2.6 input deck. CAREM-25 is an IPWR, which all components and systems belongs to the primary coolant loop of a typical pressurized water reactor are integrated in an innovative pressure vessel. CAREM-25 is provided and equipped with several innovative passive safety features [1].
Table 1. The essential design characteristics which are used to simulate the IPWR core.
The reactor core with an active length of 140 cm is filled by 61 hexagonal prism-shaped fuel assemblies. Every FA (Fuel Assembly) is constructed by 108 fuel rods, one gauging thimble and eighteen control rod-guiding sub-channel. Fuel pellets are made from UO2 enriched in U235. The reactivity throughout the core is regulated and power leveling is accomplished by using Gd2O3 in specific fuel rods. Moving gray-type absorbing rod is used as a control and regulating appliance. The coolant is free from acid boric. Fig. 2 displays the core configuration of simulated reactor core and fuel assemblies and fuel rod.
Fig. 2. The core configuration of simulated reactor core and fuel assemblies and fuel rod.
The accurate Monte-Carlo neutronic calculations are made by adjusting suitable temperature-dependent neutron cross section libraries. In order to adjust appropriate neutron cross section libraries due to the temperature change along the elevation of the core, the elevation of the core was divided into sixteen equally-sized divisions. In each division the appropriate neutron cross section library addressed by TMP card in the MCNP input deck following regulating the coolant density change in each partition. Cooling water as coolant enters from the bottom of the core with temperature 284 °C and abandon the core at top with temperature 320 °C. The cooling water then enters into the riser/chimney with a temperature about 320 °C. All calculations were done in the Beginning of the Cycle (BOC) when the fuel is fresh and there is not weighty burn up.
By calculating the power generated in fuel assemblies via using tally F4 in the MCNP simulations, the power of hot and average fuel assemblies was calculated as 2895.33 kW and 1628.42 kW, respectively. The total power is calculated from the sum of the power generated in fuel assemblies in the final coupling iteration as ∼100 MW.
By calculating the power produced in every fuel assembly and dividing that by the average magnitude of power generated by an individual assembly (1.62842 MW), power peaking factors of fuel assemblies were evaluated. The central fuel assembly in the core with enrichment of 2.8% was identified as the hottest one with power peaking factor of 1.778 (i.e. the hottest fuel assembly’s power peaking factor). The location of the hot and the average fuel assemblies in the reactor core is depicted in Fig. 3. Fig. 3 shows the distribution of thermal flux throughout the core in the mid-plane.
Fig. 3. The location of the hot and the average fuel assemblies in the reactor core.
Amongst 108 fuel rods in the hottest fuel assembly, the hottest fuel rod power peaking factor was calculated as 1.846 (i.e. the hottest fuel rod’s power peaking factor). The average fuel rod, which is situated in the average fuel assembly, was determined with power peaking factor of 1. The calculation of the Linear Power Density (LPD) and power peaking factors for the hottest and the average fuel rod is as follows:
In the hot fuel assembly, the power of the hot fuel rod was calculated via MCNP simulations as 28.02598 kW, specifically. In the average fuel assembly, the power of the average fuel rod was specifically calculated via MCNP simulations as 15.18330 kW.
Based on these calculations the LPD of the hot and the average fuel rod was calculated as follows:
Finally, the hot and the average fuel rod PPF were calculated as follows:
2.1.1. Validation of the neutronic simulations
In order to validate the simulations, in this section Doppler and moderator temperature coefficients of reactivity are calculated and compared with the IAEA report on CAREM25 [24]. By calculating core effective multiplication factor (keff) in different average fuel temperatures (Tf) and different average moderator temperatures (Tc), the Doppler coefficients of reactivity and the moderator temperature coefficient of reactivity (MTC) can be evaluated, respectively.
The Doppler coefficient of reactivity (DC) is defined as follows:
@(1)
So by calculating the slope of the fitted curve on the graph of effective multiplication factor changes versus average fuel temperatures, DC is calculated. The calculated keff versus Tf is tabulated in Table 2. The slope of the fitted curve on the graph of keff changes versus Tf is depicted in Fig. 4 and the DC is estimated as .
Table 2. The numerical results of calculated keff and its standard deviation versus average fuel temperature changes.
Fig. 4. The fitted curve on the graph of keff changes versus fuel temperature.
The moderator temperature coefficient of reactivity (MTC) is defined as follows and estimated by the similar approach of evaluating the DC.
@(2)
The calculated keff versus Tc is tabulated in Table 3. The slope of the fitted curve on the graph of keff changes versus Tc is depicted in Fig. 5 and the MTC is estimated as .
Table 3. The numerical results of calculated keff and its standard deviation versus average moderator temperature changes.
Fig. 5. The fitted curve on the graph of keff changes versus moderator temperature.
The comparison of evaluated the DC and the MTC in this study with those were reported by the IAEA in (IAEA, 2014) is shown in Table 4. There is a very good agreement between what were calculated in this study and what are reported by IAEA on CAREM25. It shows that the Mone - Carlo simulation of the SMR in this study is validated.
Table 4. The comparison of the evaluated Doppler Coefficient (DC) and moderator temperature coefficient of reactivity (MTC) with those reported by IAEA for CARM25.
Fig. 6. The axial varying relative power profile of hot and average fuel rod that is the result of neutronic calculations.
2.2. Thermal hydraulic analysis of hot and average fuel sub-channel
In order to the thermal hydraulic analysis of the hot and average fuel sub-channel, the hexagonal sub-channel geometry including fuel, clad, grid spacers and the coolant passage are constructed and meshed by using meshing module of ANSYS15.0 called Integrated Computer Engineering and Manufacturing (ICEM). The domain of Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) calculation embraces a fuel rod with height and diameter as 1400 mm and 9 mm, located in the hexagonal coolant passage with a hydraulic diameter as 14.336 mm. The details for the hydraulic diameter calculation are described as follows:
@(3)
Three spacers with 30 mm width and 1 mm thickness are considered along the sub-channel. The velocity and temperature profile are fully developed at the exit due to suitable extent of the sub-channel. The steady state, enforced turbulent and heat transferring coolant flow is assumed in the passage. Constant inlet velocity and outlet pressure are adopted as the entrance and the exit boundary condition of the sub-channel. The faces of the hexagonal sub-channel are assumed symmetric. The coolant enters the sub-channel from the bottom with a temperature of 284 °C (557.15 K) and mass flow rate of 0.08 kg/s. The value of the sub-channel inlet mass flow rate was adjusted as 0.08 kg/s in order to have the coolant outlet temperature the same as that of the reference reactor.
The pressure of 12.25 MPa is set as working pressure. All CFD calculations are carried out based on temperature dependent thermo physical properties of the coolant.
In order to perform CFD simulation, several turbulence models are used to calculate the temperature distribution along the hot and the average fuel sub-channel. Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 show the results of using several turbulence models (Shear Stress Transport (SST), RNG K-epsilon, K-Omega and Standard K-Epsilon) for calculating axial coolant and fuel temperature distribution along the average sub-channel. Also Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 depict the results of using the mentioned turbulence models for calculating axial coolant and fuel temperature distribution along the hot sub-channel. Since using standard K-Epsilon model gives results that are in better coincidence with design data rather than the other turbulence models and also better solver convergence, the standard K-Epsilon turbulence model was chosen to be used for CFD simulations. With the purpose of the survey the mesh independent of the CFD simulation, the meshes with 12, 4.4 and 1.3 million elements were utilized to discretize the domain of calculation. The mesh independent of the CFD simulation is fulfilled. With the aim of having the best solution convergence and reasonable y+ simultaneously, the domain is discretized by 12 million hexahedral and tetrahedral mesh elements are used; however, CFD simulation costs were carried by computer memory and time. The average mesh elements skewness and the average orthogonal quality were calculated as 0.19 and 0.90 which illustrated a very good mesh metric. The scalable wall function is used as CFX near wall treatment and the dimensionless wall distance, y+, is less than 40. The convergence of iterative CFD calculations was satisfied by reducing the residual RMS Error under an acceptable value of . As a boundary condition, symmetric wall was used for six faces of the hexagonal sub-channel in CFD simulations.
Fig. 7. The results of using several turbulence models for calculating axial coolant temperature distribution along the average sub-channel.
Fig. 8. The results of using several turbulence models for calculating axial fuel temperature distribution along the average sub-channel.
Fig. 9. The results of using several turbulence models for calculating axial coolant temperature distribution along the hottest sub-channel.
Fig. 10. The results of using several turbulence models for calculating axial fuel temperature distribution along the hottest sub-channel.
A desktop computer equipped with an Intel i5 CPU 3.1 GHz and 16 GB of memory was used for neutronic and CFD calculations. A single execution of CFX software for CFD simulation of the sub-channel for a single iteration takes almost 7 h. One MCNPX2.6 run takes approximately 8 h.
Fig. 11 shows the 3D meshes of the fuel sub-channel. The mesh independence of the calculation is reflected in Fig. 12, which shows the changes of average coolant velocity along the fuel sub-channel results from CFD simulation by considering a different number of mesh elements (Re = 83489.79).
Fig. 11. The 3D meshes of the fuel sub-channel.
Fig. 12. The mesh independence of the calculation.
By considering the fuel sub-channel inlet mass flow rate, , as 0.08 kg/s, the hydraulic diameter, , as 14.336 mm and calculated dynamic viscosity of water as@calculated in the mean temperature of the sub-channel , Reynolds number, , was calculated as 83489.79 which shows a turbulent fluid flow in a fuel sub-channel.
The increases in the velocity magnitude are due to grid spacer. A grid spacer reduces the flow area which in turn results in an increase in the velocity magnitude over the places of spacers.
In order to perform neutronic and thermal-hydraulic coupling calculations based on what is shown in Fig. 1, the active height of the core and the sub-channels were discretized into 16 equal size segments. The power generated in every segment is calculated by neutronic simulation and used as the energy source in thermal-hydraulic simulation. The average temperature of fuel and coolant in each segment, which results from thermal-hydraulic simulation is used in neutronic calculation via modifying the MCNPX input deck corresponding to the iteration steps. The schematic of neutronic and thermal-hydraulic coupling for an axial segment along the sub-channels are shown in Fig. 13.
Fig. 13. The schematic of neutronic and thermal-hydraulic coupling for an axial segment along the sub-channels.
In this study the gap between fuel and the clad was considered in the MCNP simulation, but not seen in the CFX simulation. Since the gap distance between fuel and clad is 0.075 mm and play a negligible role as thermal resistance against heat flux from the fuel to the clad and the coolant, it was neglected in CFX simulation.
The gap distance just affects the radial profile of internal temperature in the fuel rod including clad and has no remarkable effect on the axial coolant temperature profile as well as on the outlet coolant temperature of the sub-channels. Despite of neglecting the gap in CFX simulation, the error of Doppler and moderator temperature coefficient of reactivity was calculated in this study in comparison with what is reported by IAEA on CAREM25 was evaluated as 9.5% and 13%, respectively (Table 4).
Nevertheless, as a suggestion, the effect of the gap distance on the thermal hydraulic characteristics of the fuel sub-channel can be studied in a separate work in the future.
<Section>3. Results and discussions</Section>
By performing a loose external neutronic-thermal hydraulic coupling calculation, shown in Fig. 1, an acceptable convergence is accomplished in the hot and average fuel rod power peaking factors, the fuel and the coolant temperature distribution in the fuel sub-channels after six iterations. Fig. 14 demonstrates the trend of convergence of the hot fuel rod axial power peaking factor for every sixteen axial node along seven successive iterations. A very good convergence is achieved after sixth iteration.
Fig. 14. The trend of convergence of the hot fuel rod axial power peaking factor for every sixteen axial node along seven successive iterations.
Table 5 demonstrates the convergence of the hot fuel rod axial power peaking factor distribution and calculated mean squared errors along the successive iterations, respectively. Whenever the mean squared error of successive iterations becomes less than 0.002, the convergence of the calculations is achieved. There is a mean squared error as 0.0404 between the first iteration (no coupling) and the sixth iteration in calculating the hot fuel rod axial power peaking factor distribution.
Table 5. Mean squared errors of axial power peaking factor for the hot fuel rod.
Mean squared errors of axial power peaking factor for the hot fuel rod	0.02382	0.00922	0.00525	0.00182	0.00165
Fig. 15, Fig. 16 reveal the six iterative calculation results of the fuel and the coolant axial average temperature pattern along the hottest fuel sub-channel (fitted curve). Fig. 17, Fig. 18 depict the six iterative calculation results of the fuel and the coolant axial average temperature pattern along the average fuel sub-channel (fitted curve).
Fig. 15. The six iterative calculation results of the fuel axial average temperature pattern along the hottest fuel sub-channel.
Fig. 16. The six iterative calculation results of the coolant axial average temperature pattern along the hottest fuel sub-channel.
Fig. 17. The six iterative calculation results of the fuel axial average temperature pattern along the average fuel sub-channel.
Fig. 18. The six iterative calculation results of the coolant axial average temperature pattern along the average fuel sub-channel.
The LPD (Linear Power Density) of the hottest and the average fuel rod are calculated as are@and@, respectively. The highest centerline temperature of the hottest and the average fuel rod were calculated as 633 K (359.85 °C) and 596 K (322.85 °C), respectively. Temperature-dependent properties of water, fuel and cladding from Ref. [25] were used in thermal-hydraulic calculations. Fuel and clad thermal conductivity were reported in Table 1.
By considering single-phase flow and using constant thermo-physical properties, an analytical solution was provided to verify the fuel axial temperature distribution. The fuel axial temperature along the fuel rod is calculated by the following formula:
Where@is the fuel axial temperature in ,@is the coolant bulk temperature in ,@is the linear heat power along the fuel rod in@which can be obtained from neutronic simulations,@is the clad thermal conductivity in ,@and@are the outer and inner radius of the clad in ,@is the convection heat transfer coefficient in@.@is calculated from the Weisman correlation for single phase flow parallel on the fuel rod array with triangle lattice and pitch to diameter ratio 1.53, as follows:
Where@is the Nusselt number,@is Reynolds number,@is Prandtl number. The coolant thermo-physical properties were calculated at the average coolant temperature of the channel. The results of CFX and analytical solution results of the fuel axial temperature profile are given in Fig. 19 and Fig. 20 for the average and the hottest sub-channel, respectively. There is a very good agreement between the analytical solution result and CFX simulation results.
Fig. 19. The results of CFX and analytical solution results of the fuel axial temperature profile for the average sub-channel.
Fig. 20. The results of CFX and analytical solution results of the fuel axial temperature profile for the hottest sub-channel.
Minimum Departure from Nucleate Boiling Ratio (MDNBR) in the hot sub-channel is an important parameter on thermal-hydraulic aspects and safety of the reactor core. The DNBR is the ratio of Critical Heat Flux and axial heat flux. From equation (2), (3) and the neutronic calculations, the DNBR was calculated in the full power and the steady state condition of the reactor core at the BOC. The CHF was calculated from Refs. [27].
@(4)
@(5)
G is the coolant mass flux and@is the local and saturated temperature difference in degree Fahrenheit.
Fig. 21 shows the axial heat flux, CHF and DNBR along the hot sub-channel. The MDNBR is equal to 1.798.
Fig. 21. Axial heat flux, CHF and DNBR along the hot sub-channel.
Notwithstanding a large number of differences between small IPWRs and current large commercial reactors, several important differences between present IPWR and VVER-1000 reactor parameters were listed in Table 6. Contextually, the IPWR works with lower power density and lower fuel temperature; however, it has comparable MDNBR with that of VVER-1000 [28].
Table 6. The comparison of present IPWR and VVER-1000 parameters [28].
The coolant enters the sub-channel with a temperature of 557.15 K (284 °C) and get hotter when moving up along the sub-channel. The coolant leaves the hot sub-channel and the average sub-channel with a temperature of 596 K (322.85 °C) and 579 K (305.85 °C), respectively. The neutronic calculation demonstrates that the axial profile of heat generation along the active length of the core follows a nearly symmetric cosine graph. The peak of the fuel axial temperature occurs in the middle of the core height. Thermal hydraulic calculation via CFD simulation shows that the coolant average temperature increase gradually along the height of the fuel sub-channel according to the heat generated profile in the fuel and transferred into the coolant.
The fuel rods stay tightly together in a fuel assembly by means of 4 spacers. An individual fuel rod is hold in a fuel assembly by a hexagonal spacer grid, which is shown in Fig. 22. Because the lacks of design specifications, the spacer grid design in this study is innovative and hypothetical. It has been tried to simulate the nearest design to the original one. A space grid holds the fuel pin by three supports. The space grid is 30 mm long and its thickness is 1 mm.
Fig. 22. The innovative spacer grid used in this study.
The spacer grids reduce the coolant flow passage and this makes the coolant flow more turbulent either in the place of the spacer and it’s downstream. The turbulent flow in turn results in a higher heat transfer coefficient in the place and downstream of the spacer grid. The higher heat transfer coefficient causes the higher heat transfer from fuel into the coolant. Fig. 23 displays the turbulence kinetic energy downstream the spacer number 2 along the hottest fuel sub-channel via 3D contour.
Fig. 23. The turbulence kinetic energy downstream the spacer number 2 along the hottest fuel sub-channel.
The effect of space grid on the flow turbulence enhancement extended to x/L = 0.22 downstream the spacer where L is the length of fuel pin (1.4 m). The effect of consecutive first three spaces on the convective heat transfer coefficient along the hot sub-channel is reflected in Fig. 24. A significant increase in convective heat transfer coefficient due to spacers along the fuel sub-channel increase heat transfer from fuel to the coolant especially in the places with higher heat transfer coefficient. It has seen an average growth about 40% in the heat transfer coefficient due to the spacers.
Fig. 24. The effect of consecutive first three spaces on the convective heat transfer coefficient in the hot sub-channel.
Fig. 25 relates the effect of spacers and also the enhancement of the heat transfer coefficient on the local reduction of fuel centerline temperature. The fuel pin centerline temperature is calculated in sixteen axial 87.5 mm long segments of fuel pin. Calculations were carried out for six iterations of neutronic and thermal hydraulic coupling. The local reduction of fuel centerline temperature is marked in Fig. 25.
Fig. 25. The effect of spacers on the local reduction of fuel centerline temperature.
Working in a low fuel temperature and keeping a significant gap below the melting point of fuel, make the IPWR as a safe type of generation –III + nuclear reactor.
<Section>4. Conclusion</Section>
This paper is aimed at the thermal hydraulic study of the hot and average fuel sub-channel in a Generation III + - IPWR by loose external coupling to the neutronic simulation. The high-power fuel rod in the hot fuel assembly as well as the average fuel rod in the average fuel assembly is determined by Monte Carlo neutronic simulation via MCNPX2.6. All simulations were carried out based on the available design specification of the CAREM-25 and at the beginning of the cycle. Beside the fuel assemblies and fuel rod relative power density evaluation in the reactor core, the axial distribution of relative power density (i.e. power peaking factors) along the hot and average fuel sub-channel were calculated. The neutronic and thermal hydraulic loose external coupling convergence was fulfilled after 6 iterations and the fuel pin and coolant axial temperature changes along the hot and average fuel sub-channel were computed and demonstrated via several graphs.
The highest centerline temperature of the hottest and the average fuel rod were calculated as 633 K (359.85 °C) and 596 K (322.85 °C), respectively. Contextually, the IPWR works with lower power density and lower fuel temperature; however, it has comparable MDNBR with that of VVER-1000. The coolant enters the sub-channel with a temperature of 557.15 K (284 °C) and get hotter when moving up along the sub-channel. The coolant leaves the hot sub-channel and the average sub-channel with a temperature of 596 K (322.85 °C) and 579 K (305.85 °C), respectively.
The effect of spacer grids on the fuel temperature was investigated. It was displayed that spacer grids make a turbulent coolant flow in the place and downstream of themselves, which in turn lead to an increase in heat transfer coefficient about 40%.
It was depicted that the augmented heat transfer coefficient leads to a greater heat transfer of fuel into the coolant which in turn results in the local reduction of fuel pin temperature.
<Section>Declaration of competing interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>References</Section>
[1]
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
Design Features to Achieve Defence in Depth in Small and Medium Sized Reactors
IAEA Nuclear Energy Series. (2009)
No. NP-T-2.2
Google Scholar
[2]
D.T. Ingersoll
Deliberately small reactors and the second nuclear era
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 51 (2009), pp. 589-603
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[3]
NEA
Current Status, Technical Feasibility, and Economics of Small Nuclear Reactors
Nuclear Energy Agency, OECD, Paris (2011)
Google Scholar
[4]
J. Vujic, et al.
Small modular reactors: simpler, safer, cheaper
Energy, 45 (2012), pp. 288-295
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[5]
X. Yan, et al.
Study of a nuclear energy supplied steelmaking system for near-term application
Energy, 39 (2012), pp. 154-165
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[6]
W.K. In, et al.
Assessment of core protection and monitoring systems for an advanced reactor SMART
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 29 (2002), pp. 609-662
Google Scholar
[7]
G.C. Lee, W.P. Baek, S.H. Chang
Improved methodology for generation of axial flux shapes in digital core protection systems
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 29 (2002), pp. 805-819
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[8]
M.G. Na, et al.
Estimation of the nuclear power peaking factor using in-core sensor signals
Nuclear Engineering and Technology, 36 (2004), pp. 420-429
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[9]
ANSYS Version 15 User Guide (2014)
Google Scholar
[10]
T. Hohne, et al.
Application of CFD codes in nuclear reactor safety analysis
Science and Technology of Nuclear Installations, 2010 (2010), pp. 1-8
CrossRefGoogle Scholar
[11]
H. Sharifian, et al.
Study of PWR transients by coupling of ANSYS-CFX with a kinetic model
Radiation Physics and Engineering, 2 (2018), pp. 3-21
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[12]
D.B. Pelowitz, et al.
MCNPXTM User’s Manual Version 2.6.0
LOS ALAMOS NATIONAL LABORATORY (2008)
Google Scholar
[13]
J.F. Briesmeister, et al.
MCNP- A General Monte Carlo N-Particle Transport Code Version 4C, LA-13709-M
Los Alamos National Laboratory (April 2000)
Google Scholar
[14]
A. Sood
The Monte Carlo method and MCNP - a brief review of our 40 Year history
Topical Meeting on Industrial Radiation and Radioisotope Measurement - Applications Conference, Chicago (July, 2017)
Google Scholar
[15]
Y.P. Mahlers
VVER-1000 neutronics calculation with ENDF/B-VII data
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 36 (2009), pp. 1224-1229
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[16]
B. Verboomen, et al.
Monte Carlo calculation of the effective neutron generation time
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 33 (2006), pp. 911-916
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[17]
Monte Carlo N-Particle Transport System User’s Manual:C700, Los Alamos National laboratory, New Mexico (2000)
Google Scholar
[18]
D. Delmastro
Thermal-hydraulic aspects of CAREM reactor
Proceedings of the IAEA TCM on Natural Circulation Data and Methods for Innovative Nuclear Power Plant Design, Vienna, Austria (2000)
Google Scholar
[19]
S. Gomez
Development activities on advanced LWR designs in Argentina
Proceedings of the Technical Committee Meeting on Performance of Operating and Advanced Light Water Reactor Designs, Munich, Germany (2000)
Google Scholar
[20]
M. Ishida
Development of new nuclear power plant in Argentina
Proceedings of the Advisory Group Meeting on Optimizing Technology, Safety and Economics of Water Cooled Reactors, Vienna, Austria (2000)
Google Scholar
[21]
M. Ishida
Carem project development activities
Proceedings of the International Seminar on Status and Prospects for Small and Medium Size Reactors, Cairo, Egypt (2001)
Google Scholar
[22]
H. Boado Magan, et al.
CAREM project status
Science and Technology of Nuclear Installations, 140373 (2011), pp. 1-6
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[23]
E. Villarino, D. Hergenreder, S. Matzkin
Neutronic core performance of CAREM-25 reactor
27 Annual Meeting of the Argentine Association of Nuclear Technology, AANT), Argentina (2000)
Google Scholar
[24]
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
Design Features to Achieve Defence in Depth in Small and Medium Sized Reactors
IAEA Nuclear Energy Series. (2009)
No. NP-T-2.2
Google Scholar
[25]
Internationa AtomicEnergy Agency (IAEA)
Thermo Physical Properties Database of Materials for Light Water Reactors and Heavy Water Reactors
IAEA. (2006)
TECDOC-1496
Google Scholar
[27]
W. Jens, P. lottes
Analysis of Heat Transfer, Burnout, Pressure Drop and Density Data for High Pressure Water
Argone National Laboratory, Chicago (1951)
Google Scholar
[28]
F. Faghihi, et al.
Neutronics and sub-channel thermal-hydraulics analysis of the IranianVVER-1000 fuel bundle
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 87 (2016), pp. 39-46
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar