<title>Prediction method for thermal-hydraulic parameters of nuclear reactor system based on deep learning algorithm</title>
<author>1,HaoQin,2,ChenglongWang,3,ChenglongWang,4,WenxiTian,5,SuizhengQiu,6,GuanghuiSu</author>
<Affiliation>1,Department of Nuclear Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710049, China;2,Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Advanced Nuclear Energy and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China;3,State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Applied Thermal Engineering</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier Ltd.</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2021.117289</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1359431121007250</URL>
Prediction method for thermal-hydraulic parameters of nuclear reactor system based on deep learning algorithm
HaoQin,ChenglongWang,ChenglongWang,WenxiTian,SuizhengQiu,GuanghuiSu
Department of Nuclear Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710049, China
Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Advanced Nuclear Energy and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Energy allocation optimization of gas cooled space nuclear reactor is conducted.
A set of models of direct Brayton cycle coupled with radiator are established.
Mass of heat pipe radiator is unacceptable for megawatt space applications.
Liquid droplet radiator is promising to be used in large power space reactors.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The development of the space vehicles puts forward higher requirements on the energy supply, and the megawatt gas-cooled space nuclear reactors are promising to satisfy the demand. The energy allocation optimization on the space nuclear reactors takes critical part in the system design. The optimization between the energy conversion efficiency and radiator mass of the gas-cooled space nuclear reactor is conducted and analyzed. The models of direct Brayton cycle, heat pipe radiator, and liquid droplet radiator are established. The working performance of the thermodynamic cycle coupled with heat pipe radiator (HPR) and liquid droplet radiator (LDR) are obtained respectively, and compared. The area and weight of the HPR increases linearly with the radiant power. The calculation results show that, for space nuclear reactors adopting HPR, decreasing the coolant temperature at the reactor core outlet (T1) from 1500 K to 1200 K will increase the specific surface area from 1200 m2/MW to about 3000 m2/MW with the same energy conversion efficiency. The radiant power of the LDR can be regulated by operation mode with the radiator weight remains unchanged. The mass of LDR is only about 10% of HPR for case with electricity power Pe = 0.5 MW, T1 = 1500 K, showing significant advantage in the mass optimization. This paper may contribute to the energy management and allocation optimization of the gas-cooled space nuclear reactor.
Keywords:Gas-cooled space nuclear reactor;Heat pipe radiator;Liquid droplet radiatordirect Brayton cycle;Energy allocation optimization
<Section>Nomenclature</Section>
a
cross-section area of a droplet
cp
specific heat capacity
D
thickness of the droplet layer
d
diameter
E
evaporation rate of liquid droplet
E2, E3
second /third order of exponential integral function
G
mass flow rate
k
isentropic index of the working fluid
L
length
M
molecular weight
m
mass
N
droplet number density per unit volume
P
power
p
saturated vapor pressure
Q
total evaporation loss rate of the LDR
q
evaporation loss rate per unit area
R
universal gas constant
S
surface area
s
entropy
T
temperature
t
flight time
v
flight velocity
Greek Symbols
ε
emissivity
η
efficiency
κ
optical thickness
ξ
heat exchange coefficient
π
pressure ratio
ρ
density
σ
pressure recovery factor
τ
surface tension
Subscript/Superscript
0
initial
B
Brayton cycle
c
compressor
d
droplet
E
environment
e
electricity
ev
evaporation
g
electricity generator
h
heat
hp
heat pipe
hx
heat exchanger
l
liquid droplet layer
r
radiator
s
surface
t
turbine
v
vapor
x, y, z
coordinate
Abbreviations
HPR
heat pipe radiator
LDR
liquid droplet radiator
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Nuclear reactor is a promising choice for large power space applications due to its low specific weight, high power density, compact structure and low environment dependency [1]. Space nuclear reactors can be clarified into different types according to their coolants, including liquid metal-cooled reactor [2], heat pipe-cooled reactor [3] and gas-cooled reactors [4]. As for large power range or megawatt power level, the gas-cooled reactor coupled with direct Brayton cycle is the most suitable design [5], [6], whose layout is shown in Fig. 1. In this figure, four equivalent Brayton cycle systems are coupled with the gas-cooled reactor. Each Brayton cycle system has two loops responsible for heat transmission, energy conversion and waste heat dissipation. The working fluid of the first loop is helium-xenon (He-Xe) gas mixture. The coolant is heated by the fission energy in the reactor core, and it expands in the turbine. The He-Xe gas mixture is cooled in the gas cooler, and it is compressed and driven to the regenerator and reactor core in sequence [7]. The working fluid of the second loop varies from one radiator to another, including liquid metal, silicone oil, etc.
Fig. 1. Layout of gas-cooled space nuclear reactor.
The only way for the heat dissipation of the space nuclear reactor is radiation. The widely accepted space radiators include loop type radiator, heat pipe radiator (HPR) [8] (Fig. 2(a)) and liquid droplet radiator (LDR) [9] (Fig. 2(b)). The loop type radiator has simple structure but it has been nearly abandoned in recent space nuclear reactor designs due to its fatal drawback of single-point failure. Heat pipe radiator utilizes heat pipe as the heat transmission medium, which has steady working performance, high heat transfer efficiency, and good environmental adaptability; therefore, it has been adopted in various space nuclear reactor designs [10]. However, the HPR is configured with heavy alloy materials and it needs to be armored to avoid meteorite hitting. Consequently, it has high weight, especially for high power space applications. It should be pointed out that the radiation area/mass of the HPR varies directly with the radiation power, hence, it may become unacceptable for megawatt space nuclear reactors.
Fig. 2. Space radiators for waste heat dissipation.
To satisfy the heat dissipation requirement of the large power space reactor, new radiators with low weight and high radiation efficiency are urgently needed, among which the LDR has various preferable advantages. The liquid droplet created in the droplet generator is cooled down by the radiation during the flight to the droplet collector. The flying droplets form the droplet layer, which looks like the “wall”. The LDR has minimum thermal resistance between the heat carrier and the radiating environment, bringing extremely high heat transfer coefficient. Besides, it is meteorite-hit invulnerability which is attractive for space applications [11].
To increase the Brayton cycle efficiency, a lower temperature of the cold source (T3 in the Fig. 1) is preferred. Higher cycle efficiency brings smaller reactor core volume and less waste heat. On the other hand, lower cold source temperature (T3) leads to lower radiator temperature (Tr), which will decrease radiation heat transfer coefficient significantly according to the Stefan-Boltzmann law. The radiation area and the weight of the radiator will increase sharply. It has been pointed out that the radiator mass (HPR) accounts for approximately 60% of the total mass of the energy generation and conversion system (except the weight of power conditioning system on the space application) [12]. Therefore, there remains an optimization interval for the gas-cooled space nuclear reactor: to increase the cycle efficiency and decrease the radiation area and radiator mass. This is an energy allocation optimization between energy utilization and dissipation. The component mass optimizations of a gas-cooled nuclear reactor coupled with closed Brayton cycle for space applications have been conducted [13], [14], [15], [16], [17], including the heat exchanger [18], radiation shadow shield [19] and radiator [20], etc. The calculation models are developed for each component to simulate the cycle performance, however, the radiators involved in the space power plants are HPRs. The mass optimization of a gas-cooled space nuclear reactor adopting LDR as the heat dissipation module has not been available in literature.
In this paper, the energy allocation optimization of the gas-cooled space nuclear reactor coupled with direct closed Brayton cycle is investigated, in which the HPR and LDR are adopted as heat dissipation module separately, and their integrated performance are analyzed and compared. The paper is arranged as follows: The investigation background is introduced in Section I; the physical and mathematical models are presented in Section II, including the Brayton cycle model, heat transfer model of the HPR and LDR; Section III analyzes the energy conversion coefficient and radiator mass of the Brayton cycle coupled with the HPR and LDR respectively, and the comparison between the two allocations are given; the paper is concluded in Section IV.
<Section>2. Physical and mathematical models</Section>
2.1. Direct Brayton cycle model
The energy conversion module of the space nuclear reactor is Brayton cycle with regeneration, and the key points have been marked in Fig. 1 [21]. The working fluid of the Brayton cycle (He-Xe gas mixture) also acts as the coolant of the nuclear reactor. The He-Xe gas mixture is heated in the reactor core (4′-1) directly, and it does work while expanding in the gas turbine (1–2) to convert the thermal energy into kinetic energy and electricity. The regenerator is adopted to cool down the exhausted gas (2-2′) and to preheat the gas towards the reactor core (4-4′). Then, the He-Xe gas mixture flows into the reactor core to constitute a thermodynamic cycle, and the gas is compressed and driven by the compressor (3–4).
The relations of temperatures of these key points are expressed as follows,
@(1)
@(2)
@(3)
@(4)
in which,@ ,@ ,@ ,@ , @and k is the isentropic index of the working fluid. @ and @ are pressure ratio in the compressor and turbine: , . @ is the heat exchange coefficient of the regenerator. Besides, @ due to the pressure loss in the thermodynamic cycle. Normally, @ where @ is the total pressure recovery factor of the Brayton cycle. Hence, , and the coefficient can be denoted as .
The heat exchange coefficient is introduced to evaluate the working performance of the gas cooler (2′-3):
@(5)
where, Tr_in and Tr_out represents the working fluid temperature of the second side that flow into and out of the radiator, respectively.
The efficiency of the Brayton cycle is expressed as
@(6)
The total efficiency of the energy conversion system is written as
@(7)
where, Pe and Ph represent the electricity power and heat power of the reactor core, respectively. The total thermal-electricity conversion coefficient is the product of the efficiency of the electricity generator and the Brayton cycle.
To optimize the working parameters of the thermodynamic cycle, two basic constraints must be satisfied, which are analyzed below respectively.
@(1)
The power generated by the gas turbine should be larger than that of consumed by the compressor: , in which,
@(8)
@(9)
The assumption can be adopted: the mass flow rate and the specific heat capacity of the working fluid are constant in the compressor and gas turbine. Consequently, the inequality can be simplified into:
@(10)
in which, .
(2)
For the regenerator, the temperature of the heat side should be larger than that of the cold side: . It can be converted to the expression:
@(11)
2.2. Heat pipe radiator
The heat pipe radiator has been widely numerically and experimentally investigated[22], [23], [24], including the heat transfer mechanism, mass optimization, safety analysis, etc. The specific area is defined as the average radiator area for the total electricity power, which is written as follows[15],
@(12)
@(13)
in which, —surface temperature of the heat pipe radiator; —emissivity of the surface; —radiation heat transfer coefficient of the heat pipe radiator, considering the self-irradiation of the surface. In Eq., the units of the surface area and electricity power are m2 and MW, respectively.
2.3. Liquid droplet radiator
For space applications, the liquid droplet radiator is often designed as a thin layer to increase the radiation heat transfer efficiency. The optical thickness @ is utilized to describe the droplet layer radiation properties, which is defined as follows,
@(14)
To ensure the radiation heat transfer capability, the optical thickness is normally no more than 2[9]. In this case, the temperature distribution along the thickness direction can be assumed as uniform. Besides, the width of the droplet layer is much larger than the thickness, hence the temperature distribution along the width direction can also be assumed as uniform. The investigation has demonstrated that it is acceptable to obtain the average temperature by 1-D simulation for droplet layers with any optical thickness [9]. Hence, the liquid droplet temperature can be expressed as follows,
@(15)
in which, the TE represents the environment temperature. The liquid droplet temperature varies with the flight time t, and the total flight time is determined by the radiator length L and droplet fly velocity v.
The liquid droplet radiator has extremely high heat transfer efficiency, however, it also has a significant drawback that the liquid working fluid will evaporate due to the vacuum environment. The calculation has shown that the working fluid evaporation has paltry effect on the heat transfer [9], but it leads to the working fluid loss, which will shorten the service life of the radiator. Therefore, during the thermal design or working performance analysis of the LDR, the evaporation characteristics should be evaluated. The evaporation rate of the liquid droplet is expressed as follows [25],
@(16)
where, pv represents the saturated vapor pressure of liquid droplet, and R and M are the universal gas constant and molecular weight of the working fluid. The saturated vapor pressures of liquid droplet and liquid with flat surface have the relationship expressed as
@(17)
The evaporation loss rate per unit area at one side of the droplet layer is written as below [26],
@(18)
where, the @ is the optical thickness of the droplet layer, and the E2, E3 are the second and third order exponential integral function, respectively. Therefore, the total evaporation loss rate of an LDR is
@(19)
2.4. System description
To investigate the fitment of the thermodynamic cycle and different types of radiators, a typical design is taken as an example, and the parameters are listed in the Table 1. It is noteworthy that the operational parameters are consistent with the pre-conceptual design of the gas-cooled space nuclear reactor OMEGA [27].
Table 1. Design parameters of the thermodynamic cycle.
For the heat pipe radiator, the specific surface area can be obtained from Eq. and Eq., and the radiation surface weight is approximately proportional to the surface area. As for the liquid droplet radiator, the working performance including radiation heat transfer and evaporation characteristics are highly dependent on the operational and geometrical parameters of the LDR [28]. It is complicated and unnecessary to analyze the effect of all parameters, hence, a typical LDR design is adopted as the reference whose main structural parameters are listed in Table 2. It should be noted that the LDR are always constructed in “cross” configuration to expand the radiation area. Consequently, the general radiation efficiency will decrease by approximately 20 ~ 25% caused by the mutual radiation of droplet layers [29]. Hence, the coefficient @ is introduced to take this effect into consideration.
Table 2. Design parameters of the LDR.
The space application environment put rigorous requirements on the working fluid of the LDR, such as high specific heat capacity to increase heat carrying efficiency, low density to be light weight, moderate viscosity to be conducive to droplet formation, low vapor pressure to decrease evaporation loss, etc. [30]. Therefore, the research and development of the working fluid is one of indispensable and challenging work during the LDR research and development. The silicon oil and liquid metal have been considered to be the working fluid. The 1,2-dimethyl-3-((1′,1′,3′,3′-tetramethul-3′-phenyldisilox-anil) methyl) imidazolium-bis(trifluoromethyl-sulfonyl) imide ionic liquid will be adopted in the paper. Investigation has shown that this kind of working fluid can operate at the temperature range of 360 ~ 600 K [31], and its physical properties including , , @ and M are used in the calculation. However, the vapor pressure of the silicon oil has not been available in the open literature. Generally, the vapor pressure of the working fluid needs to be less than 10-7 Pa during the operation temperature range to minimize the evaporation losses, and the liquid lithium can basically satisfy the requirement. Consequently, in order to qualitatively point out the variation characteristics of the evaporation loss, the vapor pressure P0 and surface tension @ are adopted from liquid lithium. The physical properties of the adopted working fluid are listed in the Table 3 [32].
Table 3. Physical properties of the LDR working fluid.
<Section>3. Results and discussion</Section>
3.1. Brayton cycle coupled with heat pipe radiator
In the Brayton cycle, the highest temperature (T1) is confined by the reactor design, and it has been set as the constant in the analysis. If the T3 is given, two solutions can be found of Eq. and Eq. respectively, the solutions forms the optimization region of the T3 and , which is shown in the shadow area in Fig. 3. Besides, the relationship between the lowest temperature T3 and the pressure ratio @ at the given Brayton cycle efficiency is shown. When the pressure ratio is fixed, the efficiency has negative relation with the T3; When the T3 is fixed, the efficiency increases first and then decreases with the increasing pressure ratio. Differentiating the Eq. with respect to X and let the derivative , the maxima of the thermodynamic efficiency with the T3 will obtained. The appropriate pressure ratio is in the range of 2.0 ~ 2.5.
Fig. 3. Energy allocation optimization region of the Brayton cycle coupled with HPR.
For a given specific radiation surface area of the heat pipe radiator, the variation of T3 with the @ is obtained from Eq. and presented in the Fig. 3, which is a closed cycle. The radiation surface area does not vary linearly with the T3 or . For a given T3, the specific surface area decreases firstly and then increases along with the increasing . This performance can be explained from the thermodynamic efficiency variation , which is determined by Eq.. When the @ decreases, the waste heat need to be dissipated will increase if the required electricity remains unchanged. Since the T3 remains constant, the radiation heat flux doesn’t change, and the radiation surface area will increase. Similarly, when the @ increases, the radiation surface area (and the specific surface area) will increase.
If the @ is fixed, the specific surface area variation with the increasing T3 presents the same tendency. In this case, the @ keeps decreasing, and the waste heat increases. However, the T3 also increases, indicating the radiant heat flux increases, therefore, the radiant surface area reduces instead of increasing. If the T3 continues to rise, the increment of the radiant surface area brought by the decreasing @ will be larger than the reduction of the surface area caused by the increasing T3. Accordingly, the (specific) radiant surface will rise.
Besides, the least specific surface area occurs at T3 and @ are around 530 K and 2.2, respectively. If the T3 is lower than 400 K or higher than 650 K, the specific surface area will not lower than 1200 m2/MW, indicating that the lowest temperature of the Brayton cycle has a proper permission range.
It can be found that cases with relatively lower energy conversion efficiency have the possibility to achieve lower specific surface area, which is beneficial for the space nuclear reactor. Therefore, the energy conversion efficiency is suggested to be no more than 35% to maintain the specific surface area less than 1200 m2/MW and to reduce the weight of the heat pipe radiator.
The conclusions listed above are deduced from the assumption that the highest temperature of the Brayton cycle is 1500 K, as designed for the OMEGA reactor. The highest temperature at the reactor core outlet is strictly restricted by the material. Herein, the extreme temperature of several gas-cooled space nuclear reactors is set at 1200 K. It is widely known that higher temperature brings higher energy conversion efficiency and lower system weight, but the quantitative influence has not been evaluated, which is presented below. The energy allocation optimization region for T1 is 1500 K and 1200 K are given in Fig. 4.
Fig. 4. Effect of T1 on the energy allocation optimization of the Brayton cycle coupled with HPR.
It can be found that the Brayton cycle with higher T1 has wider optimization region. Besides, the iso-efficiency line of the thermodynamic cycle with T1 = 1500 K is higher than that of 1200 K, suggesting that given the same T3 and , the higher T1 is, the higher energy conversion efficiency will be. Furthermore, to attend the same energy conversion efficiency, if the T1 decreases from 1500 K to 1200 K, the specific surface area will increase from 1200 m2/MW to about 3000 m2/MW.
Besides the extreme temperature of the thermodynamic cycle (T1), the ambient temperature of the radiation heat transfer (Ts) is another critical factor on the specific surface area. The ambient temperature of the deep space is nearly 3 K, but the effective temperature is much higher caused by the nearby objects. Values ranging from 0 K to 223 K are often adopted as the ambient temperature in open literature, and 190 K is widely used as a conservative estimate [13]. The energy allocation characteristics are compared for cases with Ts = 190 K and 223 K respectively, which is shown in Fig. 5. When the T3 is higher than 550 K, the two curves are almost coincident. That is because, in these cases, the Tr,in and Tr,out are much higher, and the difference between the Ts is negligible. For cases with higher ambient temperature, if the T3 is the same, the @ need to be a little larger to attend the same specific surface area.
Fig. 5. Effect of Ts on the energy allocation optimization of the Brayton cycle coupled with HPR.
During the energy allocation optimization of the thermodynamic cycle coupled with HPR, several parameters are involved as listed in Table 1. Based on the calculation and analysis in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, two representative cases are selected: T1 = 1500 K, T3 = 407 K, =2.6; T1 = 1200 K, T3 = 338 K, =2.5. The total energy conversion efficiency and specific surface area are 31.9%, 1197.3 m2/MW and 30.5%, 2910.9 m2/MW, respectively. It is known that reduction of these parameters will decrease cycle efficiency and increase specific surface area of the radiator. In order to figure out the quantitative influence of the parameters on the total energy conversion efficiency and specific surface area, the sensitivity analysis is conducted. The relative deviation of the efficiency and specific surface area of the HPR versus the reference values with 1% relative change of the individual parameters are presented in Fig. 6. The sensitivity of the parameters presents little difference for the two typical cases. The internal efficiency of the turbine () and the recovery factor of the total pressure in the thermodynamic cycle (σ) show significant influence on the cycle efficiency and the specific surface area. Therefore, improving the equipment efficiency and reducing the plant pressure loss are the main topics in the thermal–hydraulic design of the Brayton loop.
Fig. 6. Sensitivity analysis of factors on the energy allocation optimization.
3.2. Brayton cycle coupled with liquid droplet radiator
The surface area of the heat pipe radiator is nearly proportional to the radiant power, while the liquid droplet radiator can radiate heat at different power levels with the same radiation surface area through regulating the liquid droplet flight velocity, droplet diameter, and optical thickness to switch operation modes [28]. Based on the understanding of the working performance of the liquid droplet radiator, several parameters have been set as constant as listed in Table 2, and the geometric dimensions of the LDR is also given. The operational parameters of the Brayton cycle are listed in Table 1. The. The electricity power of the nuclear system is 1 MW, and the environment temperature is 190 K. The variations of the pressure ratio, radiant power, liquid droplet flight velocity, and evaporation loss rate are obtained and presented in Fig. 7.
Fig. 7. Parameters variations with @ of Brayton cycle coupled with LDR.
The @ increases with , and it will be 2.17 when the electricity efficiency reaches 36%, which is still relatively low. Meanwhile, the droplet flight velocity decreases with the increasing , reducing the coolant mass flow rate to decrease the radiant power. As the result, the temperature difference between the inlet and outlet of the LDR increases. The evaporation loss rate of the working fluid of the LDR decreases with the increasing , caused by the reducing temperature of the coolant. That is a desired performance for the LDR design: increasing the energy conversion efficiency and decreasing the evaporation loss rate. It is noteworthy that the variation tendency of the Qev can be taken as a reference, and one should not be confined to the quantitative values.
The effective electricity power is also set as 1 MW, and the sensitivity analysis of the T1 (T1 = 1380 K, 1400 K, 1420 K) is conducted and shown in Fig. 8. For less than 26%, one solution of the @ can be obtained, and for higher , there exits two @ for the Brayton cycle. Certainly, the higher @ and lower @ are preferred, as highlighted by the shadow area in the figure. To attend the same , the Brayton cycle with higher T1 has lower . Brayton cycle with different T1 has different extreme . For example, the @ can exceed 36% when the T1 is 1500 K, while the highest @ is approximately 32% when the T1 is 1420 K. For a much lower T1, such as 1200 K, if the required effective electricity power is still 1 MW, there is no solution for the @ and , suggesting that for such LDR design, it is impossible for the nuclear power system to provide 1 MWe when T1 is no more than 1200 K.
Fig. 8. Effect of T1 on the energy allocation optimization of the Brayton cycle coupled with LDR.
The different effective electricity power requirements lead to different working characteristics of the thermodynamic cycle, as shown in Fig. 9, in which the T1 is set as 1200 K. It can be found that cases with lower electricity power has wider working optimization region: higher energy conversion efficiency and lower pressure ratio. Similar with the influence of T1 as discussed in Fig. 8, the maximum @ varies with the Pe. If the Pe is 0.6 MW, the highest @ will not exceed 22%.
Fig. 9. Effect of Pe on the energy allocation optimization of the Brayton cycle coupled with LDR.
3.3. Comparison between the HPR and LDR
If the desired effective electricity power on the space application is same, the operational performance of the Brayton cycle coupled with the HPR and LDR can be compared, including the radiant surface area and mass, etc. The calculation results are summarized in Table 4. For the heat pipe radiator, the mass to panel area ratio falls in the range of 6.0 ~ 7.5 kg/m2 (6.75 kg/m2 is adopted in the calculation) [13], while the mass of the liquid droplet layer of the LDR can be calculated by the mass flow rate of the working fluid.
Table 4. Comparison between the HPR and LDR.
The area and mass of the HPR increases linearly with the radiant power. For the same Pe, when the T1 decreases from 1500 K to 1200 K, the radiator inlet temperature decreases about 100 K and the radiator mass will sharply increase, with the growth rate up to 255.8%. As for the LDR, the radiant power can be regulated by adjusting the droplet flight velocity, therefore, the mass of the droplet layer has been already determined by the geometric design, and it has no change with Pe. The mass of LDR is only about 10% of HPR for case with Pe = 0.5 MW, T1 = 1500 K, and the proportion will be much lower for other cases, indicating that the LDR has significant advantage compared with the HPR. Besides, the LDR puts strict requirement on the T1. If the T1 is not high enough, the thermodynamic cycle coupled with LDR may not provide desired electricity power.
The LDR shows notable superiority regarding to the energy allocation optimization of the gas-cooled space nuclear reactor. In fact, the LDR still has a long distance from practical application. The development of the working fluid of the LDR is one of the indispensable projects to be effectively solved. The working fluid with extremely low vapor pressure and suitable for wide temperature range is desired to decrease the evaporation loss rate.
<Section>4. Conclusions</Section>
The energy allocation optimization on the space applications takes critical part in the system design. The optimization between the energy conversion efficiency and radiator mass of the gas-cooled space nuclear reactor is conducted and analyzed. The working performance of the heat pipe radiator and liquid droplet radiator are compared. The main conclusions are listed below:
(1)
For space nuclear reactors adopting heat pipe radiator, the energy conversion efficiency is preferably no more than 35% to maintain the specific surface area less than 1200 m2/MW (T1 = 1500 K). Higher T1 brings lower radiator surface area. If the maximum temperature of the coolant at the reactor core outlet (T1) decreases from 1500 K to 1200 K, the specific surface area will increase from 1200 m2/MW to about 3000 m2/MW.
(2)
For space nuclear reactors adopting liquid droplet radiator, if the T1 = 1500 K, the electricity efficiency can attend 36% while the compressor pressure ratio is 2.17. Given the same , the Brayton cycle with higher T1 has lower . If the T1 is constant, the maximum @ decreases with the increasing Pe.
(3)
The area and weight of the heat pipe radiator (HPR) increases linearly with the radiant power, while the radiant power of the liquid droplet radiator (LDR) can be regulated by operation mode with the radiator weight remains unchanged. The mass of LDR is only about 10% of HPR for case with Pe = 0.5 MW, T1 = 1500 K.
Compared with the HPR, the LDR shows notable advantages in the energy allocation optimization of the gas-cooled space nuclear reactor. In order to apply the LDR on high power space devices, the proper working fluid of the LDR should be investigated preferentially. Besides, the analysis model of the Brayton cycle has been simplified for the convenience of calculation. Although the general variation patterns obtained by the simplified models are consistent with the actual situation, the discussion and analysis of the calculation results brought by the detailed model are the established work in the future.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgement</Section>
This research has been supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 12075182) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Grant No. xzy022020019).
<Section>References</Section>
[1]
G.L. Bennett, R.J. Hemler, A. Schock
Space nuclear power - An overview
J. Propul. Power, 12 (5) (2012), pp. 901-910
Google Scholar
[2]
A.D. Perez-Valseca, et al.
Stand-alone core sensitivity and uncertainty analysis of ALFRED from Monte Carlo simulations
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 108 (Oct.) (2017), pp. 113-125
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[3]
M.S. El-Genk
Deployment history and design considerations for space reactor power systems
Acta Astronaut., 64 (9–10) (2009), pp. 833-849
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[4]
L.C. Juárez-Martínez, G. Espinosa-Paredes
Development of a zero-dimensional dynamic simulator of a power conversion system with a high-temperature gas reactor
Int. J. Energy Res. (2021)
Google Scholar
[5]
B.M. Gallo, M.S. El-Genk
Brayton rotating units for space reactor power systems
Energy Convers. Manage., 50 (9) (2009), pp. 2210-2232
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[6]
M.S. El-Genk
Space nuclear reactor power system concepts with static and dynamic energy conversion
Energy Convers. Manage., 49 (3) (2008), pp. 402-411
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[7]
J.C. King, M.S. El-Genk
Submersion-Subcritical Safe Space (S4) reactor
Nucl. Eng. Des., 236 (17) (2006), pp. 1759-1777
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[8]
C. Wang, et al., Experimental study on startup performance of high temperature potassium heat pipe at different inclination angles and input powers for nuclear reactor application. Annals of Nuclear Energy, 136(Feb.) (2020) 107051.1-107051.8.
Google Scholar
[9]
H. Qin, et al.
Radiative and evaporative characteristics analysis of a liquid droplet layer for space applications
Aerosp. Sci. Technol. (2019)
Google Scholar
[10]
W. Zhang, et al., Thermal-hydraulic analysis of the thermoelectric space reactor power system with a potassium heat pipe radiator. Annals of nuclear energy 136(Feb.) (2020) p. 107018.1-107018.9.
Google Scholar
[11]
C. Zeng, et al.
A simplified method for calculating the heat rejection from a rectangle droplet sheet
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 132 (2019), pp. 762-771
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[12]
G.R. Longhurst, et al., Multi Megawatt Power System Analysis Report. 2001, Idaho National Engineering and Environmental Laboratory.
Google Scholar
[13]
B. Sondelski, G. Nellis
Mass Optimization of a Supercritical CO2 Brayton Cycle with a Direct Cooled Nuclear Reactor for Space Surface Power
Appl. Therm. Eng. (2019), Article 114299
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[14]
K.E. Harris, et al.
Mass Optimization of a Supercritical CO2 Brayton Cycle Power Conversion System for a Mars Surface Fission Power Reactor
in Nuclear & Emerging Technologies for Space (2017)
Google Scholar
[15]
V.A. Soldatov, A.V. Soldatov
Thermodynamic Analysis of a Space Nuclear Power Plant with a Gas-Turbine Energy Conversion System
At. Energ., 115 (3) (2014), pp. 168-175
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[16]
W. Wang, et al.
Power optimization of an irreversible closed intercooled regenerated brayton cycle coupled to variable-temperature heat reservoirs
Appl. Therm. Eng., 25 (8) (2005), pp. 1097-1113
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[17]
H. Liu, Z. Chi, S. Zang
Optimization of a Closed Brayton Cycle for Space Power Systems
Appl. Therm. Eng., 179 (2020), Article 115611
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[18]
G.B. Ribeiro, F.B. Filho, and L. Guimar?Es, Thermodynamic analysis and optimization of a Closed Regenerative Brayton Cycle for nuclear space power systems. Applied Thermal Engineering 90 (2015) 250-257.
Google Scholar
[19]
S.A.A. B, et al., Mass optimization of the radiation shadow shield for space nuclear power system. Progress in Nuclear Energy, 2021. 131.
Google Scholar
[20]
P.V. Hull, et al., Thermal Analysis and Shape Optimization of an In‐Space Radiator Using Genetic Algorithms. 2006.
Google Scholar
[21]
M.J. Moran, H.N. Shapiro
Engineering Thermodynamics. (2010)
[22]
G. Xiahou, et al.
Influence of inclination angle on heat transfer performance of heat pipe radiator with an array of pulsating condensers
Appl. Therm. Eng., 191 (5) (2021), Article 116847
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[23]
S. Xu, et al.
Air source heat pump/heat pipe domestic room heating system: Design and experimental research
Appl. Therm. Eng., 192 (2021), Article 116930
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[24]
C.L. Wang, et al.
Performance analysis of heat pipe radiator unit for space nuclear power reactor
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 103 (2017), pp. 74-84
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[25]
C. Pijin
Scientific Foundation of Vacuum Technology
National Defense Industry Press, Beijing (1987)
Google Scholar
[26]
H. Ye, Y.-L. Ma
Combined Radiation-Evaporation Model of a Liquid Droplet Layer in Space
J. Heat Transfer, 11 (133) (2011), Article 111502
Google Scholar
[27]
H. Qin, et al.
Thermal-hydraulic analysis of an open-grid megawatt gas-cooled space nuclear reactor core
Int. J. Energy Res., n/a(n/a) (2020)
Google Scholar
[28]
H. Qin, et al.
Parametric investigation of radiation heat transfer and evaporation characteristics of a liquid droplet radiator
Aerosp. Sci. Technol., 106 (2020), Article 106214
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[29]
N.V. Bondareva, et al.
Optimal operational modes for frameless space radiators with organosilicon ultrahigh coolant
Therm. Eng., 63 (13) (2016), pp. 964-970
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[30]
A.T. Mattick, A. Hertzberg
Liquid Droplet Radiators for Heat Rejection in Space
Journal of Energy, 5 (6) (1981), pp. 387-393
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[31]
A.A. Koroteev, A.A. Safronov, N.I. Filatov
Influence of the structure of a droplet sheet on the capacity of frameless space radiators and the efficiency of the power units
High Temp., 54 (5) (2016), pp. 767-770
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[32]
R. Jackson, B. Carey
Liquid metals handbook
Atomic Energy Commission (1955)
Google Scholar