<title>Experimental and theoretical study of jet hydrodynamic breakup behavior with air entrainment</title>
<author>1,JingtanChen,2,YuanZhou,3,JiyunZhao,4,JunjieCai,5,HoujunGong</author>
<Affiliation>1,Department of Mechanical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China;2,College of Physics, Sichuan University, 29 Wangjiang Road, Chengdu, Sichuan, China;3,Research Institute of Nuclear Reactor Engineering, Nuclear Power Institute of China, 328 Changshun Avenue Section 1, Chengdu, Sichuan, China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107900</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454920305971</URL>
Experimental and theoretical study of jet hydrodynamic breakup behavior with air entrainment
JingtanChen,YuanZhou,JiyunZhao,JunjieCai,HoujunGong
Department of Mechanical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China
College of Physics, Sichuan University, 29 Wangjiang Road, Chengdu, Sichuan, China
Research Institute of Nuclear Reactor Engineering, Nuclear Power Institute of China, 328 Changshun Avenue Section 1, Chengdu, Sichuan, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Experimental and theoretical study of jet breakup behavior under air entrainment.
Influence of air entrainment on liquid jet breakup behavior and breakup length.
Effects of jet velocity and density ratio on jet breakup behavior.
A new correlation for jet breakup length with the effect of air entrainment.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Molten jet breakup is a vital phenomenon during Fuel-Coolant Interaction (FCI), which can be strongly affected by hydrodynamic behaviors around the jet surface. When a liquid jet plunges into another liquid surface, air entrainment may occur and influence the jet breakup process. In this paper, the hydrodynamic breakup behavior of liquid jets accompanied by air entrainment is investigated experimentally and theoretically. Mercury and Benzyl benzoate is used as jet material with density ratios of 13.63 and 1.12 respectively. The experimental results show that the air is entrained into the water and wrapped around the liquid jet. The cause for this air entrainment phenomenon is the momentum loss of liquid jet when injecting into the water surface. In the low-density ratio cases, the air entrainment effect is more remarkable due to greater loss of jet momentum. This phenomenon has a delay effect to jet breakup process by preventing contact between the jet column and water. The existing correlations are not enough for predicting the jet breakup length with air entrainment. A revised correlation equation is proposed in which jet breakup length is the sum of maximum air void depth and the existed jet breakup length correlation. The proposed correlation shows good agreements with both the high-density ratio and the low-density ratio experimental results. Conclusions in this paper are helpful in understanding the hydrodynamic jet breakup behavior with air entrainment, offering the accidental scenarios an applicable reference.
Keywords：FCI;Jet breakup;Air entrainment;Visual experiment,Theoretical analysis
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Fuel-Coolant Interaction (FCI) might bring about the energetic vapor explosion when molten fuel pours in the form of jets into the volatile coolant. This vapor explosion accident may challenge the structural integrity of the plant safety barriers. Melt jet breakup is one of the key factors for potential vapor explosion because it can lead to rapid interface area increase and local heat transfer rise (Renaud et al., 2014, Masahiro et al., 2002, Georges, 2000). In a light water reactor (LWR), molten metal jet breakup in water will occur. In a lead-cooled fast reactor, molten jet breakup under low-density ratio condition will happen. The primary mechanism of jet breakup is flow instability, and therefore many instability models have been developed. Usually, gaseous matters such as entrained air and generated vapor will appear when melt jet is plunging into the coolant. As a result, gas is entrained into the jet stream and the behavior of gas will whereafter affect jet breakup behavior. Understanding the effect of air entrainment on jet breakup behavior is a premise to study the underlying mechanism and predict potential vapor explosion power.
Jet breakup behavior has been studied both experimentally and theoretically since the 19th century. The early study on liquid jets breakup behavior was for inviscid jets by Strutt and Rayleigh (1878). Tomotika (1935) extended Rayleigh's theory by solving the general eigenvalue relation for a case of a liquid jet penetrating another immiscible liquid. After that, jet formation and breakup behavior has been studied extensively in order to predict the breakup length of the jet and the size of the droplets Meister and Scheele, 1969, Meister and Scheele, 1969, Kitamura et al., 1982, Teng et al., 1995, Das, 1997. Recently, researches on jet breakup behavior mainly focused on the jet breakup process under liquid–liquid (Lakdawala et al., 2015, Parmar et al., 2015, Saito et al., 2017) or gas–liquid systems (Carsten et al., 2004, Wegener et al., 2014, Homma et al., 2006, Cheong and Howes, 2004). For the liquid–liquid system, Homma et al. (2006) studied the axisymmetric liquid jet breakup behavior and Parmar et al. (2015) studied the influence of jet-jet interaction on droplet size and jet instability. Most of these experiments are designed to place the jet nozzle below the water surface and the flow instability at the air–liquid interface is not considered.
Under the background of FCI, breakup behaviors of molten jets under heating conditions (Ting et al., 2018, Radu et al., 2016, Bang et al., 2003, Abe et al., 2006, Abe et al., 2004, Nishimura et al., 2010, Louis et al., 2016, Matsuo et al., 2008) and adiabatic conditions (Saito et al., 2017, Saito et al., 2014, Homma et al., 2006, Suzuki et al., 2014, Shinjo and Umemura, 2010) were studied and several breakup mechanisms were presented. Abe et al., 2006, Matsuo et al., 2008, Abe et al., 2004 conducted visual experiments to study the melt jet breakup behavior and flow mechanisms. They concluded that molten jet front experiences Rayleigh-Taylor instability due to vertical velocity effect and molten jet side experiences Kelvin-Helmholtz instability due to parallel velocity effect. Radu et al. (2016) studied the flow mechanisms of molten jets at different inlet velocities and concluded that at low Weber number conditions molten jet mainly experiences Rayleigh-Plateau instability. At high Weber number condition Rayleigh-Taylor and Kelvin-Helmholtz instabilities are dominant. Most of the flow instability models focus on the relative velocity and density ratio of molten jet and coolant. The participation of gaseous matter on flow instabilities such as the entrained air has not been studied.
However, when a liquid jet plunges into the air–liquid interface, air entrainment may occur (Kiger and Duncan, 2012, Soh et al., 2005, Zhu et al., 2000); which leads to different flow instability behaviors around the liquid jet. Many situations can lead to air entrainment, such as the pouring of liquids, breaking waves at the surface, waterfalls and hydraulic jumps. In an early paper, Lin and Donnelly (1969) made a significant observation that for highly viscous laminar jets air entrainment is caused by the breakup of a quasi-steady air film enshrouding the jet below the liquid surface. For low-viscosity liquids, air entrainment is due to the surface roughness of the jet. Subsequently, researchers such as Van de Sande and Smith, 1976, Ervine et al., 1980, McKeogh and Elsawy, 1980 confirmed this conclusion; but the precise mechanism by which the process occurs was not been examined in detail at that time. Then, numerous empirical correlations were proposed in the literature including Ohkawa et al., 1987, Funatsu et al., 1988, Kusabiraki et al., 1990, Soh et al., 2005, Zhu et al., 2000, which give us a deeper understanding of the air entrainment phenomenon. In these studies, the jet material and pool material are the same and whether a different liquid jet will lead to this air entrainment phenomenon and its effect on the jet breakup process is still not clear. Under the background of FCI in nuclear engineering severe accident area, air entrainment can be discovered through some visual images during molten liquid metal injection process (Abe et al., 2006, Louis et al., 2016, Matsuo et al., 2008). So; when a liquid jet plunges into another liquid, a similar air entrainment phenomenon may happen and the effect on the jet breakup process should be re-analyzed.
In the present study, the liquid jet breakup behavior with air entrainment is analyzed using experimental and theoretical methods. Two materials with distinct density differences are used as jet materials in visual experiments and their breakup behaviors are captured. Effect of air entrainment on jet breakup is discussed and the parameter effects of jet inlet velocity and density ratio on breakup length are presented. Based on the existed correlation equation, a new jet breakup length correlation is proposed and the predicted results are compared with the experimental results.
<Section>2. Experimental apparatus and conditions</Section>
In order to study the liquid jet breakup behavior with air entrainment, mercury and benzyl benzoate are chosen as jet material. To create a large density difference, mercury jet is used to simulate high-density molten metal and Benzyl benzoate is used to study hydrodynamic jet breakup behavior, which is similar to many oily materials in previous researches (Saito et al., 2017, Saito et al., 2014, Suzuki et al., 2014, Yeon et al., 2012). The physical properties of mercury, Benzyl benzoate, molten core and water are shown in Table 1. The benzyl benzoate jet is defined as the low-density ratio jet and mercury jet is defined as the high-density ratio jet.
Table 1. Physical properties of materials.
The schematic diagram of the experimental apparatus is shown in Fig. 1(a). It contains a jet releasing device, a water tank and a recording device. The jet releasing device consists of a liquid jet container, a detachable nozzle, a releasing rod and a transparent water tank. Releasing rod is used to reduce the slight shaking of the container and make sure the liquid jet will encounter no external instability before it reaches the water surface. The water tank is transparent (46.0 cm-high, 30.0 cm-long and 30.0 cm-wide) and a scale mark is stick on the front side of the tank to measure the data of jet penetrating depth. The nozzle shape is shown in Fig. 1(b). The length of the nozzle is 30.0 mm and the diameter is 32.0 mm. A nozzle hole (Dj = 5.0 mm) is at the center with a small chamfer to reduce flow resistance. The length to diameter ratio of the nozzle is 6 to assure a fully developed velocity profile at the nozzle exits. The nozzle is screwed to the container and the whole jet releasing device is attached to a stable shelf.
Fig. 1. (a) Schematic diagram of the experimental apparatus (b) Shape of the nozzle.
As for the recording device, a high-speed camera (Sony RX10M4) is used for capturing jet breakup behavior with 1000 fps and images resolution of 1244 × 420 pixels. Light is provided by a 500 W osram lamp. The camera is placed in parallel to the water surface by a tripod and penetration depth of the jet is measured from the water surface to the jet front. The measurement method is introduced by exporting jet images in computer software Getdata and through scale mark on the transparent tank, the jet penetration depth is measured. In Fig. 1 due to refraction in water (Chen et al., 2017), the measured jet penetration depth is smaller than the actual value. The relation between the measured value and the actual value can be calculated based on the similar triangle theorem. The actual jet penetration depth can be obtained in Eq. (1).
@(1)
@(2)
L1 represents the distance between the jet and the scale mark, which is 15 cm. L2 represents the distance between the scale mark and the camera, which is 100 cm. Through this equation, the relation can be expressed as Eq. (2). All of the experimental data in this paper are Lactual. Another error comes from image processing because the position of jet front needs to be decided in the computer software. In this experiment, the camera covers an area of approximately 0.6 m length and 0.2 m width, so in one pixel the error is 0.48 mm. Compared with the value of jet penetration depth this error could be neglected.
The experimental procedures are listed as follows. Water is initially filled and the water surface is adjusted to a suitable position. The jet container is installed and adjusted to a specific height. The vertical position of the nozzle is at the center of the water tank, which means L1 is fixed at 15 cm. Next, jet material is loaded into the container with the release rod closed. Finally, the camera is placed parallel at the water surface and 1 m away from the water tank. After the rod is quickly pulling up, the whole jet breakup process is recorded by camera and data of jet penetration depth is measured through image processing software.
The inlet velocity of liquid jet Vj is altered by changing H, which is the height between the nozzle outlet and the water surface. The measurement method of the inlet velocity Vj is to obtain the jet falling distance of a period of time just before the jet reaches the water from images and divided by time (the time interval is 0.02 s). Due to the pixels of the image, the measurement error of jet length will lead to an error of inlet velocity. It is calculated that the error of inlet velocity is ± 3.9%. Table 2 is the experimental cases with different jet density and inlet velocity.
Table 2. Experimental conditions.
<Section>3. Experimental results and discussion</Section>
3.1. Jet breakup behavior
Photos of jet breakup behavior of case 1 and case 5 are shown in Fig. 2(a) and the schematic jet breakup process is concluded in Fig. 2(b). It should be noticed that two after breakup images in Fig. 2(a) have been zoomed out for easy display. The length scale in these two images cannot be compared with other images. The typical jet breakup behaviors show that air entrainment will lead to different characteristics of the jet breakup process. Three steps of the jet breakup process are concluded and air entrainment is defined.
Fig. 2. (a) Photos of breakup behavior of (i) low-density ratio case (Case 1) and (ii) high-density ratio case (Case 5) (b) Schematic of jet breakup behaviors with air entrainment.
At low-density ratio cases:
(1)
Once the liquid jet plunges into the surface, a “V” shape air void is formed. It prevents contact between water and jet column. As a result, the jet column has no distinct surface stripping or breakup. Air entrainment is an initial process of injection and it can be described as a phenomenon that air is entrained into the water and wrapped around the liquid jet.
(2)
Along with the movement of the water, the air void begins to shrink and it closes at the middle position. Part of the entrained air will be trapped and a bubble is formed. The jet column will begin to encounter flow instability and starts to deform by water impact. The jet front will continue to penetrate and breakup accompanied by the entrapped air bubble.
(3)
Affected by liquid–liquid flow instability, the liquid jet will be stripped and break up into small droplets as the liquid jet falls. Eventually, the liquid jet will fully break into numerous droplets and the whole jet breakup process will come to an end.
At high-density ratio cases:
(1)
After the liquid jet plunges into the water, a small air void is formed at the surface. However, most of the jet is immersed in water and flow instability immediately begins.
(2)
During the jet falling and breakup process, the shape of the jet front transforms into a mushroom shape due to Rayleigh–Taylor instability and the jet column is experiencing surface stripping due to Kelvin–Helmholtz instability (Abe et al., 2006).
(3)
The jet column and jet front will completely break into droplets. The air entrainment phenomenon only occurs for a very short period of time (less than 10 ms) and has no evident influence on the whole breakup process.
From a qualitative comparison of two jet breakup processes, it is concluded that at low-density ratio cases air entrainment is more obvious than at high-density ratio cases and this phenomenon can delay the contact between water and liquid jet. As a result, it will lead to weaker flow instability at the jet surface until the air void is closed.
Generally, air entrainment is not affected exclusively by the density ratio. The shape of the liquid jet before plunging into the surface is also crucial (Cheng et al., 2018). Before a liquid jet enters the water, it will accelerate under the gravitational effect. Affected by flow instability in the air, the shape of the jet front may vary and the jet column may not be a deal cylinder. These factors can positively affect the occurrence of air entrainment. In this paper, several experimental methods are adopted to try to eliminate the instability of the jet before it enters the surface. A more detailed discussion is introduced in Section 4.
As for other jet properties such as surface tension and viscosity, a previous numerical study by authors (Chen et al., 2018) has been conducted to analyze the effect of jet density, viscosity and surface tension on the occurrence of air entrainment. For validation, this study carries out the corresponding simulation, with VOF (Volume of Fluid) method to track the interface. The numerical calculations are performed on Fluent 15.0. The conclusions showed that jet density is a more crucial factor under the comparison of the current two experimental materials. Therefore, in this paper density ratio can be used as a factor for explaining the occurrence of air entrainment. However, it should be noticed that density ratio is not the sole factor for this phenomenon so that a more detailed study from a wide range of materials can be conducted in the future.
3.2. Jet breakup length
In order to evaluate jet breakup behavior with air entrainment quantitatively, jet breakup length and breakup time are introduced. Jet breakup length is an important parameter which is widely used to describe jet breakup behavior (Homma et al., 2006, Radu et al., 2016, Bang et al., 2003). The schematic diagram of breakup length and breakup time is shown in Fig. 3. It is found that the velocity of the jet front decreases at a turning point and eventually reaches terminal velocity. Two straight lines with different slopes can be used to describe the jet front depth. A steeper slope represents the jet velocity before it breaks into droplets. A gentler slope represents the droplet velocity after fully breakup. Jet breakup length(lb) is defined as the length of jet when two straight lines intersect and jet breakup time(tb) is defined as the time when the jet achieves breakup length. The smaller the jet breakup length, the quicker the jet breakup process will complete.
Fig. 3. Schematic of jet breakup length and breakup time (Case1).
All the experimental results of jet front position histories are shown in Fig. 4. It includes low-density ratio cases from case 1 to case 4 and high-density ratio cases from case 5 to case 8. From Fig. 4 it is found that jet breakup length can be obtained in the cases, and this parameter is used to further analyze the jet breakup behavior in the present study. Compared with different jet inlet velocity cases, the jet falling velocity will increase with the increase of jet inlet velocity. However, the velocities of the jet front after fully breakup show no similar tendency due to uncertainty in this experiment. Compared with different jet density cases, the high-density jet front will penetrate deeper and leads to much greater jet breakup length. The decrease extent of jet velocity at breakup time is more obvious in low-density ratio cases. From Fig. 4, the value of jet breakup length can be obtained. The effects of density ratio and velocity on breakup length are discussed in the following sections.
Fig. 4. (a) Jet front position time histories of low-density ratio cases (b) Jet front position time histories of high-density ratio cases.
3.3. Effect of jet density
Epstein’s and Saito’s semi-empirical correlations of evaluating breakup length are mentioned to compare with the experimental results, which are shown in Eqs. (3) and (4) (Epstein and Fauske, 2001) respectively.
@(3)
@(4)
Dj is the jet diameter and lb is the jet breakup length. Saito’s correlation points out that the force balance among the inertia forces of a melt jet is the most important factor for jet breakup process and it depends on jet inlet velocity Vj, which is nondimensionalize to Froude number (Fr). The equation of Fr is shown in Eq. (5).
@(5)
By contrast, Epstein’s correlation is independent of Vj. Entrainment coefficient E0 with the value between 0.05 and 0.1 is introduced for adjusting the difference between simple modeling and actual phenomena. This correlation is based on the classical theory of atomization that unstable wave growth leads to the formation of droplets and the jet Weber number criterion for atomization is suitable in this paper (We number of jet should be larger than 3). Previous experimental studies have shown good agreement between data and these correlations at liquid jet in water condition (Radu et al., 2016, Abe et al., 2004, Saito et al., 2014, Thakre et al., 2015). From the correlations the jet density and jet velocity have a strong relation to breakup length. The effect of jet density on breakup length is analyzed firstly.
The effect of jet density on jet breakup length is analyzed in Fig. 5 including experimental results in this paper, results from other papers (Radu et al., 2016, Abe et al., 2004, Saito et al., 2014, Epstein and Fauske, 2001) and Epstein’s correlation prediction. Saito’s correlation prediction is not suitable in this figure since each data have various Fr number. In high-density ratio cases , air entrainment is not obvious although the gas–water surface exists. The correlation can successfully predict the jet breakup length in this range. In low-density ratio cases , the experimental results consist of the cases with jet nozzle above the air–water surface and the cases with jet nozzle below the air–water surface. It shows that when a low-density liquid jet plunges into the gas–liquid surface, air entrainment will happen and the jet breakup length is much greater than the jet breakup length when the liquid jet nozzle is placed below the water surface. The correlation underestimates the cases with the occurrence of air entrainment, which shows that air entrainment has a delay effect on jet breakup process. It can be explained that this correlation is based on liquid–liquid flow instability and any effect of gas is not considered. Therefore, a new correlation needs to be put forward in order to accurately predict the jet breakup process with air entrainment.
Fig. 5. Effect of jet density on jet breakup length.
3.4. Effect of jet velocity
Fig. 6 shows the effect of jet velocity on jet breakup length with experimental results (Yuzuru et al., ,2015) and two correlations. From Fig. 6; the Epstein’s correlation can closely predict the jet breakup length of high-density ratio cases and shows that the jet breakup length has no obvious relation with jet inlet velocity. At low-density ratio cases, however, it has a positive relation with jet inlet velocity and all the jet breakup lengths are larger than the Epstein’s correlation prediction. Moreover, it is observed that jet breakup length has a positive correlation with increasing jet velocity and Saito’s correlation seems to capture this trend but it fails to predict the high-density ratio cases. Since air entrainment will strongly affect the low-density ratio jet breakup process, it can be assumed that higher jet velocity will promote the effect of air entrainment, which eventually leads to larger jet breakup length. Combined with the results in Fig. 5 a new correlation should be proposed to describe the jet breakup length with air entrainment, which can predict both low and high density ratio cases. The next section is a theoretical analysis of air entrainment effect on the jet breakup process and the proposal of a revised correlation.
Fig. 6. Effect of jet velocity on jet breakup length.
<Section>4. Theoretical analysis</Section>
4.1. Theoretical model
In order to theoretically analyze the effect of air entrainment on jet breakup lengths, a new theoretical model is proposed.
As shown in Fig. 7, breakup length (Lb) refers to the length of the jet column in water before the jet is completely broken into droplets. The smaller the breakup length, the faster the breakup process is completed. When the air entrainment occurs, a large air void will form and until it reaches maximum depth (hm), the jet column will not be disturbed by flow instability from water. After the void disappears, the jet breakup process will begin due to surface instability. Eventually, the jet column will fully breakup and reaches Lb by penetrating a distance of lb. Therefore, Lb should be the sum of maximum void depth (hm) and the jet breakup length under liquid–liquid flow instability condition (lb).
Fig. 7. Schematic of jet breakup length.
Therefore, the new breakup length is shown in Eq. (6),
@(6)
lb is the breakup model based on liquid–liquid interface instability. Here, the existed breakup model from Eq. (4) is adopted. Therefore, the derivation of hm is the focus of this section.
4.2. Maximum void depth (hm)
Theoretical analysis of air void during liquid plunging process has been studied including droplet impact and jet impact study (Soh et al., 2005, Zhu et al., 2000). Fluid velocity in droplet impact study is assumed to decrease to zero after the impact and based on the conservation of energy, air void during the impact can be obtained. Soh et al. (2005) adopted a different approach using velocity ratio to describe the jet impact process, which is similar to the analysis of this paper.
Before the analysis of air void, some assumptions and simplification of the air entrainment phenomenon need to be made.
(1)
the acceleration due to the gravity of the jet flow is ignored considering large Fr number in this paper.
(2)
the velocity of jet flow during air void formation remains unchanged, which can be concluded from Figs. 3 and 4.
(3)
when the air void reaches its maximum depth, its kinetic energy is regarded as 0, that is, it will no longer expand and penetrate and will begin to close.
(4)
after passing the maximum depth, the air void will close rapidly and the liquid–liquid instability jet breakup process will immediately begin.
The control volume in which the momentum equation applies consists of the section of the jet below the free surface. Hence the momentum equation takes its form in Eq. (7):
@(7)
where V2 is the jet falling velocity during the air void formation process. The components that make up the momentum equation are the momentum flux , the force due to pressure and the body force. In the pressure component, p2 is the static pressure at the jet front and pj is the static pressure at the water surface. From Bernoulli’s equation, the pressure term is shown in Eq. (8).
@(8)
By substituting the p2 from Eq. (8), the integral on the right-hand side of Eq. (7) can be integrated over the jet cross-section and the second term on the right in Eq. (7) can be expressed as the drag coefficient CD. The substituted result is shown in Eq. (9).
@(9)
where CD is defined as a drag coefficient. It is related to the jet front shape before it reaches the water surface. The drag coefficient of a disc-like front is 1.17, and of a spherical front is 0.38 (Hoerner, 1965). By substituting (9) into (7), it is obtained in Eq. (10) that
@(10)
The velocity ratio  (V2/Vj) is the velocity ratio before and after the liquid jet plunging into the surface and it can be used to describe the momentum loss during the jet plunging process. The experimental data is shown in Fig. 8. The results show that it is strongly related to the material of the liquid jet. High-density jet has a high-velocity ratio and the jet front is a spherical shape. Low-density jet has a rather low-velocity ratio and the jet front is a disc-like shape. The value of CD can be fitted by using averaging the value of  and CD of high-density ratio cases is 0.0439 and CD of low-density ratio cases is 1.437 (shown in dot line in Fig. 8). From this figure, the low-density jet will lose more momentum so more kinetic energy is transmitted to the surrounding water to form a larger void. The destiny ratio of jet and pool material can strongly affect the velocity ratio, which represents the jet kinetic energy loss. Next, in order to analyze the relation between kinetic energy loss and the air void volume, the energy equation is adopted.
Fig. 8. Velocity ratios versus Froude number.
For the energy equation, the control body is considered for all fluids (including jet, water and air) below the calm free surface. Hence the energy equation takes its form in Eq. (11):
@(11)
By Cardan's method of solution (for large Froude number (Zhu et al., 2000), which gives to,
@(12)
From Eq. (12), the maximum height of the air void can be calculated. It shows that the hm is proportional to the one-third power of the Froude number. G is given by the first moment of the truncated cone about its base diameter in Eq. (13). Dc is the diameter of the void at the free surface. The height of the cone h can be set when Dc is a constant value. The value of G is estimated from experimental results. The smaller circular surface of the truncated cone has a diameter equal to the diameter of the jet. In low-density ratio cases air entrainment is more obvious and experimental results show that Dc = 0.9 cm when h = 3.5 cm. In high-density ratio cases, from experimental results air entrainment phenomenon is not obvious and Dc = 0.52 cm, which is slightly larger than Dj and h = 0.1 cm.
@(13)
Together with G, Fr and  in Fig. 9, the estimated values of hm/dj are obtained by using the average value of CD in Fig. 8. The result of G, experimental and theoretical results of hm/Dj is shown in Table 3. The theoretically calculated results show good agreement with the low-density ratio cases. In high-density ratio cases from case 5 to case 8, air entrainment phenomenon is not obvious and the obtained experimental data have relatively large errors. The theoretical and experimental results show certain discrepancy but this error will not strongly affect the jet breakup length prediction since the maximum void depth only occupies a small position of the jet breakup length. This correlation can be used to evaluate the jet breakup process with air entrainment effect.
Fig. 9. Comparison of new correlation prediction and the experimental results of (a) low-density ratio cases; (b) high-density ratio cases.
Table 3. . Theoretical results based on Eq. (12).
4.3. Comparison of experimental data and new correlation
Fig. 9(a) and (b) shows the comparison of new correlation prediction and the experimental results of low-density ratio cases and high-density ratio cases respectively. The stacking bar chart represents the theoretical results of Lb, which is the sum of hm and lb. The E0 value in lb is set as 0.06745 in low-density ratio cases and 0.0613 in high-density ratio cases. The line chart represents the experimental results. In Fig. 9(a), since air entrainment is more obvious in low-density ratio cases, hm has a greater contribution to the jet breakup length, and the previous correlation lb can better predict the jet breakup length when hm is considered. In Fig. 9(b), air entrainment is not obvious in high-density ratio cases, and hm has little effect on the jet breakup length. The previous correlation lb and the new correlation show good agreement with the experimental jet breakup length. From Fig. 9, as the jet inlet velocity increases, the jet breakup length shows a slight increase in low-density ratio cases. However, in high-density ratio cases inlet velocity has no obvious effect on jet breakup length. It can be assumed that jet velocity has an increasing effect on hm which eventually leads to larger jet breakup length.
In the real circumstances, this air entrainment phenomenon could happen at the initial time of injection, which is already reported in large-scale prototype FCI experiments in Europa called KROTOS. In their experiments, the large void pocket was observed and it delayed the occurring time of the steam explosion. Authors believe this paper provides a deeper understanding of this phenomenon and offers the safety design of the real reactor the reliable guidance and reference.
<Section>5. Conclusions</Section>
Hydrodynamics breakup behaviors of the liquid jet are studied experimentally and theoretically. The air entrainment phenomenon during the breakup behavior is captured using the high speed camera. Jet breakup length is adopted to discuss the behavior and effects of velocity and density ratio on jet breakup length are presented. Epstein’s and Saito’s correlation are introduced to compare with experimental results and the effect of air entrainment is theoretically analyzed. A new correlation equation based on Epstein’s correlation is proposed. The followings are conclusions from this paper.
(1)
Air entrainment occurs at the initial process of injection and can be described as a phenomenon that the air is entrained into the water and wrapped around the liquid jet. The momentum loss of the jet causes this phenomenon. Towards the breakup process, the air entrainment effect is more remarkable in the low-density ratio case, where more considerable momentum loss takes place.
(2)
By comparing with correlations and other data, air entrainment has a delay effect on the jet breakup. The mechanism is that the entrained air can prevent contact between the jet column and pool material, which leads to weaker flow instability. Saito’s correlation fails to predict the results of high-density ratio cases and Epstein’s correlation underestimates the low-density ratio cases with air entrainment effect.
(3)
Jet breakup length is theoretically analyzed with the consideration of air entrainment effect. A new correlation based on Epstein’s correlation is proposed. The jet breakup length is the sum of the maximum void depth hm and the previous jet breakup length lb. The new correlation can be used in large Froude number cases. In high-density ratio cases (density ratio larger than 2), the CD is set as 0.0439. In low-density ratio cases (density ratio smaller than 2), the CD is set as 1.437. The new correlation is able to predict the jet breakup length with air entrainment effect and will provide a better understanding of this phenomenon. In the real circumstances, this phenomenon could happen at the initial time of injection, which is already reported in large-scale prototype FCI experiments in Europa called KROTOS. In their experiments, the large void pocket was observed and it delayed the occurring time of the steam explosion. Authors believe this paper provides a deeper understanding of this phenomenon and offers the safety design of the real reactor the reliable guidance and reference.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Jingtan Chen: Investigation, Writing - original draft. Yuan Zhou: Resources, Funding acquisition. Jiyun Zhao: Supervision. Junjie Cai: Writing - review & editing. Houjun Gong: Software, Formal analysis.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgments</Section>
This work is funded by National Natural Science Foundation of China under the grant 51506134 and 11605193.
<Section>Appendix A. Supplementary data</Section>
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:
Download : Download XML file (321B)
Supplementary data 1.
<Section>Research data for this article</Section>
Data not available / No data was used for the research described in the article
About research data
<Section>References</Section>
Renaud et al., 2014
M. Renaud, R. Bruno, P. Stephane, L. Julien
The challenge of modeling fuel-coolant interaction: Part II -Steam explosion
Nucl. Eng. Des., 280 (2014), pp. 528-541
Google Scholar
Masahiro et al., 2002
F. Masahiro, M. Kunihito, K. Izumi
A linear stability analysis of a vapor film in terms of the triggering of vapor explosions
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 39 (10) (2002), pp. 1026-1032
Google Scholar
Georges, 2000
B. Georges
Vapor explosions
Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 32 (2000), pp. 573-611
Google Scholar
Strutt and Rayleigh, 1878
J.W. Strutt, L. Rayleigh
On the instability of jets
Proc. Lond. Math. Soc, 10 (4) (1878)
Google Scholar
Tomotika, 1935
S. Tomotika
On the instability of a cylindrical thread of a viscous liquid surrounded by another viscous fluid
Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser., A150 (1935), pp. 322-337
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Meister and Scheele, 1969
B.J. Meister, G.F. Scheele
Drop formation from cylindrical jets in immiscible liquid systems
A.I.Ch.E J., 15 (1969), pp. 700-706
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Meister and Scheele, 1969
B.J. Meister, G.F. Scheele
Prediction of jet length in immiscible liquid systems
A.I.Ch.E J., 15 (1969), pp. 689-699
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kitamura et al., 1982
Y. Kitamura, H. Mishima, T. Takahashi
Stability of jets in liquid–liquid systems
Can. J. Chem. Eng., 60 (1982), pp. 723-731
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Teng et al., 1995
H. Teng, C.M. Kinoshita, S.M. Masutani
Prediction of droplet size from breakup of cylindrical liquid jets
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow., 21 (1995), pp. 129-136
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Das, 1997
T.K. Das
Prediction of jet breakup length in liquid–liquid systems using the Rayleigh-Tomotika analysis
Atom. Spray, 7 (1997), pp. 549-559
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lakdawala et al., 2015
A.M. Lakdawala, R. Thaokar, A. Sharma
DGLSM based study of temporal instability and formation of satellite drop in a capillary jet breakup
Chem. Eng. Sci., 130 (2015), pp. 239-253
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Parmar et al., 2015
H. Parmar, V. Pareek, C.M. Phan, G.M. Evans
Influence of jet-jet interaction on droplet size and jet instability in immiscible liquid-liquid system
Chem. Eng. Sci., 123 (2015), pp. 247-254
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Saito et al., 2017
S. Saito, Y. Abe, K. Koyama
Flow transition criteria of a liquid jet into a liquid pool
Nucl. Eng. Des., 315 (2017), pp. 128-143
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Carsten et al., 2004
C. Carsten, F. Peter, J.W. Erich
Drop formation in a co-flowing ambient fluid
Chem. Eng. Sci., 59 (2004), pp. 3045-3058
Google Scholar
Wegener et al., 2014
M. Wegener, L. Muhmood, S. Sun, A.V. Deev
The formation and breakup of molten oxide jets
Chem. Eng. Sci., 105 (2014), pp. 143-154
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Homma et al., 2006
S. Homma, J. Koga, S. Matsumoto, M. Song, G. Tryggvason
Breakup mode of an axisymmetric liquid jet injected into another immiscible liquid
Chem. Eng. Sci., 61 (2006), pp. 3986-3996
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Cheong and Howes, 2004
B.S. Cheong, T. Howes
Capillary jet instability under the influence of gravity
Chem. Eng. Sci., 59 (2004), pp. 2145-2157
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ting et al., 2018
Z. Ting, C. Songbai, Z. Ting, M. Chuiyi, L. Xu'an
A new experimental investigation on local fuel-coolant interaction in a molten pool
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 120 (2018), pp. 593-603
Google Scholar
Radu et al., 2016
S. Radu, M. Riccardo, T. Minoru, I. Fabio, P. Ilie
Experimental and numerical study of freezing and flow characteristics of Wood’s Metal injection in a water pool
Appl. Therm. Eng., 103 (2016), pp. 1261-1277
Google Scholar
Bang et al., 2003
K.H. Bang, J.M. Kim, D.H. Kim
Experimental study of melt jet breakup in water
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 40 (10) (2003), pp. 807-813
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Abe et al., 2006
Y. Abe, E. Matsuo, T. Arai, H. Nariai, K. Chitose, K. Koyama, K. Itoh
Fragmentation behavior during molten material and coolant interactions
Nucl. Eng. Des., 236 (2006), pp. 1668-1681
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Nishimura et al., 2010
S. Nishimura, K. Sugiyama, I. Kinoshita, W. Itagaki, N. Ueda
Fragmentation mechanisms of a single molten copper jet penetrating a sodium pool: transition from thermal to hydrodynamic fragmentation in instantaneous contact interface temperatures below its freezing point
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 47 (3) (2010), pp. 219-228
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Louis et al., 2016
M. Louis, K. Pavel, W.M. Ma, S. Bechta, G. Dmitry
On the influence of water subcooling and melt jet parameters on debris formation
Nucl. Eng. Des., 309 (2016), pp. 265-276
Google Scholar
Matsuo et al., 2008
E. Matsuo, Y. Abe, K. Chitose, K. Koyamac, K. Itoh
Study on jet breakup behavior at core disruptive accident for fast breeder reactor
Nucl. Eng. Des., 238 (2008), pp. 1996-2004
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Abe et al., 2004
Y. Abe, T. Kizu, T. Arai, H. Nariai, K. Chitose, K. Koyama
Study on thermal-hydraulic behavior during molten material and coolant interaction
Nucl. Eng. Des., 230 (2004), pp. 277-291
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Suzuki et al., 2014
T. Suzuki, H. Yoshida, F. Nagase
Development of numerical evaluation method for fluid dynamics effects on jet breakup phenomena in BWR lower plenum
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 51 (7) (2014), pp. 968-976
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Saito et al., 2014
R. Saito, Y. Abe, H. Yoshida
Experimental study on breakup and fragmentation behavior of molten material jet in complicated structure of BWR lower plenum
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 51 (1) (2014), pp. 64-76
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Shinjo and Umemura, 2010
J. Shinjo, A. Umemura
Simulation of liquid jet primary breakup: dynamics of ligament and droplet formation
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow., 36 (2010), pp. 513-532
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kiger and Duncan, 2012
Kiger, Kenneth, T., Duncan, James, H., 2012. Air-entrainment mechanisms in plunging jets and breaking waves. Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 44 563–596.
Google Scholar
Soh et al., 2005
W. Soh, B. Khoo, W.Y. Daniel Yuen
The entrainment of air by water jet impinging on a free surface
Exp. Fluids., 39 (2005), pp. 496-504
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhu et al., 2000
Zhu, Y., Oguz, H.N., Prosperetti, A., 2000. On the mechanism of air entrainment by liquid jets at a free surface, J. Fluid. Mech. 404, 151–177.
Google Scholar
Lin and Donnelly, 1969
T.J. Lin, H.G. Donnelly
Gas bubble entrainment by plunging laminar liquid jets
AIChE J., 12 (1969), pp. 563-571
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Van de Sande and Smith, 1976
E. Van de Sande, J.M. Smith
Jet break-up and air entrainment by low velocity turbulent water jets
Chem. Eng Sci., 31 (1976), pp. 219-224
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ervine et al., 1980
D.A. Ervine, E. McKeogh, E.M. Elsawy
Effect of turbulence intensity on the rate of air entrainment by plunging water jets
Proc. Inst. Chem. Eng., 69 (1980), pp. 425-445
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
McKeogh and Elsawy, 1980
E.J. McKeogh, E.M. Elsawy
Air retained in pool by plunging water jet
ASCE J. Hydraul. Div., 106 (1980), pp. 1577-1593
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ohkawa et al., 1987
A. Ohkawa, D. Kusabiraki, N. Sakai
Effect of nozzle length on gas entrainment characteristics of vertical liquid jet
J. Chem. Eng. Jpn., 20 (1987), pp. 295-300
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Funatsu et al., 1988
K. Funatsu, Y. Hsu, T. Kamogawa
Gas holdup and gas entrainment of a plunging water jet with a constant entrainment guide
Can. J. Chem. Eng., 66 (1988), pp. 19-28
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kusabiraki et al., 1990
D. Kusabiraki, H. Niki, K. Yamagiwa, A. Ohkawa
Gas entrainment rate and flow patterns of vertical plunging liquid jets
Can. J. Chem. Eng., 68 (1990), pp. 893-903
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yeon et al., 2012
W. Yeon, K. Bang, Y. Choi, Y.S. Kim, J. Lee
CFD analysis of core melt spreading on the reactor cavity floor using ANSYS CFX code
Nucl. Eng. Des., 249 (2012), pp. 90-96
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chen et al., 2017
J.T. Chen, Y. Zhou, M.J. Zhong, J.F. Wang, H.J. Gong, Q.Y. Huang
Experimental and computational study on jet final depth under coolant jet-melt interaction
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 54 (9) (2017), pp. 1002-1010
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Cheng et al., 2018
Cheng, H., Zhao, J.Y., Wang, J., 2018. Experimental investigation on the characteristics of melt jet breakup in water: The importance of surface tension and Rayleigh-Plateau instability. Int. J. Heat. Mass. Transfer 132, 388–393.
Google Scholar
Chen et al., 2018
Chen, J.T., Zhou, Y., Huang, Q.Y., Wang, Y.L., 2018. Experimental and simulation study of jet breakup behavior under air entrainment. In: 12th International Topical Meeting on Nuclear Reactor Thermal-Hydraulics, Operation and Safety (NUTHOS-12), Qingdao, China, October 14–18, 2018.
Google Scholar
Epstein and Fauske, 2001
M. Epstein, H.K. Fauske
Applications of the turbulent entrapment assumption to immiscible gas-liquid and liquid-liquid systems
Trans. I. Chem. E, 79 (2001), pp. 453-462
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Thakre et al., 2015
S. Thakre, L. Manickam, W. Ma
A numerical simulation of jet breakup in melt coolant interactions
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 80 (2015), pp. 467-475
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yuzuru et al., 2015
Yuzuru, I., Yutaka, A., Eiji, M., Kazuya, K., 2015. Effects of surface solidification on fragmentation behavior of molten material jet, Trans. JSME 15-00147, https://doi.org/10.1299/transjsme (in Japanese).
Google Scholar
Hoerner, 1965
Hoerner, S.F., 1965. Fluid Dynamic Drag, second ed., Midland Park, NJ.
Google Scholar