<title>The effect of high-frequency oscillations on the disturbance waves in annular flow</title>
<author>1,Andrey V.Cherdantsev,2,Sergey V.Isaenkov,3,Mikhail V.Cherdantsev,4,Dmitry M.Markovich</author>
<Affiliation>1,Kutateladze Institute of Thermophysics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Science, 1 Lavrentiev ave., Novosibirsk 630090, Russia</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>International Journal of Multiphase Flow</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.ijmultiphaseflow.2021.103754</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S030193222100197X</URL>
The effect of high-frequency oscillations on the disturbance waves in annular flow
Andrey V.Cherdantsev,Sergey V.Isaenkov,Mikhail V.Cherdantsev,Dmitry M.Markovich
Kutateladze Institute of Thermophysics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Science, 1 Lavrentiev ave., Novosibirsk 630090, Russia
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Periodic oscillations of liquid flow rate were applied to control annular gas-liquid flow.
The flow becomes much more regular under excitation within a certain frequency range.
The effect is reached due to periodic enhancement / suppression of trains of short initial waves.
Amplitude and speed of excited disturbance waves grow and saturate much faster.
Minor increase of entrainment due to excitation is observed.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
In this paper, an analysis of susceptibility of wave structure in annular flow to small high-frequency oscillations is carried out. Downward adiabatic air-water flow at atmospheric pressure is studied in a vertical 11.7 mm pipe. The range of superficial gas velocities is 0 – 70 m/s and the range of wetting densities is 1.6 – 4.6 cm2/s. Spatiotemporal records of liquid film thickness are obtained with the Brightness-Based Laser-Induced Fluorescence technique. The region of interrogation is one longitudinal section of the pipe with a length of 470 mm, starting from the inlet. The oscillations are imposed by a solenoid-driven membrane causing periodic pulsations of liquid flow rate. The oscillation frequency range is 0 – 100 Hz. The amplitude of pulsations decreases with the oscillation frequency. The effect of oscillations is first tested on liquid films falling in absence of gas flow. In this case, the excited waves are of the same frequency as the imposed oscillations, and the stages of wave development are shifted closer to the inlet. In the case of liquid films under strong gas shear, the oscillations induce low-amplitude waves, which interfere with high-frequency initial waves, produced by the shear instability. Without excitation, groups of successive initial waves coalesce to produce the disturbance waves, which vary in speed and coalesce with each other. Within a certain range of excitation frequency, each period of low-amplitude wave produces one disturbance wave, so that coalescence nearly disappears and the waves become regular. Various criteria of susceptibility are proposed; the best ones are based on spectral analysis. The susceptibility range of excitation frequencies encompasses the ‘natural’ passing frequency of disturbance waves far downstream. The width of this range is of the order of 20 Hz but decreases at high frequencies when the amplitude of the pulsations decreases. Under excitation, the disturbance waves accelerate and grow in amplitude very fast, reaching saturated values near the inlet. The saturated values are not very different from the ‘natural’ ones. An increase in the excitation frequency within the range of susceptibility leads to a small decrease in the speed and amplitude of the disturbance waves. The entrained fraction shows only a minor increase due to the excitation.
Keywords:Annular flow;Disturbance waves;Imposed oscillations;Flow development;Entrainment;Laser-induced fluorescence
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Annular flow is a flow of a liquid film in presence of a high-speed gas stream. This flow is widely used in industrial applications where intensive heat removal, liquid mixing or large interfacial area is required, such as heat exchangers, cooling systems, and chemical reactors. It is common in pipelines for the production and transportation of hydrocarbons and may occur in systems with intensive phase transitions, e.g., in the nuclear industry.
At large gas and liquid flow rates, liquid droplets are torn from the film surface and entrained into the gas core. Transition to entrainment is associated with the appearance of large-scale solitary liquid structures known as disturbance waves. A disturbance wave is a large volume of liquid traveling with high speed over a thin layer of the base film. By their shape, these structures rather remind localized hydraulic jumps than waves, having long flat tops with significantly rough surfaces (Hewitt et al. 1990, Schubring et al. 2010). The roughness is caused by short high-amplitude ripple waves, which are generated at the rear slopes of disturbance waves and travel faster than the disturbance waves (Alekseenko et al. 2008). These ripples are torn by the gas stream into droplets, and this is the main mechanism of liquid entrainment (Woodmansee & Hanratty 1969, Cherdantsev et al. 2014). Apart from these “fast ripples”, “slow ripples” are also generated at the rear slopes of disturbance waves; the slow ripples lag behind the disturbance waves and travel over the base film with low speed until the following disturbance wave absorbs them.
Flow with entrainment is characterized by a significant increase of pressure drop and heat transfer in the flow (e.g., Hewitt & Hall Taylor 1970, Chu & Dukler 1975, Gogonin 2004). The disturbance waves, slow and fast ripples contribute to pressure drop in the channel, acting as elements of surface roughness. Liquid mixing is enhanced by intense wave motion and interaction between waves. Entrained droplets are accelerated by the gas flow and eventually hit the film surface at large speeds under shallow angles, which results in massive entrapment of bubbles by the liquid film (Cherdantsev et al. 2017). Bubbles are entrapped by the base film but are accumulated by passing disturbance waves (Hann et al. 2018). The interfacial area increases greatly due to the strong agitation of the film surface and the presence of droplets in the gas core and bubbles in the film. Both droplet entrainment and deposition contribute to mass and momentum transfer between the gas core and the liquid film. Film thinning due to entrainment, together with entrapped bubbles and craters in the liquid film due to droplet impact may provoke dry-out in heated systems.
Thus, the presence of disturbance waves is the key phenomenon that affects and, to a certain extent, defines all the complex and practically important processes described above. When liquid is introduced as a film, the disturbance waves appear not far (a few centimeters) from the point of the first contact between the phases (i.e., channel inlet). The first stage of gas-liquid interaction results in the production of high-frequency initial waves (Zhao et al. 2013, Alekseenko et al. 2015), which appear presumably due to Kelvin-Helmholtz instability (Isaenkov et al. 2019, 2020). These waves are quite regular and produce a slightly blurred hump in the spectrum around the main frequency of the order of several hundred Hz. The initial waves promptly coalesce with each other and form the disturbance waves with several times larger longitudinal size, generating slow and fast ripples at their rear slopes (Alekseenko et al. 2015). This process was recently reproduced numerically by Fan et al. (2019, 2020).
After the disturbance waves are formed, their propagation is accompanied by the change of their properties. Downstream evolution of particular properties of disturbance waves was studied by Hall Taylor & Nedderman (1968), Webb & Hewitt (1975), Wolf et al. (2001), Hazuku et al. (2008), Waltrich et al. (2013), Zhao et al. (2013). Due to velocity variation between individual disturbance waves, they coalesce, which results in an exponential reduction of wave frequency downstream. Average properties of disturbance waves, such as velocity and amplitude, were found to increase downstream (see also the review by Azzopardi 1997).
In our recent paper (Cherdantsev et al. 2021), a systematic quantitative study of disturbance wave development over the first 400 mm (34 pipe diameters) of 11.7 mm pipe length in a vertical downward air-water flow was carried out. Dependencies of passing frequency, average velocity, amplitude, and longitudinal size of the disturbance waves on the downstream distance were analyzed. It was found that the wave frequency drops about three times due to the coalescence of disturbance waves. Wave velocity grows fast during the first 150-200 mm from the inlet and keeps growing at a lower rate further downstream. Wave amplitude grows approximately in a square-root manner over the whole region, whilst the longitudinal size is stabilized relatively quickly by 150-200 mm and the further growth can be neglected. The coalescence of disturbance waves does not affect the surviving waves a lot: the velocity of the surviving wave increases by about 2% due to coalescence and its amplitude increases by 5-6%, which is small in comparison to the effect of individual downstream evolution of a wave. Besides, coalescence removes slower and smaller waves from the sample, thus gradually making the amplitude/velocity distributions more uniform and shifting them towards larger values.
Far downstream, the disturbance waves are “stabilized”, i.e., move with a constant speed over long distances (Hall Taylor et al. 1963) and possibly keep other properties constant as well. The majority of disturbance wave studies were carried out at large distances: mean properties of disturbance waves were measured in a wide range of conditions and tested against various empirical relationships (see, e.g., the most recent papers by Lin et al. 2020, Moreira et al. 2020, Uche 2020, Fershtman et al. 2020, Fershtman et al., 2021, Wang et al. 2021, Rivera et al. 2021).
Even in this “stabilized” region, the disturbance waves are highly stochastic, with strong variation in properties between individual waves. Needless to say that at the initial stage with a large number of waves, rapid downstream evolution, and multiple coalescence events, the chaos is much stronger. A question appears whether it is possible to reduce this chaos with minor external effort and thus control the flow to a certain extent, making it more stable and predictable.
One of the possible ways to control the wave structure is to create artificial waves of preset frequency by imposing external perturbations. The perturbations may be pulsations of the flow rate or oscillations of a plate located near the interface. This approach is widely used in various studies of surface wave motion, including laboratory modeling of sea waves (e.g., Troitskaya et al. 2011, Shemer & Singh 2021), stratified flow in pipes (e.g., Ayati et al. 2017), and liquid films flowing under gravity in various conditions (Kapitza & Kapitza 1949, Krantz & Goren 1971, Kharlamov et al. 2015, Charogiannis et al. 2015, Adebayo & Matar, 2017, Guzanov et al. 2018, Aktershev et al. 2021). Alekseenko et al. (2009) used this approach to experimentally obtain dispersion relationships for linear growing waves on gas-sheared liquid films; however, in that case, only the gas speeds below 8 m/s were analyzed.
The experiments with imposing the external perturbations on thick gas-sheared liquid film at high gas speeds (i.e., in annular flow with disturbance waves and liquid entrainment) are really scarce. In order to prove the link between the entrainment and the disturbance waves, Azzopardi and Whalley (1980) briefly increased liquid flow rate to create an artificial disturbance wave and provoke liquid entrainment under flow conditions where entrainment does not usually occur. Okawa et al. (2010) imposed low-frequency (0.05 – 0.5 Hz) oscillations onto the gas flow rate in heated annular flow to investigate the effect of oscillations on wave structure and critical heat flux. Posada and Waltrich (2017, 2018) imposed similar gas flow rate oscillations (0.02 – 0.1 Hz) to study flow pattern transitions and flow structure in adiabatic churn and annular flows.
In the present paper, we investigate the possibility of affecting annular flow by imposing high-frequency oscillations of the inlet liquid flow rate. In order to make the analysis more comprehensive, the effect of perturbations on liquid film structure is analyzed across long downstream distances starting from the inlet. Spatiotemporal evolution of waves at different stages of flow development is compared for different excitation frequencies within the same flow conditions.
<Section>2. Experimental methods</Section>
Both the flow facility and the measurement configuration employed in the present work are essentially the same as used in our recent paper, Cherdantsev et al. (2021). A schematic of the flow facility is shown in Fig. 1(a). Working liquid originally stored in the receiving tank (1) is lifted by the pump (2) into the pressure tank (3). Then the pump is switched off and liquid flows under gravity; its flow rate is controlled by a float rotameter (5). Prior to entering the test section, the working liquid fills a cylindrical distributor (7) with a volume of about 1 liter. The working section (8) of the rig is a vertical cylindrical acrylic resin pipe with an internal diameter D = 11.7 mm and a length of 650 mm. The liquid is supplied onto the pipe inner walls through a ring-shaped slot with a thickness of 0.5 mm and a length of 60 mm. The outer wall of the slot is the inner wall of the pipe, and the inner wall of the slot is the outer surface of a thin-walled gas-feeding tube coaxially mounted into the pipe. The gas flow is supplied through this tube (inner diameter 10.1 mm, wall thickness 0.3 mm) from the centralized line of compressed air. A schematic of the inlet is shown in Fig. 1(b). With this inlet configuration, the annular flow pattern takes place from the very beginning of the working section.
Fig. 1. (a) Schematic of the flow facility: 1 – receiving tank; 2 – pump; 3 – pressure tank; 4 – valves; 5 – float rotameter; 6 – oscillation device; 7 – distributor; 8 – working section; 9 – orifice meter; 10 – U-manometer; 11 – separator; 12 – laser; 13 – camera; 14 – section for droplet flow rate measurements. (b) Schematic of the inlet section with the distributor (7) and oscillation device (6). (c) Droplet flow rate measurements (14): A –sampling tube; B – separator; C – vessel for collected liquid.
The oscillator device is installed into the liquid-supplying pipe just before the distributor (6 in Fig. 1a, b). The device itself consists of a cylindrical vessel with a diameter of 20 mm; it contains a solenoid with a metal core rod connected to a circular rubber membrane, covering the vessel completely. The solenoid is connected to an AC power supply with an adjustable frequency and output voltage up to 5V. Under the applied current, the rod is periodically pushed out of the solenoid and pulled inside it, thus deforming the membrane. The perturbation induced by the membrane is passed through the liquid filling the distributor towards the inlet slot, being manifested in periodic pulsations of the inlet liquid flow rate. A rough estimation of the volume difference between the extreme positions of the membrane gives about 0.5 ml at the frequency of 20 Hz. This volume decreases with the frequency due to the increased magnetic resistance of the solenoid. Direct study of the oscillator-induced perturbations via measurements of velocity and pressure fields inside the distributor is a challenging task. Instead, the effect of the imposed oscillations was tested on a relatively simple object, namely, the liquid film flowing down under the action of gravity, in absence of gas flow (see Section 3.1).
In the experiments, the frequency of the oscillations, f0, varies from 20 to 100 Hz. The first series of experiments is made within a wide range of f0 from 0 to 100 Hz with a step of 20 Hz. After primary analysis, the second series of experiments are carried out with a step of 5 Hz, encompassing the f0 value at which the film showed the strongest sensitivity to the imposed oscillations.
Distilled water with small (10 mg/l) addition of Rhodamine 6G fluorescent dye is used as a working liquid. At the typical working temperature of 16⁰C, its kinematic viscosity, , is equal to 1.15*10−6 m2/s. Liquid flow is described by the wetting density, WL = QL/πD, where QL is volumetric liquid flow rate. The range of WL is 1.6 – 4.6 cm2/s, which corresponds to liquid Reynolds numbers (ReL = QL/πDv) from 140 to 400. Gas flow is described by superficial gas velocity, defined as VG = 4QG/πD2, where QG is volumetric gas flow rate. The values of VG of 29, 43, 57, and 70 m/s are used. This range corresponds to gas Reynolds numbers from 22,600 to 54,600. In addition, the flow of gravitationally falling film (i.e., with VG = 0) is employed in the test experiments. QG and QL are controlled with an accuracy of ±2% and ±3%, respectively.
The measurements of film thickness are carried out with the Brightness-Based Laser-Induced Fluorescence (BBLIF) technique. Continuous 532 nm laser (12) is used for excitation of fluorescence in the liquid film. The laser beam is converted into an optical sheet illuminating a longitudinal section of the pipe, starting from the inlet. This section is viewed by a high-speed camera (13) equipped with a long-pass filter. The length of the region of interrogation (RoI) is 470 mm; it is observed by a line of camera matrix consisting of 1000 pixels, which results in a spatial resolution of 0.47 mm/pixel. The camera frame rate is 10 kHz; exposure time is 40 – 67 µs, depending on flow conditions. The brightness of fluorescence in arbitrary units is recorded in form of spatiotemporal matrices, J(x,t), where x is the longitudinal coordinate, t - time. These matrices are converted into corresponding matrices of film thickness, h(x,t). The conversion procedure is based on the Lambert-Beer law and in situ reference signal, as described in Cherdantsev et al. (2021). The measurement errors for BBLIF technique will be considered in Sections 3 and 5.
In addition to the film thickness measurements, the flow rate of the dispersed liquid phase (i.e., liquid traveling as droplets) is measured in order to understand if there is any effect of the imposed oscillations on this quantity. The measurements station (see Fig. 1c) is located downstream the RoI at the distance of 500 mm below the inlet (14 in Fig. 1a). A thin-walled metal tube with an inner diameter of 2 mm is bent to pass through the pipe wall (see A in Fig. 1c). One end of the tube is located at the pipe centerline. The other end enters a small separator (B), so that the entrained liquid is finally gathered in a vessel (C). The droplets were collected during a time span varying from 2 to 12 minutes, depending on intensity of entrainment. The mass of collected liquid was measured using electronic scales. Liquid flow rate through the probe was calculated as ratio of volume of collected liquid to the time span. The full flow rate of the dispersed phase in the pipe was estimated by multiplying the flow rate through the probe by the ratio of the cross-section area of the pipe to that of the probe. Thus, it was assumed that the local flow rate of droplets was uniform over the cross-section of the pipe. The assumption was not checked directly (i.e., the measurements were conducted at centerline only). According to Gill et al. (1963), the distribution of droplet flow rate becomes uniform already at 48 pipe diameters from the inlet (see Fig. 4 in that paper); in our case, the distance was equal 43 pipe diameters.
The outer end of the probe was connected to the atmosphere; hence, the probe was not working in an isokinetic manner. In general case, the difference between gas speed in the pipe and gas speed in the probe may lead to errors in entrainment measurements. However, test experiments with either reducing or increasing the gas flow rate through the probe about 2 times did not show strong effect on entrainment. We suppose that the isokineticity is less important for the case of downward flow and at near-atmospheric pressure. In any case, the goal of entrainment measurements in the present paper is to compare between the cases with and without the imposed flow oscillations; the potential error sources described above are expected to affect the measurements in the same manner in both cases under comparison.
The random error of the droplet flow rate measurements can be estimated as follows. The absolute error of the scales is 1 mg, equivalent to 10−3 ml for volume measurements. However, since the liquid is collected in form of droplets, the absolute error would be rather equal to the volume of a single water droplet, which is considered equal 0.05 ml. This gives relative error for the volume of liquid varying from 0.3 to 4%. Absolute error of time span measurements can be estimated as 4 seconds, since the time uncertainty of connection and disconnection of the vessel to the separator could reach up to 2 seconds each. The relative error of time measurements thus varies between 0.6 to 3.3%. The total relative error for droplet flow rate varies from 2 to 5%.
<Section>3. Qualitative changes of flow structure due to the imposed perturbations</Section>
3.1. The case of falling film flow
At the first stage, the effect of the imposed perturbations was studied for the case of falling film flow (i.e., flow under gravity in absence of gas flow), in order to test the imposed oscillations on a reference flow. The spatiotemporal records are presented in Fig. 2 for one liquid flow rate and six frequency values from 0 to 100 Hz with the step of 20 Hz. It should be noted that the liquid flow rates used in the present work are quite large in comparison to the typical values employed in earlier studies of falling films with excitation.
Fig. 2. Spatiotemporal matrices of film thickness with different frequency of imposed oscillations for thick falling film flow. WL = 1.6 cm2/s, VG = 0. Excitation frequency f0 changes from 0 (a) to 100 Hz (f) with step of 20 Hz.
The data are presented in form of spatiotemporal matrices of film thickness, h(x,t). Horizontal dimension corresponds to downstream distance, x, with a total length of the area of 470 mm. The value of x = 0 corresponds to the flow inlet. Vertical dimension corresponds to time; fragments with duration of 200 ms are shown.  The brightness of each pixel of an image is directly proportional to the local instantaneous film thickness in the corresponding cell of the matrix. The white color would correspond to h ≥ 1 mm, black to h = 0 mm. A vertical stripe about x = 60 – 70 mm is a thread connecting two sections of a pipe (see also Fig. 2a-b in Fan et al. 2020). This thread locally obscures the view but does not affect the flow, since the connection inside the pipe is smooth.
In absence of imposed perturbations (Fig. 2a) the film surface is nearly smooth during the first 100-150 mm. At large liquid flow rates, the length of the smooth zone grows with the liquid flow rate (see, e.g., Portalski & Clegg 1972). The first observable waves are of high frequency and quite regular though different in amplitude. Further downstream (x ~ 250 mm) these waves tend to merge and form longer nonlinear waves. These waves lose regularity around x = 350 mm. The latter stage supposedly corresponds to the disruption of two-dimensional waves into three-dimensional solitary horseshoe waves, see Kharlamov et al. (2015).
When the flow rate oscillations are imposed, the waves become well distinguishable at the very inlet (Fig. 2b-f). Their temporal separation corresponds well to the imposed frequency: there are 4 periods in 0.2 s record for f0 = 20 Hz and 20 periods for f0 = 100 Hz. The amplitude of the excited waves (difference between crest and trough film thickness) gets smaller with frequency. This regular structure is observed during the first ~ 150 mm; then the waves lose regularity and, in the case of large f0, the passing frequency of the waves reduces significantly.
Fig. 3 shows the wave structure in a more traditional way. Fig. 3(a) shows example fragments of temporal records of film thickness obtained near the inlet, by the 6th pixel of the camera, which averages the signal over the distance of approximately 2.55 to 3 mm from the inlet. The records obtained at different excitation frequencies are shifted by a constant value of film thickness for better visibility. For each fragment with duration of 0.2 seconds, 2000 time instants are shown by small dots. There is a scatter in the film thickness due to the thermal noise of the camera, which makes each record blurred. Standard deviation of the signal due to this noise is 5 μm. Under an assumption that the absolute error is independent on film thickness, this gives 1% relative error for film thickness of 0.5 mm near the inlet and 5% for the base film with typical thickness of 0.1 mm (see Fig. 13a).
Fig. 3. Wave structure near the inlet (x = 2.8 mm) for WL = 1.6 cm2/s, VG = 0 at different excitation frequencies. (a) Temporal records of film thickness. (b) Frequency spectra of the film thickness records.
Apart from this noise, in absence of perturbations (f0 = 0) the film is uniform indeed. The mean film thickness, h0(x), is about 0.5 mm at this point, being nearly the same as the thickness of the liquid inlet slot. Upstream this point, h0 is slightly higher than 0.5 mm, whilst downstream this point h0 gradually decreases with x towards an equilibrium value. The imposed oscillations are obvious in the records: the waves are regular and their passing frequency corresponds well to that of the oscillations. This is confirmed by the spectral structure of the records, which is shown in Fig. 3(b). The spectra were obtained by straightforward application of Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) to a 1-second record h(t) taken with 10 kHz sampling frequency; mean film thickness over the record was subtracted before applying FFT. This gives us spectral amplitude for frequencies up to 5 kHz with the step of 1 Hz. In Fig. 3(b), the first 200 Hz are shown. The spectra with excitation are indeed quite close to purely harmonic. For low excitation frequencies, nonlinearity takes place already, being manifested in the presence of overtones. The amplitude of the main harmonics corresponds quite well to the wave amplitudes seen in the record. It could be also noted that the wave amplitude decreases with f0, which is in agreement with the decrease of the membrane oscillations amplitude.
Fig. 4 shows how the signal spectrum evolves downstream. Each image of this Figure is a graphical representation of a matrix A(x,f). Each column shows the spectral amplitude A(f) for a temporal record h(t) at given x. The frequency range of 0 – 500 Hz is shown. White corresponds to A ≥ 0.1 mm. The horizontal axis shows the same range of x as shown in Fig. 2. Without excitation (Fig. 4a), a broad-band spectrum is observed. It becomes visible around x = 150 mm at a frequency of about 80 Hz and then spreads over a broad range of frequencies; the maximum of the spectrum finally shifts towards lower frequencies, around 20 Hz. With the excitation (Fig. 4b-f), the spectrum is quite discrete and well-pronounced over the first 150 mm from the inlet. At this stage, it consists of the main harmonic at f0, well detectable from the very beginning, and its numerous overtones, promptly appearing and developing with downstream distance. In presence of excitation, the broad-band spectrum appears noticeably closer to the inlet and spreads over a wide range of frequencies much faster. As a result of interaction between the broad-band and the discrete spectra, the latter is dampened: the individual peaks decay downstream. The higher is the overtone's frequency, the later it appears and the earlier it decays. By the end of RoI, nearly the same spectrum is observed for all the cases, with a blurred main hump around 20 Hz and a long decaying tail.
Fig. 4. Downstream evolution of temporal spectra of film thickness records. WL = 1.6 cm2/s, VG = 0 m/s, f0 varies from 0 (a) to 100 Hz (f) with increment of 20 Hz. White corresponds to spectral amplitude A ≥ 0.1 mm.
To summarize, these preliminary experiments confirm that: 1) the excitation system works properly, at least with respect to the frequencies; 2) the amplitude of excitation decreases with frequency; 3) the excitation shifts the stages of wave evolution closer to the inlet.
3.2. Qualitative effect of perturbations in case of strong gas shear
The presence of a high-speed gas stream makes the wave structure of liquid film entirely different, as shown in Fig. 5. This Figure is constructed in exactly the same manner as Fig. 2; the ‘only’ difference is the presence of a gas stream with a superficial velocity of 43 m/s. Some obvious differences between Fig. 2 and Fig. 5 catch the eye. At VG = 43 m/s the film between the waves is thinner (i.e., the image is darker), whilst the wave amplitude is higher and the waves are faster (i.e., the waves are brighter and their trajectories are more horizontal). In general, the gas-sheared film is much more non-uniform and agitated than the falling film.
Fig. 5. Spatiotemporal matrices of film thickness with different frequency of imposed oscillations for thick gas-sheared film. WL = 1.6 cm2/s, VG = 43 m/s. Excitation frequency f0 changes from 0 (a) to 100 Hz (f) with step of 20 Hz.
At the very inlet, the film surface is already agitated by small-amplitude high-frequency initial waves, even in absence of any external perturbations (see Fig. 5a). Shortly after their appearance, the initial waves coalesce to form large-scale disturbance waves (Alekseenko et al. 2015). Further downstream, the film consists of solitary disturbance waves separated by long areas of thin base film. Each individual disturbance wave undergoes acceleration and growth of amplitude; individual properties of the waves vary significantly. The disturbance waves coalesce with each other, which leads to a decrease in their frequency. Detailed analysis of downstream evolution of disturbance wave properties and the role of coalescence events in it is given in Cherdantsev et al. (2021).
When external perturbations are applied (Fig. 5b-f), the obvious effect is seen only for f0 = 40 Hz (Fig. 5c). In this case, the disturbance waves pass with quite uniform time intervals, corresponding to the period of oscillations (there are 8 periods per 0.2 s duration of the fragment). Though the passing frequency of disturbance waves near the end of the area is roughly the same for all f0 values (7-10 waves per 0.2 s), such regularity is not observed in any other case except f0 = 40 Hz. Furthermore, at f0 = 40 Hz, stabilization of disturbance wave properties occurs much closer to the inlet in comparison to any other case: the velocity of the disturbance waves becomes constant starting from about 60 mm from the inlet. Downstream this point, there are no disturbance waves apart from the regular ones; thus, there are no disturbance waves to be absorbed and no coalescence events.
For the other values of excitation frequency, the effect of excitation – if any – is not that obvious. For f0 ≥ 80 Hz (Fig. 5e-f), no prominent difference in the passing frequency is observed and the waves are as irregular as in absence of excitation. For f0 = 60 Hz (Fig. 5d), the passing frequency of the disturbance waves increases, but the waves fail to maintain a constant speed and separation time. For f0 = 20 Hz (Fig. 5b), one can observe surges passing with the imposed frequency but they usually end by producing 2-3 disturbance waves instead of a single one.
Fig. 6 shows downstream evolution of signal spectra, obtained the same manner as that in Fig. 4. In absence of excitation (Fig. 6a), the broad-band spectrum is present from the inlet (cf. the dark spectrum in Fig. 4a). A bright area around f = 270 Hz can be observed near the inlet (see the discussion of Fig. 7b for details), but it soon disappears after a few millimeters distance. Further downstream, the dominant part of the spectrum appears within the range between 20 and 60 Hz. An example of such a spectrum obtained far from the inlet is shown in Fig. 6(g) by the black line. Within the range of 20-60 Hz several peaks of comparable amplitude can be seen due to irregularity of the disturbance waves.
Fig. 6. Downstream evolution of temporal spectra of thickness records of thick gas-sheared film. WL = 1.6 cm2/s, VG = 43 m/s, f0 varies from 0 (a) to 100 Hz (f) with increment of 20 Hz. (g) Comparison of spectra obtained far from the inlet (x = 423 mm) without excitation and at f0 = 40 Hz.
Fig. 7. (a) Temporal records of film thickness near the inlet (x = 2.8 mm) for WL = 1.6 cm2/s, VG = 43 m/s at different excitation frequencies, shifted by 0.5 mm. (b) Corresponding frequency spectra of the film thickness records, shifted by 0.02 mm. (c) Modeled harmonic signal and modulated signal (Eq. 1); (d) Corresponding frequency spectra.
At f0 = 40 Hz (Fig. 6c), with the strongest effect of the imposed oscillations, there is a well-pronounced peak in the spectrum, corresponding to f0, over the whole length of RoI. There are also several overtones of the main frequency, but they are weaker and, except for the first one at f = 80 Hz, decay quite quickly. An example of such spectrum at x = 423 mm from the inlet is shown in Fig. 6(g) by the red line. The general shape of the spectrum far from the inlet is the same as in absence of excitation but the peak at the excitation frequency is of much higher amplitude than any other peak. For f0 = 20 and 60 Hz (Fig. 6b and d, respectively), one can notice the peaks at f = f0, but even the main peaks do not last long in these cases. No obvious difference is seen between the cases with f0 ≥ 80 Hz and f0 = 0, as it could be expected from Fig. 5.
In order to understand how the liquid flow rate oscillations imposed at the inlet affect the disturbance waves downstream, a close inspection of the initial stage is required. In Fig. 7(a, b), the film thickness records and the corresponding spectra obtained at the distance x = 2.8 mm are presented in a similar manner as in Fig. 3. This distance is very close to the inlet and the corresponding image columns are barely distinguishable in Fig. 5 and 6.
At this initial stage, the presence of excitation is not obvious for film thickness records (Fig. 7a). The typical separation time between the initial waves corresponds to frequency, fm, of about 270 Hz. This frequency is much larger than the largest excitation frequency value employed in this work. For a fixed combination of flow rates, fm is the same for any value of f0. The spectrum of such signal (Fig. 7b) is very different from that shown in Fig. 3. First, the random component of the signal (‘basic’ frequency-independent level of spectral amplitude, or ‘broad-band’ spectrum as mentioned before) is comparable to the amplitude of the peak values. Second, the main peak (at least, for f0 = 0 and 60-100 Hz) is not narrow but blurred over the neighboring frequency range. Moreover, for these four f0 values, the spectrum is almost the same, possibly, due to the low amplitude of the imposed oscillations at high excitation frequencies.
For the cases with f0 = 20 and 40 Hz, the spectra change due to the excitation. Though the “random” component remains the same, the main hump located at fm = 270 Hz nearly disappears. Instead of it, a narrow peak appears at f = f0 and two peaks appear around fm. For f0 = 40 Hz, these two peaks are located at fm ± f0. For a harmonic signal
the spectrum with a single peak at f = fm can be transformed into three peaks at f = f0, f = fm - f0 and f = fm + f0 if the signal is modified as follows:
@(1)
For this model signal, the peak at f = fm disappears, since the high-frequency peaks are in the opposite phase at maxima and minima of the low-frequency component. The idea is illustrated in Fig. 7(c-d).
The form of eq. (1) can be physically explained as follows. The imposed oscillations perturb the average film thickness with frequency f0, which is described as the second term of eq. (1). This low-frequency oscillation creates modulation of the ‘natural’ high-frequency waves, since the short waves developing on a locally thicker film are expected to grow faster, and vice versa. Thus, modulation would be in phase with the base level oscillations, as eq. (1) suggests. Of course, the record of a real gas-sheared liquid film thickness is more complicated, and the ratio of the amplitudes is different from that in the example, but we suppose the main principle would be still valid.
For f0 = 20 Hz, the low-frequency peak is located at f0, but there are no well-pronounced peaks around fm: in this case, the main hump is broken into a series of moderate-amplitude peaks, supposedly due to interaction of the blurred main hump to the modulating low-frequency perturbation.
Though the main hump of spectral amplitude around fm disappears from the spectrum, the initial waves with this frequency remain in the records. At f0 = 20 and 40 Hz, the initial waves travel in trains or surges of frequency f0. The initial waves are amplified at the crests of the oscillations and dampened in the troughs. This structure is barely distinguishable in the short fragments of the temporal records shown in Fig. 7(a), but manifests itself well in signal spectra as shown in Fig. 7(b). It is also seen quite clearly in the magnified fragments of the spatiotemporal matrices near the inlet, shown in Fig. 8 (the fragments are taken from the bottom left corners of Fig. 5b-c). The temporal duration of these fragments corresponds to 1.5 periods for f0 = 20 Hz and three periods for f0 = 40 Hz.
Fig. 8. Spatiotemporal matrices of film thickness with different frequency of imposed oscillations for thick gas-sheared film. WL = 1.6 cm2/s, VG = 43 m/s. (a) f0 = 20 Hz; (b) f0 = 40 Hz.
It can be seen that for f0 = 40 Hz (Fig. 8b), a disturbance wave is formed due to the coalescence of several initial waves from the front (bottom at such images) part of the surge. The waves from the rear part of the surge are smaller and slower, and their coalescence produces a slow low-amplitude wave which is soon absorbed by the following disturbance wave. In the case of f0 = 20 Hz (Fig. 8a), the surge is longer, as could be expected. The initial waves coalesce in groups, thus producing several disturbance waves from a surge. Again, a few initial waves at the rear part of the surge do not make a proper disturbance wave but decelerate and decay in amplitude. In between the surges, no disturbance waves are formed.
It could be assumed that there exists a sufficient amount of initial waves to form a disturbance wave (the number may depend on flow conditions). A single surge contains a limited number of initial waves. Besides, the initial waves appearing at the top of the surge are expected to be of higher amplitude and speed and hence be more efficient in the production of disturbance waves. So, for f0 = 40 Hz (Fig. 8b), the short surges carry enough initial waves to produce only one successful disturbance wave; the excess initial waves at the tail of a surge do not make it. The properties of successful disturbance waves are similar to each other and they are separated from each other by the surge period, hence, nearly no interaction between disturbance waves takes place. Thus, the regularity of disturbance waves in this case (see Fig. 5c) is achieved not only by amplifying the regular disturbance waves but also by efficiently dampening everything between them.
For longer surges at f0 = 20 Hz, several disturbance waves (4 in the example given in Fig. 8a) are generated within one surge. They are located close to each other, and their properties may vary with the phase of the surge. Thus, the difference in properties of individual disturbance waves and probability of coalescence are much higher than for f0 = 40 Hz.
In absence of excitation, there are neither surges nor gaps between them; the initial waves, though not entirely identical, pass with approximately regular intervals. Each small group of initial waves produces a disturbance wave; thus, a large amount of closely located disturbance waves with significant scatter in individual velocity lead to high irregularity and a high rate of coalescence. Higher excitation frequencies do not produce surges (see Fig. 7), so the disturbance wave formation process is not distinguishable from that in absence of excitation. The absence of surges may be related due to the lower amplitude of membrane oscillations due to higher frequency; it is also possible that there exists a limiting ratio between fm and f0 to create the surges.
<Section>4. Frequency range of susceptibility</Section>
The above observations show that it is indeed possible to control disturbance waves in annular flow by means of liquid flow rate oscillations. The control is expressed in the regular character of the waves and much faster stabilization of their properties. However, the control is only possible for a certain range of excitation frequencies. In this section, we attempt to analyze these ranges and derive the criteria of flow susceptibility to the imposed oscillations.
The previously analyzed range of excitation frequencies (i.e., from 0 to 100 Hz with the step of 20 Hz) is not detailed enough for proper analysis. To improve the range of conditions, for each combination of gas and liquid flow rates, the value of f0, showing the strongest effect of excitation was estimated based on qualitative visual observations. Then, additional experiments with f0 changing with an increment of 5 Hz around the estimated value were carried out.
The most straightforward way to analyze the effect of the imposed oscillations is to measure the individual time separation between the successful disturbance waves far from the inlet, at the end of the area of interrogation. For simplicity and reliability, this was done manually, based on the graphical form of full h(x,t)-records (like those shown in Fig. 5, but five times longer in time). Visual identification of individual disturbance waves is simple and unambiguous, since the whole spatiotemporal trajectory of a wave is visible at once and each wave can be traced back in time almost to the inlet. For each disturbance wave surviving up to the point x = 400 mm, the time instant when it passed this coordinate, tn, was recorded. Then for each successive pair of disturbance waves time separation, Tsep = tn+1 - tn, was calculated. The mean frequency of disturbance waves was estimated as < f > = 1 / < Tsep >. The results of these measurements are shown in Fig. 9(a, b). The frequency of disturbance waves far from the inlet does not vary too much with the excitation frequency. However, there is a range of f0 values where < f > is approximately equal f0. The width of this range is about 20 Hz for low gas and liquid flow rates. So, the most straightforward criterion of susceptibility would be expressed as:
Fig. 9. (a, b) Mean passing frequency of disturbance waves near the end of RoI vs the excitation frequency f0. (c, d) The degree of regularity of disturbance waves (R1). VG = 29 m/s (a, c); VG = 43 m/s (b, d).
The larger are gas and liquid flow rates, the narrower is the range of susceptibility. For VG = 43 m/s and WL ≥ 3.5 cm2/s, there is nearly no f0 values where R0 is close to unity (apart from the obvious point of intersection). For VG = 57 and 70 m/s, the situation does not improve, so these two values of VG will not be shown in the further analysis. This lack of susceptibility could have been explained by, e.g., a higher level of turbulence in both phases due to higher flow rates. However, no qualitative differences were found in the evolutionary patterns of disturbance waves without excitation within the whole investigated range of gas and liquid flow rates. An alternative explanation is that for large VG and WL the range of susceptibility is expected to correspond to f0 ≥ 70 Hz, where the amplitude of the imposed perturbations is low (see also Fig. 3). Thus, it cannot be excluded that with a better excitation device the range of controllable disturbance waves may be expanded.
Another important characteristic of the excited waves is the regularity with which they pass through the observation point. It can be quantitatively described as the degree of uniformity of time separation between successive waves:
where σTsep is the standard deviation of the Tsep array. For perfectly regular waves, R1 would be obviously equal unity, whilst for the uniformly random position of the waves it would approach zero. For the present data, R1 is about 0.5-0.6 outside the susceptibility range (Fig. 9c, d). Inside the range, R1 increases up to 0.7-0.8, which confirms that when < f > ≈ f0, the disturbance waves are also more regular.
It would be interesting and useful to introduce an easy-to-calculate criterion of susceptibility, which would not involve manual processing. An intuitive approach here is to average the h(x,t) matrix over time with step equal to the period of excitation, T0 = 1 / f0:
where N is the temporal duration of the record in seconds (N = 1 in our case); tm changes from the sampling period (0.1 ms in our case) with step equal to the sampling period up to T0. Under such processing, a perfectly periodic signal would show one period of the signal for given x. This period would shift due to wave propagation and possibly change downstream due to wave evolution. A completely random signal would turn into the dependence <h>(x), uniform along tm given that Nf0 is large enough.
In Fig. 10(a-b), the hm-matrices are shown for the case with WL = 1.6 cm2/s and VG = 43 m/s, for f0 = 40 Hz (a) and f0 = 0 (b). Note that, unlike in the previous Figures of this kind, the white color corresponds to h ≥ 0.5 mm here. As expected, a generalized portrait of a quasi-periodic wave can be seen in (a), passing towards the top of the image and reappearing at the bottom as x increases. Though this generalized ‘wave’ reflects the individual waves, it is of smaller amplitude and larger spatial size than any individual wave due to the non-exact periodicity of the excited waves. In absence of excitation (Fig. 10b), the hm-matrix is essentially more uniform, having neither base film nor disturbance waves, though the typical velocity and spatial/temporal scales of the waves could be guessed due to the limited number of time periods used to get this average.
Fig. 10. (a) Full h(x,t)-matrix, averaged over the time period of excitation (25 ms). WL = 1.6 cm2/s, VG = 43 m/s, f0 = 40 Hz. (b) The same processing for the case with f0 = 0. (c, d) The degree of regularity (R2).  VG = 29 m/s (c); VG = 43 m/s (d).
A simple quantity to characterize the degree of periodicity based on hm-matrices is their characteristic amplitude:
Here, averaging starts from the distance x1 selected so that the initial stage of disturbance wave formation and the thread are excluded from the analysis. Unfortunately, Am does not depend only on the wave regularity, but also on the wave amplitude. Hence, with the same degree of regularity, flow with larger WL and lower VG would have higher Am. The wave amplitude can be roughly estimated as the standard deviation of a film thickness record, σh, which can be used for normalization of the Am values.  Besides, the longer averaging period, and, respectively, the smaller number of values to be averaged over, would increase the probability of higher random fluctuations within hm. The value Am / σh indeed shows a general tendency to grow approximately linear with T0, both with and without excitation. To compensate for this, the final complex is written as:
The results are shown in Fig. 10(c, d). This new criterion is in general agreement with the observations on frequency and periodicity of the waves (cf. Fig. 9); the advantage is that it can be obtained in a purely automatic manner.
However, the most reliable and still automatic way to construct a susceptibility criterion is based on spectral amplitude matrices, A(x,f), such as those presented in Fig. 6. In particular, Fig. 6(c) shows how the spectral amplitude at the excitation frequency can persistently dominate in the spectral structure, despite that the variation of time separation (i.e., σTsep/<Tsep>) is over 0.25 (see the green line in Fig. 9d, f0 = 40 Hz). With perfectly regular signal, the frequency with maximum spectral amplitude, fmax, is supposed to be equal f0 throughout the RoI. So, the degree of regularity R3 can be estimated as the ratio of the length of RoI where the condition fmax(x) = f0 is fulfilled, to the full length of RoI:
This ratio is plotted in Fig. 11(a, b), where the susceptibility ranges are distinguishable as the areas with R3 close to unity. These ranges approximately correspond to the ranges where the directly measured frequency of disturbance waves corresponds to the excitation frequency, see Fig. 9 (a, b). A slightly more forgiving and informative modification of this criterion, R4, involves the information on the spectral amplitude itself. It is assumed that, in order to make the signal irregular, the spectral amplitude A(fmax, x) should be significantly larger than A(f0, x). The criterion is then defined as:
Fig. 11. Spectral criteria of susceptibility: (a,b) Fraction of RoI length with the dominant frequency corresponding to the excitation frequency (R3); (c, d) The ratio of spectral amplitude at the excitation frequency to the maximum amplitude averaged over the length of RoI (R4). VG = 29 m/s (a, c); VG = 43 m/s (b, d).
Obviously, if R3 is close to unity, R4 will be even closer. The meaning of this modification is not to overestimate the importance of secondary frequencies of the amplitude comparable to A(f0, x), which may occasionally overcome it due to small variation of the signal, whilst A(f0, x) remains a significant part of the signal spectrum. With this approach, more stable – i.e., less sensitive to small variations – ranges of susceptibility can be obtained (see Fig. 11c, d).
<Section>5. Effect of the imposed perturbations on wave characteristics and liquid entrainment</Section>
As shown above, the film is sensitive to the imposed oscillations within a certain range of excitation frequency, f0. Within this range, disturbance wave frequency closely follows f0, and the waves are relatively regular in comparison to the no-excitation case. In the present section, we study the effect of excitation on the flow dynamics on a quantitative level. By the flow dynamics, we imply the dependence of average properties of disturbance waves (velocity, amplitude, and longitudinal size) on the downstream distance. Besides, the thickness of the base film layer over which the disturbance waves propagate, and the flow rate of liquid traveling as droplets, are analyzed. There are two main kinds of comparison which could be made for each flow characteristic. Firstly, we compare the difference between the no-excitation case and the case with f0 from the middle of the sensitivity range. Secondly, we study how the wave properties change if the disturbance wave frequency is forcedly altered within the susceptibility range.
Some of the meaningful film properties can be measured with reasonable accuracy using standard signal processing techniques. E.g., the thickness of the base film, hB(x), can be estimated as the most probable value of the film thickness record, h(t), obtained at every x. Another example is the average velocity of the waves, which can be measured with cross-correlation technique. For each x, cross-correlation function (CCF) between the two records, h(t, x ± dx), was calculated, where dx is equal to 20 pixels or 9.4 mm. The time lag corresponding to the maximum of CCF, τ0, was found. To increase the resolution, the vicinity of the CCF maximum was approximated by a parabola; the position of its maximum, τ1, was used to build a more precise estimation of the time lag. A similar approach was used by Farias et al. (2012) and Alekseenko et al. (2014). The velocity was then defined as VC(x) = 2dx/τ1(x). This estimation was found to be in good agreement with the average velocity of disturbance waves measured in a semi-manual way (see below).
To reliably measure the average amplitude or longitudinal size of disturbance waves, one has to identify all the waves directly. Automatic identification of disturbance waves is generally possible in both spatiotemporal (see Alekseenko et al. 2014, Vasques et al. 2018, Fan et al. 2020) and temporal (e.g., Fershtman et al. 2021, Rivera et al. 2021, Wang et al. 2021) records. However, any kind of identification relies on an arbitrarily selected threshold value of either wave amplitude (for the temporal records) or both amplitude and velocity (for spatiotemporal ones), which would change with the phases flow rates as well. As a rule, such algorithms have a fraction of false-positive and/or false-negative errors. In this work, we applied the same way of identification of the spatiotemporal trajectories of the disturbance waves as in Cherdantsev et al. (2021), namely, by manually marking about 10-15 points of each trajectory and then approximating the obtained {x,t} points with a polynomial curve. The trajectories were identified only for the waves which survive through the length of RoI without being absorbed by another disturbance wave. Obviously, such processing is tiresome and time-consuming. As a rule, it was made only for the cases without excitation and with a few values of f0 from the susceptibility range, according to Fig. 11 (c, d). Once the spatiotemporal trajectory of a wave is obtained, the wave's individual velocity, V, amplitude, A, and longitudinal size, L, can be measured automatically, see Cherdantsev et al. (2021). Then the mean values of these quantities over all waves at given x can be calculated.
Example dependencies VC(x) are shown in Fig. 12(a) for the same case with WL = 1.6 cm2/s, VG = 43 m/s. Without excitation (black dots), VC grows quite rapidly during the first 150-200 mm from the inlet and then keeps growing at a much lower rate (see the more detailed analysis in Cherdantsev et al. 2021). With the excitation at f0 = 40 Hz (red dots), which is close to the middle of the susceptibility range (see Fig. 11d), VC grows much faster. By x = 150 mm, it reaches the saturated value, which does not change downstream anymore. This behavior could be expected from the comparison between Fig. 5(a) and (c): indeed, the individual waves at f0 = 40 Hz have a constant slope of the characteristic lines over the major part of the RoI. In the downstream half of RoI, the stabilized velocity at f0 = 40 Hz is quite close to that at f0 = 0.  For these two cases, the standard deviation of V(x) dependencies, estimated based on manual identification of the disturbance wave trajectories, is shown by crosses in Fig. 12(a). For f0 = 40 Hz, the standard deviation is significantly smaller, which corresponds to the stronger regularity of the excited waves.
Fig. 12. (a) Dependence of mean wave velocity and its standard deviation on downstream distance for f0 = 0, 30, 40 and 50 Hz. WL = 1.6 cm2/s, VG = 43 m/s. (b, c) The average velocity over the distant half of RoI. VG = 29 m/s (b); VG = 43 m/s (c).
For different excitation frequencies, f0 = 30 Hz (green dots) and f0 = 50 Hz (blue dots), the velocity evolution is qualitatively the same as for f0 = 40 Hz; the growth rate at f0 = 30 Hz is slightly lower. The velocity observed far downstream decreases with the excitation frequency. This behavior is intuitively clear in terms of mass conservation. The time-averaged liquid flow rate is independent on the excitation frequency. It consists of the liquid carried by the base film, by the disturbance waves, and in form of entrained droplets. If we assume (and it will be confirmed below) that the ‘base film’ and ‘droplets’ components do not change significantly due to the imposed oscillations, then the total liquid flow rate carried by the disturbance waves also remains the same, and, if the number of disturbance waves increases with f0, each wave would carry less liquid. The lesser flow rate in a single wave can be expressed in smaller volume (amplitude and/or longitudinal size) of the wave, or in lower speed, or both. Fig. 12(b, c) shows how VC averaged over the downstream half of RoI changes with f0. Within the susceptibility range (cf. Fig. 9a-b and Fig. 11) there is a systematic decrease in <VC> with f0, thus supporting the commonality of the above considerations. Outside this range, the velocity is more or less the same, without any strong tendency.
In Fig. 13, the data on base film thickness, amplitude, and longitudinal size of disturbance waves are presented for WL = 1.6 cm2/s, VG = 43 m/s.  Each 10th value of x is shown in order not to overload the image. The base film thickness is indeed mainly unaffected by the excitation frequency (Fig. 13a), which is true for the whole range of flow conditions.
Fig. 13. Dependence of the base film thickness (a), mean amplitude (b) and longitudinal size (c) of disturbance waves for f0 = 0, 30, 40 and 50 Hz. WL = 1.6 cm2/s, VG = 43 m/s. In (b) and (c) power-law approximations of A(x) and L(x) are shown by solid lines.
The dependencies of the average amplitude of disturbance waves on x are shown in Fig. 13(b). The amplitude of a disturbance wave was defined the same way as in Cherdantsev et al. (2021), namely, as the average value of film thickness within the range of ±2 mm around the coordinate of its trajectory x at fixed time moment t, with the subtraction of hB(x). This method was selected to suppress the effect of localized optical distortions, appearing due to reflection of fluorescence at steep interfaces of the fast ripples. In general, the scatter of the measured values of amplitude is quite large; it mainly comes from physical variation of height of an individual disturbance wave due to appearance and disappearance of fast ripples, enhanced by the distortions mentioned above. The standard deviation of an A(x)-record after subtracting the trend expressed by a power-law approximation (see below) is about 60 μm for all four f0 values in Fig. 13(b). The difference in A(x) behavior due to f0 shown by the trends exceeds 60 μm and cannot be entirely attributed to the scatter effect. More details on potential sources of measurement errors of the amplitude of disturbance waves can be found in Cherdantsev et al. (2021).
Without excitation, A(x) grows downstream in a square-root manner, starting from quite small values and increasing over 4 times by the end of RoI. This dependence can be approximated with a power-law function, A(x) = axn, which is shown in Fig. 13(b) by a solid line. The n-coefficient in this particular case is 0.56. With the excitation at f0 = 40 Hz, the wave amplitude evidently grows much faster: at the distance of 30 mm from the inlet, the amplitude is already three times higher than that without excitation. However, the amplitude growth is much weaker in this case: the n-coefficient is only 0.1. So, the effect of excitation on wave amplitude dynamics is similar to that on velocity: under excitation, a quantity grows much faster near the inlet, and quickly gets almost saturated.
The standard deviation values shown by crosses in Fig. 13(b) indicate the level of amplitude variation over the whole ensemble of individual disturbance waves observed at fixed x. This level exceeds the aforementioned combined scatter due to amplitude variation of individual disturbance waves due to ripples and distortions. The relative variation of amplitude is much higher than that for velocity; moreover, in contrast to the velocity case, the excitation does not reduce the amplitude variation between the waves. Similar to the velocity case, the amplitude at f0 = 30 Hz grows slower than at f0 = 40 Hz, but reaches higher value by the end of RoI. Within the range of excitation, the amplitude value in the lower half of RoI decreases with f0; the effect of f0 on <A> is even stronger than that on <V>.
The longitudinal size of a wave, L(x,t), was defined, again, in the same manner as in Cherdantsev et al. (2021), namely, as the spatial extent of the wave where the film thickness is higher than hB(x) + 0.2A(x,t). The average longitudinal size of the waves also grows with x (see Fig. 13c), but the growth rate is not high (n is 0.19 without excitation if the power-law approximation is applied). The effect of the excitation frequency on L(x) is similar to that on V and A, but quantitatively the difference is much smaller. The difference in L near the end of RoI is small in comparison to the scatter in L between individual disturbance waves (which is also shown by crosses for f0 = 0 and 40 Hz). Similar to the amplitude case, the excitation does not regularize the longitudinal size of the disturbance waves.
As for the last component of the liquid flow rate, namely, the entrained droplets, no strong effect of excitation was observed. The flow rate of the dispersed phase, QE, at x = 500 mm was measured (see the end of Section 2) for f0 = 0 and for f0 from the middle of the range of susceptibility. Two independent series of measurements were carried out (which are shown by the same symbols in Fig. 14). The values of QE grow with both gas and liquid flow rates, as expected (Fig. 14a). With excitation, the entrainment seems to be slightly higher, but the difference does not exceed 5% (Fig. 14b). Some positive effect of excitation can be seen, but it is quite small and comparable to the measurement error. Besides, the difference does not seem to depend on the efficiency of excitation on the disturbance waves. As it was found in section 4, at large gas and liquid flow rates high excitation frequencies are required to affect the disturbance waves, and the amplitude of oscillations was not large enough at such frequencies. Nonetheless, the effect of excitation on QE is even smaller at low WL and VG, where the excitation effect on disturbance waves is strong.
Fig. 14. (a) Dependence of flow rate of entrained droplets with and without excitation on gas velocity. (b) Direct comparison of droplet flow rates in presence of excitation plotted versus that in absence of excitation.
Probably, this small additional amount of droplets is not entrained from the disturbance waves, but from the initial waves near the inlet, before the disturbance waves are formed. In this region, short two-dimensional initial waves undergo fast growth on a thick layer of liquid film leaving the inlet (see Isaenkov et al. 2019). It is possible that, when these waves reach their maximum amplitude, transverse instability leads to tearing-off small droplets. Recently, Inoue & Maeda (2021) have derived a theoretical model describing such a phenomenon, and obtained satisfactory agreement with indirect estimation of entrainment rate inside a 20 mm long tube by Yarygin et al. (2019). Potential contribution of this phenomenon into total entrainment rate cannot be large in the conditions of the present work, since the significant growth of entrained fraction starts at some distance from the inlet (see, e.g., Fig. 2b in Cherdantsev et al. 2021), after the disturbance waves are formed. However, this entrainment mechanism can respond to the excitation near the inlet: if the initial waves grow faster due to excitation, probability of droplet creation from their tips would increase.
<Section>6. Discussion and conclusions</Section>
In the present paper, the possibility to affect the hydrodynamics of annular gas-liquid flow via high-frequency periodic pulsations of liquid flow rate is investigated. The pulsations are applied in the liquid distributor in form of harmonic oscillations with frequency varying from 20 to 100 Hz. To the best of our knowledge, no attempts of this kind were published before.
Downward adiabatic air-water annular flow at near atmospheric pressure in a vertical 11.7 mm pipe was studied within the range of liquid wetting densities, WL, 1.6 – 4.6 cm2/s, and gas superficial velocities, VG, 0 – 70 m/s. The effect of the excitation was studied by analyzing the spatiotemporal matrices of film thickness obtained with the BBLIF technique. The region of interrogation (RoI) had a length of 470 mm, starting from the inlet; the measurements were taken with a spatial resolution of 0.47 mm/pixel and a sampling frequency of 10 kHz.
For thick films falling under gravity in absence of gas flow, the excitation works well, producing the waves of the preset frequency starting from the inlet. The stage of the smooth film observed in absence of excitation disappears completely. The waves grow and become significantly nonlinear but then the regularity disappears, supposedly due to break-up into three-dimensional solitary waves. It could be said that the excitation shifts all the stages of wave evolution for falling films closer to the inlet.
For thick films under strong gas shear – i.e., for annular flow with liquid entrainment – the excitation does indeed affect the disturbance waves, but only for a certain range of excitation frequencies, encompassing the passing frequency of disturbance waves far from the inlet in absence of excitation. Within this range, the frequency of disturbance waves is equal to the excitation frequency.
The way how the excitation at the inlet affects the disturbance waves far downstream is related to the mechanism of formation of disturbance waves. The disturbance waves are created due to the coalescence of several initial waves with high (of the order of several hundred Hz) frequency (see Alekseenko et al. 2015 and Isaenkov et al. 2019). In absence of excitation, the initial waves pass with roughly constant time separation. As a result, a large number of disturbance waves is produced near the inlet, but these waves are located close to each other and have strong variation in individual properties, which leads to numerous coalescence events.
The imposed oscillations cause periodic variation of the film thickness over which the initial waves propagate, and, in addition, the amplitude modulation of the initial waves themselves. The resulting signal consists of slightly thicker surges carrying a number of amplified initial waves; the troughs between the surges are nearly free of the initial waves. It appears that a certain number of initial waves is both necessary and sufficient to create a disturbance wave, and the further evolution depends on how many initial waves are carried by a surge.
If the amount of initial waves carried by a surge belongs to a certain range, the surge creates a single disturbance wave; the excess of the initial waves decays. In this case, the number of produced disturbance waves corresponds to the number of surges. The disturbance waves are quite uniform in velocities and are well separated from each other, which reduces the probability of coalescence. Longer surges may produce several disturbance waves with varying properties, located close to each other. As a result, this case would be not very different from the case of no excitation. If f0 is too high, there is no effect as well. The surges are badly pronounced and the flow structure is again not different from that without excitation. In general, f0 > 70 Hz nearly does not produce regular structures, which could be explained by the low amplitude of the imposed pulsations in that range due to the imperfectness of our equipment.
So, within the appropriate frequency range, the excitation does not just amplify the production of disturbance waves at the imposed frequency but also dampens the production of disturbance waves in between. As a result, the regularity of disturbance waves increases. The excited disturbance waves are even well distinguishable in the signal spectra, unlike in the case without excitation. The regularity is generally observed over the whole length of RoI. It is interesting to note that, despite the gas-sheared liquid film flow is much more chaotic than the gravitationally falling film, the regularity caused by the imposed oscillations lasts for longer distances in the case of gas-sheared film.
Under excitation, the amplitude and velocity of disturbance waves grow and saturate at much shorter distances from the inlet. The wave properties at the end of RoI are not very different from those without excitation. If f0 is changed within the range of susceptibility, the amplitude, velocity, and longitudinal size of the waves decrease with increasing f0, since the liquid flow rate carried by disturbance waves remains unchanged.
The other components of liquid flow rate – the base film and the entrained droplets – are nearly unaffected by the excitation. The entrainment occurs due to disruption of ripples traveling on top of disturbance waves (Woodmansee & Hanratty 1969, Cherdantsev et al. 2014); hence, its intensity is expected to depend on the local number and properties (mainly, amplitude) of the disturbance waves. Under excitation, the number of disturbance waves near the inlet is significantly reduced; on the other hand, the amplitude of disturbance waves promptly reaches high values. We assume that the contributions of these two effects into entrainment compensate each other. However, even if the excitation does not directly affect the disturbance waves, a small increase of entrainment is possible due to enhancement of the initial waves.
The practical outcome of this paper may be shortened as follows. Against expectations, it is possible to affect annular flow using high-frequency low-amplitude pulsations of liquid flow rate. The changes are possible in a relatively narrow range of frequencies and are not massive. Mainly, they result in high degree of regularity of the disturbance waves and prompt stabilization of disturbance wave properties, which makes the film hydrodynamics more stable and predictable. Besides, it is possible to slightly alter the disturbance wave characteristics by shifting the balance between the passing frequency on one hand, and velocity, amplitude, and longitudinal size on the other.
Though the amplitude of the oscillations does not have to be large to affect the flow, there seems to be a lower limit, since at high excitation frequencies the effect is weak or absent. It is unclear how exactly the value of oscillation amplitude affects the flow. At least, the excitation frequency is more important for susceptibility than the amplitude: if the gas speed is increased, the frequency range of susceptibility shifts towards the increased frequency of disturbance waves far downstream, despite that the amplitude is larger for small frequencies. Although velocity and amplitude of disturbance waves are indeed larger at lower frequency (i.e., at larger pulsations amplitude), this kind of difference is observed far from the inlet, whilst near the inlet no obvious tendency can be seen: e.g., initial values of wave amplitude are the highest for f0 = 40 Hz and the lowest for f0 = 30 Hz. Improvement of the excitation device so that it would be able to produce the necessary amplitude at higher frequencies and investigation of excitation efficiency at larger gas and liquid flow rates would be one possible direction of future research. Another interesting direction is to investigate whether the imposed oscillations are able to produce a more prominent effect in less stable conditions. For example, it is possible that the imposed oscillations may shift the transition to entrainment in annular flow, both in the region of high gas and low liquid flow rates, and vice versa.
<Section>Author statement</Section>
Andrey V. Cherdantsev: Conceptualization, Methodology, Formal Analysis, Writing – Original Draft, Writing – Review & Editing, Funding Acquisition
Sergey V. Isaenkov: Investigation, Formal Analysis
Mikhail V. Cherdantsev: Investigation
Dmitry M. Markovich: Supervision, Funding Acquisition
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
The work was supported by Russian Science Foundation (project 19-79-30075). The equipment was provided by grant No. 075-15-2019-1888 from the Government of the Russian Federation.
<Section>References</Section>
Adebayo and Matar, 2017
I.T. Adebayo, O.K. Matar
Droplet impact on flowing liquid films with inlet forcing: the splashing regime
Soft Matter, 13 (41) (2017), pp. 7473-7485
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Aktershev et al., 2021
S. Aktershev, S. Alekseenko, A. Bobylev
Waves in a rivulet falling down an inclined cylinder
AIChE J, 67 (1) (2021), p. e17002
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Alekseenko et al., 2008
S.V. Alekseenko, V.A. Antipin, A.V. Cherdantsev, S.M. Kharlamov, D.M. Markovich
Investigation of waves interaction in annular gas–liquid flow using high-speed fluorescent visualization technique
Microgravity Sci. Technol., 20 (3) (2008), pp. 271-275
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Alekseenko et al., 2009
S.V. Alekseenko, S.P. Aktershev, A.V. Cherdantsev, S.M. Kharlamov, D.M. Markovich
Primary instabilities of liquid film flow sheared by turbulent gas stream
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 35 (7) (2009), pp. 617-627
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Alekseenko et al., 2014
S.V. Alekseenko, A.V. Cherdantsev, O.M. Heinz, S.M. Kharlamov, D.M. Markovich
Analysis of spatial and temporal evolution of disturbance waves and ripples in annular gas–liquid flow
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 67 (2014), pp. 122-134
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Alekseenko et al., 2015
S.V. Alekseenko, A.V. Cherdantsev, M.V. Cherdantsev, S.V. Isaenkov, D.M. Markovich
Study of formation and development of disturbance waves in annular gas–liquid flow
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 77 (2015), pp. 65-75
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ayati et al., 2017
A.A. Ayati, P.S.C. Farias, L.F.A. Azevedo, I.B. de Paula
Characterization of linear interfacial waves in a turbulent gas-liquid pipe flow
Phys. Fluids, 29 (6) (2017), Article 062106
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Azzopardi, 1997
B.J. Azzopardi
Drops in annular two-phase flow
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 23 (7) (1997), pp. 1-53
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Azzopardi and Whalley, 1980
B.J. Azzopardi, P.B. Whalley
Artificial waves in annular two-phase flow. ASME Winter Annual Meeting, Chicago (1980)
1980
Google Scholar
Charogiannis et al., 2015
A. Charogiannis, J.S. An, C.N. Markides
A simultaneous planar laser-induced fluorescence, particle image velocimetry and particle tracking velocimetry technique for the investigation of thin liquid-film flows
Exp. Thermal Fluid Sci., 68 (2015), pp. 516-536
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Cherdantsev et al., 2014
A.V. Cherdantsev, D.B. Hann, B.J. Azzopardi
Study of gas-sheared liquid film in horizontal rectangular duct using high-speed LIF technique: Three-dimensional wavy structure and its relation to liquid entrainment
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 67 (2014), pp. 52-64
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Cherdantsev et al., 2017
A.V. Cherdantsev, D.B. Hann, B.N. Hewakandamby, B.J. Azzopardi
Study of the impacts of droplets deposited from the gas core onto a gas-sheared liquid film
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 88 (2017), pp. 69-86
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Cherdantsev et al., 2021
M.V. Cherdantsev, S.V. Isaenkov, A.V. Cherdantsev, D.M. Markovich
Development and interaction of disturbance waves in downward annular gas-liquid flow
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 138 (2021), Article 103614
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chu and Dukler, 1975
K.J. Chu, A.E. Dukler
Statistical characteristics of thin, wavy films III. Structure of the large waves and their resistance to gas flow
AIChE J, 21 (3) (1975), pp. 583-593
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fan et al., 2019
W. Fan, H. Li, H. Anglart
Numerical investigation of spatial and temporal structure of annular flow with disturbance waves
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 110 (2019), pp. 256-272
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fan et al., 2020
W. Fan, A.V. Cherdantsev, H. Anglart
Experimental and numerical study of formation and development of disturbance waves in annular gas-liquid flow
Energy, 207 (2020), Article 118309
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Farias et al., 2012
P.S.C. Farias, F.J.W.A. Martins, L.E.B. Sampaio, R. Serfaty, L.F.A. Azevedo
Liquid film characterization in horizontal, annular, two-phase, gas–liquid flow using time-resolved laser-induced fluorescence
Exp. Fluids, 52 (3) (2012), pp. 633-645
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fershtman et al., 2020
A. Fershtman, L. Robers, H.M. Prasser, D. Barnea, L. Shemer
Interfacial structure of upward gas–liquid annular flow in inclined pipes
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 132 (2020), Article 103437
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fershtman et al., 2021
A. Fershtman, D. Barnea, L. Shemer
Wave identification in upward annular flow-a focus on ripple characterization
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 137 (2021), Article 103560
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gill et al., 1963
L.E. Gill, G.F. Hewitt, J.W. Hitchon
Sampling probe studies of the gas core in annular two-phase flow—I the effect of length on phase and velocity distribution
Chem. Eng. Sci., 18 (8) (1963), pp. 525-535
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gogonin, 2004
I.I. Gogonin
Heat transfer in condensation of vapor moving inside vertical tubes
J. Eng. Phys. Thermophysics, 77 (2) (2004), pp. 454-470
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Guzanov et al., 2018
V.V. Guzanov, A.V. Bobylev, O.M. Heinz, S.M. Kharlamov, A.Z. Kvon, D.M. Markovich
Characterization of 3-D wave flow regimes on falling liquid films
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 99 (2018), pp. 474-484
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Taylor et al., 1963
Hall Taylor, N. S., G.F. Hewitt, P.M.C Lacey
The motion and frequency of large disturbance waves in annular two-phase flow of air-water mixtures
Chem. Eng. Sci., 18 (8) (1963), pp. 537-552
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Taylor and N.S., 1968
N.S. Hall Taylor, R.M. Nedderman
The coalescence of disturbance waves in annular two phase flow
Chem. Eng. Sci., 23 (6) (1968), pp. 551-564
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hann et al., 2018
D.B. Hann, A.V. Cherdantsev, B.J. Azzopardi
Study of bubbles entrapped into a gas-sheared liquid film
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 108 (2018), pp. 181-201
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hazuku et al., 2008
T. Hazuku, T. Takamasa, Y. Matsumoto
Experimental study on axial development of liquid film in vertical upward annular two-phase flow
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 34 (2) (2008), pp. 111-127
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hewitt and Taylor, 1970
G.F. Hewitt, N.S. Hall Taylor
Annular Two-Phase Flow
Pergamon (1970)
Google Scholar
Hewitt et al., 1990
G.F. Hewitt, S. Jayanti, C.B. Hope
Structure of thin liquid films in gas-liquid horizontal flow
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 16 (1990), pp. 951-957
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Inoue and Maeda, 2021
C. Inoue, I. Maeda
On the droplet entrainment from gas-sheared liquid film
Phys. Fluids, 33 (1) (2021), Article 011705
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Isaenkov et al., 2019
S.V. Isaenkov, A.V. Cherdantsev, I.S. Vozhakov, M.V. Cherdantsev, D.G. Arkhipov, D.M. Markovich
Study of primary instability of thick liquid films under strong gas shear
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 111 (2019), pp. 62-81
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Isaenkov et al., 2020
S.V. Isaenkov, I.S. Vozhakov, M.V. Cherdantsev, D.G. Arkhipov, A.V. Cherdantsev
Effect of Liquid Viscosity and Flow Orientation on Initial Waves in Annular Gas–Liquid Flow
Appl. Sci., 10 (12) (2020), p. 4366
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kapitza and Kapitza, 1949
P.L. Kapitza, S.P. Kapitza
Wave flow of thin layers of viscous liquids. Part III. Experimental research of a wave flow regime
Zhurnal Eksperimentalnoi i Teoreticheskoi Fiziki, 19 (1949), pp. 105-120
Google Scholar
Kharlamov et al., 2015
S.M. Kharlamov, V.V. Guzanov, A.V. Bobylev, S.V. Alekseenko, D.M. Markovich
The transition from two-dimensional to three-dimensional waves in falling liquid films: Wave patterns and transverse redistribution of local flow rates
Phys. Fluids, 27 (11) (2015), Article 114106
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Krantz and Goren, 1971
W.B. Krantz, S.L. Goren
Stability of thin liquid films flowing down a plane
Ind. Eng. Chem. Fund., 10 (1) (1971), pp. 91-101
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lin et al., 2020
R. Lin, K. Wang, L. Liu, Y. Zhang, S. Dong
Application of the image analysis on the investigation of disturbance waves in vertical upward annular two-phase flow
Exp. Thermal Fluid Sci., 114 (2020), Article 110062
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Moreira et al., 2020
T.A. Moreira, R.W. Morse, K.M. Dressler, G. Ribatski, A. Berson
Liquid-film thickness and disturbance-wave characterization in a vertical, upward, two-phase annular flow of saturated R245fa inside a rectangular channel
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 132 (2020), Article 103412
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Okawa et al., 2010
T. Okawa, T. Goto, Y. Yamagoe
Liquid film behavior in annular two-phase flow under flow oscillation conditions
Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 53 (5-6) (2010), pp. 962-971
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Posada and Waltrich, 2017
C. Posada, P.J. Waltrich
Effect of forced flow oscillations on churn and annular flow in a long vertical tube
Exp. Thermal Fluid Sci., 81 (2017), pp. 345-357
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Posada and Waltrich, 2018
C. Posada, P.J. Waltrich
Similarities and differences in churn and annular flow regimes in steady-state and oscillatory flows in a long vertical tube
Exp. Thermal Fluid Sci., 93 (2018), pp. 272-284
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Portalski and Clegg, 1972
S. Portalski, A.J. Clegg
An experimental study of wave inception on falling liquid films
Chem. Eng. Sci., 27 (6) (1972), pp. 1257-1265
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Rivera et al., 2021
Y. Rivera, J.L. Muñoz-Cobo, J.L. Cuadros, C. Berna, A. Escrivá
Experimental study of the effects produced by the changes of the liquid and gas superficial velocities and the surface tension on the interfacial waves and the film thickness in annular concurrent upward vertical flows
Exp. Thermal Fluid Sci., 120 (2021), Article 110224
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Schubring et al., 2010
D. Schubring, T.A. Shedd, E.T. Hurlburt
Planar laser-induced fluorescence (PLIF) measurements of liquid film thickness in annular flow. Part II: Analysis and comparison to models
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 36 (10) (2010), pp. 825-835
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Shemer and Singh, 2021
L. Shemer, S.K. Singh
Spatially evolving regular water wave under the action of steady wind forcing
Phys. Rev. Fluids, 6 (3) (2021), Article 034802
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Troitskaya et al., 2011
Y. Troitskaya, D. Sergeev, O. Ermakova, G. Balandina
Statistical parameters of the air turbulent boundary layer over steep water waves measured by the PIV technique
J. Phys. Oceanography, 41 (8) (2011), pp. 1421-1454
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Uche, 2020
O. Uche
Evaluation of Wave Characteristics in Annular Flow in Horizontal Pipes
Int. J. Oil Gas Coal Eng., 8 (1) (2020), p. 1
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Vasques et al., 2018
J. Vasques, A. Cherdantsev, M. Cherdantsev, S. Isaenkov, D. Hann
Comparison of disturbance wave parameters with flow orientation in vertical annular gas-liquid flows in a small pipe
Exp. Thermal Fluid Sci., 97 (2018), pp. 484-501
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Waltrich et al., 2013
P.J. Waltrich, G. Falcone, Barbosa Jr, R J.
Axial development of annular, churn and slug flows in a long vertical tube
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 57 (2013), pp. 38-48
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2021
G. Wang, Z. Dang, M. Ishii
Wave structure and velocity in vertical upward annular two-phase flow
Exp. Thermal Fluid Sci., 120 (2021), Article 110205
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Webb and Hewitt, 1975
D.R. Webb, G.F. Hewitt
Downwards co-current annular flow
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 2 (1) (1975), pp. 35-49
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wolf et al., 2001
A. Wolf, S. Jayanti, G.F. Hewitt
Flow development in vertical annular flow
Chem. Eng. Sci., 56 (10) (2001), pp. 3221-3235
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Woodmansee and Hanratty, 1969
D.E. Woodmansee, T.J. Hanratty
Mechanism for the removal of droplets from a liquid surface by a parallel air flow
Chem. Eng. Sci., 24 (2) (1969), pp. 299-307
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yarygin et al., 2019
V.N. Yarygin, V.G. Prikhodko, I.V. Yarygin, Y.N. Vyazov
Near-wall liquid film interaction with co-current gas flow inside nozzle and under outflow into vacuum
Vacuum, 159 (2019), pp. 494-499
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhao et al., 2013
Y. Zhao, C.N. Markides, O.K. Matar, G.F. Hewitt
Disturbance wave development in two-phase gas–liquid upwards vertical annular flow
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 55 (2013), pp. 111-129
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar