<title>Evaluation of energy and impulse generated by superheated steam bubble collapse in subcooled water</title>
<author>1,V.I.Melikhov,2,O.I.Melikhov,3,S.E.Yakush,4,T.C.Le</author>
<Affiliation>1,National Research University Moscow Power Engineering Institute, Krasnokazarmennaya 14, Moscow 111250, Russia,2,Joint Stock Company Electrogorsk Research and Engineering Center on NPP Safety, Saint Constantine Str. 6, Electrogorsk, Moscow Region 142530, Russia,3,Ishlinsky Institute for Problems in Mechanics RAS, Ave. Vernadskogo 101, Bldg. 1, Moscow 119526, Russia</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nucengdes.2020.110753</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029549320302478</URL>
Evaluation of energy and impulse generated by superheated steam bubble collapse in subcooled water
V.I.Melikhov,O.I.Melikhov,S.E.Yakush,T.C.Le
National Research University Moscow Power Engineering Institute, Krasnokazarmennaya 14, Moscow 111250, Russia
Joint Stock Company Electrogorsk Research and Engineering Center on NPP Safety, Saint Constantine Str. 6, Electrogorsk, Moscow Region 142530, Russia
Ishlinsky Institute for Problems in Mechanics RAS, Ave. Vernadskogo 101, Bldg. 1, Moscow 119526, Russia
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Collapse of superheated vapor bubble in subcooled water considered.
Vapor superheat is essential for energetic collapse to occur.
At high superheats collapse of vapor bubbles is similar to cavitation.
Melt droplet size caused by bubble collapse is evaluated.
Correlation for melt splash height due to vapor bubble collapse is found.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Collapse of superheated vapor bubbles in subcooled water is studied from the viewpoint of possible mechanisms of premixed zone formation in stratified vapor explosions. Numerical modeling is performed for spherically symmetric bubble collapse in subcooled water, with different initial vapor superheats. The kinetic energy of liquid flow generated due to vapor collapse is obtained. It is shown that the primary mechanism triggering vapor collapse and water flow is vapor cooling in the bubble by colder interface, lowering the vapor pressure and generating necessary pressure drop. Results are compared with an idealized case of bubble vapor maintained at the saturation conditions corresponding to water temperature. Two-dimensional simulations of bubble collapse near solid wall are performed by the boundary element method. Implications to stratified vapor explosions are discussed, and correlations for possible splashing of melt due to the impact of water jets generated by a collapsing steam bubble are obtained.
Keywords:Steam condensation;Bubble collapse;Superheated vapor;Cavitation;Stratified steam explosion;PremixingMelt splashing
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
In some scenarios of light water reactor (LWR) severe accidents with core meltdown, a highly energetic interaction of molten core materials (corium) with water is possible, known as steam explosion. In this event, rapid conversion of thermal energy into mechanical work occurs due to vapor expansion, posing significant threat to reactor containment integrity. The initial pressure spike can be amplified and transformed into a detonation-like self-propagating wave, provided that the interaction is featured by melt fragmentation into finely dispersed debris, which increases sharply the surface area of thermal interaction. As a pre-requisite for the occurrence of steam explosion, some premixing of melt and water must be present, with melt forming rather big drops of about 1 cm size, with film boiling on the interface. Subsequent explosion accelerates water with respect to the heavier melt drops, causing their surface instability and fragmentation.
For the most part, corium-water interaction following vessel failure in a severe accident was analyzed in the configuration where melt was released as a jet into a water pool deep enough for significant jet fragmentation and to occur; in this case the premixed zone is formed by the melt drops resulting from the jet fragmentation. Such a configuration was studied in extensive international research projects FARO, KROTOS, SERENA – see e.g. (Huhtiniemi and Magallon, 2001, SERENA, 2005, Magallon, 2009). On the contrary, melt release into a shallow water pool did not attract much attention because in this case the melt jet reaches the pool bottom and spreads over it forming a stably stratified configuration “melt-vapor film-water”, with no apparent premixing mechanism present (Berthoud, 2000). However, experimental confirmation of the possibility of strong steam explosion in stratified geometry (Kudinov et al., 2017) renewed interest in the mechanisms of melt premixing with water and vapor in the configuration which can be thought of as stably stratified, with heavy melt lying underneath lighter water. Experimental evidence provided by Kudinov et al. (2017) shows that spreading of high-temperature melt over the bottom of a shallow pool is featured by significant unsteadiness of the interface and quite energetic vertical splashes of hot material.
The hypotheses of possible premixing layer formation mechanisms put forward in (Kudinov et al., 2017) include (i) evaporation of entrapped under the melt surface water; (ii) rapid release of non-condensable gases during melt cooling; (iii) instabilities of the interface during melt spreading; (iv) jet breakup and jet impingement on the melt layer; however, the authors of the mentioned experimental work conclude that “experimental observations provide reasons to doubt that one of them is the main driving mechanism for the development of premixing layer in stratified configuration”.
As the physical mechanism, leading potentially to melt splashes, periodic formation and collapse of steam bubbles on the boundary between water and steam film separating water from the spreading melt was identified by Kudinov et al. (2017). Collapse of the bubbles, clearly seen on the experimental video records, can produce a high-speed water jet directed towards the molten material, penetrating through the vapor film and coming into direct contact with the melt. Rapid evaporation of water following this event produces, in return, splashes of the molten material, further destabilizing the vapor film boundary. This processes, running simultaneously on the boundary, result in the dynamic formation of melt-water–vapor mixture capable of highly energetic interaction (steam explosion).
In order to confirm this hypothesis, quantitative estimates are required for the characteristics of the collapse of hot vapor bubbles formed in subcooled liquid. Quite similar problems arise in cavitation where collapsing bubbles are the reason for surface erosion in pipes and machinery, see e.g., (Caupin and Herbert, 2006, Brennen, 2013). The principal difference with the problems relevant to melt-fuel interactions, though, is that cavitation is, basically, an isothermal process where bubble formation occurs due to local fall of total pressure to the saturation pressure at the ambient temperature, while bubble collapse occurs when the pressure in liquid is recovered due to flow deceleration. Therefore, no vapor superheat is encountered in cavitation, unlike the case considered here, when there are no initial pressure differences between vapor and liquid, however, the vapor is hot (superheated with respect to the saturation temperature at the ambient pressure). The problems of hot vapor condensation upon direct contact with subcooled water were studied in application to heat exchangers, steam condensers etc., see e.g. (Yang et al., 2019), but the main emphasis of these studies was on the determination of heat transfer characteristics, rather than on the dynamic effects.
In this paper, evolution of superheated vapor bubbles in subcooled water is considered, with emphasis on the determination of energy characteristics of the process (kinetic energy of liquid). First, a spherically symmetric bubble collapse problem is solved and compared with an ideal case where the vapor pressure is maintained equal to the (low) saturation pressure at the ambient temperature; the latter case is similar to cavitation bubble collapse. After that, the influence of nearby wall on the bubble collapse is considered in two-dimensional framework, in order to evaluate the geometry effect on bubble collapse. Finally, the results obtained are analyzed from the viewpoint of premixing zone formation in stratified steam explosions.
<Section>2. Spherically symmetric bubble collapse</Section>
2.1. Mathematical model
Consider a coupled problem of superheated vapor bubble dynamics in surrounding subcooled liquid. Initially, both vapor and liquid are at rest, and the internal bubble pressure is the same as in the surrounding liquid: @. The initial liquid temperature is below the saturation temperature,@ , while the initial vapor temperature takes some value in the range between  and the melt temperature Tm.
Due to vapor cooling and condensation on the bubble surface, the internal bubble pressure is falling, and the developing pressure drop between the bubble and ambient liquid generates the flow converging to the bubble center. The transient flow dynamics is governed by the interplay of the inertia of liquid, vapor pressure, and the condensation rate dependent, in turn, on the thermal processes in the vapor and liquid phases. For fast enough bubble collapse, the pressure in vapor can be inhomogeneous, affecting the condensation rate.
On the time scale relevant to bubble collapse, gravity effects are negligible and can be disregarded. Suppose that the bubble is located far enough from any obstructions, so that the surrounding fluid can be assumed infinite, and the problem can be formulated as one-dimensional and spherically symmetric. Bubble collapse near a rigid boundary will be considered in Section 3 in the 2D fluid-dynamical formulation.
In the spherical coordinate system originating at the bubble center, the continuity, momentum, and energy equations for vapor (subscript v) in the bubble (0≤r≤a
) take the form
@(1)
@(2)
@(3)
Equations (1), (2), (3) describe the flow of variable-density, conductive gas. Viscous effects are known to play a minor role in radial flows (Nigmatulin, 1990), therefore they are not taken into account.
The surrounding liquid is assumed to be incompressible@, see (Plesset and Chapman, 1971), therefore for @ the divergence-free radial velocity field decays as
@(4)
where @ is the bubble boundary velocity.
Under the above-stated assumptions, the flow is fully described by the Rayleigh-Plesset equation (Lord Rayleigh, 1917, Plesset, 1949) for the bubble boundary velocity:
@(5)
where @ is the pressure at the bubble boundary (liquid–vapor interface). The terms accounting for liquid viscosity and surface tension are omitted from Eq. (5) because their effects are small in the process considered (Plesset and Chapman, 1971, Labuntsov and Yagov, 2016). Pressure distribution in the liquid is described by
@(6)
The liquid energy equation takes into account the convective and conductive heat transfer mechanisms:
@(7)
Properties of the liquid phase were taken constant, because their variation is small in the liquid temperature range considered; for the vapor all properties were taken from the steam tables (IAPWS).
On the liquid–vapor interface, the common quasi-equilibrium scheme is adopted which assumes that, despite the non-equilibrium existing in the bulk of gas and liquid, on the boundary itself both phases coexist in the thermodynamically equilibrium state (Nigmatulin, 1990). Therefore, the temperatures of both phases on the interface are equal to the saturation temperature at the interface pressure:@ . Under the condition of thermodynamic equilibrium between the phases, the phase change rate per unit area,@ , is determined by the sum of heat fluxes incident on the interface from liquid and vapor sides:
@(8)
The rate of phase change determines the jump between the vapor velocity on the boundary,  and interface velocity @: @. At the bubble center, symmetry conditions are posed for vapor velocity and temperature, @; at infinity, stagnant liquid at the ambient temperature is assumed: .
2.2. Numerical method
For convenience of numerical solution of Eqs. (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), transform the independent variables  so that the bubble radius become constant in time:
@(9)
The system of equations to be integrated numerically comprises four partial differential equations (1), (2), (3) and (7), as well as two ordinary differential equations (the Rayleigh-Plesset equation (5) and kinematic equation  relating the bubble radius and the boundary velocity), non-linear differential condition (8) and non-linear dependencies of vapor density and internal energy on its pressure and temperature (equation of state).
The vapor phase equations (1), (2), (3) were integrated by a semi-implicit numerical method (Liles and Reed, 1978). The differential equations were discretized on a staggered grid introduced in the computational domain, with all thermodynamic parameters defined at the cell centers, and velocity defined on the cell faces. The convective terms were approximated by the upwind (donor) scheme, all other spatial derivatives were approximated by the central difference scheme.
The key feature of the numerical method (Liles and Reed, 1978) is that in the vapor velocity equation (2) only the pressure gradient is approximated implicitly, which results in the linear relationship between the unknown cell-face velocity at the new time level and pressure in the two adjacent cells. This implicit relationship is substituted into the discretized equations (1), (3) for the vapor mass and energy where the density and internal energy are linearized in terms of pressure and temperature with respect to the previous time-step state, according to the thermodynamic properties of vapor. As a result, a tri-diagonal system of linear algebraic equations is obtained for pressure, solved by the standard method. The new-level values of pressure are used then to update all other vapor properties. This method allows the time step restrictions due to speed of sound to be eliminated, leaving, however, the time step restriction due to velocity-based Courant number. On the initial stage of the process where the flow is featured by propagation of pressure waves in the bubble, simulations were performed with small time steps, corresponding to the Courant number based on the speed of sound of about unity, in order to resolve the vapor flow adequately. At the later stage where the waves are damped and the flowfield in the bubble becomes smooth, simulations were performed with larger time steps obtained from the stability criterion.
The liquid energy equation (7) was integrated by implicit finite-difference method with symmetric spatial approximation of the heat conduction term and upwinded approximation for the convective term.
Two-point approximations were used for the heat fluxes in both phases in the interface balance condition (8). To achieve proper coupling of all equations, global iterations were performed on each time step. First, the heat fluxes in (8) were evaluated from the previous-level temperatures, and the condensation rate  was obtained. After that, several iterations were performed updating the new-level solution and calculating the new value for the condensation rate. Typically, convergence was achieved in 8–10 iterations; in the solution obtained the heat fluxes at the interface were balanced with the phase change rate according to Eq. (8).
An iteration scheme was also applied to take into account the non-linearity of the Rayleigh-Plesset equation (5). The interface pressure  was taken from the near-boundary cell on the vapor side of the interface. All non-differential terms in (5) were evaluated from the corresponding values obtained on the previous iteration. In fact, equations (5), (8) pose the boundary conditions on the bubble surface for the partial differential equations (1), (2), (3) and (7).
Simulations were performed on a uniform in  computational mesh, the number of cells within the bubble () where vapor equations were integrated was in the range 50–100. The time step was  ms; the material Courant number, taking the form  in the transformed variables (9), did not exceed 0.15. The size of domain on the liquid side of the interface, where the liquid energy equation (7) was solved, was chosen in accordance with the depth of thermal wave penetration into the liquid. It was shown that for solving the problem on the time interval corresponding to bubble collapse, it is sufficient to solve the thermal problem on the interval , maintaining the initial temperature of liquid  on the right boundary. The size of mesh cells on the fluid side was equal to that on the vapor side. For these parameters, convergence of numerical solutions with respect to mesh cell size was achieved.
Note that the assumption of incompressible liquid becomes invalid at the final stage of bubble collapse when the in-bubble pressure and the heat flux from vapor to the interface change rapidly and implosion occurs, therefore, numerical solutions were obtained on the time interval from the initial time to almost complete bubble collapse, when fluid starts to decelerate noticeably. Reflection of the pressure wave from the origin and formation of a secondary cavity in liquid was not of interest for the purpose of the current study.
2.3. Problem parameters
The initial conditions for the simulations of superheated bubble collapse in subcooled water were posed keeping in mind the conditions of experiments by Kudinov et al (2017): the ambient pressure was  Pa, the initial water temperature  K corresponded to subcooling by 25 K with respect to the boiling temperature 373 K. The initial vapor pressure in the bubble was set to , while the initial vapor temperature  was set higher than the saturation temperature of vapor by  (referred to as the initial vapor superheat). Note again that in the cavitation studies the initial vapor temperature is usually set to , while the initial pressure is taken equal to  (for the above water subcooling, the vapor pressure in the bubble would be  Pa). The initial vapor superheat was varied from 300 to 650 K (this value is uncertain because in the vapor film, separating hot melt and water, large gradients of vapor temperature are inevitable, and the parameters of vapor captured by the coolant are not known).
Unfortunately, only few details are given in (Kudinov et al., 2017) on the size of bubbles appearing on the water–vapor boundary: it is stated that this size is of the order of few centimeters, which correlates with the photos in Fig. 16 therein. Application of the Rayleigh-Taylor theory (Lord Rayleigh, 1883, Taylor, 1950) to estimate the wavelength of the fastest growing perturbation on the water–vapor boundary gives the value  mm, which is of the same order as the bubble size registered in the experiments (Kudinov et al., 2017).
As the literature survey shows (Epstein and Fauske, 1985, Melikhov et al., 1993, SERENA, 2005), in the theoretical studies of dispersed particle (bubble or droplet) formation due to the development of hydrodynamic interface instability, the size of the formed particle is usually taken not as the full wave length of the perturbation mode, but only some fraction of it (0.1–0.5), which means that formation of dispersed phase occurs at this fraction of wavelength. It can not be excluded that, apart to the centimeter-size bubbles observed in the experiments (Kudinov et al., 2017), smaller bubbles also contributed to the mixing process. In view of this uncertainty, a parametric study is carried out in this work. The lower boundary for the bubble diameter was taken in the middle of the above-mentioned range for the wavelength fraction (0.1–0.5), namely,  mm; the upper boundary for the diameter was rounded to 30 mm. Therefore, simulations were carried out for the initial bubble radii , 5, 10, and 15 mm.
The model described by Eqs. (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8) takes into account all heat and mass transfer processes in both the vapor and liquid phases, and will be used in the following part of the paper for all simulations. However, it is instructive to compare the results obtained on its basis with results of a simplified (idealized) model in which it is assumed that thermal processes in the liquid and gas are infinitely fast, so that the vapor in the bubble remains all the time at the saturation pressure corresponding to the temperature of ambient liquid. Under this assumption, the bubble pressure is constant and equal to , so that from the very beginning there exists a pressure drop between the bubble and ambient fluid, driving the converging water flow filling the initial cavity. The latter case is very close to cavitation, and will be used below for the comparisons and studying the effect of vapor superheat.
2.4. Bubble collapse dynamics
Consider the results obtained for bubbles of different sizes for the initial vapor superheat @ K. In Fig. 1a,b, the time dependencies of the bubble radius @ and vapor pressure at the center of bubble @ are shown.
Fig. 1. Time histories of bubble radius (a) and vapor pressure (b) for the initial vapor superheat  K. Dashed line: saturation pressure at the ambient temperature .
It can be seen in Fig. 1b that at the initial stage of the process significant reduction in the bubble pressure occurs. This is explained by rapid vapor cooling in the bubble due to heat transfer to the bubble interface having lower temperature (saturated conditions). While this heat flux (according to Eq. (8)) reduces the condensation rate, its effect on pressure due to vapor cooling plays a predominant role. Also visible in Fig. 1b are pressure oscillations (as a “ripple” on the pressure–time curves) which are attributed to wave propagation inside the bubble, caused by the initial strong effect of the temperature discontinuity on the boundary; these waves are damped with time.
The dashed line in Fig. 1b shows the saturation pressure at the ambient temperature. It can be seen that for small bubbles the internal pressure falls below this level. However, closer inspection of the vapor state shows that in comparison with the local saturation pressure, the vapor always remains superheated (so that no bulk condensation is expected).
Comparison of Fig. 1a and 1b shows that on the initial stage the liquid remains almost stagnant due to its inertia, gradually accelerating due to the appearing pressure drop between the ambient level and vapor bulk. This causes relevant accelerating propagation of the bubble boundary and reduction in the bubble size (see Fig. 1a). At the final stage, the converging water flow compresses the gas because the reduction in the vapor volume proceeds faster than condensation at the interface. This causes the peak in the vapor pressure, seen in Fig. 1b.
As was stated above, simulations were performed only up to some small time prior to complete bubble collapse because water compressibility was not taken into account and model assumptions become questionable at this stage. Yet, from Fig. 1a it is possible to find the collapse time and evaluate the average linear velocity, dividing the initial radius by the collapse time. This integral velocity was in relatively narrow range, 5.8–6.4 m/s, with the lower value corresponding to the largest bubble.
2.5. Evaluation of kinetic energy of liquid
Consider the kinetic energy gained by liquid due to bubble collapse. For a volume of fluid bounded by the bubble of radius  and an arbitrary spherical surface of radius , the kinetic energy is equal to
@(10)
where integration was performed taking into account the velocity distribution (4). Taking the limit , obtain the total kinetic energy of fluid motion caused by the bubble collapse (see Obreschkow et al., 2006, Schenke et al., 2019):
@(11)
In Fig. 2, time dependencies are shown for the kinetic energy of water, corresponding to the initial vapor superheat , 400, and 650 К; the initial bubble size was  mm. By the dashed line, a similar dependence is plotted for the ideal case of infinite heat conductivities of liquid and vapor (recall that in this case the vapor pressure is constant and equal to the saturation pressure at the ambient temperature during the whole process of bubble collapse). All curves are normalized by the maximum total kinetic energy of liquid obtained in the ideal case,  mJ.
Fig. 2. Time histories of the kinetic energy of liquid obtained for different initial superheats; the dashed line corresponds to the ideal case of constant vapor pressure.
It follows from Fig. 2 that when the vapor present initially in the bubble is superheated to high temperature, the heat fluxes from the bubble bulk to the interface are so high that, due to rapid gas shrinking and bubble pressure lowering, the surrounding liquid is accelerated by the pressure drop quite fast, acquiring the kinetic energy comparable with that observed in the ideal case where the internal pressure is maintained low from the very beginning. Notably, for the initial gas superheat of 650 K, the maximum kinetic energy attained by the liquid in the course of bubble collapse is practically equal to that in the ideal case. For the superheat equal to 400 and 300 K, however, the maximum kinetic energy of the liquid is 80% and 65% of the kinetic energy in the ideal case, respectively. Also seen in Fig. 2 is that the time corresponding to the maximum kinetic energy is increasing with the decreasing vapor superheat (0.38 ms in the ideal case, 0.42–0.52 ms for superheats from 650 down to 300 K). Therefore, the ideal case can be used for conservative estimates of the maximum energy and minimum collapse time for a given bubble size.
In order to study the influence of bubble size on the energetics of the collapse, in Fig. 3 the time dependencies of the kinetic energy of liquid  are shown for larger bubbles, with the initial radii  and 15 mm (results for smaller sizes are not shown because the maximum energies are much smaller and curves are not discernible in the scale of Fig. 3).
Fig. 3. Time histories of the kinetic energy of liquid  obtained for different initial sizes of bubble for vapor superheat 650 K.
It follows from Fig. 3 that the kinetic energy of liquid flow is increasing with the bubble size. The dependence of the maximum kinetic energy of liquid obtained for the vapor superheat 650 K on the initial bubble size  is plotted by dots in Fig. 4.
Fig. 4. Dependence of the maximum kinetic energy of liquid on the initial bubble radius  obtained for vapor superheat 650 K. Dots: numerical data, dashed line: cubic approximation (12).
The numerical data  presented in Fig. 4 can be approximated with sufficient accuracy by a cubic parabola
@(12)
where @ mm,  J is the maximum kinetic energy of liquid for the initial bubble radius . The approximating relationship (12) is plotted in Fig. 4 by the dashed line.
Thus, the analysis performed in this part allows one to conclude that at high initial superheats of vapor in the bubble, fast cooling and condensation of the vapor brings about rapid fall of bubble pressure. The higher the initial superheat, the closer bubble collapse characteristics and the kinetic energy of liquid to the idealized case where the internal pressure is maintained at the saturation level corresponding to the ambient temperature. In a sense, collapse of superheated vapor bubble at high superheats resembles much better studied cavitation bubble collapse, so that relevant experimental and theoretical data can be taken for the analysis of premixing mechanisms in stratified melt-coolant interaction.
So far, the analysis of bubble collapse was performed assuming spherical symmetry of the flow and interface. Such an approach simplifies significantly the considerations and alleviates computational difficulties. However, it is known from cavitation studies that near solid surfaces posing limitations on the flow field, collapse of vapor bubbles is asymmetrical, with the formation of a cumulative jet directed towards the boundary. It can be expected that collapse of superheated vapor bubble will proceed in qualitatively similar way. In the next section, the effect of asymmetry (presence of solid wall) on the energy characteristics of the bubble collapse process is analyzed.
<Section>3. Bubble collapse near a wall</Section>
3.1. Formulation
In the previous section, it was demonstrated that thermal and fluid-dynamic processes accompanying superheated vapor condensation and bubble collapse in subcooled liquid are close to those that would occur in an ideal case of constant vapor pressure, equal to the saturation pressure at the ambient temperature, . This assumption simplifies the mathematical model, eliminating the necessity to resolve the processes in the gas phase, and opening the gate for the application of very efficient numerical methods. In what follows, we make use of the boundary element method (BEM) and consider the collapse of a bubble modeled as a cavity with a constant pressure  in an incompressible liquid with the ambient pressure . The melt, possessing the density by an order of magnitude higher than water, is modeled by a rigid wall. Note that the analysis of water jet-melt interaction and generation of splashes is a subject of future work, not considered here.
The general scheme of the flow is sketched in Fig. 5. As before, we consider a bubble of the initial radius  located at a height  above a rigid wall. The problem is considered in axisymmetric formulation, with the -axis directed upward from the wall, through the bubble center.
Fig. 5. Sketch of the computational domain for modeling of bubble collapse near a wall.
Fig. 6. Non-dimensional downward velocity on the upper portion of the bubble at the axis of symmetry: a) variation of  at ; b) variation of  at .
The surrounding fluid is assumed to be incompressible; its potential flow is described by the Laplace and Bernoulli equations
@(13)
@(14)
where @ is the velocity potential, @ is the local pressure. At large distances from the bubble, the pressure takes its ambient value, the liquid velocity vanishes, and the velocity potential tends to an arbitrary constant, taken to be zero:
@(15)
On the bubble surface, the pressure is given by @; therefore, Eq. (14) on the surface takes the form
@(16)
On the bubble surface, the position vector  of fluid particles and the velocity vector, @, are related by kinematic formula
@(17)
Evolution of the velocity potential of the moving boundary points is determined by the substantial derivative which, with reference to Eq. (16), takes the form:
@(18)
Since the rigid wall is impenetrable, the boundary condition for the velocity is
@(19)
where @ is the -component of velocity vector.
Thus, coupled solution of Laplace’s equation (13) with boundary conditions at infinity (15), on the bubble surface (18) and rigid wall (19), and equation for the displacement of bubble surface (17) determines at each instant the velocity potential and bubble surface position. The liquid velocity is determined as the gradient of potential, whereas the pressure is obtained from the Bernoulli equation (14).
This problem formulation was considered earlier by Plesset and Chapman (1971) in order to estimate the water jet velocity generated by collapsing cavitation bubbles; the free surface of the cavity was represented by large number of points moving with the fluid velocity at the surface according to (17). Each time step was performed by solving Laplace’s equation (13) for the velocity potential, determination of the velocities at the surface points, displacement of the points and finding the new free surface position; the velocity potential of the moving boundary points was updated from Eq. (18).
In the current work, the problem is solved by the boundary element method (BEM), see e.g., (Brebbia et al., 1984, Blake et al., 1986), which was shown to be effective in fluid dynamics problems with free surfaces; implementation of this method is considered in the following section. In Section 3.3, results obtained by both methods are compared.
3.2. Solution method
The problem formulated in the previous section was solved numerically by the BEM method together with the Euler method for time advancement. In BEM, the initial differential formulation is reduced by Green’s formula to an integral equation for the potential and its normal derivative on the bubble surface:
@(20)
Here,@  is a point located either on the bubble surface , or in the domain @ occupied by liquid,  is the current point on the surface ;  and  are the cylindrical coordinates of the respective points,  is Green’s function,  is a parameter taking one of two fixed values:
(21)
For the integral equation written in the form (20), Green’s function for the current problem is
@(22)
In (22), the impermeability condition for the rigid surface is satisfied by introduction of an image source, with the position vector  defined as the image of  in the plane  .
To write the integral equation (20) taking into account the axial symmetry of the flow, introduce a variable  describing the boundary. As such a variable, use the boundary length reckoned from the upper intersection point of the boundary and -axis;  defines the cylindrical coordinates of the surface points,  and . After integration with respect to the polar angle, equation (20) is reduced to an equation containing an integral over the bubble boundary (Taib, 1985):
@(23)
Here, @ is the bubble boundary, @ is the normal derivative of potential. Function @ in (23) is expressed by
(24)
where@ ,@ , @,@ , @while @ is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind
(25)
Function @ entering (23) takes the form
(26)
Here,@ ,@ , @ is the complete elliptic integral of the second kind
(27)
Having in hand the distribution of potential along the boundary,@ , obtained on the previous time step , it is possible to find from the integral equation (23), by the BEM numerical method, the normal derivative of potential  if the point  is chosen on the boundary. To obtain the numerical solution, consider first the discrete representation of the boundary, as well as of the potential and its normal derivative on the boundary.
The boundary of length  is approximated by @ linear segments , joining @ collocation points chosen on the boundary; each -th segment joins the endpoints  and . The contour integral (23) is approximated by a sum of integrals over the linear segments.
The potential  and its normal derivative  are defined at the endpoints of each linear segment, ,  ; at the beginning of new time step the values of potential  are known, while its normal derivative values  have to be calculated.
When calculating the integrals over segments, the potential and its normal derivative at the internal points of the segment were linearly interpolated between the values at the endpoints. In a similar way, the radial and axial coordinates of the internal points necessary for the integration were interpolated. As a result, the integral from Eq. (23) over an arbitrary segment  was reduced to a linear expression with respect to the unknown values of the normal derivative of the potential at the segment endpoint,  and .
By placing  at an endpoint of an arbitrary -th segment and performing the above manipulations, one obtains a linear equation relating the yet unknown values of the normal derivative of potential at the segment endpoints. By visiting all collocation points in sequence, one arrives at a system of  linear equations with respect to the endpoint values . This system was solved by the Gauss elimination method to obtain the normal derivatives of the potential, i.e., the normal velocities of liquid, at all segment endpoints.
The described procedure of solving the integral equation (23) by BEM is the most computationally difficult part of the overall numerical algorithm. At the next stage, the known values of potential at the segment endpoints  are used to obtain the tangential derivatives of the potential (i.e., the tangential velocities) at the segment endpoints. This is achieved by fitting a parabola to three adjacent points and finding its derivative at the midpoint:
@(28)
Here, @ and @ are the lengths of neighboring segments:
@(29)
@(30)
The normal and tangential velocity components at the segment endpoints @ define the velocity vectors  at these points at time . The positions of segment endpoints at a new time, , are determined by solving (17) with the Euler scheme:
@(31)
On the final stage, equation (18) is integrated by the Euler scheme to obtain the velocity potential at the segment endpoints  at the new time instant:
@(32)
As a result, the new-time boundary coordinates and the velocity potential at the collocation points are obtained, which is sufficient to repeat the procedure and advance the solution in time.
With the potential and its normal derivative on the bubble boundary known, the potential can be restored at any point in the liquid (it is sufficient to place  in the bulk of the liquid domain and evaluate the integral (23)), after which the liquid velocity can be found; the pressure field is then obtained from Eq. (14).
In order to eliminate possible high-frequency instability of the boundary shape, a smoothing filter based on the cubic splines is applied. Periodic redistribution of nodes along the boundary is performed to avoid clustering of nodes in the course of numerical solution.
The time step  was chosen in accordance with the approach by Gibson and Blake (1982). In essence, this places a bound on  found from the maximum change in potential over the surface
@(33)
where @ is a user-defined constant determined through experimentation.
3.3. Verification of boundary element method
In (Plesset and Chapman, 1971), simulations were performed for bubble collapse near a solid wall. The results are presented in the non-dimensional form, with the time and velocity scales  and  , respectively. In order to verify the numerical solver developed in this work, simulations by BEM were performed for the same configuration, with different number of elements to which the bubble boundary is subdivided, as well as for different values of the parameter  determining the time step (see (33)).
In Fig. 6a, simulation results are shown for  at different : the non-dimensional velocity  is plotted against the non-dimensional time , the number of boundary elements was . For comparison, the data by Plesset and Chapman (1971) are plotted.
Fig. 6b shown that in the current BEM solutions the variation of the number of segments in the range  for  has only a minor (within 1%) effect on the calculated velocity; this was also confirmed for the other values of .
A rather strong dependence of the solution on  can be seen. The solution by Plesset and Chapman (1971) agrees quite well with the BEM solutions obtained in the range ; however, with further decrease in  the current solutions converge towards somewhat different limit (the velocity grows more steeply, and the collapse occurs earlier). No data on the parameters of numerical simulation could be found in (Plesset and Chapman, 1971), therefore, it is difficult to make deeper conclusion on the reasons for the differences visible in Fig. 6a. In particular, it is not evident if the data obtained by Plesset and Chapman (1971) represent the converged (in terms of boundary representation and time step) solution, or not.
Further verification was performed by comparing the BEM results with a recent work (Aganin et al, 2013) where numerical solutions, also obtained by BEM, were presented for the problem of bubble collapse near a rigid wall. The problem was solved for  mm,  MPa,  kg/m3,  kPa. No details on the simulation parameters (number of segments, time step, etc.) are given in (Aganin et al, 2013); the results for collapse of a bubble touching the wall, , are presented therein in the graphical form. These graphs were digitized and plotted below together with the solutions obtained by BEM.
In Fig. 7, distributions of velocity components along the bubble boundary are shown at time  µs. Non-dimensional velocity components  and  are plotted against the non-dimensional boundary coordinate , with the abscissa taking values 0 and 1 at the top and bottom collocation points located on the axis. In the simulations, the number of elements was , the time step control parameter  was variable. It can be seen that, with decrease in , the current solution tends to that from (Aganin et al, 2013). No visible effect of increasing the number of segments on the bubble surface is observed.
Fig. 7. Distribution of non-dimensional vertical () and radial () velocity components over the bubble boundary length at µs.
Thus, verification against the data by Plesset and Chapman, 1971, Aganin et al., 2013 confirmed the validity of the code. Also, in these simulations the optimal parameter values  and  were established; these parameters were used in all the simulations presented in the following section.
3.4. Effect of wall on bubble collapse
Numerical simulations of bubble collapse near a solid wall were performed, with the purpose of determining the effect of the wall on bubble collapse. In line with the above analysis, the parameters corresponding to the experiments by Kudinov et al. (2017) were taken. Namely, the ambient pressure was Pa, the initial vapor pressure in the bubble  Pa, liquid water density  kg/m3 (at  K). Spherically symmetric case was used as a reference one, and flows in the presence of the wall were calculated with heights , , and , where the initial bubble radius was  mm.
In Fig. 8, the shapes of bubble undergoing compression by water are shown at several consecutive times: in Fig. 8a () the shapes are shown at , 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.4075, 0.4082, and 0.40842 ms; in Fig. 8b () the shapes are shown at , 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.41, 0.417, 0.422, 0.425 and 0.4274 ms; in Fig. 8c (@) at , 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.415, 0.425, 0.433, 0.439, and 0.4399 ms.
Fig. 8. Shapes of collapsing bubble: a) , b) , c) .
It follows from Fig. 8a that for the initial distance to wall @ the bubble remains practically spherical during the main stage of its collapse, its deformation occurs only on the final stage. However, as the initial bubble position is shifted towards the wall, significant influence on the shape of collapsing bubble is evident, see Fig. 8b,c; the closer the wall, the more pronounced is the deformation of the bubble along the vertical axis, indicating the development of the water flow directed towards the surface. This phenomenon is well-known in cavitation where cumulative jets hitting the surfaces cause its erosion (Brennen, 2013).
In Fig. 9, the pressure distributions and velocity fields are shown at the instants when closing of the bubble occurs, i.e., the rear surface of the bubble catches up its front surface. Fig. 9a shows that a bubble collapsing far from the wall remains almost spherical, the velocity distribution is weakly asymmetric, without any pronounced impact on the wall. However, as the bubble is shifted closer to the wall (Fig. 9b, c), flow asymmetry becomes more evident, the velocity is increasing and pressure is decreasing, in accordance with the Bernoulli equation (13).
Fig. 9. Pressure (top) and velocity (bottom) in liquid: a) ,  ms, b) ,  ms, c) ,  ms.
From the Rayleigh solution one might anticipate that the maximum pressure would be attained in a zone enveloping the bubble surface. Due to the loss of spherical symmetry in the rigid boundary example, however, the maximum pressure is located on the axis of symmetry on the side of the bubble opposite to the rigid boundary. A physical explanation of the above phenomena is as follows. At the beginning of the collapse phase, the maximum pressure is achieved at infinity, causing the fluid to accelerate towards the bubble (i.e., the bubble is acting as a sink). However, as the collapse progresses, mass conservation demands that the fluid located some distance away from the bubble must decelerate, creating a pressure maximum close to the collapsing bubble surface where the acceleration of the fluid is zero. At the same time, the small volume of fluid between the point of maximum pressure and the bubble is accelerated continually, creating a liquid jet with very high speed.
Velocity vector color indicates the local pressure (see the color scale in each plate).
The impact of fluid on the wall can be characterized by an integral quantity, the Kelvin impulse, defined as the surface integral over the whole bubble surface :
@(34)
where @ is a unit vector in the -direction; the minus sign takes into account that the surface normal, , is directed outwards with respect to the fluid (i.e., into the bubble). In the axisymmetric case considered here, only the -component is of interest. As noted in (Benjamin and Ellis, 1966, Pearson et al., 2004), the Kelvin impulse of a moving bubble has the same physical meaning as the momentum of a rigid projectile in free space; it is a global measure of fluid momentum characterizing the impact effects of fluid and cavitation-related damage.
In Fig. 10, the variation of Kelvin impulse @ with time is presented for different distances to the wall . Evidently, the Kelvin impulse grows continuously up to the very instant of bubble collapse; the closer the bubble to the wall, the higher is  (for the distance  decreasing from  to , the maximum Kelvin impulse is increased more than by a factor of 5). In the absence of wall, .
Fig. 10. Variation of Kelvin impulse @ with time.
It is also of interest to compare other integral quantities characterizing bubble collapse near a wall, namely the instantaneous bubble volume and kinetic energy of liquid defined in the two-dimensional case as
@(35)
In Fig. 11, time dependencies of these quantities are presented for different distances @ between the bubble and wall.
Fig. 11. Integral characteristics of bubble collapse near a wall: a) bubble volume; b) kinetic energy of liquid.
It follows from Fig. 11 that the presence of wall does not affect significantly the rate at which the volume of bubble is decreasing, and the kinetic energy is growing. In the spherically symmetric case, bubble collapse proceeds somewhat faster; accordingly, the kinetic energy is also increasing faster than in the presence of a wall. Note that the time dependence for the kinetic energy (18) obtained in the 2D case by the boundary element method (Fig. 11b) coincides with the dependence in Fig. 2 obtained from the Rayleigh-Plesset equation. Note also that, unlike the Kelvin impulse which characterizes the liquid motion along the -axis (so that it vanishes in the spherically symmetric case), the kinetic energy characterizes the liquid motion as a whole, therefore it is the highest in the spherically symmetric case.
Note that the dynamics of bubble collapse near a rigid surface is qualitatively similar to the chugging phenomenon observed for a nozzle ejecting vapor to a subcooled water pool (Yang et al., 2019). At high enough water subcooling, and relatively small vapor flowrates, the vapor bubble formed at the nozzle orifice is condensing rapidly, and due to the emerging pressure drop the pool water enters the nozzle, after which formation of the next vapor bubble begins.
3.5. Evaluation of melt splash due to bubble collapse
The results obtained allow one to make estimates of the possible effect of collapsing vapor bubbles on the layer of melt, relevant to the premixing stage of stratified steam explosion. It is known from the experimental observations (Kudinov et al., 2017) that the thickness of the mixing layer formed during the melt spreading was about 5 cm. Estimate the size of melt droplets capable to jump by  cm, using the maximum value of the Kelvin impulse  µN·s obtained in the simulations , see Fig. 10. To this end, evaluate the initial melt velocity necessary for such a jump,  m/s. By equating the Kelvin impulse of water acting on the melt  and momentum of a melt particle, , obtain that  g (melt density  kg/m3), which corresponds to the melt particle radius 1.15 mm. Thus, collapse of a bubble having the initial radius 3.375 mm can throw a melt particle of the radius of about 1 mm to the height 5 cm.
In the experiments by Kudinov et al, 2017, however, it was observed that the upper boundary for the splashed melt fragments size was about 5 mm. Therefore, parametric studies were performed with the variation of initial bubble radius , 5, 7.5, and 10 mm (the bubble height was kept at ). Results of these simulations are presented in Fig. 12. Expectedly, larger bubbles produce larger wall impact: the increase in the bubble radius from  to 10 mm leads to the increase in the maximum Kelvin impulse by a factor of 25. The estimates, similar to those presented above, show that upon collapse of vapor bubbles of radius 7.5 mm the melt particles reaching the height 5 cm can have the size of 2.5 mm, and bubbles of the radius 10 mm can lead to splashing of 3.4 mm melt particles, which is comparable with the sizes observed in the experiments (Kudinov et al., 2017). Even better agreement can be expected for bubbles located initially at smaller heights , as is the case in cavitation near solid surfaces.
Fig. 12. Kelvin impulse obtained for different initial bubble sizes.
To generalize the estimates for melt droplet rise due to collapse of a hot vapor bubble, consider the non-dimensional form of the expressions following from the above analysis. Introduce the velocity scale , length scale , and time scale . In the corresponding non-dimensional variables, as was noted by Plesset and Chapman (1971), the problem solution depends on a single parameter, the ratio .
The maximum value of non-dimensional Kelvin impulse (its scale is ), as is shown in the calculations presented above, is equal to 0.15. The balance between the maximum Kelvin impulse and melt drop momentum is
@(36)
Expressing the melt droplet mass in terms of its density  and radius , and relating the initial droplet velocity to the height of its rise , obtain the relationship between the melt droplet size, initial bubble size, and melt rise height:
@(37)
In Fig. 13, the dependencies of the size of melt droplet on the initial bubble size are plotted for three values of melt rise height.
Fig. 13. Dependence of the radius of melt droplet on the initial bubble radius for three melt rise heights.
It follows from Fig. 13 that a bubble of a given initial radius, say, 1 cm, can produce the rise by 3 cm of a melt drop of the radius 0.39 cm, or rise by 7 cm of a melt droplet of 0.33 cm radius. On the other hand, considering a melt drop of a given radius, say, 0.4 cm, it can be concluded that it can reach the height of 3 cm upon collapse of a bubble of radius 1.03 cm, or reach the height of 7 cm upon collapse of a vapor bubble having the radius of 1.21 cm. Thus, small variation in the bubble or melt droplet size entails significant variation in the melt rise height. This high sensitivity is explained by strong power-law (6-th power) dependence of the rise height on the bubble and droplet size. It follows from (36) that
@(38)
The results of these estimations support the hypothesis that collapse of large (or the order of few centimeters diameter) bubbles observed in the experiments by Kudinov et al (2017) could cause noticeable splashes or eruptions of melt, contributing to the formation, and maintaining the existence of the premixing zone in the stratified configuration.
<Section>4. Discussion and conclusions</Section>
The study performed in this work generally supports the possibility of fast and energetic collapse of a superheated vapor bubble captured in subcooled water, even if the initial pressure in the bubble and in water is the same. The absence of the initial pressure drop between the liquid and bubble is what differs this case from the well-known and extensively studied cavitation bubbles. It is the high initial vapor superheat that is required to provide the conditions and physical mechanism for rapid bubble collapse. Additional studies, carried out in the course of this research, have clearly shown that in the absence of superheat (i.e., for a bubble comprising vapor at the saturation temperature corresponding to the common pressure of liquid and vapor), a relatively slow isobaric process of vapor condensation proceeds, with the condensation rate limited by heat conduction to the colder ambient liquid. In this case, no dynamic effects were observed, and the bubble pressure remained at its initial value for the most of the condensation period. Evidently, such events are of no significance in the context of melt-water premixing.
At high vapor superheats, on the contrary, bubble collapse proceeds very rapidly, accompanied by the phenomena pertinent to cavitation. For the most part, this is attributed to the rapid decrease of bubble pressure due to cooling of the vapor contained within. Although the initially hot bubble gas produces additional heat flux onto the interface hindering condensation, a lot more important is that the higher the superheat, the deeper is the pressure drop creating necessary conditions for acceleration of converging water flow. Note that collapse of initially superheated bubbles can occur in saturated water, while traditional cavitation is impossible there.
For bubbles collapsing near the melt surface, which was modeled in this work by a rigid wall, the kinetic energy gained by the liquid is comparable with the spherically symmetric collapse far from the wall. At the same time, the presence of boundary leads to the formation of a focused impact of liquid. The Kelvin impulse, being an integral measure of the impact, is increasing as the initial bubble height is diminished. The estimated performed on the basis of simulation results suggest that impact of the liquid is capable to transfer momentum to melt droplets sufficient for splashing of melt to height 5 cm (an estimate for the premixed layer thickness in experiments by Kudinov et al, 2017); for the initial bubble radii of 7.5–10 mm, the estimated sizes of melt droplets are comparable with the experimental observations.
In the context of stratified vapor explosions, a key quantity determining the energy characteristics of the collapsing vapor bubbles is the bubble size (the kinetic energy of induced water flow is proportional to bubble volume, or its size cubed). The Rayleigh-Taylor instability wavelength seems to provide only the lower bound for the bubble size. More relevant would be to take into account also the Kelvin-Helmholtz instability due to melt spreading in the stratified configuration. Examples of such an approach in application to severe accident analysis and melt-coolant interaction can be found in (Epstein and Fauske, 1985, Melikhov et al., 1993) where interface instabilities were considered and the fastest growing perturbation wavelengths were determined in the system melt-vapor film-water in vertical arrangement (melt jet). For the stratified configuration, the Kelvin-Helmholtz instability is related to horizontal flow, perpendicular to the gravity force direction, which also might affect the results.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
V.I. Melikhov: Software, Investigation, Writing - original draft. O.I. Melikhov: Methodology, Formal analysis, Writing - original draft. S.E. Yakush: Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing - review & editing. T.C. Le: Software, Investigation, Visualization.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
This research was funded by Russian Science Foundation (RSF) under Grant 18-19-00289. Authors are grateful to Dr. P. Kudinov and D. Grishchenko from Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Sweden, for valuable discussions.
<Section>References</Section>
Aganin et al., 2013
A.A. Aganin, M.A. Ilgamov, L.A. Kosolapova, V.G. Malakhov
Collapse of a cavitation bubble in liquid near a solid wall
Vestnik Bashkirskogo universiteta (Bulletin of Bashkir University), 18 (1) (2013), pp. 15-21
[In Russian]
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Benjamin and Ellis, 1966
T.B. Benjamin, A.T. Ellis
The collapse of cavitation bubbles and the pressures thereby produced against solid boundaries
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. London, A260 (1966), pp. 221-240, 10.1098/rsta.1966.0046
Google Scholar
Berthoud, 2000
G. Berthoud
Vapor explosions
Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 32 (2000), pp. 573-611, 10.1146/annurev.fluid.32.1.573
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Blake et al., 1986
J.R. Blake, B.B. Taib, G. Doherty
Transient cavities near boundaries. Part 1
Rigid boundary. J. Fluid Mech., 170 (1986), pp. 479-497, 10.1017/S0022112086000988
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Brebbia et al., 1984
Brebbia C.A., Telles J.C.F., Wrobel L.C. 1984. Boundary Element Techniques. - Springler-Verlag.
Google Scholar
Brennen, 2013
C. Brennen
Cavitation and Bubble Dynamics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (2013)
Google Scholar
Caupin and Herbert, 2006
F. Caupin, E. Herbert
Cavitation in water: a review
Comptes Rendus Physique, 7 (9–10) (2006), pp. 1000-1017, 10.1016/j.crhy.2006.10.015
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Epstein and Fauske, 1985
Epstein, M., Fauske, H.K., 1985. Steam film instability and the mixing of core – melt jets and water. Proceedings of the National Heat Transfer Conference. Aug. 1985, Denver, USA, 277–284.
Google Scholar
Gibson and Blake, 1982
D.C. Gibson, J.R. Blake
The growth and collapse of bubbles near deformable surfaces
Appl. Sci. Res., 38 (1982), pp. 215-224, 10.1007/BF00385951
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Huhtiniemi and Magallon, 2001
I. Huhtiniemi, D. Magallon
Insight into steam explosions with corium melts in KROTOS
Nucl. Eng. Design, 204 (1–3) (2001), pp. 391-400, 10.1016/S0029-5493(00)00319-8
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
IAPWS
IAPWS, The International Association for the Properties of Water and Steam, URL: http://www.iapws.org (last accessed 07 May 2020).
Google Scholar
Kudinov et al., 2017
P. Kudinov, D. Grishchenko, A. Konovalenko, A. Karbojian
Premixing and steam explosion phenomena in the tests with stratified melt-coolant configuration and binary oxidic melt simulant materials
Nucl. Eng. Des., 314 (2017), pp. 182-197, 10.1016/j.nucengdes.2017.01.029
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Labuntsov and Yagov, 2016
D.A. Labuntsov, V.V. Yagov
Mechanics of Two-phase System
Izdatelstvo MEI, Moscow (2016)
[In Russian]
Google Scholar
Liles and Reed, 1978
D. Liles, W. Reed
A semi-implicit method for two-phase fluid dynamics
J. Comput. Phys., 26 (1978), pp. 390-407, 10.1016/0021-9991(78)90077-3
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lord Rayleigh, 1883
Lord Rayleigh
Investigation of the character of the equilibrium of an incompressible heavy fluid of variable density
Proceed. London Mathemat. Soc., 14 (1883), pp. 170-177, 10.1112/plms/s1-14.1.170
Google Scholar
Lord Rayleigh, 1917
Lord Rayleigh
On the pressure developed in a liquid during the collapse of a spherical cavity
Phil. Mag., 34 (200) (1917), pp. 94-98, 10.1080/14786440808635681
Google Scholar
Magallon, 2009
D. Magallon
Status and prospects of resolution of the vapour explosion issue in light water reactors
Nucl. Eng. Technol., 41 (5) (2009), pp. 603-616, 10.5516/NET.2009.41.5.603
CrossRefGoogle Scholar
Melikhov et al., 1993
Melikhov, O.I., Melikhov, V.I., Nigmatulin, B.I., 1993. Breakup of liquid jets in film boiling. Proceedings of International Seminar on the Physics of Vapor Explosions. Oct. 25–29, 1993, Tomakomai, Japan, 90–95.
Google Scholar
Nigmatulin, 1990
Nigmatulin, R.I., 1990. Dynamics of Multiphase Media, Vol.1, 2. Hemisphere, N.Y. ISBN 9780891163282.
Google Scholar
Obreschkow et al., 2006
D. Obreschkow, P. Kobel, N. Dorsaz, A. de Bosset, C. Nicollier, M. Farhat
Cavitation bubble dynamics inside liquid drops in microgravity
Phys. Rev. Lett., 97 (2006), Article 094502, 10.1103/PhysRevLett.97.094502
CrossRefGoogle Scholar
Pearson et al., 2004
A. Pearson, J.R. Blake, S.R. Otto
Jets in bubbles
J. Eng. Math., 48 (2004), pp. 391-412, 10.1023/B:engi.0000018172.53498.a2
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Plesset, 1949
M.S. Plesset
The dynamics of cavitation bubbles
J. Appl. Mech., 16 (1949), pp. 228-231
Google Scholar
Plesset and Chapman, 1971
M.S. Plesset, R.B. Chapman
Collapse of an initially spherical vapour cavity in the neighbourhood of a solid boundary
J. Fluid Mech., 47 (2) (1971), pp. 283-290, 10.1017/S0022112071001058
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Schenke et al., 2019
S. Schenke, T. Melissaris, T.J.C. van Terwisga
On the relevance of kinematics for cavitation implosion loads
Phys. Fluids, 31 (2019), Article 052102, 10.1063/1.5092711
CrossRefGoogle Scholar
SERENA, 2005
SERENA, Meignen, R., Araki, K., Bang, K.H., Basy, S., Berthoud, G., Buck, M., Burger, M., Corradini, M.L., Dinh, T.N., Jacobs, H., Magallon, D., Melikhov, O.I., Moriyama, K., Naitoh, M., Ratel, G., Song, J.H., Suh, N., Theofanous, T.G., Yuen, W.W. 2005. Comparative review of the codes and models used for the SERENA calculations. March, 15.
Google Scholar
Taib, 1985
B.B. Taib
Boundary integral method applied to cavitation bubble dynamics
PhD Thesis. The
University of Wollongong, UK (1985)
Google Scholar
Taylor, 1950
G. Taylor
The instability of liquid surfaces when accelerated in a direction perpendicular to their planes
Proceed. Roy. Soc. London. Ser. A, Mathemat. Phys. Sci., 201 (1065) (1950), pp. 192-196, 10.1098/rspa.1950.0052
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yang et al., 2019
S.R. Yang, J. Seo, Y.A. Hassan
Thermal hydraulic characteristics of unstable bubbling of direct contact condensation of steam in subcooled water
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 138 (2019), pp. 580-596, 10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2019.04.065
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar