<title>Hot duct break transient with two- and three-loop ALLEGRO models</title>
<author>1,GusztávMayer</author>
<Affiliation>1,Centre for Energy Research (EK), 1525 Budapest 114, P.O. Box 49, Budapest, Hungary
</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nucengdes.2020.110911</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029549320304052</URL>
Hot duct break transient with two- and three-loop ALLEGRO models
1,GusztávMayer
Centre for Energy Research (EK), 1525 Budapest 114, P.O. Box 49, Budapest, Hungary
<Section>Highlights</Section>
A new three-loop CATHARE ALLEGRO input deck was developed.
Hot duct break transient causes core bypass in ALLEGRO gas-cooled fast reactor.
The cooling performance of the two- and three-loop ALLEGRO models were compared.
The three-loop model has better cooling performance in case of hot duct break.
Flow reversal near the break is possible.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
ALLEGRO is a concept of a small nuclear reactor with the primary aim to demonstrate the viability of the Generation IV (GFR) Gas cooled Fast Reactor technology and to ensure the experimental and qualification background for its new refractory fuel. In the GFR development the so-called bypass transients represent a pivotal role during safety analysis. Since the hot duct is located inside the cold duct there is no loss of coolant during the transient, nevertheless a huge core bypass may develop, which threatens the cladding integrity. The current ALLEGRO design consists of two primary cooling loops but a three-loop version is also investigated. In this paper the hot duct break transient is studied with a two- and three-loop ALLEGRO model by using the French CATHARE thermal hydraulics code. The preliminary analysis showed that the three-loop model has a better cooling performance.
Keywords:Gas cooled fast reactor;Three-loop ALLEGRO;Hot duct break;CATHARE;Bypass transient
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The development of ALLEGRO traces back to the beginning of the 2000′s when the GEN IV International Forum (GIF) selected the Gas cooled Fast Reactor (GFR) technology as a future development direction aiming at the closing of the fuel cycle, ensuring proliferation resistance, sustainability, reliability and high thermal efficiency (Stainsby et al., 2011). The development started by the collaboration of European research institutes, universities and companies.
As part of the European gas cooled fast reactor development, two basic designs were developed parallel. Both of them have helium primary coolant at a pressure of 7.0 MPa, circulated by the primary blowers. The first design is the GFR, which is the large-scale prototype of the gas fast reactor technology with a thermal power of 2400 MW (GFR2400). The second is the ALLEGRO, which is the demonstrator of the GFR2400 and which has an envisaged thermal power of not higher than 75 MW.
The CEA 2009 ALLEGRO design has two secondary circuits with pressurized water coolant at a pressure of 6.5 MPa. The tertiary circuit of ALLEGRO is an air cooler, which delivers the heat to the ambient air. There is no electricity production envisaged with ALLEGRO. Since the core outlet coolant temperature for these reactors is proposed to be at about 800 °C, a new refractory carbide fuel is aimed to be developed, which withstands this high temperature and the fast neutron spectrum. The primary aim of ALLEGRO is to qualify the new refractory carbide fuel in fast neutron spectrum and in high temperature helium environment. This newly tested and qualified fuel will be used later in the GFR-2400 reactors. Other important role of ALLEGRO as a demonstrator reactor is to show the viability of the helium cooled technology for the GFR-2400 reactors.
Significant part of the current nuclear developments focuses on SMRs (small modular reactors) (Karol et al., 2015), which have the benefit of being manufactured at a plant and bringing to a site to be assembled. Due to its relatively low thermal power ALLEGRO may also serve as an SMR. The modularity, the less on-site construction may significantly decrease the costs, which makes the design favorable on the energy market. Nevertheless, ALLEGRO being a fast spectrum reactor, the closure of the fuel cycle would also be beneficiary on the long term energy production.
The predecessor of ALLEGRO was called ETDR (Experimental Technology Demonstration Reactor) (Morin et al., 2009). Later, the concept was redesigned and it was renamed to ALLEGRO (Poette et al., 2009b, Poette et al., 2009a). The new reactor concept, ALLEGRO featured a higher thermal power of 75 MW and two coolant loops in comparison to the earlier reactor concept of 50 MW and a single coolant loop. The concept was investigated within several European and national projects. Recently, the ALLEGRO reactor has been developed by a consortium named V4G4 Centre of Excellence (Gadó, 2014), associating several research organizations and companies from Czech Republic, France, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia (Vácha et al., 2019).
Since there is still no experimental reference for the new carbide fuel in fast neutron spectrum, ALLEGRO cannot directly be started with this fuel. For that reason, a three-step methodology is planned to be used. In the first step, the ALLEGRO core will contain MOX or UOX fuel with stainless steel cladding for which sufficient experiences exist. In this first core-configuration the outlet helium coolant temperature will be kept at 520 °C for all the subassemblies because of the temperature limit of stainless steel. In the second step, in some of the core positions, experimental carbide subassemblies will be used at elevated outlet helium coolant temperature of about 800 °C. The remaining part of the core, which consists of stainless steel cladding, will have lower, 520 °C outlet temperature. The different outlet temperatures will be reached by adjusting some gagging at the inlet of each fuel sub-assembly. Finally, in the third core-configuration the already tested carbide fuel will be loaded into the core. Because of the good refractory properties of the ceramic cladding the outlet temperature will be 800 °C for all the subassemblies.
The development of ALLEGRO is an iterative process. A study (Mayer and Bentivoglio, 2015), performed for the CEA 2009 ALLEGRO MOX core by using the CATHARE thermal hydraulics code, pointed out that the two-loop version of ALLEGRO satisfies the defined peak cladding temperature (PCT) values for loss of flow accident (LOFA), loss of off-site power (LOSP), loss of heat sink (LOHS), loss of coolant accident (LOCA up to 10 in.). A new nitrogen injection strategy was proposed in order to handle 1 in. LOCA + blackout, 10 in. LOCA + guard vessel failure, total hot and cold duct break. Nevertheless, another study (Mayer and Bentivoglio, 2014) pointed out that the hot duct break transient aggravated by the loss of the second loop may lead to higher PCT values than the required limit in a conservative case. Investigating this topic further, the idea of using three primary loops instead of two has arisen to improve the design. The hypothesis is that in case of a three-loop design a single failure has less effect on the PCT values, because there is one additional loop - which is intact - for the heat removal. Accordingly, this study focuses on the differences between the cooling capabilities of the two- and three-loop ALLEGRO models in case of hot duct break.
This study does not contain uncertainty analysis of the hot duct break transient, because the primary goal is to show the difference between the cooling capabilities of the two- and three-loop models. Of course, the final safety analysis of ALLEGRO should definitely be supported by uncertainty analysis.
The novelty of this paper is that it compares the cooling performance of the two- and the three-loop ALLEGRO models for the hot duct break initiating event, which is aggravated by the failure of one of the two primary blowers. The newly developed three-loop ALLEGRO input deck is available for future studies with wide range of scenarios like LOCA, LOFA, etc. and it supports the designers to make decision in the two- or three-loop question.
<Section>2. The CEA 2009 ALLEGRO design</Section>
Fig. 1 shows the main cooling loops of CEA 2009 ALLEGRO design. It consists of two primary and three decay heat removal (DHR) loops. The two main loops are used parallel and the DHR loops are closed in normal operation. The core is cooled by helium at pressure of 7 MPa. The blowers are driven by the main motors with electrical power of 418 kW and a smaller power pony motor is mounted to the same shaft in order to ensure cooling in case of scram. The successful scram signal switches off the main motors and starts the pony motors to maintain the blower speed at 20% of its nominal value. The DHR loops are mostly used in design extension conditions (DEC), when the cooling cannot be maintained by using the primary loops.
Fig. 1. The cooling loops of CEA 2009 ALLEGRO design.
The secondary circuits contain pressurized water at 6.5 MPa. There is 5 bar pressure difference between the primary and the secondary circuits in order to avoid water ingress into the core at the beginning of a primary system to secondary system leakage accident (PRISE). The water coolant is circulated by the secondary pumps. Since the electricity production is not envisaged in ALLEGRO, the heat is removed from the secondary circuit by an air cooler, the ultimate heat sink is the ambient air.
When the heat removal from the core by using the two primary loops is not sufficient, the primary valves close, the DHR valves open and the DHR blowers start parallel. The secondary circuit of the DHR loops contains pressurized water at 1.0 MPa and there is no active element in it. Since the flow is driven by natural circulation, the heat exchangers are located highly above the core. The tertiary circuit of the DHR loop is a pool, which ensures cooling capacity for 24 h by the vaporization of its water content. It is sized to dissipate the decay heat by purely natural convection, if the system is pressurized. Since the hot duct break transient belongs to the Category 4 transients (see later at fuel acceptance criteria), the DHR loops do not play any role in this study. The heat is removed by the use of the main heat exchangers and the main blowers are driven by their pony (auxiliary) motors.
The three-loop model has the same structure (Fig. 2), the only difference is that it has a third primary cooling loop. The power of the core is the same in both the two- and three-loop models. One important advantage of the three-loop model against the two-loop model is that it is more resistant to single failure. For instance, in case of a hot duct break in the first loop and a blower failure in the second loop, there is still a third cooling loop available in the three-loop model. In the two-loop model only the first blower is supposed to run, even though it is located in the broken loop. In case of the three-loop model both the first blower in the broken loop and the third blower in the intact loop are supposed to operate. According to this, in case of the three-loop model only the 1/3 of the total blower capacity is lost instead of the ½.
Fig. 2. The cooling loops of the three-loop ALLEGRO design.
<Section>3. Representation of hot duct guillotine break</Section>
In the current ALLEGRO design the hot duct (hot leg) is located inside the cold duct (cold leg) as it can be seen in Fig. 3a. In this concentric pipe arrangement a thermal insulation is necessary between the hot and the cold ducts (Fig. 3b) to decrease the heat exchange. In this arrangement three kinds of breaks can be imagined. In the first only the hot duct and its insulation are broken and the cold duct remains intact. In the second case the cold duct is broken and the hot duct remains intact. In the third both the hot and cold ducts are broken. In the first case there is no depressurization of the system, because the break is inside the cold duct, which is the outer boundary of the primary circuit. Nevertheless, there is a huge core bypass (see Fig. 3a). In the second case, when the cold duct is broken, there is a LOCA transient in which there is a depressurization of the primary circuit. In order to keep necessary backup pressure for this scenario a so-called guard vessel is used, which encompasses the whole primary circuit and can maintain maximum 10–13 bar backup pressure. In the third case there is a LOCA transient and a core bypass transient at the same time. This research focuses on the first case, in which the hot duct is broken and the cold duct remains intact and there is no depressurization of the system and no LOCA.
Fig. 3a. Representation of ALLEGRO hot duct break. For the sake of simplicity only the broken loop is depicted. Dashed arrows show decreased coolant mass flow rate through the core due to the huge core bypass. There is no LOCA, since the outer boundary of the primary circuit remains intact.
Fig. 3b. The cross section of ALLEGRO ducts. The hot duct is located inside the cold duct.
Until the cold duct remains intact, the classical 200% size break – which is usually supposed in most of the pressurized water reactor (PWR) analyses – can geometrically be excluded because of the lack of sufficient space in the cold duct. The two new hot duct parts (as a result of the guillotine break) have a large diameter each and they have no sufficient place to move in perpendicular directions generating two fully opened pipes. On the other hand, the shrinking of the hot duct in axial direction is possible due to the fast and high temperature change of the pipe wall. The axial displacement of the hot duct (Fig. 4) is also possible due to the flexible supports in the heat exchangers, which are designed to ease the thermomechanical stresses caused by the elongation of the pipe. In this study the hot duct break size was selected between 20% (~127 mm = 5 in.) and 100% (600 mm = 23.6 in.) of the inner hot duct diameter without supposing any other objects (debris of insulation, liner, etc.) in the flow path.
Fig. 4. Representation of the hot duct guillotine break of ALLEGRO. There is a gap between the two hot duct parts, which causes a core bypass.
In case of hot duct break, the pressure loss between the hot and the cold ducts plays a major role during the transient. The lower is the pressure loss coefficient the higher core bypass may develop. In a previous study this value was selected to be 0.549 (Mayer and Bentivoglio, 2014). In a recent paper by using the computational fluid dynamics (CFD) technique (Farkas et al., 2019) the pressure loss coefficient was found to be around the value of 1.0. Keeping in mind that the CFD codes use turbulence models, which may bring some uncertainty into the calculations, and to stay conservative, the smaller value of 0.549 was selected for all of these calculations in the present study.
<Section>4. The CATHARE code</Section>
The French proprietary CATHARE 2 V2.5_3 code with its graphical user interface GUITHARE is developed by CEA, EDF, FRAMATOME and IRSN. Originally it was elaborated for thermal hydraulic simulation of pressurized and boiling water reactors, but later its validity was extended for gas cooled reactors. The code was validated against existing system loops with gas coolant (Bentivoglio and Tauveron, 2006, Bentivoglio and Tauveron, 2008, Bentivoglio and Messié, 2008, Polidori et al., 2013) and was used for transient analysis of GFR2400MW (Mayer and Bentivoglio, 2015), and code-to-code benchmarks of ALLEGRO (Bubelis et al., 2008, Kvizda et al., 2019). Recently, the application of the code was extended for gases where the ideal gas equation of state is not valid (Mauger et al., 2019).
<Section>5. Hot duct break model</Section>
The simulation of the ALLEGRO hot duct break with a one-dimensional code like CATHARE is limited. Since the hot duct is inside the cold duct, in case of hot duct break the hot and the cold ducts are connected to with a simple pipe element. There is a valve in this pipe, which is closed during normal operation. When the break is initialized this valve is opened. Fig. 5 shows the bypass which is formed due to the opening of the valve.
Fig. 5. Representation of the hot duct break modeling in the two-loop ALLEGRO model. The red arrow represents the break flow. After the closure of the second valve (Main valve 2) the second loop has no effect. The three DHR loops are closed during the transient. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
<Section>6. The new three-loop ALLEGRO input deck</Section>
In the European VINCO project, a code-to-code benchmark was performed by the members of the V4G4 consortium (Kvizda et al., 2019) using the CATHARE2, RELAP5-3D and MELCOR codes. In that work each participant developed an own input deck, which were based on an earlier CEA input and on a new ALLEGRO database and benchmark specification. In this work the VINCO input deck is used for the two-loop modeling. On the other hand, for the three-loop calculations the development of a new ALLEGRO input was necessary. In this study, using the two-loop VINCO ALLEGRO CATHARE input deck, a new three-loop model was developed to simulate the hot duct break scenario. In the followings the modifications between the two models are described.
6.1. Core
Since this study focuses primarily on the thermal hydraulic processes in ALLEGRO, the reactor core and its neutronic parameters were kept identical in both the two- and three-loop models. In this way, it is easy to compare the cooling capabilities of the two models.
In the VINCO benchmark (Kvizda et al., 2019) a new thermal hydraulics core model was used, in which the thermal inertias of the reflector and shielding materials were modeled. As a result, the calculated maximum cladding temperatures were significantly lower compared to the case when the thermal inertia of the inner elements were neglected. Nevertheless, those calculations may contain large uncertainties concerning the heat exchange coefficients, because the lack of the current experimental support. In order to stay conservative, in this paper the inner coupling between the heat structures in the core (as it was modeled in the VINCO project) are neglected for both the two- and three-loop models.
6.2. Main heat exchangers
The CEA 2009 ALLEGRO model contains two main heat exchangers (MHX), which remove 37.5 MW thermal power individually. In order to remove the same thermal power with three loops (25 MW/MHX), the following modifications were carried out. The heating perimeter of the heat exchangers and the flow areas were decreased to the 2/3 of the two-loop model on both the primary and secondary side of the MHXs. This ensures similar velocity distribution in the two- and three-loop models in the MHXs.
6.3. Air cooler
In the three-loop model, similarly to the MHXs, the air cooler was modeled by decreasing the number of heat exchanger pipes to the 2/3 of the original number of the two-loop model. This was achieved by modifying the heat exchange perimeter. The flow area at the tertiary side was also decreased by the same factor in order to get similar velocity distribution in the air cooler.
6.4. DHR blowers
The DHR loops and blowers do not play any role in the hot duct break transient, since the DHR valves are closed during the whole procedure. For this reason, there were no modifications in the new input deck regarding the DHR loops.
6.5. Main blowers
The main primary blower characteristic is described with a nondimensional head and torque map in the original VINCO model. In this study the same map is used for the two-loop calculations, but the reference values of the blower were modified. Since the total mass flow rate of the three-loop ALLEGRO core remained unchanged, its nominal value in each loop was set to the 2/3 of the two-loop version. This modification influenced the nominal torque of the blowers. The nominal head of the blowers remained unchanged.
6.6. Piping
The length and diameter of the primary hot and cold ducts were not modified in the three-loop ALLEGRO model. The pressure loss coefficients along the loops were identical in the two- and the three-loop models.
<Section>7. Nodalization scheme</Section>
The input deck developed in the earlier projects was the starting point of this study. Its simplified nodalization scheme is shown in Fig. 6. On the left hand side there is the core. The upper and the lower plenums are represented by CATHARE VOLUME elements. There are four channels that represent the inner part of the core: two bypasses, one average and one hot channel. They are modeled by using the so-called AXIAL elements. The reflector and shielding is also taken into account at the bottom and at the upper part of these channels. Between the hot and the cold ducts there is an AXIAL element which connects them. This is the representation of the internal break used in the simulations. For the sake of simplicity, only one secondary and one tertiary circuit is shown on the right hand side of Fig. 6. The main heat exchanger (MHX) is represented by using two axial elements, one on the primary and a second in the secondary circuit. The pressure of the secondary circuit is maintained by the pressurizer. The tertiary circuit consists of only one axial element and two boundary conditions. The three DHR loops, the guard vessel, the nitrogen injection lines are not depicted since they do not play any role in the hot duct break scenario.
Fig. 6. Representation of the ALLEGRO CATHARE nodalization scheme. The internal break is modeled by using an axial element, which connects the hot and cold the ducts. Only one primary loop is depicted. The three DHR loops are not presented.
<Section>8. Acceptance criteria for fuel</Section>
Acceptance criteria for the ALLEGRO MOX cladding can be found in (Kvizda et al., 2019). In case of design extension condition (DEC) the proposed limit is 1300 °C, which is the melting temperature of the cladding. If the PCT remains below this limit the cladding integrity is ensured. For categories 3 and 4 the 850 °C temperature maximum is proposed. On the one hand, it is the limit of cladding burst at high (100 bar or higher) pressure difference. On the other hand, it is the maximum temperature of strong pellet cladding mechanical interaction (PCMI) with the irradiated, brittle cladding. For categories 1 and 2 the limit of 620 °C for the cladding temperature is proposed. Since the break of the total hot duct belongs to the category 4 transients, the corresponding temperature limit for the fuel cladding is 850 °C.
<Section>9. Results</Section>
9.1. The role of blower inertia
The hot duct break transient starts with the opening of the break between the hot and the cold ducts in the first loop. This is accomplished by the opening of the valve between the hot and the cold ducts as it was described previously. At the same time - as a single failure criterion - the blower and its pony motor in the second loop are supposed to be out of operation. Since the opening of the break causes a large core bypass, the “power to mass flow rate” signal activates the scram, which stops the reactor and results in the decreasing of core power according to Fig. 7. The sequence of events of the investigated transients can be found in Table 1.
Fig. 7. Reactor power on logarithmic scale.
Table 1. Sequence of events and maximum peak cladding temperatures.
The scram signal lets the absorbers fall into the core and at the same time it also switches the main blowers off. This action is needed to avoid the fast overcooling of the fuel and its cladding in most of the scram cases, because of the low thermal inertia of the ALLEGRO core. As the main blower rotational speed in the first loop (Fig. 8) decreases to 20% of its nominal value, a pony motor – which is mounted to the same shaft - is activated and it maintains the 20% rotational speed of the main blower during the whole transient.
Fig. 8. Rotational speed of the main blower in the first loop for different models.
Four hot duct break transients were investigated with a break size of 23.6 in., which is the inner diameter of the hot duct. In the first case, the two-loop input deck of ALLEGRO with a blower inertia of 10 kg*m*m was used. The remaining three simulations were carried out by using the new three-loop model with blower inertias of 6.7, 10 and 20 kg*m*m. The 6.7 kg*m*m value in the three-loop model corresponds to the same total primary rotational inertia of the two-loop model (6.667*3 = 10*2). It can be seen in Fig. 8 that if the blower inertias are 10 kg*m*m in both models, then the first blower reaches the 20% rotational speed about 5 s earlier in the two-loop model than in the three-loop model. If the 6.67 kg*m*m value for the blower inertia is set for the three-loop model then the rotational speeds of the 1st blower are almost identical in the two- and in the three-loop model. It is not surprising because the total inertia of the blowers in the primary circuit is the same for both models in this case. When the 20 kg*m*m blower inertia is selected for the three-loop model (total of 60 kg*m*m for the three blowers), the rotational speed of the first blower reaches the 20% of its nominal value significantly later, at about 33 s. It will soon be clear, that this ensures better cooling performance and lower peak cladding temperature at the beginning of the transient.
The pony in the second loop is supposed not to operate because of the single failure criterion, and as a result of this the main blower finally stops. Fig. 9 shows the second blower rotational speed for all of the previously mentioned four cases. It can be seen that as the blower inertia is higher, the time instance of the stop of the blower is also higher. It should be noted that the value of the blower friction was the same in all models.
Fig. 9. Rotational speed of the main blower in the second loop for different models.
In the third loop the blower rotational speed decreases up to the 20% of its nominal value, where the pony is activated which maintains the flow during the rest of the transient (Fig. 10). Of course, in the two-loop model there is no third loop and there is no third blower.
Fig. 10. Rotational speed of the main blower in the third loop with different blower inertias.
Shortly after the pony motors in the first and third loops are activated and maintain the 20% rotational speed of the nominal value of the main blowers, the mass flow rate in the second loop becomes negative, which may damage the second blower. In order to avoid this issue, the blower protection signal partially closes (stem position of the valve is 5%) the main valve in the second loop when the rotational speed ratio compared to the two other blowers becomes lower than 80%. This is depicted in Fig. 11. When the second blower rotational speed reaches the 5% of its nominal value, the valve in the second loop closes fully (stem position is 0%). It can be seen in Fig. 11 that similarly to the previous examples the blower inertia influences the partial and the full closure time instants of the second valve. The larger blower inertia results in more delayed valve closure actuation. If the total inertias of the blowers are equal, the time instances of the actuation in the two- and three-loop models are very close to each other. There are no primary valve actuations in the first and in the third loop during the transient, the stem positions are kept constant. Of course, in steady state conditions the stem positions are controlled values to ensure the desired mass flow rates in the loops.
Fig. 11. Valve positions in the second loop.
Fig. 12 depicts the core mass flow rate, which is mainly influenced by the pressure rise of the blowers and the pressure losses throughout the system including the hot duct break. (The core pressure loss in nominal conditions is roughly 0.8 bar and in the heat exchanger 0.2.) It can be seen that at the first 100 s of the transient the core mass flow rates are very similar in the two- and three-loop models - when the total blower inertias are the same - but after that point the mass flow rate in the two-loop model becomes higher. Other outcome for the three-loop model is that the core mass flow rates are higher for the larger blower inertias until the startup of ponies. Later, the mass flow rates become very similar in the three-loop calculations.
Fig. 12. Core mass flow rate.
Fig. 13 shows that the steady mass flow rate through the break between the cold and the hot ducts is one order higher compared to the core mass flow rate (Fig. 12). During the first minute of the transient the blower inertia has a large effect on the break mass flow rate. It is mainly driven by the rotational speed of the blowers. Obviously, the blowers with higher inertia generate higher break mass flow rates. After reaching the 20% pony speed, the break mass flow rates of the different models become very similar. In the two-loop model the final break mass flow rate is slightly smaller than in the three-loop model.
Fig. 13. Break mass flow rate.
The peak cladding temperature has a limit of 850 °C for the ALLEGRO MOX core in Category 4 transients. Fig. 14 shows the time evolution of maximum cladding temperature. The break size is 23.6 in. for each simulation. It can be seen that the peak cladding temperature for the two-loop model is the highest amongst all cases, even if the 6.7 kg*m*m blower inertia is used in the three-loop model. The temperature difference is 31 °C. It can also be seen that if the blower inertia in the three-loop model is 20, then the peak cladding temperature is below the 850 °C limit, even if the break size is the largest.
Fig. 14. Maximum cladding temperature.
9.2. The effect of break size
In the previous example a guillotine break was envisaged at the hot duct near the reactor downcomer with the conservative assumption of a 24.6 in. (100%) break size. In ALLEGRO cross duct geometry the classical 200% hot duct break is not possible because of geometrical reasons, without the break of the cold duct (total cross duct – break of both the hot and the cold ducts). Nevertheless, in case of a small break at the hot duct, the steel material of the pipe in the vicinity of the break may dramatically be overcooled in a relatively short time, which may result in high thermal stresses and increased crack propagation. In the roughly 10 m long DHR ducts the 100% break size is theoretically imaginable, if conservative considerations are taken into account by supposing the shrinking of the hot duct caused by the fast and sudden temperature drop.
In Fig. 15, Fig. 16 the maximum cladding temperatures can be seen for different break sizes for the two- and three-loop models, respectively. Considering smaller break sizes, the peak cladding temperature is decreasing. In order to show more comparative results between the two- and the three-loop ALLEGRO versions, we suppose that the total blower inertia is the same for both models.
Fig. 15. Maximum cladding temperatures for the two-loop model for different break sizes. The inertia of both blowers is 10 kg*m*m.
Fig. 16. Maximum cladding temperatures for the three-loop model for different break sizes. The inertia of each blower is 6.67 kg*m*m.
According to Fig. 15 the PCTs fall below the 850 °C criterion in case of the 15 in. or smaller break sizes. When the three-loop model is used (Fig. 16) the PCT criterion fulfils for break sizes up to 20 in., even if the decreased  kg*m*m inertia is used for each blower.
9.3. Two loops versus three loops
Selecting the 23.6 in. break size and comparing the two- and three-loop models with the 10 kg*m*m and the 6.6667 kg*m*m inertia, respectively, the whole picture may seem contradictory, because the PCT in the three-loop model is lower by 31 °C compared to the two-loop model, despite the fact that the results show very similar core mass flow rates for both models during the first two minutes of the transients. It can be explained by Fig. 17, which shows the lower plenum temperatures. Since the coolant flows from the lower plenum to the core, its temperature influences the cladding temperature. It can be seen that there is a lower inlet core temperature in case of the three-loop model than in the two-loop model. The difference is 31 °C. This explains the better performance of the three-loop model. It should be noted that in the three-loop model the third primary circuit is operating during the transient, because the single failure criterion was used only for the second blower.
Fig. 17. Lower plenum temperatures.
The upper plenum temperature (Fig. 18) reveals more difference between the models in case of 23.6-inch hot duct break. In the three-loop model the upper plenum temperature is significantly lower than in the two-loop model. Closer analysis of the data showed that in case of the three-loop model the operating third blower changes the main flow directions according to Fig. 19. A relevant portion of the third loop coolant does not flow into the core but into the break in the first loop. It changes the flow direction towards the upper plenum in the first loop. As a result of that the cold helium coolant flows directly to the upper plenum, which causes low temperature. The mass flow rates from the upper plenum towards the first loop hot duct inlet can be seen in Fig. 20. The figure shows that as the primary valves in the second loops are closed, the mass flow rate in the first loop of the two-loop model becomes positive, opposed to the three-loop model in which it stays negative. The cold helium flows to the upper plenum directly. This explains the low upper plenum temperature in the three-loop model in Fig. 18.
Fig. 18. Upper plenum temperatures.
Fig. 19. Representation of the hot duct break modeling in the three-loop ALLEGRO model after the closure of the second loop valve. The red arrows represent the break flow and the direction changes compared to the two-loop model. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 20. The evolution of mass flow rates coming from the upper plenum to the inlet of the hot ducts in the first (broken) loop.
<Section>10. Conclusion</Section>
The difference between the cooling performances of the two- and three-loop ALLEGRO models were investigated in case of hot duct break scenario. The break was initiated at the hot duct of the first loop close to the reactor vessel. As a single failure criterion the blower was immediately stopped in the second loop and its main primary valve was supposed to close after its rundown. Opposed to other reactor types this transient does not lead to the depressurization of the system, since the hot duct is located inside the cold duct, nevertheless a huge core bypass develops.
The core model was the same in both the two- and three-loop versions. In the three-loop model the heat exchange surfaces and loop mass flow rates were decreased to the 2/3 of the two-loop model. The total blower inertia was kept constant in one of the three-loop examples for easy comparison.
The results showed that the peak cladding temperature was lower by 31 °C in case of the three-loop model than in the two-loop model, if the total blower inertias (20 kg*m*m for all the systems, i.e. 2*10 for the two-loop system and 3*6.667 for the three-loop system) were identical. The main reason of this is that the lower plenum temperature is also lower in the three-loop simulation. The calculations showed larger, 65 °C difference in PCTs between the two- and three-loop models, when the inertia of each blower was the same (10 kg*m*m for each).
The increased blower inertia led to significantly lower PCT values. From cooling point of view, increasing the blower inertia seems a promising tool in case of hot duct break. Nevertheless, the fast overcooling of the cladding should be avoided in case of other initiating events, when the scram is actuated and the core cooling is good, for instance in loss of flow accident (LOFA). This suggests that the blower inertia should have a carefully selected trade-off value in ALLEGRO.
The effect of the hot duct break size was studied by varying the diameter of the pipe, which represents the hot duct break. This pipe connects the hot and the cold ducts in this break model. The results showed that the break size plays a major role in the final peak cladding temperatures. For this reason, it is important to elaborate an ALLEGRO design in which the hot duct break with large break sizes is practically eliminated or at least the probability of the accident is low.
To sum up the results, three main conclusions for the ALLEGRO developers can be drawn. Firstly, the gain coming from the additional (third) loop is not very significant compared to the two-loop version in case of hot duct break transient. It is not necessarily worth the extra cost which occurs due to the construction of the third primary loop. Nevertheless, it has to be emphasized that in these calculations the hot and the cold duct diameters were the same for both the two- and three-loop models. For this reason, further studies would be beneficial in which the diameter of the three-loop hot and cold duct is proportionally decreased. This decreased diameter may increase the benefit of the three-loop model against the two-loop model in the sense of PCT. In addition, further future studies are necessary to assess the effect of bypass transients at different break locations of ALLEGRO. Such a study may reveal larger gain in PCT between the two- and three-loop models. Additionally, in this study the break was supposed not to have any debris in the cooling path, which may significantly influence the cooling capability of the loops. Since the debris in the cooling path increases the risk of blower failure, the three-loop model may have more benefit.
Secondly, increasing the blower rotational inertia, instead of using three loops, may help a lot in the sense of peak cladding temperature, which design modification may result in a much lower building cost.
Thirdly, the relevance of the three cooling loops may be more significant for other initiating events such as total cross duct break which needs to be further investigated. The question of using two or three primary loops in ALLEGRO is still under consideration and it should be supported by probabilistic safety assessment (PSA) studies too.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Gusztáv Mayer: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation, Writing - original draft, Visualization, Project administration, Funding acquisition.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>References</Section>
Bentivoglio and Messié, 2008
Bentivoglio, F. and Messié, A., 2008. ‘Cathare simulation of a depressurization transient for the 2400MW Gas Fast Reactor concept’, in: Societe Francaise d’Energie Nucleaire - International Congress on Advances in Nuclear Power Plants - ICAPP 2007, ‘The Nuclear Renaissance at Work’.
Google Scholar
Bentivoglio and Tauveron, 2006
F. Bentivoglio, N. Tauveron
Validation of CATHARE code for gas-cooled reactors: comparison with E.V.O experimental data on Oberhausen II facility
Proceedings of the 2006 International Congress on Advances in Nuclear Power Plants, ICAPP’06 (2006)
Google Scholar
Bentivoglio and Tauveron, 2008
F. Bentivoglio, N. Tauveron
Validation of the CATHARE2 code against Oberhausen II data
Nucl. Technol. (2008), 10.13182/NT08-A4008
Google Scholar
Bubelis et al., 2008
E. Bubelis, et al.
A GFR benchmark: Comparison of transient analysis codes based on the ETDR concept
Prog. Nucl. Energy (2008), 10.1016/j.pnucene.2007.11.090
Google Scholar
Farkas et al., 2019
I. Farkas, et al.
Determination of pressure loss coefficient of the hot duct break of the CEA ALLEGRO 2009 concept using a CFD technique
May
Nuclear Engineering and Design, Elsevier (2019), pp. 234-242, 10.1016/j.nucengdes.2019.05.016
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gadó, 2014
J. Gadó
The reactor ALLEGRO and the sustainable nuclear energy in Central Europe
EPJ Web of Conferences (2014), 10.1051/epjconf/20147808001
Google Scholar
Karol et al., 2015
M. Karol, T. John, J. Zhao
Small and Medium sized Reactors (SMR): a review of technology
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. Elsevier, 44 (2015), pp. 643-656, 10.1016/j.rser.2015.01.006
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kvizda et al., 2019
B. Kvizda, et al.
ALLEGRO Gas-cooled Fast Reactor (GFR) demonstrator thermal hydraulic benchmark
Nucl. Eng. Des., 345 (2019), 10.1016/j.nucengdes.2019.02.006
Google Scholar
Mauger et al., 2019
G. Mauger, et al.
On the dynamic modeling of Brayton cycle power conversion systems with the CATHARE-3 code
Energy (2019), 10.1016/j.energy.2018.11.063
Google Scholar
Mayer and Bentivoglio, 2014
G. Mayer, F. Bentivoglio
Transient analysis of crossduct break scenarios using the CATHARE2 Code for the 75MW ALLEGRO demonstrator
Int. Conf. Nucl. Eng., Proc., ICONE, 3 (2014), 10.1115/ICONE22-31094
Google Scholar
Mayer and Bentivoglio, 2015
G. Mayer, F. Bentivoglio
Preliminary study of the decay heat removal strategy for the gas demonstrator ALLEGRO
Nucl. Eng. Des., 286 (2015), 10.1016/j.nucengdes.2015.02.001
Google Scholar
Morin et al., 2009
F. Morin, et al.
Status of the ETDR preconceptual design studies
Conference: SMIRT-18, Beijing, China (2009)
Google Scholar
Poette et al., 2009a
C. Poette, V. Brun-Magaud, et al.
ALLEGRO: The European Gas Fast Reactor demonstrator project
International Conference on Nuclear Engineering (2009), 10.1115/ICONE17-75326
Google Scholar
Poette et al., 2009b
C. Poette, J. Malo, et al.
GFR demonstrator ALLEGRO design status
International Congress on Advances in Nuclear Power Plants 2009, ICAPP 2009 (2009), pp. 323-332
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Polidori et al., 2013
M. Polidori, et al.
Thermal-hydraulic codes benchmark for gas-cooled fast reactor systems based on hefus3 experimental data
International Congress on Advances in Nuclear Power Plants, ICAPP 2013: Nuclear Power - A Safe and Sustainable Choice for Green Future, Held with the 28th KAIF/KNS Annual Conference (2013)
Google Scholar
Stainsby et al., 2011
R. Stainsby, et al.
Gas cooled fast reactor research in Europe
Nucl. Eng. Des. Elsevier B.V., 241 (9) (2011), pp. 3481-3489, 10.1016/j.nucengdes.2011.08.005
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Vácha et al., 2019
P. Vácha, et al.
000379 progress in the ALLEGRO project - neutronics and thermal-hydraulics
ICAPP 2019 – International Congress on Advances in Nuclear Power Plants France, Juan-les-pins – 2019, May 12-15 (2019)
Google Scholar