<title>3D thermal hydraulic characteristics analysis of pool-type upper plenum for lead-cooled fast reactor with multi-scale coupling program</title>
<author>1,ZerenZou,2,ChongShen,3,XilinZhang,4,ShuaiWang,5,HongliChen</author>
<Affiliation>1,School of Nuclear Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China;2,Science and Technology on Reactor System Design Technology Laboratory, Nuclear Power Institute of China, Chengdu, China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nucengdes.2020.110892</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029549320303861</URL>
3D thermal hydraulic characteristics analysis of pool-type upper plenum for lead-cooled fast reactor with multi-scale coupling program
ZerenZou,ChongShen,XilinZhang,ShuaiWang,HongliChen
School of Nuclear Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China
Science and Technology on Reactor System Design Technology Laboratory, Nuclear Power Institute of China, Chengdu, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Successful calculation of pool-type LFR using ATHLET-OpenFOAM program.
In ULOF, thermal slows down the establishment of natural circulation.
At the end of the ULOF, eddy in upper plenum make cladding temperature higher.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The large space plenum of the lead-cooled reactor has complex three-dimensional thermal hydraulic phenomena such as thermal stratification and coolant mixing, which affects the safety performance of the reactor. In this paper, based on the multi-scale coupling program ATHLET-OpenFOAM, three-dimensional simulation of the hot pool for lead-cooled fast reactor M2LFR-1000 is carried out. Considering the axis symmetry of the hot pool model and reducing the amount of calculation, 1/8 model of the hot pool is selected to build the model by CFD, and the rest is simulated by system program ATHLET. The steady-state operation condition is first calculated by coupling program. Based on the calculation of steady-state condition, the main thermal parameters of M2LFR-1000 primary coolant system and the complex three-dimensional phenomena of the upper plenum under unprotected loss of flow accident (ULOF) are studied, and the results of multi-scale coupling calculation are compared with those of ATHLET alone. The results show that there is an obvious thermal stratification in the inner region and the outer region of the upper plenum in the early period of the accident, which slows down the speed of establishing natural circulation. During ULOF accident, there are obvious vortex flow changes in the inlet outer side and the outlet area of the upper plenum.
Keywords:Multi-scale coupling analysis;M2LFR-1000;ULOF;Thermal stratification;Natural circulation
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Lead Fast Reactor generally choose pool structure. Because of the pool structure, there are some complex coolant flow and three-dimensional thermal hydraulic phenomena in the reactor, such as coolant local mixing, buoyancy driven flow and thermal stratification. The three-dimensional coolant flow field in a large volume main pressure vessel, that is, the three-dimensional coolant flow field in hot and cold pools, affects the evolution of relevant safety parameters in the main coolant system. For example, when a coolant loss of flow accident occurs, the local three-dimensional temperature distribution will affect the evolution of coolant mass flow rate in the main system during the transition from forced to natural circulation, and flow instability and thermal stratification may occur, which may affect the effectiveness of the reactor passive residual heat removal system. The traditional safety analysis mainly uses the system safety analysis program to numerically simulate the thermal hydraulic phenomena of the reactor. In the system safety analysis program, the fluid flow is assumed to be one-dimensional, although the entire reactor system can be calculated more quickly, but the simulation of the local phenomenon is rough. The CFD program directly solves the basic equations of fluid mechanics and includes a variety of models for turbulence, heat transfer, multiphase flow, and chemical reactions, enabling detailed three-dimensional calculations of space. However, CFD programs require smaller grid sizes and larger grid counts, making it difficult to simulate the entire system under current computer hardware conditions. Multiscale coupling method emerged as the times require. This method can successfully couple the system program with CFD program to realize fast and precise numerical simulation of the thermal-hydraulic characteristics of the lead-cooled fast reactor pool reactor system, local components and local thermo-hydraulic characteristics.
Since the development of water-cooled reactors is relatively mature, the multi-scale coupling method is first applied to water-cooled reactors. Aumille et al. of the Betis Atomic Energy Laboratory in the United States used a semi-implicit coupling algorithm to couple the system program RELAP-3D with the CFD program and used the Edwards-O'Brien experiment to perform the principle verification calculation (Aumiller et al., 2001, Aumiller et al., 2002). Yizhou et al. coupled the core part of the GT-MHR system of the high-temperature gas-cooled reactor based on the system safety analysis program RELAP with the coolant down-pressure system based on the CFD program, and successfully carried out a fine three-dimensional simulation of the thermal mixing and flow of the lower coolant pressure ventilation system (Yan, 2011). GRS in Germany is committed to coupling the one-dimensional system safety analysis program ATHLET with the three-dimensional CFD programs ANSYS CFX and OpenFOAM (Papukchiev et al., 2009). The Royal Institute of Technology (KTH) of Sweden developed a coupling method between RELAP5 and CFD program STAR-CCM+ (Papukchiev et al., 2015). Belgium SCK•CEN and Ghent University proposed an implicit coupling method and coupled RELAP5-3D and FLUENT (Toti et al., 2017). Based on the coupling program, SCK•CEN carried out transient simulation of pool-type test facility E-SCAPE in protected loss of flow transient, and observed complex multi-dimensional flow and temperature field, as well as the influence on the system behavior (Toti et al., 2018). In addition, SCK•CEN used this coupling program to carry out research on asymmetric accidents, and simulated the response of E-SCAPE under local outflow accident conditions. The complex asymmetric three-dimensional flow field and temperature field of the plenum under the flow transient are studied in detail (Toti et al., 2017). At present, the research on multi-scale transient thermal characteristics of pool-type lead-cooled fast reactor is still in its preliminary stage. The main work is focused on the pool-type lead-cooling device E-SCAPE, and its transients under protection and local outflow accidents are studied. Characteristics, studied the thermal stratification phenomenon and the influence of asymmetric flow field, have certain reference value, but the core adopts electric heating rod model, no neutron feedback, the research results cannot fully represent the pool type lead cold fast reactor Multi-scale transient characteristics. Therefore, it is urgent to carry out research on multi-scale transient thermal characteristics of the actual pool type lead-cooled fast reactor.
ATHLET-OpenFOAM multi-scale coupling program is developed by GRS. The coupling program framework adopts the mode of “master-slave program”, develops the corresponding coupling interface, compiles the FORTRAN code of ATHLET program into a shared link library, and connects it to the redeveloped OpenFOAM solver. ATHLET-OpenFOAM multiscale coupling program uses semi-implicit algorithms (Herb, 2014).
This paper aims to achieve more accurate transient thermal characteristics safety study of the main coolant system of pool type lead-cooled fast reactor M2LFR-1000 by using ATHLET-OpenFOAM coupling analysis program. At the same time, the local three-dimensional thermal phenomena of the pool lead cooled fast reactor under the unprotected loss of flow transient accident conditions and the influence of these phenomena on the relevant thermal parameters of the main coolant system are revealed.
<Section>2. Geometry and calculation model</Section>
2.1. M2LFR-1000 reactor
Based on previous research and development in the small modular natural circulation lead-cooled fast reactor (SNCLFR) (Chen et al., 2016), USTC proposed M2LFR-1000 reactor. M2LFR-1000 is a medium modular driven lead cooled fast reactor (1000-MWt Medium-power Modular Lead-cooled Fast Reactor), which has completed the overall design and preliminary thermal-hydraulic analysis and safety analysis (Chen et al., 2017). The overall structure design of M2LFR-1000 is shown in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of M2LFR-1000.
M2LFR-1000 main heat transfer system consists of three coolant loop systems. The working fluid used in the primary circuit system is liquid lead, which is normally driven by a pump and has a certain natural circulation capacity under accident conditions. In the primary loop system, liquid lead is drawn from the cold pool into the core passage through the main pump, and the liquid lead is heated during the upward flow and then flows into the hot pool. After passing through the hot pool, liquid lead is cooled through eight heat exchangers, then flowed into the cold pool, and finally pumped into the core to participate in the cycle.
Rankine cycle is adopted in the secondary circuit system, and the working fluid used is water/superheated steam (pressure is 18 MPa). The three-loop system (final heat trap) adopts air cooling mode. The design parameters of heat transfer system are shown in Table 1.
Table 1. the design parameters of heat transfer system.
The core of M2LFR-1000 reactor consists of 335 fuel assemblies, 12 control rod assemblies, 12 safety rod assemblies and 132 dumb assemblies. In order to flatten the power and manage the fuel, the fuel assembly is divided into internal and external regions, with 163 fuel assemblies in the inner region and 192 fuel assemblies in the outer region. M2LFR-1000 fuel assemblies are arranged in eight layers with a fuel rod spacing of 14 mm. There are 169 fuel rods in each fuel assembly, which are fixed by a five-layer positioning grid. Core layout is shown in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2. Scheme of M2LFR-1000 core.
2.2. Coupling calculation model
Fig. 3 is a schematic diagram of coupling model for M2LFR-1000 system. The model includes core (ICA, OCA), hot pool (HP_Up, HP_Mix), cold pool (CP, CP_BOTTOM), eight main heat exchangers (IHX) and four main pumps (Pump). The second loop only considers the secondary heat exchangers (SHX_In, SHX, SHX_Out) of the main heat exchanger. In the ATHLET model, the fuel rod model is selected for core heating, which is simulated by the heat generated by the point neutron kinetics model.
Fig. 3. Coupled calculation model for M2LFR-1000 system.
The hot pool (HP) is simulated with OpenFOAM, and the rest is still simulated with ATHLET and then data exchange is performed at the coupled interface.
Three coupling interfaces are considered in the coupling model, which are located at the outlet of the inner core channel, the outlet of the outer core channel and the inlet of the main heat exchanger. As shown in Fig. 3, the inner core channel exit and the outer core channel exit adopt the first type of coupling interface, at which ATHLET transfers mass flow (m) and temperature (T) to OpenFOAM, and OpenFOAM transfers pressure (p) and temperature (T) to ATHLET. The main heat exchanger inlet uses the second type of coupling interface, at which ATHLET transfers pressure (p) and temperature (T) to OpenFOAM, and OpenFOAM transfers mass flow (m) and temperature (T) to ATHLET.
3. CFD model
3.1. Assumption
@1)
The upper core structure (UCS) has a great impact on the flow in the upper plenum, which accelerates the coolant mixing in the upper plenum and reduces the thermal stratification. In order to simplify the calculation of CFD, the UCS modeling and its influence are not considered here.
@2)
It is assumed that there is no heat exchange between the hot pool and the cold pool, and the separator boundary is treated according to the adiabatic boundary condition.
3.2. Turbulence modeling and solver
The k-ω SST model was used to calculate the turbulent flow inside the upper plenum. The k-ω SST model combines the advantages of the k–ε model with the ones of the k–ω-model and takes advantage of the fact that for using in the near wall region the k–ω-model an analytical solution for the viscous sub-layer is known for small y+ values (Wilcox, 1986); (Stieglitz et al., 2007). The k-ω SST model is used in the CFD simulation of a device which imitates the lead-bismuth coolant MEGAPIE of PSI, and the calculation results seem to be good (Stieglitz et al., 2007).
Compared with k-ε model, k-ω SST model seems to be a good choice for turbulent model and it is in good agreement with experimental results in the single natural circulation loop operated by Luzzi (Luzzi et al., 2017). Ivan uses k-ω SST model for CFD calculation of ALFRED LFR demo fuel assembly, and the results are good (Piazza et al., 2014). In many case, the turbulent Prandtl number (Prt) can be consider constant and approximately equal to 1.0. In this study, the Prt is 0.9, and the Boussineq hypothesis is used at the same time.
In the CFD model, we use the buoyantBoussinesqPimpleFoamCoupled solver, which is a coupling solver developed by GRS based on the OpenFOAM solver of buoyantBoussinesqPimpleFoam, and uses the pimple algorithm to solve it.
3.3. Boundary condition and time interval
A steady-state and a transient calculation in the Upper plenum of M2LFR-1000 were carried out using CFD code “OpenFOAM”. Since the eight heat exchangers of the hot pool are symmetrically arranged, considering the axial symmetry of the hot pool model, in order to reduce the calculation amount, the hot pool 1/8 model is selected, and the model includes a complete heat exchanger outlet of the hot pool. The boundary of the model includes two entrances, one exit, two symmetries, and wall. The entrance type adopts velocity-inlet and temperature-inlet, and the temperature and velocity of the inlet are obtained by the transfer of the calculated value of ATHLET. The exit type adopts pressure-outlet, and the pressure of the outlet are obtained by the transfer of the calculated value of ATHLET. As shown in Fig. 4, the boundary type of the left and right symmetrical faces is symmetry. No-slip conditions were applied at all of the wall’s interfaces, and an adiabatic boundary condition were applied.
Fig. 4. One-eighth grid diagram of M2LFR-1000 upper plenum.
A reasonable analysis interval should be established with the use of fine grids in the model. In order to achieve numerical stability and time calculation accuracy, i.e. the Courant number (Co) should be less than 1. The minimum size of CFD grid is 0.0341 m, and according to previous calculation experience, the velocity of internal lead generally does not exceed 1.7 m/s. According to the Eq. (1), the maximum time step is 0.02 s. Therefore, in this study, the time step size is 0.02 s, and an adjustTimeStep is applied.
@(1)
3.4. Mesh sensitivity analysis
The core outlet area is simplified into a circular shape and an annular area, corresponding to the inner core passage exit and the outer core passage exit. The outlet is followed by a complete heat exchanger, and the M2LFR-1000 upper plenum grid is shown in Fig. 4.
Since CFD analysis is sensitive to model setting and grid, three different grid dimensions are used in grid model for grid sensitivity analysis. The mesh sensitivity analysis shows that with the increase of mesh density, the average pressure value at the outlet of the upper plenum has the same trend, as shown in Fig. 5. Moreover, the outlet temperature of the three grids is almost the same, as shown in Fig. 6. Therefore, the grid size of 67,987 is selected for this calculation.
Fig. 5. Pressure value under different mesh size over time.
Fig. 6. Temperature value under different mesh size over time.
<Section>4. Verification</Section>
4.1. Safety criterion
Lead-cooled fast reactor belongs to the fourth generation advanced reactor. Because of the different development levels of coolant oxygen control technology and cladding surface treatment technology in various countries, the safety criteria used in the design schemes of various types of lead-cooled fast reactor are different. M2LFR-1000 refers to the safety design guidelines of lead-cooled fast reactor proposed by GIF-IV forum (Development of Safety Design Criteria, 0000), and combines its own design characteristics, puts forward the following safety judgment criteria:
1)
Fuel maximum temperature limit: In the design basis conditions DBC1, DBC2 and DBC3, the fuel temperature limit is selected to be 2673 °C; In the design basis condition DBC4, only the local fuel rods are melted; under the design extended working condition DEC, there is no large-scale fuel melt.
2)
Cladding maximum temperature limit: Under DBC1, the cladding temperature limit is 550 °C; in DBC2, DBC3, the cladding temperature limit is 650 °C; in DBC4 and DEC, the cladding temperature limit is 1500 °C melting point of the cladding.
3)
Limits of coolant temperature and flow velocity: In LFR, the boiling point and freezing point of coolant are 1750 °C and 327.5 °C, respectively (Agency, 2015). The lowest temperature limit of coolant is 350 °C, the highest temperature limit is 1500 °C and the coolant flow rate limit is 2 m/s.
4.2. Verification in steady-state condition
In this paper, the coupled analysis program is used to analyze the thermal characteristics of the M2LFR-1000 primary circuit coolant system model, and the steady state results calculated by the coupling analysis program are compared with the steady state results calculated by the system safety analysis program ATHLET alone.
Table 2 shows the main thermal parameters for the M2LFR-1000 main coolant system at steady state. It can be seen from Table 2 that the steady state calculation result of the coupling analysis program has little error with the result calculated by ATHLET alone. Since the three-dimensional flow field and temperature field are stable under steady-state conditions, the steady-state calculation results calculated by the coupling analysis program are reasonable, and the next transient thermal safety analysis can be carried out.
Table 2. Calculation results of the steady-state condition of M2LFR-1000.
Table 3 shows the temperature distribution of fuel pellets, cladding and coolant in the core active zone under steady-state conditions, and compares the calculation results of the coupling program with the ATHLET calculation results of the system safety analysis program. From Table 3, it can be seen that the coupled calculation results of core temperature distribution are almost the same as those of ATHLET, and the maximum error is 1.64 °C. Compared with the internal fuel zone, the external fuel zone has a higher power density, and the highest temperature of the fuel cell center appears in the external fuel zone. The maximum temperature is 1321.19 °C, which is lower than the safety limit of 2673 °C under normal operating conditions. However, the maximum temperature of the cladding occurs in the internal fuel zone, which is 503.59 °C, which is below the safety limit. The calculated fuel pellet, cladding and coolant temperature are lower than the steady-state limit, indicating that the reactor can operate safely under steady-state conditions.
Table 3. Core temperature distribution in M2LFR-1000 steady-state condition.
The temperature field and flow field of the hot pool under the steady state conditions of M2LFR-1000 are shown in Fig. 7. The vertical section of the hot pool inlet and outlet center is shown in the figure. It can be seen from the temperature cloud diagram that due to the high flow rate of the coolant exiting the core of the lead-cooled fast reactor, the coolant lead from the outlet of the inner and outer zone of core does not mix in the inlet area of the hot pool. However, the radial temperature gradient is very small, and the temperature difference is about 1.8 °C, which will not bring greater thermal stress hazard to the parts of the hot pool. In fact, if the role of UCS in the upper plenum is considered, the coolant in the upper plenum can be kept fully mixed under steady-state operation. It can be seen from the flow field diagram that the flow rates at the two inlets of the hot pool are the same, both being 1.51 m/s.
Fig. 7. Temperature and velocity fields of vertical section.
<Section>5. Transient analysis</Section>
5.1. ULOF accident process
M2LFR-1000 adopts a pool structure. In the event of a coolant loss-of-flow, the three-dimensional temperature distribution of the upper plenum may affect the evolution of the mass flow inside the primary coolant system during the transition from forced to natural circulation. During the accident, thermal stratification may occur, and it may affect the re-establishment of the stable natural circulation of the primary coolant system after the accident, and reduce the core flow, which is not conducive to the core cooling of the core after the accident. In order to accurately evaluate the transient safety characteristics of M2LFR-1000, based on the multi-scale coupling program ATHLET-OpenFOAM, the transient thermal safety analysis of the primary coolant system of M2LFR-1000 under loss-of-flow accident is carried out, and the variation law of the main thermal parameters of the primary coolant system during the accident is studied in detail. The influence of the complex three-dimensional effect of the upper plenum on the main thermal parameters of the primary coolant system in a primary circuit are studied, and the transient safety characteristics of M2LFR-1000 are evaluated.
During the operation of the reactor, primary flow decreases rapidly through the core due to loss of power or mechanical failure, which is called loss-of-flow accident. In the process of loss-of-flow accident, the mismatch between core flow rate and core power will lead to the increase of fuel cladding temperature, and even cause the cladding temperature to exceed the safety limit and fail. According to whether the shutdown system can work normally, the loss-of-flow accidents can be divided into protected loss-of-flow accidents and unprotected loss-of-flow accidents. Protected loss-of-flow accident means that the shutdown system can still work normally after the shutdown of the pump, while unprotected loss-of-flow accident means that the shutdown system can not work normally after the shutdown of the pump. In order to analyze the natural circulation capability of the reactor after the accident, we choose the ULOF accident to calculate.
5.2. Transient condition
1)
Before 0 s, the reactor was in steady state;
2)
At 0 s, all main pumps lose power supply and start to coast-down. The coast-down half time is 0.56 s (Bandini and Polidori, 2013, Schikorr et al., 2015);
3)
The emergency shutdown signal is not triggered during the accident;
4)
The secondary circuit system remains in normal operation;
5)
The neutronics model of point reactor take into account the fuel temperature effect and coolant temperature effect.
The reactivity caused by the axial and radial expansion of the reactor is included in the Doppler effect and the coolant temperature reactivity. The Doppler coefficient ρ1 of fuel is −0.6012 pcm/ °C, and coolant temperature coefficient ρ2 is 0.2647 pcm/ °C. The axial expansion coefficient ρ3 is −115.98 pcm/%, and the radial expansion coefficient ρ4 is −486.73 pcm/%. The axial expansion coefficient ρ3 is converted into the fuel Doppler coefficient through the linear expansion coefficient α of the fuel, as shown in formula 2. The radial expansion coefficient ρ4 is converted into the coolant temperature effect coefficient by the coefficient of thermal expansion β of the coolant, as shown in formula 3.
@(2)
@(3)
When the temperature of MOX fuel is 2000 °C, the linear expansion coefficient α is 1.03× (Carbajo et al., 2001), and the new fuel Doppler coefficientis −0.7201 pcm/ °C by adding formula (2). The thermal expansion coefficient formula of liquid lead is as follows (Fazio et al., 2015):
@(4)
When the temperature of lead coolant is 400 °C, the new coolant temperature coefficientis −5.6408 pcm/ °C by adding formula (3), (4).
5.3. Calculation results and discussions
Fig. 8 shows the trend of M2LFR-1000 core power and flow over time. After the ULOF accident, the core flow rate drops rapidly, the main coolant circuit gradually transitions from the forced to the natural cycle, and finally a new natural cycle is established. The natural circulation mass flow calculated by coupling program is stable at 14.2% of the full power conditions, and it is only 0.3% lower than that calculated by ATHLET alone.
Fig. 8. Power and flow rate trend over time (ULOF).
The mass flow rate of natural circulation depends on the height difference between the active zone of reactor core and the actual heat transfer zone of heat exchanger and the pressure drop of the whole main coolant loop. Under the action of negative coolant feedback, the core power decreases rapidly, and then increases gradually under the action of positive fuel Doppler feedback, and finally stabilizes at 40.3% of the full power condition. Fig. 9 shows the reactivity curves of M2LFR-1000 coolant system after ULOF accident. Because the fuel temperature drops rapidly after the accident, the Doppler feedback of fuel in the core is positive, the coolant feedback is negative and plays a leading role. The absolute value of reactivity introduced is the largest, which plays a vital role in the safety of M2LFR-1000 in ULOF accident. The total reactivity of the core is negative at first and stabilizes at 0 around 200 s, which indicates that the M2LFR-1000 main coolant loop has established a new stable state.
Fig. 9. Trend of reactivity over time (ULOF).
By comparing the results calculated by the coupling program with those calculated by ATHLET alone, it can be found that the trend of core flow calculated by the coupling program is consistent with that calculated by ATHLET alone. Finally, almost the same mass flow rate of natural circulation is established, but in the coupling calculation, the establishment of natural circulation is slower. It can be seen that after the ULOF accident, the complex three-dimensional thermal hydraulic phenomena in the upper plenum have a certain influence on the core flow rate. According to Fig. 8 and Fig. 12, in the early stage after the accident, there is indeed thermal stratification in the upper plenum, which leads to slower establishment of natural circulation, which can be explained theoretically. ATHLET uses the lumped parameter method to solve the heat transfer equation of the upper plenum, while OpenFOAM in the coupling program directly solves the three-dimensional heat transfer equation when solving the upper plenum, and the calculation result will be more accurate.
The main reason for the difference in the early stage of accident is that the mixing of coolant in the upper plenum results in different coolant temperatures entering the heat exchanger, which results in incomplete pressure loss in the upper plenum compared with the pressure drop in the upper plenum simulated by ATHLET. In the coupling calculation, the cooler coolant on the outside of the upper plenum is not sufficiently mixed with the coolant that is hotter into the upper plenum, and the cooler coolant on the outside of the upper plenum is not carried away, resulting in an increase in the gravitational pressure drop of the coolant passing through the upper plenum and a decrease in the natural circulation capacity in the primary circuit. Eventually, the natural circulation of the primary coolant system in the coupling calculation is established more slowly. With the development of the accident, the temperature field and flow field of the upper plenum are gradually stabilized, and the core flow of the coupled calculation is gradually matched with the ATHLET calculation alone. Since the natural circulation is established more slowly in the coupling calculation, the core power is relatively small compared to the ATHLET calculation, but it is consistent with the ATHLET calculation alone in the later stage of the accident.
In a real reactor, if the coolant is mixed after hitting the UCS and then entering the heat exchanger, it will greatly reduce the thermal stratification phenomenon and reduce the impact on the establishment speed of natural circulation.
Fig. 10 shows the variation trend of the maximum temperature of fuel pellets in the outer core region with time. From Fig. 10, it can be seen that after the ULOF accident, the fuel pellet temperature drops rapidly, drops to a minimum of 625.92 °C at 79 s, then rises due to the increase of core power, and finally stabilizes to around 782.5 °C. The final stable temperature of coupling calculation is 3.9 °C lower than that of ATHLET alone.
Fig. 10. Maximum temperature of fuel pellets (ULOF).
Fig. 11 shows the variation trend of the maximum temperature of the cladding in the core with time. From Fig. 11, it can be seen that after ULOF accident, the cladding temperature firstly rises and reaches a peak value of 630.6 °C in about 21 s due to the rapid decrease of core flow rate, which is far below the temperature limit of 1500 °C under DEC. Then the cladding temperature begins to decrease and finally stabilizes at 581.7 °C. Compared with the results of coupling calculation, the peak temperature of ATHLET is 618.5 °C, which is 12.1 °C lower than that of coupling calculation. In the final stage of ULOF accident, the calculated temperature of coupling calculation is 1.8 °C higher than that of ATHLET alone.
Fig. 11. Maximum temperature of cladding (ULOF).
Fig. 12. Change of temperature field in upper plenum.
According to Fig. 13, after the natural circulation is finally established, there is still eddy in the middle and lower outer sides of the upper plenum and near the outlet of the upper plenum. However, Fig. 10 and Fig. 11 show that when the pellet temperature calculated by the coupling program is lower than that calculated by ATHLET, the temperature of the cladding calculated by coupling calculation is higher than that calculated by ATHLET alone, which indicates that the coolant flow from the lower plenum to the core is smaller than that calculated by ATHLET alone. Therefore, the cladding temperature calculated by coupling program is higher.
Fig. 13. Change of flow field in upper plenum (ULOF).
Fig. 12 shows the temperature field in upper plenum of M2LFR-1000 within 0 to 1000 s after ULOF accident. From Fig. 12, it can be seen that the temperature of the upper plenum of M2LFR-1000 changes dramatically after the ULOF accident. At the beginning of the accident, because the core outlet temperature rises, the hot coolant enters into the upper plenum, but because the flow velocity of the coolant in the lower outer side of the upper plenum is very small, the hot coolant entering the upper plenum entrance is not fully mixed with the coolant with lower temperature outside, and flows directly upward from the upper plenum outlet to main heat exchanger. At about 80 s, the coolant temperature at the core outlet began to decrease. From Fig. 12, it can be seen that the coolant temperature from the core to the upper plenum has stabilized at about 300 s after the accident. Because of the large temperature difference between the inner and outer sides of the upper plenum, the hot coolant in the upper plenum gradually diffuses outward, mixes with the relatively cold coolant in the outer side of the upper plenum, and the temperature of entire upper plenum gradually stabilized to about 565.85 °C.
Fig. 13 shows the change of flow field in the upper plenum of M2LFR-1000 within 0 to 1000 s after ULOF accident. During the period of 0 ~ 50 s after the accident, it can be seen that because the coast-down half-time of the main pump is 0.56 s, after all the main pumps fail, the flow velocity at the entrance of the upper plenum decreases rapidly, resulting in drastic changes in the flow field of the upper plenum in the early stage of the accident. The coolant eddy with high velocity in the steady state of the upper plenum decay rapidly. The eddy with low velocity in the middle and lower outer sides of the upper plenum increase gradually, and the eddy near the outlet of the upper plenum also increase gradually. In the later stage of the ULOF accident, the eddy in the lower outer side of the upper plenum disappear slowly. From Fig. 13, it can be seen that the overall coolant flow velocity in the upper plenum has not changed much during the period of 600 s to 1000 s after the accident, and the stable flow field in the upper plenum has been re-established.
In ULOF accident, the secondary circuit is assumed to be still in normal operation. Due to the existence of a strong heat sink at the top of the circuit, it will lead to good natural circulation convection. In this case, it may reduce the difference between the calculation results of the system program and the coupled program. In this paper, the UCS is not considered in the modeling, but the UCS will strengthen the coolant mixing in the upper plenum, so as to reduce the thermal stratification phenomenon in the early stage of ULOF accident, and then reduce the impact of thermal stratification on the establishment speed of natural circulation. In a real accident, the primary and secondary power supply is more likely to be disconnected at the same time. At this time, in addition to the main pump starting to stop rotating, the secondary loop feed water is also disconnected. At this time, the accident is more like ULOOP (ULOF + ULOHS) and the decay heat removal system starts to work. Compared with the assumption in this paper, the natural circulation capacity will be greatly reduced and the core power will be stabilized at the decay power level.
<Section>6. Conclusions</Section>
Based on the system-CFD multi-scale coupling analysis program ATHLET-OpenFOAM, the coupling calculation model of the main coolant system is established with the medium modular lead cooled fast reactor M2LFR-1000 as the research object, in which the hot pool is modeled by CFD and the rest is modeled by ATHLET. Based on the steady-state thermal characteristics, the transient thermal safety analysis of the M2LFR-1000 primary circuit main coolant system under the ULOF was carried out. Following conclusion can be drawn based on the detail analyses.
1)
In the steady-state condition, the main thermal parameters obtained by coupling calculation are in good agreement with the results obtained by ATHLET alone, and the complex flow in the upper plenum, especially the local vortex flow at the outlet of the upper plenum, can be observed successfully by coupling calculation.
2)
In the early stage of the ULOF accident, an obvious thermal stratification occurred in the upper plenum. In the later stage of the accident, the thermal stratification gradually disappeared until the temperature of the entire upper plenum stabilized. Thermal stratification will slow down the establishment of the overall natural cycle. In fact, in a real reactor, UCS will weaken the phenomenon of thermal stratification, thereby reducing the impact on the speed of reactor natural circulation establishment.
3)
In the early stage of the ULOF accident, the flow velocity at the entrance of the upper plenum decreases rapidly, and the eddy with low velocity in the middle and lower outer sides of the upper plenum increase gradually, and the eddy near the outlet of the upper plenum also increase gradually. In the later stage of the accident, the eddy in the lower outer side of the upper plenum disappear gradually.
4)
In the final stage of ULOF accident, eddy still existed in the upper plenum, which caused the cladding temperature calculated coupling program to be higher than that calculated by ATHLET alone.
More comprehensive analysis including the influence of coast-down time of pump, more complex real boundary conditions and models on natural circulation capacity will be calculated in the future.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Zeren Zou: Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Software, Data curation, Writing - original draft. Chong Shen: Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Software, Data curation, Formal analysis. Xilin Zhang: Resources, Software, Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Supervision. Shuai Wang: Writing - review & editing. Hongli Chen: Supervision.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgement</Section>
Thank GRS for providing ATHLET-OpenFOAM coupling code. This work is supported by Science and Technology on Reactor System Design Technology Laboratory of Nuclear Power Institute of China (No. LRSDT2020106), Chengdu, China.
<Section>Appendix A. Supplementary data</Section>
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:
Download : Download XML file (310B)
Supplementary data 1.
<Section>Research data for this article</Section>
Data not available / The authors do not have permission to share data
About research data
<Section>References</Section>
Carbajo et al., 2001
J.J. Carbajo, et al.
A review of the thermophysical properties of MOX and UO2 fuels
Journal of Nuclear Materials, 299 (3) (2001), pp. 181-198, 10.1016/S0022-3115(01)00692-4
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Agency, 2015
N.E. Agency
Handbook on lead-bismuth eutectic alloy and lead properties, materials compatibility, thermal-hydraulics and technologies
Nucl. Sci. (2015), pp. 647-730
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Aumiller et al., 2001
D.L. Aumiller, E.T. Tomlinson, R.C. Bauer
A coupled RELAP5-3D/CFD methodology with a proof-of-principle calculation
Nucl. Eng. Des., 205 (1–2) (2001), pp. 83-90
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Aumiller et al., 2002
D.L. Aumiller, E.T. Tomlinson, W.L. Weaver
An integrated relap5-3d and multiphase cfd code system utilizing a semi-implicit coupling technique
Nucl. Eng. Des., 216 (1–3) (2002), pp. 77-87
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bandini and Polidori, 2013
Bandini G, Polidori M. Report on the Results of Analysis of DEC Events for the ETDR (ALFRED). 2013.
Google Scholar
Chen et al., 2016
H. Chen, Z. Chen, C. Chen, et al.
Conceptual design of a small modular natural circulation lead cooled fast reactor SNCLFR-100
Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 41 (2016), pp. 7158-7168
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chen et al., 2017
H. Chen, X. Zhang, Y. Zhao et al. A Medium-power Modular Lead-cooled Fast Reactor M2LFR-1000 emphasizing application of optimization methods in preliminary design. The 8th Korea-China Workshop on Nuclear Reactor Thermal-Hydraulics (WORTH-8)[C]. Yeosu, Korea, Oct.22-24, 2017.
Google Scholar
Development of Safety Design Criteria, 0000
Development of Safety Design Criteria for the Lead-cooled Fast Reactor. https://conferences.iaea.org/indico/event/126/session/29/contribution/75.pdf.
Google Scholar
Fazio et al., 2015
Fazio C, Sobolev V P, Aerts A, et al. Handbook on Lead-bismuth Eutectic Alloy and Lead Properties, Materials Compatibility, Thermal-hydraulics and Technologies[R]. Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development, 2015.
Google Scholar
Herb, 2014
Joachim Herb. Coupling OpenFOAM with Thermo-Hydrualic Simulation Code ATHLET[R]. June 2014.
Google Scholar
Luzzi et al., 2017
Luzzi L , Misale M , Devia F , et al. Assessment of analytical and numerical models on experimental data for the study of single-phase natural circulation dynamics in a vertical loop. Chemical Engineering ence, 2017, 162(Complete):262-283.
Google Scholar
Papukchiev et al., 2009
A. Papukchiev, G. Lerchl, C. Waata, et al.
Extension of the simulation capabilities of the 1D system code ATHLET by coupling with the 3D CFD software package ANSYS CFX
Proc. NURETH-13 (2009)
Google Scholar
Papukchiev et al., 2015
A. Papukchiev, M. Jeltsov, K. Kööp, et al.
Comparison of different coupling CFD–STH approaches for pre-test analysis of a TALL-3D experiment
Nucl. Eng. Des., 290 (2015), pp. 135-143
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Piazza et al., 2014
Piazza I D , Magugliani F , Tarantino M , et al. A CFD analysis of flow blockage phenomena in ALFRED LFR demo fuel assembly. Nuclear Engineering & Design, 2014, 276(sep.):202-215.
Google Scholar
Schikorr et al., 2015
M. Schikorr, E. Bubelis, B. Carluec, et al.
Assessment of SFR reactor safety issues. Part I: Analysis of the unprotected ULOF, ULOHS and UTOP transients for the SFR (v2b-ST) reactor design and assessment of the efficiency of a passive safety system for prevention of severe accidents
Nucl. Eng. Des., 285 (2015), pp. 249-262
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Stieglitz et al., 2007
R. Stieglitz, M. Daubner, A. Batta, et al.
Turbulent heat mixing of a heavy liquid metal flow in the MEGAPIE target geometry—the heated jet experiment
Nucl. Eng. Des., 237 (15–17) (2007), pp. 1765-1785
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Toti et al., 2017
Toti A, Vierendeels J, Belloni F. Numerical analysis of a dissymmetric transient in the pool-type facility E-SCAPE through coupled system thermal-hydraulic and CFD codes[C]//17th International Topical Meeting on Nuclear Reactor Thermal Hydraulics. 2017.
Google Scholar
Toti et al., 2017
A. Toti, J. Vierendeels, F. Belloni
Improved numerical algorithm and experimental validation of a system thermal-hydraulic/CFD coupling method for multi-scale transient simulations of pool-type reactors
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 103 (2017), pp. 36-48
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Toti et al., 2018
A. Toti, J. Vierendeels, F. Belloni
Extension and application on a pool-type test facility of a system thermal-hydraulic/CFD coupling method for transient flow analyses
Nucl. Eng. Des., 331 (2018), pp. 83-96
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wilcox, 1986
D.C. Wilcox
Multiscale model for turbulent flow
American Institute of Aeronautic and Astronautics (1986)
Google Scholar
Yan 2011
Yan Y. Coupled CFD-system-code simulation of gas cooled reactor. 2011.
Google Scholar