<title>Nonlinear stability analysis of a self-pressurized, natural circulation integral reactor via the Lyapunov's second method</title>
<author>1,A.F.Pilehvara,2,M.H.Estekia,3,G.R.Ansarifara,4,A.Hedayatb</author>
<Affiliation>1,Department of Nuclear Engineering, Faculty of Physics, University of Isfahan, Hezarjarib Avenue, Postal Code: 81746-73441 Isfahan, Iran；2，Reactor and Nuclear Safety Research School, Nuclear Science and Technology Research Institute (NSTRI), End of North Karegar Street, Postal Code: 14399-51113 Tehran, Iran</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107692</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S030645492030390X</URL>
Nonlinear stability analysis of a self-pressurized, natural circulation integral reactor via the Lyapunov's second method
A.F.Pilehvara,M.H.Estekia,G.R.Ansarifara,A.Hedayatb
Department of Nuclear Engineering, Faculty of Physics, University of Isfahan, Hezarjarib Avenue, Postal Code: 81746-73441 Isfahan, Iran
Reactor and Nuclear Safety Research School, Nuclear Science and Technology Research Institute (NSTRI), End of North Karegar Street, Postal Code: 14399-51113 Tehran, Iran
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Direct Lyapunov function in a self-pressurized, natural circulation integral reactor is revealed.
The primary coolant in a self-pressurized, integral reactor is asymptotical global stable.
Neutronic and thermal hydraulic feedbacks can guarantee a stable operation.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The non-linear stability of a small modular self-pressurized reactor is assessed here by means of a direct Lyapunov function. The trial and error method is analyzed by applying an appropriate dynamical model for this type of reactors. A function containing all the states of the system which has conditions of a direct Lyapunov function is presented. This continuous function is positive definite and its derivative is negative semi-definite. The results indicate that the primary coolant is asymptotically global stable over its entire power range. Also, we assess the effects of neutronic and thermal hydraulic feedbacks on the system stability. Its been found that in the presence of these feedbacks, the system is stable in the entire power range.
Keywords：SMR；Nonlinear stability；Lyapunov's second method；Asymptotically stablei；PWR；Neutronic and thermal hydraulic feedbacks
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The stability analysis of a new generation of Small Modular Reactors (SMR) is one of the complicated issues in this field of study towards applying passive systems (International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), March, 2006, Marcel et al., 2013a). A self-pressurized, natural circulation integral reactor, which is a type of SMRs, has some specific features that make the stability analysis of this type of reactors different to that of conventional pressurized water reactors (PWRs) and boiling water reactors (BWRs) (Marcel et al., 2008, Marcel et al., 2013a).
The main phenomena involved in the stability performance of this reactor are density wave oscillation (DWO), reactivity feedbacks, flashing-driven, natural circulation and etc (Zhao et al., 2018, Marcel et al., 2013b).
The DWO stability analysis using the drift flux model and the impact of neutronic and pressure feedbacks on the DWO stability have been assessed by Zanocco et al. (2004). Its been found that the stability of this type of reactors is influenced by the dynamics of the steam dome whose pressure feedback is identified as a stabilizing effect. Marcel et al., 2017b, Shi et al., 2015 applied the results of some experimental studies on the natural circulation instability for this type of reactors. Zhao et al. (2018) assessed the effect of flashing phenomenon on the natural circulation for a natural circulation integrated pressurized reactor. The impact of neutronics and pressure feedbacks on the stability of these reactors are already analyzed by Marcel et al. (2013b). Its been observed that the system becomes less stable by decreasing the pressure and an increase in the condensation power makes the reactor more stable. Pilehvar et al. (2020) performed the linear stability analysis of a natural circulation integrated self-pressurized reactor by linearizing the new dynamical model. It has been shown that an increase in the reactor power and chimney height and also a decrease in the friction loss coefficient improve the systems inherent safety and security.
These useful works investigated different aspects of the stability of this type of reactors using linear approaches. Nevertheless, the nonlinear stability analysis of these reactors is inevitable. In this type of reactors, the innate dynamic due to the presence of neutronic and thermodynamic feedbacks is nonlinear. The previously reported linear models were basically linearized around an equilibrium point and thus were limited to small deviations from the operating point and subject to questions of local stability. Therefore, the linear approach is not applicable where there exists a significant change in the state of the system. There are two basic limitations associated with the linearization method. Firstly, this method is an approximation around an operating point and is not valid throughout the global behavior in the state space. Secondly, the dynamics of the nonlinear systems are much richer than the dynamics of a linear system (Khalil, 1996). In other words, linearization of a system eliminates some nonlinear effects of the system and this can affect the stability analysis of the system.
An important and reliable stability analysis method for a nonlinear system is the Lyapunov's second (direct) method. There are different kinds of stability problems that arise in the study of dynamical systems. These include the stability of equilibrium points, input-output stability, stability of periodic orbit and etc. The stability analysis of equilibrium points is usually evaluated by the Lyapunov’s theory (Khalil, 1996).
Ansarifar (2016) assessed the control of nuclear steam generators using an adaptive dynamic sliding mode method based on the Lyapunov’s approach. Zaidabadi and Ansarifar (2018) designed an adaptive observer based adaptive control for PWR during load following operation using the Lyapunov’s approach. Mousakazemi and Ayoobian (2019) designed a robust tuned PID controller with PSO based on two-point kinetic model for a PWR. They introduced a Lyapunov function to guarantee the stability condition of the system in various time intervals.
This work is the first attempt to evaluate the stability of equilibrium points of a nonlinear reactor system by finding the Lyapunov function. This function can be applied in designing the control system for these reactors. Also, we use this function to assess the impacts of neutronic and thermal hydraulic feedbacks on the system stability.
<Section>2. The reference reactor</Section>
The conceptual design of CAREM-25 reactor is chosen as the general case study1 based on the available data. The primary system and some data of this reactor are shown in Fig. 1 and Table 1 (Carelli and Ingersoll, 2015, IAEA, 2014, IAEA, 2016, Erfaninia et al., 2016, Erfaninia et al., 2017, Marcel et al., 2013a, Marcel et al., 2014, Marcel et al., 2017a). In this reactor, the coolant pump is eliminated and the primary coolant flows due to the natural circulation in the pressure vessel. The primary coolant is heated in the core hence its density reduces. Then the coolant enters into the chimney due to the natural circulation. After leaving the chimney, the coolant follows a downward path in the steam generator tubes, then it flows to into the downcomer. The system pressure remains constant due to the dynamic equilibrium between the vapor and the liquid in the steam dome at the top of the pressure vessel (Pilehvar et al., 2018, Marcel et al., 2013a, Marcel et al., 2014, Marcel et al., 2017a).
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the CAREM reactor (Marcel et al., 2013a).
Table 1. Design features of reactor.
<Section>3. The dynamic model</Section>
For a small modular self-pressurized reactor with the natural circulation, we consider the previously reported model by Pilehvar et al. (2018). This model consists of 11 autonomous first order nonlinear differential equations expressed as . The objective of this model is to predict the operating range and transient states of the system throughout the reactor cycle length (Pilehvar et al., 2018). The model includes a combination of neutronics and thermal-hydraulics equations for the reactor, the first-order lags equations for the chimney and the down-comer, the energy conservation equations for the steam generator and a model based on the conservation of mass, volume, and energy for the steam dome. Some specific values of the parameters in the model are shown in Table 3 (Kerlin et al., 1976, Holbert and Venkatesh, 1995, Arda and Holbert, 2015, Arda and Holbert, 2016, Skinner and Cohen, 1959, Hetrick, 1971, Sonntag et al., 2003, International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), March, 2006, Prock, 1988). The equations and assumptions made in this model are as follows:
1)
The heat flux is uniform in the axial direction
2)
The single-phase natural circulation is modeled in the core, chimney and down-comer while a non-equilibrium two-fluid model is implemented in the steam dome
3)
The Boussinesq approximation
4)
The secondary side is at the saturation condition
5)
The fluid in the steam dome is always at the saturation condition
6)
The condensation power occurs only in the steam dome
@(1)
@(2,3,4)
@(5)
@(6)
@(7)
where @ is the total number of fuel rods, @ is the fuel thermal conductivity, @ is the gap heat transfer coefficient, @ is the fuel height, @ is the fuel pellet radius, @ is the gap thickness, @ is the cladding thickness, @ is the cladding thermal conductivity, @ is the fuel rod diameter and @ is the heat transfer coefficient of the cladding surface. The heat transfer coefficient of the cladding surface (@) is calculated by utilizing a Dittus-Boelter correlation (Todreas and Kazimi, 2010, Tong and Weisman, 1979, Lamarsh and Baratta, 2001, Arda and Holbert, 2015, Arda and Holbert, 2016) given by:
@(8)
where @ is the equivalent hydraulic diameter, @ is the thermal conductivity of the primary coolant, @ is the Pin pitch, @ and@ are the Reynolds and Prandtl numbers, respectively.
@(9)
@(10)
@(11)
@(12)
Table 3. The specific values adopted by the parameters in the presented model.
The heat transfer coefficient for the primary fluid is calculated through the correlation for a bank of tubes given by Incropera (2011).
@(13)
where @ is the Nusselt number, parameters @ and @ are determined according to the configuration, @ is the Prandtl number and  is the Prandtl number at the surface conditions. For the surface heat transfer coefficient of the secondary fluid, the Dittus-Boelter correlation, (Zhao et al., 2003) is applied as follows:
@(14)
where @ is the outer diameter of the tube metal and  is the coil diameter.
@(15)
where@, @,and @.The @ is calculated through Eq. (16). @ and @ are determined through Eqs. (17), (18) as follows (Pilevar et al 2018):
@(16)
@(17)
@(18)
where @ is the density gradient with respect to the temperature, index denotes the core, the steam generator, the chimney and the down comer in each section,  is the core outlet enthalpy,  is the chimney outlet saturation enthalpy,  is the onset of flashing and  is the liquid quality at the chimney outlet.
In this model, the set of parameters [@,@,@,@ ,@ , @,@ ,@ ,@ ,@, @] constitute the system states and the input is specified by. In order to properly implement the states in the Lyapunov function, the proportional state, , is considered.
The equilibrium points of this dynamic model are obtained through equation , which can be written as  in the space state method with A, B and being the state matrix, the input matrix and the input vector (Ogata, 2010), respectively. The solution of this problem is defined by the determinant of the matrix . The elements of matrix  can be determined on each equilibrium point using
@(19)
Where @ is the state function and the zero index indicates the equilibrium point of the system. The determinant of this matrix, calculated in the entire power range, turns out to have infinitesimal values which can be approximated by setting it to zero. For example, matrix  shown below has@ at the nominal power:
@
In this problem, since @ and the input, which is caused by the control rod, is not implemented in the system (@) at the equilibrium points, the problem has infinite solutions.
In other words, the system has infinite equilibrium points. In practice, this issue is interpreted as the ability of the system to remain stable at any power level with respect to its appropriate temperature and pressure. It is worth mentioning that the insertion of an extra reactivity leads to a change in the reactor power (decreases/increases) until a new power level is obtained at a new equilibrium point.
<Section>4. Methodology</Section>
The stability of a nonlinear autonomous system based on Lyapunov’s second (direct) method can be analyzed by finding a scalar function consisting of the system’s states. In this method the system is stable around the equilibrium point, provided that the scalar function  meets the following conditions (Khalil, 1996):
1.
@
2.
@
3.
@
4.
@
Provided that , the system around the equilibrium point is asymptotically stable.
Finding Lyapunov function is not subject to a specific algorithm. For simple systems, finding this function is not complicated, while in complex systems with many states, it is arduous to find the solution space; thus, it is sometimes found by the trial and error approach. Failure to find this function does not necessarily mean that the system is unstable. Moreover, this function is not unique and many of them might be found for one system (Khalil, 1996).
<Section>5. Results</Section>
The candidate Lyapunov function is expressed as:
@(20)
and its partial derivative are continuous. At the equilibrium point,@ , so . When @, the system is deviated from the equilibrium point (). In such a situation ,  because . Consequently,  for . The derivative of this function is expressed as follows:
@(21)
where @ is valid. The generation of any disturbance in the system and its behavior around the equilibrium point is caused by . If , changes in the states in relation to the equilibrium point are positive, , thus, . On the other hand, if , changes in the states in relation to the equilibrium point are negative, , thus, . If , the input equal to reactivity caused by the control rod is not implemented in the system and the system reaches the equilibrium point (). Here, the derivative of the Lyapunov function is always negative definite, which means, the system is asymptotically stable.
To prove this issue, two scenarios are outlined in MATLAB/Simulink (Mathworks, 2016). In the first scenario, one external reactivity, Fig. 2, is implemented to the system. The total reactivity of the system affected by the thermal and pressure feedbacks is shown in Fig. 3. Changes in the reactor power due to the presence of the external reactivity are shown in Fig. 4. As it can be observed, the reactor power experiences a descending trend from t = 200 s to t = 650 s and then reaches a plateau which lasts for around 300 s. Afterward, it increases monotonically with a constant slope towards the initial volume.
Fig. 2. The external reactivity as an input variable in the dynamic model (first scenario).
Fig. 3. The system reactivity response to an external reactivity in the input variable (first scenario).
Fig. 4. The core relative power response to an external reactivity in the input variable (first scenario).
The Lyapunov function is shown in Fig. 5, where this function is positive definite at all the times where the external reactivity is implemented. Also, it can be observed that the Lyapunov function is zero in 450–750 s because there is no change in the external reactivity in this time period. In other words, the system is in an equilibrium point. So the Lyapunov function must be zero.
Fig. 5. The Lyapunov function response to an external reactivity in the input variable (first scenario).
The derivative of the Lyapunov function is shown in Fig. 6 where all reactivity implementations are negative definite. Also, the derivative of the Lyapunov function is zero in 450–750 s because the system is in an equilibrium point in this interval. Hence, the system is stable.
Fig. 6. The derivative of the Lyapunov function response to an external reactivity in the input variable (first scenario).
As it can be observed from Fig. 6, the derivative of the Lyapunov function is less than zero in the transient situations. In other words, when the system is deviated from the equilibrium point, the derivative of Lyapunov function is not zero, . So the system around the equilibrium point is asymptotically stable.
In the second scenario, one external reactivity is implemented to the system (see Fig. 7). The total reactivity and the changes in the reactor power as a result of implementing an external reactivity are depicted in Fig. 8, Fig. 9.
Fig. 7. The external reactivity as an input variable in the dynamic model (second scenario).
Fig. 8. The system reactivity response to an external reactivity in the input variable (second scenario).
Fig. 9. The core relative power response to an external reactivity in the input variable (second scenario).
The Lyapunov function is shown in Fig. 10. This function is positive definite at all the times where the external reactivity is implemented. Also, the derivative of the Lyapunov function is shown in Fig. 11, where it is negative definite at all reactivity implementations times. Therefore, the system is asymptotically stable.
Fig. 10. The Lyapunov function response to an external reactivity in the input variable (second scenario).
Fig. 11. The derivative of the Lyapunov function response to an external reactivity in the input variable (second scenario).
On the other hand, this system has infinite equilibrium points in each power level indicating global stability. In other words, if there is no change in the external reactivity, the system is in an equilibrium point, otherwise, the system is in transient situation and its derivative of the Lyapunov function is negative definite. So the system is stable in the entire power range.
5.1. Feedbacks influence in the system stability
In order to study the influence of feedbacks in the system stability, a sinusoidal external reactivity is implemented to the system (see Fig. 12) in four different cases. There are three reactivity feedback coefficients (fuel, coolant and pressure) that change dynamical situation (see Eq. (1)). In this study the fuel feedback is considered as neutronic feedback and also the pressure and the coolant feedbacks are considered as thermal hydraulic feedbacks.
Fig. 12. The sinusoidal external reactivity as an input variable.
In the first case, all the fuel, the coolant and the pressure feedbacks are considered while in the second case these feedbacks are eliminated. In the third case, fuel feedback and in the fourth case, coolant and pressure feedbacks are eliminated.
5.1.1. First case (stability analysis with fuel, coolant and pressure feedbacks)
As observed in Fig. 13, in the first case, the relative power is bounded. In other words, the system is stable against a bounded input. On the other hand, the Lyapunov function is positive definite at all external reactivity implementation times (see Fig. 14). In addition, the derivative of the Lyapunov function is negative definite at all reactivity implementations times (see Fig. 15). Therefore, the system is asymptotically stable in the presence of neutronic and thermal hydraulic feedbacks.
Fig. 13. The core relative power response to a sinusoidal external reactivity with both the neutronic and thermal hydraulic feedbacks.
Fig. 14. The Lyapunov function response to a sinusoidal external reactivity with both the neutronic and thermal hydraulic feedbacks.
Fig. 15. The derivative of the Lyapunov function response to a sinusoidal external reactivity with both the neutronic and thermal hydraulic feedbacks.
5.1.2. Second case (stability analysis without fuel, coolant and pressure feedbacks)
In the second case, the relative power is unbounded. In other words, the system is unstable against a bounded input (see Fig. 16). In addition, the Lyapunov function drops to zero at some points (see Fig. 17) and its derivative is positive definite (see Fig. 18). Therefore, the system is unstable in the absence of neutronic and thermal hydraulic feedbacks. Therefore, for this type of reactors, we can see that neutronic and thermal hydraulic feedbacks guarantee a stable operation in the entire power range.
Fig. 16. The core relative power response to a sinusoidal external reactivity without the neutronic and thermal hydraulic feedbacks.
Fig. 17. The Lyapunov function response to a sinusoidal external reactivity without the neutronic and thermal hydraulic feedbacks.
Fig. 18. The derivative of the Lyapunov function response to a sinusoidal external reactivity without the neutronic and thermal hydraulic feedbacks.
5.1.3. Third case (stability analysis with coolant and pressure feedbacks)
As shown in Table 3, the coefficient of the fuel and coolant feedbacks are negative and the coefficient of the pressure feedback is positive. As observed in Fig. 19, in the presence of coolant and pressure feedbacks, the relative power is bounded and it is almost similar to the first case. In addition, as shown in Fig. 20, the Lyapunov function is positive definite at all external reactivity implementation times. Also, the derivative of the Lyapunov function is negative definite (see Fig. 21). Therefore, for this type of reactors, the effect of pressure feedbacks is neutralized by the effect of coolant temperature feedbacks. This is because the self-pressurization phenomenon does not let the pressure increase or decrease too much.
Fig. 19. The core relative power response to a sinusoidal external reactivity with the thermal hydraulic feedbacks.
Fig. 20. The Lyapunov function response to a sinusoidal external reactivity with the thermal hydraulic feedbacks.
Fig. 21. The derivative of the Lyapunov function response to a sinusoidal external reactivity with the thermal hydraulic feedbacks.
5.1.4. Fourth case (stability analysis with fuel feedback)
As observed in Fig. 22, in the presence of the fuel feedback, the relative power is bounded. In other words, the system is stable against a bounded input. On the other hand, as shown in Fig. 23, the Lyapunov function is positive definite at all external reactivity implementation times. Also, the derivative of the Lyapunov function is negative definite (see Fig. 24). Therefore, the system is asymptotically stable in the presence of neutronic feedback.
Fig. 22. The core relative power response to a sinusoidal external reactivity with the neurtonic feedback.
Fig. 23. The Lyapunov function response to a sinusoidal external reactivity with the neurtonic feedback.
Fig. 24. The derivative of the Lyapunov function response to a sinusoidal external reactivity with the neurtonic feedback.
<Section>6. Conclusion</Section>
In this work, we introduce a candidate Lyapunov function, which consists of the system states, by adopting a dynamic model appropriate for a small modular self-pressurized reactor with natural circulation. Using this function, the asymptotically global stable of the system can be determined. Also, it is shown that neutronic and thermal hydraulic feedbacks can guarantee a stable operation in the entire power range. In terms of stability analysis, the drawbacks of the linear methods, associated with eliminating the nonlinear effects, do not appear in the nonlinear approach proposed in this paper. In other words, the linearization process of this nonlinear model is performed by keeping the first term of Taylor expansion around an equilibrium point while the other terms are neglected. This may lead to elimination of some nonlinear effects. In contrast, the Lyapunov method does not include these eliminations hence its results are more reliable. In the Lyapunov approach, the stability of the system can be guaranteed and the uncertainties of the linear models do not exist.
This method can be of benefit to both the design of control systems and the safety studies of small modular self-pressurized reactors with natural circulation. In this type of reactors, control systems are passive. For example, pressure is controlled by applying saturated water in the steam dome. Safety systems are also passive by introducing the first and second passive shutdown system, the passive residual heat removal system, the passive emergency injection system and safety relief valves. Subsequently, the nonlinear dynamics of the primary coolant should be considered in designing these systems. Therefore, implementing linear models in designing these systems may cause uncertainties in the system while the proposed nonlinear method eliminates these uncertainties and guarantees a more proper operation of the system.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Appendix A. Supplementary data</Section>
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:
Supplementary data 1.
<Section>References</Section>
Ansarifar, 2016
G.R. Ansarifar
Control of the nuclear steam generators using adaptive dynamic sliding mode method based on the nonlinear model
Ann. Nucl. Energy., 88 (2016), p. 280e300
Google Scholar
Arda and Holbert, 2015
S.E. Arda, K.E. Holbert
A dynamic model of a passively cooled small modular reactor for controller design purposes
Nucl. Eng. Des., 289 (2015), pp. 218-230
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Arda and Holbert, 2016
S.E. Arda, K.E. Holbert
Nonlinear dynamic modeling and simulation of a passively cooled small modular reactor
Prog. Nucl. Energy., 91 (2016), pp. 116-131
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Carelli and Ingersoll, 2015
M.D. Carelli, D.T. Ingersoll
Handbook of Small Modular Nuclear Reactors, Wood head Publishing Series in Energy: Number 64 (2015)
Elsevier (2015)
Google Scholar
Erfaninia et al., 2016
A. Erfaninia, A. Hedayat, S.M. Mirvakili
Neutronic study of a new generation of the small modular pressurized water reactor using Monte-Carlo simulation
Prog. Nucl. Energy., 93 (2016), pp. 218-230
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Erfaninia et al., 2017
A. Erfaninia, A. Hedayat, S.M. Mirvakili, M.R. Nematollahi
Neutronic-thermal hydraulic coupling analysis of the fuel channel of a new generation of the small modular pressurized water reactor including hexagonal and square fuel assemblies using MCNP and CFX
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 99 (2017), pp. 213-227
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hetrick, 1971
D.L. Hetrick
Dynamics of Nuclear Reactor. The
University of Chicago Press (1971)
Google Scholar
Holbert and Venkatesh, 1995
Holbert, K.E., Venkatesh, N., 1995. Valid ranges for using the cross-power spectral density phase angle for moderator temperature coefficient sign determination. Nucl. Sci. Eng. 119 (3), 203e211.
Google Scholar
Incropera, 2011
F.P. Incropera
Fundamentals of Heat and Mass Transfer
John Wiley & Sons (2011)
Google Scholar
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), March, 2006
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), March 2006. Status of innovative small and medium sized reactor designs (accessed at http://pub.iaea.org/MTCD/publications/PDF /te_1485_web.pdf).
Google Scholar
IAEA, 2014
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), September 2014. Advances in Small Modular Reactor Technology Developments (accessed at https://aris.iaea.org/Publications/IAEA-SMR-Booklet-2014.pdf).
Google Scholar
IAEA, 2016
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), 2016. STATUS OF SMALL AND MEDIUM SIZED REACTOR DESIGNS (accessed at https://aris.iaea.org/Publications/SMR-Book-2016.pdf).
Google Scholar
Kerlin et al., 1976
T.W. Kerlin, E.M. Katz, J.G. Thakkar, J.E. Strange
Theoretical and experimental dynamic analysis of the H. B. Robinson nuclear plant
Nucl. Technol., 30 (1976), p. 299e316
Google Scholar
Khalil, 1996
H.K. Khalil
Nonlinear Systems
(second edition), Prentice Hall Press (1996)
Google Scholar
Lamarsh and Baratta, 2001
J.R. Lamarsh, A.J. Baratta
Introduction to Nuclear Engineering
(third ed.), Prentice-Hall (2001)
Google Scholar
Marcel et al., 2013a
C.P. Marcel, F.M. Acuna, P.G. Zanocco, D.F. Delmastro
Stability of self-pressurized, natural circulation, low thermo-dynamic quality, nuclear reactors: the stability performance of the CAREM-25 reactor
Nucl. Eng. Des., 265 (2013), pp. 232-243
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Marcel et al., 2014
C.P. Marcel, D.F. Delmastro, M.C. Magni, O. Calzetta
CAREM: Argentina's innovative SMR
Nucl. Eng. Int. Magazine (2014)
Google Scholar
Marcel et al., 2017a
C.P. Marcel, D.F. Delmastro, M. Schlamp, O. Calzetta
CAREM-25: A Safe Innovative Small Nuclear Power Plant
Nuclear Espana, 1996 (2017), pp. 19-23
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Marcel et al., 2013b
C.P. Marcel, H.F. Furci, D.F. Delmastro, V.P. Masson
Phenomenology involved in self-pressurized, natural circulation, low thermo-dynamic quality, nuclear reactors: the thermal–hydraulics of the CAREM-25 reactor
Nucl. Eng. Des., 254 (2013), pp. 218-227
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Marcel et al., 2008
C.P. Marcel, M. Rohde, T.H.J.J. Van Der Hagen
Experimental investigations on the ESBWR stability performance
Nucl. Technol., 164 (2) (2008), pp. 232-244
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Marcel et al., 2017b
C.P. Marcel, M. Rohde, T.H.J.J. Van Der Hagen
An experimental parametric study on natural circulation BWRs stability
Nucl. Eng. Des., 318 (2017), pp. 135-146
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Mathworks, 2016
Mathworks, 2016. SIMULINK Dynamic System Simulation Language User's Guide.
Google Scholar
Mousakazemi and Ayoobian, 2019
S.M.H. Mousakazemi, N. Ayoobian
Robust tuned PID controller with PSO based on two-point kinetic model and adaptive disturbance rejection for a PWR-type reactor
Prog. Nucl. Energy., 111 (2019), pp. 183-194
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ogata, 2010
K. Ogata
Modern Control Engineering
(fifth edition), Prentice Hall Press (2010)
Google Scholar
Pilehvar et al., 2020
A.F. Pilehvar, M.H. Esteki, G. Ansarifar, A. Hedayat
Stability analysis and parametric study of natural circulation integrated self-pressurized water reactor
Ann. Nucl. Energy., 139 (2020), Article 107279
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Pilehvar et al., 2018
A.F. Pilehvar, M.H. Esteki, A. Hedayat, G. Ansarifar
Self-pressurization analysis of the natural circulation integral nuclear reactor using a new dynamic model
Nucl. Eng. Technol., 50 (2018), pp. 654-664
Google Scholar
Prock, 1988
J. Prock
Mathematical modeling of a steam generator for sensor fault detection
Appl. Math. Modeling., 12 (1988), pp. 581-599
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Shi et al., 2015
S. Shi, Z. Wu, Z. Liu, J.P. Schlegel, C.S. Brooks, J. Eoh, Y. Yan, Y. Liu, W.S. Yang, M. Ishii
Experimental study of natural circulation instability with void reactivity feedback during startup transients for a BWR-type SMR
Prog. Nucl. Energy., 83 (2015), pp. 73-81
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Skinner and Cohen, 1959
R.E. Skinner, E.R. Cohen
Reduced delayed neutron group representation
Nucl. Sci. Eng. (1959), pp. 5-291
Google Scholar
Sonntag et al., 2003
R.E. Sonntag, C. Borgnakke, G.J. Van Wylen
Fundamental of Thermodynamic
John Wiley & Sons Press (2003)
Google Scholar
Todreas and Kazimi, 2010
Todreas, N.E., Kazimi, M.S., 2010. Nuclear Systems, vol. 1. CRC Press. Tong, L.S., Weisman, J., 1979. Thermal analysis of Pressurized Water Reactors, second ed., pp. 279-282.
Google Scholar
Tong and Weisman, 1979
Tong, L.S., Weisman, J., 1979. Thermal analysis of Pressurized Water Reactors, second ed., pp. 279-282.
Google Scholar
Zaidabadi Nejad and Ansarifar, 2018
M. Zaidabadi Nejad, G.R. Ansarifar
Adaptive observer based adaptive control for P.W.R nuclear reactors during load following operation with bounded xenon oscillations using Lyapunov approach
Ann. Nucl. Energy., 121 (2018), pp. 382-405
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zanocco et al., 2004
P. Zanocco, M. Gimenez, D. Delmastro
Modeling aspects in linear stability analysis of a self-pressurized natural circulation integral reactor
Nucl. Eng. Des., 231 (2004), pp. 283-301
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhao et al., 2003
L. Zhao, L. Guo, B. Bai, Y. Hou, X. Zhang
Convective boiling heat transfer and two-phase flow characteristics inside a small horizontal helically coiled tubing once-through steam generator
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 46 (25) (2003), p. 4779e4788
Google Scholar
Zhao et al., 2018
Y. Zhao, M. Peng, G. Xia, L. Lv
Flashing-driven natural circulation characteristics analysis of a natural circulation integrated pressurized water reactor
Nucl. Eng. Des., 337 (2018), pp. 236-244
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar