<title>Cladding designs for the lower head of central measuring shroud against thermal shock in SFRs</title>
<author>1,DaogangLu,2,Shu Zheng,3,QiongCao</author>
<Affiliation>1,Beijing Key Laboratory of Passive Technology for Nuclear Energy, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nucengdes.2020.110972</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029549320304751</URL>
Cladding designs for the lower head of central measuring shroud against thermal shock in SFRs
DaogangLu,Shu Zheng,QiongCao
Beijing Key Laboratory of Passive Technology for Nuclear Energy, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Models with different cladding thicknesses were established in FEM.
Cladding was designed to protect the LHCMS from thermal shock damage.
Gap distance between the LHCMS and cladding was designed.
Effects of different cladding thicknesses on the LHCMS were studied.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
In the normal operating conditions of sodium-cooled fast reactors (SFRs), the coolant near the core outlet keeps high temperature. However, in the scram conditions, the temperature of coolant from core outlet decreases sharply due to the reduction of core power. It makes the surface temperature of the central measuring shroud above the core outlet, which is used to supply the guiding of control rods and in-vessel measuring equipment, suddenly decrease. The maximum temperature change of the lower head of central measuring shroud (LHCMS) can reach 175 K in 20 s. Such condition will bring a severe thermal shock to the LHCMS. Several thermal shocks may bring fatigue damage to the LHCMS and threaten the safety of the reactors.
Cladding can be used to protect the LHCMS from the fatigue damage of thermal shocks. Currently, there is no standard procedure for designing cladding of the LHCMS. In this paper, a numerical design procedure for designing cladding of LHCMS was proposed. The thermo-structural coupling method and ASME fatigue assessment method were used. Firstly, the models with different cladding thicknesses were established in finite element method (FEM). Secondly, the fatigue damage factors were calculated based on the strain results and fatigue assessment method, then, the design cladding thickness was determined according to Miner’s linear fatigue rule. In the meanwhile, if there is contact between the LHCMS and cladding, there will exist friction and squeeze that increase the stress and strain on the structures. Therefore, a reasonable gap distance should also be designed between the LHCMS and cladding after determining the cladding thickness. It should be noted that when designing the cladding thickness, in order to avoid the influence of the possible contact on the deformation of the LHCMS, special model settings were used so that the LHCMS and cladding can deform without interaction. Thirdly, the deformation values of the model with the design cladding thickness at different times were obtained, then the gap distance was determined according to the relative deformation values of the LHCMS and cladding. Finally, a model with the design cladding thickness and gap distance was established to verify design results.
From the simulation results, under the boundary conditions of this paper, the cladding thickness should be 4 mm, and the gap distance between the LHCMS and cladding should be 4 mm. In addition, the effects of different cladding thicknesses on the temperature, stress and strain of the LHCMS were also studied. The results showed that under the scram conditions (temperature decrease), the temperature of the outside surface of the LHCMS increases by 10 K or 1.5%, the stress and strain of the outside surface of the LHCMS (away from the stress and strain concentration area) decrease by about 9% with every 1 mm increase of the cladding thickness at 20 s. Besides, the stress and strain concentration will increase the stress and strain by 17% to 21%. The numerical design procedure and results of this paper can provide reference and data for the design of the LHCMS cladding in SFRs, and thereby having good potential application.
Keywords:Sodium-cooled fast reactors;Thermal shock;Cladding designs;ASME fatigue assessment method
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Thermal shock is a common phenomenon in SFRs. When the reactor is in scram (unscheduled shutdown) conditions, the temperature of liquid sodium at the core outlet will suddenly drop, causing the surface temperature of the LHCMS above the core outlet to decrease, which will bring thermal shocks to the LHCMS. During the life of SFRs, there may be hundreds of unscheduled shutdown conditions according to China Experimental Fast Reactors (CEFR). Each shutdown condition may cause some thermal shock fatigue to the LHCMS, hundreds of unscheduled shutdown conditions may eventually cause cracks or even failure of the LHCMS. To protect the LHCMS, cladding is often added to the surface of the LHCMS. Firstly, we need to understand the effects of thermal shock on the components. The study (Sharabi et al., 2016) has simulated the flow behavior of the downcomer under pressurized thermal shock condition and then gave the stress results of the downcomer. The results showed that the maximum thermal stress emerged at the inlet nozzle and the plume affected areas. The other study (Wang et al., 2017) also studied the thermal stress under pressurized thermal shock condition. The simulation focused on the direct vessel injection line. The results of finite element method (FEM) showed that the maximum stress occurred when the wall temperature has the largest reduce rate. The study (Kerezsi et al., 2000) developed an experiment to investigate crack growth in pressure vessels under thermal shock condition. The results showed that the primary load has little or even no effect on crack initiation. However, the primary load has great effect on the crack growth rate. As for the fluid characteristics under thermal shock conditions, the study (Loginov et al., 2011) used computational fluid dynamics to simulate the flow patterns of turbulent flows. The investigation showed a good qualitative prediction of the bulk flow patterns. And the large-eddy simulation approach has the ability to give a reliable description of the turbulence modeling. Other studies (Trampus, 2018, Oliver et al., 2019) have also done important work about thermal shock phenomenon.
Secondly, the function and effects of cladding also need to be understood. The study (Zheng et al., 2019) has revealed that the contact and squeeze between two cladding layers will result in increase in thermal stress, which should be considered in cladding designs. In addition, the discontinuity of model will lead to stress concentration, causing high thermal stress. Therefore, the maximum thermal stress was at the junction of two components. The study (Cheverton et al., 1990) performed four thermal shock experiments to evaluate the effects of cladding on the propagation of flaws. The results of the experiments indicated that cladding has the function of reducing the potential for initiation of a subclad flaw and deep propagation of a surface flaw. The study (Lu et al., 2020) showed that the allowable number of cycles of model with gaps can be five times bigger than that of contact model, which indicates the cladding gap is efficient to decrease the contact stress. And it also provided a reference for the design of the cladding gap distance. The study (Jang et al., 2003) calculated the stress and stress intensity factors (SIF) at the reactor pressure vessel. And the effects of cladding thermal expansion coefficients and thermal conductivity on the SIF were studied. It is found that the thermal properties of cladding are important to the failure probability. Besides, it has also proved that the cladding has significant impacts on the safety of components. The study (Wagih et al., 2018) investigated the influences of two different cladding on the time for fuel failure during severe accidents. Under thermal shock, the performance of chromium-coated claddings is comparable to that of Zircaloy-4 cladding. The study (Xue et al., 2015) investigated the thermal stress variation of fuel cladding during beam trips. The results showed that the creep, irradiation and corrosion have little effects on the cladding integrity. The mechanical stress induced by gas pressure decreases, while the total equivalent stress range does not change during the process of beam trips. The study (Zheng et al., 2020) has revealed that cladding has the ability to efficiently reduce the amplitude of temperature variation. And the study (Pelykh et al., 2016) developed a method to forecast cladding failure.
According to the above studies, we know that thermal shock phenomena will cause the components to have a large temperature change, resulting in a large thermal shock stress. However, the existence of cladding can reduce the temperature changes on the component surface, resulting in a less thermal shock stress. On the other hand, we should also avoid the contact between the LHCMS and cladding since it will increase the stress and strain of the LHCMS. Therefore, both the cladding thickness and gap distance should be considered in the process of cladding designs. In this paper, the thermo-structural coupling method and ASME fatigue assessment method will be used to design the cladding of the LHCMS, including the cladding thickness and the gap distance between the LHCMS and cladding. Besides, the effects of different cladding thicknesses on the temperature, stress and strain of the LHCMS will also be studied.
<Section>2. Procedure for designing cladding thickness and gap distance</Section>
The main function of the cladding is to decrease the temperature changes of the LHCMS. When the temperature outside the cladding drops sharply, the temperature of the LHCMS, which is inside the cladding, will have smaller changes, so the thermal stress of the LHCMS caused by thermal shock will be smaller compared with that of the LHCMS with no cladding. Apparently, if the cladding is thicker, the temperature changes outside the cladding will have less effects on the temperature of the LHCMS. However, considering the engineering cost and weight, the thickness of cladding needs to be set to an appropriate value, which should not be too conservative, nor should it be so small that the LHCMS is damaged during its lifetime. In addition, according to the study (Zheng et al., 2019), the contact between the LHCMS and cladding will increase the stress of the LHCMS, which means a reasonable gap distance also needs to be determined between the LHCMS and cladding to reduce contact stress.
A numerical design procedure for designing cladding of LHCMS is proposed in this paper. The linear elastic analysis is adopted. And the “design by analysis” method is applied to give design results. In the design procedure, firstly, a LHCMS model without cladding (cladding thickness n = 0) is established in FEM. The temperature curve below the LHCMS during scram conditions is selected as input to obtain the stress, strain and fatigue damage factor D of the LHCMS. (1 is the critical value of D according to Miner’s linear fatigue rule. D < 1 means that the component will not be damaged during its lifetime; D > 1 means that the component will be damaged during its lifetime.) If D > 1 when n = 0, the cladding thickness n is increased by 1 mm, and D is calculated again. This procedure does not stop until D < 1. The minimum n that makes D < 1 is selected as the design cladding thickness nd. It should be noted that, in the design process of cladding thickness, gap distance is not set since it is impossible to know it in this stage. In order to avoid the effects of contact on the deformation of the LHCMS, in the structural analysis the connection between the LHCMS and cladding will be deleted to make the layers deform relatively freely like there is a gap. Under such boundary condition, the structural results should be the same as that of the model with design gap distance since the deformation of two models is almost the same. Secondly, the deformation of the LHCMS and cladding with thickness nd is analyzed. Based on the relative deformation values, the gap distance between the LHCMS and cladding is determined. Finally, a model with design cladding thickness and gap distance is established. The stress, strain and fatigue damage factor of the design model is simulated to verify the rationality of the design results. The flowchart of the design procedure can be shown in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. Flowchart of the numerical design procedure for designing cladding of the LHCMS.
<Section>3. Designing the cladding thickness</Section>
3.1. FEM model
Fig. 2 shows the central measuring shroud model without cladding. There are 33 sleeves, whose function is to provide guidance for the control rods and in-vessel equipment. The function of the LHCMS is to protect the measuring equipment and control rods inside the LHCMS.
Fig. 2. The central measuring shroud model.
It can be seen from red lines in Fig. 2(b) that the LHCMS model is symmetrical. In order to simplify the simulation, 1/6 model is adopted in this paper, as shown in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3. The 1/6 LHCMS model without cladding.
According to the design procedure introduced in section 2, the cladding thickness may be 1 mm, 2 mm, 3 mm, etc., as shown in Fig. 4, which shows the local enlarged views of different cladding thicknesses. The 1/6 LHCMS model with 5 mm cladding is shown in Fig. 5.
Fig. 4. Local enlarged views of the models with different cladding thicknesses.
Fig. 5. The LHCMS model with 5 mm cladding thickness.
The mesh size is important for the accuracy of the FEM. According to the mesh sensitivity analysis in previous study (Zheng et al., 2019), the maximum mesh size is chosen to be 0.005 m. The hexahedral mesh is adopted in this analysis, as shown in Fig. 6.
Fig. 6. Mesh of the LHCMS model.
This paper uses the thermo-structural coupling simulation method. SOLID70 is selected as the element type for transient temperature analysis, it will be converted into SOLID185 in the structural analysis. SOLID70 has three directions of heat conduction. It has eight nodes and each node has a temperature degree of freedom. SOLID70 can be used for three-dimensional static or transient thermal analysis. And it can realize uniform heat transfer. SOLID185 can be used for three-dimensional structural analysis. It has eight nodes and each node has three degrees of freedom (X, Y, Z), which can realize large strain, elastic–plastic, or creep analysis.
The LHCMS will be affected by corrosion and high temperature in a long time. Therefore, the LHCMS, sleeves and cladding are made of austenitic stainless steel 316H, which has a high melting point and good corrosion resistance. The physical properties of the 316H at selected temperatures are shown in Table 1 (ASME, 2013).
Table 1. Physical properties of the 316H at selected temperatures.
3.2. Boundary conditions
The temperature curve below the LHCMS during scram conditions is selected as the input temperature. According to the data calculated from the data of CEFR, the temperature curve can be shown as Fig. 7.
Fig. 7. Temperature curve below the LHCMS under scram conditions.
The transient analysis is applied to obtain temperature results at different times, then based on the temperature results the structural analysis is used to gain stress, strain and deformation results at different times.
Since the coolant from the core outlet hardly enters the sleeves, the boundary conditions of transient analysis can be divided into two parts: Inside of the LHCMS and outside of the LHCMS. Meanwhile, the sleeves can also be divided into two parts: Upper part of the sleeves, which is inside the LHCMS; And lower part of the sleeves, which is outside the LHCMS. Therefore, inside of the LHCMS consists of the inside surface of the LHCMS, the top surface of the sleeves, the inside surface of the sleeves and the outside surface of upper part of the sleeves. Outside of the LHCMS includes the outside surface of the LHCMS, the bottom surface of the sleeves, the outside surface of the lower part of the sleeves. According to the data calculated from CEFR, 786 K is applied to the inside of the LHCMS, and 12000 W/(m2·K) as well as temperature curve under scram conditions are applied to the outside of the LHCMS. A “Bonded” contact pair is set between the LHCMS and cladding to simulate the process of heat transfer. The boundary conditions of transient analysis can be shown as Fig. 8 (a).
Fig. 8. Boundary conditions of transient and structural analysis.
In the structural analysis, since the top surface of the LHCMS connects with central measuring shroud, as shown in Fig. 2(a), there is barely displacement in Z direction. And there is no object that may constrain the deformation along XY directions. Therefore, only the displacement in Z direction is constrained on the top surface of LHCMS in this simulation. In addition, the model is a 1/6 model, so the symmetric boundary should be applied to the periphery of the model. In section 4, a gap distance between the LHCMS and cladding will be designed to ensure no contact between the LHCMS and the cladding. It is difficult to know what the gap distance should be when designing the cladding thickness, in order to avoid the effects of the contact on the deformation of the LHCMS, the “Bonded” contact pair is deleted in the structural analysis, which means that there is no relationship between the LHCMS and cladding. In this case, both the LHCMS and cladding can deform relatively freely without any interaction. But the stress, strain and deformation results is the same as that of the model with design gap distance, since the deformation of two models is almost the same. The boundary conditions of the structural analysis can be illustrated as Fig. 8 (b).
3.3. Fatigue theory and design results
The fatigue theory adopted in this paper is from ASME NH (ASME, 2013). The fatigue assessment procedure can be summarized as follows:
(1) Equivalent strain range Δεequiv,i
Firstly, obtain all strain components εxi,εyi,εzi,γxyi,γyzi,γzxi for the complete cycle.
Then, select a point when conditions are at an extreme for the cycle. This time point is referred as subscript o.
Next, calculate the history of the strain components change during the cycle.
Δεxi=εxi-εxo;Δεyi=εyi-εyo;Δεzi=εzi-εzo;
Δγxyi=γxyi-γxyo;Δγyzi=γyzi-γyzo;Δγzxi=γzxi-γzxo
Finally, calculate the equivalent strain range for each point in time.
Δεequiv,i=22(1+v∗)(Δεxi-Δεyi)2+(Δεyi-Δεzi)2+(Δεzi-Δεxi)2+32(Δγxyi2+Δγyzi2+Δγzxi2)1/2
(2) The maximum equivalent strain range Δεmax
The maximum value of the above calculated equivalent strain range is defined as Δεmax.
(3) Modified maximum equivalent strain range Δεmod
The conservative estimate of the Δεmod can be gained as:
Δεmod=KeKΔεmax
where K is either the equivalent stress concentration factor, or, the maximum value of the theoretical elastic stress concentration factor in any direction for the local area under consideration. And
Ke=1if KΔεmax≤3Sm-/E
Ke=KΔεmaxE/3Sm- for KΔεmax>3Sm-/E
where 3Sm-=(1.5Sm+SrH). SrH is relaxation strengths associated with the temperatures at hot extremes of the stress cycle. Sm is the allowable stress of the material under high temperature.
(4) Multiaxial plasticity and Poisson ratio adjustment factor Kv
Kv=1.0+fKv′-1.0
where f is a factor determined by Triaxiality factor T.F. And Kv′ is the plastic Poisson ratio adjustment factor determined by the value of KeKΔεmaxE/3Sm¯.
(5) Total strain range εt
εt=KvΔεmod
The total strain range εt is used to enter the design fatigue curves to determine the allowable number of cycles, N.
Finally, Miner’s linear fatigue rule is adopted to obtain the fatigue damage factors D.
D=mN
where m is the actual number of cycles, which refers to the scram conditions that may happen during the life of the SFRs.
In accordance with the above procedure, the fatigue damage factors of the models with different cladding thicknesses can be shown as Table 2.
Table 2. Results of fatigue analysis.
The actual number of cycles m adopted in this paper is 550. The scram means emergency shutdown under accident or unscheduled conditions with control rods inserted into reactor core. However, as a research reactor, CEFR cannot provide accurate number of scrams for a new type of high-power commercial SFR that this study is designing for, such as the number of unscheduled shutdown conditions with control rods insertion and the number of unscheduled shutdown conditions without control rods insertion. Therefore, conservatism has to be the priority in the design process, most of unscheduled shutdown conditions, which are about 550 times in total, are considered as scrams, regardless of whether the control rods are inserted or not.
Based on the design procedure shown in Fig. 1 and the results of fatigue analysis shown in Table 2, Table 4mm is the first cladding thickness that makes the fatigue damage factor<1. Therefore, the design cladding thickness should be 4 mm. The results of 5 mm cladding thickness is also shown to ensure the fatigue damage factor doesn’t increase. The linear elastic analysis method adopted in this paper is the most conservative “design by analysis” method. And in the design process, the conservatism of boundary conditions is considered. Therefore, the design cladding thickness of 4 mm should be the most conservative result.
<Section>4. Designing the gap distance</Section>
In order to eliminate the possible contact, a reasonable gap distance should be designed between the LHCMS and cladding. Such design is achievable because the LHCMS and cladding are separately fixed on the upper supporting structure.
The design procedure of gap distance in this analysis includes three steps. Firstly, based on the results of the LHCMS model with 4 mm cladding, the maximum deformation values of the LHCMS and cladding at every time are obtained. Then, since the cladding gap is set at initial time, the relative deformation values of each time relative to 0 s are calculated. Finally, the relative deformation values are analyzed to give a proper gap distance.
The maximum deformation vector sum of the LHCMS and the cladding at different times is shown in Table 3 based on the results of model with 4 mm cladding.
Table 3. The maximum deformation vector sum of the LHCMS and cladding at each time.
Table 3 shows that there is deformation at 0 s, this is because the initial temperature of this analysis is around 800 K, not room temperature (293.15 K). Taking the position of the LHCMS and cladding at 0 s as the initial position, the relative deformation values of 1 s-20 s can be shown in Table 4. The positive values refer to that the LHCMS or cladding is expanding relative to the position at 0 s. While the negative value refers to that the LHCMS or cladding is contracting relative to the position at 0 s.
Table 4. Relative deformation values of the LHCMS and cladding.
As can be seen from Table 4, there are three states of the LHCMS and the cladding: Both the LHCMS and cladding are relatively expanding; The LHCMS is relatively expanding and the cladding is relatively contracting; And the LHCMS and cladding are both relatively contracting. When both the LHCMS and cladding are relatively expanding or contracting, the conservative gap distance should be the maximum relative deformation value of the LHCMS and the cladding. When the LHCMS is relatively expanding and the cladding is relatively contracting, the conservative gap distance should be the sum of the relative expansion value of the LHCMS and the relative contraction value of the cladding.
According to the above analysis, the gap distance between the LHCMS and cladding should be 3.008 mm. However, considering the self-expansion and possible positioning error in engineering, the gap distance is chosen as 4 mm.
In sum, under the boundary conditions in this paper, the cladding design results are: the cladding thickness is 4 mm, and the gap distance between the LHCMS and cladding is 4 mm.
<Section>5. Verifying the design results</Section>
In order to guarantee that the design of the cladding thickness and gap distance is reasonable, a model with the design cladding thickness and gap distance is established, then the fatigue damage factor, which determines the cladding thickness, and the relative deformation values, which determines the gap distance, will be given to verify the design results.
Since the central measuring shroud is soaked in liquid sodium, the gap will be filled with liquid sodium. However, the liquid sodium can hardly flow in the gap, the sodium only has the function of heat conduction in this study. The model with design values is shown in Fig. 9. The purple part refers to the gap (sodium). The mesh of it is set as solid elements. The physical properties of liquid sodium at selected temperatures can be shown as Table 5.
Fig. 9. Model with design cladding thickness and gap distance.
Table 5. Physical properties of sodium at selected temperatures.
The boundary conditions for this model are nearly the same as that described in section 3.2. However, there are some differences. In transient analysis, the LHCMS and the sodium layer, the sodium layer and cladding are connected by two “Bonded” contact pairs. In structural analysis, the contact pairs will all be deleted, and the mesh of sodium layer will also be deleted to avoid the influences of the solid elements on the stress and strain of the LHCMS and cladding.
Fig. 10 and Fig. 11 illustrate the stress contour and strain contour of the model with design cladding thickness and gap distance. It can be clearly seen that the large stresses and large strains are at lower part of sleeves where large temperature difference exists and the connection area between the LHCMS and sleeves where stress and strain concentration exists. Among them, the maximum stress and strain of the model both appear at the connection area. Therefore, the nodes at the connection area are selected to give fatigue damage factor D.
Fig. 10. von Mises stress contour of the model with design cladding thickness and gap distance.
Fig. 11. Elastic strain contour of the model with design cladding thickness and gap distance.
Using the fatigue theory described in section 3.3, the maximum fatigue damage factor D of the model with design cladding thickness and gap distance can be shown as Table 6.
Table 6. The fatigue damage factor of model with design cladding thickness and gap distance.
Besides, the relative deformation values of the model with design values can be shown as Table 7.
Table 7. Relative deformation of the LHCMS and cladding of the model with design values.
It can be seen from Table 6 that the fatigue damage factor is 0.515, which is very close to the fatigue damage factor of 0.521 in design stage (Table 2) and smaller than 1.
Table 7 illustrates that the conservative gap distance is 3.032 mm, which is very close to the gap distance of 3.008 mm in design stage (Table 4) and smaller than design value 4 mm.
Therefore, the design cladding thickness and gap distance is acceptable.
<Section>6. The effects of different cladding thicknesses on the temperature, stress and strain of LHCMS</Section>
Apart from the design for cladding, the effects of different cladding thicknesses on the temperature, stress and strain are also studied in this paper. As discussed in section 3, in total, six LHCMS models with different cladding thicknesses are studied (0 mm, 1 mm, 2 mm, 3 mm, 4 mm and 5 mm). Fig. 12 shows the temperature contours of the LHCMS. The thicknesses in the figure refer to the cladding thicknesses. According to the temperature distribution, the temperature of the outside surface of the LHCMS gradually increases with the thickening of the cladding. This shows that the cladding plays an important role in slowing down temperature changes of the LHCMS when the coolant temperature is sharply reduced.
Fig. 12. Temperature contours of the LHCMS in models with different cladding thickness at 20 s.
Fig. 13 illustrates temperature changes with time at P1-P6 shown in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4. P1-P6 all refer to the same point in different models, which is at the outside surface of the LHCMS. On the whole, it can be seen that as the thickness of cladding increases, the temperature changes of outside surface of the LHCMS tends to be gentle, which means that the influence of the external temperature on the LHCMS becomes smaller. When the thickness of the cladding is 4 mm and 5 mm, the temperature of outside surface of the LHCMS hardly changes in the first 5 s, while under other thicknesses, the temperature of the outside surface of the LHCMS changes obviously in the first 5 s.
Fig. 13. Temperature variation of P1-P6.
In addition, according to the input temperature curve (Fig. 7), when the external coolant temperature is stable at about 670 K (20 s), the temperature of the outside surface of the LHCMS is 684 K (cladding thickness: 0 mm), and the temperature of the outside surface of the LHCMS increases by about 10 K or 1.5% for every 1 mm increase of the cladding thickness.
Fig. 14 shows the stress contours of the LHCMS. The thicknesses in the figure also refer to the cladding thicknesses. By comparing Fig. 12 and Fig. 14, it can be seen that after the cladding is thickened, the temperature change of the LHCMS is reduced, and the thermal stress of the LHCMS is reduced as well, indicating that the existence of the cladding can reduce thermal stress on the LHCMS. Fig. 15 shows the elastic strain contours of the LHCMS in six models at 20 s. The strain change is quite similar to the stress change: When the cladding is thickened, the elastic strain of the LHCMS is reduced, which indicates that the existence of the cladding can reduce strain on the LHCMS.
Fig. 14. von Mises stress contours of the LHCMS of different models at 20 s.
Fig. 15. Elastic strain contours of the LHCMS of different models at 20 s.
Fig. 16 illustrates stress changes at P1-P6 shown in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4. By comparing Fig. 13 and Fig. 16, it can be also found that there is a relationship between temperature changes and thermal stress. From 0 s to 5 s, when the thickness of the cladding is 4 mm and 5 mm, the temperature of the outside surface of the LHCMS has almost no changes, and the stress also has almost no changes. While other models with thinner cladding thickness has significant changes in temperature, and the stress also has obvious changes. From 5 s to 20 s, the temperature changes of P1-P6 are further enlarged, and the stress changes are further enlarged as well. Furthermore, it can be seen that when the external coolant temperature is stable at about 670 K (20 s), the stress of the outside surface of the LHCMS (P1-P6) decreases by about 26 MPa or 9% for every 1 mm increase of the cladding thickness. Fig. 17 shows the strain variation of P1-P6 shown in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4. Since it is a linear elastic analysis, it can be found that the strain variation is almost the same as the stress variation. Similarly, it can be concluded that at about 670 K (20 s), the strain of the outside surface of the LHCMS (P1-P6) decreases by about 1.51 × 10-4 or 9% for every 1 mm increase of the cladding thickness.
Fig. 16. Stress variation at P1-P6.
Fig. 17. Strain variation at P1-P6.
Fig. 18 shows the stress variation at the points where the maximum stress occurs in each model. In different models, all maximum stress points appear at the connection area between the LHCMS and the sleeve. The reason is that at the connection area, there is an obvious change in the shape of the model, in addition to thermal stress, there is also stress caused by stress concentration. P1-P6 are far from the connection area, so the stresses in Fig. 18 are greater than that of the corresponding cladding thickness in Fig. 16. The increase of the stress for each model is around 50 MPa to 60 MPa. Therefore, the stress concentration in this analysis will increase the stress by about 17% to 21%. Fig. 19 shows the elastic strain variation at the points where the maximum strain occurs in each model. All maximum strain points also appear at the connection area between the LHCMS and sleeve. The increase of the strain for each model is about 3.33 × 10-4 to 3.65 × 10-4. Therefore, similarly, the strain concentration will increase the strain by about 17% to 21%.
Fig. 18. Stress variation of the maximum stress point in each model.
Fig. 19. Strain variation of the maximum strain point in each model.
<Section>7. Conclusions</Section>
In this paper, a numerical design procedure for designing the cladding of the lower head of central measuring shroud (LHCMS) was proposed. Firstly, FEM models with different cladding thicknesses were established and simulated. Secondly, the cladding thickness of the LHCMS was designed. Thirdly, the gap distance between the LHCMS and cladding was designed. Finally, the model with design values was established and simulated to verify the design results. Besides, the effects of different cladding thicknesses on temperature, stress and strain distribution of LHCMS were also studied. According to the results and discussion, the main conclusions are as follows:
1.
Under the scram conditions of SFRs, based on the boundary conditions in this paper, the cladding thickness should be 4 mm to ensure that the LHCMS is not damaged by thermal shocks during its lifetime. From the deformation analysis, the gap distance between the LHCMS and cladding should be set to 4 mm to ensure that they will have no contact.
2.
When the external coolant temperature is stable at about 670 K (20 s), the temperature of the outside surface of the LHCMS increases by about 10 K or 1.5% for every 1 mm increase of the cladding thickness under scram conditions (temperature decrease).
3.
The stress and strain values of the outside surface of the LHCMS (away from the stress concentration area) decrease both by about 9% for every 1 mm increase of the cladding thickness. The stress and strain concentration in this analysis will increase the stress and strain both by about 17% to 21%.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Daogang Lu: Conceptualization, Resources, Supervision, Project administration. Shu Zheng: Software, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation, Writing - original draft, Visualization. Qiong Cao: Methodology, Validation, Funding acquisition.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
The authors thank the sponsoring of National Natural Science Foundation of China (11805069) and Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, China (2019MS035).
<Section>References</Section>
ASME, 2013a
ASME
Boiler & Pressure Vessel Code II
The American Society of Mechanical Engineers, New York, Materials. Part D. Properties (2013)
Google Scholar
ASME, 2013b
ASME
Boiler & Pressure Vessel Code III, Rules for Construction of Nuclear Facility Components. Division 1 - Subsection NH. Class 1 Components in Elevated Temperature Service
The American Society of Mechanical Engineers, New York (2013)
Google Scholar
Kerezsi et al., 2000
B.B. Kerezsi, A.G. Kotousov, J.W.H. Price
Experimental apparatus for thermal shock fatigue investigations
Int. J. Press. Vessels Pip., 77 (7) (2000), pp. 425-434
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jang et al., 2003
C. Jang, S.-C. Kang, H.-R. Moonn, et al.
The effects of the stainless steel cladding in pressurized thermal shock evaluation
Nucl. Eng. Des., 226 (2) (2003), pp. 127-140
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Loginov et al., 2011
M.S. Loginov, E.M. Komen, T. Höhne
Application of large-eddy simulation to pressurized thermal shock: Assessment of the accuracy
Nucl. Eng. Des., 241 (8) (2011), pp. 3097-3110
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Sharabi et al., 2016
M. Sharabi, V.F. González-Albuixech, N. Lafferty, et al.
Computational fluid dynamics study of pressurized thermal shock phenomena in the reactor pressure vessel
Nucl. Eng. Des., 299 (2016), pp. 136-145
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2017
M.J. Wang, L.Y. Bai, L.F. Wang, S.Z. Qiu, W.X. Tian, G.H. Su
Thermal hydraulic and stress coupling analysis for AP1000 Pressurized Thermal Shock (PTS) study under SBLOCA scenario
Appl. Therm. Eng., 122 (2017), pp. 158-170
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wagih et al., 2018
M. Wagih, B. Spencer, J. Hales, et al.
Fuel performance of chromium-coated zirconium alloy and silicon carbide accident tolerant fuel claddings
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 120 (2018), pp. 304-318
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Trampus, 2018
P. Trampus
Pressurized thermal shock analysis of the reactor pressure vessel
Procedia Struct. Integrity, 13 (2018), pp. 2083-2088
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Cheverton et al., 1990
R.D. Cheverton, J.W. Bryson, D.J. Alexander, T. Slot
Thermal-shock experiments with flawed clad cylinders
Nucl. Eng. Des., 124 (1–2) (1990), pp. 109-119
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Xue et al., 2015
S. Xue, M. Jin, G. Wang, Z.B. Chen
Fuel cladding integrity analysis during beam trip transients for China lead-based demonstration reactor
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 83 (2015), pp. 94-100
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Pelykh et al., 2016
S.N. Pelykh, M.V. Maksimov, S.D. Ryabchikov
The prediction problems of VVER fuel element cladding failure theory
Nucl. Eng. Des., 302 (2016), pp. 46-55
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lu et al., 2020
D.G. Lu, S. Zheng, Q. Cao, et al.
A numerical procedure for determining the layer-to-layer gap distance of the cladding protecting lower head of central measuring shroud from thermal shock
Nucl. Eng. Des., 363 (2020), p. 110633
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Oliver et al., 2019
S.J. Oliver, M. Mostafavi, F. Hosseinzadeh, et al.
Redistribution of residual stress by thermal shock in reactor pressure vessel steel clad with nickel alloy
Int. J. Press. Vessels Pip., 169 (2019), pp. 37-47
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zheng et al., 2019
S. Zheng, D.G. Lu, Q. Cao, et al.
Contact model analysis on cladding designs against thermal shock for the lower head of central measuring shroud in a fast reactor
Nucl. Eng. Des., 352 (2019), Article 110204
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Zheng et al., 2020
S. Zheng, D.G. Lu, Q. Cao, et al.
Cladding design on lower head of the central measuring shroud in a fast reactor against thermal striping
Nucl. Eng. Des., 352 (2020), Article 110389
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar