<title>Two-phase flow measurements and observations in a cooling panel of the reactor cavity cooling system</title>
<author>1,R.Vaghetto,2,S.Yang,3,D.Hodge,4,Y.Hassan</author>
<Affiliation>1,Texas A&M University, Department of Nuclear Engineering, Thermal-Hydraulic Research Laboratory, USA;2,Texas A&M University, Department of Mechanical Engineering, USA</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2020.103578</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0149197020303255</URL>
Two-phase flow measurements and observations in a cooling panel of the reactor cavity cooling system
R.Vaghetto,S.Yang,D.Hodge,Y.Hassan
Texas A&M University, Department of Nuclear Engineering, Thermal-Hydraulic Research Laboratory, USA
Texas A&M University, Department of Mechanical Engineering, USA
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Two-Phase flow measurements were conducted in the cooling panel of a RCCS facility.
Void fraction and coolant temperature at risers' outlet were analyzed.
Subcooled and saturated boiling flow characteristics were discussed.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The analysis of the flow behavior within a cooling panel of a scaled water-cooled reactor cavity cooling system has been performed supported by high-resolution measurements of the void fraction at the risers’ outlet. The results have shown a stable, symmetric distribution of the flow through the risers during subcooled boiling conditions, characterized by small, slow bubbles with average void fraction lower than 0.3 for all risers. As the temperature increased to saturation, flow distribution appeared strongly asymmetrical and unstable, with peaks of void fraction as high as 0.9. Large, faster bubbles were observed during these peaks, immediately followed by flow of subcooled liquid water. Flow stagnation and inversion has also been observed. The high resolution void fraction results, complemented by the measurements of the coolant flow rate and temperatures, not only have further described the behavior of the system under hypothetical accident conditions, but represent a unique set of data to support the validation of system-level codes, and more advanced computational tools.
Keywords:Water-cooled reactor cavity cooling system;High-resolution void fraction measurements;Two-phase natural circulation
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Natural circulation systems are widely employed in a variety of industrial applications, including cooling and air conditioning, and energy systems such as the solar (Thalange et al., 2018), nuclear fusion (Bao et al., 2018), and nuclear fission (Corvaro, 2009; Lommers et al., 2014). This is essentially due to their higher reliability compared to active systems. Advanced nuclear reactors use natural circulation as a means to reliably remove the decay heat from the core, guaranteeing adequate core cooling when forced flow is lost, and requiring no human intervention. Natural circulation, being an integral part of advanced reactors, is considered one of the most promising means for passive heat removal.
The Reactor Cavity Cooling System (RCCS) is an example of passive safety systems relying on natural circulation, and is designed to remove the heat leakage from the reactor vessel during normal conditions, becoming the major heat sink during postulated accident scenarios (INL/EXT-17-43218). The RCCS is an integral part of different advanced reactor technologies, including high-temperature gas-cooled reactors (HTGR), liquid metal fast reactors (LFR) (Aoto et al., 2014), and molten salt reactors (MSR) (Scarlat et al., 2014). While the design of the RCCS may differ depending on the reactor technology, its basic functionality, and the important expected phenomena during normal and abnormal operations have evident similarities among these reactor technologies. This includes the heat transfer mechanisms between the reactor vessel and the RCCS, and the complex behavior of the coolant within the cooling panels during normal operations, and, most importantly, during accident scenarios.
The complex phenomena of heat and mass transfer that may take place in the RCCS have motivated numerous experimental efforts, aimed at increasing the understanding of such phenomena, study the effects of design and operating parameters, and assess the overall performance of the RCCS. Experimental data was also sought to validate the predictive capabilities of system codes and one-dimensional approached (Zhao, 2019), and more advanced computational fluid dynamics tools. While the behavior of the RCCS under nominal conditions (steady-state) has been widely studied and understood with sufficient detail (Lisowski, 2013, Vaghetto, 2014; Tompkins, 2016; Chen et al., 2017), the phenomena occurring during certain transient scenarios still require further investigation. This is especially true for certain accident scenarios of the water-cooled RCCS (WRCCS) involving the loss of active heat removal from the water tanks, that will lead to an increase of the water temperature to saturation, and subsequent two-phase flow conditions within the cooling panel and other regions of the RCCS (Lisowski, 2014). There are evident challenges in measuring two-phase flow parameters in a system with multiple risers like the one typical of the RCCS cooling panels, in comparison to other system-level thermal-hydraulic parameters (i.e. temperatures). Different methods have been explored to conduct void fraction, and other two-phase flow measurements for WRCCS (Tompkins, 2018). New investigations are necessary to increase the level of knowledge and produce new experimental data to validate the capabilities of system codes and Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) codes in predicting such phenomena. Computational tools have been developed to support the safety analysis and licensing calculation required for non-Light Water Reactor (LWR) designs. The Comprehensive Reactor Analysis Bundle (CRAB) identifies a suite of non-LWR codes, consisting of NRC developed codes nicely integrated with specialized codes developed by the Department of Energy under the NEAMS program (NRC Report, 2020). Some of these codes may be potentially used for more than one design type. This is the case of TRACE, a thermal-hydraulic system code developed by the NRC for analysis of LWRs, that can be used to simulate heat transfer loops and heat removal systems in non-LWRs, likely being the preferred code for analysis of systems and components using water as the working fluid. Two-phase flow measurements employing high-speed, high-resolution cameras may overcome some of the limitations of more conventional methods, being relatively easily applicable for large, complex systems, while removing any effect on the flow, and achieving competitive uncertainties.
A scaled WRCCS facility has been designed and constructed with specific features to conduct flow visualization and measurements of single- and two-phase flow conditions within the cooling panel. A transient scenario has been conducted to investigate the global behavior of the flow within a set of multiple risers, and provide unique experimental data of void fraction, combined with other conventional system-level measurements, capturing the characteristics of the two-phase flow behavior within the entire cooling panel and identify interesting phenomena such as flow stagnation and flow inversion. The measurements conducted provide a unique and valuable set of data for validation of specialized computational tools.
1.1. Facility description
The experimental facility used to conduct the two-phase flow tests is a small-scale (1/23 axial length) WRCCS. The experimental facility was designed to represent the Rector Cavity Cooling System of a typical HTGR (Thielman, 2005). The main dimensions of the RCCS prototype (including the axial length of the cavity) were taken from the reference design, while other features have been adapted to the water-cooled design. The axial length of the cavity was defined based on engineering considerations, including the total maximum power installed. This was decided to be equal to 1 m, corresponding to an axial length-scale, lR = 1/23. The main similarity groups, expressed as the ratio of the model parameter and the reference (prototype) parameter, included the axial length-scale, lR (radial dimensions of the panel were preserved in the facility design), the temperature rise within the cavity, ΔTR, the Froude number, Fr, and the Richardson number, Ri. The final scaling ratios expressed as a function of the axial scaling factor, are summarized in Table 1 (Vaghetto, 2014).
Table 1. Scaling ratios.
An overview of the test facility and main components installed is show in Fig. 1. A set of three 8 kW radiant heaters are installed to simulate the heat leaking from the reactor vessel. A 1.09 m tall stainless-steel cooling panel consisting of nine vertical pipes (5.08 cm ID, P/D = 2) welded together with interstitial fins, is placed in front of the heaters and designed to collect the heat transferred by radiation and convection within a thermally-insulated cavity. The heated water flows upward through the risers, collects into the upper manifold, and moves toward the water tank located at the top of the facility. During normal operation, the natural circulation is maintained at steady-conditions by the heat removal system designed to cool the water of the tank through a secondary cooling system, with colder water flowing back to the lower manifold. Loop pressure drop, and subsequent operating flow rate, can be modulated using a throttle valve located at the bottom (exit) of the water tank. During certain accident scenarios, the heat removal system may become unavailable, causing a continuous increase of the water temperature to saturation, and subsequent boiling conditions. Upper and lower manifolds are made of clear borosilicate glass (10.16 cm ID) to allow flow visualization and high-fidelity measurements of the flow within the horizontal collector and nine branches (Quintanar, 2019; Holler et al., 2020). Measurement of void fraction and flow visualization presented in this article are taken at the upper manifold.
Fig. 1. Overview of the experimental facility with the primary loop and auxiliary systems (Left); Detailed view of the cavity and cooling panel. Risers are numbered from left (close to the cavity inlet) to right (cavity outlet).
1.2. Instrumentation
The facility is equipped with instrumentation to record system-level parameters of the flow as shown in Fig. 1. A Krhone Optiflux® 4100 magnetic flow meter coupled with a Krohne IFC-300 signal converter (accuracy = 0.2% of the measured value ± 1 mm/s) is installed at the bottom section of the main loop, to measure the bulk flow rate of the water in the main loop. Resistance temperature detectors (RTDs) are located at the inlet and outlet of the cavity to monitor and record the coolant temperature through the cavity during the transient. Forty-five k-type thermocouple probes are installed at the cooling panel to measure the temperature of the cooling water along the nine risers. The probes are placed at five different elevations within the heated section of the risers, including the inlet and outlet, and at three additional equidistant locations. The panel walls are instrumented with several thermocouples and with a fine network of optical fiber distributed temperature sensors (DTS) that have been in past investigations used to generate high-fidelity temperature distributions (Holler et al., 2019, Holler et al., 2020).
Instrumentation was calibrated using standard, certified laboratory procedures. Table 2 lists the measurement uncertainties of flow and temperature measurement devices.
Table 2. Measurements uncertainty.
A set of three Phantom Miro high-speed cameras were installed to record high-resolution videos of the flow within the upper manifold. Fig. 2 depicts the visualization system installation with the experimental facility. Cameras were mounted on a fine-motion traverse system for alignment and adjustment of the cameras’ view angle. This installation, and the use of 50 mm lenses installed at each camera, allowed for the simultaneous capture of all nine risers (three for each camera view) during the transient event, as shown in Fig. 3. The Cameras frame rate (240 fps) was optimized during shakedown tests to maximize the recording time (30 s) and capture the flow features based on the observed of bubble transition times. Two 48 W, 4200 lumen LED backlight panel (60.96 × 60.96 cm2) were installed behind the upper manifold to provide a uniform, high-intensity source of illumination to the entire manifold. The complete visualization system (including cameras and LED panels) is shown in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2. Visualization system installation.
Fig. 3. Complete set view of the camera and processing windows (marked in red).
<Section>2. Methodology</Section>
This section describes the methodology adopted to obtain the spatially and temporally resolved void fraction fields in each riser, at selected time intervals during transient, from the high-resolution images recorded by the cameras. Frames were extracted from the cine files recorded. A background image taken at the beginning of the test under the final test configuration, was subtracted from these frames in order to acquire clearer bubble shapes.
Before the binarization process, the images were corrected to account for the optical distortion generated by the cylindrical pipe walls and water. The correction methodology adopted consisted of performing an in-situ calibration using a dotted calibration target (with known patterns’ dimensions) placed inside the glass riser filled with water. The horizontal and vertical distortion was quantified by comparing the calibration image with the one for the bare (without pipe) target in air under the same focal conditions. The raw images were then calibrated by coordinate transformation, using local function to account for the different distortion at the different locations in the pipe. The calibrated images were then converted to binary images, by applying a dynamic threshold approach (Wang, 2009), where bubbles are marked with white pixels and the liquid water with black pixels. Binary images were then resized to remove areas affected by black shadows produced by the edged of the LED panel (risers 1, 6, 7, and 9). This process was adopted to achieve a consistent region of interest (ROI) within the risers, as shown in Fig. 3.
This sequence of the image post-processing is graphically represented in Fig. 4.
Fig. 4. Image processing sequence.
From the resized binary images, the time-dependent, spatially-averaged void fraction was calculated using equation (1), and the ratio of the are number of white pixels and the total number of black pixels.
@(1)
Where@is the spatially averaged void fraction,@is the background subtracted pixel position within the resized ROI, and@is the position of the white pixel.
2.1. Grid size sensitivity and optimization for spatial upscaling
To obtain the instantaneous two-dimensional void fraction field, a spatial upscaling with fixed grid was applied to the resized ROI (full resolution = 129 × 253 pixels). The grid size was optimized by performing a sensitivity analysis using the normalized void fraction deviation (Eq. (2)) as figure of merit:
@(2)
Where superscript m × m denotes the grid size in pixels, subscript avg denotes the time average, and subscript max indicated the maximum value within a 0.8 s duration.
Here, the grid size determines the spatial resolution of the instantaneous void fraction field within the ROI. Fig. 5 shows the bubble size distribution (equivalent diameter Db in pixels) during a typical transient period (about 20 s) of two-phase flow observed in a single riser [Liu et al., 2015, Lau et al., 2013]. In the same figure, the normalized void fraction deviation is shown for different grid sizes investigated, and for two void fraction cases (high void fraction, <α >avg = 0.6 ± 0.037 – red dots; low void fraction, <α>avg = 0.19 ± 0.003 – blue triangles). The equivalent (area-equivalent) bubble diameter was estimated from the projected area under the assumption of azimuthal symmetry around the minor axis of the bubble, and can be calculated as Db=(4A/π)1/2, where A is the bubble projected area (Ito, 2011; Gera and Gautam, 1995; Besagni et al., 2016; Estrada-Perez et al., 2015; Yoo, 2016a, b; Yang, 2019). The grid size of 5 × 5 pixels was found to be the best representation of the averaged void fraction within the observed bubble size distribution, minimalizing the void fraction deviation for both cases investigated.
Fig. 5. Grid size determination methodology.
It has to be noted that the visualization technique adopted in the presented work was executed using a single view camera system. Subsequently the third dimension was not resolved in present study, and the void fraction is presented as a projected volume fraction onto a single plane perpendicular to the camera view. Overlapped bubbles are treated as a single bubble during image post-processing.
Fig. 6 illustrates the results of spatial upscaling using a 15x15 gird size (not optimized) and the 5x5 grid size (optimal configuration used for the analysis). As it can be seen, the upscaling with coarse grid size of 15 × 15 pixels resulted in loss of information compared to the results obtained with the optimum grid size of 5 × 5 pixels. It has to be noted that size of the majority of the bubble observed resides within the 5 pixels length scale. The upscaled data were then downscaled back to the original resolution (129 × 253 pixels) using bi-cubic interpolation.
Fig. 6. Sequential illustration of the spatial upscaling.
2.2. Approach to uncertainty estimation
Uncertainty estimation of two-phase flow measurements certainly include a higher level of complexity compared to single-phase measurements. The employment of advanced visualization techniques may overcome some effects typical of intrusive techniques, but it is important to identify the contributors to measurement uncertainty, and estimate their impact to the measurements’ error. When applying flow visualization techniques based on the use of cameras and image post-processing, contribution of the magnification factor, optical distortion, and image processing algorithm utilized need to be accounted.
In our approach, the magnification factor is estimated by executing an in-situ spatial calibration. The conversion factor is then used to convert the camera pixels into an actual length (mm). The calibration was executed with the camera final layout and settings adopted during the test. Each riser's outer diameter was measured using a caliper (accuracy 0.01 mm) to account for fabrication tolerances.
Results obtained during the experiment described in this article are presented in terms of time-dependent, spatial-averaged void fraction, and two-dimensional void fraction contours. These parameters are extracted from two-dimensional projected image of three-dimensional two-phase flow in a cylindrical geometry. Effects of optical distortion, and interference of the out-focused bubble in the depth of field were estimated following the methodology established by (Lau, 2013) for the case of a polydisperse bubbly flow with a depth of field (image depth) 2.5 times larger than the maximum bubble diameter. Contribution of the imaging processing to the measurement error was estimated following the approach proposed by (Ferreira. 2012), due to the similarity in the image post-processing adopted. These considerations have led to an estimated maximum uncertainty of the spatial average void fraction of approximately 30%. The two-dimensional void fraction contours account for an additional contribution from the grid size, which was discussed in previous section. This contribution was estimated to be up to 15%.
There are certainly some intrinsic challenges in performing measurements of void fraction, particularly within the geometry, and under the operating conditions of a typical of an RCCS cooling panel. Among other measurement methods applicable to multi-phase flows, the one described in this article may offer unique advantages compared to other methods for being non-intrusive, providing high spatial resolution, and applicable to large scale (entire set of nine risers in this study). A comprehensive state-of-the-art overview of two-phase flow measurements and their uncertainty conducted by (Tompkins et al., 2018), reported a void fraction measurement uncertainty of ±10.5% for the conductivity-based wire-mesh sensors, when compared to other methods. It is also stated that this uncertainty strongly depends on particular flow conditions, with best results observed at higher flow rates. Considering the flow conditions observed during the transient, the overall uncertainty of the measurements achieved in this study is satisfactory for the type of analysis conducted, and very competitive to other methods.
2.3. Overview of the transient experiment
The experiment was conducted with a constant total power of the electric heaters 7.4 kW. The power was increased from the value adopted during steady-state tests (Holler et al., 2019; Quintanar et al., 2019). Test preparation consisted of filling the system with de-ionized water up to the top of visualization window of the water tank, setting the throttle valve to a fully open position, and initializing the data acquisition system, electric heaters, and cooling system. Once steady-conditions were achieved, the cooling system was shut down to initiate the transient. The test initial conditions (Power = 7.4 kW, Valve opening = 100%) are maintained throughout the duration of the test. Detailed information of the test preparation and steady-state results are available in (Holler et al., 2019; Quintanar et al., 2019). Loop flow rate and coolant temperatures were monitored and recorded during the entire duration of the test. A total of ten 30-s high-resolution movie sets were recorded by the high-speed cameras during the transient, triggered from the data acquisition system at times when two-phase conditions were established and observed. For the scope of this study, only the results obtained by the analysis and post-processing of two most representative sets of high-resolution movies will be reported.
<Section>3. Results and discussion</Section>
The transient's the loop flow rate and the water temperature at the inlet and outlet of the risers' panel are plotted in Fig. 7 (left) for the duration of the transient. The first part of the transient (0–~3 h) was characterized by a slow, steady increase of the coolant temperatures and flow rate. While the temperatures continued to increase beyond this time, coolant flow rate started a slow descend toward a point where flow stagnation was observed (at approximately 6 h into the transient), followed by generation of steam bubbles within the risers which helped reestablishing the flow within the system. This behavior cycled several times later in the transient, as it can be seen on Fig. 7 (right), until the test was terminated.
Fig. 7. Flow rate and cavity inlet and outlet coolant temperatures. Left: Overview of the entire test duration. Right: View of the last phase of the transient.
The same flow rate curve is plotted with the risers' outlet coolant temperatures in Fig. 8. These temperatures are recorded with thermocouples probes located right below the visualization windows and are most representative of the subcooled or saturation conditions of the coolant leaving the cooling panel. The zoomed view on the right of Fig. 8 shows the saturation temperature at the location of the probes. This is the temperature corresponding to local pressure (estimated from the hydrostatic column of water above the location of the probes) under saturation conditions. The same figure shows the instant where two of the cine movie sets have been recorded, which will be analyzed in the following plots. At about 7.30 h, the loop flow rate is observed to decrease, but still large enough (>30 LPM) to provide sufficient cooling water to the risers, maintaining the temperature below the estimated saturation temperature. The corresponding cine file (marked as movie 5 in the figure) was recorded to captured the two-phase flow under subcooled boiling conditions. At approximately 7.38 h, the loop flow rate reduced below 5 LPM while the temperature of the coolant at the risers’ outlet reached saturation. The corresponding cine file (marked as movie 6 in the figure) was recorded to capture the two-phase flow under saturated boiling conditions.
Fig. 8. Flow rate and risers' outlet coolant temperatures. Left: Overview of the entire test duration. Right: View of the last phase of the transient with identification of the cine files.
The spatial-average void fraction and the risers’ outlet temperature during subcooled boiling conditions are plotted in Fig. 9. This period is characterized by a relatively stable void fraction, with similar temperature and subcooling conditions within all nine risers. Slightly higher void fraction (approx. 0.3) is observed at risers 7, 8, and 9, compared to the rest of the risers (approx. 0.2). In general, the observation during the tests confirmed similar conditions within the nine risers for bubble size, as can also be seen from the two-dimensional void fraction contour plots of Fig. 10, representing a snapshot taken at point 1 of Fig. 9.
Fig. 9. Subcooled Boiling Conditions - Spatially-averaged void fraction (blue curves) and risers' outlet coolant temperature (red curves) for (a) Riser 1, (b) Riser 2, (c) Riser 3, (d) Riser 4, (e) Riser 5, (f) Riser 6, (g) Riser 7, (h) Riser 8, and (i) Riser 9; (Dotted line: saturation temperature).
Fig. 10. Two-Dimensional void fraction contour under subcooled boiling conditions at t = 15s from Movie 5 recording start time. The coolant outlet temperature (°C) is reported under each riser.
Characteristics of the flow and temperature within the risers during saturated boiling conditions are unstable and asymmetric as can be seen from the spatial-average void fraction and the risers’ outlet temperature plotted in Fig. 11. To better understand the behavior of the flow within the risers, the coolant outlet temperature was plotted for an extended period (100 s), compared to the void fraction (limited to the 30s cine file duration). As it can be seen from the plots of Fig. 11, with coolant temperature at saturation, the flow in the risers is characterized by larger bubbles of relatively larger velocity compared to the ones observed during the subcooled phase. In addition, each riser experienced a rapid production of steam bubbles of larger size and velocity, with high void fraction reaching and exceeding 0.9, immediately followed by liquid flow (very low void fraction). Temperature of the coolant dropped after the peak indicating the arrival of subcooled water from the bottom manifold. The behavior is evidently asymmetric with peaks of void fraction occurring at different times and magnitude, but generally followed by a sudden decrease of the local coolant temperature. This is clearly seen through the void fraction contour snapshots of Fig. 12, taken at the times marked on the plots of Fig. 11.
Fig. 11. Saturated Boiling Conditions - Spatially-averaged void fraction (blue curves) and risers' outlet coolant temperature (red curves) for (a) Riser 1, (b) Riser 2, (c) Riser 3, (d) Riser 4, (e) Riser 5, (f) Riser 6, (g) Riser 7, (h) Riser 8, and (i) Riser 9. (Dotted line: saturation temperature).
Fig. 12. Two-Dimensional void fraction contour under saturated boiling conditions at (a) t = 0 s, (b) t = 7 s, (c) t = 18 s, (d) t = 24 s, and (e) t = 34 s from movie 6 recording start time. The coolant outlet temperature (°C) is reported under ach riser.
Additional information is obtained from the high-resolution cine files recorded during the subcooled and saturated boiling phases. During subcooled boiling conditions (Fig. 13), flow characteristics appeared to be consistent among the risers (symmetric flow conditions). Bubbles are small in size and uniformly distributed within the risers’ volume. Due to the very low flow rates, the bubbles are able to leave each riser moving straight upward and collecting at the top of the upper manifold (manifold outlet is on the right in Fig. 13).
Fig. 13. Flow Visualization during subcooled flow conditions.
During saturated boiling conditions (Fig. 14), flow within the risers appear to be asymmetric, with liquid flow (very low void fraction) in some risers, and very high void fraction in others. Under these conditions, bubbles are generally larger in size and characterized by higher transition velocities.
Fig. 14. Flow Visualization during saturated flow conditions (Snapshots are taken at different times for each set of risers).
Of particular interest is the flow stagnation and inversion that is observed at different risers during saturated boiling conditions (Fig. 15). This behavior was observed immediately after the void fraction peak.
Fig. 15. Reverse Flow at Riser 6 through snapshots taken at (a) 7.9 s, (b) 8.5 s, (c) 9.5 s, and (d) 11 s after Movie 6 recording start time.
This particular behavior was observed after the riser was interested by the large production of steam (corresponding to the void fraction peaks of Fig. 11. The production of larger steam bubbles, and the higher bubble transition velocities, favorized higher flow rates of colder liquid from the bottom manifold through the riser under consideration, causing a sudden decrease in the temperature within the riser. As a result of the decreased buoyancy forces the net flow within the riser is expected to cease, with subsequent stagnation of the liquid water observed at the risers' outlet. As the temperature of the liquid within the heated section of the panel increases, colder, denser water originally stagnating at the riser's exit (outside the heated section of the panel), may now move downward, producing the inversion effect observed in Fig. 15. This condition persists until the temperature of liquid within the heated section of the panel increases sufficiently to re-established a net upward flow within the riser.
<Section>4. Conclusion</Section>
High resolution measurement of the void fraction at the risers’ outlet of a water-cooled scaled reactor cavity cooling system have been collected and analyzed to investigate the flow behavior under subcooled and saturated boiling conditions. Stable, uniform flow conditions were observed within the risers during the subcooled phase, characterized by low void fraction (<0.3), small bubble size, and lower transition velocities. During saturated boiling conditions, string asymmetries were observed within the risers. At different times in the risers, larger bubbles at higher velocities were discharged into the top manifold, with a peak of void fraction up to 0.9, immediately followed by subcooled liquid flow. Observation through the camera recording, also found downward flow in risers at different times following the void peak. The spatially resolved void fraction fields and spatial-averaged void fraction data obtained during this test activity is a unique reference dataset for quantitative and qualitative comparison with the predictions of specialized system-level codes, and more advanced computation tools adopted for WRCCS studies.
<Section>Declaration of competing interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgment</Section>
The work presented in this article was partially supported by the Department of Energy Nuclear Energy University Programs, grant contract DE-NE0008552. The authors would like to thank Daniel Wacker for his contribution to the two-phase data post-processing.
<Section>References</Section>
Aoto et al., 2014
K. Aoto, P. Dufour, Y. Hongyi, J.P. Glatz, Y. Kim, Y. Ashurko, R. Hill, N. Uto
A summary of sodium-cooled fast reactor development
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 77 (2014), pp. 247-265
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bao et al., 2018
H. Bao, Y. Guo, S. Liu, C. Peng
Experimental study on natural circulation heat transfer of square channel in water-cooled blanket
IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci. Institute for Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 46 (2018), pp. 2291-2300
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Besagni et al., 2016
G. Besagni, P. Brazzale, A. Fiocca, F. Inzoli
Estimation of bubble size distributions and shapes in two-phase bubble column using image analysis and optical probes
Flow Meas. Instrum., 52 (2016), pp. 190-207
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chen et al., 2017
L. Chen, T. Ma, Y. Zheng, H. Zhao, F. Li, X. Chen, Y. Ma
Experimental verification on design model of the passive residual heat removal system of MHTGR
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 98 (2017), pp. 23-28
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Corvaro and Paroncini, 2009
F. Corvaro, M. Paroncini
An experimental study of natural convection in a differentially heated cavity through a 2d-piv system
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 52 (1–2) (2009), pp. 355-365
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Estrada-Perez et al., 2015
C.E. Estrada-Perez, J. Yoo, Y.A. Hassan
Feasibility investigation of experimental visualization techniques to study subcooled boiling flow
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 73 (2015), pp. 17-33
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ferreira et al., 2012
A. Ferreira, G. Pereira, J.A. Teixeira, F. Rocha
Statistical tool combined with image analysis to characterize hydrodynamics and mass transfer in a bubble column
Chem. Eng. J., 180 (2012), pp. 216-228
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gera and Gautam, 1995
D. Gera, M. Gautam
Bubble rise velocity in two-dimensional fluidized beds
Powder Technol., 84 (1995), pp. 283-285
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Holler et al., 2019
D. Holler, R. Vaghetto, Y. Hassan
High-resolution wall temperature measurements with distributed fiber optic sensors
Int. J. Therm. Sci., 145 (2019), p. 106042
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Holler et al., 2020
D. Holler, R. Vaghetto, Y. Hassan
Water temperature measurements with a Rayleigh backscatter distributed sensor
Opt. Fiber Technol., 55 (2020), p. 102160
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ito et al., 2011
D. Ito, H. Kikura, M. Aritomi
Micro wire-mesh sensor for two-phase flow measurement in a rectangular narrow channel
Flow Meas. Instrum., 22 (2011), pp. 377-382
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
INL/EXT-17-43218
INL/EXT-17-43218, “Identification and Characterization of Thermal Fluid Phenomena Associated with Selected Operating/Accident Scenarios in Modular High Temperature Gas-cooled Reactors.
Google Scholar
Lau et al., 2013
Y. Lau, K.T. Sujatha, M. Gaeini, N. Deen, J. Kuipers
Experimental study of the bubble size distribution in a pseudo-2D bubble column
Chem. Eng. Sci., 98 (2013), pp. 203-211
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lau et al., 2013
Y. Lau, N. Deen, J. Kuipers
Development of an image measurement technique for size distribution in dense bubbly flows
Chem. Eng. Sci., 94 (2013), pp. 20-29
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Liu et al., 2015
L. Liu, H. Yan, G. Zhao
Experimental studies on the shape and motion of air bubbles in viscous liquids
Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci., 62 (2015), pp. 109-121
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lisowski et al., 2013
D. Lisowski, T. Haskin, A. Tokuhiro, M. Anderson, M. Corradini
Study on the behavior of an asymmetrically heated reactor cavity cooling system with water in single phase
Nucl. Technol., 183 (2013), pp. 75-87
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lisowski et al., 2014
D. Lisowski, O. Omotowa, M. Muci, A. Tokuhiro, M. Anderson, M. Corradini
Influences of boil-off on the behavior of a two-phase natural circulation loop
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 60 (2014), pp. 135-148
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lommers et al., 2014
L. Lommers, B. Mays, F. Shahrokhi
Passive heat removal impact on AREVA HTR design
Nucl. Eng. Des., 271 (2014), pp. 569-577
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
ML 20030A176, 2020
ML 20030A176
NRC Non-light Water Reactor (Non-LWR) Vision and Strategy, Volume 1 – Computer Code Suite for Non-LWR Plant Systems Analysis, vol. 1, ML20030A176 Rev (2020)
Quintanar et al., 2019
N.R. Quintanar, T. Nguyen, R. Vaghetto, Y.A. Hassan
Natural circulation flow distribution within a multi-branch manifold
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 135 (2019), pp. 1-15
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Scarlat et al., 2014
R.O. Scarlat, M.R. Laufer, E.D. Blandford, N. Zweibaum, D.L. Krumwiede, A.T. Cisneros Charalampos Andreades, C.W. Forsberg, E. Greenspan, L. Hu, P.F. Peterson
Design and licensing strategies for thefluoride-salt-cooled,high-temperature reactor (FHR) technology
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 77 (2014), pp. 406-420
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Thalange et al., 2018
V. Thalange, E. Pal, N. Minocha, A. Nayak, S. Mahajani, S. Panse, J. Joshi
Thermal hydraulics of natural circulation loop in beam-down solar power tower
Energy, 159 (2018), pp. 1088-1101
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Thielman et al., 2005
J. Thielman, P. Ge, Q. Wu, L. Parme
‘‘Evaluation and optimization of general atomics’ GT-MHR reactor cavity cooling system using an axiomatic design approach
Nucl. Eng. Des., 235 (2005), pp. 1389-1402
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tompkins et al., 2016
C. Tompkins, M. Corradini, M. Anderson
Temperature profiles and mixing in a natural-circulation cooling facility via distributed optical sensors
Nucl. Technol., 196 (2016), pp. 346-354
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tompkins et al., 2018
C. Tompkins, H.M. Prasser, M. Corradini
Wire-mesh sensors: a review of methods and uncertainty in multiphase flows relative to other measurement techniques
Nucl. Eng. Des., 337 (2018), pp. 205-220
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Vaghetto and Hassan, 2014
R. Vaghetto, Y. Hassan
Experimental investigation of a scaled water-cooled reactor cavity cooling system
Nucl. Technol., 187 (2014), pp. 282-293
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yang et al., 2019
S. Yang, J. Seo, Y.A. Hassan
Thermal hydraulic characteristics of unstable bubbling of direct contact condensation of steam in subcooled water
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 138 (2019), pp. 580-596
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yoo et al., 2016a
J. Yoo, C.E. Estrada-Perez, Y.A. Hassan
“Experimental study on bubble dynamics and wall heat transfer arising from a single nucleation site at subcooled flow boiling conditions – Part 1: experimental methods and data quality verification
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 84 (2016), pp. 315-324
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yoo et al., 2016b
J. Yoo, C.E. Estrada-Perez, Y.A. Hassan
“Experimental study on bubble dynamics and wall heat transfer arising from a single nucleation site at subcooled flow boiling conditions – Part 2: data analysis on sliding bubble characteristics and associated wall heat transfer
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 84 (2016), pp. 292-314
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang and Dong, 2009
H.Y. Wang, F. Dong
A method for bubble volume calculating in vertical two-phase flow
J. Phys. Conf., 147 (2009), Article 012018
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhao et al., 2019
H. Zhao, Y. Zheng, X. Chen, T. Ma, Y. Dong
A one-dimensional code of the passive residual heat removal system for the modular high temperature gas-cooled reactor
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 110 (2019), pp. 374-383
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar