<title>Optimal design of a Small Modular Reactor core with dual cooled annular fuel based on the neutronics and natural circulation parameters</title>
<author>1, M. ZaidabadiNejad, 2, G.R.Ansarifar </author>
<Affiliation>1，Department of Nuclear Engineering, University of Isfahan, 81746-73441 Isfahan, Iran</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nucengdes.2020.110518</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029549320300133</URL>
Optimal design of a Small Modular Reactor core with dual cooled annular fuel based on the neutronics and natural circulation parameters
M. ZaidabadiNejadG.R.Ansarifar
Department of Nuclear Engineering, University of Isfahan, 81746-73441 Isfahan, Iran
<Section>Highlights</Section>
For the first time, dual cooled annular fuel in the SMR is studied thoroughly.
Neutronics and natural circulation parameters are optimized for a SMR.
Effect of power peaking factor and natural circulation parameters are investigated.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Small Modular Reactors (SMRs) are the creative design of nuclear reactors that have received considerable attention in recent years. Since there is insufficient operational experience in SMRs, extensive research on these types of reactors may be needed to improve the current level of these systems performance. Also, one of the approaches which can help the enhancement of a reactor power is changing its fuel geometry. For this purpose, as well as decreasing the maximum fuel temperature in the reactors, the technology of annular fuels with the ability of internal and external cooling shows its importance. The nuclear SMRs with annular fuel which is cooled internally and externally has the potential to increase high power density while maintaining a sufficient safety margin. The benefit of the dual cooled annular fuel design is that heat can be transferred to the coolant at both the outer and inner channels. Hence, in this study, for the first time, dual cooled annular fuel in the Small Modular Reactors is considered and studied thoroughly. In this paper, neutronics and natural circulation parameters are calculated for an SMR with Annular Fuel which is cooled internally and externally, with changes of the internal radius. By analyzing the fuel internal radius changes in a specific range via the neutronics and computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulation codes, the effects of power peaking factor, effective multiplication coefficient and natural circulation parameters are investigated. For the purpose of data fitting, an artificial neural network is trained using the observed data. The input consists of different internal radiuses which yields to output consisting effective multiplication factor, power peaking factor and natural circulation parameters. The Optimal geometry of annular fuel is determined using the neural network by implementing the genetic algorithms based on these neutronics and natural circulation parameters. Finally, using a simulated optimal geometry in the hot channel by neutronics and CFD simulations, thermal–hydraulic and neutronics calculations are accomplished, and these parameters are compared with the conventional SMR which uses solid (conventional) fuel. One of the main results of the evaluation is that optimal internally and externally cooled fuel in the presented SMR has a satisfactory margin for the departure from nucleate boiling (DNB) and maximum fuel rod temperature relative to the solid fuel which is used in the conventional SMRs. Indeed, fuel center temperature of conventional SMR is much more than that of presented optimal SMR. Also, presented optimal geometry increases the core effective multiplication coefficient which leads to increase in the excess reactivity. Also, reduces total power peaking factor and improves natural circulation parameters compared to the conventional SMR.
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The conventional design of Small Modular Reactors (SMRs) fuel has been continued to exist since its creation. Evolutionary improvements in the quality of fuel, causing a significant reduction in the rate of fuel failure, changes in fuel assembly design which allowed substantially increase power density and performance during a loss of coolant accidents. However, great achievements must be made to achieve a better plant economy and safety. Therefore, it is desirable to produce new generations of SMR fuels that have lower production cost, higher power density and greater safety margin which are easily able to be installed in existing SMRs with minimal plant design modifications.
Based on the experience of conventional UO2 fuel, a concept of dual cooled annular fuel has been introduced (Kazimi, 2001).
Annular fuel rod with voided central regions but without internally cooling, have been used in Eastern type of PWR and evaluated for other nuclear reactors (Meldrum, 1980). Dual cooled annular fuels are used in research reactors and are recommended for high temperature gas cooled reactors (Bujas, 1975). With this type of fuel, the additional cooling surface results in a lower heat flux to the coolant, thus resulting in a significantly higher margin for departure from nucleate boiling, lower fuel temperatures (Kim et al., 2002a, Kim et al., 2002b) and high fuel burnup (Hejzlar et al., 2001). Therefore, the performance of dual cooled annular fuel at both accidental and operational conditions is expected to be better than the conventional UO2 nuclear fuel design.
In this paper, the core of a NuScale SMR based on the use of dual cooled annular fuels is designed and optimized.
SMRs are designed with the potential of providing clean and cost-effective energy. As per the International Atomic Energy Association (IAEA) classification, SMRs are defined as reactors which produce a power output of less than or equal to 300 MWe; but in general, any reactor with an electrical output less than 700 MWe is considered as a SMR. In contrast to large reactors, SMRs can be fabricated and assembled in a factory environment and then, transported to the nuclear power site. This will help limit the on-site preparation and also, reduce the lengthy construction duration and construction cost. Also, makes the SMRs 20 to 30 percent less expensive (Nuclear Energy Association, 2011). In addition, the scalability and flexibility features of SMR makes it more suitable for small isolated areas with low energy demands, limited infrastructure and smaller and less established grid system.
The NuScale is one kind of SMR, that is an integral pressurized LWR consisting of 12 independent modules each capable of producing an output of 45 MWe (Li et al., 2012) that is shown in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. Modular NuScale power (Ingersoll et al., 2014).
The preliminary designs for the SMR are in accordance with the Multi Application Small Light Water Reactor (i.e. MASLWR), which was developed in 2003 by the Nexant Bechtel and Oregon State University in collaboration with the Idaho National Engineering Lab (Nuclear Regulation Committee, 2015). The reactor includes advanced safety features such as the passive containment heat removal systems (International Atomic Energy Association, 2011). Furthermore, the reactor is sealed in a high-pressure containment vessel which is submerged completely in water in a safety related pool, thus providing safety benefits in case of radiation leaks. The plant is designed to operate for 24 months without refueling. In addition, it is also capable of accommodating the used nuclear fuel for all the 12 modules just like the large commercial reactors (International Atomic Energy Association, 2011).
The used NuScale in this paper consists of 37 fuel assemblies and generates 160 MW thermal power (50 MWe). This nuclear reactor uses the natural circulation of the primary coolant for cooling the core during normal operation (Ingersoll et al., 2014). This reactor uses natural circulation to circulate fluid through the core because of the fluid density difference between the heat exchanger and the core (Fig. 2) (International Atomic Energy Agency, 2005).
Fig. 2. natural circulation flow within Nuscale (International Atomic Energy Agency, 2005).
The nuclear core provides a heat source that heats the water, causing its density to decrease and the helical coils heat exchanger provides a heat sink that cools the water, causing its density to increase. The density difference acting over an elevation difference results in a buoyancy force that drives the fluid flow around the loop. Natural circulation operation enhances overall plant safety as well as improving economics (International Atomic Energy Agency, 2007).
Natural circulation can provide the driving force on low load operation which can reduce the vibration of the main coolant pump. As for another advantage, it can remove the residual heat of core under accident conditions (International Atomic Energy Agency, 2009). But one of the disadvantages of a natural circulation system is the low driving head (Ghadimi and Paselar, 2012).
Natural heat-transfer is a very complicated phenomenon due to the coupling of heat transfer and fluid velocity. These are affected by a lot of parameters, including the temperature difference between the heat sink and source, flow resistance and fluid properties. The effects of this temperature difference can be decoupled from the other parameters, and the comprehensive influences of temperature difference can be calculated by a simple integrated expression. Then, based on this result, the natural circulation behavior under single-phase condition can be predicted (Zhu et al., 2013).
For single-phase circulation, the one-dimensional Energy equation under steady-state condition can be expressed as:
@(1)
Momentum equation:
@(2)
where T is the temperature difference between the heat sink and source,ρ is the density, cp is the specific heat, ṁ is the mass flow rate, g is the gravity; H is the mean height difference between the heat sink and source; f is the coefficient of flow resistance; A is the cross-section of channel; Nc is the number of loop’s components, which may be a heat exchanger, orifice or, etc. The subscript n denotes the parameters of the nth component. The density variation for small values of  can be calculated by
@(3)
where γ is the coefficient of thermal expansion. Inserting Eq. (3) into Eq. (2) provides the mass flow rate:
@(4)
Eqs. (1), (4) provide the heat transported by natural circulation as:
@(5)
By defining parameter k as follows:
@(6)
Eq. (5) shows that natural heat transfer circulation is a function of dT and k. According to the Eq. (4), it can be seen that an increase in  dT results in a larger driving force and mass flow rate. Also, according to the Eq. (1), it can be seen that more heat is carried per unit mass flow rate. Parameter k is the function of working fluid properties, the gravity field, flow resistance characteristics and the loop configuration.
In this paper, neutronics and natural circulation parameters are calculated in the NuScale nuclear reactor as a SMR with Dual Cooled Annular Fuel considering changes of the internal radius. At the first, the desired annular fuel (internally and externally cooled) under clean and cold, also under full power conditions was modeled for the different internal radiuses with same distance gap to gap of fuel rod using deterministic neutronics calculation codes (CITATION and WIMS) and effective multiplication coefficient and power peaking factor have been calculated.
Then, natural circulation parameters calculations are accomplished for a simulated dual cooled annular fuel in a hot channel using Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) simulation codes (Fluent). These calculations are compared with a conventional NuScale that does not use this kind of fuel.
In NuScale as a SMR, it is most important that the distance between gap to gap of two fuel rods should not be less than 3 mm. Therefore, in this paper, for all of the modeled dual cooled annular fuel rods, this distance is same and assumed 3 mm.
By analyzing the fuel internal radius, changes in a specific range in the neutronics and natural circulation parameters are investigated.
For the purpose of data fitting, an artificial neural network is trained in MATLAB using the observed data. The input consists of different internal radiuses which yields to output consisting effective multiplication factor, power peaking factor (as neutronics parameters),  and  (as natural circulation parameters).
The optimal geometry of annular fuel is determined using the neural network by implementing genetic algorithms. In the optimization process, it has been shown that having an internal radius of 0.467 cm provides an optimal geometry. Also, validation of the designed artificial neural network and the genetic algorithm has been done using neutronics and Thermal-hydraulic calculations.
Finally, using a simulated optimal geometry in the hot channel by neutronics and CFD code, neutronics and thermal–hydraulic calculations are accomplished and compared with a conventional SMR that uses solid fuel.
<Section>2. Core modeling and neutronics analysis</Section>
For performing neutron of nuclear reactor calculation with WIMS and CITATION code, the first step is cell calculation that simulates fuel assemblies in the reactor core. The cell calculation is performed in fuel assemblies using the WIMS code in pin cell model by discretization of the angular dependence (DSN) method to derive the group constants. In WIMS, macroscopic cross-sections for all parts of core, such as fuel assemblies, reflectors, etc., are calculated and used in the next step, core calculation, which performs the calculation of neutronic parameters.
WIMS is a general lattice cell program, which uses transport theory to calculate flux as a function of energy and position in the cell. This code, at the first, calculates spectra for a few spatial regions in the full number of energy groups of its library and uses these spectra to condense the basic cross-sections into few groups. A few group calculations are then carried out using a much more detailed spatial representation. The resulting fluxes are then expanded using the spectra of the previous calculation, so that the reaction rates at each spatial point can be calculated in the library group structure. The pin cell is a physical model in WIMS for cylindrical geometry that can model a number of fuel rods where all the defined materials should be homogenized and then the transport equation is solved by the code (Donnelly, 1986). Hence, equivalent cell (Fig. 6) has to be transferred to cylindrical geometry to be usable in the WIMS input structure. This conversion is an approximation that is used for cell calculation.
This code is a deterministic computational tool that is used to calculate neutron flux distribution and infinite and effective multiplication factor, and solves the neutron transport equation (Eq. 7) in the desired region. The calculated neutron flux is used to obtain the macroscopic cross sections of homogeneous cells in a given energy group structure. Then, macroscopic cross sections are used as group constants of material in the input file of different types of cardiac code. All versions of WIMS use ENDF3/B core data. This data is usually stored in a file called a data library in a specified number of energy groups and used by the code. The WIMS computer code library is typically produced and used in 69 energy groups.
@(7)
n, is neutron density
@, is the total loss reactions (absorption and scattering) with neutrons at time t, location r, and energy E and angular Ω.
@, is the number of scattering-reactions which neutrons emitted in the small energy interval dE at E and small angular range dΩ at Ω from the reaction of the neutron at energy E′ and direction of motion Ω′,
This equation has 7 independent variables
@
Since the neutron transport equation is an integral–differential equation and a function of 7 independent variables, it is not possible to use analytical methods to solve this equation. Therefore, numerical methods should be used. In this paper for solving the transport equation in the WIMS code, the Discrete direction (DSN Method) was used.
In this method, to solve the directional problem, we attempt to discrete the directional variable. Thus, we solve the transport equation only for a finite number of specified directions. Each of these weights is assigned as a weight that represents a region or area on a single sphere and the sum of all these weights for different directions is one. Thus, the neutron flux and current can be expressed in terms of discrete directions, so that the transport equation becomes a set of linear differential equations.
There are 3 types of FAs as shown in Fig. 4, and all of these 3 types of FAs have been modeled in the WIMS code and macroscopic cross-sections for all parts of core, such as fuel assemblies, reflectors, etc., calculated and used in the next step, core calculation, which performs the calculation of neutronic parameters.
WIMS has been used in this paper to create average group constants for 3 types of fuel assemblies used for the Equilibrium Cycle.
After discretization of transport equation, multi-group transport equation is obtained:
@(8)
χg, is g-th fission spectrum.
The final solution of the transport equation in the WIMS code is obtained in a step where the energy treatment gets simplified and spatial effects are treated in more detail. The general scheme of the WIMS code is presented in Fig. 3, where, on the left-hand side, the input data needed at each step are presented, and on the right-hand side, the data transferred between the parts of the code are given.
Fig. 3. Simplified flowchart of WIMS calculation (Donnelly, 1986).
Second step of neutron calculations is simulating reactor core that is called core calculation. In core calculation, CITATION code is run using the group constants obtained from the WIMS code.
The CITATION computational code solves the multi-group neutron diffusion equation by finite difference method. This code is capable of solving this equation in one, two and three dimensional spaces and in different coordinate systems. The capabilities of this code include the calculation of neutron flux distribution (power distribution) at the reactor core and the infinite and effective multiplication factor, fuel management calculations, fuel depletion calculations, and disturbance calculations.
The energy-dependent diffusion equation is written as follows (Kazimi et al., 2004):
@(9)
By discretizing the energy variable, Eq. (9) is written as follows:
@(10)
Using the finite difference method, the one-dimensional neutron multi-group diffusion equation is written as follows:
@(11)
@(12)
This equation is solved by the CITATION code using the Successive Over Relaxation (SOR) iterative method (Fowler and Vondy, 1969).
In CITATION code, the core height was divided into 20 regions in the axial direction, and in the radial direction, any Square fuel assembly was divided into 4 virtual Squares in the considered model as shown in Fig. 4, in which the area of these 4 virtual Squares was equal to one real FA.
Fig. 4. NuScale core model in CITATION code.
Important physical parameters of the NuScale reactor which is modeled in this paper are given in Table 1 (NuScale, 2018).
Table 1. Parameters of the NuScale nuclear reactor.
Fig. 5. Loading Pattern for Reference Equilibrium Cycle for NuScale nuclear reactor (Standard, 2018)
In this study, all the neutronics calculations have been performed for two conditions. The first one is under a cold and clean condition as presented in Table 2 to calculate the effective multiplication factor. The second is full power condition as presented in Table 3 to calculate the power peaking factor.
Table 2. Conditions of the Clean and Cold (Lamarsh, 2001)
Characteristics of the each designed dual cooled annular fuel rods with 3 mm distance between gap to gap of two fuel rods are provided in Table 4. All kind of fuel rods have the same value (mass) of UO2 that is equal with conventional NuScale fuel rod.
Table 4. Fuel rod geometrical data.
One of the important aims of this paper is to analyze the power peaking factors of NuScale with dual cooled annular fuel. Limitation of Power peaking factors is essential for the safe operation of the nuclear reactor. The most important power peaking factors are the axial power peaking factor (Pqz), the radial power peaking factor (Pqr) and the total power peaking factor (Pqt). These factors are calculated using WIMS and CITATION codes under full power condition.
Power peaking factors are necessary to evaluate the safe operation of the nuclear reactor. Power peaking factors are the bridge between the neutronics and thermal-hydraulics analysis of the nuclear reactor core. Indeed, these parameters indicate maximum power released locally in the core and consequently, maximum fuel temperature in the fuel rod (at the hot spot) of the core. The most important power peaking factors are usually introduced in NuScale at steady state and pulse operation (Ravnik, 1990):
A. Axial power peaking factor (Pqz)
It is defined as the ratio between the maximum and average axial power density, (Pz) max and  respectively:
@(13)
B. Radial power peaking factor (Pqr) and
It is defined as the ratio between the maximum and average power density P(x,y,z) in radials integrated into a particular point (x,y) over entire height (h) of the fuel rod:
@(14)
and its average
@(15)
For calculations of fuel element temperature distributions, radial power distribution is important.
C. Total power peaking factor
It is defined as the product of the axial power peaking factor (Pqz) and the radial power (Pqr) peaking factor:
@(16)
2.1. Neutronics results
By modeling the presented dual cooled annular fuel for various inner radiuses and using neutronics calculation codes, the variation of power peaking factor and effective multiplication coefficient are obtained as presented in Table 5.
Table 5. Multiplication factor and power peaking factor for various internal radius of fuel rods.
* Solid fuel is the fuel of conventional NuScale reactor
According to the obtained information from the above table (effective multiplication coefficient and power peaking factor versus various internal radius of fuel rods) and the expressed design standard (equality of mass fuel and mass flow of presented NuScale reactor and Conventional), it can be seen that increasing the internal radius of fuel rods leads to increase in the effective multiplication coefficient and decrease in the power peaking factor.
Also, it is found that by increasing the inner radius by more than 0.45 (cm) and near 0.5 (cm), the power peaking factor increases, which is due to the more increasing of the pitch-lattice relative to the mean free-path and excessive reduction of the mean power-density in the core and, also, increasing the flux-gradient. Indeed, by increasing the inner radius by more than 0.45 (cm), pitch-lattice in the fuel-assemblies is very larger than mean free-path which leads to reduction of the fission rate, therefore, flux-gradient increases and mean (average) power-density in the core decreases which leads to increase the power peaking factor.
Increasing the effective multiplication coefficient at cold and clean condition leads to increase in the excess reactivity of the core which increases the operation cycle without refueling and it is useful from fuel management viewpoint. The increased reactivity is due to additional moderator “inside” the fuel rods. Indeed, effect of the increasing moderator is dominant and significant with increasing the internal radius of fuel rods which leads to increase in the effective multiplication coefficient.
Also, reduction of total power peaking factor is needed in order to power flattening which is crucial from safety viewpoint.
<Section>3. Thermal-hydraulic analysis</Section>
According to the neutronics simulation in full power and obtained maximum power density, the hot channel for each kind of fuel rods is determined. For Thermal-hydraulic analysis of these hot channels, firstly, the equivalent cell containing fuel rods with surrounding coolant according to Eq. (17) (Todreas and Kazimi, 2011) for the Square assemblies is designed that is shown in Fig. 6.
@(17)
where P is the pitch length of the lattice. Fluent and gambit codes are used for Thermal-hydraulic analysis of the obtained equivalent cell. Fig. 7 shows this modeled Equivalent cell.
Fig. 6. Equivalent Square cell.
Fig. 7. Equivalent modeled cell in the FLUENT code.
K-e model (Launder and Spalding, 1972) was applied for turbulence modeling. The turbulence kinetic energy, k, and its rate of dissipation, , are obtained from transport equations (17), (18):
@(18)
@(19)
where  mt is the turbulent viscosity and computed by combining k and  e as
follows:
@(20)
In Eqs. 18–20,  Gk is the generation of turbulence kinetic energy due to the mean velocity gradients, Ym is the contribution of the fluctuating dilatation incompressible turbulence to the overall dissipation rate,  Gb represents the generation of turbulence kinetic energy due to buoyancy,C1e ,C2e , C3e and Cm are constants. be and  pk are the turbulent Prandtl numbers for e and K, respectively. Se and Sk are user-defined source terms.
The differential equations governing the flow, turbulence and heat transfer under the assumptions of steady, incompressible flow are given by Zaidabadi nejad et al. (Zaidabadi et al., 2017).
The Thermal-hydraulic equations were solved using FLUENT 6.3.26 code. The axial power distribution in the hot channel was assumed to be a cosine shape, which was defined to be coded by a UDF (User Defined Function) written in C programming language.
The convergence criterion was fixed in a way that the residual values were lower than 10-4, which satisfies the convergence criterion very well, as shown in Fig. 8.
Fig. 8. Residual values.
The most important aim of Thermal-hydraulic analysis is investigation of the internal radiuses effect on the natural circulation parameters. Therefore, for each hot channel simulation, Velocity distribution throughout the hot channel was achieved and  were calculated.
3.1. Thermal-hydraulic results
In this section, by modeling the equivalent cell for each desired dual cooled annular fuel for various internal radiuses, the variation of Velocity distribution throughout the hot channel,  and  based on Inner radius of this fuel rods are obtained and have been presented in Table 6.
Table 6.  and  for various Inner radius of fuel rods.
*Solid fuel is the fuel of conventional NuScale reactor
In all simulations, the intake mass flow rates into the cell are the same and equal. The input velocity to each equivalent cell is obtained in different simulations using the flow rate and cross-sectional area of each equivalent cell.
The results show that the inner radius increasing decreases the value of @ and@ . The velocity of the fluid in inlet and riser is constant but in an inner and outer channel, it has a distribution. In riser and inlet channel, no heat is added to the fluid; hence, velocity is constant, but in the inner and outer channel that is placed in the core, and the heat is added to the fluid; therefore, velocity has a distribution. Also, the increase of the internal radius causes reduction in the fluid velocity. Because, the mass flow rate is assumed to be constant and the same for all geometries, and as the flow-area (cross-sectional area) increases with increasing in the inner radius, the inlet velocity then decreases, so, velocity distributions throughout the riser, inlet, outer channel and inner channel decreases when inner radius increases.
It should be considered that decreasing the  @ leads to reduction of the velocity-gradient and therefore, shear stress decreases which implies that the fluid motion will be more easier throughout the channel. So, natural circulation improves.
The grid independency for the chosen meshes in both the neutronics and thermal-hydraulics was done which is shown in Fig. 9 (a) for the maximum temperature of fuel and Fig. 9 (b) for effective multiplication factor. As shown in Fig. 9, by increasing the number of grids to , maximum temperature of fuel and by increasing the number of grids to , effective multiplication factor converge to the fixed values and are independent from the number of grids. Therefore, sensitivity study was performed on the applied meshes in both the neutronics and thermal-hydraulics studies.
Fig. 9. Grid independency of the numerical method a) thermal-hydraulics and b) neutronics.
<Section>4. Artificial neural network</Section>
Using a written neural network program in MATLAB software, a neural network was created with a transfer function tan-sigmoid with 2 neurons in the hidden layer and a linear transfer function with 4 neurons in the layer output. Different transfer functions can be used for fitting, but sigmoid transfer functions have a certain reputation. Fig. 10 shows the designed neural network for training.
Fig. 10. Neural network designated for training.
The input consists of different internal radiuses yields to output consisting effective multiplication factor, power peaking factor,  and .
The network is used by default using the Levenberg – Marquardt Algorithm as the learning function. The algorithm is intelligently designed to reduce the neural network error and converge the output of the network to the target set for it.
Additionally, input vectors are randomly divided into three sets:
70% of the data in the training set
15% of the data in the evaluation set to prevent Overfitting the network
15% of the data in the test set to check the network’s final performance.
The neural network uses training data to train the network and after training, test data has been used to regulate neurons and check the network’s final performance.
Regarding the settings applied to the program, the training routine stops if the evaluation set error increases in 6 consecutive increments. In Fig. 11 network performance has been shown. This diagram for educational errors, evaluation, and tests indicates that the stop has occurred in step 27.
Fig. 11. Network Performance Diagram.
For statistical analysis of the network, the regression between target and output data is investigated. Fig. 12 shows the regression diagram for educational, evaluation, testing, and ultimately the total data.
Fig. 12. Network Regression.
<Section>5. Genetic algorithm</Section>
Every optimization problem follows a specific goal. In other words, solving an optimization problem involves finding solutions that maximize the profit variables while minimizing the loss variables, which is called the cost function. Therefore, an appropriate criterion should be considered in order to find the optimal response. At the beginning of solving any optimization problem, by determining the cost function appropriate to that problem, the suitability of each population is also determined. The next steps of solving, including the selection of parents will continue.
Indeed, the Genetic Algorithm (GA) flowchart is demonstrated in Fig. 13 (Simon, 2013, Yang, 2014).
Fig. 13. GA flowchart.
The goal of the optimization process is to minimize or maximize the cost and fitness functions.
Parent selection methods are as follows:
i)
Roulette Wheel Selection
ii)
Stochastic Universal Sampling
iii)
Tournament selection
iv)
Rank selection
v)
Random selection
In selecting the roulette wheel, the circular wheel is divided. A fixed point is selected around the wheel and the wheel is rotated. The wheel area, opposite the fixed point, is selected as the parent and the same process for the second parent is repeated.
Stochastic Universal Sampling is quite similar to roulette wheel selection. But instead of having only one fixed point, we have several fixed points. Therefore, all parents are selected in just one-wheel spin. Also, such a set encourages very fit people to be elected at least once.
In this research, the Roulette Wheel Selection (RWS) method is used based on the cost. In this method, parent selection is done regarding the uniform probability density function (Pi) of individuals (Do and Nguyen, 2007, Montes et al., 2004).
Assume  is a sample random variable related to selected parents, and npop is the number of the initial population. One of the following equations can be used as a probability density function (Pi):
@(21)
@(22)
@(23)
where C: cost of individuals; β: selection pressure (positive number); : arbitrary small number. If β = 0, the probability of individual selection is equal; and if β→∞, just the best individual is chosen. In this work, the value of β is selected as an adaptive parameter in each iteration. The steps of the RWS method are as follows:
i)@
ii)@
iii)@
The arithmetic crossover procedure is implemented on the crossover of real numbers. The generation rate of mutated number is according to the normal (Gaussian) or the Cauchy distributions (Chellapilla, 1998, Rudolph, 1997).
In order to decrease the  and increase the for improving the natural circulation also, decrease the power peaking factor for power flattening, and increase the effective multiplication coefficient at cold and clean condition for increasing the excess reactivity of the core, in this paper, a cost function (objective function) has been designed and used as follows:
@(24)
Indeed, above cost function has been chosen based on the safety and fuel management viewpoints. Also, values of  are small and in order to increase its effect in the cost function, inlet and outlet velocity difference has been chosen as:.
In this paper, regarding the parameters used in the cost function, GA takes the values of system inputs (inner-radius) and outputs (effective multiplication factor, power peaking factor,  and ). Then, the best value of the inner-radius, based on minimization the cost function (24), is selected in each iteration. This procedure is repeated until the cost (objective) function is converged or termination criteria are achieved.
In order to analyze the performance of the genetic algorithm, a parameter called the Number of Function Evaluation (NFE) is considered. Using this parameter, we can examine the performance of the algorithm in reaching the optimal answer. Fig. 14 shows that with increasing the NFE, the value of the expense function decreases, which expresses the efficiency and accuracy of the function of the presented genetic algorithm.
ll-size image
Fig. 14. Changes in the cost function in terms of the number of function evaluation.
For this cost function, optimal internal radius, the effective multiplication factor, power peaking factor,  and have been generated and presented in Table 7.
Table 7. Optimal internal radius and related parameters derived from the genetic algorithm.
5.1. Optimal design of the annular fuel assembly and validation
In this section, using the results obtained from the GA in the previous section, we re-designed a new annular fuel with an optimal internal radius.
Characteristics of optimal designed dual cooled annular fuel rods with 3 mm distance between gap to gap of two fuel rods are provided in Table 8.
In order to validate the designed artificial neural network and genetic algorithm, effective multiplication factor, power peaking factor,  and  are calculated in optimal geometry using neutronics and Thermal-hydraulic simulations, as described in the previous section. The results of the Optimal Annular Fuel Assembly are presented in Table 9.
Table 9. The results of neutronics and Thermal-hydraulic simulations for optimal fuel assembly.
Comparing Table 7 with Table 9 confirms that neutronics and natural circulation parameters in optimal geometry derived from neutronics and Thermal-hydraulic simulations agree with these parameters obtained from GA very well, with absolute errors: 0.7 × 10-4, 5.6 × 10-4, 2 × 10-4 and 9 × 10-5 for effective multiplication coefficient, power peaking factor,  @ and @, respectively. This indicates the validity of the designed artificial neural network and genetic algorithm.
<Section>6. Comparison of the presented optimal NuScale with conventional NuScale</Section>
In this section, comparison of the calculated and obtained Thermal- hydraulic and neutronics parameters for the presented optimal NuScale and conventional NuScale reactor is presented. Indeed, to Compare the designed optimal NuScale with conventional NuScale, both of these reactors were simulated using neutronics and CFD codes under equal thermal power and coolant mass flow rate conditions. Then, their comparison has been carried out in terms of the maximum temperature of the fuel and Pressure drop in normal operation conditions, Departure from Nucleate Boiling Ratio (DNBR) as safety margin, effective multiplication coefficient, power peaking factor and natural circulation parameters.
6.1. Axial distribution of fuel temperature in normal operation conditions
To compare the maximum fuel temperature of these two kinds of NuScale reactors in normal operation conditions, the axial variation of fuel temperature is required that is given in Fig. 15. It is observed that at equal conditions, the maximum fuel temperature of a conventional NuScale reactor is much higher than that of the optimal NuScale reactor. The maximum fuel temperature of the conventional NuScale is calculated as 635 [K] and the optimized NuScale maximum Fuel Temperature is calculated as 575 [K].
Fig. 15. axial fuel temperature distribution.
Some additional detail about the thermal model such as the gas gap condition between annular fuel pellet and the inner/outer cladding tubes and cladding properties has been given in Tables 10 & 11 as follows:
Table 10. Properties of clad.
Also, cladding is assumed a zirconium alloy.
6.2. Pressure drop
To compare the pressure drop of these two reactors, their Pressure drop behavior has been presented as Fig. 16. It can be seen that in the equal working conditions, the pressure drop along the axial length of the conventional NuScale reactor is much more than pressure drop of presented optimal NuScale reactor. Therefore, it can be concluded that in the presented optimal NuScale reactor with dual cooled annular fuel, natural circulation properties have been improved by decreasing the pressure drop compare to the conventional NuScale reactor.
Fig. 16. Comparison of Pressure drop distribution along the axial length of the reactor.
Indeed, decreasing the pressure drop leads to reduction of the velocity-gradient and therefore, shear stress decreases which implies that the fluid motion will be easier throughout the channel. So, natural circulation improves in the optimal NuScale reactor with dual cooled annular fuel. It can be seen that there are two different slopes in the conventional NuScale pressure drop curve, because, velocity distributions throughout the riser and outer channel (reactor core) for solid fuel are different. Indeed, the velocity of the fluid in inlet and riser is constant but in outer channel (reactor core), it has a distribution. In riser and inlet fluid no heat added to the fluid, hence, velocity is constant, but, in the outer channel that placed in the core, heat adds to the fluid, therefore, velocity has a distribution and velocity-gradient in the core is large and significant compare to the riser. Therefore, pressure drop in the reactor core differs with pressure drop in the riser. Also, due to the more velocity-gradient in the core, slope of the pressure drop in the reactor core is more than slope of the pressure drop in the riser.
6.3. Departure from nucleate boiling ratio (DNBR)
The MDNBR for the inner and outer channels of presented optimal NuScale and outer channel of conventional NuScale was calculated to determining the safety criteria.
This parameter, as important nuclear safety factor, limits the core heat flux to prevent entering the film boiling region. The following formula was used to calculate DNBR (Ebrahimian and Ansarifar, 2016):
@(25)
Actual heat flux of the fuel rod () obtained from Fluent and the following correlation by Jens and Lottes (Jens and Lottes, 1951) for critical heat flux () have been applied.
@(26)
where C and m are pressure-dependent parameters that are 0.611 and 0.467, respectively, and for the presented model, G is the coolant mass flux in lb/hr-ft2 that is obtained from the CFD code for the outer and inner channels, and ΔTsub is the difference between the saturated and local temperatures in 0F.
To compare these two kinds of NuScale reactors’ power, their DNBR behavior is achieved as shown in Fig. 17.
Fig. 17. The variation of DNBR.
It can be seen that increasing the cross-sectional area of the inner channel leads to an increase in the internal channel mass flux; therefore, the inner channel MDNBR for the optimized NuScale increases compare to the MDNBR for the conventional NuScale. In addition, the increased outer diameter in the desired optimal NuScale reduces outer channel mass flux, which reduces the critical heat flux () in the outer channel (outer surface of annular fuel) and leads to reduction in the outer channel MDNBR for the optimized NuScale, while, due to the outer surface increasing in optimal NuScale, actual heat flux of the fuel rod () reduces which leads to increase in the outer channel MDNBR for the optimized NuScale. Therefore, DNBR behavior for outside of annular fuel in the presented optimal NuScale is very similar to the DNBR behavior for conventional fuel as shown in the Fig. 17. However, MDNBR for outside of annular fuel in the presented optimal NuScale is more than MDNBR for the conventional NuScale.
6.4. Effective multiplication coefficient ( and power peaking factor (Pq)
To compare the  and Pq of these two NuScale reactors in normal operation conditions, the values of these parameters are required and they have been given in Table 5, Table 9. It can be seen that in the equal working conditions,  and Pq of the conventional NuScale reactor are less and more than those of the presented optimal NuScale reactor, respectively. Indeed, presented optimal geometry increases the core effective multiplication coefficient (Keff) at cold and clean condition which leads to increase in the excess reactivity of the core which increases the operation cycle without refueling, which is useful from fuel management viewpoint. Also, presented optimal design reduces total power peaking factor (Pq) which leads to more power-flattening which is very important from safety viewpoint.
6.5. Natural circulation parameters
To compare the  and  of these two reactors in normal operation conditions, the value of these parameters is required which is given in Table 6, Table 9. It can be seen that in equal working conditions,  and  of conventional NuScale reactor are more than those of presented optimal NuScale reactor. Therefore, it can be concluded that in the presented optimal NuScale reactor with dual cooled annular fuel, natural circulation properties have been improved by decreasing the , compare to the conventional NuScale reactor.
<Section>7. Conclusion</Section>
For the first time, in this paper an optimal SMR Core with externally and internally Dual Cooled Annular Fuel has been designed and presented to improve the current performance level of these types of reactors. Indeed, considering the advantages of the dual-cooled annular fuel, for the first time, dual cooled annular fuel in the SMRs has been considered and studied thoroughly. In this paper, neutronics and natural circulation parameters were calculated for an SMR with dual cooled annular fuel with changes of the internal radius. By analyzing the fuel internal radius changes in a specific range via the neutronics and computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulation codes, the effects of effective multiplication coefficient, power peaking factor and natural circulation parameters were investigated.
Regarding the NuScale reactor as the reference SMR of a new type passive integral PWR, the reactor core geometry was simulated. Also, effective multiplication coefficient, power peaking factor,  and  in the new designed NuScale Reactor with Dual Cooled Annular Fuel were calculated by considering changes of the inner-radius. At first, with annular fuel (internally and externally cooled) under clean and cold and full power conditions with deterministic cell and core neutronics calculation codes (WIMS and CITATION), the designed SMR core was modeled for the different internal radiuses with same distance gap to gap of fuel rod and effective multiplication coefficient and power peaking factor were calculated. Then, Thermal-hydraulic calculations have been done by simulation of different radius of the fuel rod via Fluent as a CFD code and then  and  were obtained.
comparison between annular fuel with different inner radius showed that an increase in inner radius leads to increase in the core effective multiplication coefficient, reduction in total power peaking factor and reduction in the value of  and .
For the purpose of data fitting, an artificial neural network was trained in MATLAB using the observed data. The input consists of different internal radius yields to output consisting effective multiplication coefficient, power peaking factor,  and . Then, the optimal geometry of radial fuel was determined using the neural network by implementing the genetic algorithms (GA). In the optimization process, it has been shown that having an internal radius of 0.467 (cm) provides an optimal geometry. Also, validation of the designed artificial neural network and the genetic algorithm has been done using neutronics and Thermal-hydraulic calculations which show that there is an acceptable convergence between the results of the genetic algorithm and the neutronics and Thermal-hydraulic calculations which indicates the authenticity of the neural network and the calculation of the genetic algorithm.
Finally, using simulation of the optimal geometry and conventional geometry in the hot channel by neutronics and CFD simulation codes, core effective multiplication coefficient, power peaking factor, , , DNB, pressure drop and fuel temperature calculations were performed and compared with conventional NuScale that does not use this kind of fuel.
One of the most important results of the analysis is that optimal dual cooled annular fuel in the presented SMR has a sufficient margin for the departure from nucleate boiling (DNB) and fuel pellet temperature relative to the solid fuel which is used in the conventional SMRs. Indeed, fuel center temperature of conventional SMR is much more than that of presented optimal SMR. Also, presented optimal geometry increases the core effective multiplication coefficient (Keff) at cold and clean condition which leads to increase in the excess reactivity of the core which increases the operation cycle without refueling and it is useful from fuel management viewpoint. Also, presented optimal design reduces total power peaking factor (Pq) which leads to more power-flattening and improves natural circulation parameters by decreasing the Pressure drop and compare to the conventional SMR.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
M. Zaidabadi Nejad: Writing - original draft, Software, Validation, Investigation. G.R. Ansarifar: Conceptualization, Methodology, Visualization, Supervision, Writing - review & editing.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>References</Section>
Bujas, 1975
Bujas R.G, 1975, Annular Fuel Element for High-Temperature Reactors, U.S patent # 3928132.
Google Scholar
Chellapilla, 1998
K. Chellapilla
Combining mutation operators in evolutionary programming
IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., 2 (3) (1998), pp. 91-96
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Do and Nguyen, 2007
B.Q. Do, L.P. Nguyen
Application of a genetic algorithm to the fuel reloads optimization for a research reactor
Appl. Math. Comput., 187 (2) (2007), pp. 977-988
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Donnelly, 1986
J. Donnelly, WIMS-CRNL: A user's manual for the Chalk River version of WIMS, 1986.
Google Scholar
Ebrahimian and Ansarifar, 2016
M. Ebrahimian, G.R. Ansarifar
Investigation of the nano fluid effects on heat transfer characteristics in nuclear reactors with dual cooled annular fuel using CFD (Computational Fluid Dynamics) modeling
Energy, 98 (2016), pp. 1-14
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fowler and Vondy, 1969
T. Fowler, D. Vondy
Nuclear Reactor Core Analysis Code: Citation
Oak Ridge National Lab, Tenn (1969)
Google Scholar
Ghadimi and Paselar, 2012
P. Ghadimi, Bandari H. Paselar
Determination of the heave and pitch motions of a floating cylinder by the analytical solution of its diffraction problem and examination of the effects of geometric parameters on its dynamics in regular waves
Int. J. Appl. Math. Res., 1 (4) (2012)
Google Scholar
Hejzlar et al., 2001
P. Hejzlar, M.J. Driscoll, M.S. Kazimi
High Performance Annular Fuel for Pressurized Water Reactors
Trans. Am. Nucl. Soc., 84 (2001), p. 192
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ingersoll et al., 2014
D.T. Ingersoll, Z.J. Houghton, B. Brommb, C. Desportes
NuScale small modular reactor for Co-generation of electricity and water
Desalination, 340 (2014), pp. 84-93
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
International Atomic Energy Agency, 2007
International Atomic Energy Agency
Status of Small Reactor Designs without
Onsite Refuelling (2007)
Google Scholar
International Atomic Energy Agency, 2009
International Atomic Energy Agency
Passive Safety Systems and Natural Circulation in Water Cooled Nuclear
Power Plants (2009)
Google Scholar
International Atomic Energy Agency, 2005
International Atomic Energy Agency, 2005, Natural circulation in water cooled nuclear power plants.
Google Scholar
International Atomic Energy Association, 2011
International Atomic Energy Association
Status of Small and
Medium Sized Reactors (2011)
Google Scholar
Jens and Lottes, 1951
W. Jens, P. Lottes
Analysis of Heat Transfer, Burnout, Pressure Drop and Density Date For High-Pressure Water
Argonne National Lab (1951)
Google Scholar
Kazimi, 2001
M.S. Kazimi
High Performance Fuel Design for Next Generation PWRs
(1st Quarterly,), MIT, MIT-NFC-PR-001 (2001)
Google Scholar
Kazimi et al., 2004
M.S. Kazimi., D, Feng., Y, Yuan., P, Hejzlar., H, Feinroth., B, Hao., E. J., Lahoda., H, Hamilton., “The Design and Manufacturing of Annular Fuel for High Power Density and Improved Safety in PWRs“, Florida: International Meeting on LWR Fuel Performance, September 19-22, 2004.
Google Scholar
Kim et al., 2002b
Kim H.T, No H.C and Kazimi M.S, Safety Analysis of the Annular Fuel by RELAP5/MOD3.2y, MIT-NFC-TR-038, Jan, 2002b.
Google Scholar
Kim et al., 2002a
H.T. Kim, P. Hejzlar, NO H.C, P. Hejzlar, M.S. Kazimi
Performance of internally and externally cooled annular fuel in loss of coolant accident
International Congress on Advanced Nuclear Power Plants, Hollywood, Florida, June 9-13 (2002)
Google Scholar
Lamarsh, 2001
LAMARSH T.R., Introduction to Nuclear Engineering, 2001, Polytechnic Institute of New York.
Google Scholar
Launder and Spalding, 1972
B. Launder, D. Spalding
Lectures in mathematical models of turbulence (Booklectures in mathematical models of turbulence.)
Academic Press, Inc, London (1972), p. 174
(London), Ltd
Google Scholar
Li et al., 2012
T. Li, T.W. Kim, Zhang, Y. Revankar, T. Sh, W. Tian, G.H. Su, S. Qiu
MELCOR severe accident analysis for a natural circulation small modular reactor
Progr. Nuclear Energy, 100 (2012), pp. 197-208
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Meldrum, 1980
C.M. Meldrum
Economics Evaluation of Annular Fuels for PWRs
Trans. Am. Nucl. Soc., 35 (1980), p. 78
Google Scholar
Montes et al., 2004
J.L. Montes, J.J. Ortiz, I. Requena, R. Perusquía
Searching for full power control rod patterns in a boiling water reactor using genetic algorithms
Ann. Nuclear Energy, 31 (16) (2004), pp. 1939-1954
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Nuclear Energy Association, 2011
Nuclear Energy Association, June 2011. Current Status, Technical Feasibility and Economics of Small Modular Reactors.
Google Scholar
Nuclear Regulation Committee, 2015
Nuclear Regulation Committee. 2015, Small Modular Reactors.
Google Scholar
NuScale Standard Plant Design Certification Application, 2014
NuScale Standard Plant Design Certification Application, 2014, Critical Heat Flux Test Program Technical Report, NuScale Power, LLC.
Google Scholar
NuScale, 2018
NuScale Standard Plant Design Certification Application, Chapter Four, 2018, NuScale Power LLC.
Google Scholar
Ravnik, 1990
Ravnik M., Nuclear Safety Parameters of Mixed TRIGA Cores, 1990, In Proceedings of the Workshop on Reactor Physics Calculations for Applications in Nuclear Technology, Trieste.
Google Scholar
Rudolph, 1997
G. Rudolph
Local convergence rates of simple evolutionary algorithms with Cauchy mutations
IEEE Trans. Evol. Comput., 1 (4) (1997), pp. 249-258
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Simon, 2013
D. Simon
Evolutionary Optimization Algorithms
John Wiley & Sons (2013)
Google Scholar
Todreas and Kazimi, 2011
N.E. Todreas, M.S. Kazimi
Nuclear Systems: Thermal-hydraulic Fundamentals
CRC Press (2011)
Google Scholar
Yang, 2014
X.-S. Yang
Nature-inspired Optimization Algorithms
Elsevier (2014)
Google Scholar
Zaidabadi et al., 2017
M. Zaidabadi, G.R. Ansarifar, M.H. Esteki
Thermal-hydraulic analysis of VVER-1000 nuclear reactor with dual-cooled annular fuel using K–w SST Turbulence model
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 101 (2017), pp. 118-127
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhu et al., 2013
H. Zhu, X. Yang, H. Gong, S.H. Jiang
Theoretical and experimental study on single-phase natural circulation under inclined conditions
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 50 (3) (2013), pp. 304-313
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar