<title>Nuclear analysis of the Water cooled lithium lead DEMO reactor</title>
<author>1,F.Moro,2,A.Colangeli,3,A.Del Nevo,3,D.Flammini,4,G.Mariano,5,E.Martelli,6,R.Mozzillo,7,S.Noce,8,R.Villari</author>
<Affiliation>1, ENEA, Department of Fusion and Nuclear Safety Technology, I-00044, Frascati, Rome, Italy;2,Sapienza University of Rome, Department of Basic and Applied Sciences for Engineering, Rome 00161, Italy;3,ENEA, Department of Fusion and Nuclear Safety Technology, 40032, Camugnano, Bologna, Italy;4,Sapienza University of Rome, Department of Astronautical, Electrical and Energy Engineering, 00186, Roma, Italy;5,CREATE Consortium, Federico II University of Naples, Naples, 80125, Italy;6,Tor Vergata University of Rome, Industrial Engineering Department, Rome, 00133, Italy</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Fusion Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.fusengdes.2020.111833</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0920379620303811</URL>
Nuclear analysis of the Water cooled lithium lead DEMO reactor
F.Moro,A.Colangeli,A.Del Nevo,D.Flammini,G.Mariano,E.Martelli,R.Mozzillo,S.Noce,8,R.Villari
ENEA, Department of Fusion and Nuclear Safety Technology, I-00044, Frascati, Rome, Italy
Sapienza University of Rome, Department of Basic and Applied Sciences for Engineering, Rome 00161, Italy
ENEA, Department of Fusion and Nuclear Safety Technology, 40032, Camugnano, Bologna, Italy
Sapienza University of Rome, Department of Astronautical, Electrical and Energy Engineering, 00186, Roma, Italy
CREATE Consortium, Federico II University of Naples, Naples, 80125, Italy
Tor Vergata University of Rome, Industrial Engineering Department, Rome, 00133, Italy
<Section>Highlights</Section>
The WCLL DEMO MCNP model integrating a semi-heterogeneous breeding blanket description has been developed.
The WCLL DEMO nuclear performances in terms of shielding capabilities and tritium self-sufficiency have been assessed.
Results highlights that the WCLL DEMO satisfies the design targets.
The impact of the FW water conditions on the reactor nuclear performances has been evaluated.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
In the frame of the EUROfusion roadmap, the development of a conceptual design for the Demonstration Fusion Power Reactor (DEMO), beyond ITER, is a key issue. The DEMO reactor shall guarantee the tritium self-sufficiency, generate electricity and operate as a test facility for the fusion power plant relevant technologies, such as the breeding blanket (BB). The Water Cooled Lithium Lead (WCLL) concept has been chosen as a candidate for the DEMO BB: it relies on liquid Lithium Lead as breeder and neutron multiplier, Eurofer as structural material and pressurized water as coolant.
A detailed MCNP model of the latest WCLL BB layout has been generated and integrated in the DEMO MCNP generic model suitably designed for neutronic analyses. Three-dimensional neutron and gamma transport simulations have been carried out by means the MCNP Monte Carlo code and JEFF nuclear data libraries in order to assess the WCLL-DEMO performances in terms of tritium self-sufficiency and shielding effectiveness to protect the vacuum vessel and the toroidal field coils. Moreover, the impact on the Tritium production of the water content in the first wall (FW) and the effect of its pressure/temperature has been addressed.
The outcomes of the present study provide guidelines for the optimization of the WCLL DEMO reactor nuclear performances through the assessment of the loads on sensitive components and the estimation of its potential tritium generation capabilities.
Keywords:DEMO;WCLL;Breeding blanket;Neutronics;Nuclear analysis;MCNP
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The neutronic analyses on the WCLL breeding blanket are devoted to the assessment of the nuclear performances of the blanket concept present design, verifying its compliancy with the design targets both in terms of tritium self-sufficiency and shielding performances [1]. The analyses have been performed on the latest design of the SMS (Single Module Segment) WCLL DEMO concept, that is presently under development: the outcomes of the present study provide guidelines for the optimization of the breeding blanket structure and its future development.
The TBR assessment is a key issue to verify the self-sufficiency of a WCLL DEMO reactor: according to the recommendations, the total TBR should be greater than 1.10 to guarantee the necessary tritium generation to sustain the reactor, considering the impact of the in-vessel components that reduce the tritium generation (e.g. penetrations for diagnostic or plasma heating systems) and the losses.
The estimation of the nuclear loads provides data for the thermo-mechanical analyses and allows the evaluation of the breeding blanket and manifold/back supporting structure (BSS) shielding capabilities, verifying their compliancy with the recommended requirements on the Vacuum Vessel (VV) and Toroidal Field Coils (TFC). The blanket and manifold/BSS system should ensure that the damage on Vacuum Vessel (VV) steel, cumulated over DEMO lifetime (equivalent to 6 FPY), is below 2.75 dpa, in order to prevent the degradation of the stainless-steel properties (fracture toughness is reduced by no more than 30 %). Furthermore, the He concentration should be below 1 appm in reweldable zones. The protection of the superconductive TFC is one of the most critical issues in the design of the breeding blanket: different nuclear quantities are estimated in order to assess the effect of the radiation streaming from the plasma on the magnets. In particular, the evaluation of the fast neutron fluence on the superconductor coils (109 n/cm2/s) and the estimation of the nuclear heating due to neutrons and gammas deposited on the winding pack (<50 W/m3), provide a reliable verification of the WCLL breeding blanket shielding efficiency. The above-mentioned nuclear responses have been assessed through three-dimensional coupled neutron and gamma transport simulations by means of the MCNP5v1.6 Monte Carlo code [2] and the Joint Evaluated Fusion File JEFF 3.3 nuclear data libraries [3].
<Section>2. The WCLL Breeding Blanket: structure and MCNP modeling</Section>
The present WCLL BB design [4] is based, as for on Single-Module-Segment (SMS) concept where a basic breeding unit (BU), is replicated in Inboard and Outboard along the poloidal direction. The single BU (Fig. 1) includes the FW and side walls, top and bottom caps, internal stiffening and baffle plates, BSS, cooling pipes, LiPb manifolds and water manifolds for FW and breeding zone cooling.
Fig. 1
Fig. 1. WCLL BU: perspective view of the Outboard breeding unit, showing the inner cooling pipes layout.
Considering the complexity of the BU cooling pipes assembly, the WCLL BB MCNP modeling approach has been based on the segmentation of the outboard BB into radial sectors (Fig. 2) with specifically defined material mixture (Table 1). It’s ought to be stressed that the water density used in the definition of the materials is 0.866 g/cm3, corresponding to about 31 bar and 200 °C.
Fig. 2
Fig. 2. WCLL DEMO MCNP model: poloidal section showing the Inboard and Outboard breeding blanket (top) and toroidal section along the equatorial plane (bottom).
Table 1. radial segmentation of the SMS WCLL breeding blanket MCNP model with materials volume percentage for each layer.
The pre-processing and simplification of the layered WCLL BB CAD model has been performed by means of the 3D modeling software Ansys SpaceClaim 2019 [5] in order to generate a CAD model suitable for neutronic analyses. Successively the simplified WCLL BB model has been converted into the equivalent MCNP geometrical representation by means of the CAD-to-MCNP interface SuperMC [6] and manually integrated into the 2017 DEMO 1 generic MCNP model. The obtained WCLL DEMO MCNP model is shown in Fig. 2: the reduced radial extension of the inboard module has been handled through the decrease of the toroidal extension of the innermost sector of the breeding zone, thus, ideally, keeping the distance between the FW and the cooling channels fixed.
The DEMO reactor baseline layout used in the present studies is the EU DEMO1 2017 reference configuration model representing a 11.25° toroidal sector of the tokamak [7], with plasma parameters shown in Table 2.
Table 2. : main parameters of the DEMO baseline configuration.
<Section>3. Nuclear analyses</Section>
The MCNP DEMO model integrating the WCLL blanket has been used to assess the nuclear performances of the WCLL DEMO, to verify its shielding capability to protect the TFC and the tritium self-sufficiency of the machine. Relevant nuclear responses, such as the neutron flux, nuclear heating, damage and He-production radial profiles have been assessed on the equatorial mid plane. Results have been normalized to 1998 MW fusion power (neutron yield: 7.095 × 1020 n/s), according to the plasma parameters specified in Table 2. The simulations have been performed using standard MCNP cell-based (F4, F6, F1, F2 tallies) and mesh tallies (FMESH tally) with proper multiplier to calculate the nuclear quantities of interest for the WCLL design development, performances assessment and verification of design requirements [8,9].
3.1. Tritium breeding ratio
The assessment of the tritium breeding ratio (TBR) has been performed for each region of the BB that contributes to the Tritium generation (i.e. the BU sectors and the LiPb manifolds). Both the neutron capture reactions on 6Li and 7Li isotopes have been considered. The resulting total TBR for this configuration is 1.118, thus the present design target for Tritium self-sufficiency is satisfied: 94.4 % of the tritium is produced in the breeding zone, while the residual portion is generated in the manifold zone. The percentage contribution to the total TBR from each layer of the BB/LiPb manifold is shown in Fig. 3: most of the Tritium is generated in the outermost layer of the breeding zone (about 22 % of the total amount of Tritium), however, the contribution from the LiPb manifold is essential in reaching the 1.1 design target.
Fig. 3
Fig. 3. Percentage contributions to the total TBR from each layer of the breeding zone and LiPb manifolds. The layers numbering refers to the radial segmentation described in Table 1.
The poloidal distribution of the TPR (t/cm3/s) has been estimated for inboard and outboard poloidal sectors defined by specific surfaces (i.e.: using as separation surfaces the planes that defined the blanket modules in the multi-module configuration [10], Fig. 4). The highest TPR is obtained in the equatorial zone, where it reaches 1.07 × 1012 Tritium atoms/cm3/s in the inboard segment #5 and 9.26 × 1011 Tritium atoms/cm3/s in the outboard segment #5.
Fig. 4
Fig. 4. Poloidal distribution of the TPR.
3.2. Nuclear power deposition
The nuclear power deposition due to neutrons and secondary gammas in the WCLL blanket components is provided in Table 3.
Table 3. : Nuclear power deposition in the WCLL BB components.
About 81 % of the total nuclear power (1739.24 MW) is deposited in the breeding blanket/manifold/BSS system (74.8 % in the breeding zone). Moreover, the breakdown of the nuclear power distribution in the inboard and outboard blanket segments shows that most of the power is deposited in the outboard (70.32 %).
3.3. Shielding performances
The shielding performances of the WCLL BB have been assessed through the evaluation of the neutron flux, nuclear heating, dpa and He-production in steel components along the inboard and outboard midplane.
The total and fast (E > 100 keV) neutron fluxes radial profiles are shown in Fig. 5 for both the inboard and outboard. The total neutron fluxes at the inboard and outboard W armour are 5.13 × 1014 n/cm2/s and 5.5 × 1014 n/cm2/s, respectively. In inboard, the blanket/manifold system provides an attenuation of more than two orders of magnitudes to the VV inner shell and the neutron flux further decreases of three orders of magnitude across the VV, being 1.17 × 109 n/cm2/s (total), and 7.93 × 108 n/cm2/s (fast) on the TFC. With respect to the previous analyses performed on the 2015 DEMO1 baseline model [11], the neutron fluxes at the TFC are significantly higher because of the reduced inboard radial extension of the space available for the blanket system integration; however, the shielding capability of the WCLL BB ensure that the 109 n/cm2/s design limit for the fast neutron flux on the TFC is fully satisfied.
Fig. 5
Fig. 5. Radial profile of the total (blue) and fast (red) neutron flux at the equatorial plane for the inboard (upper panel) and outboard (lower panel) midplane. The dotted red line indicates the design target for the fast neutron flux on the TFC (109 n/cm2/s). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
As far as the outboard is concerned, the larger BB radial extension provides an attenuation of the neutron flux across the blanket/manifold system of about 3 orders of magnitude. The radial profiles of the nuclear heating density evaluated on in Eurofer and LiPb (blanket) and SS316 L (Vacuum Vessel and TFC) is shown in Fig. 6 for the both the inboard and outboard sectors.
Fig. 6
Fig. 6. Nuclear heating radial profile in W armour, Eurofer, LiPb and SS316 L assessed at the equatorial plane for the inboard (upper panel) and outboard (lower panel). The dotted red line indicates the design target on the TFC (5 × 10−5 W/cm3). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
As far as the inboard is concerned, the maximum values are 25.7 W/cm3 on W armour and 8.8 W/cm3 on Eurofer in the FW and 0.046 W/cm3 on the VV inner shell SS316 L. In the TF coil, the maximum nuclear heating density is 1.73 × 10−5 W/cm3: even with a consistent reduction of the BB inboard radial extension, the design limit of 5 × 10−5 W/cm3 is satisfied thus the shielding capabilities of the BB system ensure sufficient protection of the TF coil. For the outboard segment, the heat load on the W armour is 28.4 W/cm3, while the higher values assessed for the FW Eurofer and SS316 L VV inner shell are 9.59 W/cm3 and 1.66 × 10-2 W/cm3 respectively.
The radiation damage has been assessed in terms of dpa per FPY (dpa/FPY) produced in the structural steel of the blanket (Eurofer) and in the Vacuum Vessel SS316 L (Fig. 7). In inboard, the maximum damage assessed for the Eurofer FW is 8.1 dpa/FPY and it decreases to 8.67 × 10−3 dpa/FPY in the SS316 L VV inner shell. As far as the outboard is concerned, the same maximum values are 9.5 dpa/FPY at the FW and 2.46 × 10−3 dpa/FPY at the VV. Considering the design limit of 2.75 dpa integrated over 6 FPY, the cumulated damages over the DEMO lifetime for the VV inner shell are 0.059 dpa and 0.015 dpa in inboard and outboard respectively: in both cases the design target limit is fulfilled.
Fig. 7
Fig. 7. Radial profile of the damage on Eurofer (up to the manifolds) and SS-316, evaluated in the inboard (upper panel and outboard (lower panel) midplane.
The aim of the Helium production calculations is to verify that the gas generated at locations where re-welding of steel components is required, is lower than 1 appm at the end of DEMO lifetime [12]: the most critical locations for the steel re-weldability are the vessel zones (e.g. close to vessel ports), thus the Helium production has been assessed in terms of appm per FPY (appm/FPY) produced in the structural steel of the blanket (Eurofer) and in the SS316 L steel of the VV (Fig. 8).
Fig. 8
Fig. 8. Radial profile of the He production on Eurofer (up to the manifolds) and SS-316, evaluated in the inboard (upper panel and outboard (lower panel) midplane.
In inboard, the He-production in the FW Eurofer is 94 appm/FPY, it decreases to 8.08 × 10−2 appm/FPY in the VV inner shell, and it’s 1.21 × 10-6 appm/FPY on TFC. As far as the outboard module is concerned, the maximum in FW Eurofer is 114 appm/FPY and in VV inner shell is 2.43 × 10−2 appm/FPY. Integrating the He-production results for the VV over the foreseen 6 FPY lifetime, the maximum cumulated He-production is 0.48 appm for the inboard and 0.24 for the outboard: in both cases the limit of 1 appm is fulfilled. Both the He production and nuclear heating radial profiles show a peak behind the LiPb manifold that is due to the high amount of water that is present in the water manifolds (about 86 % in volume). This is due to the water moderation effect that induces a softer neutron spectrum: as a consequence, the He-production is enhanced in nearby zone through the reactions with 10B and, at the same time, the heat load increases, because of higher gamma generation in the adjacent steel.
3.4. Water in PWR conditions and its distribution in the FW: impact on the WCLL DEMO performances
In the actual DEMO reactor, the water pressure and temperature status can be assumed to be close to the PWR ones (pressure 15.5 MPa, temperature around 275 °C). In order to accurately represent these conditions, the WCLL DEMO MCNP model has been updated with the usage of water at 0.725 g/cm3 in each radial sector. The obtained model has been employed to evaluate the impact of the reduced water density on the WCLL BB performances, both in terms of tritium breeding and shielding capability.
As far as the tritium production is concerned, the total TBR assessed with the updated model is 1.119: with respect to the previous cases analyzed (TBR = 1.118), the increment due to the reduced the water density is less than 0.1 %. Fig. 9 shows the percentage contribution to the total TBR of each layer of the BB/Manifold system for both the water densities considered in the present study.
Fig. 9
Fig. 9. Percentage contributions to the total TBR from each layer of the breeding zone and LiPb manifolds: comparison of the results for different water densities. The layers numbering refers to the radial segmentation described in Table 1.
On one hand, the water in PWR conditions has a reduced moderation effect on the neutron impinging on the first blanket layers, resulting in a drop on their capture probability on the Lithium nuclei; on the other hand, this effect is counterbalanced by the higher amount of neutrons that can reach the outer blanket layers, thus increasing the Tritium generation in these areas. The cumulative effect is a slight increase in the total TBR mainly due to the contribution from the fifth layers outwards. Moreover, the behavior of the neutron flux, heat load, damage and He production radial profiles along the inboard and outboard midplane is almost unchanged from the FW up to the LiPb manifolds, while the effect of the lower density water becomes significant from the water manifolds up to the TFC, resulting in a general increase of the nuclear responses, that remain, however, well below the design limits.
The outcome of the nuclear heating calculations has been used as input for the thermo-hydraulic analyses: the results highlighted that the FW can be sufficiently cooled even reducing the water channels of each BU from 10 (as in the present model), to 6. The impact of this improvement on the TBR has been assessed modifying the WCLL BB MCNP model accordingly: the content of water in the second layer of the FW has been reduced from 50.85 % to 30.51 % (reduction of 40 % of water volume), while the content of Eurofer has been increased from 48.88 % to 69.22 %. The total TBR evaluated using this configuration is 1.138, thus the effect of the FW water content on the neutron capture on Lithium in the breeding zone is significant [13]. The water in the FW has a double effect: it moderates the neutrons enhancing the probability that they could interact with the 6Li nuclei (e.g. the neutron absorption cross section on 6Li increases with the reduction of the incident neutron energy) and, on the other hand, it reduces the neutron streaming in the inner layers of the breeding zone. From a strictly physical point of view, the optimal amount of water can be determined through a correct balance of these two phenomena, but the engineering constraints, in terms of heat removal from the FW, have to be considered as driving criteria in the design of the cooling channels.
<Section>4. Conclusions</Section>
The analyses performed have been carried out on the latest SMS WCLL DEMO concept using a quasi-heterogeneous approach for the MCNP modeling of the BB. The assessment of the WCLL DEMO nuclear performances highlights that the actual design targets, both in terms of Tritium self-sufficiency and shielding capabilities, are satisfied. Future activities will be dedicated to the nuclear analysis of a fully heterogenous WCLL DEMO. Additional studies performed using water in PWR conditions shows a negligible impact on the TBR and a general increase of the nuclear responses in the area behind the LiPb manifold, without compromising the shielding efficiency of the BB/manifolds system. Moreover, a significant increase in the total TBR (1.138) has been observed removing 40 % of the water amount from the FW. It’s ought to be noted that, taking into account the margins for calculation uncertainties and incomplete DEMO models, the TBR design target has been recently set to TBR ≥ 1.15 [14]: further improvements in the WCLL blanket layout will be implemented, in order to satisfy the updated requirements.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
F. Moro: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation, Writing - original draft, Supervision. A. Colangeli: Visualization, Formal analysis. A. Del Nevo: Project administration, Funding acquisition. D. Flammini: Visualization, Writing - review & editing. G. Mariano: Formal analysis, Data curation, Software. E. Martelli: Visualization, Formal analysis. R. Mozzillo: Visualization, Formal analysis. S. Noce: Visualization, Formal analysis. R. Villari: Formal analysis, Writing - review & editing.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgments</Section>
This work has been carried out within the framework of the EUROfusion Consortium and has received funding from the Euratom research and training programme 2014-2018 and 2019-2020 under grant agreement No 633053. The views and opinions expressed herein do not necessarily reflect those of the European Commission.
<Section>References</Section>
[1]
U. Fischer, et al.
Neutronic performance issues of the breeding blanket options for the European DEMO fusion power plant
Fus. Eng. Des., 109-111 (2016), pp. 1458-1463
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[2]
X-5 Monte Carlo Team
MCNP - a General Monte Carlo N-ParticleTransportCode, Version 5.
Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico, USA (2003)
Google Scholar
[3]
JEFF3
3 Nuclear Data Library
http://www.oecd-nea.org/dbdata/jeff/jeff33/#neutron
Google Scholar
[4]
A. Del Nevo, et al.
Recent progress in developing a feasible and integrated conceptual design of the WCLL BB in EUROfusion project
Fus. Eng. Des., 146 (2019), pp. 1805-1809
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[5]
www.spaceclaim.com.
Google Scholar
[6]
Y. Wu, FDS Team
CAD-based interface programs for fusion neutron transport simulation
Fus. Eng. Des., 84 (2009), pp. 1987-1992
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[7]
C. Bachmann, et al.
Overview over DEMO design integration challenges and their impact on component design concepts
Fus. Eng. Des., 136 (2018), pp. 87-95
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[8]
U. Fischer, et al.
Neutronic analyses and tools development efforts in the European DEMO programme
Fus. Eng. Des., 89 (9-10) (2014), pp. 1880-1884
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[9]
U. Fischer, et al.
Methodological approach for DEMO neutronics in the European PPPT programme: tools, data and analyses
Fus. Eng. Des., 123 (2017), pp. 26-31
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[10]
F. Moro, et al.
Neutronic analyses in support of the WCLL DEMO design development
Fus. Eng. Des., 136 (2018), pp. 1260-1264
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[11]
S. Noce, et al.
Nuclear analysis of the single module segment WCLL DEMO
Fus. Eng. Des., 147 (2019), Article 111207
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
[12]
V. Barabash, et al.
Materials challenges for ITER – current status and future activities
J. Nucl. Mater., 367-370 (2007), pp. 21-32
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[13]
P. Chiovaro, et al.
Parametric study of the influence of First Wall cooling water on the Water cooled Lithium Lead Breeding Blanket nuclear response
Fus. Eng. Des., 146 (2019), pp. 2070-2073
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[14]
U. Fischer et al., Required, Achievable and Target TBR for the European DEMO, submitted to Fus. Eng. Des., this conference.
Google Scholar