<title>A preliminary study on concrete ablation during ex-vessel cooling in pre-flooded Westinghouse 3-loop NPP reactor cavity</title>
<author>1,HanbeeNa,2,Dong GuKang,3,SukyoungPak,4,Hee JoonLee</author>
<Affiliation>1,Department of Severe Accident and Risk Assessment, Korea Institute of Nuclear Safety, 62 Gwahak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34142, Daejeon, Republic of Korea;2,Department of Safety Analysis, Korea Institute of Nuclear Safety, 62 Gwahak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34142, Republic of Korea;3,Department of Operational Safety Analysis, University of Science and Technology, 217 Gajeong-ro Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34113, Republic of Korea;4,School of Mechanical Engineering, Kookmin University, Seoul, Republic of Korea</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107838</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454920305363</URL>
A preliminary study on concrete ablation during ex-vessel cooling in pre-flooded Westinghouse 3-loop NPP reactor cavity
HanbeeNa,Dong GuKang,SukyoungPak,Hee JoonLee
Department of Severe Accident and Risk Assessment, Korea Institute of Nuclear Safety, 62 Gwahak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34142, Daejeon, Republic of Korea
Department of Safety Analysis, Korea Institute of Nuclear Safety, 62 Gwahak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34142, Republic of Korea
Department of Operational Safety Analysis, University of Science and Technology, 217 Gajeong-ro Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34113, Republic of Korea
School of Mechanical Engineering, Kookmin University, Seoul, Republic of Korea
<Section>Highlights</Section>
An analytical model to evaluate the adequacy of ex-vessel cooling in pre-flooded condition is developed.
The model considers the melting of dry debris bed and the pyrolysis of concrete.
The results of the concrete ablation depth during ex-vessel cooling in Westinghouse 3-loop nuclear power plant are provided.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
We develop an analytical model about concrete ablation during ex-vessel cooling in a pre-flooded cavity. The model considers the melting of dry debris bed, the formation of crust, the growth of crust and the thermal ablation of concrete. This model can obtain concrete ablation depth during ex-vessel cooling. It is evaluated the adequacy of ex-vessel cooling in the pre-flooded reactor cavity of Westinghouse 3-loop nuclear power plants. If the debris bed is formed only in the zone directly below the reactor vessel narrowly and thickly, the characteristic of the debris bed should be like POMECO BED-5 and the pressure should be 2 bar or above to keep the integrity of the containment. However, if the debris bed is evenly distributed on the reactor cavity, it is assessed the pressure should be equal to or greater than 1 bar, 2 bar and 3 bar for POMECO BED-5, STYX BED and COOLOCED-8 BED, respectively.
Keywords：Concrete ablation;Debris bed coolability;Pre-flooded cavity;Molten corium-concrete interaction
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
When thermal energy is produced by nuclear fission in nuclear power plants (NPPs), fission products are accumulated in nuclear fuels. Fission products are usually unstable and release decay heat as they continuously transformed into stable nuclides through radioactive decay. When the reactor shuts down, radioactive decay continues to occur even. Therefore, to release the decay heat to an ultimate heat sink in case of emergency, NPPs should be equipped with reliable safety features (e.g., safety injection system, auxiliary feedwater system and so on). However, when an initiating event such as Large-Break Loss-of-Coolant-Accident (LBLOCA) or Total Loss of Feed Water (TLOFW) occurs and the safety features fail to work properly, then the fuel would melt down due to the radioactive decay heat. This fuel melt accident called a severe accident.
At this case, the molten corium could damage the reactor vessel and eventually fall into a reactor cavity whenever it fails to cool down the molten fuel and discharge the decay heat to an ultimate heat sink outside the NPPs. Because the molten corium in the reactor cavity floor continuously emits thermal energy due to the radioactive decay, and it thermally attacks the structure of a containment. The leak-tightness integrity of the containment would be impaired if the molten corium is not still adequately cooled. Consequently, a large amount of radioactive material would be released to the environment. Thus, it is needed ex-vessel cooling to cool down the molten corium and discharge the accumulated heat to the outside in the case of in-vessel cooling failure.
There are four Westinghouse (WH) 3-loop NPPs (e.g., Kori unit 3 & 4 and Hanbit unit 1 & 2). Based on their Severe Accident Management Guidelines (SAMG), it is guided to inject the cooling water into the reactor cavity without considering whether the reactor vessel is breached or not at the moment of flooding the reactor cavity. Thus, in the WH (3-loop) NPPs, the reactor cavity may be in a dry state or a deep pool state at the moment of the reactor vessel failure.
The phenomena during the ex-vessel cooling in the pre-flooded cavity are quite different from ex-vessel cooling in the dry cavity condition. If the molten corium falls into the pre-flooded deep pool, the molten corium may be fragmented due to the Rayleigh-Taylor and Kelvin-Helmholtz instability (Matsuo et al., 2008). A steam explosion during the dropping process could occur, and the containment could be damaged by the dynamic loads from the steam explosion. Consequently, the containment may be damaged at the moment of the reactor vessel failure, thus, a large amount of radioactive material could be released to the outside at the early stage. Perhaps this is one of the worst cases caused by nuclear power plant accidents, because nearby residents may not have enough time to evacuate. However, in this study, we assume that there is no steam explosion during the molten corium falling. If there is no steam explosion, a heat-generating debris bed is formed in the reactor cavity. The major aim of this research is to make a model on concrete ablation in a pre-flooded cavity during the ex-vessel cooling and to do the safety analysis of this condition.
The major benefit of the ex-vessel cooling in the pre-flooded cavity is that as soon as the molten corium falls into the deep pool, the cooling is facilitated by boiling with the coolant. Moreover, operators do not need to take into consideration the moment of the reactor vessel failure; they just need to inject the coolant into the reactor cavity as soon as possible and then watch the ex-vessel cooling of the molten corium. However, as Greene et al. pointed out, the molten corium may not be well spread in the flooded reactor cavity floor (Greene et al., 1988). If this is the case, the radioactive decay heat is concentrated only on the area where the molten corium is spread. Therefore, if the cooling of the molten corium or the debris bed is not sufficient, it is possible thermally to attack the containment more severely in the pre-flooded cavity condition.
Several researches were found on the coolability of the debris bed in the pre-flooded condition. Firstly, FARO (Magallon and Huhtiniemi, 2001), MIRA (Haraldsson and Sehgal, 1999), and DEFOR (Kudinov and Davydov, 2013) and others were carried out on the particle size distribution of fragmented particles when molten materials fall into the water. Also, the COOLOCE (Takasuo, 2013), STYX (Lindholm et al., 2006), POMECO (Li et al., 2012) and others were carried out to obtain the dryout heat flux of the debris bed reflecting the particle distribution results. We conduct safety analysis assuming that the debris beds whose characteristics are the same as those of COOLOCE-8 BED, STYX BED, and POMECO BED-5 can be formed in the WH (3-loop) pre-flooded deep pool. There are several analytical models for obtaining the dryout heat flux of a heat-generating packed particle bed (Na et al., 2017b, Schulenberg and Müller, 1987, Tung and Dhir, 1988, Lipinski, 1982, Reed, 1982).
The reactor cavity floor shapes of the Korean NPPs (e.g., WH (3-loop), ARP1400 and OPR1000) are longish corridors rather than circular floors. Besides, the location of the reactor vessel is located at one end of the corridor. Therefore, more than half of the zone directly below the reactor vessel is surrounded by a wall and the other is open to the corridor. Therefore, it seems that more than half of the fragmented particles may be clustered on the narrow area forming a thick debris bed in the pre-flooded cavity floor even assuming the fragmented particles have good spreadability. Thus, the radioactive decay heat may be concentrated on the narrow area, which increases the possibility of damage in the leak-tightness of the containment.
However, if the reactor cavity is in a dry state at the moment of reactor vessel failure, then the molten corium may spread well and the thickness of the molten corium in the reactor cavity is uniform throughout the reactor cavity. Thus, the radioactive decay heat is evenly distributed on the reactor cavity floor. Then, the coolant is supplied into the reactor cavity, and the water promotes the cooling of the molten corium through boiling. The major benefit of this cooling method is that the thermal load is well distributed rather than concentrated on narrow area. However, if the water supply is delayed, the possibility of containment integrity failure increases. Although the radioactive decay heat is uniformly distributed, much of the generated heat is used to melt the concrete structures until the coolant is injected. To evaluate the adequacy of this cooling method, melt spreading experiments such as COMAS (Steinwarz et al., 2001), FARO L26S (Tromm et al., 2000), some experiments of Hokkaido university (Matsumoto et al., 2017, Ogura et al., 2018) and others were carried out. Furthermore, some researchers (Kawahara and Oka, 2012, Na et al., 2017a, Ye et al., 2013, Yeon et al., 2012) carried out numerical studies on the melt spreadability using three-dimensional calculation methods. There are SWISS (Blose et al., 1987), COMET-L3 (Miassoedov et al., 2010), MACE (Farmer et al., 2000) and other experiments on the molten corium-concrete interaction (MCCI).
In this paper, we investigate whether the integrity of the containment is maintained during the ex-vessel cooling process when the molten corium falls into the pre-flooded reactor cavity in the event of a severe accident of Kori Units 3 and 4 which are the WH (3-loop) NPPs. The framework of the analysis method is similar to the method used in APR1400 NPPs (Na et al., 2017b) and OPR1000 NPPs (Na et al., 2020) safety analysis. We use the one-dimensional dryout heat flux model of the heat-generating packed particles, and the assumption about the shape of the debris bed is used in the same way. However, we improve the analytical model in the study. According to the previous model, it is assumed that the integrity of all the deposited debris beds is maintained during the ex-vessel cooling. However, in this model, we consider the condition in which the dry debris bed melts, and the crust is formed and growing.
According to the Nuclear Safety Act of Republic of Korea, nuclear operators shall submit an Accident Management Program (AMP) by 2019. To review the adequacy of their AMP, according to the Safety Review Guideline for AMP (KINS, 2018), the containment is needed to keep its leak-tightness during the ex-vessel cooling. In this respect, the guideline requires that the integrity of the bottom containment liner plate of the containment should be maintained during the ex-vessel cooling.
The major aim of developing the current model is to use this analysis as one of references to assess the appropriateness of the submitted AMP. Therefore, when the model is derived, we use some conservative assumptions to obtain the conservative results in terms of the downward concrete ablation depth during the ex-vessel cooling. This paper also presents the safety analysis results of WH (3-loop) NPPs using the newly developed model.
<Section>2. Debris bed coolability and concrete ablation analysis methodology<Section>
2.1. Dryout heat flux model
Fig. 1 (Na et al., 2017b) shows a schematic of a porous medium that generates thermal energy, and some part is submerged and the other part is dry. If the thermal power density of the debris bed is Sε and all of the generated heat in the soaked bed (L in Fig. 1) is removed by boiling with the coolant, then the heat flux from the wet bed to the water is expressed as follows:
(1)@
Fig. 1. Schematic of partially dry debris bed (Na et al., 2017b).
The radioactive decay power decreases monotonically and can be expressed as follows (El-Wakil, 1979):
(2)@
Where @ is the thermal power of the reactor just before the shutdown. The above equation also considers the radioactive decay heat of the fission products in the gaseous form such as noble species like Xe-135 and so on. They may escape from the molten corium to the atmosphere of the containment. However, all of their effects has been considered for conservative results in the current study.
Therefore, we express the thermal power density of the debris bed as follows:
(3)@
where Vdeb is the total volume of the debris bed.
Since the thermal power density of the debris bed Sε can be known at each time, the heat flux from the wet debris bed to the water can be obtained if the water penetration depth L is known.
This study obtains a dryout heat flux from the model formulated in the previous study (Na et al., 2017b). We can obtain the water penetration depth L from the relationship on the effective liquid saturation se. The effective liquid saturation se is zero where x = 0 in Fig. 1, and we can obtain the value of se where x = L in Fig. 1 using the following Eqs. (5)~(7).
(4)@
(5)@
(6)@
(7)@
Eq. (4) shows the correlation between the capillary pressure and the relative liquid saturation function f(se) (Leverett, 1941). Eq. (5), which was introduced by Udell (Udell, 1985) from Leverette's result (Eq. (4)), shows the relationship between the relative liquid saturation function f(se) and the effective liquid saturation se. The effective liquid saturation function value at the upper boundary x = L is obtained using Eq. (6). We assume that the size of the departing bubble db is twice as the radius of curvature at the top boundary dL (Lu and Chang, 1987). The bubble size is obtained using Eq. (7) (Tung and Dhir, 1988).
The gradient of the effective liquid saturation se in the x-axis direction (Fig. 1) of the debris bed which generates heat is as follows:
(8)@
A, B, C and D in Eq. (8) can be expressed as follows:
(9)@
(10)@
(11)@
(12)@
where @ and @ are related to the drag of laminar and turbulent flows in a porous medium.
Therefore, for any characteristics (dp and ε) and any thermal power density Sε of the debris bed, the water penetration depth L is obtained using Eqs. (8), (9), (10), (11), (12) for the value of se,L. Hence, the dryout heat flux of the debris bed is obtained using Eq. (1).
2.2. Descriptions on concrete ablation models
Fig. 2 shows the phase change of the debris bed during the ex-vessel cooling in the model derived in this study considering the melting of the dry debris bed. If the total height of the debris bed is greater than the initial water penetration depth L at the moment of debris bed formation, then some of the debris bed is dry (see Fig. 2 (a)). We define this state as Phase 1.
Fig. 2. Phase change during ex-vessel cooling if initially dry bed melts.
In the previous study (Na et al., 2017b, Na et al., 2020), the analysis were based on the assumption that the debris bed in the dry zone is structurally intact and does not melt during the cooling process. In the previous concrete ablation model, considering the quasi-steady-state assumption, the decay heat generated in the dry zone is transferred downward and likely to pyrolyze the below concrete. However, in this paper, the proposed model considers the phenomena that the dry debris bed may melt when the heat generated in the dry debris bed zone is large enough compared to the amount of the heat transfer from the dry zone to the upper and lower part.
By the way, even if the decay heat thermally attacks the structure, it does not necessarily mean that the ex-vessel cooling in the pre-flooded cavity condition is not appropriate. Because the sacrificial concrete, which acts as a heat sink, is on the containment liner plate which performs leak-tightness functions. If only the sacrificial material is damaged and the containment liner plate is intact during the ex-vessel cooling as shown in Fig. 2(d), then the leak-tightness integrity of the containment is maintained.
In Phase 1, the particles in the dry debris bed may begin to melt due to the internally generated radioactive decay heat. However, if there is enough upward and downward heat flux in Phase 1, then the particles do not melt and all the particles are eventually fully submerged during the ex-vessel cooling. If this is the case, we calculate the thermal concrete ablation depth using the method used in the previous studies (Na et al., 2017b, Na et al., 2020).
When the dry debris bed is melted, then we define this state as Phase 2. In Phase 2, there is no crust on the melt, because the upward heat flux from the bulk melt to the top of the melt is more than the maximum possible amount of the heat flux on the top of the melt through boiling. Based on the quasi-steady-state assumption, it can be assumed that thermally generated energy in the melt except for the heat flux to the top is transferred downward. In addition, the downward transferred energy except for the energy conducted to the below concrete melting surface is used to melt the concrete. We assume that the molten concrete mixed uniformly with the bulk melt except for the gaseous component (e.g., CO2, water vapor, etc.) which is escaped from the melt.
Table 1 shows the properties of the molten corium (Na et al., 2017b) used in the study, and Table 2 shows the siliceous concrete properties used in the study. We assume that the properties of the basemat and sacrificial concrete of Kori unit 3 and 4 are the same as Table 2. Also, the thickness of the sacrificial concrete is assumed to be 0.914 m (3 ft). The properties of the concrete actually vary with the temperature, however, there is no information on the effect of temperature on the properties. Thus, we use the reference values if it is in the solid state without considering the temperature effect. As for the molten concrete, we use the density of 2,024 kg/m3, the specific heat of 1,120 J/kg/K, and the conductivity of 0.876 W/m/K. The values are obtained with the assumption that the properties changes with the temperature following the equation provided in the literature (Kodur, 2014).
Table 1. Molten corium properties (Na et al., 2017a).
Table 2. Siliceous concrete properties (KEPCO E&C, 2013).
Mass fraction of gaseous component (CO2 and water vapor, etc.)	0.0736
In this study, to avoid confusion about molten material, ‘corium’ denotes the material which is initially produced in the reactor vessel, ‘melt’ denotes the mixture of the ‘corium' and the molten concrete, and ‘crust’ is referred to the solidified material of the ‘melt’.
Fig. 3 (Journeau and Piluso, 2012) shows the change in the solidus and liquidus temperature of the corium-concrete mixed melt in terms of the mass fraction of the concrete in the melt. If the concrete mass fraction is greater than about 10%, then the solidus temperature of the mixed melt is approximately 1,450 K. This is equivalent to the melting temperature of the concrete considered in this study. To simplify the model, we assume the melt solidus temperature to be 1,450 K even if the concrete mass fraction in the melt is less than 10%. If the solidus temperature of the melt is less than or equal to the melting temperature of the concrete, then there is no crust formed between the melt and the concrete melting surface. Moreover, even if it is assumed that the solidus temperature of the melt is higher than the concrete melting temperature of the concrete, it would be very difficult to have a stable crust on the concrete melting surface, because the concrete continuously melts and there is a mass flow of the molten concrete upward. Therefore, we assume that there is no stable crust between the melt and the concrete melting surface in the model.
Fig. 3. Typical corium–concrete pseudo-binary phase diagram (Journeau and Piluso, 2012).
In the proposed model, we assume the maximum possible heat flux from the melt to the water is determined from the dryout heat flux except for the power per unit area in the initially wet debris bed (Hs in Fig. 2). We also assume that the structural integrity of the originally submerged part (Hs in Fig. 2) is maintained during the ex-vessel cooling. Therefore, we can obtain the maximum possible heat flux on the top of the melt (Phase 2) or the crust (Phase 3) which is the dryout heat flux @ except for the power per unit area generated in the initially soaked debris bed (Sε⋅Hs). In this paper, we denote maximum dischargeable heat flux on the top of the melt or the crust to the water by ‘up-cooling heat flux’ @.
If the up-cooling heat flux @ is greater than the heat flux from the bulk melt to the top of the melt, the crust would exist. Although it is possible for the crust to be broken by the releasing CO2, water vapor, etc., from the melting concrete, we assume that the crust remains stable. We classify this curst existing state as Phase 3.
In Phase 3, as the up-cooling heat flux @ increases over time, the crust grows gradually. The temperature of the top of the crust is similar to the saturation temperature of the coolant, and the temperature of the bottom of the crust maintains the melt solidus temperature of 1,450 K. The crust would shrink as the temperature is lowered (Nayak et al., 2009), and this would cause some crust to fragment and form another debris bed. We retain the term ‘crust’ of the fractured crust in the study to avoid confusion with the debris bed originally formed in the pre-flooded cavity.
The coolant would penetrate through the newly fragmented zone, and the heat is transferred from the fractured crust to the water by boiling. Thus, the temperature of the wet zone may be close to the water saturation temperature as Nayak et al.'s measurements (Nayak et al., 2009), and there is the dry region with a high temperature below the wet crust.
Finally, in Phase 4, all the melt solidifies. The temperature of the melting surface of solidifying crust is 1,450 K, which is equivalent to the concrete melting temperature. Therefore, there is no further heat transfer to the bottom, and all the generated decay heat is released upward.
2.2.1. Analytical model in Phase 1
We assume that the height of the initially soaked and dry debris bed (Hs and Hd in Fig. 2) remains constant in Phase 1 for the simplicity in this model, while the height of the soaked zone (Hs) and the dry zone Hd actually increases and decreases, respectively. It is also assumed that the structural integrity of the initially wet debris bed is maintained throughout the ex-vessel cooling process. Fig. 4(a) is a schematic of the thermal energy flow (@ and @) and the radioactive decay heat generation @ in Phase 1.
Fig. 4. A schematic of thermal energy flow, thermal power generation and energy consumption in Phase 1, 2 and 3.
The corium mass of the dry debris bed per unit area is as follows:
(13)@
The power generated by radioactive decay per unit area in the dry debris bed is as follows:
(14)@
where Pcor is the radioactive decay thermal power generated per unit mass of molten corium, and it is expressed as Eq. (15).
(15)@
where Mcor,total is the total mass of the molten corium, and the value is assumed to be 104.6 tons for the WH (3-loop) NPPs.
Although the water penetration depth increases, it is assumed that the water penetration depth and the thickness of the dry zone are kept constant in Phase 1. Instead, it is assumed that the heat flux from the dry zone to the cooling water @ increases as follows:
(16)@
In Eq. (16), at the moment of debris bed formation, the dryout heat flux @ is same as the thermal power per unit area of the wet debris bed (Sε(t)⋅Hs) so the heat flux from the dry zone to the cooling water @ is zero. Although the thermal power density Sε decreases with time, the effect of increasing water penetration depth L is greater so that the heat flux from the dry zone to the cooling water @ gradually increases with time.
In Phase 1, as for the downward heat flux from the dry debris bed to the below concrete @, it is assumed that only the heat conduction exists and concrete does not melt for the conservative concrete ablation results. The heat conduction flux below the floor can be expressed as Eq. (17) (Mills, 1995) from the semi-infinite conduction theory assuming that the concrete has infinite depth.
(17)@
Because we assume no concrete melting in Phase 1, the heat flux from the dry debris bed to concrete is expressed as Eq. (18).
(18)@
Consequently, with the quasi-steady-state assumption during this process, the thermal power per unit area used to melt the dry debris bed is as follows:
(19)@
We also assume that the initial dry debris bed temperature is 2,848 K, which is the solidus temperature of the corium, for the conservative concrete ablation results. Under this assumption, it can melt quickly to form a melt (Phase 2), and pyrolysis of the concrete begins from this moment.
The amount of thermal energy required to melt the dry debris bed is as follows:
(20)@
If the following condition is met, all the initially dry debris bed melts and then go to Phase 2.
(21)@
If @ is not very large compared to heat flux from the dry zone to the cooling water @ and to the concrete @ in Phase 1, it is possible that the heat flux to the outside may be greater than @ before the all the dry debris beds melt. This is because @ decreases gradually, whereas @ increases gradually with time. If this happens, the initially dry debris bed does not melt. In this case, the concrete ablation depth analysis is performed using the methodology (section 2.2.5.) which was used in the previous research papers (Na et al., 2017b, Na et al., 2020).
2.2.2. Analytical model in Phase 2
In Phase 2, the dry debris bed is melted so the melt is formed, and the radioactive decay heat produced in the melt is transferred to the top and the bottom of the melt, simultaneously. However, the thermal power of the radioactive decay in the melt is large compared to the up-cooling heat flux so that the stable crust does not exist. Fig. 4(b) is a schematic of the thermal energy flow (@, etc.), the radioactive decay heat generation rate @ and the energy consumption (@) in Phase 2.
We assume that in Phase 2 the sum of the heat flux to the water from the initially soaked debris bed and the heat flux to the water due to local boiling on the top of the melt is the dryout heat flux of the debris bed. Therefore, the up-cooling heat flux @ on the top of the melt, which is the heat flux to water on the surface, equals the dryout heat flux except for the power per unit area in the originally wet debris bed (Hs in Fig. 2). This is expressed as follows:
(22)@
It is assumed that the total heat flux to the water in Phase 1, 2 and 3 is the same as the dryout heat flux of the debris bed. Therefore, although the bottom of the debris bed is blocked by a surface of the melt in Phase 2 and the other fractured crust in Phase 3, it is assumed that the maximum heat flux to the water is the same as the dryout heat flux obtained by the method in section 2.1. Assuming that Case A and B indicate a debris bed with the bottom surface and a debris bed with infinite depth with the same power density in the debris beds, then the effective liquid saturation is the same at the top for Case A and B in dryout condition. Because the water supplies from the top of the debris bed and then the water flows downward, the effective liquid saturation decreases by evaporation. Therefore, the effective liquid saturation at the same depth location is the same for Case A and B. Because the amount of remaining water is the same for both cases at the location of the bottom surface, it is also assumed that the remaining heat flux to the water for Case A by boiling the remaining water on the surface and Case B by boiling of it in the debris bed below the location is same as well. Similarly, the maximum heat flux to water on the top surface of the fractured crust is obtained by the dryout heat flux except for the power per unit area in the initially soaked debris bed, when the melt is transformed to the fractured crust (Phase 3).
There is no heat-generating crust in Phase 2, so the maximum heat flux from the melt to its top surface @ becomes equal to the up-cooling heat flux @ as Eq. (23).
(23)@
In Phase 2, some concrete melts due to the downward transferred heat. It is assumed that the molten concrete well mixes with the melt. Therefore, the mass and mass fraction of the melt changes continuously due to the incorporation of the molten concrete. However, before the crust exists, the amount of corium mass in the melt is unchanged in Phase 2. Therefore, the radioactive decay power per unit area generated in the melt by the corium is as follows:
(24)@
With the quasi-steady-state assumption, the heat flux from the melt to the bottom surface @ in Phase 2 can be expressed as follows:
(25)@
The bottom concrete would be thermally ablated by @, and the molten concrete, except for the gaseous components, is assumed to be uniformly mixed with the melt. The temperature of the just melting concrete is 1,450 K, and the temperature of the molten concrete needs to rise to the equilibrium temperature of the bulk melt with the quasi-steady-state assumption. Therefore, some of the downward heat flux from the melt to the bottom surface @ is used to raise the molten concrete temperature to the equilibrium.
Suppose that the molten concrete evenly mixes with the melt, the mixture properties such as the conductivity (Poling et al., 2001), the density, the specific heat and the latent heat are assumed, respectively, as follows:
(26)@
(27)@
(28)@
(29)@
The heat flux from the melt to the below concrete @, which is the same as the downward heat flux @, melts the concrete @, and the remaining heat flux raises the temperature of the underlying concrete through conduction @ as follows:
(30)@
We use the semi-infinite conduction theory for the conductive heat flux below the concrete melting surface with the assumption that there is infinite concrete under the reactor cavity floor. Therefore, the conductive heat flux is given as follows:
(31)@
The thermal ablation rate of the concrete per unit area can be expressed as follows:
(32)@
As a result, the accumulated amount of ablated concrete mass per unit area @ can be expressed as Eq. (33), and the ablation depth X can be expressed as Eq. (34).
(33)@
(34)@
About 7.36 wt% of the molten concrete is gaseous component such as CO2, water vapor and so on. Thus, they would escape from the melt. During these releases, melt eruption may occur. If this phenomenon occurs, heat transfer may be prompted (Farmer et al., 2006). However, the current model does not consider the melt eruption phenomenon in order to make the model conservative.
It is assumed that the molten concrete is uniformly mixed in the melt, so the total mass, the corium mass, and the concrete mass in the melt can be expressed, respectively, as follows:
(35)@
(36)@
(37)@
To calculate @, the bulk temperature of the melt Tm is required. From ACE MCCI experiment L6, Strizhov et al. provided heat transfer coefficient whose value is 150 ~ 500 W/m2/K (Strizhov et al., 1992). We intentionally choose the maximum value of heat transfer coefficient of 500 W/m2/K. This assumption makes the model conservative in terms of concrete ablation. Due to the largest value of heat transfer coefficient, the bulk temperature keeps the lowest, thereby minimizing the power per unit area @ required to raise the temperature of the molten concrete to the equilibrium.
The temperature of the bulk melt can be obtained by Eq. (38).
(38)@
The required power per unit area used to raise the temperature of the molten concrete to equilibrium is as follows:
(39)@
From the iteration of Eqs. (24)~(39), conversing values of @ and others can be obtained for each time step.
2.2.3. Analytical model in Phase 3
There exists a stable crust on the top of the melt in Phase 3. Fig. 4(c) is a schematic of thermal energy flow (@, etc.), radioactive heat generation (@ and @) and energy consumption (@) in Phase 3. Since there are stable interfaces on the top and the bottom of the melt and it is assumed that the crust solidus temperature and concrete melting temperature are 1,450 K, the decay power per unit area of the melt @ is transferred to the top of the melt @ and the bottom of the melt @ evenly with the quasi-steady-state assumption as follows:
(40)@
The formation of the crust occurs when the heat flux from the bulk melt to the top of the bulk melt @ is smaller than the up-cooling heat flux @ on the top of the crust as follows:
(41)@
where the up-cooling heat flux @ is the maximum heat flux emitted by boiling on the top of the solid crust. @ is the heat flux through heat convection from the bulk melt to its top interface.
Although disturbances due to escaping gaseous CO2, water vapor, etc., may affect the stability of the crust, we assume that once the crust is generated, it exists stably and releases gaseous CO2, water vapor, etc. without structural damage.
If the mass of corium in the crust per unit area is @, the radioactive decay power in the crust per unit area is as follows:
(42)@
If the up-cooling heat flux @ is greater than the sum of the upward heat flux from the bulk melt to the top surface @ and the generated power per unit area in the crust @, then the excess is supplemented by the latent power per unit area solidifying some melt and growing the crust. Therefore, the crust growing rate @ can be obtained by the following energy balance.
(43)@
In Eq. (43), we assume the density of solidifying melt ρcrust is the same to it of the melt ρm at the moment of the solidification. The thickness of the crust Lcrust at each time is as follows:
(44)@
The total crust mass, the corium mass and the concrete mass in the crust per unit area change as follows:
(45)@
(46)@
(47)@
As the crust grows, the total melt mass, the corium mass and the concrete mass in the melt per unit area at each time step are as follows:
(48)@
(49)@
(50)@
As the melt solidifies, the mass of the corium, which includes unstable fission products, in the melt decreases. Therefore, the power generated in the melt diminishes concurrently as the amount of the corium decreases and the decay power per unit fission product mass also decreases with time (Eq. (15)).
In Phase 3, the concrete also melts due to the heat flux from the melt to the concrete, and the molten concrete needs to rise to the bulk equilibrium temperature of the melt with the quasi-steady-state assumption. Therefore, some heat flux @ is needed to raise the temperature of the molten concrete to the equilibrium bulk melt temperature. Therefore, the downward heat flux from the melt to the bottom surface is replaced by Eq. (51).
(51)@
Similarly, the equilibrium bulk melt temperature and @ can be obtained using Eqs. (38), (39).
The relation among the heat flux from the melt to the below concrete @, which is the same to the downward heat flux q̇"downward, the heat flux for melting the concrete @ and the conductive heat flux below the concrete melting surface @ can be obtained by Eq. (30). Similarly, the concrete melting rate per unit area @, the amount of accumulated ablated concrete per unit area @ and the ablation depth X can be obtained by Eq. (32), (33), (34), respectively.
From the iteration of the equations, we can obtain the conversing values of @, etc., for each time step.
As the temperature of the crust decreases, it shrinks (Nayak et al., 2009) and fragments, thus forming another debris bed. The water coolant may then penetrate through this void. The radioactive decay heat in the wet crust where the coolant can penetrate is transferred by boiling. Therefore, the temperature of the submerged zone converges to the saturation temperature of the water coolant (Nayak et al., 2009). Fig. 5 shows a schematic of the overlying water, the wet debris bed, the wet fractured crust, the dry crust and the melt.
Fig. 5. A Schematic of overlying water, wet debris bed, wet crust, dry crust, and melt in Phase 3.
The maximum dry crust thickness where the water coolant cannot reach is evaluated using the heat conduction equation. The melt provides the heat flux from the melt to the bottom of the dry crust by heat convection. The temperature at the bottom surface of the dry crust is equal to the melt’s solidus temperature of 1,450 K (Tm,solidus) and the temperature of the top of the dry crust is assumed to be the water saturation temperature Tsat. Thus, the thickness of the dry crust can be obtained by Eq. (52) which is derived by the heat conduction relation.
(52)@
where @ and kcrust are the thermal power density and the thermal conductivity of the crust, respectively. These values vary and are dependent on the location of the crust. Because the top of the crust is solidified early, more corium is contained. On the other hand, a later solidified crust has more concrete. In the current model, only the overall mean values of corium and concrete mass fraction of the crust can be obtained from Eqs. (45), (46), (47). In the study, because the dry crust is thin and just created, it is assumed that the properties of the just solidified crust are more similar to the values of the melt rather than the average values of the whole crust. Therefore, in the safety analysis calculations, @ and kcrust are replaced with @ and km, respectively.
2.2.4. Description of Phase 4
As the melt solidifies in Phase 3, the location of the bottom of the crust can reach the top surface of the remaining concrete. Therefore, all the melt solidifies and so all the fission products are in the crust. Since the temperature at the last solidification point is at 1450 K which is the highest temperature in the crust. Because the up-cooling heat flux is larger than all the decay power per unit area in the crust, there is no further heat flux to the bottom. As the decay power decreases, the depth of the wet crust increases. All the crust is eventually submerged with the water, and all the decay heat is discharged to the coolant by boiling.
2.2.5. Analytical model when dry bed does not melt
As the thermal power density of the debris bed continues to decrease, the water penetration depth increases. Therefore, the debris bed would be fully submerged eventually after which all the radioactive decay heat is then transferred to the coolant.
Under the quasi-steady-state assumption, the radioactive decay energy produced in the wet debris bed and dry debris bed is transferred to the water and the reactor cavity floor, respectively. Therefore, the amount of downward heat flux can be expressed as follows:
(53)@
where Vdeb, H0 , L(t) are the total debris bed volume, the total height of the debris bed and the water penetration depth, respectively.
Some of the downward heat flux to the bottom is used to raise the temperature of the concrete below the concrete melting surface, and the rest is consumed to melt the concrete. Therefore, the heat flux to the bottom can be expressed as follows:
(54)@
The heat conduction below the concrete melting surface can be expressed by semi-infinite heat conduction theory with the assumption that there is an infinite thickness concrete as follows:
(55)@
The concrete ablation rate per unit area is given as follows:
(56)@
Therefore, the amount of the accumulated ablated concrete mass and the ablated concrete depth can be obtained, respectively, as follows:
(57)@
(58)@
<Section>3. Concrete ablation analysis during ex-vessel cooling</Section>
If an initiating event such as LBLOCA or TLOFW occurs in the WH (3-loop) NPPs and the engineering safety features like safety injection (SI) system does not operate properly, meaning that the continuous generated radioactive decay heat is not discharged to the outside, the fuel rod would melt. Furthermore, if the molten corium still does not cool after this time, then the reactor vessel would be breached, and the molten corium falls into the reactor cavity.
In the event of a severe accident, the most important key to an accident management is to cool the molten corium and discharge the decay heat to an ultimate heat sink. Therefore, according to the Kori unit 3 and 4 SAMG, there are procedures injecting coolant into steam generators and the reactor vessel preferentially. The SAMG also has the other cooling strategy by injecting the coolant into the reactor cavity to make ex-vessel cooling possible.
However, according to the current SAMG, it guides the operators to supply the cooling water to the reactor cavity without considering whether the reactor is breached or not. There is a lot of differences in the phenomena occurring during the ex-vessel cooling process depending on whether the cooling water is supplied before and after the reactor vessel failure.
The purpose of this research is to investigate the concrete ablation analysis during the ex-vessel cooling when the reactor cavity is a pre-flooded deep pool before the reactor vessel failure. The adequacy of the ex-vessel cooling is determined by whether the maintenance of the structural and leak-tightness integrity of the containment is kept during the ex-vessel cooling. According to the Safety Review Guideline for AMP (KINS, 2018), to review the adequacy of the ex-vessel cooling of the submitted AMP, the bottom containment liner plate (CLP), which acts as a gasket of a valve to prevent the leakage of radioactive material, should maintain its integrity.
The CLP is on the basement concrete. Also, there is an ablative material, sacrificial concrete, on the containment liner plate like Fig. 2(a). The sacrificial concrete protects the containment liner plate by absorbing the heat flux from the molten corium. The thickness of the sacrificial concrete decreases as it absorbs the thermal energy by melting itself. If some of the sacrificial concrete remains during the ex-vessel cooling process, then the containment liner plate maintains its integrity. This prevents the catastrophic situation of the release of a large amount of radioactive material.
According to the Modular Accident Analysis Program (MAAP) analysis results of Kori unit 3 and 4, the moment of the reactor vessel failure of the severe accidents initiated by LBLOCA and TLOFW is about 6,970 sec and 11,910 sec, respectively (FNC Technology, 2012a). Even if the containment spray system is activated immediately after the LBLOCA happens, then the earliest time to flood the reactor cavity is about 7,560 sec (FNC Technology, 2012b). Although the most severe case of MCCI in terms of the decay power and the concrete ablation depth is the LBLOCA-initiating severe accident, the reactor cavity is not flooded at the time of the reactor vessel breach. Therefore, only the top-flooding cooling of the molten corium is possible for the LBLOCA-initiating severe accident. Hence we choose the other severe accident case of TLOFW for the current safety analysis.
Table 3 shows the results of the severe accident from the MAAP simulations (FNC Technology, 2012a). It is calculated that about 20.4 ton molten corium is discharged at the time of the reactor vessel failure and the rest melt is sequentially dropped. However, it is assumed that total 104.6 ton molten corium falls at the moment of the reactor failure for the simplicity in this study.
Table 3. MAAP results of a severe accident initiated by TLOFW (FNC Technology, 2012a).
Fig. 6 shows the layout of the reactor cavity of the WH (3-loop) NPPs. We can observe that about 70% of the zone directly below the reactor vessel is surrounded by a wall of 2.82 m radius and the rest is open to the corridor. By reviewing the drawing of the reactor cavity floor, the total cross-sectional area of the cavity floor is estimated to be about 58.4 m2. If the molten corium falls into the deep pool and fragments, it is very likely that a large portion of the fragmented particles piles thickly due to the blockage by the 2.82 m radius wall in the zone directly below the reactor vessel, even if particles have good spreadability.
Fig. 6. Reactor cavity layout of WH (3-loop) of Kori unit 3 and 4.
From the results of the previous study (Na et al., 2017b, Na et al., 2020), we deduced that two decisive factors determining the concrete ablation depth. The first one is the characteristics such as the effective diameter and the porosity of the debris bed, and they are related to the coolability of the debris bed. The second one is the debris bed thickness, and it affects how thermal load on the reactor cavity floor is applied. The debris bed height may be determined by the spreadability of the fragmented particles, the geometry of the reactor cavity and the location of the reactor vessel in the reactor cavity.
As the previous studies, we assume that the characteristics of debris bed formed in the pre-flooded cavity is the same as three beds (e.g., COOLOCE-8 BED (Takasuo, 2013), STYX BED (Lindholm et al., 2006) and POMECO BED-5 (Li et al., 2012)). Because the packed particle beds were made considering the particle size distribution based on the melt fragmentation tests like FARO test (Magallon and Huhtiniemi, 2001), we have assumed that the characteristics of the debris bed formed in the real pre-flooded reactor cavity are similar to those of them. Table 4 shows the effective diameter, the porosity and the dryout heat flux of the packed beds.
Table 4. Effective diameter, porosity, and dryout heat flux of COOLOCE-8 BED, STYX BED and POMECO BED-5.
1) Takasuo (2013).
2) Na et al. (2017b).
3) Lindholm et al. (2006).
4) Li et al. (2012).
The other decisive factor is the height of the debris bed. If the debris bed piles up thickly only in a narrow area of the reactor cavity floor, it means that the radioactive decay heat is concentrated only on the narrow area, which in turn means that only a small portion of the reactor cavity floor is under highly concentrated thermal attack.
To precisely assess the shape of the debris bed, it may be needed a discrete element method and a very fast computer to do the full-scale simulations on the deposition of the fragmented particles. However, we do not have such technology and such a fast computer currently. Therefore, the safety analysis is performed for the one dimensional geometry with the assumption of cylindrical shapes. The height of the cylindrical bed varies according to the distribution of fragmented particles.
The first case (Case 1) is about the debris bed which is formed into a cylindrical column with a diameter of 5.64 m. Fig. 6 shows that the reactor cavity is a longish corridor and the location of the reactor vessel is located at the end of the reactor cavity. If the molten corium falls in the deep pool and fragments, this means that they are solidified and lose fluidity. Even if it is assumed that the particles have good spreadability, it is very likely that more than half of the fragmented particles are blocked by the 2.82 m radius wall and piles on the floor thickly in this narrow space. Therefore, all the radioactive decay heat is concentrated only on this area. The area ratio of Case 1 of WH (3-loop) is approximately 42.8% of the reactor cavity floor area. However, this is larger than the area ratio of 27.1% of APR1400 (Na et al., 2017b) and 28.0% of OPR1000 (Na et al., 2020) for Case 1. Hence as for Case 1 of WH (3-loop), the radioactive decay heat may be more dispersed when compared with Case 1 of APR1400 and OPR1000.
As for the second case (Case 2), the fragmented particles spread to half of the corridor and form a debris bed with uniform height. In the third case (Case 3), the fragmented particles are evenly distributed throughout the reactor cavity floor (area: 58.4 m2). This means that the thermal load of the radioactive decay heat is distributed evenly throughout the reactor cavity. Hence it is the best situation in terms of the concrete ablation. However, considering the fact that the reactor cavity of the WH (3-loop) is a longish corridor and the reactor vessel is located at the end of the reactor cavity and that the fragmented particles lose their fluidity, a situation like Case 3 seems to be very difficult to occur. Fig. 7 shows the dimension of the debris bed assumed in this study.
Fig. 7. Dimension of debris beds of Case 1, 2 and 3.
The upper figures of Fig. 8 are the assumed situations relating the deposition of the debris bed for Case 1, 2 and 3, and the lower figures of Fig. 8 are the considered debris bed shapes for Case 1, 2 and 3 in the model. Because our model is one-dimension in the vertical direction, the change of top surface shape from the assumed situations to the considered shapes has no effect. However, there is not only top water flow but also lateral water flow in the assumed debris beds, but there is only top water supply in the considered shapes of the model meaning that the considered shapes are more conservative in terms of debris bed coolability.
Fig. 8. Assumed debris bed shapes of Case 1, 2 and 3 in WH (3-loop) NPPs reactor cavity and the debris bed shapes considered in the model.
According to the results from MAAP code (FNC Technology, 2012a), it is assumed that the reactor vessel is breached about 3.3 h after the shutdown. Kori unit 3 and 4 has the normal thermal power of 2,775 MW. Therefore, the decay power at the moment of the reactor vessel failure is about 23.0 MW obtained from Eq. (2). If the molten corium mass is 104.6 tons and the density is 8000 kg/m3, then the volume of the molten corium is 13.08 m3. Therefore, the volume of the debris bed with 0.37 porosity is 20.8 m3. Hence the thermal power density of the debris bed with porosity 0.37 at the time of the reactor failure is about 1.104 MW/m3.
Fig. 9 shows the change of the water penetration depth with the time at 3 bar when COOLOCE-8 BED, STYX BED and POMECO BED-5 type debris bed are formed. In the figures, t is the time from the reactor vessel failure (3.3 h). Assuming that the structural integrity of all the packed beds is kept during the ex-vessel cooling, then as the thermal power density of the debris bed decreases, the depth of the water penetration increases gradually and eventually all debris beds are submerged with water. Thereafter, all the radioactive decay heat is released by boiling with the cooling water.
Fig. 9. Water penetration depth for the three kinds of debris beds (COOLOCE-8 BED, STYX BED, and POMECO BED-5) of WH (3-loop) NPPs in case of a severe accident initiated by TLOFW.
Fig. 10 shows the transition of the dryout heat flux of the debris beds with the time in the three beds. Because the radioactive decay power density of the debris bed decreases, the water penetration depth increases. Overall, the dryout heat flux decreases slowly. Fig. 11 shows the initial height of the dry debris bed for Case 1 to 3 and the three types of debris beds from 1 bar to 5 bar at the moment of the debris bed formation.
Fig. 10. Transition of dryout heat flux of the three type beds at 3 bar from the moment of reactor vessel failure.
Fig. 11. Height of initial dry zone of debris beds of Case 1, 2 and 3.
<Section>4. Case studies</Section>
We have conducted the safety analysis of the concrete ablation depth for the three heights of the debris beds (Case 1, Case 2 and Case 3), in which the three types of the debris beds (COOLOCE-8 BED, STYX BED and POEMCO BED-5) and the pressure from 1 bar to 5 bar are also considered in the analysis.
4.1. Case 1
Case 1 is about the situation in which the molten corium of 104.6 tons forms the debris bed with a cylindrical shape of 5.64 m in diameter in the pre-flooded reactor cavity. The height of the debris bed is 0.832 m.
Fig. 12 shows the safety analysis results when the COOLOCE-8 BED type debris bed is formed and cooled at the pressure of 3 bar. Fig. 12(a) shows the location of the concrete melting surface, the top location of the melt and the top location of the debris bed. The concrete still is under thermal ablation 1000 h after the reactor vessel failure, and the integrity of the containment is impaired because the containment liner plate melts about four hours after the reactor vessel failure. The thickness of the dry crust is infinitesimal to be identified in the figure. Fig. 12(b) shows the energy balance. Here, the black line indicates the total radioactive decay power per unit area. Therefore, the value is the same in the three cases of COOLOCE-8 BED, STYX BED and POMECO BED-5 for Case 1. However, the cooling capacities of the three beds are different from each other. Because the coolability of COOLOCE-8 BED is the worst, so the blue line is lowest among them comparing the blue lines of Fig. 12(b), Fig. 13(b) and Fig. 14(b). About 800 h after the reactor vessel failure, the heat flux to the coolant is greater than the radioactive decay power per unit area (Fig. 12(b)). If the previous methodology is used, when the coolant reaches the bottom of the debris bed, all the decay heat is removed by boiling since this moment. However, a melt still exists at the moment in the current model, so that there are still heat-generating fission products in the melt. Therefore, part of the generated decay heat is still transferred to the concrete.
Fig. 12. Concrete ablation and energy balance results for COOLOCE-8 BED of Case 1 at 3 bar.
Fig. 13. Concrete ablation and thermal energy balance results for STYX BED of Case 1 at 3 bar.
Fig. 14. Concrete ablation and thermal energy balance results for POMECO BED-5 of Case 1 at 3 bar.
Fig. 13 shows the safety analysis results when the STYX BED type debris bed is formed and cooled with 3 bar circumstance. The debris bed's coolability is better than that of the COOLOCE-8 BED type debris bed, thus it cools more quickly than the COOLOCE-8 BED type debris bed and the concrete ablation depth is less than that of COOLOCE-8 BED. About 120 h after the reactor vessel failure, although the total heat flux to the coolant is greater than the total decay power per unit area, because there is still the heat-generating melt at the moment, some of the decay heat generated in the melt is still transferred to the bottom by heat convection, causing concrete ablation. Meanwhile, about 300 h after the reactor vessel failure all the melt solidifies, and all the radioactive decay energy is transferred to the coolant. The concrete ablation depth is about 15.6 m, which means that the leak-tightness integrity of the containment is not maintained. The integrity of the containment is impaired about five hours after the reactor vessel failure.
Fig. 14 shows the results of the POMECO BED-5 at the pressure of 3 bar. The initial dry debris bed height is only about 0.147 m. Therefore, if we use the new model, then the dry debris bed does not melt, so we perform the analysis using the previous model (section 2.2.5). The concrete ablation depth during the ex-vessel cooling process is only about 0.15 m, thus that only some sacrificial concrete is thermally ablated and the containment liner plate is kept intact. It is estimated for the debris bed to be fully submerged about 3.8 h after the reactor vessel failure.
Fig. 15 shows the results of the concrete ablation depth of Case 1 1,000 h after the reactor vessel failure or at the end of the concrete ablation. The cross-sectional area of Case 1 of the WH (3-loop) NPP is about 42.8% of the total reactor cavity floor area, which is relatively larger than 27.1% and 28.0% of Case 1 in APR1400 and OPR1000, respectively. Thus, even in the worst case (Case 1), the radioactive decay heat is relatively distributed in WH (3-loop) NPPs compared to APR1400 and OPR1000. Therefore, if the coolable POMECO BED-5 type debris bed is formed and the pressure is 2 bar or higher, the integrity of the containment building is maintained during the ex-vessel cooling. However, whenever the debris beds such as the COOLOCE-8 BED or STYX BED are formed, the integrity of the containment is not maintained during the ex-vessel cooling process even at 5 bar, so that a large amount of radioactive material may be released to the environment.
Fig. 15. Comparison of concrete ablation depth of Case 1.
4.2. Case 2
Case 2 is the case when the fragmented particles spread to the half of the corridor of the reactor cavity and a uniform height debris bed is formed. The cross-sectional area is 40.4 m2 and the debris bed is 0.515 m in height.
Fig. 16 shows the safety analysis results at 3 bar when the COOLOCE-8 BED type debris bed is formed. Although the total heat flux to the water is greater than the decay power per unit area about 105 h after the reactor vessel failure, some of the generated decay heat goes to the lower interface because there is still the heat-generating melt. Thus, the concrete is still under thermal ablation at the moment. About 264 h after the reactor vessel failure, all the melt solidifies. Thereafter, all the radioactive decay heat is discharged to the coolant, and there is no concrete ablation anymore. The leak-tightness of the containment is impaired about 9 h after the reactor vessel breach. The depth of the ablation during ex-vessel cooling is about 8.2 m, which means that there would be a large amount of release of radioactive materials to the outside.
Fig. 16. Concrete ablation and thermal energy balance results for COOLOCE-8 BED of Case 2 at 3 bar.
Fig. 17 shows the safety analysis results when the STYX BED type debris bed is formed and cooled at the condition of 3 bar. The thickness of the initial dry debris bed is 0.171 m. The dry debris bed does not melt, thus we use the previous model for the concrete ablation analysis. The debris bed is completely submerged about 14.8 h after the vessel failure, since then all the radioactive decay heat is discharged to the coolant by boiling. The ablation depth of the concrete is about 0.65 m during the ex-vessel cooling. This means that only some of the sacrificial concrete is thermally ablated and the containment liner plate is intact meaning that the leak-tightness of the containment is maintained.
Fig. 17. Concrete ablation and thermal energy balance results for STYX BED of Case 2 at 3 bar.
Considering the POMECO BED-5 type debris bed at 3 bar, we observe that the water penetration depth is already greater than the total height of the debris bed (0.515 m) at the moment of the debris bed formation. Therefore, all the debris bed is fully submerged from the outset, and all the generated radioactive decay heat is removed by boiling.
Fig. 18 shows the concrete ablation results of Case 2 1000 h after the reactor vessel failure or at the moment of the end of the concrete ablation. Whenever the poor-coolable COOLOCE-8 BED type debris bed is formed, then the leak-tightness integrity of the containment is not maintained even at 5 bar. However, when the STYX BED type debris bed is formed, the integrity of the containment is maintained with the pressure of 3 bar or higher. Also, if the most coolable debris bed like POMECO BED-5 is formed, then the integrity of the containment is maintained during the ex-vessel cooling even at 1 bar.
Fig. 18. Comparison of concrete ablation depth of Case 2.
4.3. Case 3
The debris bed is uniformly distributed on the reactor cavity floor in Case 3. The total reactor cavity floor area is about 58.4 m2, and the height of the debris bed is about 0.356 m. Therefore, the thermal load from the radioactive decay heat is uniformly distributed. This means that the thermal load is the smallest everywhere in the reactor floor, and this is the best case in terms of cooling the heat-generating debris bed and reducing the concrete ablation depth. Furthermore, since the thickness of the debris bed is the thinnest, it is likely to be fully submerged from the moment of the debris bed formation if the debris bed has good cooling properties. However, it does not seem that Case 3 occurs, by reviewing the geometry of the longish corridor and the location of the reactor vessel even assuming that the fragmented particles have good spreadability.
Fig. 19 shows the safety analysis results of the debris bed with the COOLOCE-8 BED characteristics at 3 bar condition. In this case, the previous model is used in the concrete ablation analysis since the dry debris bed does not melt. The debris bed is estimated to be completely submerged at about 20.3 h after the reactor vessel failure. The depth of the concrete ablation at the time is about 0.58 m. Therefore, only some part of the sacrificial concrete is thermally ablated, and the leak-tightness of the containment is maintained due to the intact containment liner plate.
Fig. 19. Concrete ablation and thermal energy balance results for COOLOCE-8 BED of Case 3 at 3 bar.
Fig. 20 shows the safety analysis results when the STYX BED type debris bed is formed and cooled at the pressure of 3 bar. Since the depth of the water penetration in the debris bed is 0.344 m, the initial dry-zone height is only about 0.012 m thick. As Fig. 20(b) shows that the majority of the thermal energy generated by radioactive decay is transferred to the water by boiling, so the heat flux to the bottom is very small. Consequently, there is negligible concrete ablation during the ex-vessel cooling since almost radioactive decay heat is transferred to the water and most of downward heat flux is conducted to the below concrete.
Fig. 20. Concrete ablation and thermal energy balance results for STYX BED of Case 3 at 3 bar.
As for the case of POMECO BED-5, the water penetration depth is 0.685 m so the debris bed is already fully submerged at the moment of the debris bed formation. Thus all the radioactive decay heat is discharged to the coolant.
Fig. 21 compares the concrete ablation depth during the ex-vessel cooling at each pressure for the three types of debris beds for Case 3. If the POEMCO BED-5 type debris bed is uniformly formed on the reactor cavity floor, the integrity of the containment is maintained during the ex-vessel cooling at all pressure conditions. However, as for the STYX BED and COOLOCE-8 BED type debris beds, the pressure needs to be higher than or equal to 2 bar and 3 bar, respectively, to maintain the leak-tightness.
Fig. 21. Comparison of concrete ablation depth of Case 3.
<Section>5. Summary and conclusion</Section>
In this study, we first develop an analytical model on the concrete ablation during the ex-vessel cooling in a pre-flooded cavity. The model considers the melting of the dry debris bed, the formation of the crust, the growth of the crust and the thermal ablation of the concrete. Then we analyze whether the containment keeps its integrity using the model if the heat-generating debris bed is formed in the pre-flooded deep pool reactor cavity of WH (3-loop) NPPs and the severe accident is initiated by TLOFW event. It is assumed that the three type debris beds (e.g., COOLOCE-8 BED, STYX BED and POMECO BED-5) are formed in the pre-flooded cavity. Three heights of the debris beds and the pressure from 1 bar to 5 bar are considered in the study. Case 1 is the debris bed which is formed only directly below the reactor vessel with the uniform height. Case 2 is that the fragmented particles spread up to the half of the corridor of the reactor cavity with the uniform height, and Case 3 is that the fragmented particles are evenly distributed throughout the reactor cavity floor.
If the debris bed like POMECO BED-5, which has best coolability, is formed in the zone directly below the reactor vessel as the case of Case 1, then the integrity of the containment is maintained at the pressure of 2 bar or higher. However, for COOLOCE-8 BED or STYX BED, it is assessed that the containment integrity is not maintained even at the pressure of 5 bar. As for Case 2, the integrity of the containment is maintained when pressure is even at 1 bar in the case of POMECO BED-5 and 3 bar or higher in the case of STYX BED. However, if the COOLOCE-8 BED like debris bed is formed, then the integrity of the containment is not maintained during the ex-vessel cooling process even at 5 bar. Finally, as for Case 3, the integrity of the containment is maintained at all pressure, 2 bar or higher and 3 bar or higher for the debris beds which is same as POMECO BED-5, STYX BED and COOLOCE-8 BED, respectively. However, Case 3 does not seem to occur by reviewing the geometry of the reactor cavity and the location of the reactor vessel even if the fragmented particles have good spreadability.
The current study has led to several perspectives as for the ex-vessel cooling in a pre-flooded reactor cavity. Firstly, if the atmospheric pressure increases, the dryout heat flux also increases resulting in the decrease in the concrete ablation depth. Because the density of water vapor released from the debris bed increases and its volume decreases, there is less drag on supplemental coolant causing the increase in dryout heat flux. Therefore, in terms of an accident management strategy, it would be good intentionally to increase the pressure of the containment. Of course, this may have the disadvantage of increasing an amount of radioactive material leakage to the environment.
The second aspect is about the height and spreadability of the debris bed. When the debris bed is stacked in a narrow space, it means that the radioactive decay heat is concentrated on the narrow area. On the other hand, if it is widely distributed, the decay heat is dispersed. The thinner the debris bed thickness, the less thermal load on the reactor cavity floor. Therefore, it is advantageous to lower the height of the debris bed in the term of cooling and concrete ablation. However, we cannot control the height and shape of debris bed in an accident situation, but they are determined by the geometry of reactor cavity, the location of reactor vessel and the spreadability of fragmented particles. Therefore, additional study is needed to predict how the fragmented particles are deposited for each NPP in order to assess the adequacy of ex-vessel cooling in the pre-flooded cavity.
The third important thing is the characteristics of the debris bed. When a debris bed with good cooling properties is formed, the amount of heat released to the cooling water increases. Therefore, the amount of thermal attack decreases on the reactor cavity structure. We also cannot control the characteristics of the debris bed, but it is determined by nature. It seems that the considered debris beds in the study such as the debris beds like COOLOCE-8 BED, STYX BED and POMECO BED-5 represent the real debris bed because they are based on the actual fragmentation test results. However, it cannot be ruled out the possibility that their characteristics may be away from the real debris bed and an inhomogeneous debris bed could be formed. Therefore, it is also needed the additional researches on how coolable the real debris bed is formed in a pre-flooded cavity.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Hanbee Na: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Writing - original draft. Dong Gu Kang: Data curation, Investigation, Writing - original draft. Sukyoung Pak: Visualization, Investigation. Hee Joon Lee: Supervision, Writing - review & editing.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgments</Section>
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (NRF-2018R1A2B6006160).
<Section>References</Section>
Blose et al., 1987
Blose, R.E., Gronager, J.E., Suo-Anttila, A.J., Brockman, J.E., 1987. SWISS: Sustained Heated Metallic Melt/Concrete Interactions with Overlying Water Pools (No. NUREG/CR-4727).
Google Scholar
El-Wakil, 1979
M.M. El-Wakil
Nuclear Heat Transport
International Textbook Company (1979)
Google Scholar
Farmer et al., 2006
Farmer, M.T., Lomperski, S., Kilsdonk, D.J., Aeschlimann, R.W., 2006. OECD / MCCI-2005-TR06 OECD MCCI Project Final Report.
Google Scholar
Farmer et al., 2000
Farmer, M.T., Spencer, B.W., Kilsdonk, D.J., Aeschlimann, R.W., 2000. Results of MACE core coolability experiments M0 and M1b, In: Proceeding of 8th International Conference on Nuclear Engineering (ICONE-8). Baltimore, MD.
Google Scholar
Greene et al., 1988
Greene, G.A., Finrock, C., J. Klages, A., Schwarz, C.E., 1988. Experimental Studies on Melt Spreading, Bubbling Heat Transfer and Coolant Layer Boiling (No. NUREG/CP-0096). In: Proceedings of 16 th Water Reactor Safety Meeting.
Google Scholar
Haraldsson and Sehgal, 1999
Haraldsson, H.O., Sehgal, B.R., 1999. Breakup of high temperature oxide jet in water. In: Proceedings of The Ninth International Topical Meet- Ing on Nuclear Reactor Thermal Hydraulics NURETH-9. San Francisco, California.
Google Scholar
Journeau and Piluso, 2012
Journeau, C., Piluso, P., 2012. Comprehensive Nuclear Material, In: Core Concrete Interaction. Elsevier, pp. 635–654. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-056033-5.00048-3.
Google Scholar
FNC Technology, 2012a
FNC Technology, 2012a. A report on ex-vessel debris coolability for Kori unit 3 and 4 (No. FNC1212-TR12-93(0)).
Google Scholar
FNC Technology, 2012b
FNC Technology, 2012b. A report on reactor cavity flooding condition calculations for Kori unit 3 & 4 (No. FNC1212-TR12-67(0)).
Google Scholar
KEPCO, 2013
KEPCO E&C, 2013. An assessment on MCCI and coolability of molten corium for Shin-Kori unit 5 and 6.
Google Scholar
KINS, 2018
KINS, 2018. Safety review guideline for accident management program (No. KINS/GE-N016(Rev.1)).
Google Scholar
Kawahara and Oka, 2012
T. Kawahara, Y. Oka
Ex-vessel molten core solidification behavior by moving particle semi-implicit method
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 49 (12) (2012), pp. 1156-1164, 10.1080/00223131.2012.740944
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kodur, 2014
V. Kodur
Properties of concrete at elevated temperatures
ISRN Civil Eng., 2014 (2014), pp. 1-15
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kudinov and Davydov, 2013
P. Kudinov, M. Davydov
Development and validation of conservative-mechanistic and best estimate approaches to quantifying mass fractions of agglomerated debris
Nucl. Eng. Des., 262 (2013), pp. 452-461, 10.1016/j.nucengdes.2013.05.020
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Leverett, 1941
M.C. Leverett
Capillary behavior in porous solids
Trans. Metall. Soc. AIME, 142 (1941), pp. 152-169, 10.2118/941152-G
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Li et al., 2012
L. Li, W. Ma, S. Thakre
An experimental study on pressure drop and dryout heat flux of two-phase flow in packed beds of multi-sized and irregular particles
Nucl. Eng. Des., 242 (2012), pp. 369-378, 10.1016/j.nucengdes.2011.11.006
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lindholm et al., 2006
I. Lindholm, S. Holmström, J. Miettinen, V. Lestinen, J. Hyvärinen, P. Pankakoski, H. Sjövall
Dryout heat flux experiments with deep heterogeneous particle bed
Nucl. Eng. Des., 236 (19-21) (2006), pp. 2060-2074
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lipinski, 1982
R.J. Lipinski
A Model for Boiling and Dryout in Particle Beds (No. NUREG/CR-2646), USNRC (1982)
Google Scholar
Lu and Chang, 1987
S.M. Lu, R.H. Chang
Pool boiling from a surface with a porous layer
AIChE J., 33 (11) (1987), pp. 1813-1828, 10.1002/aic.690331108
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Magallon and Huhtiniemi, 2001
D. Magallon, I. Huhtiniemi
Corium melt quenching tests at low pressure and subcooled water in FARO
Nucl. Eng. Des., 204 (1–3) (2001), pp. 369-376, 10.1016/S0029-5493(00)00318-6
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Matsumoto et al., 2017
T. Matsumoto, K. Sakurada, S. Miwa, H. Sakashita, M. Mori
Scaling analysis of the spreading and deposition behaviors of molten-core-simulated metals
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 108 (2017), pp. 79-88, 10.1016/j.anucene.2017.04.038
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Matsuo et al., 2008
E. Matsuo, Y. Abe, K. Chitose, K. Koyama, K. Itoh
Study on jet breakup behavior at core disruptive accident for fast breeder reactor
Nucl. Eng. Des., 238 (8) (2008), pp. 1996-2004, 10.1016/j.anucene.2019.107123
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Miassoedov et al., 2010
A. Miassoedov, H. Alsmeyer, T. Cron, J. Foit
The COMET-L3 experiment on long-term melt–concrete interaction and cooling by surface flooding
Nucl. Eng. Design, 240 (2) (2010), pp. 258-265, 10.1016/j.nucengdes.2008.12.005
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Mills, 1995
A.F. Mills
Heat and Mass Transfer
CRC Press (1995)
Google Scholar
Na et al., 2020
H. Na, D.G. Kang, Y.H. Ryu, H.J. Lee
One-dimensional ex-vessel coolability analysis of debris beds formed in OPR1000 pre-flooded reactor cavity
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 138 (2020), p. 107123, 10.1016/j.anucene.2019.107123
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Na et al., 2017a
H. Na, H.S. Kim, H.J. Lee, D.S. Kim, S. Kwon
Preliminary feasibility study of post-flooding ex-vessel corium cooling strategy by CFD spreading simulations and concrete ablation analysis
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 97 (2017), pp. 139-152, 10.1016/j.pnucene.2016.12.017
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Na et al., 2017b
H. Na, H.J. Lee, S. Kwon, S.J. Kim, J. Kim
One-dimensional coolability and concrete ablation analysis of volumetrically heat-generating debris bed
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 106 (2017), pp. 256-270, 10.1016/j.anucene.2017.03.025
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Nayak et al., 2009
A.K. Nayak, R.K. Singh, P.P. Kulkarni, B.R. Sehgal
A numerical and experimental study of water ingression phenomena in melt pool coolability
Nucl. Eng. Des., 239 (7) (2009), pp. 1285-1293, 10.1016/j.nucengdes.2009.02.016
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ogura et al., 2018
T. Ogura, T. Matsumoto, S. Miwa, M. Mori, T. Hibiki
Experimental study on molten metal spreading and deposition behaviors
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 118 (2018), pp. 353-362, 10.1016/j.anucene.2018.04.036
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Reed, 1982
Reed, A.W., 1982. The effect of channeling on the dryout of heated particulate beds immersed in a liquid pool. Ph.D. Dissertation, MIT.
Google Scholar
Poling et al., 2001
B.E. Poling, J.M. Parusnitz, J.P. O’Connell
The properties of gases and liquids, McGraw-Hill, New York (2001)
Google Scholar
Schulenberg and Müller, 1987
T. Schulenberg, U. Müller
An improved model for two-phase flow through beds of coarse particles
Int. J. Multiph. Flow, 13 (1) (1987), pp. 87-97, 10.1016/0301-9322(87)90009-7
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Steinwarz et al., 2001
W. Steinwarz, A. Alemberti, W. Häfner, Z. Alkan, M. Fischer
Investigations on the phenomenology of ex-vessel core melt behaviour (COMAS)
Nucl. Eng. Des., 209 (1–3) (2001), pp. 139-146, 10.1016/S0029-5493(01)00396-X
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Strizhov et al., 1992
Strizhov, V., Ptacek, J., Corradini, M., 1992. Energy modeling of the ACE MCCI experiment L6. In: Proceedings of the Second OECD (NEA) CSNI Specialist Meeting on Molten Core Debris-Concrete Interaction.
Google Scholar
Tromm et al., 2000
W. Tromm, J.J. Foit, D. Magallon
Dry and wet spreading experiments with prototypic material at the FARO facility and theoretical analysis
Proceeding of OECD Workshop on Ex-Vessel Debris Coolability, Karlsruhe, Germany (2000), pp. 178-188
Google Scholar
Tung and Dhir, 1988
V.X. Tung, V.K. Dhir
A hydrodynamic model for two-phase flow through porous media
Int. J. Multiph. Flow, 14 (1) (1988), pp. 47-65, 10.1016/0301-9322(88)90033-X
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Udell, 1985
K.S. Udell
Heat transfer in porous media considering phase change and capillarity—the heat pipe effect
Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 28 (2) (1985), pp. 485-495, 10.1016/0017-9310(85)90082-1
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Takasuo, 2013
Takasuo, E., 2013. Debris coolability simulations with different particle materials and comparisons to COOLOCE experiments (No. VTT-R-00257-13).
Google Scholar
Ye et al., 2013
I.S. Ye, A.J. Kim, C. Ryu, K.S. Ha, H.Y. Kim, J. Song
Numerical investigation of the spreading and heat transfer characteristics of ex-vessel core melt
Nucl. Eng. Technol. (2013), 10.5516/NET.03.2012.011
Google Scholar
Yeon et al., 2012
W.S. Yeon, K.H. Bang, Y. Choi, Y.S. Kim, J. Lee
CFD analysis of core melt spreading on the reactor cavity floor using ANSYS CFX code
Nucl. Eng. Des., 249 (2012), pp. 90-96, 10.1016/j.nucengdes.2011.08.047
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in Scopus
Google Scholar