<title>The cavitation performance analysis of the RCP under LBLOCA at inlet</title>
<author>1,CeAn, 2, RongshengZhu,3,YunLong,4,XiuliWang,5,YonggangLu,6,YimingChen</author>
<Affiliation>1,National Research Center of Pumps, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212013, Jiangsu, China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan,HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107605</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454920303030</URL>
The cavitation performance analysis of the RCP under LBLOCA at inlet
CeAn,  RongshengZhu,YunLong,XiuliWang,YonggangLu,YimingChen
National Research Center of Pumps, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212013, Jiangsu, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
The cavitation performance of RCPs under reverse pump mode was researched by experiment method.
Anew cavitation estimate method on RCPs under reverse pump mode was proposed.
The cavitation bubble distribution under reverse pump mode was studied by numerical method.
The variation of the blade loading distribution in the reverse pump mode with the inlet pressure was analyzed.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The reverse pump mode is an extreme working condition which is very likely to happen when LBLOCA (large break loss-of-coolant accident) occurs at the inlet of RCP (nuclear reaction coolant pump). In order to study the cavitation performance of the RCP under this kind of extreme working condition, the accuracy of the numerical data is verified by comparing it with the experimental data. Then, the GVF (gas volume fractions) of the RCP under different flow rates are analyzed by numerical simulation. A new method based on the average GVF to estimate the cavitation of the RCP under the reverse pump mode is proposed. In the process of numerical study, the cavitation of the RCP is promoted by changing the inlet pressure, and the cavitation performance of the RCP is studied by the new estimate method. The results show that the head increases at each flow rate with the decrease of inlet pressure under the incipient cavitation state and cavitation development state. When the increase rate of the head reaches the maximum, the RCP is in the full cavitation state. When the pressure drops to a certain value, the average GVF on the impeller blade surface reaches 2%, and the head of the RCP drops sharply like it under the pump mode. Finally, the cavities are widely distributed in the inlet of impeller, it will cause severe mechanical vibration and erosion to flow passage component, and even lead to serious accidents. The present work provides a useful reference for the further study of the operation of the RCP under the LBLOCA.
<Section>Abbreviations</Section>
RCPnuclear reaction coolant pumpGVFgas volume fractionLOCAloss-of-coolant accidentSBLOCAsmall break LOCALBLOCAlarge break LOCA
Keywords：Nuclear reaction coolant pump；Reverse pump mode；Pump performance；CavitationGas volume fraction
<Section>Nomenclature</Section>
Q
Volume flow rate, m3/h
QBEP
Volume flow rate in best efficiency point, the value is 41.8 m3/h
H
Head of the pump, m
n
Rotational speed, r/min
ns
Specific speed
P
Pressure, kPa
Pin
Inlet pressure, kPa
Pb
Blade loading, kPa
QP
Volume flow rate of prototype pump
Str
Ratio between ordinate value and impeller outlet diameter
R1
Impeller inlet diameter
R2
Impeller outlet diameter
V
Average GVF
Vg
Pressure face GVF
Vb
Suction face GVF
QM
Volume flow rate of test pump
HP
Head of prototype pump
HM
Head of model pump
nP
Rotational speed of prototype pump
nM
Rotational speed of model pump
DP
Impeller diameter of prototype pump
DM
Impeller diameter of model pump
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The safety performance of the RCP must be considered in loss-of-coolant accident (LOCA) at nuclear power plant safety evaluation system. LOCA refers to the loss of coolant in a nuclear power plant due to the rupture of the main pipe of the nuclear reactor coolant system (Zhu, 2010). As one of the main benchmark accidents of nuclear power plant design, LOCA results in the damage of the pressure boundary of the RCP and leads to a series of accidents, even the nuclear leakage accident caused by the reactor core burnt. According to the location of the break, LOCA is divided into inlet break LOCA and outlet break LOCA. According to the size of the break area, it’s also divided into small break LOCA (SBLOCA) and large break LOCA (LBLOCA).When the main coolant inlet pipeline of the nuclear power plant has a LBLOCA, the inlet pressure of the RCP decreases rapidly, until the work done by the RCP can not overcome the pressure difference between the inlet and outlet. At this point, the coolant flows back under the action of the pressure difference, it is defined as the reverse pump mode (Cavazzini et al., 2018) which is characterized by position of rotational speed (n > 0) and counter flow (Q < 0) under the combined action of high outlet pressure and low inlet pressure. The RCP must be strictly subject to the constraints of safety evaluation system from the beginning of design. According to ASME code, the RCP not only needs to complete the test and assessment under various special conditions, such as earthquake, thermal shock, etc., but also under various accident conditions. Therefore, this paper researches the cavitation performance of the RCP under LBLOCA at inlet.
Several studies have shown the behavior of the RCP under SBLOCA. The efficiency and torque of the RCP decrease monotonically at the beginning of SBLOCA. In the middle of SBLOCA, the RCP are in gas–liquid two-phase condition, and the head changes with the temperature. At this condition, the head will show a relatively complex change (Liu, 2017, Yu, 2012, Zhu et al., 2017a). However, there are few researches on LBLOCA, especially the cavitation performance of the RCP in the condition of LBLOCA. Cavitation is an undesirable phenomenon in pumps. Cavitation induces pressure fluctuation and uneven load distribution, thereby seriously reducing the efficiency of pumps and affecting their operational stability (Tan et al., 2014) (Tan et al., 2015). For the reverse pump mode caused by LBLOCA, the huge flow resistance caused by back flow and the instability caused by cavitation will cause more damage to the surface of flow passage and significantly reduce the service life of pumps.
Many achievements have been made in the research of the performance of fluid machinery with liquid medium. The inner flow and unsteady characteristics of a scaled model RCP in non-uniform inflow are investigated by experimental and numerical method (Cheng et al., 2020.; Long et al., 2017, Long et al., 2016a, Xu et al., 2018, Yun et al., 2017, Yun Long et al., 2017). These studies not only give scaled model test method of the RCP, but also introduce the appropriate numerical calculation method. Through these, the unsteady characteristics of the main pump with non-uniform in flows are obtained. By adopting experimental and numerical method, the flow characteristics of fluid machinery in cavitation state can be obtained. Cavitation state is a transient process, therefore, most of the current research is to analyze the cavitation characteristics under the transient state (Fu et al., 2016, Wang et al., 2014, Yue and Lei, 2018). The influence of temperature, inlet pressure and flow rate on cavitation performance of fluid machinery was analyzed (Gohil and Saini, 2015, Zhu et al., 2014), and the scholars have proposed various improved designs to optimize cavitation performance of fluid machinery at the basis (Wang, 2013, Wang et al., 2013). In addition, recent studies use vibration signal analysis method to test the cavitation performance of fluid machinery (Asish et al., 2018, Azizi et al., 2017) and help for judging the cavitation state. However, the cavitation performance of the above researches is mainly on the pump mode and the turbine mode. Refer to the complete characteristic curve of the pump (Zhu et al., 2017b) , as shown in Fig. 1, there are many special conditions need to be explored, such as the reverse pump mode in this paper.
Fig. 1. The complete characteristic curve of the pump (Lu et al., 2017).
This paper presents a method for determining the development stage of cavitation under the reverse pump mode. Meanwhile, by adopting numerical and experimental study, the pump performance and cavitation performance of the RCP under the reverse pump mode were studied, and the cavities distributions of the RCP under this mode are analyzed. It provides a useful reference for the further study of the operation of the RCP in the condition of the inlet LBLOCA.
<Section>2. Test pump and 3D modeling</Section>
2.1. Test pump
According to the water conservancy industry standard of the People's Republic of China SL 140–200, acceptance test procedure for water pump model and device model, test pump is designed by reducing the prototype of the RCP into a scale of 1:10, and the specific conversion process is as follows:
@(3)
@(4)
The main designed parameters of prototype pump and test pump are shown in Table 1:
Table 1. The comparison of main performance parameters between the prototype pump and the test pump of RCP.
The impeller geometrical parameters of the RCPs are shown in Fig. 2. The value of each parameters is shown in Table 2.
Fig. 2. Main structural impeller parameters.
Table 2. Basic geometric parameters of the pump.
2.2. Design of experimental setup
The test pump is manufactured according to the proportion of design parameters to test and verify. The experimental setup used in this research is a multi-functional closed test bed designed and built by the Fluid Mechanical Engineering Research Center of Jiangsu university and Jiangsu National Pump Co., LTD. Fig. 3 shows the schematic diagram of the experimental setup, including: Test pump, Surge tank I, II, Inline pump, Valve I ~ V, Vacuum tank, Compensator, Vacuum pump and related Pipeline. The Compensator is used to connect water loop and vacuum tank, and the pipe connecting the vacuum tank is located on its upper part to prevent water from flowing into the vacuum tank. The flow between the Test pump and Inline pump is opposite. In addition, relevant measuring instruments also include Torque meter, Electromagnetic flowmeter, Pressure sensor, etc. the schematic diagram of test section is shown in Fig. 4.
Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of the experimental setup.
Fig. 4. Schematic diagram of test section.
2.3. Operation steps of cavitation test
The experimental setup is shown in Fig. 3. The medium of Vacuum pump, Vacuum tank and the Pipelines connecting the two parts is air. The function of the Compensator is to connect the vacuum tank with the test pipe and to prevent the water in the test pipe from flowing into the vacuum tank when adjusting the pressure. The medium of the Compensator is air and water. And the other Pipelines and devices is full of water. In the test of pump mode, Valve I and Valve III are always closed, and the flow rate is adjusted by Valve II. Whereas, in the cavitation test under the reverse pump condition, the Valve I is always closed, the flow rate is adjusted by Valve II, and the Pin of the Test pump is adjusted by Valve III.
In this paper, the transient speed and torque of the motor is collected by the ZJ torque sensor, and its measurement accuracy is 0.1. The pressure of the inlet and outlet of the test pump can be collected using the WT2000 intelligent pressure sensor, and the pressure sensor are −0.1 ~ 1 MPa, and the measurement accuracy is 0.2. The KEFN electromagnetic flowmeter with a DN80 is selected as the test device. It can directly display the flow, at the same time, output 4 ~ 20 mA pulse current signal with 0.5 sampling accuracy.
The operation steps of cavitation performance test are as follows:
1.
Open Inline pump and Test pump successively, and adjust the flow rate to −1.0 QBEP (-41.8 m3/h). Test data are recorded until the data of Test pump inlet and outlet pressure sensor is stable.
2.
Open Valve Ⅳ, close the Valve III, and open the Vacuum pump in turn. Until the pressure gauge of the Vacuum tank changes, and close the Valve Ⅳ and Vacuum pump.
3.
Slightly open Valve III to adjust the test system pressure. Close Valve III immediately when flow changes. After that, the flow rate is adjusted to −0.1 QBEP by valve II, and the test data is recorded when the parameters displayed by each instrument is stable.
4.
Repeat steps 2 and 3 until the pressure stops falling. At this point, a test is completed and valve V is opened to connect the Pipeline to the atmosphere.
5.
Close Valve V and repeat the above steps to complete the cavitation test under −0.1 QBEP, −0.6 QBEP and −1.6 QBEP conditions.
2.4. Calculation model and mesh generation
Fig. 5 shows the 3D calculation model of the Test pump, and the computational domain includes suction, impeller, guide vane, pump casing and the outlet. At the same time, considering the influence of the inlet and outlet boundary on the calculation results, the inlet and outlet sections of the test pump model are extended. Commercial Software ICEM is used to mesh the established 3D model. In the previous research process, other members of the research group have checked the mesh independence of the model. When the number of grids is about 3.3 million, the head difference is<0.5%, and it can be considered that the grid has no impact on the calculation results at this condition (Long et al., 2016b, Lu et al., 2019). Finally, the grid number is shown in the Table 3 and the mesh model is shown in Fig. 6.
Fig. 5. The RCP 3D model.
Table 3. The grid number of the test pump.
Fig. 6. Mesh model.
<Section>3. Numerical study and experimental verification</Section>
3.1. The setting of boundary conditions
The numerical calculation of the pump model is carried by ANSYS CFX 18.1. The RNG k-ε turbulence model and the full cavitation model proposed by Singhal et al.(Singhal et al., 2002) are used to simulate the cavitation flow inside the pump. The cavitation model can be used to solve the periodic phase transition process caused by cavitation. The inlet condition is the average static pressure inlet, and the outlet condition is the normal speed outlet. The reference pressure is set to 0 Pa, the cavitation saturated vapor pressure is set to 3169 Pa. The standard wall function is selected near the wall surface and the wall boundary condition is set as adiabatic non-slip wall surface. The residual target is set to 10-4.
3.2. Experimental verification
Fig. 7 shows the pump performance curve under pump mode obtained by test and numerical calculation respectively. It shows that the pump performance curve of the pump is slightly different from the numerical calculation result, and the relative error is basically within 10%.
Fig. 7. The pump performance curve under pump mode.
Fig. 8 shows the pump cavitation performance curve under pump mode in the condition of Q = 1.0 QBEP. The experimental data shown in the Fig. 8 is basically consistent with the numerical data. The error is caused by measurement error, casting and machining precision during the test. In conclusion, the pump performance curve and cavitation performance curve of the pump obtained by numerical calculation are consistent with the experimental results, so the numerical results are reliable.
Fig. 8. The cavitation performance curve under pump mode.
Therefore, the numerical calculation of the pump under reverse pump mode was carried out in a similar setting. When setting boundary conditions, the simulation under the reverse pump mode needs to change the flow direction of the fluid medium. At this condition, the outlet under the pump mode becomes the current flow inlet, while the inlet under the pump mode becomes the outlet. The rest of the Settings remain unchanged.
Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 respectively show the pump performance curve and cavitation performance curve (Q = -1.0 QBEP) of the pump under reverse pump mode. At Fig. 9, the pump performance curve of the pump measured by the test is very consistent with the numerical results under reverse pump mode. The error between experimental and numerical data also conform to the requirements of GB/T 3216–2016 and the maximum error is no>7%. It shows that the numerical data match the experimental data well under the reverse pump mode.
Fig. 9. The pump performance curve under reverse pump mode.
Fig. 10. The cavitation performance curve under reverse pump mode.
It can also be seen from Fig. 8 and Fig. 10 that the cavitation performance curve of the pump under the reverse pump mode is quite different from that under the pump mode. Under the pump mode, when the pressure inside the pump is higher than the critical pressure, its head have little change with the decrease of pressure. When cavitation occurs, the head decreases sharply with the decrease of pressure. However, the numerical results are different under the reverse pump mode. When the Pin is higher than 25 kPa, the head basically remains unchanged with the decrease of the Pin. Starting from Pin = 25 kPa, the head increases slowly with the decrease of Pin. When the pressure drops to −50 kPa, the head increases rapidly. Finally, when the pressure drops to −60 kPa, the head also decreases sharply like the pump mode. The same rule appears in the test results.
<Section>4. Cavitation performance analysis of the reverse pump mode</Section>
4.1. Definition of average GVF
According to the pump industry standard, the critical cavitation point is usually defined as the point which the head decreases by 3% compared with the one without cavitation under the pump mode. By some special external conditions to make the pump out of pump mode, the above criteria method is no longer applicable. Therefore, the reverse pump condition of the RCP is studied in this paper. In order to quantitatively analyze the cavitation state in the RCP and make it suitable for various working conditions, an estimate standard of cavitation is proposed in this paper.
In the pump mode, the number and volume of cavities generated by cavitation in the incipient cavitation state are small. These can’t cause obvious influence on the flow field. In other words, the pump performance curve does not appear any change. When the head drops by 3%, the cavitation has developed to a considerable extent. Therefore, the above criterion is essentially to make a quantitative estimate of the cavitation state. It uses the influence of cavitation on the internal flow field which the pump performance curve shows the drop in the head. Compared with the experimental study, it is easier to quantitatively obtain the GVF of a certain section during the numerical study of the flow field in the RCP. Therefore, the cavitation state in the flow field can be quantitatively defined by monitoring the GVF in a certain section. The average GVF of the whole blade surface is monitored in this paper.
4.2. Judgement of cavitation stage
In order to study the relationship between average GVF and cavitation, the cavitation performance is explored by continuously reducing the Pin. Fig. 11 shows the variation trends of average GVF  and head with Pin at different flow rates (-0.6 QBEP, −1.0 QBEP, −1.6 QBEP).
Fig. 11. The variation trend of GVF and head with Pin.
As can be seen from Fig. 11, with the decrease of Pin, the average GVF  of the pump impeller blade and head have the same change trend at different flow points under the reverse pump mode. The head rises first and then falls, but it is difficult to find a determine variation parameter in this trend to estimate the occurrence of cavitation.
The average GVF  increases slowly at prophase decrease of Pin. When the pressure reaches a certain level, it will drop sharply. This variation trend is similar with the NPSH variation trend under pump mode. Therefore, the average GVF  is taken as the quantitative standard of cavitation state and the relationship between them is shown in Table 4.
Table 4. The relationship between the average GVF and the cavitation state.
The significance of such relationship is that different cavitation states can be quantitatively expressed in terms of average GVF . This can not only estimate the cavitation quantitatively, but also establish the quantitative relationship between cavitation and pressure.
It should be noted that the state of cavitation represented by the same average GVF  is not the same under different modes, such as the pump mode and the reverse pump mode. It is only used as a research method for the reverse pump mode in this paper.
The analysis is combined with Fig. 11(b). When the Pin = 25 kPa, the average GVF  reached 0.97%. It can be determined that when the Pin is>25 kPa, the pump is in the incipient cavitation state. And when the Pin = -34 kPa, the average GVF  is about 2.09%. Therefore, when the Pin is less than −34 kPa, the pump is in the full cavitation state. When −34 kPa < Pin < 25 kPa, the pump is in the cavitation development state.
The variation trend of the head in Fig. 11(b) shows that the cavitation performance curve is very different from it under the pump mode. When the Pin > 25 kPa, the head remains almost unchanged with the decrease of the Pin. When −60 kPa < Pin < 25 kPa, the head gradually increases with the decrease of the Pin. When Pin = -50 kPa, the average GVF reaches 7.47%, and the pump has been in the full cavitation state. When Pin < -50 kPa, the head rises rapidly. Finally, the head drops sharply when the pressure drops to −60 kPa.
Due to the limitation of experimental condition, the experiment under Q = -1.6 QBEP failures. Thus, the numerical data are shown in Fig. 11(c) now only.
4.3. The vapor volume fraction distribution
The span surface of impeller is illustrated in the Fig. 12. Fig. 13 shows the vapor volume fraction distribution diagram of different span surface in reverse pump mode (Q = -1.0 QBEP) in different Pin.
Fig. 12. The define of span surface.
Fig. 13. The vapor volume fraction distribution diagram of the different span surface in reverse pump mode.
Fig. 13 indicates that cavities in the impeller first appear at the surface which is Span = 0.1 under the incipient cavitation state. As shown in Fig. 13(a), cavities are produced on the blade pressure surface near the inlet edge before Pin = -40 kPa. With the development of cavitation, the vapor volume fraction increases. When the pump is in the full cavitation state (P < -50 kPa), the cavities fill the impeller inlet. However, in other parts of impeller passage, there is no cavity aggregation.
Fig. 13(b) shows that, few cavities are found in the Span = 0.5 surface before Pin = -40 kPa. When P < -50 kPa, cavities appear on the blade suction surface close to the inlet edge. These cavities are produced at the pressure surface near the hub and spread to here by the action of the flow.
Synthesize the descriptions of Fig. 13(a) and Fig. 13(b), the vapor volume fraction distribution can be obtained. Only a few cavities exist in the impeller passage when the Pin = 25 kPa. By reducing the Pin from 25 kPa to −34 kPa, the cavitation region grew very slowly. When the Pin drops to −50 kPa, the content of cavities in the impeller passage increases sharply with the decrease of the Pin. The cavitation region diffuses to the impeller inlet along the blade pressure face, and the average GVF  on the monitoring surface has reached 7.74%. The pump has been in the full cavitation state at this point. With the further decrease of pressure, the cavitation region in the impeller increases rapidly. When the Pin drops to −80 kPa, the impeller inlet region between the surface of span = 0.5 and the Hub is already filled with cavities.
<Section>5. The blade loading analysis</Section>
As shown in Fig. 13, there are few distinctions among the different blade on the vapor volume fraction distribution diagram. Therefore, the blade loading is studied by choosing one of blades. The blade loading distributions of span line under different inlet pressures are shown in Fig. 14 ~ Fig. 16. The span line is the intersection line between the span surface and the blade surface.
Fig. 14. The blade loading distributions of span = 0.1 line.
In Fig. 14, the value of Streamwise (Str) defined the location of the point corresponding to the pressure value, and its value is:
@(5)
Fig. 14 shows the blade loading distributions of the Span = 0.1 surface under different inlet pressures. The Pb increases in the region of impeller outlet (1 < Str < 0.774) with the Str reduces. When Str = 0.774, the Pb of each curve shown in Fig. 14 reaches the largest value. On the pressure surface, the Pb drops to −101 kPa when Str = 0.455. Combining with the Fig. 13(a), the results can be gotten that the vapor volume fraction are distributed on the region where the Pb closes to −101 kPa. When Pin = 25 kPa, the area of the vapor volume fraction distribution is narrow (0.455 < Str < 0.269). In the pressure surface of Str < 0.269, the Pb rises rapidly. Therefore, the vapor volume fraction are hardly found in the Span = 0.1 surface close to the impeller inlet as shown in Fig. 13(a). The same phenomenon is shown in the curve of Pin = -34 kPa and Pin = -40 kPa. The Str of inflection points for Pb rising decrease with the Pin reduce. When Pin ≤ -50 kPa, the Pb of the pressure surface where the Str < 0.463 is keep in −101 kPa.
When 1 < Str < 0.704, the Pb in suction surface shows an upward trend. When 0.704 < Str < 0, the Pb in suction surface shows a downward trend no inflection point be found in this region. In the curve of Pin = -80 kPa, Pb = -101 kPa when Str < 0.163.
By comparing Pb distributions between the pressure surface and the suction surface shown in Fig. 14, the following conclusions are also drawn. When 1 < Str < 0.56, the Pb in suction surface is lower than it in pressure surface. The direction of blade loading in this region is along the normal direction from the pressure surface to the suction surface. The region is defined as the positive loading area. When 0.56 < Str < 0, the direction of blade loading is the opposite, and the region is defined as the negative loading area.
Fig. 15 shows the blade loading distributions of the Span = 0.5 line under different Pin. The Pb increases in the region of impeller outlet (1 < Str < 0.664) with the Str reduces. When Str = 0.664, the Pb of each curve shown in Fig. 14 reaches the largest value. The largest values shown in Fig. 14 are performed a downward trend with the Pin drops from 25 kPa to −50 kPa. When Pin = -80 kPa, the largest Pb is higher than the values from −34 kPa to −50 kPa. The Pb decrease sharply in the region of impeller outlet (0.664 < Str < 0.44) with the Str reduces. At the impeller blade inlet, the blade loading reduces with the rise of Pin. The Pb reaches the −101 kPa Until Pin decreases to −80 kPa. On other curves, the values of this region increase as the pressure increases. When Pin ≥ -50 kPa, the Pb is much higher than −101 kPa, and the cavities are not observed in Fig. 13.
Fig. 15. The blade loading distributions of span = 0.5 line.
Fig. 16. The blade loading distributions of span = 0.9 line.
When 1 < Str < 0.52, the Pb presents a positive loading as shown in Fig. 15. It is different from Fig. 14, the negative loading area is narrow. When Pin = 25 kPa, the negative loading area is 0.52 < Str < 0.206. The Pb difference between pressure surface and suction surface is very small when Str > 0.206. The negative loading regions are narrowing with the reducing of the Pin. Meanwhile, the differences in Str > 0.206 are growing with the reducing of the Pin.
Fig. 16 shows the blade loading distributions of the Span = 0.9 line under different Pin. The curves at different Pin show a similar trend in Fig. 16. In the curve of Pin = 25 kPa, the Pb of the pressure surface increases in the region of impeller outlet (1 < Str < 0.66) with the reducing of the Str. The maximum Pb is 293 kPa when Str = 0.66. In the region of 0.66 < Str, the Pb decreases sharply and then flattens out with the Pin dropping. In other curves, the maximum values from −34 kPa to −80 kPa are 239 kPa, 227 kPa, 224 kPa and 254 kPa respectively when Str = 0.754, 0.811, 0.811 and 0.837. As shown in Fig. 16, the Pb is much higher than −101 kPa, and cavities are not observed in span = 0.9.
When 1 < Str < 0.466, the Pb presents a positive loading as shown in Pin = 25 kPa curve of Fig. 16. The negative loading area is the region of 0.466 < Str < 0.282 and the differences are small. When Str > 0.282, the positive loading area appears again. The similar trends are shown in the other curves in Fig. 16.
In summary, the following conclusions are revealed in Fig. 14 ~ Fig. 16. At the blade near the impeller outlet, the direction of blade loading is along the normal direction from the pressure surface to the suction surface. In Span = 0.1 line, the direction of blade loading is inversed at the other half. With the span rising, the span line is close to the shroud, and the negative loading area shrinks towards the middle of blade. Nearby the blade inlet, the positive loading area appears and enlarges. With the cavitation development, the negative loading area shrinks and the positive loading area enlarges.
As for the flow mechanism of cavitation performance mentioned in this paper, the research group is carrying out further research.
<Section>6. Conclusions</Section>
This paper takes the RCP as the research object. The cavitation performance of the RCP under LBLOCA at inlet is explored by numerical and experimental study. The conclusions are as follows:
1)
The average GVF of the whole blade surface has a similar variation trend with the NPSH variation trend under pump mode, and it can be taken as the quantitative standard of cavitation state.
2)
The cavitation performance curve under the reverse pump mode is different from the one under the pump mode. When the RCP is in the reverse pump mode, the heads with different flow rates increase as inlet pressure decreases at the incipient cavitation state and cavitation development state. When the increase rate reaches the maximum, the RCP is in the full cavitation state. After the pressure drops to a certain value, the head of the RCP drops sharply as in the pump mode.
3)
The half blade near the impeller outlet is the positive loading area. In Span = 0.1 line, the other half is the negative loading area. With the span surface approaching the shroud, the negative loading area shrinks towards the middle of blade, and the positive loading area appears nearby the blade inlet and enlarges. As cavitation progresses, the positive load area also increases.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Ce An: Data curation, Formal analysis, Writing - review & editing. Rongsheng Zhu: Methodology. Yun Long: Conceptualization. Xiuli Wang: Conceptualization. Yonggang Lu: Resources. Yiming Chen: Validation, Writing - original draft.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgments</Section>
Foundation Program: National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFB0606105); National Youth Natural Science Foundation of China(51906085); Key R & D programs of Jiangsu Province of China (BE2016160, BE2017140, BE2018112); Key R & D programs of Anhui Province of China (201904a05020070); Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province of China (BK20171302); Postgraduate Research & Practice Innovation Program of Jiangsu Province (KYCX18_2240); Key R & D programs of Taizhou City (TG201918).
<Section>References</Section>
Asish et al., 2018
K.P. Asish, S.R. Janani, T. Rajiv
Prediction of flow blockages and impending cavitation in centrifugal pumps using Support Vector Machine (SVM) algorithms based on vibration measurements
Measurement, 130 (2018), pp. 44-56
Google Scholar
Azizi et al., 2017
R. Azizi, B. Attaran, A. Hajnayeb, A. Ghanbarzadeh, M. Changizian
Improving accuracy of cavitation severity detection in centrifugal pumps using a hybrid feature selection technique
Measurement, 108 (2017), pp. 9-17
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Cavazzini et al., 2018
Cavazzini, G., Houdeline, J., Pavesi, G., Teller, O., Ardizzon, G.J.R., Reviews, S.E., 2018. Unstable behaviour of pump-turbines and its effects on power regulation capacity of pumped-hydro energy storage plants. 94, 399-409.
Google Scholar
Cheng et al.2020
Cheng, H., Li, H., Yin, J., Gu, X., Hu, Y., Wang, D., Investigation of the distortion suction flow on the performance of the canned nuclear coolant pump.
Google Scholar
Fu et al., 2016
Q. Fu, F. Zhang, R. Zhu, B. He
A systematic investigation on flow characteristics of impeller passage in a nuclear centrifugal pump under cavitation state
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 97 (2016), pp. 190-197
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gohil and Saini, 2015
P.P. Gohil, R.P. Saini
Effect of temperature, suction head and flow velocity on cavitation in a Francis turbine of small hydro power plant
Energy, 93 (2015), pp. 613-624
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Liu, 2017
Y. Liu Study on Shaft-Block under Small Break Loss of Coolant Accident of AP1000 Nuclear Main 2017 Pump. Jiangsu University
Google Scholar
Long et al., 2017
Y. Long, D. Wang, J. Yin, Y. Hu
Experimental investigation on the unsteady pressure pulsation of reactor coolant pumps with non-uniform inflow
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 110 (2017), pp. 501-510
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Long et al., 2016a
Y. Long, J. Yin, D. Wang, Y. Hu
The Effect of the Channel Head on the Unsteady Pressure Pulsation Characteristics at the Inlet and Outlet of Reactor Coolant Pumps
IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science, 49 (2016), Article 032011
Google Scholar
Long et al., 2016b
Y. Long, R. Zhu, D. Wang, J. Yin, T. Li
Numerical and experimental investigation on the diffuser optimization of a reactor coolant pump with orthogonal test approach
Journal of Mechanical Science Technology, 30 (2016), pp. 4941-4948
Google Scholar
Lu et al., 2017
Y. Lu, R. Zhu, X. Wang, Q. Fu, M. Li, X. Si
Study on gas-liquid two-phase all-characteristics of CAP1400 nuclear main pump
Nuclear Engineering Design, 319 (2017), pp. 140-148
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lu et al., 2019
Y. Lu, R. Zhu, X. Wang, Y. Wang, Q. Fu, D. Ye
Study on the complete rotational characteristic of coolant pump in the gas-liquid two-phase operating condition
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 123 (2019), pp. 180-189
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Singhal et al., 2002
A.K. Singhal, M.M. Athavale, H. Li, Y. Jiang
Mathematical Basis and Validation of the Full Cavitation Model
Journal of Fluids Engineering-transactions of The Asme, 124 (2002), pp. 617-624
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tan et al., 2014
L. Tan, B. Zhu, S. Cao, Y. Wang, B. Wang
Numerical simulation of unsteady cavitation flow in a centrifugal pump at off-design conditions
Journal of Mechanical Engineering Science, 228 (2014), pp. 1994-2006
Google Scholar
Tan et al., 2015
L. Tan, B. Zhu, Y. Wang, S. Cao, S. Gui
Numerical study on characteristics of unsteady flow in a centrifugal pump volute at partial load condition %J Engineering Computations
Engineering Computations, 32 (2015), pp. 1549-1566
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2014
L. Wang, Y. Lou, Z. Wang
Cavitating flow simulations and experiments on Francis turbine model
Journal of drainage and irrigation machinery engineering, 32 (2014), pp. 771-775
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang, 2013
Y. Wang The Cavitation Performance Analysis and Assessment of a Mixed Flow Pump Designed with Model Transformation Method 2013 Dalian University of Technology
Google Scholar
Wang et al., 2013
Y. Wang, H. Liu, S. Yuan, D. Liu, wang, J.,
Characteristics of cavitation vibration and noise in centrifugal pumps with different vane wrap angles
Journal of drainage and irrigation machinery engineering, 31 (2013), pp. 390-393
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Xu et al., 2018
R. Xu, Y. Long, D. Wang
Effects of rotating speed on the unsteady pressure pulsation of reactor coolant pumps with steam-generator simulator
Nucl. Eng. Des., 333 (2018), pp. 25-44
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yu, 2012
J. Yu The study of nuclear main pump performance in the SBLOCA 2012 Dalian University of Technology
Google Scholar
Yue and Lei, 2018
H. Yue, T. Lei
Symmetrical and unsymmetrical tip clearances on cavitation performance and radial force of a mixed flow pump as turbine at pump mode
Renewable Energy, 127 (2018), pp. 368-376
Google Scholar
Yun et al., 2017
L. Yun, W. Dezhong, Y. Junlian, C. Youlin, F. Chao
The Effect of Different Inflows on the Unsteady Hydrodynamic Characteristics of a Mixed Flow Pump
International Journal of Fluid Machinery and Systems, 10 (2017), pp. 138-145
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yun Long et al., 2017
D.W. Yun Long, Junlian Yin, Hu. Yaoyu, Hongjuan Ran
Numerical investigation on the unsteady characteristics of reactor coolant pumps with non-uniform inflow
Nucl. Eng. Des., 320 (2017), pp. 65-76
Google Scholar
Zhu, 2010
J. Zhu Nuclear power plant safety. China electric power 2010 press
Google Scholar
Zhu et al., 2017a
R. Zhu, Y. Liu, X. Wang, Q. Fu, Y. Lu, X. Wang, H. Zhong, B. Zhang
Gas-liquid two-phase flow characteristics of the nuclear main pump during the initial localized constructed analogs condition period
Journal of Harbin Engineering University, 38 (2017), pp. 1399-1405
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhu et al., 2017b
R. Zhu, Y. Liu, X. Wang, Q. Fu, A. Yang, Y. Long
The research on AP1000 nuclear main pumps’ complete characteristics and the normalization method
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 99 (2017), pp. 1-8
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhu et al., 2014
R. Zhu, X. Wang, Q. Fu, Y. Long
Features of Transient Flow during Collapse of Nuclear Power Pump Cavitation
Applied Mathematics & Information Sciences, 8 (2014), pp. 1185-1190
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar