<title>PIV measurement and CFD analysis of the turbulent flow in a 3 × 3 rod bundle </title>
<author>1, HanWang， 2,DaogangLu, 3, YuzhongLiu</author>
<Affiliation>1,School of Nuclear Science and Engineering, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, China，2，Beijing Key Laboratory of Passive Safety Technology for Nuclear Energy, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2019.107135</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454919306450</URL>
PIV measurement and CFD analysis of the turbulent flow in a 3 × 3 rod bundle
HanWang,DaogangLu, YuzhongLiu
School of Nuclear Science and Engineering, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, China
Beijing Key Laboratory of Passive Safety Technology for Nuclear Energy, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
The turbulent flow in a rod bundle was studied experimentally and numerically.
First- and second-order turbulence statistics were provided.
Large-scale quasi-periodic flow pulsation was detected by both PIV and CFD.
EB-RSM model showed acceptable performance in predicting the flow in rod bundles.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The turbulent flow in a fuel bundle affects the heat transfer from the fuel rods to the coolant, which is a concerned issue in the design of fuel assemblies. In this paper, an experiment was performed using particle image velocimetry to measure the velocity distribution of water in a 3 × 3 rod bundle at various Reynolds numbers. The technique of matching index of refraction was utilized to fully visualize the flow field. Emphases were put on the flow inside a bare bundle that is free from the effects of grid spacer. It was found that the axial mean velocity in the subchannel is 30% higher than that in the gap center due to the cross-sectional nonuniform flow area. However, the axial root-mean-square velocity showed an inverse trend. The Reynolds shear stress exhibited a wavy variation in the lateral direction. A quasi-periodic large-scale flow pulsation was observed across the gap, and its wave length increases with Reynolds number. It was also found that the turbulent mixing coefficient was higher than that predicted by classical correlations. A numerical simulation was conducted signifying the acceptable performance of the EB-RSM model in predicting the flow behavior of water in the 3 × 3 rod bundle. Transient simulation with this turbulence model is able to capture the main flow phenomenon in the rod bundle.
Keywords：Turbulent flowRod bundlePIVFlow pulsation
<Section>Nomenclature</Section>
Cμ, Cε1, Cε2
coefficients in turbulent models
D
diameter of the rod [mm]
Dh
hydraulic equivalent diameter [mm]
F1, F2
blending functions in SST k-ω model
f2, fμ
damping functions
fc
curvature correction factor in Realizable k-ε model
Gk
turbulent production [m2/s3]
Gnl
non-linear production [m2/s3]
I
identity tensor in Reynolds stress models
k
turbulent kinetic energy [m2/s2]
N
sampling size
P
pitch [mm]
Pk, Pε
production terms [m2/s3]
Re
Reynolds number
S
gap width [mm] or modulus of mean strain rate tensor
Sk, Sε, SR
user-specified source terms
t
time [s]
u, v
instantaneous velocity components [m/s]
U, V
ensemble-averaged velocity components [m/s]
,
fluctuation velocity components [m/s]
effective mixing velocity [m/s]
turbulent mixing rate per unit length [kg/(ms)]
mean velocity vector
Vm
nominal streamwise velocity [m/s]
x, y
Cartesian coordinates [mm]
X, Y
Cartesian coordinates [mm]
y+
non-dimensional distance from wall
Greek letters
p
density [kg/m3]
ε
turbulent dissipation rate [m2/s3]
ε'
turbulent dissipation rate tensor
κ
coefficient in SST k-ω model
μ
dynamic viscosity [Pa·s]
μt
turbulent eddy viscosity [Pa·s]
γ
intermediate variable in SST k-ω model
B
turbulent mixing coefficient or coefficient in SST k-ω model
B*
coefficient in SST k-ω model
%
variable in SST k-ω model or pressure strain tensor in RSM models
ω
specific dissipation rate [1/s]
σk, σε, σω
coefficients in turbulent models
Subscripts
i, j
Coordinate alternation index
Abbreviations
CFD
computational fluid dynamics
LDV
laser Dropper velocimetry
MIR
matching index of refraction
PIV
particle image velocimetry
PWR
pressurized water-cooled reactor
P/D
pitch-to-diameter ratio
RMS
root mean square
RSM
Reynolds stress model
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Rod bundle is the representative geometry of the fuel assembly in a pressurized water reactor (PWR). Grid spacers are equipped axially along the bundle to support the rods, disturb the flow and create subchannel mixing. Hence, the heat transfer from the fuel rods to the coolant depends on the configuration and dimension of the fuel bundle, the effect of grid spacer as well as the turbulent flow behavior of the coolant. It is known that the turbulence in a bundle is highly anisotropic due to the cross-sectional nonuniform flow area and the strong mixing induced by the grid spacer (Shams and Kwiatkowski, 2018, Qi et al., 2019, Yan, 2019). In addition, a quasi-periodic large-scale flow pulsation exists if the Pith-to-Diameter ratio (P/D) of the bundle is quite small (known as tight bundle) (Rehme, 1992, Meyer, 2010, Kim et al., 2011, Yan, 2019). This large-scale motion further promotes the momentum exchange and turbulent mixing between subchannels, and consequently affects the rod temperature. Thus, a thorough understanding and prediction of the turbulent flow characteristics of water inside rod bundles is crucial to the design and optimization of fuel assemblies.
Several experimental investigations have been performed to study the fluid flow and turbulent mixing in rod bundles using flow visualization techniques such as Laser Dropper Velocimetry (LDV) and Particle Image Velocimeter (PIV). Early study of Rowe et al. (1974) measured the axial velocity, turbulent intensity and autocorrelation of water in a 2 × 3 rod bundle with P/Ds of 1.25 and 1.125 using LDV. A periodic macroscopic flow motion was detected in the gap region. The scale, frequency and intensity of this phenomenon increase with the decrease of rod spacing. A similar work using the same experimental method could be found in Xiong et al. (2014). Dominguez-Ontiveros and Hassan (2009) experimentally studied the flow behavior of water in a 5 × 5 rod bundle with grid spacers. The rod diameter was 10.25 mm and the P/D was 1.26. Instead of using stainless steel rods, the fluorinated ethylene-propylene (FEP) plastic was adopt as the material to construct the 25 rods. The primary consideration is that the index of FEP (1.338) is close to water (1.333) so that the bending of the laser light is greatly eliminated as the laser passes through the curved water-rod interface. The technique of matching index of refraction (MIR) allows for the visualization of the central rod and has been widely used by subsequent researchers. Hosokawa et al. (2012) measured the turbulent flow of water in a 2 × 2 rod bundle with a rod diameter of 20 mm and a P/D of 1.25 using PIV and MIR. The normalized axial mean velocity and turbulent intensity were found nearly overlapped under three Reynolds numbers. Besides, the axial mean velocity agreed well with the one-seventh power law. A similar work with respect to the flow in 3 × 3 rod bundles was reported by Lee et al. (2013). The bundles were constituted by large rods with a diameter of 25.4 mm and two P/Ds of 1.35 and 1.08, respectively. The quasi-periodic flow pulsation was clearly visualized in the tight rod bundle (P/D of 1.08). The root-mean-square (RMS) of the lateral velocity was utilized to evaluate the turbulent mixing coefficient. It was found that the normalized RMS velocity is proportional to Re0.9. A new correlation was proposed to predict the turbulent mixing coefficient in the rod bundle.
More recently, the turbulent flow and cross flow mixing of water in 5 × 5 rod bundles were reported by Nguyen and Hassan, 2017, Li et al., 2018, Xiong et al., 2018, Qi et al., 2019. The cross sections of the rod bundles are identical in the four studies with a rod diameter of 9.5 mm and a pith of 12.6 mm. Grid spacers with mixing vanes were all equipped along the flow direction. In Nguyen and Hassan (2017), a stereoscopic PIV system was introduced which allows to measure the three components of the velocity. The mean velocity, RMS velocity and Reynolds stresses were measured in various planes. An anisotropic flow structure downstream from the spacer was observed by analyzing the integral length scale of the turbulent eddies. The frequency of the vertex shedding promotes the peak of the coherent structure. In Xiong et al. (2018), apart from the techniques of PIV and MIR, a telecentric lens was placed between the CCD camera and the test section to compensate the perspective vision of the camera when capturing the region downstream from the grid spacer. They found that the intensity of the cross flow decreases while the lateral turbulent kinetic energy increases as the fluid leaving the grid spacer. Li et al. (2018) found that the mixing vanes can lead to a redistribution in the velocity, causing a large fluctuating velocity in various angles. The lateral velocity was enhanced but the axial velocity was suppressed by the grid spacer. They concluded that the axial direction is the dominant direction for the momentum transfer. In Qi et al. (2019), a quasi-periodic oscillation of the flow field was observed by analyzing the vortex shedding frequency at the downstream of the grid spacer. Besides, anisotropic turbulences were encountered at the upstream and downstream of the grid spacer, which cannot be accurately predicted by isotropic turbulence models. They also found that the turbulence intensity decreases sharply at 4.5 Dh, suggesting the effect of spacer on local mixing is weakened after 4.5 Dh.
From the above-mentioned literature review, it is seen that the majority of existing studies focused on the flow and mixing in rod bundles with spacers. However, the effects of spacer grid on the flow mixing were just restricted within a locally narrow length from 4.5 Dh to 10 Dh (Qi et al., 2019, Qu et al., 2019a, Qu et al., 2019b) and the strong flow mixing recovers to normal eventually. In such cases, turbulent mixing which is characterized by the anisotropic turbulent fluctuations is dominant in a rod bundle. Driven by the large shear stress, the fluid will flow towards the central subchannel. On the contrary, the fluid will flow towards the wall in the corner subchannel due to the low shear stress (Mikuž and Tiselj, 2016). This phenomenon is crucial to actually predict the turbulent mixing in grid-free rod bundles, but is seldom discussed in previous studies. In this paper, experimental measurements and numerical simulation were performed to study the flow and turbulent mixing in a 3 × 3 bare rod bundle. The ensemble-averaged mean velocity, RMS velocity and Reynolds stresses were obtained at various Reynolds numbers. In addition, the quasi-periodic large-scale turbulent structure was clearly visualized. Several turbulence models were tested against the experimental measurements, highlighting the performance of EB-RSM model in predicting the turbulent flow in the 3 × 3 rod bundle. The experimental and numerical results help to understand the flow behavior of fluid inside a grid-free rod bundle.
<Section>2. Experimental details</Section>
2.1. Experimental loop
The experiment was performed in Beijing Key Laboratory of Passive Safety Technology for Nuclear Energy. Fig. 1 shows the schematic of the experimental loop which contains a water tank, a centrifugal pump, a flow meter and the test section. Deionized water at room temperature (20 °C) was utilized as the working fluid and was driven by the variable-frequency centrifugal pump to the flow meter. Then it flowed into the test section (i.e. the 3 × 3 rod bundle) and went back to the water tank eventually. There was a bypass line at the exit of the centrifugal pump which allows for recycling the extra water to the tank. The flow rate entering into the test section was obtained by adjusting the rotational speed of the centrifugal pump and the valves in the main and bypass lines. The pipes, valves and the centrifugal pump of the experimental loop were made of stainless steel while the water tank was constructed using acrylic glass plates. The fluid temperature at the inlet of the test section was measured by a T-type sheathed thermocouple. The signals of temperature and flow rate were monitored and recorded by a high-speed NI-PXIE data acquisition system.
Fig. 1. Schematic of the experimental loop.
2.2. Test section
The test section is schematically shown in Fig. 2. Water entered into the bottom chamber from the two inlets and then flowed vertically upward through the rod bundle to the top chamber, and finally left the test section from the two outlets. The rod bundle consisted of three parts, i.e. the lower and upper parts formed by 9 stainless steel rods, and the middle transparent part constructed by 3 stainless-steel rods and 6 FEP tubes (See section A-A for details) which were designed for PIV measurements. The middle part was connected with the upper and lower parts by using two flanges and O-ring sealing to prevent the fluid leaking from inside. The outer diameter of the stainless steel rods and the FEP tubes was 9.5 mm and the pitch between neighboring two rods was 12.6 mm, resulting a P/D of 1.326. These parameters are identical to the prototype fuel assembly of current second-generation PWRs. The length of the middle part was 280 mm and the full length of the test section was 1200 mm. The 3 × 3 rod bundle was housed within a square cavity dimensioned as 37.8 × 37.8 mm2, leading to a hydraulic diameter of 7.54 mm. Prior to the middle transparent part, we designed an entrance region which was 500 mm in length, aiming to eliminate the vortex induced in the lower chamber and achieve a fully developed flow before the fluid enters into the middle test section. Table 1 summaries the main geometric differences between the experimental test section and PWR fuel assemblies.
Fig. 2. Structure of the test section.
Table 1. Geometrical information of PWR fuel assemblies and the present test section.
It is seen in Fig. 2 that four spacers existed along the flow direction to support the rods and maintain a pre-designed gap between adjacent rods. Different from existing studies, the spacers used in the present experiment did not contain any mixing vanes since we need to measure the turbulent flow in a bare rod bundle. The shape of the spacer resembles 9 circular rings connecting with each other. The thickness of the rings was only 0.5 mm, leaving as much flow area as possible. Note that the spacers were not “equipped” on the test section, but were machined with their matrix. That is to say, Spacer-1 was a part of the upper chamber and Spacer-2 was a part of the flange. By this means we can positioning the chambers and the three parts of the test section.
As shown in Fig. 2, the fluid flowed in Y-direction (streamwise direction) and the laser sheet passed through the test section in X-direction (lateral direction). The measured region located at the upper part of the transparent test section with 12–50 mm away from the end of the FEP tubes. This helps to minimize the effects of Spacer-3 on the flow in the measured region. The thickness of the FEP tubes was designed as 0.5 mm after several pre-tests. A large thickness has a better mechanical property to support the stainless steel rods. On the other hand, however, the laser decays dramatically and is reflected strongly if the thickness is too large which makes it hardly penetrates the FEP tubes. Fig. 3 shows the MIR of the transparent test section. The thin FEP tubes are nearly invisible inside water.
Fig. 3. Test section with MIR of FEP tubes and water.
2.3. PIV system
The PIV system (Dantec Dynamics) consisted of a Nd:YAG pulsed twin laser, a CCD camera (TSI, 630059 PowerView 4M Plus), a synchronizer, a set of lens and a computer. The maximum laser pulse rate was 20 Hz with a wavelength of 532 nm and an energy of 100 mJ per laser. The thickness of the laser sheet produced by the lens was about 1 mm. There were two plates placed on the sides of the test section. Each of the plate has two slits with a width of 1 mm. The flow field was captured using the camera at the resolution of 2048 pixels × 2048 pixels. The camera was equipped with a Nikon adjustable lens. Image pairs and vectors were calculated using the Insight 4G software. The interrogation regions were adjusted according to the area of interest. A 32 pixels × 32 pixels interrogation region was used with an overlap of 50% to analyze the turbulent flow behind a row of the rods. Hollow glass microspheres of 10 μm in mean diameter and 1.04 g/cm3 in density were used as the seeding particles. During the experiment, the laser sheet shot at a frequency of 7.5 Hz and the camera capture 5 pairs of image every time, and then these images were transferred to the Insight 4G software for calculating and post-processing. Once this step was done, we continued to capture the next 5 pairs of image. About 2000 image pairs of the instantaneous velocity were taken in each experiment to get a mean velocity field.
2.4. Experimental parameters and uncertainty analysis
The experiment was performed at three Reynolds number of 7540, 11,310 and 15080, corresponding to the nominal mean axial velocities (Vm) of 1 m/s, 1.5 m/s and 2 m/s, respectively. The Reynolds number was not chosen at a steady state of the reactor core or any simulation of the accident, but was pre-set based on the maximum flow rate of the experimental loop. The flow rate was measured by a volumetric flowmeter which has an uncertainty of ±1%. Regarding the PIV measurements, the uncertainties could be introduced from several sources, such as the equipment, particle lag, sampling size and processing algorithm (Lazar et al., 2010). The uncertainties of equipment contain mainly the calibration of scaling magnification and the timing accuracy. For the present experiment, a calibration scale of 80 mm was adopted corresponding to 1509 pixels, resulting an image resolution of 0.053 mm/pixel. The time duration between the synchronized two lasers ranged from 60 μs to 180 μs according to the inlet velocity and the one-fourth rule for analyzing the image pairs. The timing accuracy is determined by the delay generator, the uncertainty of which could be found on the hardware manual. Considering these two sources of uncertainty, the synthetic uncertainty for the two-dimensional velocity was about 0.5%. The seeding particle dynamics is important since the tracked particle velocities are assumed to be the fluid velocities in the interrogation window. This could be evaluated by the Stokes number which is defined as the ratio of particle response time to the flow timescale (Raffel et al., 2007). The calculated Stokes number was 0.0006 which is far below 0.1, indicating the particles have good tracking ability and the induced uncertainty could be neglected. Another introduced error that may be significant is the insufficient sampling size. To get an accurate mean velocity and ensemble-averaged turbulent statistics, a sufficient number of image pairs is needed. According to Lazar et al. (2010), the sampling error decrease with  where  is the effective number of independent samples. 2000 image pairs were taken in each run of the experiment and the uncertainty introduced from the sampling size is 2.3%. Qu et al., 2019a, Qu et al., 2019b analyzed the effect of sampling size on the turbulence statistics and confirmed that 2000 samples are sufficient for PIV measurements of water in their 5 × 5 rod bundle. The last error source is image analysis which transforms the particles image into quantitative velocity vectors using certain processing algorithms. This kind of error is associated with the adopted pre-processing technique such as background subtraction and image enhancing, interrogation window, processing algorithm, and the post-processing technique such as vector conditioning and vector validation etc. The uncertainty varies case by case but is generally less than 1% for most flow field (Lazar et al., 2010). Considering the above-mentioned four kinds of error as well as the measuring error of the volumetric flow rate, the synthetic uncertainty is 2.75% for the mean velocity.
<Section>3. Experimental results and discussion</Section>
3.1. Mean velocity
Based on the Reynolds decomposition, the instantaneous velocity in X- and Y-directions could be expressed by a mean velocity and a fluctuation velocity using Eqs. (1), (2), respectively. The mean velocities in X- and Y-directions were obtained by ensemble-averaging 2000 instantaneous velocities using Eqs. (3), (4), respectively.
@(1)
@(2)
@(3)
@(4)
Fig. 4(a) gives the instantaneous velocity vector at the nominal velocity of 1 m/s, which was randomly selected among the processed data. Note that the original point was set at the upper left of the images during the experiment. It is seen that the instantaneous velocity field is quite disordered. The vectors in the subchannel centers are much larger than those in the gap centers. This could be clearly visualized in Fig. 4(b) where the mean velocity was obtained by averaging 2000 instantaneous velocity vectors using Eq. (2). The mean velocity varied from 0.5 m/s to 1.4 m/s within the measured region. In addition, the mean velocity in the central subchannel is about 1.3 times of that in the gap center. Four lines (Line-10, Line-20, Line-30 and Line-40) were defined along the lateral direction with a streamwise interval of 10 mm. The axial mean velocity along these four lines are shown in Fig. 4(c). It is observed that the axial mean velocities are largely overlapped at these lines, indicating a fully-developed flow within the measured region. The axial mean velocities at the three Reynolds numbers were normalized by corresponding nominal velocities and are illustrated in Fig. 4(d). Along the lateral direction, the axial mean velocity increases gradually from the wall to a maximum at the subchannel center, and then decreases because the reduced flow area towards the gap center. Moreover, it is observed that the normalized mean velocities nearly overlap at the three Reynolds numbers, with a slight difference appeared in the peaks. This observation is in accordance with that reported by Hosokawa et al. (2012). The peak of the mean velocity increases by 4.7% with decreasing Vm.
Fig. 4. Distribution of the axial velocity: (a) vector of the instantaneous velocity; (b) vector of the mean velocity; (c) mean velocity at various lines; (d) mean velocity at various Reynolds numbers.
3.2. Turbulent statistics
Apart from the instantaneous and mean velocities, turbulent statistics such as the RMS velocity and Reynolds shear stress were applied to analyze the flow behavior of water in the rod bundle. The RMS velocity and Reynolds shear stress were defined as follows.
@(5)
@(6)
@(7)
Fig. 5(a) exhibits the ensemble-averaged axial RMS velocity at the nominal velocity of 1 m/s. It is observed that the RMS velocity is high in the gap region, while is relatively low in the central subchannels. In the small gap between adjacent rods, the large mean velocity gradient produces a strong turbulence energy. On the other hand, the fluctuating velocity in the central subchanel is small due to the reduced mean flow velocity gradient. The distributions of the RMS velocity at three nominal velocities could be seen more clearly in Fig. 5(b). The normalized RMS velocities seem insensitive to the Reynolds number.
Fig. 5. Distribution of the axial mean RMS velocity: (a) contour plot at Vm = 1 m/s; (b) scatter plot at three nominal velocities.
Reynolds stresses originate from the decomposition of Navier-Stokes equation, which is an evaluation of the nonuniformity of the spatial flow field. It is observed in Fig. 6(a) that the flow field could be roughly divided into three regions. The Reynolds shear stress is negative in the left-gap region, while it stays positive in the right-gap region. However, the situation reverses behind the middle rod where the left part is positive but the right part is negative. Note that the Reynolds shear stress remains nearly zero in the subchannel centers. Such a distribution in the Reynolds shear stress demonstrates an anisotropic turbulence inside the rod bundle, which is one of the major phenomena to be accurately predicted in CFD studies. As signified in Fig. 6(b), the normalized Reynolds shear stresses at the three nominal velocities increase along the X-direction like a wave. The distributions are practically overlapped and independent of Reynolds numbers.
Fig. 6. Distribution of the Reynolds shear stress: (a) contour plot at Vm = 1 m/s; (b) scatter plot at three nominal velocities.
3.3. Large-scale flow pulsation
Previous studies (Rehme, 1992, Meyer, 2010, Shams and Kwiatkowski, 2018, Yan, 2019) demonstrated that a quasi-periodic large-scale turbulent structure exists in tight rod bundles. As shown in Fig. 7, the streamwise velocity decreases from the left subchannel towards the gap center, and then increases again approaching the right subchannel, forming a large velocity gradient. Large-scale vortices were created by the turbulent shear stress as well as the strong velocity gradient parallel to the rods. Since these large-scale turbulent structures are not restricted by any wall boundary, the large vortex can stabilize in spacer, cross the gap center, rotate in opposite directions while transported by the bulk flow. According to Meyer (2010), such strong anisotropic turbulence and large-scale structures in a tight rod bundle are resulted from the quasi-periodic flow pulsation. The flow pulsation imposes two kinds of effect on the thermal-hydraulic performance of fuel assemblies. On the one hand, the interchannel mixing is promoted which enhance the heat transfer between the flue rods and the coolant. On the other hand, flow-induced vibration may be encountered if the flow pulsation is too strong, causing damage to the fuel bundles.
Fig. 7. The motion of a large eddy in a rod bundle.
Fig. 8 gives the contour plots of the streamwise instantaneous velocity at the three nominal velocities. It is observed in Fig. 8(a) that the streamwise instantaneous velocity does not aline straightly from the bottom to the top, but rather in a continuous “S” shape. Apparently, the large-scale flow pulsation is successfully captured. A close examination shows that the half-wave length of the large-scale motion is about 23 mm at the nominal velocity of 1 m/s. Similar variations in the instantaneous velocity at the nominal velocities of 1.5 m/s and 2 m/s could also be observed. The half-wave lengths of the large-scale turbulent structure are about 25 mm and 29 mm, respectively, implying the wave length increases with the Reynolds number. Hoffmann (1973) performed an experimental measurement on the turbulent flow of water in three rods with an outer diameter of 7 mm and a gap width of 0.8 mm. The Reynolds number was 7680 which is close to our experimental parameters in Fig. 8(a). The measured half-wave length of the large-scale motion was 16 mm which is 30% lower than the present PIV measurement. This deviation may be attributed to the geometry difference especially the P/D ratio. A small P/D (1.11 in Hoffmann (1973)) seems to reduce the wave length of the large-scale structure in rod bundles.
Fig. 8. Contour plot of the instantaneous velocity – visualization of the large-scale flow pulsation: (a) Vm = 1 m/s; (a) Vm = 1.5 m/s; (a) Vm = 2 m/s.
3.4. Turbulent mixing
Turbulent mixing in a rod bundle enhances the momentum and energy exchange between subchannels, especially in the regions far away from the grid spacer, and thus is one of the concerned issues in the thermal-hydraulic design of fuel assemblies. In general, the non-dimensional turbulent mixing coefficient β is introduced to represent the degree of mixing process, which is calculated as follows (Jeong et al., 2007):
@(8)
where Sij is width of the gap, ρ is the bulk density and Vij is the mean velocity in adjacent subchannels i and j.  is the turbulent mixing flow rate from subchannel i to j per unit length, which is calculated by
@(9)
where  is the effective mixing velocity from subchannel i to j. Substituting Eq. (9) into Eq. (8) yields:
@(10)
A plenty of correlations have been proposed to predict the turbulent mixing coefficient in rod bundles, as partly summarized by Jeong et al. (2007). It is known that the mixing coefficient is affected by the range of Reynolds number, the type of subchannel as well as the pitch-to-diameter of the rod bundle. In spite of the complex mixing processes, many researchers come to the conclusion that the turbulent mixing coefficient is proportional to the Reynolds number, namely . Several classical correlations, as tabulated in Table 2, have been chosen to compare with the experimental measurements. The gap-to-diameter (S/d) of these correlations are similar to the present experiment (0.326). Note that the magnitude of the lateral mean velocity was adopted as the effective mixing velocity in calculating the turbulent mixing coefficient. Besides, the mean velocity in adjacent subchannels i and j was obtained by averaging the experimental measurements of the two central subchannels.
Table 2. Selected correlations for the mixing coefficient.
Fig. 9 displays the predicted turbulent mixing coefficient given by the selected five correlations and the experimental measurements. It is observed that the turbulent mixing coefficient decreases slightly with increasing Reynolds numbers. Within the experimental range of the Reynolds number, the prediction of Castellana et al. (1974) correlation is most close to the experimental data. This is not surprising because the physical geometry, working fluid, hydraulic diameter and S/d of Castellana et al. (1974) resemble the present experiment. Note that this correlation has been widely applied in subchannel codes in the thermal-hydraulic analysis of PWR fuel assemblies (Ju, 2017).
Fig. 9. Comparison of the measured and predicted turbulent mixing coefficient at various Reynolds numbers.
<Section>4. Numerical simulation</Section>
4.1. Physical model and numerical settings
A reliable and well-validated turbulence model that can actually predict the flow behavior of water in rod bundles is indispensable in the design of fuel assemblies. In the present paper, a numerical study was conducted using the finite volume based CFD package STAR-CCM+ to validate the performance of several turbulence models in predicting bundle flows for the case of Vm = 1 m/s. Water at the room temperature of 20 °C was used as the fluid in the simulation. The density and dynamic viscosity of water are 997.56 kg/m3 and 8.89 × 10−4 Pa·s, respectively. The physical model is a 3 × 3 rod bundle which is the same as that employed in the experiment, as shown in Fig. 10. To reduce the computational resource and time, the length of the geometry was reduced to 300 mm corresponding to about 40 Dh. Periodic inlet-outlet boundary condition with a constant mass flow rate was adopted, that is to say, the flow leaving the outlet was transferred back to the inlet again to update the velocity distribution at the inlet. Thus, it seems that the fluid flows in an infinite long bundle. This method has been frequently employed in LES or DNS studies (Shams and Kwiatkowski, 2018). The boundary conditions for the 9 rods and the duct were walls with no slip conditions. Table 3 summarizes the boundary conditions of the numerical simulation. For the initial conditions, the velocity was set at 1 m/s in the streamwise direction and 0 m/s in the lateral (x and z) directions. The initial pressure inside the domain was 101325 Pa and the temperature was 20 °C, respectively.
Fig. 10. Physical model and the periodic inlet-outlet boundary condition.
Table 3. Boundary conditions for the simulation of the 3 × 3 rod bundle.
Seven turbulence models have been tested in this numerical study, including three ε-type models (the Standard k-ε, Realizable k-ε and Low-Re AKN k-ε), one ω-type model (SST k-ω) and three Reynolds stress models (GL-RSM, SSG-RSM, EB-RSM). The transport equations for the turbulent kinetic energy k and its dissipation rate ε in the ε-type models are (CD-Adapco User Guide, 2019):
@(11)
@(12)
where  is the turbulent eddy viscosity and is calculated as ,  is the mean velocity,  is the density,  is the dynamic viscosity,  and  are production terms,  and  are damping functions,  and  are user-specified source terms,  are model coefficients. The expressions of the production term in Eqs. (11) and (12) are listed in Table 4.
Table 4. Formulation of the production terms in k-ε models.
where is the curvature correction factor. The modulus of the mean strain rate tensor is defined as where . Table 5 lists the contributions to the production terms in Table 4.
Table 5. Contribution of the production terms.
where is the non-linear contribution. The model coefficients in the k-ε models are summarized in Table 6.
Table 6. Coefficients in the k-ε turbulence models.
The transport equations for the turbulent kinetic energy k and the specific dissipation rate ω in the SST k-ω model are expressed as follows (Menter, 1994, Wang et al., 2015):
@(13)
@(14)
where the blending function F1 is calculated as
@(15)
@(16)
where y is the distance to the wall surface and CDkω is defined as
@(17)
The turbulent eddy viscosity is then calculated by
@(18)
where the blending function F2 is obtained from
@(19)
@(20)
The coefficients of this model are calculated from the constants sets and , which stand for the coefficient of the k-ω model and the k-ε model respectively.
@(21)
The constants of and are listed in Table 7 and Table 8, respectively.
Table 7. Coefficients in the SST k-ω turbulence model (ϕ1).
Table 8. Coefficients in the SST k-ω turbulence model (ϕ2).
The transport equation for the Reynolds stresses tensor R is (CD-Adapco User Guide, 2019):
@(22)
where D is the Reynolds Stress Diffusion, P is the Turbulent Production, I is the identity tensor,@ is the pressure strain tensor, is the turbulent dissipation rate tensor calculated by , and is the user-specified source.
The Reynolds Stress Diffusion is defined as where the turbulent viscosity is computed as . The turbulent production is obtained directly as . The isotropic turbulent dissipation rate is obtained from a transport equation analogous to the k-ε model:
@(23)
The coefficients in the transport equations for R and ε are tabulated in Table 9.
Table 9. Coefficient in the Reynolds stress models.
Three Reynolds stress models of GL-RSM (Gibson and Launder, 1978), SSG-RSM (Speziale et al., 1991) and EB-RSM (Lardeau and Manceau, 2014) have been tested against the experimental data. The three turbulence models are governed by the transport equations of Eqs. (22) and (23), with the main difference lies in computing the pressure-strain term . The GL-RSM model is a linear model for the pressure-strain term which is decoupled into five terms, including a rapid term, a slow term, a rapid wall-reflection term, a slow wall-reflection term and a buoyancy contribution term. The SSG-RSM model is a quadratic pressure-strain model which uses a higher-order truncation of the expression for the pressure-strain term. The EB-RSM is an elliptic blending low-Reynolds number model based on an inhomogeneous near-wall formulation of the quasi-linear quadratic pressure-strain. A blending function is used to blend the viscous sub-layer with the log-layer formulation of the pressure-strain term. For detailed calculation of the pressure-strain terms in the three models, please refer to the software manual (CD-Adapco User Guide, 2019).
Low y+ wall treatment together with a fine mesh were employed for the SST k-ω model and Low-Re AKN k-ε model in order to fully resolve the boundary layer with the maximum y+ below 1. On the other hand, all y+ wall treatment was utilized for the other five models, bridging the near wall variables to the wall through a wall function. The first node was placed in the log-region rather than the viscous sublayer. A relatively coarse mesh was used for the all y+ wall treatment, as shown in Fig. 11. Grid independency of the numerical results were carefully checked by employing various number of meshes, ranging from 0.8 million to 6 million. The number of mesh cells are 4.7 million for the low y+ models and 3.1 million for the all y+ models after the grid-independent examination. For the steady-state simulation, the numerical iteration was considered to be converged when all of the residuals dropped below 1 × 10−5. For the transient simulation, the time step was set to 1 × 10−4 s. The inner iteration within each time step was set to 20 to ensure the residuals of mass and momentum dropped by at least 4 order of magnitude per time step.
Fig. 11. Cross-sectional view of the coarse mesh.
4.2. Numerical results and discussion
4.2.1. Steady-state simulation
Fig. 12 illustrates the axial mean velocity produced by the seven turbulence models as well as the experiment measurements. It is seen that the numerical simulation over-predicts the axial velocity in the two central subchannels and the wall subchannels. The standard k-ε and realizable k-ε models deviate significantly from the experimental data, and thus are not recommended in bundle geometries. The performances of the Low-Re AKN k-ε and SST k-ω models resemble each other and are better than the standard k-ε model. The RSM models solve the Reynolds stress equations separately and are expected to be superior to two-equation models in predicting the streamline curvature, vortexes and secondary flows. However, Fig. 12 signifies that these anisotropic turbulence models are not always better than the two-equation models. For example, the SSG-RSM and GL-RSM modes are only slightly improved compared to the standard k-ε model but are inferior to the SST k-ω model. The prediction given by the EB-RSM model is acceptable, although the velocity in the central subchannels is still overpredicted. Note that the EB-RSM model is quite accurate in predicting the velocity in the wall subchannels (X < 15 mm and X  > 40 mm). Fig. 13 shows the axial velocity on the cross section of the rod bundle obtained from the EB-RSM model.
Fig. 12. Comparison of the experimental and numerical axial velocity.
Fig. 13. Cross-sectional view of the axial velocity in the steady-state simulation.
The variations of the predicted Reynolds stress against the experimental measurements are displayed in Fig. 14. The numerical results follow the trend of the experimental data except in the two wall subchannels. Similar to the comparison of the axial mean velocity in Fig. 12, the EB-RSM model agrees well with the experimental data among the selected seven models.
Fig. 14. Comparison of the experimental and numerical Reynolds shear stress.
4.2.2. Transient simulation
A transient simulation was conducted after finishing the steady-state study, using the screened EB-RSM model. Fig. 15 shows the instantaneous velocity distributions on a streamwise plane and two cross-sectional planes. It is observed from the left part of Fig. 15 that the axial velocity exerts a typical waved profile, signifying that the periodic large-scale flow pulsation was predicted. A close examination on the wave profile shows that the half-wave length of the large scale pulsation was about 33 mm which is 43% higher than the experimental measurements. The cross-sectional view of the axial distribution was revealed in the right part of Fig. 15. The top-left and bottom-right central subchannels are correlated with each other during the flow pulsation while the velocity in the top-right and bottom-left central subchannels are similar in space. The flow in the rod bundle is complex with anisotropic Reynolds stresses distributions and large scale velocity pulsations.
Fig. 15. Instantaneous streamwise and cross-sectional velocities during the transient simulation.
<Section>5. Conclusions</Section>
In the present paper, experimental and numerical results were presented to reveal the turbulent flow of water in a 3 × 3 rod bundle, and the following conclusions could be drawn.
@(1)
The streamwise mean velocity in the subchannel center is about 30% higher than that in the gap center. The RMS velocity is strong in the gap center but decreases gradually towards the subchannel center. The Reynolds shear stress increases wavily along the lateral direction.
@(2)
A quasi-periodic large-scale flow pulsation was experimentally visualized at various Reynolds numbers. The half-wave length is about 23 mm at the nominal axial velocity of 1 m/s and increases with Reynolds numbers.
@(3)
The turbulent mixing coefficient decreases slightly with increasing Reynolds number. The prediction given by the Castellana et al. (1974) correlation is close to the experimental measurement.
@(4)
The EB-RSM model shows acceptable performance in predicting the mean flow of water in the 3 × 3 rod bundle.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
This research was financially supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (11605057) and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2018MS046).
<Section>References</Section>
Castellana et al., 1974
F.S. Castellana, W.T. Adams, J.E. Casterline
Single-phase subchannel mixing in a simulated nuclear fuel assembly
Nucl. Eng. Des., 26 (2) (1974), pp. 242-249
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
CD-Adapco User Guide, 2019
CD-Adapco User Guide, 2019. CD-Adapco User Guide, STAR-CCM+, Version 14.02.010, 2019.
Google Scholar
Dominguez-Ontiveros and Hassan, 2009
E.E. Dominguez-Ontiveros, Y.A. Hassan
Non-intrusive experimental investigation of flow behavior inside a 5×5 rod bundle with spacer grids using PIV and MIR
Nucl. Eng. Des., 239 (2009), pp. 888-898
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gibson and Launder, 1978
M.M. Gibson, B.E. Launder
Ground effects on pressure fluctuations in the atmospheric boundary layer
J. Fluid Mech., 86 (3) (1978), pp. 491-511
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Glasstone and Sesonske, 1994
S. Glasstone, A. Sesonske
Nuclear Reactor Engineering: Reactor Design Basics
vol. 1
(fourth ed.), Chapman and Hall (1994)
Google Scholar
Hoffmann, 1973
Hoffmann, H., 1973. Internal Report IRB/KfK.
Google Scholar
Hosokawa et al., 2012
S. Hosokawa, T. Yamamoto, J. Okajima, et al.
Measurements of turbulent flows in a 2×2 rod bundle
Nucl. Eng. Des., 249 (2012), pp. 2-13
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jeong et al., 2007
H.Y. Jeong, K.S. Ha, Y.M. Kwon, et al.
A dominant geometrical parameter affecting the turbulent mixing rate in rod bundles
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 50 (2007), pp. 908-918
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ju, 2017
H.Y. Ju
Research on the Effect of Turbulent Mixing Through Rod Bundle Supported by Spacer Grid with Mixing Vane
Thesis
Harbin Engineering University (2017)
Google Scholar
Kim et al., 2011
T. Kim, H.Y. Jung, J.Y. Bae, et al.
Large scale flow pulsation in square arrayed rod bundles
ASME-JSME-KSME 2011 Joint Fluids Engineering Conference, American Society of Mechanical Engineers (2011), pp. 3611-3616
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lardeau and Manceau, 2014
Lardeau, S., Manceau, R., 2014. Computations of complex flow configurations using a modified elliptic-blending Reynolds-stress model. In: 10th International ERCOFTAC Symposium on Engineering Turbulence Modelling and Measurements, Marbella, Spain.
Google Scholar
Lazar et al., 2010
E. Lazar, B. Deblauw, N. Glumac, et al.
A practical approach to PIV uncertainty analysis
27th AIAA Aerodynamic Measurement Technology and Ground Testing Conference (2010), p. 4355
Google Scholar
Lee et al., 2013
C.Y. Lee, C.H. Shin, J.Y. Park, et al.
An experimental investigation on turbulent flow mixing in a simulated 3×3 dual-cooled annular fuel bundle using particle image velocimetry
Nucl. Eng. Des., 260 (2013), pp. 134-144
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Li et al., 2018
X. Li, Z. Mi, S. Tan, et al.
PIV study of velocity distribution and turbulence statistics in a rod bundle
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 117 (2018), pp. 305-317
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Menter, 1994
F.R. Menter
Two-equation eddy-viscosity turbulence models for engineering applications
AIAA J., 32 (1994), pp. 1598-1605
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Meyer, 2010
L. Meyer
From discovery to recognition of periodic large scale vortices in rod bundles as source of natural mixing between subchannels—a review
Nucl. Eng. Des., 240 (6) (2010), pp. 1575-1588
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Mikuž and Tiselj, 2016
B. Mikuž, I. Tiselj
Wall-resolved Large Eddy Simulation in grid-free 5×5 rod bundle of MATiS-H experiment
Nucl. Eng. Des., 298 (2016), pp. 64-77
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Nguyen and Hassan, 2017
T. Nguyen, Y. Hassan
Stereoscopic particle image velocimetry measurements of flow in a rod bundle with a spacer grid and mixing vanes at a low Reynolds number
Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow, 67 (2017), pp. 202-219
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Qi et al., 2019
P. Qi, X. Li, X. Li, et al.
Experimental investigation of the turbulent flow in a rod bundle channel with spacer grids
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 130 (2019), pp. 142-156
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Qu et al., 2019a
W. Qu, J. Xiong, S. Chen, et al.
High-fidelity PIV measurement of cross flow in 5×5 rod bundle with mixing vane grids
Nucl. Eng. Des., 344 (2019), pp. 131-143
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Qu et al., 2019b
W. Qu, J. Xiong, S. Chen, et al.
PIV measurement of turbulent flow downstream of mixing vane spacer grid in 5×5 rod bundle
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 132 (2019), pp. 277-287
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Raffel et al., 2007
M. Raffel, C.E. Willert, F. Scarano, et al.
Particle Image Velocimetry: A Practical Guide
Springer (2007)
Google Scholar
Rehme, 1992
K. Rehme
The structure of turbulence in rod bundles and the implications on natural mixing between the subchannels
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 35 (2) (1992), pp. 567-581
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Rogers and Tahir, 1975
Rogers, J.T., Tahir, A.E.E., 1975. Turbulent interchange mixing in rod bundles and the role of secondary flows, ASME Paper 75-HT-31.
Google Scholar
Rowe and Angle, 1967
D.S. Rowe, C.W. Angle
Crossflow Mixing Between Parallel Flow Channels during Boiling. Part II. Measurement of Flow and Enthalpy in Two Parallel Channels
Pacific Northwest Lab., Battelle-Northwest, Richland, Wash (1967)
Google Scholar
Rowe et al., 1974
D.S. Rowe, B.M. Johnson, J.G. Knudsen
Implications concerning rod bundle crossflow mixing based on measurements of turbulent flow structure
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 17 (3) (1974), pp. 407-419
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Seale, 1979
W.J. Seale
Turbulent diffusion of heat between connected flow passages Part 1: outline of problem and experimental investigation
Nucl. Eng. Des., 54 (2) (1979), pp. 183-195
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Shams and Kwiatkowski, 2018
A. Shams, T. Kwiatkowski
Towards the Direct Numerical Simulation of a closely-spaced bare rod bundle
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 121 (2018), pp. 146-161
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Speziale et al., 1991
C.G. Speziale, S. Sarkar, T.B. Gatski
Modelling the pressure–strain correlation of turbulence: an invariant dynamical systems approach
J. Fluid Mech., 227 (1991), pp. 245-272
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2015
H. Wang, Q. Bi, Z. Yang, et al.
Experimental and numerical investigation of heat transfer from a narrow annulus to supercritical pressure water
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 80 (2015), pp. 416-428
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Xiong et al., 2018
J. Xiong, W. Qu, Z. Wu, et al.
PIV measurement of cross flow in a rod bundle assisted by telecentric optics and matched index of refraction
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 120 (2018), pp. 540-545
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Xiong et al., 2014
J. Xiong, N. Yu, Y. Yu, et al.
Experimental investigation on anisotropic turbulent flow in a 6×6 rod bundle with LDV
Nucl. Eng. Des., 278 (2014), pp. 333-343
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yan, 2019
B.H. Yan
The thermal hydraulic phenomenon in tight lattice bundles: a review
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 126 (2019), pp. 330-349
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
