<title>Experimental study on the hydraulic characteristics of inertia tank after the failure of pump power</title>
<author>1,GongqingWang,2,BoWang,3,JimingWen,4,RuifengTian,5,ZhixinNiu,6,XingminLiu</author>
<Affiliation>1,Fundamental Science on Nuclear Safety and Simulation Technology Laboratory, Harbin Engineering University, 150001 Harbin, China;2,China Institute of Atomic Energy, 102413 Beijing, China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107885</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454920305831</URL>
Experimental study on the hydraulic characteristics of inertia tank after the failure of pump power
GongqingWang,BoWang,JimingWen,RuifengTian,ZhixinNiu,XingminLiu
Fundamental Science on Nuclear Safety and Simulation Technology Laboratory, Harbin Engineering University, 150001 Harbin, China
China Institute of Atomic Energy, 102413 Beijing, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
The hydraulic characteristics of inertia tank are studied experimentally.
Inertia tank can slow down the decreasing speed of mass flow in UPIT.
The effects of connection pipe diameter and inertia tank diameter are researched.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Inertia tank is a potential equipment to replace the flywheel of main pump, which can reduce the decreasing speed of mass flow rate in core after the failure of main pump power. In this paper, an experimental setup has been designed and constructed to analysis the hydraulic characteristics of inertia tank. The experimental results show that after the failure of pump power, inertia tank can act as flywheel to reduce the decreasing speed of mass flow rate in upstream pipe of inertia tank, and the working process of inertia tank can be divided into transition stage, LDPI action stage and oscillation stage. The influence of connection pipe diameter (CPD) and inertia tank diameter (ITD) on the hydraulic characteristics of inertia tank are studied experimentally. The experimental results show that CPD affects the entire working process of inertia tank, while ITD mainly affects the LDPI action stage and oscillation stage.
Keywords：Nuclear heating reactor;Inertia tank;Failure of pump power;Experiment
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Deep pool-type nuclear heating reactor (DHR) has broad application prospect in district heating and seawater desalination, which is characterized by simple system, high inherent safety and low cost (Tian, 2000, Tian et al., 1998, Tian et al., 1999a, Tian et al., 1999b). To ensure the economy of DHR, the core thermal power is relatively large, and a large amount of residual heat will be generated in core after reactor shutdown under accidental conditions (Tobias, 1980). Especially for the scenario of the failure of main pump power, the safety of reactor core is seriously affected due to the rapid decrease of mass flow rate in the core. Generally, the flywheel of main pump is used to ensure the safety of reactor core at the early stage of the reactor scram (Azzoune et al., 2019, Shi, 1994). After the main pump trips, the decreasing speed of mass flow rate in reactor core slows down under the effect of inertia rotation of main pump flywheel, and then the decreasing speed of core mass flow rate can match the decreasing speed of core power. Thus, the system can safely transform to the low power condition. However, considering the high cost of the main pump with flywheel and the risk of pump shaft break (Azzoune et al., 2019), the flywheel of main pump can be replaced by inertia tank in DHR. The working principle of inertia tank is different from that of flywheel. As shown in Fig. 1, under normal operation condition of DHR, the liquid level in inertia tank is lower than the liquid level in pool, which is induced by the flow resistance of core, riser cylinder and activity decay tank. After the failure of main pump power, the inertia tank work automatically. Under the effect of the force produced by the liquid level difference between pool and inertia tank (LDPI), the decreasing speed of mass flow rate in reactor core slows down. As the coolant flows into the inertia tank, both the LDPI and the core mass flow rate decrease. Finally, the system can safety transform to the low power condition under the work of inertia tank.
Fig. 1. Sketch of the primary loop of DHR.
The main pump flywheel is a mature and reliable design, which is widely used in pressurized water reactors, boiling water reactors and pool type reactors (Gao et al., 2011, Kaliatka and Uspuras, 2000, Wu et al., 2017). A lot of theoretical and experimental researches have been done by scholars for the flywheel of main pump. Yokomura (1969) had proposed an analytical model for centrifugal pump, which considers the rotational kinetic energy of both pump impeller and rotating parts of the motor. The results show that the mechanical friction mainly affect the later stage of coastdown transition. In addition, the research results obtained by Takada show that the analytical model results are in good agreement with the experimental results (Takada and Yokomura, 1969). Since the primary loop possesses an appreciable amount of coolant, the inertia of coolant could produce a significant effect on the inertial rotation of main pump. Based on the momentum conservation equation, two analytical models which take into account the kinetic energy stored in circuit and main pump are proposed by Farhadi (Farhadi, 2010, Farhadi et al., 2007) and Gao (Gao et al., 2011, Gao et al., 2013, respectively. The results show that the ratio of the kinetic energy in a piping system to the kinetic energy of main pump has an important effect on the coastdown flowrate.
In addition, the effect of the main pump coastdown times on the safety of reactor core are also studied by scholars. Based on the SASSYS-1 system analysis code, Dunn et al (Dunn, 2002) studied the effect of the pump coastdown time on the cladding temperatures after the loss-of-flow accident occurred in AFR-300. The research results show that the cladding temperatures could keep below the limit temperature when the main pump coastdown time is 300 s. By using the multi-dimensional calculation software COMMIX-1AR/P code, the effect of the pump coastdown flow on the early stage of the cooling of reactor pool was investigated by Han et al. (2012); Han et al. (2009). It is found that the best flow coastdown time of main pump is determined to be 25 s when the loss of normal heat sink accident occurred in KALIMER-600. In the work presented by Alatrash et al. (2015) and Hammoud (Hammoud et al., 2014), the main pump flywheel can ensure the core safety after the loss-of-flow accident occurred in Jordan Research and Training Reactor and NUR nuclear research reactor.
From the literature review mentioned above, previous research focused on flywheel of main pump predominantly, and the performance of the flywheel of main pump after the failure of main pump power has been fully analyzed. However, as a key device applied in DHR to replace the main pump flywheel, the inertia tank is rarely analyzed by researchers. Therefore, a lot of work needs to be done for inertia tank. For the scenario of the failure of main pump power in DHR, the core power decrease as the control rods are inserted into the core from the top. Meanwhile, the inertia tank begins to work automatically. Under the effect of the force produced by LDPI, the decreasing speed of mass flow rate in reactor core slows down. Thus, the decreasing speed of mass flow rate in reactor core can match the decreasing speed of core power, which means the reactor core can be cooled sufficiently. Due to the large subcooling degree at the core outlet, the coolant can keep in liquid phase during the working process of inertia tank. It means the force produced by the difference of density between hot and cold coolant is relatively small. In addition, since the inertia tank plays the role of replacing the main pump flywheel in the early stage of its working process, the LDPI is relatively large during this period. Thus, the force produced by LDPI is considerably bigger than the force produced by the difference of density between hot and cold coolant. It means that the heat transfer occurred in both the core and plate heat exchanger has little effect on the working process of inertia tank. And it is feasible to study the performance of inertia tank based on DHR cold state condition. In this work, an experimental setup has been designed and constructed based on the DHR cold state condition. And the hydraulic characteristics of inertia tank after the failure of pump power are studied by experiment. In addition, the influence of the CPD and ITD on the hydraulic characteristics of inertia tank are also analyzed experimentally.
<Section>2. Investigation methods</Section>
2.1. Experimental setup
As shown in Fig. 2, the experimental setup mainly consists of pool, inertia tank, centrifugal pump, upstream horizontal pipe, downstream horizontal pipe, riser, upper horizontal pipe and downcomer. The main structural parameters of experimental setup are listed in Table 1. To evaluate the liquid level in both pool and inertia tank, a coordinate system is established with connection pipe inlet as the origin and the vertical upward direction as the positive direction (as shown in Fig. 2).
Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of experimental setup.
Table 1. Main parameters of experimental setup.
The experimental setup is designed and constructed according to the scaling method proposed by Ishii (Ishii and Kataoka, 1984, Kocamustafaogullari and Ishii, 1983). The objective of the experimental setup is to study the hydraulic characteristics of inertia tank after the failure of pump power. In the experimental setup, upstream horizontal pipe simulated the pipe inside the pool of DHR, including the reactor core, riser cylinder and activity decay tank. The downstream horizontal pipe, riser, upper horizontal pipe and downcomer in experimental setup simulate the pipe outside the pool of DHR. According to the position of inertia tank in experimental loop, upstream horizontal pipe is defined as the upstream pipe of inertia tank (UPIT), while downstream horizontal pipe, riser, upper horizontal pipe and downcomer are defined as the downstream pipe of inertia tank (DPIT). In addition, it is worth noting that the centrifugal pump is a conventional centrifugal pump without flywheel.
2.2. Experimental procedure
The experimental procedure is mainly divided into two parts, including steady state and transient state.
(a) Steady state: The power of the centrifugal pump of the experimental setup is turned on, and the fluid in the loop starts to flow under the effect of the driving force produced by centrifugal pump. The fluid in the pool flows through the upstream horizontal pipe, downstream horizontal pipe, riser, upper horizontal tube and downcomer in turn. Finally, it returns to the pool. The flow resistance in the loop can be adjusted by controlling the opening of valves 1, 3, 4 and 5, and then the required steady-state conditions of system can be established. After the system reaches steady state, the liquid level in inertia tank is lower than the liquid level in pool under the effect of flow resistance in UPIT.
(b) Transient state: Based on the steady-state condition established in step (a), the power supply of the centrifugal pump is shut down. At the same time, the data collection system begins to collect instrument data, including the volume flow rate, liquid level and pressure drop.
To study the effect of structural parameters on the inertia tank in the case of pump power failure, the above process is repeated with different CPD and ITD.
2.3. Uncertainty analysis
The experimental data in this experiment include volume flow, pressure drop, liquid level and temperature. These data are measured directly by the measuring instruments, and their uncertainty is related to the corresponding instruments. The detail descriptions of those measurement instruments are as follows:
•
The pressure drop is measured by the pressure difference transmitter with the accuracy of 0.1%.
•
The liquid level is measured by the float level transmitter with the measurement errors better than ± 1 cm.
•
The temperature is measured by the temperature sensor with the accuracy of ±0.5 °C.
•
The volume flow rate is measured by electromagnetic flowmeter. And the measuring measurement error can be less than 0.45% at the best measuring range (40 m3/h–5 m3/h). However, the mass flow rate in the experiment will falls below the best measuring range. When the volume flow rate is 5 m3/h–0.5 m3/h, the measurement error can be less than 2.6%. When the volume flow rate is in the range of 0.5 m3/h–0.1 m3/h, the measurement error can be less than 12.15%.
<Section>3. Results and analysis</Section>
3.1. Hydraulic characteristics of inertia tank
Considering that the hydraulic characteristics of inertia tank is related with the steady-state parameters, the working process of inertia tank after the failure of pump power are analyzed based on the initial steady-state parameters in Table 2.
Table 2. Initial steady-state parameters of experimental setup.
Fig. 3 presents the variation of mass flow rate and liquid level after the failure of pump power. It is observed from Fig. 3 that the liquid level in inertia tank is 4.2 m at the initial steady state, which is lower than the liquid level in pool.
Fig. 3. Variation of system parameters after the failure of pump power.
According to the transient characteristics of mass flow rate and liquid level presented in Fig. 3, the working process of inertia tank could be divided into three parts: (I) Transition stage (it begins when the failure of pump power and lasted until the maximum reversed mass flow rate in DPIT is reached). During this stage, the system transforms from the initial steady state to the operating mode driven by LDPI, and the mass flow rate changes dramatically. (II) LDPI action stage (it begins when the maximum reversed mass flow rate in DPIT is reached and lasted until LDPI decreases to zero). During this stage, the decreasing speed of mass flow rate in experimental loop decreases significantly. (III) Oscillation stage (it begins when the LDPI decreases to zero and lasted until the system changes to a static state). During this stage, the system transforms from operating mode driven by LDPI to the static state. And the oscillation of both mass flow rate and liquid level, which are characterized by the gradual decrease of oscillation amplitude, can be observed. The time points when the maximum reversed mass flow rate in DPIT is reached, LDPI decreases to zero and the system changes to static state are represented by T1, T2, T3, respectively. In addition, the flow direction in the above three stages are presented in Fig. 4. The variation characteristics for each of the three stages are described in detail below.
Fig. 4. Flow direction in connection pipe, UPIT and DPIT.
(I) Transition stage: As shown in Fig. 3, the pump power fails at 200 s. Due to the loss of the driving force produced by pump, the mass flow rate in UPIT and DPIT decrease rapidly induced by the flow resistance in the loop. The average decreasing speed of mass flow rate in UPIT and DPIT are 1.16 kg/s2 and 2.02 kg/s2, respectively. Meanwhile, the inertia tank begins to work automatically. For the flow in UPIT, the force produced by LDPI is driving force, which can slow down the decreasing speed of mass flow rate in UPIT. Under the initial steady state, the force produced by LDPI is equal to the flow resistance in UPIT. However, after the failure of pump power, due to the flow resistance in connection pipe, the force produced by LDPI is partly applied to UPIT, while the other part of force needs to overcome the flow resistance in connection pipe. Thus, the driving force produced by LDPI is smaller than the flow resistance, and the decreasing speed of mass flow rate in UPIT is still relatively large during this stage. For the flow in DPIT, due to the inertia of fluid and pump impeller, the fluid flow into the pool firstly (as shown in Fig. 4). Since the direction of the force produced by LDPI is opposite to the initial flow direction, the mass flow rate in DPIT decreases faster than that in UPIT. After that, the mass flow in DPIT reverses under the effect of the force produced by LDPI, and then the fluid in pool flows into inertia tank along UPIT and DPIT, respectively (as shown in Fig. 4). The maximum reversed mass flow rate of 0.89 kg/s is reached at 204.6 s. In addition, as shown in Fig. 3a, as the fluid in the pool flows into the inertia tank, LDPI decreases with time and the average decreasing speed of LDPI is 0.135 m/s. From the above analysis, it can be known that the transition stage begins at 200 s and ends at 204.6 s. The system is mainly affected by fluid inertia, LDPI and flow resistance during this stage.
(II) LDPI action stage: It can be seen from Fig. 4 that the fluid in pool flow into the inertia tank along UPIT and DPIT, respectively. As the fluid in pool flows into the inertia tank, LDPI decreases with time and the average decreasing speed of LDPI is 0.072 m/s. The mass flow rate in both UPIT and DPIT also decrease induced by the decrease of the driving force produced by LDPI. The average decreasing speed of mass flow rate in UPIT is 0.089 kg/s2, and the average decreasing speed of reversed mass flow rate in DPIT is 0.026 kg/s2. It can be known that the decreasing speed of mass flow rate decreases significantly compared to transition stage. This is because that due to the small flow velocity in the loop during this period, the flow resistance in the loop is small compared to the transition stage. Thus, the driving force produced by LDPI can match with the flow resistance in the loop. The change of mass flow is mainly caused by the change of LDPI. Since the cross-sectional area of the pool and the inertia tank are relatively large, the LDPI changes slowly and the mass flow rate changes slowly during this period. In addition, since the flow resistance coefficient in DPIT is much larger than that in UPIT, the reversed mass flow rate in DPIT is smaller than the mass flow rate in UPIT (as shown in Fig. 3b). From the above analysis, the LDPI action stage begins at 204.6 s and ends at 234.8 s. The system is mainly affected by LDPI and flow resistance during this stage.
(III) Oscillation stage: It is observed from Fig. 3 that after the LDPI decreases to zero, the oscillation of mass flow rate and liquid level, which are characterized by the gradual decrease of oscillation amplitude, can be observed distinctly. And the maximum oscillation amplitude of mass flow rate in UPIT is 0.181 kg/s. This is because that the mass flow rate in UPIT is 0.356 kg/s when the LDPI decrease to zero, which indicates that the fluid still has relatively large kinetic energy. Thus, the fluid flows into inertia tank under the action of fluid inertia, making the liquid level in inertia tank higher than that in pool. Due to the flow resistance coefficient in UPIT is much smaller than that in DPIT, the fluid in inertia tank flows back into the pool along UPIT under action of driving force produced by LDPI. Therefore, the pool, UPIT, connection pipe and inertia tank form a U-tube, and the fluid oscillates in this U-tube (as shown in Fig. 4). Under the effect of flow resistance, the oscillation phenomenon gradually weakens and finally the system changes to static state at 269.1 s. As shown in Fig. 3a, since the mass flow rate changes slowly during this period, the liquid level in inertia tank also change slowly. The variation of liquid level in inertia tank cannot be measured accurately due to the measuring error of float level transmitter. Thus, a step change of liquid level in inertia tank can be observed during this period. Meanwhile, since the cross-sectional area of pool is larger than that of inertia tank, the oscillation amplitude of liquid level in pool is much smaller than that inertia tank. Due to the small oscillation amplitude of liquid level in pool, the oscillation of liquid level in pool cannot be measured under the effect of the measuring error of float level transmitter. Thus, the liquid level remains unchanged during this period. In addition, it is observed from Fig. 3b that when the mass flow rate is close to zero, a step change of mass flow rate can be observed. This is because that the large measurement error of electromagnetic flowmeter under low flow velocity conditions. From the above analysis, the oscillation stage begins at 234.8 s and ends at 269.1 s. The system is mainly affected by fluid inertia and flow resistance during this stage.
3.2. Performance of inertia tank
To better understand the performance of inertia tank in the case of the failure of pump power, based on the initial steady-state parameters in Table 2, the transient responses are compared when the inertia tank is connected to the experimental loop and is separated from the experimental loop, respectively. After the failure of pump power, the valve 2 remains open when the inertia tank is connected to the experimental loop, while the valve 2 is closed when the inertia tank is separated from the experimental loop.
Fig. 5 shows the variation of mass flow rate and liquid level when the inertia tank is connected to the experimental loop and is separated from the experimental loop, respectively. As shown in Fig. 5a, whether the inertia tank is connected to the experimental loop or not, the mass flow rate in the UPIT decreases with time after the failure of pump power. However, when the inertia tank is connected to the experimental loop, the average decreasing speed of mass flow rate in UPIT is 0.212 kg/s2 and the mass flow rate in UPIT decreases to zero at 238.7 s. When inertia tank is separated from the experimental loop, the average decreasing speed of mass flow rate in UPIT is 0.804 kg/s2 and the mass flow rate in UPIT decreases to zero at 210.5 s. Therefore, when the inertia tank is connected to the experimental loop, the decreasing speed of mass flow rate in UPIT is obviously reduced under the effect of inertia tank. It indicates that the inertia tank can play the role of main pump flywheel to slow down the decreasing speed of mass flow rate in UPIT after the failure of pump power.
Fig. 5. Performance of inertia tank after the failure of pump power.
In addition, as shown in Fig. 5, the following special phenomena can be also observed when inertia tank is connected to experimental loop.
1)
For the mass flow rate in UPIT, it can be seen from Fig. 5a that after the LDPI decreases to zero, the mass flow rate in UPIT begins to oscillate under the effect of the fluid inertia, which is characterized by the gradual decrease of oscillation amplitude. However, it cannot be observed when inertia tank is separated from the experimental loop. After the action of the inertia tank in DHR, the core power is reduced to a lower level, and the system will rely on natural circulation to derived the decay heat in core. Thus, the flow oscillation occurred in the later stage of the working process of inertia tank may affect the natural circulation established in the loop.
2)
For the mass flow rate in DPIT, as shown in Fig. 5b, the reversed mass flow rate in DPIT can be observed distinctly under the effect of the force produced by LDPI, which cannot be observed when inertia tank is separated from the experimental loop. After the mass flow in DPIT reverses, UPIT and DPIT form parallel channel, and the flow resistance decreases. It means that the coolant in the pool will flow into the inertia tank faster and the working time of inertia tank is reduced. Therefore, the reversed mass flow in DPIT will reduce the performance of the inertia tank.
3)
For the liquid level in the pool, it is observed from Fig. 5c that the liquid level in the pool is reduced to 6.6 m under the effect of inertia tank, while the liquid level in pool remains constant when the inertia tank is separated from the experimental loop. It means that the pressure and the corresponding saturation temperature of coolant in reactor core are reduced after the action of inertia tank. Thus, the core safety may be affected due to the decrease of subcooling degree at core outlet.
Based on the above analysis, it shows that the inertia tank can act as the flywheel of main pump to slow down the decreasing speed of mass flow rate in UPIT. However, since the work principle of inertia tank is different from that of flywheel of pump, the phenomena induced by inertia tank, including the oscillation of mass flow rate in UPIT, the reversed mass flow rate in DPIT and the decrease of liquid level in pool, can be observed, which should be considered when applying the inertia tank. In addition, as shown in Fig. 5a, bi-directional oscillation occurs after the mass flow rate in UPIT decreases to zero for the first time. Since the inertia tank cannot act as flywheel during this period, the duration from the failure of pump power to the mass flow rate in UPIT decreases to zero for the first time is defined as the effective coast-down time of inertia tank. For instance, as shown in Fig. 5a, the effective coast-down time of inertia tank is 38.7 s.
<Section>4. Influence of the structure parameters</Section>
In this section, the influence of the structure parameters, including CPD and ITD, on the hydraulic characteristics of inertia tank after the failure of pump power are investigated by experiment.
4.1. Effects of CPD
The inertia tank is connected to the experimental loop by connection pipe, and the fluid flows into the inertia tank through the connection pipe after the failure of pump power. Since the flow resistance in connection pipe is closely related with CPD, the hydraulic characteristics of inertia tank could be affected by CPD. Based on the initial steady-state parameters of experimental setup in Table 2, the effects of CPD on the hydraulic characteristics of inertia tank are analyzed by experiment.
Fig. 6 shows the variation of mass flow rate and liquid level under the different CPD, and the effect of CPD on the duration of each stage is presented in Fig. 7. It is observed from Fig. 6c that CPD has little effect on the initial steady-state liquid level in inertia tank.
Fig. 6. Influence of CPD on the variation of system parameter.
Fig. 7. Influence of CPD on the duration of each stage.
For the transition stage, it is observed from Fig. 6 that with the increase of CPD, the decreasing speed of mass flow rate in UPIT slows down, while the decreasing speed of the mass flow rate in DPIT becomes larger. The reason is that the forces produced by LDPI is partly applied to UPIT and DPIT, while the other part needs to overcome the flow resistance in connection pipe. By increasing CPD, the flow resistance in connection pipe is reduced, which indicates that the force applied to both UPIT and DPIT becomes larger. For the flow in UPIT, since the force applied to UPIT is driving force, the decreasing speed of mass flow rate in UPIT decreases with the increase of CPD. However, for the flow in DPIT, since the direction of the force applied to DPIT is opposite to the initial flow direction, the decreasing speed of mass flow rate in DPIT becomes larger with the increase of CPD. Thus, the mass flow in DPIT reverses earlier and the duration of transition stage becomes shorter with the increase of CPD (as shown in Figs. 6b and 7). Due to the decrease of the flow resistance in connection pipe, the fluid flow into the inertia tank more easily. Namely, the decreasing speed of LDPI become larger with the increase of CPD.
For the LDPI action stage, since the flow resistance in connection pipe decreases with the increase of CPD, the fluid in pool flows into the inertia tank more quickly under the driving force produced by LDPI. Therefore, as shown in Fig. 6, the decreasing speed of LDPI and mass flow rate become larger with the increase of CPD. The duration of LDPI action stage becomes shorter as shown in Fig. 7. In addition, it is observed from Fig. 6b that the maximum reversed mass flow rate in DPIT becomes larger with the increase of CPD. This is because that the maximum reversed mass flow rate in DPIT is related with driving force produced by LDPI and flow resistance in the loop. Due to the short duration of the transition stage, the decrease of LDPI during the transition stage is relatively small compared to the initial steady-state LDPI. And LDPI at the beginning of LDPI action stage changes little under different CPD (as shown in Fig. 6c). It indicates that the driving force produced by LDPI at the beginning of the LDPI action stage is slightly affected by CPD. Meanwhile, the flow resistance in the loop decreases with the increase of CPD. Thus, the maximum reversed mass flow rate in DPIT increases with the increase of CPD.
For the oscillation stage, Fig. 8 shows the effect of CPD on the mass flow rate in both UPIT and DPIT at the beginning of oscillation stage. It is observed from Fig. 8 that the mass flow rate in both UPIT and DPIT become larger with increase of CPD. It indicates that the kinetic energy stored in fluid at the beginning of oscillation stage becomes larger. Therefore, the oscillation of mass flow rate in UPIT becomes more violently as shown in Fig. 6. And the system needs more time to dissipate the kinetic energy stored in fluid, that is, the duration of the oscillation stage becomes longer. In addition, it can be seen from Fig. 6b that when the CPD is 5.0 cm, the mass flow rate in DPIT also oscillates, which is caused by the decrease of flow resistance.
Fig. 8. Influence of CPD on the mass flow rate at the beginning of oscillation stage.
Based on the analysis above, it is found that CPD affects the entire working process of inertia tank by affecting the flow resistance in connection pipe. With the increase of CPD (from 3.5 cm to 5.0 cm), the decreasing speed of the mass flow rate in UPIT slow down during the transition stage, while it becomes larger during the LDPI action stage. And the effective coast-down time of inertia tank become shorter (from 31.15 s to 55.25 s). Meanwhile, both the maximum reversed mass flow rate in UPIT and maximum oscillation amplitude of mass flow rate in DPIT increase with the increase of CPD.
4.2. Effects of ITD
The cross-sectional area of inertia tank is related with ITD, which can affect the variation of liquid level in inertia tank when the fluid flows into the inertia tank. Thus, the hydraulic characteristics of inertia tank after the failure of pump power are affected by ITD. Based on the initial steady-state parameters of experimental setup in Table 2, the effects of ITD on the hydraulic characteristics of inertia tank are analyzed by experiment.
Fig. 9 shows the variation of mass flow rate and liquid level under the different ITD, and the effect of ITD on the duration of each stage is presented in Fig. 10. It is observed from Fig. 9c that ITD has little effect on the initial steady-state liquid level in inertia tank.
Fig. 9. Influence of ITD on the variation of system parameter.
Fig. 10. Influence of ITD on the duration of each stage.
For the transition stage, since the cross-sectional area of inertia tank becomes larger with the increase of ITD, the increasing speed of the liquid level in inertia tank decreases when fluid flows into inertia tank. Thus, as shown in Fig. 9c, the decreasing speed of LDPI decreases with the increase of ITD. However, due to the short duration of the transition stage, the decrease of LDPI is small compared to the initial steady-state LDPI. It indicates that ITD has little effect on the force produced by LDPI during transition stage. In addition, due to the large cross-sectional area of inertia tank, ITD has little impact on the flow resistance in the loop. Therefore, as shown in Fig. 9, the variation of mass flow rate is slightly affected by ITD. And the duration of transition stage changes little under different ITD (as shown in Fig. 10).
For the LDPI action stage, since the cross-sectional area of inertia tank becomes larger with the increase of ITD, it is observed from Fig. 9 that the decreasing speed of LDPI slows down. Thus, the decreasing speed of mass flow rate in both UPIT and DPIT also decrease under the effect of LDPI. In addition, as shown in Fig. 10, the duration of LDPI action stage increases with the increase of ITD.
For the oscillation stage, it can be seen from Fig. 9 that with the increase of ITD, the liquid level in both pool and inertia tank decrease when the system changes to static state. This is because that the cross-sectional area of inertia tank increases with the increase of ITD. According to the mass conservation equation, the following equation can be obtained.
@(1)
where hp_0 is the initial steady-state liquid level in pool, hIT_0 is the initial steady-state liquid level in inertia tank, hIT_1 is the liquid level in inertia tank when the system changes to static state, ap and aIT are represent the cross-sectional area in pool and inertia tank, respectively.
It can be known from Eq. (1) that by increasing ITD, the liquid level in inertia tank decreases when the system changes to static state. In addition, Fig. 11 shows the effect of ITD on the mass flow rate in both UPIT and DPIT at the beginning of oscillation stage. It is observed from Fig. 11 that ITD has slight effect on the mass flow rate in both UPIT and DPIT, which indicates that the kinetic energy stored in fluid at the beginning of oscillation stage is little affected by ITD. Therefore, as shown in Fig. 9a, ITD has slight effect on the oscillation of mass flow rate in UPIT. Meanwhile, since the cross-sectional area of inertia tank increases with the increase of ITD, the oscillation amplitude of liquid level in inertia tank decreases as shown in Fig. 9c.
Fig. 11. Influence of ITD on the initial parameters of oscillation stage.
Based on the analysis above, it is found that ITD mainly affects the LDPI action stage and oscillation stage by affecting the capacity of inertia tank, while it has slight effect on the transition stage. By increasing ITD (from 20 cm to 30 cm), the decreasing speed of mass flow rate in UPIT and reversed mass flow rate in DPIT slow down during the LDPI action stage, and the effective coast-down time of inertia tank become longer (from 38.7 s to 80.65 s). In addition, the oscillation amplitude of liquid level in inertia tank decreases with the increase of ITD.
<Section>5. Conclusions</Section>
In this paper, the hydraulic characteristics of inertia tank after the failure of pump power have been experimentally investigated. In addition, the influence of the structure parameters, including the CPD and ITD, on the hydraulic characteristics of inertia tank are also analyzed. The main conclusions are as follows:
1)
After the failure of pump power, the inertia tank can act as the flywheel of main pump to slow down the decreasing speed of mass flow rate in UPIT, and the working process of inertia tank can be divided into three parts: (I) transition stage, (II) LDPI action stage and (III) oscillation stage. Within the parameters studied in this work, the effective coast-down time of inertia tank ranges from 31.15 s to 80.65 s.
2)
The experimental results shown that the entire working process of inertia tank is affected by CPD. With the increase of CPD, the decreasing speed of the mass flow rate in UPIT slows down during the transition stage, while it becomes larger during the LDPI action stage. And the effective coast-down time of inertia tank become shorter. In addition, both the maximum reversed mass flow rate in UPIT and maximum oscillation amplitude of mass flow rate in DPIT increase with the increase of CPD.
3)
It is found that ITD mainly affects the LDPI action stage and oscillation stage, while it has slight effect on the transition stage. As the increase of ITD, the decreasing speed of mass flow rate in UPIT slows down during the LDPI action stage, and the effective coast-down time of inertia tank become longer. In addition, the oscillation amplitude of liquid level in inertia tank decreases with the increase of ITD.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Gongqing Wang: Investigation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing. Bo Wang: Data curation, Resources. Jiming Wen: Formal analysis, Resources. Ruifeng Tian: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition. Zhixin Niu: Data curation, Visualization. Xingmin Liu: Funding acquisition, Supervision.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgment</Section>
Thanks to Harbin Engineering University and China Institute of Atomic Energy for their support and help.
<Section>References</Section>
Alatrash et al., 2015
Y. Alatrash, H.-o. Kang, H.-g. Yoon, K. Seo, D.-Y. Chi, J. Yoon
Experimental and analytical investigations of primary coolant pump coastdown phenomena for the Jordan Research and Training Reactor
Nucl. Eng. Des., 286 (2015), pp. 60-66
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Azzoune et al., 2019
M. Azzoune, A. Boumedien, D. Lababsa, M.-H. Boulheouchat, A. Ameur
Analysis of a loss-of-flow accident resulting from the primary pump shaft break transient of the NUR research reactor
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 56 (1) (2019), pp. 130-145
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Dunn, 2002
F.D. Dunn
Impact of design options on natural circulation performance of the AFR-300 advanced fast reactor
Office of Scientific & Technical Information Technical Reports (2002)
Google Scholar
Farhadi, 2010
K. Farhadi
Analysis of flow coastdown for an MTR-pool type research reactor
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 52 (6) (2010), pp. 573-579
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Farhadi et al., 2007
K. Farhadi, A. Bousbia-salah, F. D'Auria
A model for the analysis of pump start-up transients in Tehran Research Reactor
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 49 (7) (2007), pp. 499-510
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gao et al., 2011
H. Gao, F. Gao, X. Zhao, J. Chen, X. Cao
Transient flow analysis in reactor coolant pump systems during flow coastdown period
Nucl. Eng. Des., 241 (2) (2011), pp. 509-514
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gao et al., 2013
H. Gao, F. Gao, X. Zhao, J. Chen, X. Cao
Analysis of reactor coolant pump transient performance in primary coolant system during start-up period
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 54 (2013), pp. 202-208
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hammoud et al., 2014
A. Hammoud, B. Meftah, M. Azzoune, L. Radji, B. Zouhire, M. Amina
Thermal-hydraulic behavior of the NUR nuclear research reactor during a fast loss of flow transient
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 51 (9) (2014), pp. 1154-1160
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Han et al., 2012
J.-W. Han, J.-H. Eoh, S.-O. Kim
Comparison of various design parameters’ effects on the early-stage cooling performance in a sodium-cooled fast reactor
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 40 (1) (2012), pp. 65-71
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Han et al., 2009
J.-W. Han, T.-H. Lee, J.-H. Eoh, S.-O. Kim
Investigation into the effects of a coastdown flow on the characteristics of early stage cooling of the reactor pool in KALIMER-600
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 36 (9) (2009), pp. 1325-1332
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ishii and Kataoka, 1984
M. Ishii, I. Kataoka
Scaling laws for thermal-hydraulic system under single phase and two-phase natural circulation
Nucl. Eng. Des., 81 (1984), pp. 411-425
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kaliatka and Uspuras, 2000
A. Kaliatka, E. Uspuras
Benchmark analysis of main circulation pump trip events at the Ignalina NPP using RELAP5 code
Nucl. Eng. Des., 202 (2000), pp. 109-118
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kocamustafaogullari and Ishii, 1983
Kocamustafaogullari, G., Ishii, M., 1983. Scaling criteria for two-phase flow natural-and forced-convection loop and their application to conceptual 2 x 4 simulation-loop design.[PWR]. Argonne National Lab., IL (USA).
Google Scholar
Shi, 1994
Shi, Y., 1994. Comparison between Pool Type and Vessel Type District Heating Reactor. Nuclear Power Engineering.
Google Scholar
Takada and Yokomura, 1969
Y. Takada, T. Yokomura
Thermo-hydraulic model test of the first nuclear ship reactor in Japan
Nucl. Eng. Des., 10 (1969), pp. 126-147
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tian, 2000
J. Tian
Simple and safe deep pool reactor for low-temperature heat supply
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 37 (2000), pp. 271-276
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tian et al., 1998
J. Tian, Y. Fu, Z. Zhaoyi
Deep pool reactors for nuclear district heating
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 33 (1998), pp. 279-288
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tian et al., 1999a
J. Tian, G. Shi, Z. Zhao, D. Cao
Economic analyses of a nuclear desalination system using deep pool reactors
Desalination, 123 (1999), pp. 25-31
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tian et al., 1999b
J. Tian, G. Shi, Z. Zhao, D. Cao, X. Wang
Simple, safe and low-cost nuclear plants as a heat source for seawater desalination
Desalination, 123 (1999), pp. 15-23
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tobias, 1980
A. Tobias
DECAY HEAT. Progr. Nucl. Energy, 5 (1980), pp. 1-93
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in Scopus
Wu et al., 2017
G. Wu, M. Jin, Y. Li
Primary pump coast-down characteristics analysis in lead cooled fast reactor under loss of flow transient
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 103 (2017), pp. 1-9
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yokomura, 1969
T. Yokomura
Flow coastdown in centrifugal pump systems
Nucl. Eng. Des., 10 (1969), pp. 250-258
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar