<title>Effect of part-length rods for different BWR subchannel geometries</title>
<author>1,LukasRobers,2,Horst-MichaelPrasser</author>
<Affiliation>1,ETH Zürich, Department of Mechanical and Process Engineering, Sonneggstrasse 3, 8092 Zürich, Switzerland</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nucengdes.2020.110909</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029549320304039</URL>
Effect of part-length rods for different BWR subchannel geometries
LukasRobers,Horst-MichaelPrasser
ETH Zürich, Department of Mechanical and Process Engineering, Sonneggstrasse 3, 8092 Zürich, Switzerland
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Effect of part length rods on the annular flow in a subchannel geometry investigated.
Recirculation zone with low axial velocities found at the end of a part length rod.
Substantial cross-flow of liquid and gas identified into the part length rod region.
Surprisingly little effect on distribution profile, when changing flow rates.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Despite the beneficial effects of part-length rods (PLRs) in BWR fuel, they also introduce inhomogeneities to the coolant flow. These effects are hard to simulate and might affect cooling efficiency, dryout margin and CRUD deposition. So far, no fundamental experimental research was conducted to explore the details of their influence to the liquid film behavior in the dominating annular flow regime.
To investigate the fluid dynamical effects of PLRs, we analyzed three different types of subchannel geometries. We varied the positions of PLRs in a pair of adjacent subchannels as well as the liquid and gas flow rates, staying within the annular flow regime. The adiabatic air-water test section was equipped with two types of sensors measuring the liquid film thickness distribution on half a fuel rod and on a fuel element wall. The measurement frequency was 10 kHz and the lateral resolution in the two-dimensional measuring domain was 2 mm. This corresponds to 64 × 16 and 16 × 32 measuring points, for rod and wall sensor respectively.
Closely downstream of a PLR, we found a recirculation zone with less shear driving the liquid film. This is reflected by an increase of the average film thickness and a decrease of the wave velocity. A cross-flow of gas and liquid towards the open space downstream of the PLR was detected. The side of neighboring fuel rods facing this open space sees an increase of liquid flow. On the PLR-averted side, the coolant flow decreases, reducing the dryout margin. Further downstream, more gas tends to traverse into the open space left behind the PLR, which again increases the driving shear stress on the liquid film. The film becomes thinner and faster. The precise channel geometry featuring PLRs have a strong and complex influence on the local average liquid film thickness and the wave velocities. Their qualitative distribution at different flow conditions however, is similar.
Keywords:Annular flow;Asymmetric channel;Fuel assembly;Liquid film;Part length rods
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Starting already in the lower half of boiling water reactor (BWR) fuel elements, the high steam quality causes annular flow. This flow regime is characterized by a fast flowing gas core, a liquid film on the walls and liquid droplets entrained in the gas core. A lot of research has already been conducted in the fundamental understanding of annular flow at BWR conditions (Adamsson and Anglart, 2006, Prasser et al., 2016, Pham et al., 2014, Dasgupta et al., 2017, Azzopardi, 1986) and to develop empirical correlations for droplet entrainment and deposition (Berna et al., 2015), as well as to describe the properties of waves (Berna et al., 2014). The deeper understanding of this flow pattern has enabled the development of BWR fuel elements towards higher efficiency, better economy and more safety. The main improvements were achieved by more rods with a smaller diameter in a fuel element and the introduction of functional spacers. The role of functional spacers for instance and their beneficial effect on the dryout margin has been analyzed by many researchers in (Kraemer et al., 1995, Feldhaus et al., 2002, Damsohn and Prasser, 2010, Pham et al., 2015, Jayanti and Rajesh Reddy, 2013). Through the deposition of entrained droplets back to the surface of the fuel rods, dryout was shown to be delayed, leading to a safer operation of fuel elements and higher power limits. However, the exact modelling and reproduction of the influence of spacers by computational fluid dynamics is still a hard task for large-scale geometries and high Reynolds number environments like a reactor. Therefore, the development of spacer models is an ongoing process (Chandraker et al., 2015).
Besides the introduction of functional spacers, from a thermal-hydraulic point of view the introduction of part length rods (PLRs) is an interesting subject. These fuel rods end at a certain intermediate height of the fuel element to increase the moderator to fuel ratio in the upper part of the core. The improved moderation helps to achieve a more uniform and thus higher average burnup. The effect of PLRs counteracting the increase in steam velocity towards the top of the core and therefore decreasing the pressure drop was also demonstrated (Johansson et al., 1993). Even though fuel elements with PLRs are widespread in operation, thermos-hydraulic research has not yet investigated this topic in depth.
In practice, so-called subchannel codes are used to predict various quantities of interest for BWR operation. They consider PLRs through models and produce good results (Glück, 2007, Adamsson and Le Corre, 2014, Inoue et al., 1995). One feature of these PLR models is the assumption of a void drift downstream of a PLR. Void drift in general is considered in various publications (Rowe et al., 1990, Sadatomi et al., 2005, Carlucci et al., 2004, Yoshida et al., 2003). However, only selected aspects of the influence of PLRs on the flow were investigated so far, e.g. by applying local optical probes used to detect droplets. Such measurements were carried out by Le Corre (2017), whereby the design of the probes allowed operation at reactor conditions at the FRIGG facility (Andersson et al., 2011). Detailed measurements on the liquid film behavior at the end of the PLR as well as their influence further downstream were not yet conducted. However, the consideration of a potential lateral transport of water in the film would be necessary to quantify the void drift downstream of PLRs accurately. Therefore, the effect of the PLRs on film thickness distribution and wave velocity are studied in the presently described research.
<Section>2. Experimental setup</Section>
2.1. Facility
The measurements were performed at the CALVIN facility at the Laboratory of Nuclear Energy Systems of ETH Zurich (Fig. 1). All tests are conducted at atmospheric conditions using air and desalinated water. A compressor provides the necessary airflow rates to reach annular flow. In the present configuration, up to 240 m3/h volumetric flow rate can be achieved. A simple water pump operating at a constant rotation speed supplies the water. The airflow rate is controlled with a PI-controller which sets compressor speed, whereas the water flow rate is controlled by manually activated valves. Both flow rates are monitored using a vortex flow meter (ABB, FV4000) for the gas and two rotameters (GF, type 335, 50 – 500 L/h and 300 – 3000 L/h) for the liquid. Behind the test section, a separator splits water and air and recycles them to the inlets of pump and compressor.
Fig. 1. Schematic representation of the CALVIN facility.
The heart of the facility is the test section where different channel geometries can be investigated. The cross-section of the channels used in this experiment are shown in Fig. 2. Blue is the flow cross-section area. Fuel rods are indicated as dashed lines. The location of the sensors is marked in red, including their orientation. In b) two sensors are used on the same rod that are 1 m apart from each other. The free flow cross-section area downstream of the end of part length rods is also filled blue. a) and b) represent part length rods ending in the inner fuel rod lattice, while c) simulates a part-length corner rod. Geometry a) and b) are double subchannel geometries as previously used by Damsohn and Prasser (2010), but with PLRs. Those two designs allow to study the effect of PLRs from different angles, where a) focuses on the close proximity of a PLR to the rod instrumented by the liquid film thickness sensor, while b) allows to focus on cross-flow effects. The physical reasoning behind making two part length rods instead of one in b) is to enhance any possible effect, especially the effect of cross-flow. In a next step, a more realistic geometry was considered in c). This channel shows the wall region of a fuel assembly with the corner rod being part length, similar to commonly used BWR fuel designs (Strasser et al., 2004). The PLR geometry is slightly simplified by a flat semicircular face at their end heights, which are shown in Table 1.
Fig. 2. Scheme of the used test channels.
Table 1. Geometrical properties of the different channels and flow conditions.
Measurements were performed at superficial gas velocities between 20 and 60 m/s for channels a) and b) and between 30 m/s and 50 m/s for channel c). The range for channel c) was smaller, because, annular flow requires higher velocities in larger cross-sections, resulting in churn flow for 20 m/s. A flow rate of 60 m/s on the other hand was not achievable because of the larger cross section of c) causing to reach the compressor limits. The volumetric liquid flow fraction 1 − @ was varied between 0.1 and 1% and is defined as
(1)@
where @ is the volumetric gas flow fraction and @ the liquid and gas volumetric flow respectively. For the comparison of the different channel geometries, tests at a superficial gas velocity of @ = 40 m/s and a liquid flow fraction of 1 - @ = 0.3% were conducted at all three channel types. However, these values refer to inlet conditions in case a) and b), while for c) they are referring to outlet conditions. Channel a) and b) have the same flow cross-section area and the same area change at the PLR’s ending. This makes a comparison easier. In channel c) the ratio of the flow cross-section up- and downstream is different, making an exact comparison at all locations impossible. The presented choice of flow rates allows the same superficial velocities at least at one point, equipped with sensors, in all channels. The following Table 1 shows all conditions in more detail for the channel comparison.
Channel a) and b) are almost identical, except for the position of the PLRs and the sensor location, as Fig. 2 and Table 1 show. However, channel a) features only one sensor at the PLR end height, while b) has two sensors; at the PLR end height and 1 m above. The PLRs end after 89 L/Dh in channel a) and 39 L/Dh in channel b). Following the reasoning of Kataoka et al. (2000), the length to reach an equilibrium of entrainment and deposition in annular flow is for our conditions about 55 L/Dh. Therefore, in channel a), developed flow can be assumed at the sensor start, while this is not the case for the lower sensor in b). In this experiment, the liquid film is generated by injecting liquid onto the wall. According to (Okada and Fujita, 1993, Azzopardi, 1997), the equilibrium is reached quicker this way. We generated the film as a layer of water covering the wall by using an inlet nozzle with a slit around the perimeter of the flow cross-section. The slit, through which the water was directed upwards onto the wall surface, was ranging 1 mm into the flow domain, causing a slight local reduction of the free cross-section (more details in (Damsohn and Prasser, 2010). However, our data suggests that the film for the lower sensor in channel b) is not yet developed. The sensors in a) and b) (lower sensor) are positioned in a way that the PLRs end after about one third of their height of 128 mm. The upper sensor in tests of type b) starts at 44 L/Dh above the ending of the PLR. Here, our data suggests developed conditions, since no changes of parameters can be seen over the sensor height. The same holds true for the sensors in geometry c), which start at 80 L/Dh above the PLR end.
2.2. Sensor technology
The principle of the sensor is a conductivity measurement in a grid of electrodes placed flush to the wall of the flow channel. The sensors are manufactured on a flexible PCB. Between a so-called transmitter electrode, supplied with a certain electrical potential, and a neighboring receiver electrode, an electrical current establishes. This allows to monitor the conductance of the liquid film, which is a measure of its thickness at the position of the sensitive element formed by these two electrodes. Since the electrodes are arranged in a square matrix, a 2D image of film thickness over the entire sensor area can be obtained at a high frequency. Round electrode pads with a diameter of 0.5 mm are used as receivers and transmitters with a pitch and therefore a spatial resolution of 2 mm. For both of them, columns and rows respectively are connected such that they form a matrix structure of receiver lines and transmitter rows. For more details, see (Damsohn and Prasser, 2010).
Fig. 3 shows the layout of the sensor electrodes for a small section of the sensor (3 × 3). The blue area corresponds to the sensitive area if the transmitter line “T” (red), is activated and the receiver line “R” (green) is read out. The large electrodes labeled with “G” are ground electrodes. All electrodes, except for the activated transmitter line are kept at ground potential (labeled with “G”). The curved rod sensor consists of a 64 × 16 matrix with 64 receiving electrode lines in flow direction and 16 transmitting lines across the perimeter of the semicircle. The wall sensor has 32 × 16 measuring positions, where 16 lines are in flow direction. The transmitting electrodes are activated in series, while all receivers can be read out in parallel. Receivers and not activated transmitter electrodes are kept at zero potential. Ground electrodes are introduced to enhance the sensor characteristic as shown in (Damsohn and Prasser, 2009). Their diameter is 1 mm for the rod sensor (as shown in Fig. 3) and 0.9 mm for the wall sensor. The maximal resolved film thickness is 0.77 mm on the rod senor and 0.61 mm on the wall sensor, which corresponds to 95% of the saturation value. Beyond this value, the measuring uncertainty becomes too large due to a decreasing sensitivity of the film thickness detection. The difference between both sensors comes from the slightly smaller ground electrodes of the wall sensor. The signal acquisition electronics were supplied by Teletronic Rossendorf GmbH. The measured current at each transmitter/receiver combination is converted to a 12-bit integer. The measurement was performed at 10 kHz during 30 s.
Fig. 3. Layout of the used sensor.
The conversion of the primary measured information into local instantaneous liquid film thickness values is performed using calibration curves obtained by a numerical simulation of the sensor response. The simulation is essentially a numerical solution of the potential field equation with the geometry of the sensing electrodes as boundary condition, whereas the thickness of a layer of conducting media representing the fluid covering the sensor surface is varied. The main simplifications are the assumption of a flat film of constant thickness and the neglecting transition resistances at the surface of the electrodes. The simulation delivers film thickness-dependent conductance values. More details on the calculation can be found in (Damsohn, 2011). Fig. 4 shows the comparison of the calculated sensor response with the measured sensor response for the rod sensor. The calibration experiments were done by and are described in more detail in Ito et al. (2016). Comparing the simulation to calibration experiments, the deviation of the film thickness was found to be on average less than 1%. The advantage of a simulation of the sensor response is a lower sensitivity towards mechanical tolerances during the experimental calibration.
Fig. 4. Comparison of the numerically simulated sensor response for a flat liquid film and the corresponding experimentally obtained values for the rod sensor.
<Section>3. Data analysis procedure</Section>
3.1. Film thickness
To obtain the film thickness, the measured local instantaneous currents are normalized by subtracting the recorded dry currents – i.e. the current that occurs when the sensor is completely dry – for zero correction at each sensor point. Afterwards, the zero-corrected value is divided by the difference of the completely wet saturated current minus the same dry current. The following Eq. (2) shows how the normalization is done for the value measured at time t and location (i, j).
(2)@
The normalized sensor response is transformed into a local instantaneous film thickness by using cubic interpolation in the calibration curve. As outlined before, the calibration curves were obtained by solving the potential field for that specific geometry. Note that boundary effects observed at the outermost three lines of the sensor were taken into account by individual calibration curves calculated with the consideration of the specific geometrical relations close to the corner of the flow channel. The film thickness in the 2D images in Fig. 7 are filtered with a median filter (3 × 1 normally and 3 × 3 for b) upper). For all images, the outermost points at ±90° are cropped because of very high film thicknesses due to the close wall.
3.2. Velocity
Local velocities were determined by calculating the cross-correlation of the signal of two neighboring measuring points in the flow direction. This is a measure for the velocity of disturbance waves in the flow – as shown in (Belt et al., 2010) – which are dominating the signal fluctuations. By correlating each point with its adjacent point in the downstream direction, the local axial wave velocity was determined at 63 × 16 locations (or 15 × 32 for the wall sensor in geometry c)) allowing a very detailed observation of the wave velocity distribution. The average liquid velocity in the film cannot be determined by this analysis. However, according to (Hall Taylor et al., 2014), most of the mass is transported in disturbance waves and therefore, the calculated velocity allows to assess tendencies in the liquid mass flow when multiplied with the film thickness.
When analyzing the data with this approach, patterns of oscillating average velocity in flow direction were found in the data that cannot arise from the flow. The reason for this unphysical velocity oscillation is cross-talk between the receivers. To overcome this issue, a Gaussian filter in flow direction (sigma = 2 pixels) was applied to the velocity distribution in Fig. 10 only.
<Section>4. Results and discussion</Section>
The results are presented in three sections. First, the film thickness distribution for all channels at a superficial velocity 40 m/s and a volumetric liquid flow fraction of 0.3% are presented. Subsequently, the wave velocity is analyzed for the same channels and flow conditions. The last section shows results for channel b) at different flow rates.
4.1. Film thickness distribution
Fig. 5 shows the film thickness for a superficial gas velocity of 33.3 m/s (40 m/s case) and liquid flow fraction of 0.3% at the upper sensor of channel b). The four subplots correspond to four different lines along the sensor at tangential positions of −50°, −15°, 15° and 50°, where positive values are facing the PLRs (cf. Fig. 2). The horizontal axis corresponds to time and the vertical axis to sensor height. The color indicates the corresponding film thickness as shown in the color bar. In annular flow, usually two types of waves are distinguished: small and slow ripple waves as well as large and fast disturbance waves (Hewitt and Hall Taylor, 1970). In Fig. 5, those structures can be seen easily. Inclined dark blue lines are disturbance waves that travel upward over the sensor. The small and brighter lines in between those dark lines are ripple waves. The steeper a line is, the faster the wave is. Towards the PLRs, the film thickness becomes thinner, but the general flow structure remains very similar. Since the gas velocity is higher in the open region downstream of the PLRs, a thinner film was expected at the locations facing that region (i.e. 50°). It also seems as if there are fewer disturbance waves facing the PLR side. However, this first impression was not confirmed by a more thoroughly wave analysis for longer time and more conditions and available correlations do also not suggest lower frequency at higher gas velocity (Berna et al., 2014).
Fig. 5. Instantaneous film thickness on different axial sensor lines vs. time for the upper sensor in channel b).
Fig. 6 shows the same plot at the same tangential positions and flow conditions for the lower sensor of channel b). The disturbance waves and ripple waves are present again. Nevertheless, in this figure, the strong influence of the end of the PLRs on disturbance waves can be seen. In particular, the lowest subplot at 50° reveals a strong deceleration and thickening of disturbance waves, seen by the change in inclination and in color. The lines show a knee at about 70 mm elevation towards smaller inclinations and therefore velocities, caused by the sudden increase of cross-section area and the subsequent deceleration of the gas core. As one would expect, the effect is more pronounced on the side facing the PLRs. Interestingly, the waves on the opposite side (−50°) seem to become thinner (and also slightly slower), indicating a cross flow of liquid towards the PLR region.
Fig. 6. Instantaneous film thickness for the lower sensor in channel b) showing the effect of a PLR end.
Those more qualitative observations from the flow structure are supported by Fig. 7, which shows the time-averaged film thickness of all sensors at superficial gas velocity @ = 40 m/s and liquid flow fraction @ = 0.3%. The flow is directed upwards on the images and the PLR faces the angle of +90 deg for b) and c) and 0° for a). The dashed lines indicate the PLR’s end height. The images show the 2D distribution of average film thickness on the rod or wall surface at the locations indicated in Fig. 2. The sensor next to the end of the PLR (images a) and b) lower) clearly captures the evolution of the flow caused by the sudden increase of the cross-section area. In both images, there is a film thickening in the region facing the PLR. In the image of the lower sensor for channel b) there is even a film thinning on the other side of the sensor (top left of b) lower). This indicates a cross-flow of liquid towards the free space above the end of the PLR. The cross-flow was also confirmed by the injection of a tracer substance in the liquid at both sensor positions in channel b) that showed a clear deviation towards the PLR for the lower sensor right at the end of the PLRs, but not anymore at the upper sensor, as Fig. 8 shows. This indicates, that there is a void drift, as well as a liquid drift into the open region downstream of a PLR. It remains unclear, which of the two effects is stronger. For thermo-hydraulic codes as used in the nuclear field, this is still an open issue. Interestingly, the change on average film thickness becomes visible only about 10 mm downstream of the end of the PLR for a) and b), while the tracer deviation towards the PLR starts about 10 mm upstream the PLR ends, indicating a small upstream effect of the PLR on the gas stream lines. Note that the background in Fig. 8 is not at zero conductivity, because of the conductivity of the water itself.
Fig. 7. Comparison of the average liquid film thickness for different channel geometries.
Fig. 8. Average measured conductivity during tracer injection of the lower (left) and upper (right) sensor in channel b).
The film thinning on sensor b) lower at negative angles due to an increase of axial shear forces can be excluded as a reason. The gas flows more easily in the empty space above the PLRs and therefore, the air is accelerated tangentially and transfers part of this lateral momentum to the liquid film, which is consequently also pushed towards the open space where the PLRs were. This causes the thinning observed on the rod surface facing away from the PLRs. In case a), such a cross-flow is not present, since the PLR is placed symmetrically with regard to the sensor. Here, only a film thickening can be seen. The reason for this thickening is the lower gas velocity behind the PLR ends. Since the same gas volume flow is now distributed over a larger area, the velocity decreases and with it the shear on the liquid film.
Visual observation of the gas phase indicate the presence of a recirculation zone at the end of PLRs, which is expected downstream of a sharp edge in a flow. The recirculation leads to a local accumulation of liquid at the end of the PLR in all geometries. The transferability of this finding to real fuel elements is not straightforward, because in the investigated channels, the PLR endings are flat instead of the more complicated head piece of the real fuel rod. Additionally, the models of the rods in our experiment are only semi- or quarter-cylinders because the channels only represent a small region of the fuel rod lattice. The consequence is that after a PLR ends, the newly created flat wall represents an unrealistic no-slip boundary as well, leading to substantially higher liquid accumulation than in reality.
To understand the reason for the thickening of the liquid film when gas velocity decreases, it is helpful to think of a force balance on the liquid film. The wall shear, which is proportional to the velocity gradient perpendicular to the wall, decelerates the film while the interfacial shear accelerates it. Gravity also decelerates the film, but since the Froude number is much larger than one, it can be neglected. The interfacial shear is depending on the velocity difference of liquid and gas at the interface and on the shape of the interface. A rougher interface transfers more shear. If the film thickness increases, mainly two of those forces change: The wall shear becomes lower, because the velocity gradient gets smaller. The roughness of the film increases – which was confirmed by calculating the standard deviation of the film thickness – which increases the interfacial shear. The velocity difference is not so much influenced by the film thickness because it is mainly determined by the gas velocity. Decreasing the gas velocity decreases the interfacial shear. Therefore, the decrease of interfacial shear by a lower gas velocity after the PLRs end is compensated by an increase of film thickness via the lower wall shear and higher interfacial shear caused by the film roughness. A secondary effect increasing the film thickness is an additional deposition of droplets that were entrained from the rear edge of the PLRs. Since this is an indirect effect (first more entrainment, then higher deposition), it does not start immediately when the PLR ends.
To analyze the film thickness distribution of Fig. 7 in more detail, Fig. 9 shows the spatial averages of different regions at identical flow rates. Channel a) and b) lower show the undisturbed flow upstream of a PLR ending. Both flows show a dip in the center region, which is slightly more pronounced for case a). The absolute values of the film thickness have an offset, despite being at the same flow rates. This can be attributed to the very different development, lengths in both cases. According to (Wolf et al., 2001) the film thickness has not yet reached steady state at appr. 39 L/Dh (sensor location of b) lower) but will decrease further downstream due to acceleration and/or entrainment. Comparing the upstream region of a) to the values of c), both also have an offset, even though flow rates and development lengths are similar. However, in this case the channel geometry is very different. The large open region downstream of the end of the PLR allows the gas to flow faster, decreases the film thickness. This explanation has some limitations however, because the wave velocities that are shown later in Fig. 11 do not show so much greater values for case c) except for the wall sensor. Another explanation for slightly lower film thickness in channel c) could be of geometrical nature. The ratio of cross-section area to circumference (i.e. similar to the hydraulic diameter) is smaller for case c) which means the film has comparably more space to distribute on the walls, which also reduces the film thickness.
Fig. 9. Average liquid film thickness upstream, downstream and far downstream of the PLR’s ending for all geometries on the rod sensor.
Fig. 10. Comparison of the average wave velocity.
Fig. 11. Average wave velocity upstream, downstream and far downstream (fully developed) of the PLR’s ending.
In the measuring results taken far downstream of the end of the PLR (plots of b) upper and c) of Fig. 7), no variations of the film thickness in the axial direction can be observed, which suggests fully developed conditions. In the tangential direction, a slight profile is visible if one looks at the curves in Fig. 9. The profile slightly declines towards the side with the more open cross-section in case b), where the PLRs were. A slightly higher wave velocity is observed here, which indicates a higher shear stress from the side of the gas flow (seen in Fig. 11). Consequently, the same mass flow of liquid can be transported in a thinner film and the dryout margin is not necessarily reduced. Note that the film thickness on the side facing the PLRs decreased compared to the values directly downstream the PLR’s end in channel b). In the same time, the thickness increased on the other side, indicating a balancing effect around the rod.
Channel c) has a more complex structure with maxima at about +60°, +5° and very weakly pronounced at −50° with slightly higher film thickness towards the PLR. The precise reason for this profile remains unclear. The maximum at +5° might stem from the close-by opposing wall. However, channel a) and b) indicate a lower film thickness when an opposing wall is close (seen by their local minima at 0° upstream of the PLR end). One can speculate, that the flat shape of the opposing wall in case c) plays an important role, because it increases the amount of close walls to the 0°-point in case c). Furthermore, the wall is slightly closer in c) than in a) and b). The wall slows down the gas core, which can lead to thicker films as seen before. Additionally, more swirls could be present in the large open region in channel c) increasing the droplet deposition. Interestingly, the wall sensor also shows a maximum at the opposing location (P2), but not at P1, where there is also a rod close-by. However, at P3 (wall sensor) and +60° (rod sensor) maxima are present as well, without a wall being close. Those are more in line with the maxima in the upstream of PLR flow in a) and b).
The point at +75° shows the decrease towards the PLR as seen in b) far downstream at a little higher tangential position. Another maximum of the wall sensor is seen at P3, where the curvature starts. The start of the curvature might act like a corner leading to an accumulation of liquid. Towards the edge of the sensor at P4 another maximum is present which comes from the close corner, where liquid can accumulate due to the sharp edge. All of this hints at a difficult and non-straight-forward influence of part length rods on the local average film thickness. It is a complex interaction of local flow rate and local velocities as well as droplet entrainment and deposition. These results are very valuable for the validation of a CFD-film flow model because they are not reproducible by simplified film models relying only on gas shear as driving force for the liquid.
4.2. Velocity distribution
The wave velocity images in Fig. 10, Fig. 11 show an overall velocity decrease downstream the rear edge of the PLR in both cases a) and b) because the cross-section area increases and therefore the gas velocity also decreases. The combination of lower velocity and film thickness (cf. Fig. 7) on the top left corner of b) lower indicates a decrease of coolant mass flow and consequently a decrease of dryout margin on rods next to PLR on the side turned away from the PLR.
The highest average velocities are found just upstream the end of the PLR for channel b), in particular also higher than upstream the PLR end in case a) as well as downstream in case c). At all these locations, the same superficial velocities are present. The mentioned observation is however expected because the disturbance wave velocity has a maximum after the initial acceleration and formation and later deceleration due to thinner films as (Wolf et al., 2001) shows. This maximum is located after appr. 30 L/Dh, which is close to the region of this sensor.
In the far downstream case in channel b), the wave velocity increases towards the open region, where the PLRs are missing, in contrast to the observation at the lower sensor. However, the variations are small. For channel c), minima are visible in the regions with a close wall, e.g. at 0° of the rod sensor or at P1, P2 and P4 for the wall sensor respectively. Towards negative tangential position, the velocity decreases after showing a maximum at −30°. The maximum comes from the large subchannel region facing this side, where the air flow can reach higher velocities. The minimum comes from the close rods and the wall at −90°, which is a non-realistic no-slip boundary condition specific to this channel. Towards positive angles, the same decrease of velocity is not visible on the plotted curve, because of the higher air flow in the large open region over the PLR. In general, one can observe that the velocity in channel c) is lower, when a wall is close and higher, when there is a large open region.
However, in channel a) upstream of the end of the PLR a slight maximum can be seen at 0°, which is closest to the opposing rod. This maximum is also present in the double subchannel without PLR, as own measurements showed, therefore an influence of the following end of the PLR can be excluded. This leaves two options: a higher liquid mass flux or a higher gas shear. Probably, a superposition of the two explains the maximum.
Note that the velocities shown here are not the actual liquid film velocities but the average velocity of disturbance waves. Therefore, no direct statement can be made on the liquid mass flow at any location. The wave velocity is nonetheless a good indicator, since disturbance waves carry most of the liquid in this annular flow (Hall Taylor et al., 2014).
4.3. Trends for varying flow rates
To see the effect of changing flow rates, channel b) is analyzed in detail, because it covers the whole length from the end of a PLR to a developed flow further downstream. The findings for channel b) are qualitatively transferable to the other geometries as well. Fig. 12 shows the influence of varying the superficial gas velocity between 20 and 60 m/s for a constant liquid flow fraction of 1 – @= 0.3%. (i.e. the liquid flow rate also increases for increasing superficial gas velocity). The curves for 40 m/s correspond exactly to the curves presented in Fig. 9, Fig. 11 for the different locations in channel b). The velocity of the waves increases as expected with increasing gas velocity, while the overall shape remains relatively similar. The average film thickness however changes slightly its shape at different superficial gas velocities.
Fig. 12. Profiles of average liquid film thickness and wave velocity for different gas flow rates and constant liquid flow fraction of 0.3%.
Upstream the PLR, the film thickness reveals a maximum at 0° for @ = 20 m/s, but it shows a slight minimum in the central region for @ > 30 m/s. The same holds true for the far downstream case. Here, the curve for @ = 20 m/s shows a massive increase of film thickness indicating these conditions are approaching churn flow. The effective superficial velocity downstream the end of the PLR is only 16.6 m/s, while the transition to churn flow occurs at 14.8 m/s according to (Taitel et al., 1980). Since the velocity is lower in the region turned away from the PLR (negative angles), churn flow is closer there and therefore, the average film thickness has such a strong inclination along the circumference. For all positions it seems like the edge effect of the close-by non-slip boundary at the wall is stronger for @ = 20 m/s, seen by the strong increase of film thickness at some of the outer points. For @ > 30 m/s the film thickness seems to be almost identical, while the velocity changes much more. This indicates that the mass flux of the liquid is mainly increased by a faster film and not by a thicker film.
Changing the liquid flow fraction from 0.1 to 1% at a constant superficial gas velocity of @ = 40 m/s reveals almost no changes of the liquid film thickness and wave velocity profile shape, as Fig. 13 shows. The only apparent difference is the more pronounced minimum of the film thickness around 0° upstream of the end of the PLRs at higher liquid flow fractions. Otherwise, film thickness as well as velocity increase monotonously with liquid flow fraction. For the other channel geometries, the same observation can be made. These findings suggest that the exact local flow parameters are very much depending on the precise geometry of the channel, but their qualitative distribution remains surprisingly similar for different flow conditions. They change exactly as well-established correlations suggest. The reason for this behavior might be the dominance of the highly turbulent gas phase, which is typical for annular flow. The gas Reynolds number is about one order of magnitude larger than the liquid Reynolds number. Consequently, the gas shear is the central driving force, which remains valid in our range of flow parameters, causing changes in local film thickness and velocity but not in qualitative distribution.
Fig. 13. Profiles of average liquid film thickness and wave velocity for different liquid flow fractions at a superficial gas velocity of 40 m/s.
<Section>5. Conclusion</Section>
The effect of part length rods in different geometries for steady state flow was investigated. For this purpose three different types of channels were used, one with a symmetrical arrangement of a PLR in a double-subchannel geometry, the second one with a pair of PLRs at one side of the double-subchannel, creating unsymmetrical flow conditions and a third one including the fuel assembly wall to see wall effects. The different geometries were compared for one set of flow rates in the annular flow region. For the second channel geometry, the effect of changing the superficial gas velocity and the liquid flow fraction were discussed. The results may be used for the simulation of PLR effects by subchannel or CFD codes. In particular, the change of film thickness near PLRs can serve as a good benchmark, as there is a complex interplay of various phenomena that must be taken into account to predict the correct film thickness.
Part length rods cause a sudden deceleration of the gas core, which results in thicker and slower liquid films, in particular on rods facing a PLR. There is a drift of both gas and liquid towards the open region above part length rods, however, it is still unclear which drift effect is dominant. The often mentioned effect of the so-called void drift is counteracted by a transport of liquid towards the free space downstream of the PLR. Whether this effect is able to exceed the drift of the gaseous phase remains an open question. Further downstream, the gas flow accelerates in the freed by the PLR cross-section and leads to a decreasing film thickness and an acceleration of disturbance waves. In this region an overall void fraction decreases is evident.
On the PLR-averted side of a rod next to a PLR, a decrease of velocity and film thickness was observed, leading to a lower coolant mass flow and consequently a decrease of dryout margin at the height where the PLR ends. The presence of a part length rod on the surrounding fuel rods well above at developed conditions is not unambiguous in terms of film thickness. In geometry b) the film thickness was decreasing towards the PLR, while there was a weak maximum in case c). In terms of wave velocity, an increase towards the open region can be observed in all cases. Changing flow rates does not show any unexpected changes of the average film thickness and wave velocity. The shape of their distribution on a rod remains surprisingly stable and is predominantly determined by geometrical features.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Lukas Robers: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Validation, Formal analysis, Investigation, Resources, Data curation, Writing - original draft, Visualization. Horst-Michael Prasser: Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing - review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgment</Section>
Part of this research was funded by Axpo Power AG and Kernkraftwerk Leibstadt AG.
<Section>References</Section>
Adamsson and Anglart, 2006
C. Adamsson, H. Anglart
Film flow measurements for high-pressure diabatic annular flow in tubes with various axial power distributions
Nucl. Eng. Des., 236 (23) (2006), pp. 2485-2493
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Adamsson and Le Corre, 2014
C. Adamsson, J.M. Le Corre
Transient dryout prediction using a computationally efficient method for sub-channel film-flow analysis
Nucl. Eng. Des., 280 (2014), pp. 316-325
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Andersson et al., 2011
S. Andersson, L.D. Smith III, A. Hallehn, D.-Y. Sheng
Westinghouse Fuel Heat Transfer Test Facilities Water Reactor Fuel Performance Meeting, Chengdu, China (2011). 11.le“, in Water Reactor Fuel Performance Meeting , Chengdu, China
(2011)
Google Scholar
Azzopardi, 1986
B.J. Azzopardi
Disturbance wave frequencies, velocities and spacing in vertical annular two-phase flow
Nucl. Eng. Des., 92 (2) (1986), pp. 121-133
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Azzopardi, 1997
B.J. Azzopardi
Drops in annular two-phase flow
Int. J. Multiph. Flow, 23 (7) (1997), pp. 1-53
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Belt et al., 2010
R.J. Belt, J.M.C. Van’t Westende, H.M. Prasser, L.M. Portela
Time and spatially resolved measurements of interfacial waves in vertical annular flow
Int. J. Multiph. Flow, 36 (7) (2010), pp. 570-587
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Berna et al., 2014
C. Berna, A. Escrivá, J.L. Muñoz-Cobo, L.E. Herranz
Review of droplet entrainment in annular flow: interfacial waves and onset of entrainment
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 74 (2014), pp. 14-43
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Berna et al., 2015
C. Berna, A. Escrivá, J.L. Muñoz-Cobo, L.E. Herranz
Review of droplet entrainment in annular flow: characterization of the entrained droplets
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 79 (2015), pp. 64-86
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Carlucci et al., 2004
L. Carlucci, N. Hammouda, D. Rowe
Two-phase turbulent mixing and buoyancy drift in rod bundles
Nucl. Eng. Des., 227 (1) (2004), pp. 65-84
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chandraker et al., 2015
D.K. Chandraker, A.K. Nayak, P.K. Vijayan
Effect of spacer on the dryout of BWR fuel rod assemblies
Nucl. Eng. Des., 294 (2015), pp. 262-273
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Damsohn and Prasser, 2009
M. Damsohn, H.-M. Prasser
High-speed liquid film sensor for two-phase flows with high spatial resolution based on electrical conductance
Flow Meas. Instrum., 20 (1) (2009), pp. 1-14
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Damsohn and Prasser, 2010
M. Damsohn, H.-M. Prasser
Experimental studies of the effect of functional spacers to annular flow in subchannels of a BWR fuel element
Nucl. Eng. Des., 240 (10) (2010), pp. 3126-3144
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Damsohn, 2011
Damsohn, M., 2011. “Liquid films and droplet deposition in a BWR fuel element”, PhD Thesis (19527), (ETH Zurich). DOI:10.3929/ethz-a-006517472.
Google Scholar
Dasgupta et al., 2017
A. Dasgupta, et al.
Experimental investigation on dominant waves in upward air-water two-phase flow in churn and annular regime
Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci., 81 (2017), pp. 147-163
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Feldhaus et al., 2002
G. Feldhaus, B.J. Azzopardi, W. Zeggel
Annular flow experiments in rod bundles with spacers
Nucl. Eng. Des., 213 (2–3) (2002), pp. 199-207
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Glück, 2007
M. Glück
Sub-channel analysis with F-COBRA-TF - code validation and approaches to CHF prediction
Nucl. Eng. Des., 237 (6) (2007), pp. 655-667
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hall Taylor et al., 2014
N.S. Hall Taylor, I.J. Hewitt, J.R. Ockendon, T.P. Witelski
A new model for disturbance waves
Int. J. Multiph. Flow, 66 (2014), pp. 38-45
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hewitt and Hall Taylor, 1970
G.F. Hewitt, N.S. Hall Taylor
Annular Two-phase Flow, Elsevier (1970), 10.1016/C2009-0-06773-7
Google Scholar
Inoue et al., 1995
A. Inoue, et al.
Void fraction distribution in BWR fuel assembly and evaluation of subchannel code
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 32 (7) (1995), pp. 629-640
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ito et al., 2016
D. Ito, P. Papadopoulos, H.M. Prasser
Liquid film dynamics of two-phase annular flow in square and tight lattice subchannels
Nucl. Eng. Des., 300 (2016), pp. 467-474
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jayanti and Rajesh Reddy, 2013
S. Jayanti, K. Rajesh Reddy
Effect of spacer grids on CHF in nuclear rod bundles
Nucl. Eng. Des., 261 (2013), pp. 66-75
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Johansson et al., 1993
Johansson, E. B., Matzner, B., Dix, G. E., Wolters Jr, R. A. & Reese, A. P., 1993. “Optimized critical power in a fuel bundle with part length rods”.
Google Scholar
Kataoka et al., 2000
I. Kataoka, M. Ishii, A. Nakayama
Entrainment and desposition rates of droplets in annular two-phase flow
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 43 (9) (2000), pp. 1573-1589
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kraemer et al., 1995
W. Kraemer, et al.
The ULTRAFLOW spacer—an advanced feature of ATRIUM fuel assemblies for boiling water reactors
Nucl. Eng. Des., 154 (1) (1995), pp. 17-21
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Le Corre, 2017
J.-M. Le Corre
Experimental Investigation and Modeling of Void Drift in Modern Bwr Fuel Designs
17th International Topical Meeting on Nuclear Reactor Thermal Hydraulics (2017)
Google Scholar
Okada and Fujita, 1993
O. Okada, H. Fujita
Behavior of liquid films and droplets in the non-equilibrium region of a downward annular mist flow (comparison of porous and central nozzle mixing methods)
Int. J. Multiph. Flow, 19 (1) (1993), pp. 79-89
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Pham et al., 2014
S.H. Pham, Z. Kawara, T. Yokomine, T. Kunugi
Detailed observations of wavy interface behaviors of annular two-phase flow on rod bundle geometry
Int. J. Multiph. Flow, 59 (2014), pp. 135-144
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Pham et al., 2015
S.H. Pham, Z. Kawara, T. Yokomine, T. Kunugi
Measurements of liquid film and droplets of annular two-phase flow on a rod-bundle geometry with spacer
Int. J. Multiph. Flow, 70 (2015), pp. 35-57
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Prasser et al., 2016
H.-M. Prasser, et al.
Bubbly, slug, and annular two-phase flow in tight-lattice subchannels
Nucl. Eng. Technol., 48 (4) (2016), pp. 847-858
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Rowe et al., 1990
D.S. Rowe, R.B. Macduff, R.E. Collingham
Thermalhydraulic subchannel model based on void-drift
International Heat Transfer Conference Digital Library, Begel House Inc. (1990), pp. 401-406
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Sadatomi et al., 2005
M. Sadatomi, A. Kawahara, T. Kuno, K. Kano
Two-phase void drift phenomena in a 2 × 3 rod bundle: flow redistribution data and their analysis
Nucl. Technol., 152 (1) (2005), pp. 23-37
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Strasser et al., 2004
A. Strasser, P. Rudling, C. Patterson
Fuel Fabrication Process Handbook
Advanced Nuclear Technology International (2004)
Google Scholar
Taitel et al., 1980
Y. Taitel, D. Bornea, A.E. Dukler
Modelling flow pattern transitions for steady upward gas-liquid flow in vertical tubes
AIChE J., 26 (3) (1980), pp. 345-354
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wolf et al., 2001
A. Wolf, S. Jayanti, G. Hewitt
Flow development in vertical annular flow
Chem. Eng. Sci., 56 (10) (2001), pp. 3221-3235
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yoshida et al., 2003
H. Yoshida, M. Kureta, K. Kitou, K. Takase, H. Akimoto
Numerical simulation of void drift using interface tracking method
Proceedings of the Tenth International Topical Meeting on Nuclear Reactor Thermal Hydraulics, Seoul (Republic of Korea), Korea Nuclear Sociey, Taejon (Republic of Korea) (2003)
Google Scholar