<title>Design and evaluation of a high power density and high energy efficiency fuel element for space nuclear reactors</title>
<author>1,YangbinDeng,2,BowenQiu,3,YuanYin,4,YingweiWu,5,GuanghuiSu</author>
<Affiliation>1,Advanced Nuclear Energy Research Team, College of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China;2,National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Reactor System Design Technology, Nuclear Power Institute of China, Chengdu, China;3,School of Nuclear Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Applied Thermal Engineering</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier Ltd.</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2021.116915</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1359431121003628</URL>
Design and evaluation of a high power density and high energy efficiency fuel element for space nuclear reactors
YangbinDeng,BowenQiu,YuanYin,YingweiWu,GuanghuiSu
Advanced Nuclear Energy Research Team, College of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
National Key Laboratory of Science and Technology on Reactor System Design Technology, Nuclear Power Institute of China, Chengdu, China
School of Nuclear Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
A novel fuel design with dual-cooling was proposed based on TOPAZ-II fuel.
Thermionic-thermoelectric models were developed and fuel analysis was conducted.
Power density could be increased by 120%, while fuel temperature was decreased.
The system conversion efficiency was increased from 9.2% to 13.4%.
The system utilization efficiency was increased from 6.6% to 10.2%.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The enhancement of the power density and efficiency of space nuclear reactors is of great value for space exploitation and exploration. Based on a TOPAZ-II space nuclear reactor, a novel fuel element design was proposed for power density and energy efficiency improvements in this study. In addition to an external thermionic generator in the original fuel design, a heat pipe thermoelectric generator (HPTEG) was implemented on the inside of the fuel ring. This novel design allowed for a significant power density increase while lowering the fuel temperature. Thermionic and thermoelectric simulation models were developed and then implemented in a thermo-mechanical analysis program for a space nuclear fuel element. With this program, the thermo-mechanical, thermionic, and thermoelectric performances during long-term operation were investigated. The results indicated that the maximum allowable power density could be increased by 120% while substantially reducing the fuel temperature in the new design. Compared with a thermionic generator, the HPTEG exhibited the characteristics of high output voltage and low current, which could reduce the joule dissipation and improve the energy utilization efficiency. Due to the high power density, the system energy conversion efficiency was increased from 9.2% to 13.4% and the system energy utilization efficiency was increased from 6.6% to 10.2%.
Keywords:Space nuclear reactor;Fuel elementHigh power density;High energy efficiency;Design and evaluation
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The power source for space exploration mainly comes from three forms of energy: chemical, solar, and nuclear. Among them, nuclear energy has incomparable advantages in terms of reliability, sustainability, and energy density. Therefore, nuclear energy could be the primary energy choice for high-power space missions in the future [1]. There are two types of space power sources: isotope power supplies [2] and nuclear reactor power supplies [3]. The latter could provide much larger power output, and it is the perfect power technology for applications such as planetary surface bases and manned deep space flights.
Space nuclear reactor (SNR) power has received much attention in space exploitation and exploration since the 1950 s. In the early stage, static power generation technologies were applied in SNRs, such as the thermoelectric generator (TEG) used in SNAP-10A [4] and the thermionic generator used in TOPAZ [3]. Since no moment of inertia is introduced from static power generators, the control requirements of the flight attitude of aircraft are reduced to a certain extent. In addition, the service life of aircraft could be significantly extended due to the absence of vulnerable rotating parts. However, static power generation technologies have the common disadvantages of small output power and low thermoelectric conversion efficiency [3], [5]. Much attention has been paid to increasing the output power and energy efficiency for SNRs with static power generators. For TEGs, power and efficiency improvement methods mainly include improving the temperature difference and reducing the joule dissipation of the generator itself [2], [6]. For thermionic generators, the cesium vapor at a certain pressure is commonly introduced to neutralize the space charge and hence increase the power output and conversion efficiency [7]. Additionally, methods to increase the surface area or reduce the electrode work function have been intensively investigated for thermionic performance enhancement, such as the usage of emitters with micro or macro cavities [8], [9] or oxygen-containing collectors [10], [11]. However, previous studies [12], [13] have reported that the fuel temperature and emitter temperature limits greatly hinder the further improvement of power and efficiency. Worse still, even without these temperature limits, increasing fission power can only improve the thermionic conversion efficiency and not the energy utilization efficiency because a large part of the electricity dissipates as joule heat due to the increasing current [13]. Consequently, the effective energy efficiency of SNRs with static power generators is usually only 3%–7% [5], [13]. Replacing static power generators with dynamic power generation technologies is a revolutionary power and efficiency enhancement strategy. With the use of Brayton cycle generators, the power output of SNRs designed in recent years can reach megawatt levels with system efficiencies approaching 30% [14], [15], [16]. However, facing the issues of long-life rotating part manufacture and mechanical vibration suppression [17], these high-power SNRs are still in the schematic design stage. Considering difficulties faced by dynamic generation technologies and the unique advantages of static generators, improving the power and efficiency of static generators is actually still an important topic.
Recently, with the aim of achieving significant improvement of power density and efficiency, Russia has conducted the optimization of the thermionic fuel element (TFE) used in TOPAZ-II [18]. In the optimized TFE, an inner shell was introduced into the annular fuel, and this inner shell served as the thermionic emitter, just like the outer shell. It was reported that this design might double the emission surface and reduce the maximum emitter temperature to 1700 K on retention of the 10% efficiency. In fact, the dual-cooled annular fuel design has been intensively investigated in commercial nuclear power plants to reduce fuel temperature and increase power density [19], [20], [21]. The idea of increasing the heat transfer area to improve fuel performance is also applicable to space reactors, just like the above TFE optimization by Russia. However, in order to accommodate a thermionic generator on the inside of the fuel ring, the size of the fuel element would need to be significantly increased, which might reduce the physical performance of SNRs.
Based on the TFE optimization by Russia and dual-cooled annular fuel design in land-based reactors, a novel fuel element design was proposed in this research based on the TFE design applied in TOPAZ-II. The new fuel design allowed substantial increases of the power density and system efficiency while maintaining the same fuel element size.
<Section>2. Design of fuel element for SNRs</Section>
2.1. Original design of TOPAZ-II
TOPAZ-II is a single-cell thermionic nuclear reactor rated at 4.5 to 5.5 kWe, and its experimental space reactors have been launched by both the former Soviet Union and the United States [3]. As shown in Fig. 1, TOPAZ-II is composed of a thermionic reactor core, radiation shielding, a coolant loop (liquid Na-K alloy) for the heat transfer from the reactor core to the radiator, helium and cesium supply systems, and a radiator for waste heat dissipation. The reactor core consists of a power control system (including moderators, reflectors, control drums, and safety drums) and 37 TFEs. Table 1 [13] summarizes the design parameters of TOPAZ-II.
Fig. 1. Original design of TOPAZ-II.
Table 1. Design parameters of TOPAZ-II [13]
The reactor core is composed of 37 TFEs. Each TFE is equipped with an emitter and a corrector and serves as an isolated thermionic converter. Among all the TFEs, 34 TFEs are connected in series as the output electric power. Therefore, the TFE design largely determines the output power and system efficiency. In the original design, the TFE consists of a fuel ring, an emitter electrode, a collector electrode, the insulator, and a coolant channel from the inside to the outside. The emitter–collector gap is filled with cesium vapor at a certain pressure to improve thermionic conversion [7]. With this structure, all the fission heat can only be conducted outward and the temperature at the fuel inner surface is very high, which is the major limiting factor for the fuel power density. In general, the peak fuel temperature should be controlled below 2300 °C to guarantee the thermal safety [12]. High fuel temperatures further lead to serious fission gas releases and fuel steam migration. Therefore, the central void should be large enough to contain fission gas and prevent blocking caused by fuel mass migration. Theoretically, the higher the emitter temperature is, the more efficient the thermoelectric conversion is. However, the emitter temperature should be controlled below 1800 °C to guarantee long-term operation [12].
2.2. Novel fuel element design
In the original TFE design of TOPAZ-II, the annular fuel was used but only with the external heat transfer path. In the annular fuel design of commercial nuclear power plants, dual-cooling design has proved to have significant advantages over single-cooling design in terms of power density and safety [19], [20], [21]. Based on this thought, the dual-cooled TFE concept was proposed to achieve power and efficiency increases. As illustrated in Fig. 2(b), the internal cooling by a heat pipe was introduced in the novel TFE design while fuel ring size remained unchanged. Partial fission energy was conducted through the heat pipe to the hot side of the TEG. In the TEG, some of the heat energy was converted to electricity, and the excess waste heat was conducted from the cold side to the radiator, as shown in Fig. 2(c). The lithium was selected as the working medium of the heat pipes because it could work well at high temperatures from 1000 K to 1600 K [22]. The molybdenum alloy was used as the shell material of the heat pipes due to its good performance at high temperatures. The alloy of silicon–germanium (SiGe), with the maximum allowable temperature over 1100 K [23], was used as the high-temperature thermoelectric material. The parameters of the novel design are summarized in Table 2. It should be noted that the parameters in Table 1 were not listed in Table 2, since they were kept unchanged in the novel design, except for the thermal power and the electric power.
Fig. 2. Novel design of TOPAZ-II.
Table 2. Parameters for design optimization.
The novel design promised to improve the performance of the SNR in the following ways:
(a)
The dual-cooling design increased the heat transfer area by 45% and shortened the radial path for fuel heat conduction. As a result, the maximum allowable power could be increased significantly while maintaining or lowering the peak fuel temperature.
(b)
With internal cooling, the fuel temperature at the inner surface could be dramatically reduced, which was important for almost eliminating the evaporation and mass transfer of the fuel ring at the inner surface. Therefore, the exhaust path of fission gas could be kept unobstructed, even though the path was much smaller (because of the implementation of the heat pipe) than that in the original design.
(c)
Heat pipes are passive heat transport devices with an extremely high effective thermal conductivity, and they can still work effectively under accident conditions. Due to the large heat capacity from the vaporization of working fluids, the heat pipe could store the excess energy to some extent when the fission power suddenly increased. Hence, the usage of heat pipes could improve the safety of SNRs.
(d)
Some of the heat was conducted to the TEG outside the core first and was then converted into electricity. Therefore, the TEG could be protected from the core radiation, and its size was not limited by the size of the core. In this novel design, the effective thermoelectric area of a single TFE was almost twice as large as the thermionic area, resulting in a higher power output.
(e)
According to previous studies [13], [24], the TEG had a much higher open voltage and much lower current density compared with the thermionic converter, which was beneficial for reducing the joule dissipation of the electricity generator itself and the joule dissipation during power transmission.
<Section>3. Methodology and validation</Section>
A preliminary simulation and performance analysis needed to be conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed novel design in terms of power and efficiency improvement. In this section, the models, methodologies, and simulation tools used in the preliminary simulation and their validation are introduced.
3.1. Thermionic modeling
Thermionic conversion is a way to generate electricity by using the phenomenon of thermal-electron emission on a metal surface. Richardson-Dushman discovered that the current density of an electrode was associated with the temperature and work function and developed the following emission model [25]:
@(1)
where @ is the current density in A·cm−2, @ is the emission coefficient in∙cm−2·K−2, @ is the temperature in K, @ is the metal work function in eV, and @ is the Boltzmann constant. The work function of the electrode in TOPAZ-II is given by reference [26]:
@(2)
where @ is the cesium reservoir temperature in K.
A thermionic converter consists of an emitter electrode and a collector electrode. Both electrodes emit electrons, but the emission of the collector can usually be neglected because of its much lower temperature. In reference [26], through solving the electron transport equation, the current density caused by the net electrons from the emitter to the collector was obtained:
@(3)
where @ is the net current density of the converter in A∙cm−2, @ is the current density of the emitter in A∙cm−2, @ and @ are the surface temperatures of the emitter and the collector in K, @ is the emitter–collector gap in mm, @ is the mean free path of the electrons in mm, @ is the pressure of the cesium vapor in torr, and @ and @ are the sheath heights of the emitter and the collector in eV. The sheath height of the electrode can be calculated with the following equations from reference [25]:
@(4)
In addition to the work function, the electrons also have to overcome an extra potential difference ( in eV) caused by the space charge effect [7] to reach the collector. Cesium vapor is commonly used to mitigate the space charge. If the space charge is completely eliminated by cesium vapor (), the maximum current density can be achieved, which is the so-called saturated regime. Instead, the conversion efficiency is affected by the space charge, which is the so-called obstructed regime. Fig. 3 [13] illustrates the motive diagrams of the thermionic converter in both the obstructed regime and the saturated regime. According to Fig. 3, the motive equations can be obtained:
@(5)
where @ is the interelectrode potential difference in eV and the interelectrode voltage @ in V has the same value as ; the term @ in eV can be calculated with:
@(6)
Fig. 3. Electric motive diagram of the thermionic converter.
3.2. HPTEG modeling
(a) Heat transfer of heat pipe
Fig. 4 illustrates the structure and working theory of the heat pipe. Due to its extremely high heat transfer performance, a high temperature heat pipe has a good isothermal characteristics. In general, the effective thermal conductivity is used for axial heat transfer simulation. This is defined as the thermal conductivity of a solid rod with the same dimensions as the heat pipe vapor space [27]. The axial temperature drops at the evaporator, adiabatic, and condenser sections can be calculated with the following equation:
@(7)
where @,@ ,@ and @ are the axial temperature drops in K at the evaporator, the adiabatic section, and the condenser, respectively. , , and @ are the lengths in m of the evaporator, the adiabatic section, and the condenser, respectively. @ is the heat flux in W·m−2 and @ is the effective thermal conductivity in W·m−1·K−1 of the heat pipe. The effective thermal conductivity of a lithium heat pipe was conservatively regarded as 3000 W·m−1·K−1 in this research according to reference [24].
Fig. 4. Structure and working theory of the heat pipe.
(b) Thermoelectric conversion
According to the Seebeck effect [28], the open voltage of a thermoelectric couple can be calculated with:
@(8)
where @ is the open voltage in V of a single P-N couple, @ is the Seebeck coefficient in μV·K−1, and @ and @ are the temperatures in K at the hot and cold sides of the PN materials, respectively.
According to reference [29], the thermoelectric conversion efficiency can be evaluated with:
@(9)
where @ is the thermoelectric conversion efficiency, @ is the constant coefficient, @ is the electric conductivity in S·m−1, and . is the thermal conductivity in W·m−1·K−1. The properties of the SiGe alloy, including , , , and @ at different temperatures can be obtained from reference [30].
According to Eq. (8) and Eq. (9), the relationship between the open voltage and the current can be described by:
@(10)
where @ is the current in A, @ is the thermoelectric conversion power in W, and @ is the heat power in W added to the thermoelectric couple.
3.3. Modification of FROBA-SPACE
Operating under the harsh conditions of high temperature and strong radiation, the performance of the thermionic converter and the TEG is affected by the thermal–mechanical behaviors and the radiation effects. Therefore, the thermionic and thermoelectric simulation should be coupled with the thermal–mechanical simulation with consideration of the radiation. In our previous studies [12], [13], [31], a performance analysis program named FROBA-SPACE was developed and continuously improved for the simulation of TFEs in TOPAZ-II. The program has a highly modularized program framework covering neutron physics, thermal-hydraulics, non-linear mechanics, radiation, and materials, and it provides interfaces for the geometry description, material definition, and computational grid meshing. Hence, the thermo-mechanical-thermionic-thermoelectric coupling simulation capability was developed based on the FROBA-SPACE program in this research. Fig. 5 shows the program structure of modified FROBA-SPACE. As shown in Fig. 5, the major upgrade made with FROBA-SPACE was the implementation of the properties and calculation models of the thermionic and thermoelectric conversions.
Fig. 5. Program structure of modified FROBA-SPACE.
3.4. Validation
Since the thermo-mechanical simulation capability of FROBA-SPACE for multi-layer cylinders has been validated in a previous study [12], the validation in this research was mainly focused on the thermionic and thermoelectric simulation capability. Hence, the modified program was benchmarked against a thermionic experiment [32] and a TEG experiment [24]. Fig. 6 presents the comparison of the J-V curves (current density versus interelectrode voltage plot) for the modified FROBA-SPACE and the experiment data [32]. The results for the simulation and the experiment were consistent overall, and they showed that the J-V curve of the thermionic converter was nonlinear. As illustrated in Fig. 7, the variations of the open voltage and electricity power versus current of a TEG with the FROBA-SPACE simulation were highly consistent with those in the reference experiment. In contrast to the thermionic J-V curve, the J-V curve of the TEG was almost linear for the test range. More details for this TEG and the experiment can be found in [24]. As a whole, these benchmarks demonstrated the accuracy and reliability of the modified FROBA-SPACE program.
Fig. 6. Comparison of thermionic characteristics. The collector temperature was 600 °C, the emitter–collector gap was 0.45 mm, and the cesium vapor pressure was 0.6 torr.
Fig. 7. Comparison of thermoelectric characteristics of a TEG.
<Section>4. Simulation and discussion</Section>
4.1. Thermo-mechanical performance
To demonstrate the performance enhancement of the proposed TFE design, simulations of both the original and the novel design were conducted and compared. Fig. 8 shows the radial temperature profiles of these two designs. It should be noted that the power of the novel TFE was double that of the original power design. As shown in Fig. 8, in spite of the double power, the fuel temperature of the new design was significantly lower than that of original design, which was due to the introduction of the heat pipe cooling on the inside of the fuel ring. Specifically, the temperature at the fuel inner surface was reduced by nearly 600 K. Therefore, it could be inferred that the evaporation and mass transfer of the UO2 at the inner surface could be almost eliminated. Additionally, the fuel temperature at the inner surface was also much lower than that at the outer surface. This was because thermal resistance of the heat pipe at the inward transfer path was much lower than the resistance of the thermionic converter at the outward transfer path. Because there was only a small amount of cesium vapor at the emitter–collector gap, radiation dominated the heat transfer and resulted in a huge temperature difference, as illustrated in Fig. 8.
Fig. 8. Radial temperature profiles of original (4200 W power) and novel (8400 W power) TFEs.
In the dual-cooled TFE design, the heat split between the internal path and the external path was a key parameter. Due to the imbalance of the inward and outward thermal resistances, the fraction of heat conducted inward was more than 55%, as shown in Fig. 9. This meant that the heat pipe carried more heat than the thermionic converter did, in spite of the significantly smaller heat transfer area exposed to the fuel ring. During the long-term operation, the inward heat fraction first increased and then decreased, which was mainly caused by the variations of the thermal resistances at the fuel-heat pipe gap and the fuel-emitter gap. As shown in Fig. 10, the fuel-emitter gap size increased sharply at the first few dozen days (Period I: The fuel dimension shrank due to densification), and then kept reducing until the gap closure (Period II: The fuel dimension expanded due to radiation swelling), resulting in the gap thermal resistance first increasing and then decreasing. The behavior was inverted for the internal fuel-heat pipe gap. It is noteworthy that the heat pipe could still work well due to its inherent passive attributes under accident conditions, but the outward heat transfer path could be cut down due to the loss of coolant or the loss of the coolant flow. Hence, the novel design needed to have better security performance than the original system. However, the performance evaluation under accident conditions was outside the scope of this research.
Fig. 9. Variation of internal and external heat splits in novel TFE.
Fig. 10. Variation of fuel-emitter and fuel-heat pipe gap sizes in novel TFE.
Fig. 11 presents the variations of the temperatures at critical positions in the novel design. All of the temperatures changed slightly during the whole operation. Taking the example of the peak fuel temperature, the maximum temperature difference during operation was only 50 K. The stability of the thermal parameters was important for maintaining the stable electricity output.
Fig. 11. Variations of temperatures at critical positions in novel design.
As mentioned in Section 2.1, the power increase of the TFE was limited by the maximum allowable fuel temperature and the emitter temperature. Fig. 12 illustrates the maximum fuel temperature and the emitter temperature for different power operations. According to Fig. 12, the allowable powers of both the original and novel designs were determined by the emitter temperature. Due to the optimization design, the maximum allowable fission power of a single fuel could be increased from 4300 W to 9500 W. Since the fuel and reactor core design retained the same dimensions as the original design, the power density of the fuel and reactor core could be increased by 120%. This is of great significance to the space industry, which pursues smaller dimensions, lighter weights, and higher outputs.
Fig. 12. Variation of temperature versus fission power in original and novel designs.
4.2. Thermionic and thermoelectric performance
Fig. 13, Fig. 14 present the variations of the voltage and the current of both the thermionic converter and the HPTEG. Overall, the variations of the voltage and the current versus the operation time were slight, which was consistent with the variations of the thermal parameters. As seen in Fig. 13, the output voltage was lower than the corresponding open voltage because the electricity generator itself formed an electrical resistance and took away some of the open voltage. Theoretically, the output voltage would be equal to the open voltage if the resistance of the electricity generator was 0. Therefore, reducing the resistance of the electricity generator was important for the increase of the output power. As shown in Fig. 13, Fig. 14, the HPTEG had the characteristics of high voltage and low current compared with the thermionic converter. This is an important and popular conversion feature because a small current means less joule heat dissipation, which was also reflected in the energy components, as shown in Fig. 15. In Fig. 15, the three curves from top to bottom illustrate the variations of the fission power, conversion power, and output power versus the current. Hence, the three color-marked regions from the bottom to the top, with the three curves as boundaries, represent the output electric power, Joule heat dissipation, and waste heat. As seen in Fig. 15, as the output power increased, the dissipation heat in the thermionic converter increased more rapidly than that in the TEG. Specifically, when the output power was 500 W, there was 386 W heat dissipation in the thermionic converter when the value was only 135 W in the TEG.
Fig. 13. Variations of the voltages of the thermionic converter and the HPTEG.
Fig. 14. Variations of the output currents of the thermionic converter and the HPTEG.
Fig. 15. Energy component variation versus output current for the thermionic converter and the TEG.
There are two efficiency parameters that deserve attention for a power generator: conversion efficiency and utilization efficiency. The pursuit of a high utilization efficiency was one of the important objectives of the novel TFE design. In this research, the conversion efficiency was defined as the ratio of the converted electrical energy to the thermal energy, and the utilization efficiency was defined as the ratio of the output electrical energy (converted electrical energy minus the joule dissipation) to the thermal energy. Hence, the utilization efficiency was lower than the conversion energy, especially for the thermionic converter due to its large current and joule dissipation. Fig. 16 illustrates the efficiency variations of both the thermionic converter and the HPTEG in the novel design. For long-term operation, the conversion and utilization efficiencies remained stable, which means the generator has a steady power output. As shown in Fig. 16, the conversion efficiency of the TEG was higher than 14% and the value of the thermionic converter was less than 10%. It should be noted that the temperature difference between the hot side and the cold side in TEG was only about 500 K, which was much smaller than the emitter–collector temperature difference (about 1200 K) in the thermionic converter, as shown in Fig. 11. Therefore, it could be concluded that the TEG had a better performance than the thermionic converter in terms of thermal-electrical energy conversion. For the utilization efficiency, the value of the TEG was larger than 11%, which was significantly higher than that (about 6.5%) of the thermionic converter. Additionally, the energy efficiency of the original system and the novel system was compared. As shown in Fig. 17, due to the optimization design, the system energy conversion efficiency was increased from about 9% to 12%, and the system energy utilization efficiency was increased from about 6.5% to 9%, which proved the superiority of the novel design.
Fig. 16. Efficiency variation of the thermionic converter and the TEG in the novel design.
Fig. 17. Efficiency variation of the original system and the novel system.
Fig. 18 shows the efficiency variation versus the fission power of the novel design. The conversion efficiencies and the utilization efficiencies of both the thermionic converter and the TEG increased with the fission power. That was because a higher fission power resulted in a higher emitter temperature in the thermionic converter and a larger temperature difference between the hot side and the cold side in the TEG, which were the key factors affecting the energy efficiency. However, in the thermionic converter, the increase rate of the utilization efficiency slowed down markedly and the conversion-utilization efficiency gap grew with the increase of the fission power. This was because the joule heat dissipation in the thermionic converter increased rapidly with the fission power. Fig. 19 presents the system conversion efficiencies and system utilization efficiencies of both the original and novel designs with different fission powers. With the consideration of the fission power limit discussed in Section 4.1, the maximum allowable system energy conversion efficiency was 13.4% and the maximum allowable system utilization efficiency was 10.2% in the novel system, which was a great progress compared with the maximum conversion efficiency of 9.2% and the maximum utilization efficiency of 6.6% in the original design. According to the maximum allowable fission power and the corresponding utilization efficiency, the maximum allowable electrical power output could be increased by 240% in the novel design while maintaining the unchanged dimensions of the reactor core.
Fig. 18. Efficiency variation versus power for the thermionic converter and the TEG in the novel design.
Fig. 19. Efficiency variation versus power of the original system and the novel system.
<Section>5. Conclusions</Section>
With the aim of achieving the increase of the power density and the energy efficiency for SNRs, a novel fuel element design was proposed based on the thermionic fuel element applied in TOPAZ-II. In the novel fuel design, the internal cooling by a heat pipe was introduced on the inside of the fuel ring, and a TEG was implemented on the condenser section of the heat pipe. The novel design promised to improve the performance of SNRs in terms of fission power increase, fuel temperature reduction, system energy efficiency improvement, and inherent safety enhancement.
To verify the advantages of the novel fuel element design, thermionic and thermoelectric models were developed and implemented in the thermo-mechanical analysis program FROBA-SPACE for TOPAZ-II, and simulations of both the original design and the novel design were conducted with the modified program. The results indicated: a) The maximum allowable fission power could be increased by 120% while reducing the fuel temperature in the novel fuel design; b) Compared with the thermionic converter, the TEG had a better performance in terms of the thermal-electrical conversion efficiency and the reduction of the joule heat dissipation; c) Benefitting from the great improvement of maximum allowable fission power, the system conversion efficiency, system utilization efficiency, and electrical power output could be increased by 4.2%, 3.6%, and 240%, respectively.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgement</Section>
This research was funded by National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 12005140) and Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (No. 2019A1515110318).
<Section>References</Section>
[1]
S.Q. Fan, Y.P. Hu, M.H. Li, S.Z. Li, T. Zhou
Thermodynamic performance of lunar surface nuclear power system with heat sink temperature change in a rotational period
Appl. Therm. Eng., 130 (2018), pp. 127-134
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[2]
G.L. Bennett
Mission interplanetary: Using radioisotope power to explore the solar system
Energy Convers. Manage., 49 (2008), pp. 382-392
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[3]
S.M. Benke
Operational testing and thermal modeling of a TOPAZ-II single cell thermionic fuel element test stand
Master Thesis, Naval Postgraduate School (1994)
Google Scholar
[4]
G.L. Bennett, R.J. Hemler, A. Schock
Space nuclear power - an overview
J. Propul. Power, 12 (1996), pp. 12-15
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[5]
V. Yarygin, V. Sidelnikov, V. Mironov
Energy Conversion Options for NASA's Space Nuclear Power Systems Initiative - Underestimated Capability of Thermionics
International Energy Conversion Engineering Conference, ICONE (2013)
Google Scholar
[6]
T. C. Holgate, R. Bennett R, T. Hammel, C. Thierry, K. Steve, S. BOB, Increasing the efficiency of the multi-mission radioisotope thermoelectric generator. Journal of Electronic Materials, 44 (2015) 1814-1821.
Google Scholar
[7]
Y. Wang, H.D. Li, H.S. Hao, J.C. Chen, S.H. Su
Optimal design of the interelectrode space in a photon-enhanced thermionic emission solar cell
Appl. Therm. Eng., 157 (2019), p. 113758
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[8]
Y. Yang, Y.S. Xue, F. Huang, H. Zhang, K. Tao, et al.
A Facile Microfluidic Hydrogen Peroxide Fuel Cell with High Performance: Electrode Interface and Power-Generation Properties
ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 1 (2018), pp. 5328-5335
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[9]
S.M. Ha, Y. Ahn
Laminar flow-based micro fuel cell utilizing grooved electrode surface
J. Power Sources, 267 (2014), pp. 731-738
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[10]
V.P. Kobyakov, A.G. Kalandarishvili
Performance of thermionic energy converters with oxygen-containing emitter and collector
Tech. Phys., 49 (2004), pp. 775-778
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[11]
Y.W. Lv, X.D. Yu, C.W. Tan, H.L. Ma, J.P. Zheng, et al.
Deposition temperature effects on tungsten single-crystal layer by chemical vapor transport
J. Cryst. Growth, 329 (2011), pp. 62-66
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[12]
Y.B. Deng, Y.W. Wu, C. Gong, D.L. Zhang, W.X. Tian, et al.
Upgrade of FROBA code and its application in thermal-mechanical analysis of space reactor fuel
Nucl. Eng. Des., 332 (2018), pp. 297-306
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[13]
Y.B. Deng, B.W. Qiu, K.L. Lu, Y. Yin, X. Gong, B. Pang, X. Huang, Y.C. Li, Y.W. Wu, G.H. Su
Performance evaluation and efficiency enhancement of a space thermionic fuel element for thermal energy conversion and utilization
Appl. Therm. Eng., 173 (2020), p. 115237
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[14]
M.R. Lapointe, S. Oleson, E. Pencil, R.M. Carolyn, D. S. Salvador, H. G. James, S. M. Lee, MW-Class Electric Propulsion System Designs for Mars Cargo Transport. AIAA Space Conference & Exposition, 2011.
Google Scholar
[15]
V. Zakirova, V. Pavshookb
Feasibility of the recent Russian nuclear electric propulsion concept: 2010
Nucl. Eng. Des., 241 (2011), pp. 1529-1537
Google Scholar
[16]
S.K. Borowski, D.R. Mccurdy, T.W. Packard
Nuclear thermal propulsion (NTP): a proven growth technology for human NEO/Mars exploration missions
Aerospace Conference, 186 (2012), pp. 1-20
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[17]
J. Chan, J. Wiser, G. Brown
System-level testing of the advanced Stirling radioisotope generator engineering hardware
Cleveland OH (2014)
Google Scholar
[18]
P. V. Andreev, A. V. Gulevich, G. A. Zaritsky, V. P. Legostaev, A. M. Nikonov, et al., Physical and Engineering Potential of Thermionics for Advanced Projects of Sub-Megawatt SNPS. Nuclear and Emerging Technologies for Space 2012.
Google Scholar
[19]
M.S. Kazimi, P. Hejzlar
High Performance Fuel Design for Next Generation PWRs: Final Report, MIT-NFC-PR-082
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (2006)
Google Scholar
[20]
Y.B. Deng, Y.W. Wu, D.L. Zhang, W.X. Tian, S.Z. Qiu, et al.
Development of a thermal–mechanical behavior coupling analysis code for a dual-cooled annular fuel element in PWRs
Nucl. Eng. Des., 301 (2016), pp. 353-365
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[21]
Y.B. Deng, Y.W. Wu, Y.M. Li, D.L. Zhang, W.X. Tian, et al.
Mechanism study and theoretical simulation on heat split phenomenon in dual-cooled annular fuel element
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 94 (2016), pp. 44-54
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[22]
M. El-Genk, J. M.TOURNIER, Uses of liquid-metal and water heat pipes in space reactor power systems. Frontiers in Heat Pipes 2(2011) 1-24.
Google Scholar
[23]
B. Zhang, T. Zheng, Q.X. Wang, Z.B. Guo, M.J. Kim, et al.
Stable and low contact resistance electrical contacts for high temperature SiGe thermoelectric generators
Scr. Mater., 152 (2018), pp. 36-39
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[24]
C.L. Wang, S.M. Tang, X. Liu, G.H. Su, W.X. Tian, et al.
Experimental study on heat pipe thermoelectric generator for industrial high temperature waste heat recovery
Appl. Therm. Eng., 175 (2020), p. 115299
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[25]
O.W. Richardson
Electron Emission from Metals as a Function of Temperature
Phys. Rev., 23 (1923), pp. 153-155
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[26]
B.M. John, N.S. Rasor
The TECMDL Thermionic Converter Computer Model
Rasor Associartes Inc. report (1982)
Google Scholar
[27]
L.M. Poplaski, S.P. Benn, A. Faghri
Thermal performance of heat pipes using nanofluids
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 107 (2017), pp. 358-371
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[28]
M.T. Borset, O. Wilhelmsen, S. Kjelstrup, et al.
Exploring the potential for waste heat recovery during metal casting with thermoelectric generators: On-site experiments and mathematical modeling
Energy, 118 (2017), pp. 865-875
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[29]
H. X. Xi, L. A., Luo, G. Fraisse, Development and applications of solar-based thermoelectric technologies. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 11 (2007) 923-936.
Google Scholar
[30]
J. Xu, X.B. Zhao, T.J. Zhu, X.Z. He
Thermoelectric Properties of Boron Doped SiGe Alloys by Ball Milling
J. Mater. Sci. Eng, 35 (2017), pp. 173-176
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[31]
Y.B. Deng, Y.W. Wu, B.W. Qiu, D.L. Zhang, M.J. Wang, et al.
Development of a new Pellet-Clad Mechanical Interaction (PCMI) model and its application in ATFs
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 104 (2017), pp. 146-156
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[32]
G. Hu, S. Zhao, K. Ruan
A Transient Analytic Method of Thermionic Reactor: TOPAZ-II
International Conference on Nuclear Engineering, ICONE (2010)
Google Scholar