<title>Modeling of an air cooler with finned heat transfer tube banks using the RELAP5-3D code</title>
<author>1,HiroyasuMochizuki</author>
<Affiliation>1,Laboratory for Advanced Nuclear Energy, Institute of Innovative Research, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 2-12-1 Ookayama, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, 152-8550, Japan</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Design</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nucengdes.2020.110902</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0029549320303964</URL>
Modeling of an air cooler with finned heat transfer tube banks using the RELAP5-3D code
HiroyasuMochizuki
Laboratory for Advanced Nuclear Energy, Institute of Innovative Research, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 2-12-1 Ookayama, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, 152-8550, Japan
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The present paper proposes a calculation model of an air cooler using the RELAP5-3D code. Up to now, the modeling of an air cooler using RELAP5-3D was not described in detail, and there was a problem when calculating the decay heat removal system with the air cooler. Above all, the study of the heat transfer model for an air cooler with finned heat transfer tube banks is few. Since a decay heat removal system with air coolers is essential in liquid metal cooled fast nuclear reactors, it is anticipated how to model the air cooler using implemented heat transfer models in the RELAP5-3D code. The finned heat transfer tube is simulated with multiple bare tubes which have the equivalent heat transfer characteristics considering fin efficiency. Two kinds of simulations have been compared to the measured results of the “Monju” reactor under the forced and natural convection conditions in order to confirm the applicability of the proposed model. The simulation result under the forced convection condition is in good agreement with the test result except the operation mode under the natural convection. Since the simulation result under the natural convection condition overpredicts the test result, the surface area is lessened in order to decrease the heat transfer. As a result, good agreement has been obtained between the simulation and the test result under the natural convection condition. Sensitivity analysis has been performed for the cases where the outside diameter and the number of the simulated heat transfer tubes, and number of divisions of the calculation meshes are changed. It has been confirmed that there is almost no change in the total heat transfer rate even if various diameter tubes are used and the number of divisions is changed. The number of heat transfer tubes has a non-linear sensitivity to the removal heat rate.
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The present paper proposes a method how to model an air cooler (AC) with finned heat transfer tube (FHTT) banks using the RELAP5-3D code. The ACs are generally implemented in the decay heat removal (DHR) system of a fast breeder reactor (FBR). Up to now, the RELAP5-3D code has been improved to calculate thermal-hydraulics of FBRs other than loss-of-coolant accidents and transients of light water reactors (LWRs) (Davis, 2006), (Riemke et al. 2009), (The RELAP5-3D© Code Development Team, 2012). The latest version of the RELAP5-3D code Version 4.3.4 has been improved further in regard to the sodium property table. However, the modeling of the AC is troublesome because of absence of an appropriate heat transfer model in RELAP5-3D. The advantage of using the RELAP5-3D code is that it is widely used not only in the field of research but also in design. This code prepares a user specified functions using a general table, and specific heat transfer coefficients can be imposed on the code as a function of temperature or time. In the present study, however, a specific heat transfer correlation as a function of the Nusselt number and the Reynolds number is required. Since the method to modify the Dittus-Boelter type correlations with the specific correlation is not introduced in the manual, the present method is proposed. After the AC model is established, the model can be applied to the simulation of not only an FBR but also an LWR with ACs which can remove decay heat. However, since the heat transfer around the FHTT banks is dependent on the fin configuration, the numerical values dealt with in this paper need to be modified to fit to each case in consideration of the fin height and fin thickness. However, the analysis method is the same as the method proposed in this paper.
In order to benchmark various system codes for the FBRs, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) coordinated several benchmark analyses based on the transient data measured in several FBRs. Although a natural circulation test result measured at the PHENIX reactor was analyzed by several system codes, the RELAP5 code was not used in the benchmark (IAEA, 2013). The PHENIX reactor was a prototype fast breeder reactor in France, and conducted extreme tests before the reactor was closed. The SASSYS-1/SAS4A, CATHARE, DYNA-P, NETFLOW++, MARS-LMR and TRACE codes were benchmarked. In the most recent years, the benchmark analysis targeting the EBR-II reactor tests was conducted and various system codes were used, e.g., SASSYS-1/SAS4A, SAC-CFR, THACS, CATHARE, EBRDYN, SIMMER-III, FRENETIC, NETFLOW++, RELAP5-3D, Super-COPD, MARS-LMR, SPECTRA, SOCRAT-BN, and TRACE. The EBR-II reactor was a fast breeder reactor in the USA loaded with metallic fuel in the core. This reactor had a unique characteristic that the fuel pins expand and a negative reactivity was inserted when the fuel temperature rose due to insufficient cooling. Therefore, many system codes have been benchmarked twice using reactor transient data. Two kinds of tests were proposed as the benchmark problems relating the EBR-II, i.e., a loss-of-flow (LOF) test and an unprotected loss-of-flow (ULOF) test. The former test was one of the abnormal transients which an FBR would experience during the plant life time. However, the second one was an unusual test without scram. This event is generally very crucial for most FBRs resulting in core damage. The reactor power decrease was anticipated by an inherent negative feedback of the neutronic characteristics in the EBR-II due to the fuel temperature increase caused by a flow rate decrease. The RELAP5-3D code was applied to the ULOF event in order to investigate mechanisms of the negative feedback of the ULOF test (van Rooijen and Mochizuki, 2015) together with the French neutronic code ERANOS2.0 (Rimpault et al., 2002). The calculated result by RELAP5-3D showed the similar transient as those by other codes mentioned in the FR17 (Fast reactors and related fuel cycles) conference (Bates et al., 2017) held by IAEA and the measured transient. Del Nevo and Martelli (2015) applied RELAP5-3D to the simulation of the above mentioned LOF test. The plant behaviors were well predicted but they found limitations of the code through the benchmark. Precise benchmark results using various codes were published by the IAEA (2017). We can know that the primary system of the FBR can be predicted well by the RELAP5-3D code through the above study if boundary conditions of the secondary heat transport system (HTS) are imposed on the code. There were a couple of plant parameters which the simulated results did not agree well with the measured results by any code, and the cause was investigated. As a result, the parameters such as Z-pipe inlet temperature and IHX inlet temperature that had a problem in the measurement or unknown cause were also confirmed.
In order to evaluate the thermal hydraulics in a system with ACs, the thermal hydraulics of the major HTS should be calculated properly. Otherwise the cause of the mismatches caused by the AC model cannot be pointed out. At present, a simulation of the thermal hydraulics in the HTS with the AC are always troublesome because the RELAP5-3D Version 4.3.4 does not have an appropriate heat transfer model to calculate the AC with FHTTs. The FHTT banks are common configuration of the AC. The heat transfer coefficient of FHTT banks was investigated using the facility and FBRs in Japan (Mochizuki and Takano, 2009). In their study, since the empirical correlations were implemented into another system code, plant parameters around the AC were predicted in good agreement. In the case of RELAP5-3D, the heat transfers under a cross-flow of air and an enlarged heat transfer surface conditions should be appropriately modeled under the limited model selection.
Literature survey has been conducted in order to learn about up-to-date modeling of the AC in case of RELAP5-3D. A couple of studies about thermal-hydraulics of plants with ACs using RELAP5 (Greene et al., 2010), (Sato et al., 2014), (Tabadar, et al., 2018) can be found. However, precise countermeasures how to model the AC are not clear unfortunately in these articles. Blake (2016) introduced an example of the air cooler model in his master degree thesis. His thesis plays an important role to develop the present model. The DHR system of the MYRRHA reactor was assessed by the RELAP5 code (Bubelis et al., 2016). The MYRRHA reactor is an accelerator driven system which is cooled by lead–bismuth eutectic. They mentioned that an enhanced DHR system was implemented in the RELAP5/mod3 (Fletcher and Schultz, 1995) models, which was developed correspondingly by Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT) and Italian National Agency for New Technologies, Energy and Sustainable Economic Development (ENEA).
Since a model to analyze FHTT banks properly cannot be found by searching the above literatures, the author proposes an AC model having a compatible heat transfer characteristic, and the model is validated by the real plant data. The test was conducted using the “Monju” FBR plant during the start-up test (Ohtaki et al., 1995).
<Section>2. General description of “Monju” reactor</Section>
Fig. 1 illustrates a schematic diagram of the “Monju” plant, which was a loop-type 714 MWt FBR with three primary HTSs, three secondary HTSs with steam generators (SGs) and a water system with turbines and feedwater heaters. Generated heat in the reactor core was transferred to the secondary HTS via an intermediate heat exchanger (IHX) with approximately 3300 heat transfer tubes (HTTs). The heat was transferred further to the tertiary HTS via the SGs. This reactor had a DHR system with an AC in each secondary HTS. The DHR system was operated after the reactor was tripped. The sodium flow in the DHR system was controlled at a minimal flow rate in order not to cause freezing of sodium under the normal operation conditions. Steam was generated in an evaporator (EV) and super-heated in a super-heater (SH) in each tertiary HTS. The sodium flow in the SG system after the turbine trip was also controlled at a minimal flow rate in order not to cause freezing. The system pressure of the super-heated steam was approximately 12.5 MPa. Condensed water was fed to the SGs via 5-steps of feedwater heaters. The feedwater heater was a shell-and-tube type heat exchanger which was heated by the extracted steam from the turbines introduced to the shell-side.
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of heat transport system of the “Monju” fast breeder reactor.
The outline of the secondary HTS that is the focus of this study is shown in Fig. 2. Lengths and diameters of the HTSs are listed in Table 1. The lengths are rounded values. The schematic of the AC is illustrated in Fig. 3. The AC consisted of many FHTT banks with 4 passes, a blower, inlet vanes, inlet and outlet dampers, and a chimney. Specifications of the components are listed in Table 2. The DHR system controlled air flow rate in order to set the outlet sodium temperature at the designated set point temperature.
Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of the secondary heat transport system with test conditions.
Table 1. Dimensions of the heat transport systems.
Fig. 3. Schematic of air cooler implemented in the “Monju” reactor.
Table 2. Specifications of air coolers implemented in the “Monju” reactor.
<Section>3. Air cooler modeling using RELAP5-3D and validations</Section>
3.1. Air cooler modeling
The HTT has a 4-pass zigzag configuration, and since air flows perpendicularly to the FHTT banks, there is always a problem regarding how to model the flow path and heat structure using RELAP5-3D. The HTT configuration is deformed like a W-shaped tube in the calculation model considering the systematic input data arrangement as illustrated in Fig. 4. The present model in Fig. 4 covers the AC itself and the secondary HTS from the inlet of the AC to the inlet point of the IHX. The input data of the calculation model are listed in Table 3. The actual HTT had non-heat transfer sections which were vertical tube sections connecting each pass (Fig. 3). These sections are omitted from the calculation model. Therefore, the tilt of the HTTs in calculation model is slightly larger than that of the actual HTT. A one-pass length is divided into 5. An air flow duct is divided into 20 so that one division of the HTT exists in one mesh height.
Fig. 4. Calculation model of the air cooler of the “Monju” reactor using the RELAP5-3D code.
Table 3. Input data of calculation model.
It should be confirmed using the calculation diagram illustrated in Fig. 4 whether or not an appropriate model can be established to simulate the thermal-hydraulics around the DHR system using the RELAP5-3D code. A stuck is divided into 10. The stuck is important to enhance the natural convection. The component 115 is a motor valve simulating the inlet vane which is controlled by the temperature at the outlet manifold which is simulated with a single-volume component 230. Air flow in the AC is simulated by the non-condensable gas option. By assuming 100% air as a non-condensable gas in water, the air flow is achieved.
As for the heat transfer coefficient of the HTT, the implemented Dittus-Boelter type correlation is selected. In general, the heat transfer coefficient of the FHTT with air cross-flow is approximately twice as large as the Dittus-Boelter correlation in the turbulent flow region as illustrated in Fig. 5. However, under conditions where the Re number is small, such as during natural circulation, the slope of the Nu number with respect to the Re number is large. The measured data of the FHTT banks in FBR plants and a mock-up facility were correlated (Mochizuki and Takano, 2009). The configuration of the FHTT is illustrated in Fig. 6. The definition of the equivalent diameter regarding heat transfer, de, in this figure follows that of Jameson (1945).
@(1)
Fig. 5. Measured Nusselt number and empirical correlations implemented in the NETFLOW++ code (from Mochizuki and Takano, 2009).
Fig. 6. Configuration of finned heat transfer tubes.
In the calculation of the air cooler with FHTTs,@ the hydraulic equivalent diameter shown below is also needed in general.
@(2)
For the positional relationship between the HTTs,@ refer to Fig. 6. Pressure loss on air side of the FHTT banks can be calculated using the correlation of the pressure loss coefficient (Suzuki and Mochizuki, 2016). However, this is the case where the correlations shown in Fig. 5 are incorporated into the code. In another study (Briggs and Young, 1963), they used the outside diameter of the base tube region as the equivalent dimeter to correlate the heat transfer coefficient and the pressure loss for many FHTTs with different configurations. For RELAP5-3D, the definition by Briggs and Young is adopted because it is necessary to use the provided heat transfer coefficient. Their correlations are shown below. The parameters in the equation is illustrated in Fig. 6.
@(3)
@(4)
@(5)
The fins are provided on a base tube to increase the heat transfer area of the tube and the area is usually far larger than that of the bare tube, i.g., more than 10 times. Since RELAP5-3D cannot incorporate the correlations of FHTT, the number of FHTTs are increased so that the total heat transfer area of simulated bare tubes has the equivalent heat transfer characteristics. It is not realistic to keep the number of HTTs and increase the outside diameter so as to be the equivalent heat transfer characteristics because the outside diameter becomes too large. As the number of HTTs increases, the flow area of the sodium increases. Therefore, it is necessary to reduce the inside diameter of HTT so that it keeps the original flow area for sodium. As a result of the smaller inner diameter, the wall thickness of the pipe increases. In order to obtain the compatible overall heat transfer coefficient of the metal tube, the thermal conductivity should be reduced. Since the volume of the material increases, the specific heat capacity should be decreased to have the same heat capacity.
In the present study, the outside area is adjusted by increasing the number of the simulated bare tubes as shown in Table 4. The input data for the system is created as usual, and the heat structure data are created on the basis of the above table. Although the active length of the FHTT in one pass is 4.025 m, all the values are listed for a mesh length of 0.805 m. When the number of tubes is increased by a factor of 11, the total heat transfer area of the bare tubes is slightly larger than the actual heat transfer area. However, since the fin efficiency of the “Monju” FHTT is approximately 0.4–0.5 and the heat transfer coefficient is roughly twice as large as that of one bare tube in the turbulent region, the increase of the number of HTTs by a factor of 11 provides the compatible heat transfer area. The factor should be decided based on the fin efficiency. Regarding the fin efficiency, we can know the meaning and the value through handbooks or study by Gardner (1945). Since the temperature of the tip region of the fin decreases and the heat transfer deteriorates, large fins are not always better. Therefore, fin efficiency is defined as an index showing how much percentage of the fin area works effectively. The fin efficiency is dependent on the fin configuration such as height and thickness of the fin. In general, the fin efficiency is high when the height of the fin is low. In order to adjust the inside flow area of the multiple bare tubes, the original diameter is lessened so as to have the consistent heat transfer and flow characteristics as the original one. Since the pipe thickness increases in this case, the thermal conductivity of the pipe is increased by a factor of 6 to have the consistent thermal resistance. The specific heat capacity of the pipe is lessoned by a factor of 12 to compensate the increase of volume of the bare HTTs.
Table 4. Heat transfer area for the heat structure input of the RELAP5-3D code.
The important points of the proposed modelling are summarized as follows;
1)
The HTTs are segmented so that one segment is located in one node on air side.
2)
The number of simulated bare HTTs is increased to have the same outside heat transfer characteristic as that of the FHTTs.
3)
Inside diameter of the HTT is lessened in order to have the same flow area of the FHTT.
4)
Increase the thermal conductivity of the HTT to compensate the increase of the thickness.
5)
Decrease the specific heat capacity of the HTT to compensate the increase of volume.
6)
Default heat transfer coefficient incorporated in RELAP5 is selected, i.e., the Dittus-Boelter type correlation.
7)
Input air content of 100% as a non-condensable gas option. Since nitrogen must be one of the non-condensable gas types in RELAP5, this value must be imposed as 0.
3.2. Analysis of the decay heat removal system of “Monju” under the forced convection condition
Validation under the forced convection condition is conducted with an AC characteristic test which was used to validate another system code (Mochizuki and Takano, 2009). This test was conducted not by the nuclear heating but by the heat generation of the primary pump running. Inlet sodium conditions of the AC are imposed on the RELAP5-3D code as time-dependent boundary conditions at the TDV-210 and the TDJ-215. TDV is an acronym for a time-dependent volume that we can set the temperature and pressure of a fluid and we can set the flow rate using a time dependent junction (TDJ). Many other system codes have similar treatments. Measured air flow rate and air inlet temperature of 30 °C are imposed on the code at the TDJ-105, and TDV-100, respectively. Sodium flow from the steam generator (SG) is also imposed on the code as time-dependent boundary conditions at the TDV-260 and the TDJ-265. The input data evolutions relating the AC are illustrated in Fig. 7. The minimal sodium flow rate in the AC during the normal reactor operation increases when the blower is started-up because the secondary sodium flow to the SG is decreased to the minimal flow rate and bypassed to the AC. The AC is operated under the forced convection (FC) condition with a low flow rate mode. The AC operation mode is changed from the FC to the natural convection (NC) condition at around 1.5 h.
Fig. 7. Boundary conditions of RELAP5-3D to calculate heat transfer in an air cooler (AC) under forced circulation.
The calculated AC outlet temperatures are compared to the measured results as illustrated in Fig. 8(a) for the case where the number of FHTTs is increased by a factor of 11. The calculated temperature traces the measured result within a temperature difference of 10 °C except a time period 1.5–4.6 h. The sodium temperature evolution due to the air flow rate change is traced correctly. However, the air outlet temperature of the AC is not traced by the calculation until the blower of the AC is operated again under the FC condition. This is because the heat transfer under the natural convection condition is overestimated in the analysis. The sodium temperature is not affected by the overestimated heat transfer because the heat capacity of sodium is larger than that of air. It can be seen from Fig. 5 that the power of the Reynolds number for the laminar flow region is larger than that for the turbulent region. Therefore, the heat transfer coefficient is overestimated when the heat transfer coefficient for the FC is extrapolated to the NC. The operation mode is changed to high air flow rate again at 4.6 h, the measured temperature is traced by the code in good agreement. This result shows that some countermeasures should be taken for the low air flow rate conditions. Fig. 8(b) shows the calculation result when the number of FHTTs is increased by a factor of 9 of the original. In this case, it can be confirmed that the air outlet temperature is sensitive and the temperature during NC is close to the measured value but the air outlet temperature during FC is underpredicted.
Fig. 8. Comparison between measured and calculated AC outlet temperature under forced circulation.
3.3. Analysis of the decay heat removal system of “Monju” under the natural convection condition
Through the above analysis, the heat transfer in the FHTT banks is calculated almost correctly under the air flow rate is imposed on the code. However, the outlet air temperature is tending to be overestimated when the AC operation mode is under the NC condition. In order to seek the appropriate simulation conditions, an AC characteristic test under the NC condition should be calculated. The suitable data for validation was measured and evaluated in the past (Mochizuki, 2007). This test was conducted at the “Monju” reactor in 1993 using the pump heat input from the primary HTS. Sodium flow rate was changed by changing manually the throttling of the valve implemented at the outlet of the AC system. Air flow rate was controlled by the throttling of the vane of the blower and the outlet damper. Sodium outlet temperature was controlled at the set point of 325 °C at first and decreased to 315 °C at around 7200 s (2 h). The evaluation model of the AC can be widely applied for various reactors if the heat transfer in the AC is reasonably calculated under the natural convection conditions.
In order to simulate the NC on the air side, the time dependent junction TDJ-105 is replaced by a single-junction component. The air flow rate is calculated by a buoyancy force working over the heat transfer section and the duct. Since the air temperature is overestimated in the previous calculation when the flow rate is low due to the NC, the number of HTTs is lessened. The FHTT banks are simulated by the increase of the number of simulated bare tubes by a factor of 9 as shown in Table 4. See Appendix 1–3 for the actual input data for the heat transfer tube banks. Input data for sodium side, air side and heat transport are shown. The input data in the heat structure model are changed for this calculation based on the data in Table 3. Then after, the loss coefficient of the component 115 is decided in order to obtain the initial air temperature which corresponds to measured temperatures. In the actual AC, air flew through the gap of damper even when the damper was closed. Therefore, this kind of adjustment is necessary. This component is simulated by a motor valve which is controlled by the sodium outlet temperature of the AC. Boundary conditions to be imposed on RELAP5-3D are illustrated in Fig. 9. Curves are measured sodium inlet temperature and flow rate for the AC. Inlet air temperature is imposed as a constant of 37 °C based on the measurement. Sodium outlet temperature is controlled by the implemented control model of RELAP5 at the set point of 325 °C at first and decreased to 315 °C at around 7200 s according to the operation procedure.
Fig. 9. Boundary conditions regarding sodium inlet temperature and flow rate to calculate heat transfer in an air cooler (AC) under natural convection condition.
Calculated outlet temperatures are illustrated in Fig. 10 together with the measured sodium inlet temperature which is used for input data of RELAP5-3D. The calculated sodium outlet temperature traces the measured result in good agreement. Although the calculated air temperature shows many spikes due to open and close of the valve component, the measured temperature evolution is traced by the code in general. In the measurement, these spikes are filtered due to a heat capacity of a thermocouple well which houses a thermocouple. These spikes in the calculation can be mathematically filtered. However, they are remained as they are.
Fig. 10. Comparison between measured and calculated AC outlet temperatures under natural convection condition.
Through the above two kinds of calculations, a perspective to simulate the AC using the incorporated models in the RELAP5-3D code has been obtained if a FHTT is simulated properly using the multiple bare HTTs. However, the proposed model has a problem that the number of HTTs should be changed depending on the air flow conditions such as the FC or the NC. This is because of the heat transfer coefficient selected in RELAP5 does not fit to the NC. The Dittus-Boelter type correlation is usually implemented in the code and this coefficient is valid only for the FC conditions, and is too large for the NC flow. Therefore, a heat transfer model which can calculate the heat transfer of FHTTs is anticipated in the RELAP5-3D code. If a universal form which treats the Nusselt number as a function of the Reynolds number and the Prandtl number is available in RELAP5-3D, many researchers will be helpful.
3.4. Sensitivity analysis of the proposed model
Many parameters are sensitive to the heat removal performance of the air cooler. Among them, the flow rate of the primary fluid and the air flow rate of the secondary fluid have particularly high sensitivity. When the decay heat removal system is on standby, both flow rates are almost 0 and the amount of heat removal is also almost 0. Since the flow rate changes depending on the flow resistance, the pressure loss of the system basically has an effect. From this, it can be easily understood that the influence of both flow rates is largest. However, the sensitivity of such a fluid condition changes depending on the operating conditions and has no relationship with the essence of the proposed model. When applying the proposed model to each calculation model, there are three main issues regarding how to interpret the model. These are what to do with the diameter and number of HTTs, and what to do with the calculation mesh.
Therefore, sensitivity analysis is conducted whether the present method can be applied to various cases which have different diameter HTTs. Because the heat transfer on gas side becomes rate limiting condition, it is appropriate to study the sensitivity of the simulated bare tube outside diameter. Since the outside surface area of the bare tube changes when the diameter of the tube is changed, the number of bare tubes is adjusted so as to keep the outside surface area. The changes in heat transfer rates under FC and NC conditions are examined when the outside diameter of the bare tube changes from 0.5 times to 1.5 times that of the base case of 50.8 mm, i.e., outside diameter ranging 25.4–76.2 mm. The basic case is the diameter and number of heat transfer tubes shown in Table 4.
As for the case of FC, sodium and air conditions are assumed as shown in Table 5. These conditions are close to the conditions immediately after the AC is activated in the test shown in Fig. 8. As for the case of NC, sodium and air conditions are assumed as shown in Table 6. In the NC test illustrated in Fig. 10, the flow resistance of the system was reduced and the sodium temperature was raised in order to increase the air flow rate, but in order to compare between FC and NC under the same conditions, the resistance and the sodium temperature were the same as the FC conditions. Also, the thermal conductivity and specific heat of the material are adjusted with respect to changes in the number of tubes.
Table 5. Boundary conditions of the sensitivity study for forced convection.
Fig. 11. Sensitivity of simulated bare tube diameter on the heat transfer rate, (a) removed heat rate at each section, (b) sensitivity.
In the above analysis, the number of HTTs is changed so as to maintain the given heat transfer area, but the sensitivity to the amount of heat transfer when the number is simply changed is examined. The basic cases are the number shown in Table 4, and the sensitivity of 0.5, 0.75 and 1.5 times is examined. In the case of FC, since the number of HTTs is already large, it cannot be increased more than 1.2 times. Therefore, the sensitivity was investigated up to 1.2 times. It can be seen from Fig. 12 that the amount of removed heat rate does not increase linearly with the increase in the number of HTTs. This is because the amount of removed heat by the air flowing around the HTT banks reaches saturation. When the value on the vertical axis is 1, the amount of heat removed is as shown in Fig. 11.
Fig. 12. Sensitivity of number of heat transfer tubes on heat transfer rate.
Fig. 13 examines how the amount of heat removed heat rate changes depending on the number of meshes in the HTT. The basic number of meshes is 20, but 4 is the least number because of the 4-pass HTT arrangement, i.e., one mesh for each pass. From this, it can be seen that if 1-pass is divided into three, the error will be about 1% for the five divisions of the basic case. Even with the simplest 1 mesh, the error is less than 7%.
Fig. 13. Sensitivity of number of meshes on heat rate.
<Section>4. Conclusions</Section>
A model of the heat transfer of an air cooler with finned heat transfer tube banks is proposed in the present study. Two tests are calculated by the RELAP5-3D code in order to confirm the applicability of a proposed model of an AC which removes decay heat of an FBR. The following conclusions are obtained through these simulations. Since numerical values dealt with in this paper have to be modified for each case because the design of fins and heat transfer tubes are different.
1)
A finned heat transfer tube implemented in the AC is simulated by the multiple bare tubes which have equivalent heat transfer characteristics. The tilt of the tube banks is slightly changed to a W-shaped flow pass considering the systematic input data arrangement. Basically, the heat transfer area is the same, but the area is adjusted considering the fin efficiency and the heat transfer correlation equation used which is a fraction of the actual measured correlation data need to do it. In the present analysis, the fin efficiency is about 0.5 and the heat transfer coefficient is about twice. Therefore, the number of bare tubes is determined so that the surface area of the bare tubes is the same as the heat transfer area of the finned heat transfer tubes.
2)
Sodium outlet temperature of the AC has been traced in good agreement under the forced convection condition of an AC characteristic test when the number of simulated bare tubes is 11 times of the original finned heat transfer tubes. However, air outlet temperature is overestimated when the AC operation is switched over to the natural convection condition.
3)
Sodium outlet temperature and air outlet temperature have been traced by the code under the natural convection condition of the AC when the number of simulated bare tubes is lessened to 9 times.
4)
Sensitivity analyses have been conducted in order to facilitate the application of the proposed air cooler model with finned heat transfer tube banks. It has been clarified that even if the outside diameter of the simulated bare tube is changed from 25.4 mm to 76.2 mm and the number of tubes is changed in order to keep the outside surface area, the heat removal rate of the air cooler hardly changes. The number of heat transfer tubes has great sensitivity with respect to the amount of heat removed and should be taken into consideration when applying to each model. The number of divisions of the heat transfer tube depends upon the experience of the analyst, but even if it is small to some extent, a large error does not occur.
5)
In the current situation where a fixed heat transfer correlation can be selected, analysis when the operation mode changes cannot be performed. Therefore, it would be convenient to be able to input the Nu number as a function of the Re number and Pr number, just as the flow resistance is input as a function of the Re number.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgement</Section>
The author would like to express his sincere thanks to Idaho National Laboratory which allows the author one license to use the RELAP5-3D code.
<Section>References</Section>
Bates et al., 2017
Bates, E., Zhang, D., Truong, B., Sui, D., Hu, W., Su, G.H., Sumner, T., Maas, L., Vezzoni, B., Marchetti, M., Zanino, R., Caron, D., van Rooijen, W.F., Mochizuki, H., Morita, K., Choi, C., Stempniewicz, M., Rtischev, N., Zhang, Y., Mikityuk, K., 2017. Conclusions of a benchmark study on the EBR-II SHRT-45R Experiment, FR17, Yekaterinburg, Russia, 372, (2017), 1–11.
Google Scholar
Blake, 2016
Blake, G.C. 2016. Scaling analysis of the direct reactor auxiliary cooling system for gas-cooled fast reactors during a depressurized loss of forced convection event, The Thesis of the Degree of Master of Science in Nuclear Engineering, Oregon State University.
Google Scholar
Briggs and Young, 1963
D.E. Briggs, E.H. Young
Convection heat transfer and pressure drop of air flowing across triangular pitch banks of finned tubes
Chem. Eng. Progr. Symp. Ser., 59 (41) (1963), pp. 1-10
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bubelis et al., 2016
Bubelis E., Jaeger, W., Bandini, G., Alemberti, A., Palmero, M., 2016. Assessment of the enhanced DHRS configuration for MYRRHA reactor. Nucl. Eng. Des. 307, 181–187. doi:10.10.16//j.nucengdes.2016.07.017.
Google Scholar
Davis, 2006
Davis, C.B., 2006. Applicability of RELAP5-3D for thermal-hydraulic analyses of a sodium-cooled actinide burner test reactor, INL/EXT-06-11518.
Google Scholar
Del Nevo and Martelli, 2015
Del Nevo, A. and Martelli, E., 2015. Qualification of a RELAP5-3D© system code nodalization of EBR-II, NURETH-16, Chicago, II, 3071–3084.
Google Scholar
Fletcher and Schultz, 1995
Fletcher, C.D., Schultz, R.R., 1995. RELAP5/MOD3 code manual, NUREG/CR-5535, INEL-95/0174.
Google Scholar
Gardner, 1945
K.A. Gardner
Efficiency of extended surface
Trans. ASME, 67 (1945), pp. 621-631
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Greene et al., 2010
Greene, S.R., Gehin, J.C., Holcomb, D.E., Carbajo, J.J., Ilas, D., Cisneros, A.T., Varma, V.K., Corwin, W.R., Wilson, D.F., Yoder Jr., G.L., Qualls, A.L., Peretz, F.J., Flanagan, G.F., Clayton, D.A., Bradley, E.C., Bell, G.L., Hunn, J.D., Pappano, P.J., Cetiner, M.S., 2010. Pre-conceptual design of a fluoride-salt-cooled small modular advanced high-temperature reactor (SmAHTR), ORNL/TM-2010/199.
Google Scholar
IAEA, 2013
IAEA, 2013. Benchmark analysis on the natural circulation test performed during the PHENIX end-of-life experiments, IAEA-TECDOC-1703, ISBN 978-92-0-139610-5.
Google Scholar
IAEA, 2017
IAEA, 2017. Benchmark analysis of EBR-II shutdown heat removal tests, IAEA-TECDOC-1819, ISBN 978-92-0-105517-0.
Google Scholar
Jameson, 1945
S.L. Jameson
Tubing spacing in finned tube banks
Trans. ASME, 67 (1945), pp. 633-642
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Mochizuki, 2007
H. Mochizuki
Validation of NETFLOW code using plant data of sodium cooled reactor and facility
Nucl. Eng. Des., 237 (2007) (2007), pp. 87-93
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Mochizuki and Takano, 2009
H. Mochizuki, M. Takano
Heat transfer in heat exchangers of sodium cooled fast reactor systems
Nucl. Eng. Des., 239 (2009), pp. 295-307, 10.1016/j.nucengdes.2008.10.013
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ohtaki et al., 1995
Ohtaki, A., Miyakawa, A., Nakai, S., 1995. Development of plant dynamics analysis code Super-COPD – Validation by Monju functional test -, PNC TN9410 95-060 (in Japanese).
Google Scholar
RELAP5-3D© Code Development Team, 2012
RELAP5-3D© Code Development Team, 2012. RELAP5-3D© Code Manual Volume I: Code structure, system models and solution methods, INEEL-EXT-98-00834 Revision 4.0, http://www4vip.inl.gov/relap5/r5manuals/ver_4_0/vol-1.pdf.
Google Scholar
Riemke et al., 2009
Riemke, R.A., Davis, C.B., Schultz, RA.R., 2009. Recent hydrodynamics improvements to the RELAP5-3D code. Proc. Of the 17th Int. Conf. on Nucl. Eng., ICONE17-75380, 1–5.
Google Scholar
Rimpault et al., 2002
G. Rimpault, D. Plisson, J. Tommasi, R. Jacqmin, J.-M. Rieunier, D. Verrier, D. Biron
The ERANOS code and data system for fast reactor neutronic analyses
Proceedings of the International Conference on the New Frontiers of Nuclear Technology (PHYSOR’02), Korea, Seoul, South (2002)
Google Scholar
Sato et al., 2014
H. Sato, H. Ohashi, S. Nakagawa, Y. Tachibana, K. Kunitomi
Validation and application of thermal hydraulic system code for analysis of helically coiled heat exchanger in high-temperature environment
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 51 (11–12) (2014), pp. 1324-1335, 10.1080/00223131.2014.928605
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Suzuki and Mochizuki, 2016
D. Suzuki, H. Mochizuki
Thermal hydraulic analysis of air cooled finned heat transfer tubes
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 95 (2016), pp. 1-11, 10.1016/j.anucene.2016.04.033
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tabadar et al., 2018
Z. Tabadar, S. Aghajanpour, M. Jabbari, M. Khaleghi, M. Hashemi-Tilehnoee
Thermal-hydraulic analysis of VVER-1000 residual heat removal system using RELAP5 code, an evaluation at the boundary of reactor repair mode
Alexandria Eng. J., 57 (2018), pp. 1249-1259
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Van Rooijen and Mochizuki, 2015
Van Rooijen, W.F.G. and Mochizuki, H., 2015. Analysis of the EBR-II SHRT-45R unprotected loss of flow experiment with ERANOS and RELAP. Sci. Technol. Nucl. Install., Article ID 832721, pp. 1–14. doi:10.1155/2015/832721.
Google Scholar