<title>Enhancement of convective-diffusion limited vaporization rates of fission products by metal fog formation</title>
<author>1,MichaelEpstein,2,Sung JinLee,3,Chan Y.Paik,4,PaoloFerroni,5,ChurlYoon</author>
<Affiliation>1,Consultant, 1118 3rd Street, Santa Monica, CA 90403, USA;2,Fauske & Associates, LLC, 16W070 83rd Street, Burr Ridge, IL 60527, USA;3,Westinghouse Electric Company, LLC, 1000 Westinghouse Drive, Cranberry Township, PA 16066, USA;4,Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, 111 Daedeok-daero 989beon-gil, Deogjin-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, South Korea</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107666</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454920303649</URL>
Enhancement of convective-diffusion limited vaporization rates of fission products by metal fog formation
MichaelEpstein,Sung JinLee,Chan Y.Paik,PaoloFerroni,ChurlYoon
Consultant, 1118 3rd Street, Santa Monica, CA 90403, USA
Fauske & Associates, LLC, 16W070 83rd Street, Burr Ridge, IL 60527, USA
Westinghouse Electric Company, LLC, 1000 Westinghouse Drive, Cranberry Township, PA 16066, USA
Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, 111 Daedeok-daero 989beon-gil, Deogjin-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, South Korea
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Enhancement of fission product evaporation due to metal fog formation is analyzed.
Predicted fission product evaporation rate in liquid metal is compared with data.
There is a paucity of experimental data on fission product evaporation rates.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Prediction of the rate of fission product vaporization from a liquid metal pool to an overlying cover gas is important to both operational and safety (source term) considerations of fast reactors. The fission product vaporization rate can be strongly influenced (enhanced) by the simultaneous presence of a metal fog in the cover gas boundary layer just above the surface of the metal pool. The metal fog droplets can scavenge fission product vapor and thermophoretically drift away from the metal pool, carrying their inventory of scavenged fission products. An algebraic model for predicting the rate of release of fission products from liquid metals to the overlying cover gas is presented here based on the notion that the fission product release rate is insensitive to the details of the metal fog droplet size distribution – a notion suggested by a simple one-dimensional stagnant film model of fission product scavenging by metal fog droplets in the cover gas boundary layer; and that leads to the conclusion that, for sufficiently lean metal fog droplet concentrations, the fission product vaporization rate is limited by the metal vaporization rate rather than the scavenging “power” of the metal fog droplets. The metal vaporization rate which drives the fission product release rate is itself enhanced by the conversion of metal vapor to metal fog in the cover gas boundary layer. Available models for prediction of the enhanced metal evaporation in the presence of “fogging” are reviewed here and modified to extend their range of applicability up to the boiling point of the metal. The facility with which the model of fission product release can be used for absolute predictions and comparison with available data is illustrated for the case of NaI release from liquid sodium into argon and nitrogen atmospheres. An available NaI released mass measurement and the model show that because of metal fogging fission product vaporization rates can exceed the rates predicted by conventional mass transfer theory by as much as an order of magnitude. Finally, the application of the fission product vaporization rate model, which incorporates both the liquid metal pool and cover gas resistances to mass transport, is used to calculate the “escaping strengths” of a number of important fission products from liquid sodium, lead, and lead-bismuth eutectic pools.
Keywords:Metal-cooled fast reactors;Source term;Fission products;Fog formation;Enhanced vaporization
onductivity
<Section>1. Introduction and outline of paper</Section>
Fission product vaporization from liquid metal matters a great deal to the risks associated with fast nuclear reactor accidents. Most of the fission product species of concern are known to be present in liquid sodium as dissolved species that exert vapor pressures at the liquid sodium surface. Thus the evaporation release of these species from liquid sodium to the overlying inert cover gas will occur. Other liquid metal coolants that are being considered for future fast reactors are lead and lead–bismuth eutectics. The available thermochemical data for a number of fission products in heavy liquid metal coolants reveal that they can escape the heavy metals by evaporation to the inert cover gas.
If the temperature of the inert cover gas is well below that of the liquid metal, conventional mass transfer theory cannot by itself be used to predict the fission product vaporization rate. This is because the molten metal is also vaporizing into the inert gas and condensing to form a metal fog within the boundary layer above the metal surface. Since the nucleation of the metal micro-drops occurs at the expense of the parent metal vapor, the metal vapor concentration gradient at the vaporizing surface is increased and the metal vaporization rate is enhanced above that predicted by conventional mass transfer theory. The fission product species gas (vapor) within the boundary layer is soluble in the new-born-pure-metal-micro-drops. Therefore the vaporization rate of the fission products is strongly influenced by the simultaneous presence of metal fog since the fog droplets can scavenge fission product vapor. As a result conventional mass transfer theory underestimates the fission product release rate by as much as an order of magnitude.
It might appear that for the interacting mechanisms of metal droplet nucleation and fission product vapor scavenging by the droplets, recourse must be made to detailed numerical solutions of the conservation equations coupled to the laws of condensation kinetics, metal fog droplet growth and fission product absorption by the metal droplets. However, the problems of enhanced metal (liquid) vaporization and enhanced fission product vaporization have been reduced to quite tractable algebraic forms which do not rely on information on metal drop size distribution.
Hills and Szekely (1969) first proposed that liquid evaporation rates are enhanced by vapor condensation close to the evaporating surface and they derived a simple algebraic model to predict the enhancement based on equilibrium between the vapor and its condensed phase. Turkdogan (1964) introduced the notion of a critical supersaturation level to analytically treat and explain nonequilibrium-fog-formation enhanced evaporation of iron-nickel alloys into helium (Turkdogan and Mills, 1964). This so-called “critical supersaturation model” (CSM) was analytically reformulated by Rosner (1967) who derived a simple expression for the liquid evaporation rate in terms of a single parameter implicitly containing condensation kinetics. The validity of the CSM was examined and confirmed by Epstein and Rosner (1970) by comparing its predictions with those of a numerical solution of the one-dimensional conservation equations using a stagnant film model of the thermal boundary layer, but including expressions for nucleation kinetics and droplet growth. Their investigation was limited to binary gas mixtures with both mixture constituents of equal molecular weights. Hayashi et al. (1976) reported good agreement between the CSM and their measurements of the evaporation rate of solid naphthalene into a laminar flow of cold gas.
To the best of the present authors' knowledge, only two studies of fission product vaporization from liquid metal pools have been reported. Brockmeier et al. (1994) expressed the release of fission products from liquid sodium in terms of a retention factor (RF) ratio. An examination of their expression for the RF, presented without derivation, suggests that they assumed that the fission product evaporation enhancement is proportional to the sodium evaporation enhancement. Measured RF values for sodium iodide (NaI) and cesium (Cs) were reported but unfortunately the measured fission product release rates that the RF values were based on were not reported. The mass of NaI released from liquid sodium was obtained from a single experiment performed by Nishimura et al. (1996). In the experiment mass transport was governed by natural convection and during the course of the experiment the temperature of the sodium pool gradually increased. Nishimura et al. assumed that the metal-fog-formation-induced enhancement of NaI evaporation is equal to that of liquid sodium and this idea yielded good agreement with their experimental result.
Three models of liquid metal evaporation are reviewed in Section 2.0: the conventional mass transfer model and two models of fog-formation-enhanced metal vaporization. The latter two models are modified to permit their application up to the boiling point of the metal and to allow for inert gas/metal vapor mixtures with disparate molecular weights. The key assumptions underlying the models are presented in Section 2.1. The conventional mass transfer model for the hypothetical case of no fog formation is briefly discussed in Section 2.2. A general analysis of metal evaporation rate enhancement is presented in Section 2.3. The assumptions underlying the previous treatments, namely negligible interfacial mass velocity (i.e., negligible Stefan flow in Hills and Szekely, 1969, Turkdogan, 1964; and Rosner, 1967) and equal molecular weight binary mixtures (Epstein and Rosner, 1970), are relaxed and an expression for the metal evaporation rate is derived in which the effects of equilibrium or nonequilibrium fog formation are contained in a single derivative term equal to the ratio of the temperature-to-vapor mass fraction gradients at the vaporizing metal surface. Starting with this equation, the equations for metal evaporation with simultaneous equilibrium metal fog formation and nonequilibrium metal fog formation are derived in 2.4 Metal evaporation flux enhancement by equilibrium condensation, 2.5 Metal evaporation flux enhanced by nonequilibrium fog formation, respectively. The conditions for the onset of fog formation are presented in Section 2.6. Comparisons of the predicted metal vaporization rates with experimental data on liquid sodium evaporation are provided in Section 2.7. Also in Section 2.7, numerical results are displayed graphically for fog-formation-enhanced liquid lead evaporation, covering the most important ranges of lead and inert cover gas temperatures.
The conventional model of fission product evaporation with no metal fog formation is presented in Section 3.1. In Section 3.2 a simple model of fission product evaporation with fog formation is pursued in which the fog droplet size and number density are introduced as known constant parameters. The sole purpose of this “parametric model” is to gain a feeling for the conditions that allow one to ignore the metal fog droplet size distribution in formulating models for the fission product evaporation rate. The parametric model indicates that if the metal fog is sufficiently dilute, fission product vaporization models that side-step descriptions of the droplet size distribution are justified. An argument for dilute metal fog behavior is presented (Section 3.2) and three models for fission product evaporation enhanced by dilute metal fog formation are discussed in Section 3.3. Two of these models are new. The model that yields the largest (conservative) fission product evaporation rates is selected for computations; it is compared with the RF measurements reported by Brockmeier et al. (1994) for NaI and with the measured released mass of NaI reported by Nishimura et al. (1996). The model accounts for the resistance due to fission product transport inside the molten metal.
The principal theoretical conclusions and their reactor safety implications together with recommendations for future work are given in Section 4, which completes the present paper.
Appendix A discusses physical properties of metal vapor/cover gas mixture components and Henry's law constants for various radionuclides dissolved in liquid sodium and lead. Appendix B demonstrates that fog droplets do not settle back to the vaporizing metal surface due to thermophoretic force.
<Section>2. Metal pool evaporation rate models</Section>
2.1. Assumptions
To simplify the equations and their numerical evaluation without sacrificing too much with respect to accuracy, the following assumptions are made:
@(1)
The mass fraction (or vapor pressure) of the metal vapor at the vaporizing metal surface, Yv,w, is equal to the equilibrium mass fraction (or vapor pressure) at the surface temperature Tw.
@(2)
The local thermo-physical properties of the vapor/inert gas mixture (thermal conductivity, viscosity, density, binary diffusion coefficient, specific heat) can be replaced by constant values evaluated at the arithmetic mean temperature T¯ = 1/2 (Tw + T∞) and arithmetic mean metal vapor volume fraction x¯v=1/2(xv,w+xv,∞) within the boundary layer.
@(3)
The difference between the metal pool bulk temperature and the metal surface temperature, Tf,∞ − Tw, is small and can be ignored for the purpose of calculating metal pool evaporation rates.
@(4)
The equilibrium vapor pressure relation is well represented by the Clausius-Clapeyron equation where the latent heat of metal vaporization, hfv, may be considered constant.
@(5)
To incorporate the induced velocity effect (Stefan flow) into the equations, the boundary layer (see Assumption 9) is represented by an equivalent otherwise stagnant film which comprises the entire resistance to heat and mass transfer.
@(6)
The Lewis number, Le, of the metal vapor/inert atmosphere mixture is unity.
@(7)
The fog droplets are not directed downward towards the vaporizing liquid metal surface but, instead, move upward and eventually leave the boundary layer and enter the bulk inert gas atmosphere. The upward droplet motion is due mainly to thermophoretic transport, and to a lesser extent by the Stefan flow.
@(8)
A critical metal vapor pressure Pv,crit can be defined above which nonequilibrium fog formation (homogeneous nucleation) is inevitable and the critical supersaturation ratio scrit = Pv,crit/Pv,eq can be expressed by a relation of the functional form ln(scrit) = (N/T)ω where N and ω are constants.1
@(9)
The temperature difference between the metal pool and the overlying atmosphere is sufficiently high so that turbulent free-convective boundary layer flow exists on both sides of the vaporizing metal surface.
@(10)
The small effect of fog droplet solidification (if it occurs) heat release on the prevailing temperature gradient in the boundary layer is neglected.
Assumptions (1), (2), (4), (5) and (6) have proved extremely useful and have provided fairly accurate predictions in mass transfer and combustion theory and have been discussed extensively in the literature. From the results of the metal pool heat transfer analysis presented later on, the maximum value of Tf,∞ − Tw is found to be at most 6.0 K, therefore validating Assumption (3). Assumptions (7), (8) are best discussed later on (see Appendix B and Section 2.5). Assumption (9) describes the expected convection flow patterns within the inert cover gas/liquid metal interfacial region at the top of the fast reactor vessel. However, laboratory experiments have been reported where mass transport above vaporizing liquid sodium is governed by forced convection rather than free convection and this gas-side flow pattern is also modeled (see Section 2.7).
2.2. Conventional metal pool evaporation model (No metal fog formation)
The metal pool evaporation rate in the absence of fog formation may be predicted by taking advantage of the fact that the equations describing isothermal mass transfer across the boundary layer are similar to those describing heat transfer across the boundary layer (i.e., the heat/mass transfer analogy). The heat flux q̇″ from the surface of the metal pool to the overlying atmosphere in turbulent free convection is well represented by the Katsaros et al. (1977) correlation:
(1)q̇″=0.156kmixg(ρmix,∞-ρmix,w)μmixαmix1/3(Tw-T∞)
where, in accord with the ideal gas law, the metal vapor/inert gas atmosphere mixture densities at the metal surface and in the bulk flow outside the boundary layer are
(2)ρmix,w=PRTw1-Yv,wMg+Yv,wMv-1=PMmix,wRTw
(3)ρmix,∞=PRT∞1-Yv,∞Mg+Yv,∞Mv-1=PMmix,∞RT∞
The density difference ρmix,∞ − ρmix,w is due to both temperature and metal vapor concentration differences across the natural convection boundary layer above the metal pool. In the case of a sodium pool, the sodium vapor is less dense than the inert gas (argon or nitrogen) and the effects due to temperature and sodium vapor concentration are additive in the sense that they both act to increase this density difference. This is not true for a lead pool where Mv ≫ Mg, although ρmix,∞ − ρmix,w remains positive up to a relatively high lead pool temperature (1950 K).
From the heat/mass transfer analogy (Bird et al., 1960), Eq. (1) is readily converted to a metal evaporation rate correlation
(4)ṁvn,c″=0.156ρmixDv-gg(ρmix,∞-ρmix,w)μmixDv-g1/3ln(1+Bnc)
where
(5a)Bnc=Yv,w-Yv,∞1-Yv,w
(5b)ρmix=PRTw+T∞)21-Yv,w+Yv,∞2Mg+Yv,w+Yv,∞2Mv
The term ln (1 + Bnc) is derived from the stagnant film model of the boundary layer and is known to accurately account for Stefan flow that appears within the boundary layer as Yv,w → 1.0. Fog formation in the boundary layer will enhance metal vaporization rates above those predicted with Eq. (4). In this respect, Eq. (4) leads to the smallest metal convection–diffusion flux away from the pool surface.
2.3. Metal evaporation flux enhancement by fog formation
Hills and Szekely, 1969, Epstein and Rosner, 1970 derived expressions for liquid vaporization enhancement when equilibrium or nonequilibrium governs the fog formation process. However, the former theory was limited to small vapor mass fractions and the latter theory was limited to cases where the molecular weights of the mixture components are nearly equal (Mv ≃ Mg). In this subsection both of these assumptions are simultaneously relaxed. The derivation of the expression for the vaporization flux enhancement proceeds up to the point where the mechanism of condensation, equilibrium or nonequilibrium, must be introduced. Equilibrium and nonequilibrium fog formation is treated in 2.4 Metal evaporation flux enhancement by equilibrium condensation, 2.5 Metal evaporation flux enhanced by nonequilibrium fog formation, respectively. The derivation begins by writing the boundary layer conservation equations for heat and mass transfer. Invoking the Lewis number unity approximation and eliminating the local rate of fog production between the two conservation equations, it is found that the group T + hfvYv/cp,v obeys a conservation equation of exactly the same form as those governing heat and/or mass transfer in non-condensing environments. This leads to the following similarity relation (Hills and Szekely, 1969, Epstein and Rosner, 1970)
(6)T+hfvcp,vYv-Tw+hfvcp,vYv,wT∞+hfvcp,vYv,∞-Tw+hfvcp,vYv,w=Yv,nc-Yv,wYv,∞-Yv,w
where Yv,nc is the local metal vapor mass fraction in the absence of fog formation, but with all mass transfer conditions (including the total liquid vaporization mass flux ṁv″) being the same as in the presence of fog formation.
In order to include the effects of Stefan flow, the simple geometry of the fog-free stagnant film model of the boundary layer is used within which the vapor mass fraction profile is
(7)Yv,nc-Yv,wYv,∞-Yv,w=expṁv″zρmixDv-g-1expṁv″δρmixDv-g-1
where δ is the thickness of the stagnant film and z is vertical distance measured from the surface of the metal pool (0 < z < δ). In the stagnant film model the total mass flux ṁv″ is equal to the vaporization rate. At the vaporizing surface the net flux of inert gas is zero and Fick's law yields the following boundary condition
(8)ṁv″=-ρmixDv-g∂Yv∂zz=01-Yv,w
Inserting Eq. (7) into the right-hand side of Eq. (6), differentiating the result with respect to z, and evaluating all the local derivatives at the vaporizing metal surface gives
(9)∂T∂Yvz=0+hfvcp,v∂Yv∂zz=0T∞+hfvcp,vYv,∞-Tw+hfvcp,vYv,w=ṁv″ρmixDv-gexpṁv″δρmixDv-g-1
where the chain rule was used to eliminate (∂T/∂z)z=0 in favor of (∂T/∂Yv)z=0. Eliminating (∂Yv/∂z)z=0 between Eqs. (8), (9), the enhanced evaporation rate is obtained in the form
(10)ṁv″δρmixDv-g=ln(1+B)
where B is a metal vapor mass transfer number in the presence of fog formation; it is defined as
(11)B=Tw-T∞+hfvcp,v(Yv,w-Yv,∞)∂T∂Yvz=0(1-Yv,w)+hfvcp,v(1-Yv,w)
In a stagnant film with no fog formation:
(12)ṁv,nc″δρmixDv-g=ln(1+Bnc)
where Bnc is given by Eq. (5). Dividing Eq. (10) by Eq. (12) yields the vaporization flux enhancement
(13)ṁv″ṁv,nc″=ln(1+B)ln(1+Bnc)
Recapitulating, the stagnant film model was used to incorporate Stefan flow into the vaporization equation. When the stagnant film model is used for this purpose it is known to accurately describe mass transfer rates in real boundary layers. Accordingly, ṁv,nc″ in Eq. (13) may be represented by Eq. (4), so that
(14)ṁv″=0.156ρmixDv-gg(ρmix,∞-ρmix,w)μmixDv-g1/3ln(1+B)
The effects of equilibrium or nonequilibrium fog formation are incorporated in the derivative (∂T/∂Yv)z=0 in Eq. (11) for B. This derivative has its simplest form when the vapor is in equilibrium with the fog droplets.
2.4. Metal evaporation flux enhancement by equilibrium condensation
When sufficient particles are present in the gas which can serve as nuclei for fog formation, the level of metal vapor phase supersaturation can be regarded as negligibly small. Then, to good approximation, the vapor pressure throughout the boundary layer is dictated by the Clausius-Clapeyron equation:
(15)Pv,eq=Cexp-hfvMvRT
Differentiating Eq. (15) with respect to T and replacing Pv,eq with the metal vapor volume fraction xv,eq = Pv,eq/P gives
(16)dxv,eqdT=hfvMvxv,eqRT2
Epstein and Rosner (1970) limited their analysis to Mg ≃ Mv and replaced xv,eq with Yv,eq in Eq. (16). For metal vapor/inert gas mixtures with disparate molecular weights xv,eq is related to Yv,eq by
(17)xv,eq=Yv,eqMvMg(1-Yv,eq)+Yv,eq
and
(18)1xv,eqdxv,eqdT=11+MgMv-1Yv,eqdYv,eqdT1Yv,eq
Eliminating dxv,eq/dT between Eqs. (16), (18) and solving the result for dT/dYv,eq:
(19)dTdYv,eq=RT2hfvMvYv,eq11+MgMv-1Yv,eq
Evaluating Eq. (19) at the vaporizing metal surface where T = Tw and Yv,eq(Tw) = Yv,w and substituting the result into Eq. (11) gives the metal vapor mass transport number in the presence of equilibrium fog formation:
(20)Beq=Tw-T∞+hfvcp,v(Yv,w-Yv,∞)RTw2(1-Yv,w)hfvMvYv,w1+MgMv-1Yv,w+hfvcp,v(1-Yv,w)
Thus from Eq. (13) with B = Beq the maximum possible liquid vaporization enhancement (due to equilibrium fog formation) is
(21)ṁv,eq″ṁv,nc″=ln(1+Beq)ln(1+Bnc)
It is worth noting that Eq. (21), together with Eq. (20), is the most general closed form expression derived to date for vaporization enhancement by equilibrium fog formation. For the particular case Mv = Mg, the Epstein and Rosner (1970) expression is recovered, and for Yv,w ≪ 1, the expression of Hills and Szekely (1969) is recovered.
2.5. Metal evaporation flux enhanced by nonequilibrium fog formation
Here a clean inert gas/metal vapor mixture is considered, that is the complete absence of foreign nuclei (for example dust) is assumed. Fog formation does not occur unless a critical metal vapor supersaturation level is achieved locally. A formula (correlation) can be constructed for the critical supersaturation ratio,
(22)scrit=Pv,critPv,eq
as a function of temperature. This is accomplished by exploiting the classical theory of homogeneous nucleation from the vapor which provides an expression for the number of droplets nucleated per unit time per unit volume, J(s,T), as a function of the local supersaturation s = Pv/Pv,eq and local temperature T. The very sensitive functional relationship between J and s is such that an uncertainty in many orders of magnitude in the value of J has relatively little effect on the corresponding value of s. For example, applying the well-known vapor phase self-nucleation expression of Frenkel (1946) to sodium vapor at 820 K, the predicted critical supersaturation ratio is s = 4.06 for a selected J = 1012 nuclei m−3 s−1. If, instead, the nucleation rate selected is J = 1016 nuclei m−3 s−1, the predicted critical supersaturation is scrit = 4.79. This property of the nucleation rate expression has led to the idea of a critical supersaturation (Eq. (22)) above which nucleation is inevitable and which can be estimated from classical nucleation expressions (Turkdogan, 1964).
Epstein and Rosner (1970) combined the steady one-dimensional conservation equations with the Frenkel expression for homogeneous nucleation kinetics and with expressions for droplet growth. Numerical solutions of these equations were carried out for methyl alcohol evaporation/fog formation and confirmed the accuracy of the critical supersaturation approach, provided that scrit predictions are based on nucleation rates in the range 1016 < J < 1023 nuclei m−3 s−1. Critical supersaturation s versus T data obtained by substituting an assumed J into Frenkel's equation can be correlated reasonably well by the logarithmic form (Epstein and Rosner, 1970)
(23)lnscrit=NTω
where N and ω are curve fitting constants. For the present fast reactor application scrit versus T numerical data for sodium and lead for a choice J = 1016 nuclei m−3 s−1 can be represented as (Epstein and Rosner, 1970)
(24)Na:lnscrit=987.2T2.3394,500<T<1100K
(25)Pb:lnscrit=2001T2.1522,450<T<1150K
Since the critical supersaturation ratio is now known for each temperature T(z) one can construct the critical vapor pressure profile Pv,crit(z) required for fog formation (see Eqs. (15), (23)):
(26)Pv,crit=Cexp-hfvMvRT+NTω
Fig. 1 displays the temperature and critical vapor pressure profiles just above the surface of the metal pool. The vaporizing surface is located at z = 0, and at z = zn fog formation first occurs. In the fog-free region 0 < z < zn the vapor pressure profile Pv(z) obeys the source-free conservation equations. In the critical supersaturation model the vapor pressure profile in the fog zone is Pv,crit(z). At location z = zn the following two boundary conditions are imposed on these vapor pressure profiles:
(27)Pv(zn)=Pv,crit(zn)
(28)∂Pv∂zz=zn=∂Pv,crit∂zz=zn
Fig. 1. Temperature and metal vapor pressure profiles illustrating the tangency condition at the onset of nonequilibrium metal fog formation.
The above equations, often referred to as the “tangency condition”, were first proposed by Turkdogan (1964). These equations force the vapor pressure profile between the vaporizing surface and the fog zone to smoothly join the vapor pressure profile within the fog zone, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
In the fog-free zone (0 < z < zn) the heat/mass transfer analogy (for a Le = 1.0 gas/vapor mixture) can be expressed as
(29)Yv-Yv,nYv,w-Yv,n=T-TnTw-Tn
where Yv,n = Yv(zn) and Tn = T(zn). Also, at z = zn one may write the identity
(30)xv,n=Pv,crit(zn)P=Yv,nMvMg(1-Yv,n)+Yv,n
Differentiating Eqs. (26), (29) with respect to T to get ∂Pv,crit/∂T, evaluating the derivatives at z = zn, and setting the results equal to one another yields
(31)MgPMvPv,crit,nhfvMvRTn2-ωNNTnω+1∂T∂Yvz=zn=1Yv,n2
Differentiating both sides of Eq. (29) with respect to T:
(32)∂T∂Yv=Tw-TnYv,w-Yv,n
and inserting this result into Eq. (31):
(33)MgP(Tw-Tn)MvPv,crit,nhfvMvRTn2-ωNNTnω+1=Yv,w-Yv,nYv,n2
Finally, Yv,n is related to Pv,crit,n = Pv,crit(Tn) via the identity
(34)Yv,n=xv,nMgMv-MgMv-1xv,n=Pv,crit(Tn)PMgMv-MgMv-1Pv,crit(Tn)P
The numerical solution of Eq. (33), together with Eqs. (26), (33), provides the temperature Tn and the vapor mass fraction Yn at the onset of nucleation, as a function of properties evaluated at the vaporizing surface and as a function of nonequilibrium fog formation kinetics embedded in the parameters ω and N. One can now immediately write the expression for the metal vapor mass transfer number, Bnoneq, when nonequilibrium (homogeneous nucleation) governs the fog formation process by simply substituting Eq. (32) for (∂T/∂Yv)z=0 into the general equation for B given by Eq. (11):
(35)Bnoneq=Tw-T∞+hfvcp,v(Yv,w-Yv,∞)Tw-TnYv,w-Yv,n(1-Yv,w)+hfvcp,v(1-Yv,w)
It follows from Eq. (13) that the metal evaporation flux, ṁv,noneq″, when nonequilibrium fog formation governs is
(36)ṁv,noneq″ṁv,nc″=ln(1+Bnoneq)ln(1+Bnc)
The theory presented in the foregoing for ṁv,noneq'' reduces to that of Epstein and Rosner (1970) for the specific case Mv ≃ Mg.
2.6. Conditions for onset of fog formation
The incipient fog formation condition when equilibrium governs the fog formation process is simply (see Eq. (21))
(37)Beq⩾Bnc
From Eqs. (5a) and (20), Eq. (37) transforms to
(38)Tw-T∞⩾RTw2hfvMv1-Yv,∞Yv,w1+MgMv-1Yv,w;equilibrium
It can be shown that Eq. (38) is equivalent to the condition that the slope of the actual metal vapor pressure profile is less than the slope of the equilibrium metal vapor pressure profile at the evaporating surface of the metal pool (namely, dPv/dz ≤ dPv,eq/dz at z = 0). The right-hand side of Eq. (38) for the liquid sodium/argon system with liquid surface temperature Tw = 800 K and Yv,∞ = 0 indicates that fog formation is possible for argon gas “subcoolings” Tw − T∞ ≥ 52 K. Replacing sodium with liquid lead coolant, one finds that lead misting is possible if Tw − T∞ ≥ 29 K.
Nonequilibrium fog formation occurs when (see Eq. (36))
(39)Bnoneq⩾Bnc
or, from Eqs. (5a) and (35),
(40)Tw-T∞⩾(Tw-Tn)Yv,w-Yv,∞Yv,w-Yv,n;nonequilibrium
The quantities Tn and Yv,n are obtained by solving Eqs. (32), (33). Typically homogeneous nucleation of sodium vapor to a fog requires a sodium surface-to-argon gas temperature difference of approximately Tw − T∞ >~ 200 °C. The required molten lead surface-to-gas temperature difference for homogeneous nucleation of lead vapor is approximately 550 K.
2.7. Comparison with experiments and numerical results
Sauter and Schutz (1983) measured sodium evaporation rates into an overlying argon gas atmosphere undergoing free convection. Similar experiments were performed by Ishiguro et al. (1974). The data from these two studies are compared with predicted values of ṁv,nc″,ṁv,eq″andṁv,noneq″ in Fig. 2, Fig. 3. The measured evaporation rates fall between the predicted bounds ṁv,noneq″andṁv,eq″. Measured evaporation rates of molten iron-nickel alloy spheres also fall between these predicted bounds (Turkdogan and Mills, 1964, Turkdogan, 1964; and Rosner, 1967). Obviously, some degree of supersaturation, between scrit for homogeneous nucleation and s = 1 for equilibrium, was necessary for fog formation in all of these experiments. The need for the analytical methods discussed earlier is evident from the fact that in Fig. 2, Fig. 3 ṁv,eq″ can exceed ṁv,nc″ by more than a factor of five and as much as an order of magnitude.
Fig. 2. Comparison of measured sodium evaporation rates (Sauter and Schutz, 1983) into an overlying argon gas atmosphere undergoing free convection with predicted values.
Fig. 3. Comparison of measured sodium evaporation rates (Ishiguro et al., 1974) into an overlying argon gas atmosphere undergoing free convection with predicted values.
As part of the Nishimura et al. (1996) experimental investigation of the free-convection-controlled release of NaI fission product from liquid sodium into nitrogen gas, the total amount of sodium evaporated was measured. In their test the bulk gas temperature T∞ and the sodium pool temperature Tw drifted upwards in close accord with the linear temperature time relations
(41)Tw=601+6.5×10-2t(K,0⩽t⩽1800s)
(42)T∞=331+1.11×10-2t(K,0⩽t⩽1800s)
Therefore, to predict the total sodium mass evaporated, mv, Eqs. (4), (21), (35) were converted to ordinary differential equations:
(43)dmv,ncdt=0.156AρmixDv-gg(ρmix,∞-ρmix,w)μmixDv-g1/3ln(1+Bnc)
(44)dmv,eqdt=Aln(1+Beq)ln(1+Bnc)ṁv,nc″
(45)dmv,noneqdt=Aln(1+Bnoneq)ln(1+Bnc)ṁv,nc″
where A (=0.0754 m2) is the surface area of the metal pool in the Nishimura et al. experiment. In Eqs. (39), (40), ṁv,nc″ is given by Eq. (4). The measurements are compared with the predicted results in Table 1. The measured released mass of 3.74 g is just above the predicted mass mv,eq = 3.57 g based on equilibrium fog formation. Apparently the nitrogen gas in the experiment contained enough foreign nuclei to achieve local thermodynamic equilibrium in the boundary layer. If fog formation is ignored, the sodium mass evaporated is underestimated by about a factor of 8.5.
Table 1. Comparison of Measured (Nishimura et al., 1996) Total Sodium Mass Evaporated with Predicted Mass (in grams).
Symbol	Predictions and Measured
mv,eq	3.57
mv (measured)	3.74
mv,noneq	0.606
mv,nc	0.415
Measurements of sodium evaporation rates into a laminar flow of argon gas were reported by Kumada et al. (1976). In this case the appropriate expression for ṁv,nc″ follows from the expression for the average heat flux from an isothermal flat plate submerged in a laminar flow; namely,
(46)q̇″=0.664kmixLuLνmix1/2νmixαmix1/3(Tw-T∞)
where u is the argon gas velocity and L (=0.14 m) is the length of the plate (sodium pool) in the direction of flow. The corresponding mass transfer equation from the heat/mass transfer analogy is
(47)ṁv,nc″=0.664ρmixDv-gLuLνmix1/2νmixDv-g1/3ln(1+Bnc)
Eq. (47) and Eqs. (21), (35) with ṁv,nc″ given by Eq. (47) are compared with the data of Kumada et al. in Fig. 4. The test parameters Tw, T∞ and u varied from test to test, so that the comparisons in Fig. 4 are made test by test and for the sake of clarity only eleven of the twenty one data points obtained by Kumada et al. are plotted in Fig. 4. The figure reveals that the measured vaporization rates fall between the predicted bounds ṁv,noneq″andṁv,eq″ when homogeneous nucleation is possible, which requires Tw - T∞ >~ 210 K, and fall between the predicted bounds ṁv,nc″andṁv,eq″ when homogeneous nucleation is not possible (Tw − T∞ <~ 210 K). All of the data points that have been left out of Fig. 4 fall between these bounds. Note that at Tw − T∞ = 40 K the predicted vaporization rates ṁv,eq″andṁv,nc″ are equal to one another. This is just another form of the fog onset condition that results in Eq. (38). Below Tw − T∞ = 40 K the boundary layer is fog free.
Fig. 4. Comparison of measured sodium evaporation rates (Kumada et al., 1976) into an overlying argon gas atmosphere undergoing laminar forced convection with predicted values (solid numerical data points).
Lead is currently being investigated as a coolant for fast reactors. Unfortunately, no experimental work has been reported on the evaporation rate of molten lead into a much colder gaseous medium. Predicted lead evaporation rates are compared with predicted sodium evaporation rates for equilibrium and nonequilibrium fog formation conditions in Fig. 5. The large difference in vaporization rates between liquid sodium and liquid lead is expected since the volatility of sodium is much greater than that of lead over the temperature range considered in Fig. 5. The models presented here are capable of predicting metal vaporization rates up to but not including the boiling point. The enhancement ratios ṁv,eq″/ṁv,nc″andṁv,noneq″/ṁv,nc″ for sodium decrease toward unity as the boiling point is approached. At such high liquid pool temperatures the latent heat release terms in Eq. (11) dominate the temperature difference term Tw − T∞ and the fog formation term (∂T/∂Yv)z=0, and the mass transfer number B reduces to Bnc for minimum vaporization.
Fig. 5. Predicted rates of evaporation of sodium (upper curves) and lead (lower curves) pools.
<Section>3. Fission product evaporation models</Section>
3.1. Conventional fission product evaporation model (No metal fog formation)
It is assumed here that metal evaporation into the overlying inert gas takes place but the metal does not condense in the boundary layer. Thus the upward diffusive/convective transport of the fission product gas occurs within a metal vapor/inert gas boundary layer. The model is restricted to systems in which the concentration of the fission product gas is very small with respect to the concentration of inert (host) gas, so that the contribution of the fission product gas to the metal vapor/inert gas physical properties can be neglected. It follows then from the heat/mass transfer analogy that the turbulent-free-convection-controlled mass flux evaporation rate of the fission product gas in the absence of metal fog formation is
(48)ṁfp,nc''=0.156ρmixDfp-mixg(ρmix,∞-ρmix,w)μmixDfp-mix1/3×ln(1+Bnc)Dv-g/Dfp-mix(1+Bnc)Dv-g/Dfp-mix-1(Yfp,w-Yfp,∞)
The second group in brackets in Eq. (48), derived from film theory assuming equal metal vapor and fission product gas film thicknesses even though Dv-g ≠ Dfp-mix, accounts for the effect of the metal-vaporization-induced Stefan flow on fission product evaporation. Eq. (48) serves as a benchmark to compare the enhanced evaporation rates against.
From Henry's law Yfp,w in Eq. (48) is related to the mass fraction yfp,w of the dissolved fission product gas on the liquid metal side of the evaporating phase boundary. Actually in Henry's law the equilibrium mole fractions of the fission product species on each side of the phase boundary are related to each other. But, since the fission product is a trace species, the mole fractions are linearly related to the corresponding mass fractions and one may write
(49)Yfp,w=KHMvPMmix,wyfp,w
To complete the expression for the fission product evaporation rate the limitation due to fission product transport through the liquid metal to the surface of the metal pool must be included in the model. To accomplish this, once again use is made of the heat/mass transfer analogy. The turbulent natural convection heat flux q̇″ from the bulk of the metal pool at temperature Tf,∞ to its surface at temperature Tw is
(50)q̇″=0.156kfgβf(Tf,∞-Tw)νfαf1/3(Tf,∞-Tw)
In this paper the temperature difference Tf,∞ − Tw is treated as a known parameter. In any specific application its estimation requires solving an energy balance written for the headspace geometry that contains the inert (cover) gas. The maximum Tf,∞ − Tw can be calculated by assuming black body thermal radiation off the surface of the metal pool:
(51)q̇″=σSBTw4
Setting Eq. (50) equal to Eq. (51) and solving the result for Tf,∞ − Tw:
(52)(Tf,∞-Tw)max=σSBTw40.156kf3/4νfαfgβf1/4
Consider liquid sodium at surface temperature Tw = 1000 K. The appropriate physical properties are: βf = 3.1 × 10−4 K−1, kf = 54.2 W m−1 K−1, νf = 2.32 × 10−7 m2 s−1, αf = 5.55 × 10−5 m2 s−1, and σSB = 5.67 × 10−8 W m−2 K−4 for the Stefan-Boltzmann constant. Inserting these estimates into Eq. (52) gives (Tf,∞ − Tw)max = 6.0 K. A somewhat higher value (Tf,∞ − Tw)max = 9.0 K is estimated for molten lead at Tw = 1000 K, but this value is still quite small compared to Tf,∞ and it is permissible to ignore the difference in estimating the metal vapor mass fraction Yv,w at the phase boundary (see Assumption 3 in Section 2.1).
The mass transfer analogy of Eq. (50) is
(53)ṁfp″=0.156ρfDfp-fgβf(Tf,∞-Tw)νfDfp-f1/3(yfp,∞-yfp,w)
Setting Eq. (48) equal to Eq. (53) and using Eq. (49) to eliminate yfp,w in Eq. (53) in favor of Yfp,w results in the following expression for the fission product mass fraction on the gas side of the phase boundary:
(54)Yfp,w=KHMvPMmix,wyfp,∞+γncYfp,∞1+γnc
where γnc is defined as
(55)γnc=KHMvρmixDfp-mixPMmix,wρfDfp-fνfDfp-fβfμmixDfp-mixρmix,∞-ρmix,wTf,∞-Tw1/3×ln(1+Bnc)Dv-g/Dfp-mix(1+Bnc)Dv-g/Dfp-mix-1
Eliminating Yfp,w between Eqs. (43), (49) results in the final expression for the fission product evaporation rate with no metal vapor condensation (fog formation):
(56)ṁfp,nc''=0.156ρmixDfp-mix1+γncg(ρmix,∞-ρmix,w)μmixDfp-mix1/3×ln(1+Bnc)Dv-g/Dfp-mix(1+Bnc)Dv-g/Dfp-mix-1KHMvPMmix,wyfp,∞-Yfp,∞
If γnc is small compared with unity, or equivalently, if KH is sufficiently small, ṁfp,nc″ is gas-side-controlled, and ṁfp,nc″ is given by Eq. (48) with Yfp,w = KHMvyfp,∞/(PMmix,w). On the other hand if γnc ≫ 1 (large KH), ṁfp,nc″ is molten metal-side-controlled, and ṁfp,nc″ is given by Eq. (53) with yfp,w = PMmix,wYfp,∞/(KHMv).
3.2. Parametric model of fission product evaporation with metal fog formation: effects of fog droplet size and number density
The initially pure metal micro-drops that comprise the fog in the gas boundary layer just above the metal pool provide an enormous surface area for the capture of the fission gas (and gaseous/volatile radionuclides in general), if present. That is, the metal fog drops can carry up to their equilibrium inventory of scavenged fission product and/or steepen the fission product gas concentration profile, thereby significantly increasing the fission product evaporation rate ṁfp″ above that predicted with Eq. (56) in the limit of gas-side control (γnc ≪ 1). More specifically, in the fog region metal drops are continuously nucleated, convected upward by Stefan flow and thermophoretic fog particle drift and replaced by new-born drops. Therefore, as the fission gas diffuses upward into the boundary layer it encounters fresh liquid metal drops to diffuse to and dissolve in. From droplet mass transfer theory, the local gas phase-diffusion-limited rate of fission product depletion by metal fog drops is
(57)ṁfp‴=4πrfogNDfp-mixρmix[Yfp(z)-Yfp,d(z)]
where ṁfp‴ is the fission product sink term (in kg m−3 s−1), N is the local fog droplet concentration (in drops m−3), rfog is the local average effective radius of a metal drop, Yfp(z) is the fission product mass fraction in the metal vapor/inert gas mixture at distance z above the surface of the metal pool, and Yfp,d(z) is the local equilibrium fission product mass fraction at the surface of the drops. The metal fog drops are so small that one may assign a spatially uniform, instantaneous fission product mass fraction yfp,d(z) to the interior of the metal drops. By virtue of Eq. (49), Yfp,d and yfp,d are related by
(58)Yfp,d(z)=KHMvPMmix,dyfp,d(z)
A few words of caution must be inserted here in that Eq. (57) is based on continuum or diffusion-controlled fission product gas transport to the metal drops. Free molecular limitations, which are important for metal drop sizes appreciably smaller than the mean-free-path between the gas molecules, have been ignored.
Eq. (57) alone suggests that prediction of ṁfp″ requires a boundary layer model capable of predicting the local quantities rfog and N. Such a model would have to incorporate fog droplet nucleation kinetics, droplet growth and upward fog droplet transport by Stefan flow and thermophoresis. This represents a formidable mathematical and computational problem that so far has only been solved for a stagnant film model of the boundary layer (Epstein and Rosner, 1970). Yet, models of fission product evaporation have been proposed with which the fission product evaporation flux ṁfp″ can be computed without knowledge of the metal fog droplet size distribution (Nishimura et al., 1996, Brockmeier et al., 1994). An overly simplistic parametric model is presented below whose only goal is, rather than absolute ṁfp″ predictions, an appraisal of the importance of fog droplet properties rfog and N in fission product evaporation and transport.
The specific flow system for which the model is developed is that of one-dimensional Fickian diffusion of fission product gas through a stagnant semi-infinite region (z → ∞) of inert gas and metal fog droplets. It will be seen later on that z = ∞ corresponds to a very short distance above the surface of the metal pool, a distance of the order of the thickness of the laminar sublayer (~10 μm). Thus the one-dimensional diffusion equation should describe the fission product gas mass fraction profile reasonably well within this region. A schematic diagram of the region of interest is pictured in Fig. 6. It is assumed that metal fog droplets are introduced into the flow from a thin, planar nucleation front on the gas side of the vaporizing metal surface. The downstream metal fog produced contains droplets of uniform size rfog and spatially constant droplet number density N. The droplets do not diffuse, but the thermophoretic force propels the drops upward with constant velocity uT. The mean separation of droplets in the fog is assumed to be sufficiently great (compared with rfog) that the droplets are considered to be noninteracting. Hence the fission product uptake behavior of each droplet is that of an isolated drop, where the local fission product mass fraction Yfp(z) is identified with the mass fraction at a large distance from the drop (as in Eq. (57)). Finally, an effective “constant” Henry's law constant KH averaged over the temperature profile across the region is assumed.
Fig. 6. Fog droplets rising from nucleation front in parametric model; illustrating fission product gas (and gaseous/volatile radionuclides in general) mass fraction profiles in fog region. The square inset shows the fission product mass fraction profile surrounding a fog drop located at vertical position z, with Yfp rising from its value at the drop surface, Yfp,d, to its free stream value Yfp(z) over a distance of the order of drop radius.
The one-dimensional diffusion equation that describes the fission product gas mass fraction profile Yfp(z) is (see Eq. (57))
(59)ρmixDfp-mixd2Yfpdz2=ṁfp‴=4πrfogNρmixDfp-mix(Yfp-Yfp,d)
Each fog drop obeys the following mass conservation equation
(60)43πrfog3ρfuTdyfp,ddz=4πrfogρmixDfp-mix(Yfp-Yfp,d)
Eqs. (54), (55) are subject to the boundary conditions:
(61)at z=0:Yfp=Yfp,w,yfp,d=0,
(62)at z→∞:Yfpand yfp,dare finite,
and are converted to dimensionless forms by introducing the dimensionless droplet number density parameter
(63)N*=4π9rfog3NrfogρfuTPMmixρmixDfp-mixMvKH2,
and dimensionless distance
(64)ξ=3ρmixDfp-mixMVKHrfog2ρfuTPMmixz
Eqs. (54), (55), after substituting Eq. (58) for yfp,d in Eq. (60), may be restated as
(65)d2Yfpdξ2=N*(Yfp-Yfp,d)
(66)dYfp,ddξ=Yfp-Yfp,d
The solutions of Eqs. (58), (59) that satisfy boundary conditions (61), (62) are
(67)YfpYfp,w=N*e-mξ+mN*+m
(68)Yfp,dYfp,w=m(1-e-mξ)N*+m
where m is the solution of
(69)m=1+1+4N*2
The fission product evaporation rate is
(70)ṁfp″=-ρmixDfp-mixdYfpdzz=0,
or by transforming to dimensionless distance ξ via Eq. (64) and using Eq. (67) to evaluate (dYfp/dξ)ξ=0:
(71)ṁfp''=3ρmix2Dfp-mix2MvKHrfog2ρfuTPMmixmN*N*+mYfp,w
The limiting cases of Eq. (71) are worth exploring. If N* is sufficiently small so that 4N* ≪ 1 in Eq. (69); then m → 1 and mN*/(N* + m) → N*, and Eq. (71) reveals that (see also Eqs. (44), (56))
(72)ṁfp''=4π3rfog3ρfNuTyfp,w=ṁfog''yfp,w,forN*<<14
Eq. (72) indicates that in the dilute fog limit N* ≪ 1/4 the fission product gas is transported (convected) from the phase boundary by the metal fog. Actually some fraction of the fission product gas must be transported by the metal vapor but this feature is not included in the model. Nevertheless, the parametric model implies that one may ignore the N(rfog) consequences of fog nucleation kinetics and pursue a theoretical approach in which the fission gas evaporation rate is in some simple way linearly proportional to the metal evaporation rate, as long as the fog can be regarded as “dilute”. The dilute fog criterion N* ≪ 1/4 suggested by the present parametric model can be expressed in terms of physical quantities as
(73)N<<916πrfog3ρmixDfp-mixMvKHrfogρfuTPMmix2
Because the exponential function e−mξ in Eq. (67), with m = 1 in the dilute fog region, reaches a value of 1.83 × 10−2 when the argument ξ = 4, the fission product species reaches its asymptotic value N*/(N* + m) in a distance (see Eq. (64))
(74)z∞=4rfog2ρfuTPMmix3ρmixDfp-mixMvKH
By way of an example, consider the sodium metal/argon gas system and fission product gas sodium iodide. The pertinent physical property values for a phase boundary temperature Tw = 720 K and bulk gas temperature T∞ = 400 K are ρmix = 0.87 kg m−3, ρf = 850 kg m−3, Dfp-mix = 2.28 × 10−5 m2 s−1, KH = 44.0 Pa, Mv = 23.0 kg kgmole−1, Mmix = 40.0 kg kgmole−1 and P = 1.013 × 105 Pa. Assuming equilibrium fog formation the predicted sodium evaporation flux is ṁv,eq″=10-4kgm-2s-1. The corresponding heat flux off the phase boundary is q̇eq″=1.15×103Wm-2 (see Eq. B-4 in Appendix B). The predicted thermophoretic velocity is uT ≃ 10−3 m s−1 (see Appendix B). Numerical solutions of the one-dimensional conservation equations incorporating nucleation kinetics and fog droplet growth in a stagnant film model of the boundary layer yield droplets of average size rfog ≃ 2 × 10−7 m (Epstein and Rosner, 1970). Inserting these parameter estimates into the right-hand-side of the inequality Eq. (73) results in 1.9 × 1016 drops m−3. This drop number density is just above the upper end of the range of predicted drop number densities, namely 1014<~N<~1016dropsm-3, inferred from detailed numerical calculations of fog formation in a stagnant film and in actual boundary layers (Epstein and Rosner, 1970, Epstein and Hauser, 1991, Epstein et al., 1992). Thus for the present example, the fission product (NaI) evaporation rate is either dilute fog controlled or nearly so. Additional calculations involving Eq. (73) indicate that NaI evaporation rates generally tend to the dilute fog limit for liquid sodium temperatures up to the boiling point.
Referring to the previous example parameter values for fission product NaI, the thickness of the diffusion boundary layer is, from Eq. (74), z∞ = 9.2 μm. Detailed numerical calculations indicate that the thickness of the drop nucleation zone is of the order of 20 μm (Epstein and Rosner, 1970). While thin, the nucleation zone is not thin enough to fit into the diffusion boundary layer of the parametric model. This is one of the physically unrealistic aspects of the parametric model.
In the nondilute (“droplet rich”) limit N* ≫ 1, Eqs. (62), (64) reveal that m → N*1/2 and
(75)ṁfp″=ρmixDfp-mix(4πrfogN)1/2Yfp,w
In this extreme ṁfp″ depends on the fog's droplet size distribution and ṁfp″ can potentially become very large as N → ∞ and approach the kinetic theory vacuum evaporation rate, although this would require nonphysically high droplet concentration levels of about 1019 drop m−3 and there would be no separation between drops.
The useful insight gained from the parametric model is the identification of two regimes of fog scavenging behavior: droplet-dilute and droplet-rich. It would appear from the model results that fogs tend to the dilute-regime where the fission product evaporation rate does not depend on the details of fog structure and the fission product scavenging rate by metal fog takes place at a rate proportional to the total fog flux or, from a conservative point of view, the total liquid metal evaporation rate. It is recognized however, given the rather crude nature of the parametric model and the large sensitivity of the dilute fog criterion (Eq. (73)) to rfog, a parameter of which there is considerable uncertainty associated with its numerical value, that the conclusion of diluteness may not always be true for actual metal fogs in real boundary layers. Dilute versus nondilute fog behavior can only be assessed with a boundary layer model that includes the effects of fog droplet nucleation kinetics and growth on fission product scavenging. While nondilute fogs may be encountered in specific applications, the simplicity of the asymptotic dilute case, and the insights obtained from its investigation amply justify its application to the prediction of fission product evaporation rates, and this is the subject of the remainder of this paper.
3.3. Models of fission product evaporation for dilute metal fogs
Three models of fission product evaporation are discussed here. One of these is the model of Nishimura et al. (1996). The other two models were created by the present authors. In accord with the dilute metal fog approximation the fog droplets generated, their sizes and number densities are not explicitly considered.
The first model (referred to as Model 1) is based on the assumption that just inside the fog nucleation zone, that is just above the location z = zn of appreciable fog formation, local equilibrium is achieved between the fission product gas outside the drops and the fission product gas dissolved in the drops. This equilibrium condition is represented by Henry's law
(76)Yfp(z)=KH(T)MvPMmixyfp,d(z);z>zn
The form of the equation for ṁfp″ that follows from Eq. (76) depends on whether metal fog formation is an equilibrium or nonequilibrium process. Treating the case of equilibrium fog formation, zn = 0 in Eq. (76). To obtain the maximum possible ṁfp″ prediction that Model 1 can provide, yfp,d(z) is set equal to the dissolved fission product concentration yfp,w on the liquid metal side of the phase boundary. Obviously, yfp,w is the maximum possible concentration of fission gas in the metal fog drops. Thus in the vicinity of the metal surface Yfp(z) is now strictly a function of the temperature profile through Henry's law “constant”:
(77)Yfp(z)=KH[T(z)]Mvyfp,wPMmix,w
The fission product evaporation rate is
(78)ṁfp″=-ρmixDfp-mix∂Yfp∂zz=0
Using the chain rule, Eq. (78) may be re-expressed as
(79)ṁfp″=-ρmixDfp-mixdYfpdTz=0dTdYvz=0∂Yv∂zz=0
From Eqs. (8), (70), Eq. (79) becomes
(80)ṁfp″=Dfp-mixMvyfp,w(1-Yv,w)Dv-gMmix,wPdKHdTTwdTdYvz=0ṁv″(Model1)
Since equilibrium metal fog formation is assumed, (dT/dYv)z=0 is given by Eq. (19) evaluated at the liquid metal surface and ṁv″ is given by Eq. (21). The expression for ṁfp″ for nonequilibrium metal fog control can be readily derived. However, it turns out that Model 1 ṁfp″ predictions are about a factor of two to three below the predictions of Model 3 (presented below) when equilibrium metal fog formation prevails, and about a factor of two to three below the one available measurement of fission gas release into a natural convection boundary layer (Nishimura et al., 1996). So Model 1 is tabled for now. Perhaps future comparisons with additional experimental data will justify its revival.
In the second model (Model 2) the enhancement of the fission product gas evaporation rate is assumed to equal the enhancement of the metal vapor evaporation rate; that is,
(81)ṁfp″ṁfp,nc″=ṁv″ṁv,nc″(Model2)
This model was proposed by Nishimura et al. (1996). From Eqs. (4), (43), Eq. (81) may be written as
(82)ṁfp″=Dv-gDfp-mix1/3(Yfp,w-Yfp,∞)(1+Bnc)Dv-g/Dfp-mix-1ṁv″(Model2)
In the above equation ṁv″ is identified with either ṁv,eq″(Eq.21)orṁv,noneq″(Eq.36), for equilibrium or nonequilibrium metal fog formation respectively. Brockmeier et al. (1994) may have been the first to employ Eq. (81), although their paper does not include a clear statement regarding the idea underlying their fission product enhancement model. They introduced the concept of a fission product retention factor RF (see Section 3.4) which contains the ratio ṁfp″/ṁv″. By inverting their expression for RF an expression for ṁfp″ is revealed that in form closely resembles Eq. (82) in the limit Bnc ≪ 1.
In the third model it is assumed that the metal fog nucleation front takes a position close to (just above) the vaporizing liquid metal surface, as illustrated in Fig. 6. In accord with the results of the parametric model of Section 3.2 for lean metal fogs, over a very short travel distance z∞ (see Eq. (74)) the droplets gain an equilibrium quantity of fission product so that one may assume that at the metal fog front the fog droplets exert a fission product vapor pressure such that Yfp = Yfp,w in the cover gas surrounding the droplets. Thus in the thin gap between the vaporizing metal surface and the metal fog nucleation front the fission product vapor concentration gradient is zero (dYfp/dz = 0) and the metal vapor may be regarded as a carrier gas which transports the fission product away from the liquid metal surface at a rate equal to the mass of the fission product per mass of metal vapor (Yfp,w/Yv,w) times the metal vaporization rate:
(83)ṁfp″=Yfp,wYv,wṁv″(Model3)
Note that Yfp,∞ does not appear in Eq. (83). The total fission product transport rate is split into two additive contributions one being the gas mixture contribution where Yfp,∞ is important and the other associated with the amount of fission product scavenged from the gas mixture during the process of metal fog droplet thermophoresis across the cover gas boundary layer. Determination of this “split” requires a detailed boundary layer model that deals with the size and number density of the metal fog droplets. Until such a model is constructed one is forced to assume that in Model 3 all of the fission product is scavenged by the metal fog drops and carried into the cover gas region at a rate that is independent of Yfp,∞ and given by Eq. (83).
Of all the three models discussed in the foregoing Model 3 is the most conservative since it predicts the highest fission product vaporization rates. Also, despite its simplicity, Model 3 is in good agreement with the published data base on NaI release from liquid sodium. Model 2 reduces to Model 3 for the specific case Dfp-mix = Dv-g, Yfp,∞ = 0 and Bnc ≪ 1. While Nishimura et al. (1996) state that their fission product evaporation calculations are based on Eq. (81), their numerical results suggest that they actually employed Eq. (83).
It remains to modify Eq. (83) to include molten-metal-side fission product transport limitations. Following the same procedure used to obtain Eq. (56), the result is
(84)ṁfp″=ṁv″KHMvyfp,∞Yv,wPMmix,w(1+γ)(Model3)
where
(85)γ=6.41KHMvṁv″PMmix,wρfDfp-fYv,wνfDfp-fgβf(Tf,∞-Tw)1/3
As mentioned previously, but this time for Eqs. (77), (78), ṁv″=ṁv,eq″(Eq.21)orṁv″=ṁv,noneq″(Eq.36) for equilibrium or nonequilibrium metal fog formation, respectively.
3.4. Comparisons with experiments and numerical results
Brockmeier et al. (1994) presented the data of Sauter and Schutz (1983) on fission product release from a liquid sodium pool in terms of a retention factor RF defined as
(86)RF=yfp,∞(ṁfp″/ṁv″)
For cover-gas-side-controlled fission product evaporation (γ ≪ 1), Eq. (86) takes the remarkably simple form
(87)RF=PMmix,wYv,wKHMv
derived directly from Eq. (84). Note that as long as gas-side-controlled evaporation is maintained, Eq. (87) is independent of the flow pattern above the surface; it is valid for both natural and forced convection since ṁnc″ does not appear in the ratio ṁfp″/ṁv″. It is demonstrated later on in this subsection that NaI evaporation is gas-side controlled. The RF data in Fig. 7 on NaI evaporation from liquid sodium (Sauter and Schutz, 1983; and Brockmeier et al., 1994) was obtained under isothermal conditions (open circles) and under conditions of evaporation into cold argon gas at 403 K (dark circles). In the experiments a forced convection argon flow was established above the liquid sodium surface.
Fig. 7. Retention factor RF of NaI versus liquid-sodium temperature Tw; theory (Eqs. (80), (82)) compared with measurements.
Starting with Eq. (47), which is valid for metal vaporization into an isothermal forced convection flow, and using the corresponding equation for fission product vaporization into a forced convection isothermal flow; namely
(88)ṁfp,nc''=0.664ρmixDfp-mixLuLνmix1/2νmixDfp-mix1/3×ln(1+Bnc)Dv-g/Dfp-mix(1+Bnc)Dv-g/Dfp-mix-1(Yfp,w-Yfp,∞)
one gets, for Yfp,∞ = 0 and isothermal flow,
(89)RF=PMmix,wKHMvDfp-mixDv-g1/3(1+Bnc)Dv-g/Dfp-mix-1(forTw=T∞)
While the above result for RF was derived for cover-gas-laminar-forced convection, the same result is obtained if the flow is turbulent. Eqs. (80), (82) are identical for the specific case Dfp-mix = Dv-g and Bnc ≪ 1 (i.e., Yv,w ≪ 1; see Eq. (5a)).
There is considerable scatter in the data in Fig. 7 and for this reason a constant retention factor RF = 3 for NaI has been recommended (Sauter and Schutz, 1983). The RF's measured under isothermal conditions are of the same order as those measured under nonisothermal conditions. In contrast, the theoretical RF curves in Fig. 7 exhibit quantitative differences between isothermal and nonisothermal conditions, the former being larger than the latter, especially as the sodium boiling point is approached (compare solid curve with dashed and dotted curve). The two RF data points at approximately 760 and 800 K, which represent a nearly factor of five step increase in RF in response to a rather small sodium liquid temperature reduction of about 30 K, are inconsistent with the NaI release measurements of Nishimura et al. (1996, see below), which show that within the temperature range 600 to 700 K, the effective RF = 3.4. This measurement is plotted in Fig. 7 (open triangle). Brockmeier et al. (1994) opined that NaI releases at liquid sodium temperatures well below the melting point of NaI (933 K) might not be due to evaporation, but due to some other mechanism such as mechanical entrainment. However, the RF value inferred from the release measurements reported by Nishimura et al. at ~650 K sheds doubt on this explanation for the two high RF measurements in Fig. 7. Eq. (87), Model 3, is consistent with the RF = 3 recommendation and, except for the two anomalously high data points, is in reasonable quantitative agreement with the measured RF's in Fig. 7.
Brockmeier et al. (1994) also reported experimental measurements of RF obtained from an isothermal sodium pool/argon atmosphere system with mass transport controlled by gas-side forced convection. Eq. (89) yields RF predictions that are essentially identical to those of Brockmeier et al. and in reasonable agreement with the measured RF values, especially at high sodium pool temperatures. Of course, since fog formation does not occur in an isothermal test, the measurements do not serve as validation of the enhanced fission product vaporization theory presented here.
Since both Tw and T∞ gradually increased during the NaI release experiment of Nishimura et al. (see Section 2.7), comparison of their measurement with theory requires transforming Eq. (83) into an ordinary differential equation, namely,
(90)dmfpdt=AYfp,wṁv"Yv,w
where Yfp,w is related to Tw via Eq. (49) with yfp,w = yfp,∞ for gas-side control (yfp,∞ = 2 × 10−4 in the Nishimura et al. experiment). Two NaI release masses of interest can be predicted by integrating Eq. (90), with ṁv″=ṁv,eq″ (Eq. (21)) to obtain mfp,eq, or with ṁv″=ṁv,noneq″ (Eq. (36)) to obtain mfp,noneq. These integrations were performed and the results are compared with the measured mfp in Table 2. Also listed in Table 2 is the predicted mfp,nc based on the assumption of no fog formation, obtained by replacing ṁfp,nc″ in Eq. (48) with (1/A) dmfp,nc/dt and integrating the result with respect to time.
Table 2. Comparison of Measured (Nishimura et al., 1996) Total NaI Mass Evaporated with Predicted Mass (in grams).
The agreement between theory and measurement in Table 2 is encouraging with the predicted mfp,eq only 17% below the measured mfp. One may have expected the measured mfp to fall below mfp,eq since the assumption of local equilibrium yields the maximum possible rate of metal evaporation. Recall, however, from Section 3.2 that there is really no readily identifiable bounding condition on the fission product evaporation rate, as the magnitude of ṁfp″ is proportional to the number density N of metal drops as N becomes very large and for which there is a considerable uncertainty in its value. The fact that the measured mfp is slightly greater than the predicted mfp,eq suggests, perhaps, that the sodium drop number density in the Nishimura et al. test was at the lower end of the droplet rich regime. Alternatively, and more likely, the difference is due to the uncertainties associated with prediction and measurement. The important point to be made regarding Table 2 is that the measured and predicted NaI mass evaporated are more than one order of magnitude larger than the minimum mass evaporated mfp,nc based on conventional mass transfer theory.
Fig. 8, Fig. 9 show γ (from Eq. (85)) as a function of Tw for various fission product gases dissolved in liquid sodium and in liquid lead, respectively, based on equilibrium metal fog formation within a natural convection argon boundary layer at T∞ = 403 K. Natural convection also occurs in the metal pools and the selected value of the temperature drop across the metal pools is Tf,∞ − Tw = 2 K. Refer to Eq. (56) for the significance of γ. The values of γ in Fig. 8 reveal that as the sodium pool temperature increases both Cs and Rb vaporization rates transition from mixed control (γ ~ 1) to mainly liquid-metal-side control (γ ≫ 1). All the other fission product mass transfer rates out of liquid sodium are cover-gas-side controlled (γ ≪ 1), although NaI vaporization becomes mixed controlled as the sodium boiling point is approached. For the liquid lead/argon gas system all the fission product release rates are cover-gas-side controlled at low lead pool temperatures (<~850 K). At high lead pool temperatures (>~1100 K) PbI2 is liquid–metal-side-controlled, Cs and Rb exhibit mixed control vaporization rates, and Po remains cover-gas-side controlled. It is worth noting that according to conventional mass transport theory all the fission product gas species exhibit mainly cover-gas-side-controlled evaporation rates. It is the metal fog fission product scavaging process that shifts some of the species evaporation rates to liquid-side control.
Fig. 8. Mixed control mass transfer number γ versus Tw for fission products dissolved in and released from liquid sodium: equilibrium metal fog formation in cover gas boundary layer.
Fig. 9. Mixed control mass transfer number γ versus Tw for various fission product gases dissolved in and released from liquid lead (or lead–bismuth eutectic): equilibrium metal fog formation in cover gas boundary layer.
Fig. 10, Fig. 11 show ṁfp,eq″(Eq.84)andṁfp,nc″(Eq.48) versus Tw for fission product release from liquid sodium and liquid lead, respectively. In addition to fission products, Fig. 11 also shows polonium which, especially for lead–bismuth eutectic coolant, is produced mainly through neutron absorption by bismuth in non-negligible amounts. Again, natural convection occurs in the argon cover gas and in the liquid metal pool. The assumed thermal conditions are Tf,∞ − Tw = 2 K and T∞ = 403 K. The curves for Rb have been omitted from Fig. 10 since on the many decade logarithm scale in this figure the Cs curves essentially overlap the Rb curves. Also not shown in Fig. 10 (for the sake of clarity) is a very sharp drop in the predicted conventional mass transfer rates (dashed curves) as Tw approaches the liquid metal boiling point due to the “blowing” effect produced by the Stefan flow component of sodium evaporation. It is clear from Fig. 10, Fig. 11 that order of magnitude enhancements in fission product vaporization rates are possible relative to those rates predicted by conventional mass transfer theory.
Fig. 10. Evaporation rates of fission products per unit area per mass fraction in liquid sodium versus Tw. Solid curves pertain to equilibrium metal fog formation and dashed curves pertain to no metal fog formation (conventional mass transfer theory). Data for Rb are not shown for clarity, as they essentially overlap with those for Cs.
Fig. 11. Evaporation rate per unit area per mass fraction in the pool versus Tw for fission product and Po release from liquid lead (or lead–bismuth eutectic). Solid curves pertain to equilibrium metal fog formation and dashed curves pertain to no metal fog formation (conventional mass transfer theory). Data for Rb are not shown for clarity, as they essentially overlap with those for Cs.
The curves in Fig. 11 were constructed for fission products in lead, but they can also be used to assess to first order accuracy the rate of fission product escape from lead-bismuth eutectic. This is because the crucial parameter KH(T) listed in Table A-2 is recommended for use for both liquid metals (Neuhausen et al., 2015). All the other pertinent physical properties of lead and lead–bismuth eutectic, including metal vapor pressure, do not differ very much from one another. Again for the sake of clarity, the curves for Rb are not displayed in Fig. 11.
Fig. 12, Fig. 13 depict the vaporization rates of NaI in liquid sodium and PbI2 in liquid lead for fixed Tw, respectively, as a function of the bulk cover gas temperature T∞. The form of Eq. (83) from which the ṁfp″ predictions are obtained is such that ṁfp″ does not necessarily approach ṁfp,nc″ as the bulk cover gas temperature approaches the incipient metal fogging temperature T∞,in from below (see Section 2.6 for predicting T∞,in). This departure from expected behavior occurs when the metal temperature is high and near its boiling point and for systems in which Dfp-mix and Dv-g differ significantly from one another. The Na/NaI pair satisfy both of these requirements and, therefore, a step change in ṁfp″ is imposed on the ṁfp″ versus T∞ curves in Fig. 12 at the bulk cover gas temperature T∞,in at which equilibrium metal fog formation occurs; so that, for T∞ < T∞,in ṁfp″ is given by Eq. (83) and for T∞ > T∞,in the evaporation rate is ṁfp,nc″ as given by Eq. (56). In reality ṁfp″ should start from ṁfp,nc″ at T∞,in and continuously increase as T∞ is lowered. This behavior can only be captured by a much more complex boundary layer/metal drop nucleation model of the type mentioned previously. Fig. 13 for the Pb/PbI2 system exhibits the expected behavior ṁfp″→ṁfp,nc″ as T∞ → T∞,in since the metal temperature is well below its boiling point and since Dfp-mix ≃ Dv-g for this system. Despite the breakdown of the model at T∞ = T∞,in in Fig. 12, it is anticipated that the model provides useful accurate or bounding estimates of ṁfp″ at temperatures not too far below T∞,in. Indeed, the curves in Fig. 12, Fig. 13 serve to illustrate that significant enhancements in the fission product vaporization rate occur at T∞ values that are only of the order of tens of degrees below the temperature T∞,in at which metal fog formation occurs.
Fig. 12. Evaporation rate of NaI per unit area per mass fraction in liquid sodium versus bulk cover gas temperature T∞. Solid curves pertain to equilibrium metal fog formation and dashed curves pertain to no metal fog formation (conventional mass transfer theory).
Fig. 13. Evaporation rate of PbI2 per unit area per mass fraction in liquid lead versus bulk cover gas temperature T∞. Solid curves pertain to equilibrium metal fog formation and dashed curves pertain to no metal fog formation (conventional mass transfer theory).
In considering the release of fission products to the cover gas during postulated accident scenarios, the instantaneous mass fraction yfp,∞(t) of the dissolved fission product in the liquid metal coolant is governed by the differential equation
(91)Vρfdyfp,∞dt=-Aṁfp″=-Aṁfp″yfp,∞yfp,∞
where V is the volume of the metal coolant within the primary reactor vessel. Assuming that the temperature of the metal coolant remains constant and that the concentration of the fission product in the bulk of the cover gas is fixed at zero (Yfp,∞ = 0), it follows that the ratio ṁfp″/yfp,∞ is also constant. For any particular fission product and any particular metal coolant temperature (Tf,∞ ≃ Tw), the constant ṁfp″/yfp,∞ can be determined from the calculated results presented in Fig. 10, Fig. 11. Equation (91) may be integrated to obtain the fraction F of a fission product vaporized as a function of time:
(92)F=1-exp-ṁfp″yfp,∞AtVρf
Table 3, Table 4 show predicted values of F as a function of metal pool temperature Tw for sodium and lead (or lead bismuth eutectic). The selected time t for insertion into Eq. (92) is one week. The other pertinent primary reactor pool parameters selected are: A = 54.7 m2, V = 738 m3, T∞ = 403 K, and Tf,∞ − Tw = 2 K. Since ṁfp″ is a weak function of Tf,∞ − Tw (see Eqs. (77), (78)), a factor of two or three change in Tf,∞ − Tw will not alter our conclusions regarding fission product retention in a significant way. With respect to the sodium pool (Table 3), significant release fractions of Cs and Rb are predicted. The release fractions of NaI and Sr are insignificant at low sodium pool temperatures but become significant at high Tw's. The release fraction of Te is insignificant at all sodium pool temperatures. Essentially all of the fission products investigated (Table 4) are predicted to be retained in lead and lead bismuth eutectic at low temperatures (Tw <~ 800 K). However, at very high temperatures (Tw >~ 1150 K) a significant fraction of these fission products are predicted to be released.
Table 3. Fraction F of fission product released from sodium metal pool in primary reactor vessel as a function of pool temperature Tw one week after accident event. Reactor metal pool parameters: A = 56.7 m2, V = 738 m3, T∞ = 403 K, Tf,∞ − Tw = 2 K.
Table 4. Fraction F of fission product released from lead or lead bismuth eutectic metal pool in primary reactor vessel as a function of pool temperature Tw one week after accident event. Reactor metal pool parameters: A = 56.7 m2, V = 738 m3, T∞ = 403 K, Tf,∞ − Tw = 2 K.
The predicted values of F in Table 3, Table 4 are probably rather conservative for several reasons. The values of the Henry constant KH, at least for the heavy liquid metal coolants, are based on maximum estimations of the vapor phase concentrations of the fission product volatiles (Neuhausen et al., 2015). The fission product concentration in the bulk of the argon cover gas is taken to be zero. The expected accumulation of fission product in the cover gas will reduce the metal pool evaporation rate which, in turn, will reduce the fission product vaporization rate. The metal vapor is assumed to be converted into a metal fog in equilibrium with its vapor. Nonequilibrium metal fog formation will reduce both the metal and fission product release fractions below those listed in Table 3, Table 4. The cover gas temperature is fixed at the value T∞ = 403 K, which is likely to be relatively low compared with actual T∞ values in the reactor cover gas region. Determination of realistic values of T∞ requires the solution of a cover gas energy balance equation which includes the thermal resistance of the reactor vessel cover plate.
3.5. Conclusions and recommendations
By exploiting previous developments of fog-formation enhanced vaporization of liquid materials (mainly metals) and providing theoretical support to the idea that the vaporization rate of fission products dissolved in metal is fog-droplet size insensitive and linearly proportional to the metal vaporization rate, a transparent and tractable (algebraic) theory for predicting metal-fog enhanced fission product (and radionuclides in general) vaporization rates has been developed (viz., Eqs. (77), (78)) that is free of the limiting assumptions which have characterized the previous treatments of enhanced metal vaporization. Specifically, the present theory can predict fission product vaporization rates up to (but not including) the boiling point of the solvent metal and for cover gas/metal systems of disparate molecular weights. The theory includes two separate models: an “equilibrium model” based on a saturated metal vapor/cover gas boundary layer and a nonequilibrium model involving a critically supersaturated metal vapor/cover gas boundary layer. The following are the salient conclusions derived from the theory:
@(1)
If the temperature drop Tw − T∞ across the cover gas boundary layer exceeds roughly 40 °C metal fog-formation enhanced fission product vaporization will occur, providing that sufficient foreign nuclei (for example dust) are suspended in the cover gas so that near equilibrium prevails between the metal vapor and metal fog drops. In this case predicted and measured metal and fission product vaporization rates are about an order of magnitude higher than the corresponding vaporization rates predicted by ignoring fog formation.
@(2)
In a clean cover gas atmosphere in which foreign nuclei are absent, Tw − T∞ must exceed about 200 °C before metal fog formation occurs by self-nucleation. In this nonequilibrium case predicted fission product vaporization enhancements are at most about a factor of three above predictions that ignore fog formation.
@(3)
There is a considerable experimentally obtained data base on liquid sodium evaporation into cold argon gas. All the measured sodium vaporization rates fall between the predictions of the equilibrium and nonequilibrium models, indicating that in the experiments some degree of metal vapor supersaturation was necessary for metal fog formation, but not the maximum possible critical supersaturation that requires an ultra pure cover gas.
@(4)
In contrast with the model comparisons with experiments that employed an argon cover gas, the equilibrium fog formation model is in excellent agreement with a reported measurement of the mass of liquid sodium evaporated into a nitrogen cover gas. Apparently sufficient foreign particles were present in the nitrogen cover gas to serve as nuclei for equilibrium fog formation.
@(5)
With respect to fission product release predictions, the theory is in reasonable agreement with published retention factors (RF: ratio of metal evaporated to fission product evaporated) for NaI dissolved in liquid sodium, both with respect to numerical values and a reported recommended empiricism RF = 3. Also, the theory predicts to within 17% a measurement of NaI mass released from liquid sodium.
@(6)
Conservative estimates of the fraction F of fission products released from a primary reactor vessel sodium pool after one week at a fixed pool temperature Tw may be summarized as follows: high fractions of Cs and Rb are released (0.13<~F <~ 0.78), the release fractions of NaI and Sr are insignificant at low Tw's (approximately 800 K) but exceed 10% at high Tw's, (approximately 1100 K) and F for Te is vanishingly small at all Tw's.
@(7)
At the end of one week all the radionuclides/fission products investigated for the lead (or lead–bismuth eutectic) pools (Cs, PbI2, Po, Rb) are predicted to be retained by the pools at temperatures below 800 K. However, except for Po, at high temperatures (Tw >~ 1100 K) the release fractions exceed 10%. The release fraction for Po exceeds 10% only if the pool temperature exceeds approximately 1300 K.
@(8)
Enhanced vaporization of radionuclides by metal fog formation can be suppressed by keeping the cover gas hot.
There is a paucity of experimental data on fission product evaporation rates from solvent liquid metals under the natural convection/metal fogging conditions expected in the cover gas/metal coolant interfacial region at the top of the primary reactor vessel. In fact, there are no data on the evaporation rates of liquid lead or lead–bismuth eutectic into much colder gaseous media nor are there data on evaporation rates of fission products dissolved in these heavy metal coolants. Only one measurement has been reported on fission product evaporation from a solvent liquid metal, namely NaI release from liquid sodium. It is strongly recommended that additional systematic experimental studies be performed to test the accuracy of the theory presented here for predicting fission product evaporation rates into natural convection cover gas boundary layers. Recall that, theoretically speaking, there is no upper limit to the fission product evaporation rate and that the present theory is restricted to the lean fog droplet concentration regime for which there is no need to be concerned with the size and number density of metal fog droplets and the fission product vaporization rate is controlled by the metal vaporization rate. To gain deeper insight into the nature of the lean fog droplet concentration assumption implicit to the present theoretical approach, a numerical calculational study should be initiated that includes homogeneous and heterogeneous metal-vapor nucleation kinetics, fog droplet growth and scavenging of fission product vapor by the condensed metal fog drops, all within a cover gas natural convection boundary layer.
<Section>Acknowledgement</Section>
This work was partially supported by the Lead-cooled Fast Reactor (LFR) program of Westinghouse Electric Company and the Integrated Sodium Fast Reactor Analysis (ISFRA) program of Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute (KAERI).
<Section>Appendix A</Section>
Property Values
The pertinent physical property expressions for the liquid metal; namely ρf(T), νf(T), σf(T), Pv,eq(T), kf(T) and βf(T) were obtained from Fink and Leibowitz (1996) for liquid sodium and from Sobolev and Gassi (2015) for liquid lead. Note that σf(T) does not appear in any of the equations in this paper, but it is used in Frenkel's (1946) homogeneous nucleation equation to predict the critical supersaturation ratios from which Eq. (23) is constructed. The values of the latent heat of metal vaporization hfv were average, constant effective values based on Clausius-Clapeyron-equation fits to Pv,eq(T) measurements (see Eq. (15)). The results were hfv = 4.427 × 106 J kg−1 for sodium and hfv = 8.89 × 105 J kg−1 for lead. The vapor specific heats used were average, constant effective values: cp,v = 2452 J kg−1 K−1 for sodium vapor suggested by the measurements reported in Fink and Leibowitz and cp,v = 100 J kg−1 K−1 for lead vapor, the estimated specific heat of monatomic lead vapor. The metal vapor/cover gas mixture densities ρmix,w, ρmix,∞, and ρmix were estimated using the ideal gas law at temperatures Tw, T∞, and T¯, respectively.
The Chapman-Enskog theory (see, e.g., Bird et al., 1960) was used to estimate the viscosities of the cover gas μg and the metal vapor μv over the temperature ranges of interest. Power law fits μ ~ Tn of the calculated results were obtained to facilitate the mass transfer calculations. Similarly, the Chapman-Enskog theory was used to obtain power law relationships between the metal vapor/cover gas binary diffusion coefficients Dv-g and gas mixture temperature. Again, the Chapman-Enskog theory was used to obtain power law relationships between the fission product gas/metal vapor binary diffusion coefficients Dfp-v and the fission product gas/cover gas binary diffusion coefficients Dfp-g. The characteristic molecular diameter and energy of interaction between the molecules, which are required input values for the Chapman-Enskog theory, are not known for sodium nor for all the fission products. These so-called Lennard-Jones parameters were estimated from the properties of sodium and the fission products at their melting points (Bird et al., 1960). The following simple volume-fraction-averaged binary diffusion coefficient Dfp-mix for the diffusional transport of fission product gas through the cover gas/metal vapor mixture was employed
(A1)Dfp-mix=x¯vDfp-v+(1-x¯v)Dfp-g
The Stokes-Einstein equation (Bird et al., 1960) was used to estimate the binary diffusion coefficients Dfp-f of the fission products dissolved in the liquid metal.
The most important input parameter for Eq. (84) is the Henry's law constant KH. Table A-1 lists available empirical equations for KH(T) for various fission products that exert a finite vapor pressure when dissolved in liquid sodium (Castleman and Tang, 1968). Table A-2 lists KH(T) for various fission products dissolved in liquid lead (Neuhausen et al., 2015). Castleman and Tang (1968) plotted KH versus 1/T which gave straight lines. The expressions in Table A-1 are “eyeball fits” to these lines. The lines in Castleman and Tang's plot are restricted to specific temperature ranges, but were not restricted to these ranges for the fission product evaporation rate calculations given here. Similarly, the expressions in Table A-2 were extrapolated beyond the temperature ranges assigned by Neuhausen et al. to cover the lead pool temperatures of interest in source term evaluations.
Table A-1. Henry's Law Constant KH(T) for Fission Products Dissolved in Liquid Sodium (Castleman and Tang, 1968).
*Not necessarily restricted to this range for practical applications
(Castleman and Tang).
Table A-2. Henry's Law Constant KH(T) for Fission Products Dissolved in Liquid Lead and Lead-Bismuth Eutectic (Neuhausen et al., 2015).
<Section>Appendix B</Section>
Thermophoretic force and velocity
While most of the assumptions (approximations) exploited herein have already been discussed, it remains to demonstrate that fog droplets do not settle back onto the vaporizing metal surface (Assumption 7 in Section 2.1).
The thermophoretic velocity uT is related to the temperature gradient by the equation (Talbot et al., 1980)
(B1)uT=-KTνmixT∂T∂z
in which KT is a dimensionless thermophoretic transport coefficient. Assuming a nearly constant heat flux q̇″ across the gas boundary layer, an approximate expression for uT is, from Eq. (B-1)
(B2)uT=KTνmixq̇''kmixTw
Employing the chain rule, q̇'' may be expressed in terms of ṁv″ as follows (see Eq. (8))
(B3)q̇''=-kmix∂T∂zz=0=-kmixdTdYvTw∂Yv∂zz=0=kmix(1-Yv,w)ρmixDv-gdTdYvTwṁv''
The derivative (dT/dYv)Tw is given by Eq. (19) for equilibrium fog formation and by Eq. (32) for nonequilibrium fog formation. The heat flux for equilibrium fog formation is
(B4)q̇eq″=kmixRTw2ρmixDv-ghfvMv1-Yv,wYv,wṁv,eq″1+MgMv-1Yv,w
which will be used to assess the magnitude of the thermophoretic force FT. The conclusions regarding the magnitude of FT versus that of the gravitation force FG do not change if q̇eq″ is replaced by q̇noneq″ (nonequilibrium fog formation) or, for that matter, by q̇nc″ (no fog formation), since all of these heat fluxes do not differ significantly in magnitude from one another.
The thermophoretic force FT acting on a droplet of radius rfog is the product of the Stokes friction coefficient f and the thermophoretic velocity uT:
(B5)FT=fuT=6πμmixrfogCsluT
In the above equation Csl is a slip factor that corrects f for free-molecular flow effects. A semi-empirical formula for Csl is (Friedlander, 1977)
(B6)Csl=1+λrfog1.257+0.4exp-1.1rfogλ
where λ is the mean free path of the mixture:
(B7)λ=νmixπMmix2RT1/2
The gravitational force FG that opposes the upward thermophoretic droplet drift is
(B8)FG=4πrfog3ρfg3
The ratio of the forces FT and FG is
(B9)FTFG=9KTνmix2ρmixq̇″2rfog2CslTwkmixρfg
In all cases of practical interest, FT/FG ≫ 1, thereby demonstrating that the thermophoretic force overwhelms gravity and the fog droplets rise and enter the mainstream gas flow rather than settle back onto the metal surface. As an example, for sodium evaporation at Tw = 720 K and T∞ = 400 K: ρmix = 0.87 kg m−3, νmix = 4.08 × 10−5 m2 s−1, kmix = 2.76 × 10−2 W m−1 K−1, ρf = 850 kg m−3, Yv,w = 2.87 × 10−3, hfv = 4.427 × 106 J kg−1, Dv-g = 4.91 × 10−5 m2 s−1, KT = 0.6 (for rfog ≤ 0.5 μm; Talbot et al., 1980) and λ = 1.49 × 10−7 m. From Eqs. (21) and (B-4), ṁv,eq″=10-4kgm-2s-1andq̇''=1.15×103Wm-2. For rfog = 2 × 10−7 m, Csl = 2.0 and FT/FG = 340.
<Section>Appendix C. Supplementary data</Section>
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:
Supplementary data 1.
<Section>References</Section>
Bird et al., 1960
Bird, R. B., Stewart, W. E., and Lightfoot, E. N., 1960, Transport Phenomena, John Wiley, New York.
Google Scholar
Brockmeier et al., 1994
U. Brockmeier, M. Koch, H. Unger
Volatile fission product and sodium release from liquids
Nucl. Eng. Des., 148 (1994), pp. 499-507
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Castleman and Tang, 1968
Castleman, A.W. and Tang, I.N., 1968, “Fission Product Vaporization from Sodium Systems,” in Proc. Int'l Conf. Sodium Technology, Argonne National Laboratory (November 7-9); ANL-7520, Part I, pp. 540-548.
Google Scholar
Epstein and Hauser, 1991
M. Epstein, G.M. Hauser
Simultaneous fog formation and thermophoretic droplet deposition in a turbulent pipe flow
J. Heat Transfer, 113 (1991), pp. 224-231
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Epstein and Rosner, 1970
M. Epstein, D.E. Rosner
Enhancement of diffusion-limited vaporization rates by condensation within the thermal boundary layer 2. Comparison of homogeneous nucleation theory with the critical supersaturation model
Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 13 (1970), pp. 1393-1413
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Epstein et al., 1992
M. Epstein, G.M. Hauser, H.K. Fauske, M.A. Grolmes, R.E. Henry, J.C. Leung
Fog formation and deposition within laminar and turbulent natural convection boundary layers along cold vertical plates
Chem. Eng. Comm., 118 (1992), pp. 163-187
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fink and Leibowitz, 1996
J.K. Fink, L. Leibowitz
A Consistent assessment of the thermophysical properties of sodium
High Temp. Mat'ls Sci., 35 (1996), pp. 65-103
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Frenkel, 1946
J. Frenkel
Kinetic Theory of Liquids
Oxford Univ. Press, London (1946)
Google Scholar
Friedlander, 1977
S.K. Friedlander
Smoke, Dust and Haze
John Wiley, New York (1977), p. 32
Google Scholar
Hayashi et al., 1976
Y. Hayashi, A. Takimoto, M. Kanbe
Transport reaction mechanism of mist formation based on the critical supersaturation model
J. Heat Transfer, 98 (1976), pp. 114-119
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hills and Szekely, 1969
A.W.D. Hills, J. Szekely
A note on the enhancement of the diffusion-limited vaporization rates by condensation within the thermal boundary layer
Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 12 (1969), pp. 111-114
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ishiguro et al., 1974
Ishiguro, R., Kumada, T., Abe, T., 1974, “Natural Convection and Evaporation From a Free Surface of Liquid Sodium,” in: Heat Transfer 1974, Proc. 5th Int. Heat Transfer Conf. 12, pp. 15-19.
Google Scholar
Katsaros et al., 1977
K.B. Katsaros, W.T. Liu, J.A. Businger, J.E. Tillman
Heat transport and thermal structure in the interfacial boundary layer measured in an open tank of water in turbulent free convection
J. Fluid Mech., 83 (1977), pp. 311-335
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kumada et al., 1976
T. Kumada, F. Kasahara, R. Ishiguro
Sodium evaporation into a forced argon flow, (I) measurements of evaporation under conditions of fog formation
J. Nucl. Sci. and Tech., 13 (1976), pp. 74-80
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Neuhausen et al., 2015
Neuhausen, J. et al., 2015, “Properties of Irradiated LBE and Pb,” in: Section 5 of Handbook on Lead-Bismuth Eutectic Alloys and Lead Properties, Materials Compatibility, Thermal-Hydraulics and Technologies, OECD Nuclear Energy Agency, pp. 239-478.
Google Scholar
Nishimura et al., 1996
Nishimura, M., Nakagiri, T., and Miyahara, S., 1996, “Evaporation Release Behavior of Volatile Fission Products (Iodine, Cesium, and Tellurium) from Liquid Sodium Pool to Inert Cover Gas,” Tech. Committee Mtg. on Evaluation of Radioactive Materials Release and Sodium Fires in Fast Reactors, IWGFR/92, Oarai, Japan.
Google Scholar
Rosner, 1967
D.E. Rosner
Enhancement of diffusion-limited vaporization rates by condensation within the thermal boundary layer
Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 10 (1967), pp. 1267-1275
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Sauter and Schutz, 1983
Sauter, H., Schutz, W., 1983, “Aerosol-und Aktivitatsfreisetzung aus Kontaminierten Natriumlachen in Inertgasatmosphare,” Technical Report KfK-3504, Nuclear Research Center Karlsrule (see also, Brockmeier et al., 1994).
Google Scholar
Sobolev and Gassi, 2015
Sobolev, V.P., Gassi, A., 2015, “Thermophysical and Electric Properties of Liquid Lead. Bismuth and Lead-Bismuth Eutectic,” in: Section 2 of Handbook on Lead-Bismuth Eutectic Alloys and Lead Properties, Materials Compatibility, Thermal-Hydraulics and Technologies, OECD Nuclear Energy Agency, pp. 27-131.
Google Scholar
Talbot et al., 1980
L. Talbot, R.K. Cheng, A.W. Schefer, D.R. Willis
Thermophoresis of particles in a heated boundary layer
J. Fluid Mechs., 101 (1980), pp. 737-758
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Turkdogan, 1964
E.T. Turkdogan
The theory of enhancement of diffusion-limited vaporization rates by a convection-condensation process – part I, theoretical
Trans. Am. Inst. Min. Engrs., 230 (1964), pp. 740-750
Google Scholar
Turkdogan and Mills, 1964
E.T. Turkdogan, K.C. Mills
The theory of enhancement of diffusion-limited vaporization rates by a condensation process – part II, experimental
Trans. Am. Inst. Min. Engrs., 230 (1964), pp. 750-753
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar