<title>Development of thermal hydraulic analysis code of annular fuel under flow blockage condition</title>
<author>1,HangXia,2,YingweiWu,3,WenxiTian,4,G.H.Su,5,SuizhengQiu</author>
<Affiliation>1,School of Nuclear Science and Technology, Shanxi Engineering Research Center of Advanced Nuclear Energy, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107962</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454920306587</URL>
Development of thermal hydraulic analysis code of annular fuel under flow blockage condition
HangXia,YingweiWu,WenxiTian,G.H.Su,SuizhengQiu
School of Nuclear Science and Technology, Shanxi Engineering Research Center of Advanced Nuclear Energy, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
A sub-channel code which is capable of modelling the flow blockage has been developed and verified.
The results of flow blockage of the inner channel and out channel has been obtained.
The effect of the flow blockage on the heat split and DNBR has been discussed.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
A sub-channel code capable of modelling the flow blockage of the annular fuel has been developed and verified by the experiment. A fuel conduction model has been developed for the blockage to consider the effect of the blockage on the temperature distribution of the fuel. Blockage at different position has been modeled and the middle blockage is selected as the calculation object. Blockage of inner and outer channel with different blockage rate has been calculated and the results of fuel temperature distribution, the heat split, the mass flow rate and the DNBR distribution has been obtained. Based on the analysis of the results, the blockage of inner and outer channel will have different effects on mass flow and heat split of the fuel, and the blockage of inner channel has a greater impact on DNBR and fuel temperature than that of outer channel.
Keywords：Flow blockage;Flow rate;Heat split;Temperature distribution;DNBR
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
During the operation of the nuclear reactor, some of the coolant channels in the fuel assembly may be blocked, and a large amount of research has been conducted on the flow blockage phenomenon in the fuel bundle. In most cases, the coolant channels in the fuel assembly are arranged in parallel, and the channel blockage will cause flow redistribution in the fuel assembly. As a result, the flow rate in the blocked channel decreases and the fuel temperature increases, threatening the safe operation of the reactor.
In order to analyze the flow redistribution caused by the blockage, a lot of experimental research and numerical simulation have been carried out. Tapucu et al. conducted an experiment with two laterally interconnected channels and one of which has a blockage.
Two types of blockages, plate and smooth have been considered in the experiment. The flow distribution and axial pressure distribution have been obtained (Tapucu et al., 1984). Teyssedou et al. studied the axial mass flow distribution of a two-phase flow in two laterally interconnected channels (Teyssedou et al., 1989). In addition to experimental studies, a large number of numerical simulations of channel blockages have been conducted. KAERI (Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute) has developed a sub-channel code named MATRA-LMR-FB and three types of blockages have been analyzed with the code (Jeong et al., 2009). Naveen Raj et al. has analyzed the thermal hydraulic consequences of planar blockage within a 217 pin wire wrapped fuel bundle by using the CFD approach (Naveen Raj and Velusamy, 2018). The flow and heat transfer characteristics of the coolant in the case of flow blockage in heavy liquid metal cooled fuel assemblies has been studied by Di Piazza et al., the results indicate that a maximum clad temperature around 800℃ can be obtained with a 15% blockage (Di Piazza et al., 2014). Ma et al. investigate the thermal hydraulic characteristics of flow blockage accidents in rectangular fuel assembly by CFD method and discuss the velocity and temperature distribution for some typical blockage cases (Ma et al., 2018).
A large number of studies on flow blockage have been carried out for different types of fuel and nuclear reactor. Many studies have been carried out on the analysis of the neutron physics, thermal hydraulics and mechanical performance of annular fuels (Blinkov et al., 2010, Deng et al., 2016a, Deng et al., 2016b, Zaidabadi et al., 2017). However, there are few studies on the flow blockage of annular fuel. The blockage of the inner and outer channels will have different effects on the thermal hydraulic performance and the analysis of flow blockage of the annular fuel is necessary. In this paper, a sub-channel code named SACAF-BF (Subchannel Analysis Code for Annular Fuel with Flow Blockage) has been developed and verified with the experiment results. The results of flow blockage of outer channel and inner channel has been obtained and discussed.
<Section>2. Mathematical and physical models</Section>
Although there are many sub-channel codes for calculating the thermal hydraulic characteristics of the annular fuel, these codes cannot be applied to the calculation of the blocking situation. In the case of blockage, the flow area of the blocked channel will change along the axial direction, and the governing equations needs to be modified accordingly. The governing equations for the inner and outer channels are as follows.
2.1. Governing equation
For the outer channel, the lateral flow between the channels needs to be considered. The equations of continuity, axial momentum, lateral momentum and energy need to consider lateral flow and turbulent mixing.
Continuity equation
@(1)
Axial momentum equation
@(2)
Transverse momentum equation
@(3)
Energy equation
@(4)
However, there is no lateral flow and turbulent mixing in the inner channel, terms related to lateral flow and turbulent mixing should be deleted from the equation of the outer channel when simulating the inner channel.
2.2. Fuel conduction model
The blockage will introduce an additional thermal resistance on the surface of the cladding, and the fuel conduction model needs to be modified. The conduction models for the blocked area and the unblocked area should be different. The fuel conduction model for the unblocked area is as follow.
@(5)
Where @ is the fuel or clad density (kg/m3), @ is the specific heat of the fuel or clad (J/kg•K), Vi is the volume of the node, qi-1,i is the heat flow from node i-1 to I (W), qi+1,i is the heat flow from node i + 1 to i (W),  is the volumetric heat generation rate (W/m3).
For the unblocked area, the outermost node of the fuel is on the outer surface of the cladding, however, considering the blockage is formed on the surface of the outer cladding, the outermost node of the fuel should be on the surface of the blockage. The node division diagram of the fuel is shown in Figs. 1 and 2.
Fig.1. Node division for unblocked fuel.
Fig.2. Node division for blocked fuel.
When considering the effect of blockage on the temperature distribution of the fuel, it is necessary to determine the thickness of the blockage. The calculation of the thickness of the blockage for inner channel and outer channel is different. In the current calculation, the blockage is set to stainless steel.
For the outer channel, the thickness of the blockage is calculated as follow.
Where d is the rod pitch,  is the blockage ratio, Aij is the initial flow area at the blockage and ro is the radius of the outer surface of the outer cladding.
For the inner channel, the calculation of the thickness of the blockage is simple.
Where ri is the radius of the outer surface of the inner cladding.
Once the thickness of the blockage is determined, the fuel conduction model for the blocked area can be established.
2.3. Heat transfer model
In order to obtain the convective heat transfer coefficient between the coolant and the fuel surface, the boiling heat transfer curve is divided into 5 different heat transfer regimes, which are ingle-phase liquid forced convection, subcooled nucleate boiling, saturated nucleate boiling, transition and film boiling, single-phase vapor forced convection. The heat transfer regime is determined by the local coolant condition of the axial interval and the fuel surface temperature of each fuel rod. The onset of nuclear boiling is determined by taking the maximum of the liquid phase forced convection and subcooled or saturated nucleate boiling heat transfer coefficients. The transition from pre-CHF to post-CHF conditions is assumed to occur when the local heat flux exceeds the calculated critical heat flux. The W-3 correlation is used to calculate the critical heat flux.
Where p is the pressure of the coolant, G is the mass flux,  is the equilibrium steam quality,  is the hydraulic diameter and  is the saturated liquid enthalpy.
Once the critical heat flux is determined, the DNBR of the axial interval can be obtained.
Where CHF is the critical heat flux and  is the heat flux of the fuel surface.
In addition, it is necessary to determine the coolant flow distribution and fuel heat distribution. The flow distribution of channels must meet the condition that the pressure drops of all channels are equal, and the heat split of the fuel needs to meet the condition that the temperature distribution of the fuel is continuous (Xia et al., 2019). The calculation results of DNBR in the code have been compared and verified with the VIPRE-01 code (Feng et al., 2007). The operating conditions are illustrated in Table 1. Figs. 3 and 4 give the distribution of DNBR in the axial height of the inner and outer channel. It can be seen that the calculation results of the two codes are in good agreement.
Table 1. Operation conditions for the calculation.
Fig.3. Comparison of DNBR in the inner channel.
Fig.4. Comparison of DNBR in the outer channel.
<Section>3. Code verification</Section>
To verify the code, the experiment conducted by Tapucu et al. (1984) is used to compare with the calculation results. In the experiment, the hydrodynamic behavior of two laterally interconnected channels with blockages in one of them has been studied. The mass flow rates and the pressures in the channels upstream and downstream of the blockage has been obtained. The geometry of the channel is given in Table 2.
Table 2. Geometry of the channel.
Figs. 5 and 6 give the comparison of the code predictions with experiments data on the pressure of the blocked channel and unblocked channel respectively. It can be seen that the pressures upstream and downstream of the blockage and unblocked channels decrease linearly. However, in the vicinity of the blockage, the pressure in the channel changes very sharply. In the blocked channel, the pressure will increase in the upstream area near the blockage, caused by the stagnation of the flow by the blockage and the deceleration resulting from the mass transfer to the unblocked channel, and there is a large pressure drop at the blockage. In the downstream area near the blockage, as the flow area of the blocked channel increases, the flow velocity drops and the pressure increases. In the unblocked channel, the pressure decrease faster in the upstream near the blockage due to the increase of the flow rate caused by the mass transfer, then there will be a recovery of the pressure due to the decrease of the flow rate. Obviously, the code calculation results are in good agreement with the experimental results.
Fig. 5. Comparison of the pressure distribution of the channel with blockage.
Fig. 6. Comparison of the pressure distribution of the channel without blockage.
Fig. 7 give the comparison of the code predictions with experiments data on the mass flow rate of the unblocked channel. Mass flow in the unblocked channel will increase first and then decrease due to pressure difference between channels.
Fig. 7. Comparison of the mass flow rate of the channel without blockage.
<Section>4. Results and discussion</Section>
In order to analyze the thermal hydraulic performance of the annular fuel under blocking conditions, a 5 × 5 fuel bundle is selected as the study object. The geometry of the annular fuel and the operating conditions are given in Tables 3 and 4. The fuel number and sub-channel number are shown in Fig. 8 and Fig. 9 respectively. Fig. 10 shows the radial power factor distribution of the fuel.
Table 3. Geometry of the annular fuel.
Table 4. Operating conditions.
Fig. 8. Fue numbering of 5 × 5 rod bundle.
Fig. 9. Sub-channel numbering of 5 × 5 rod bundle.
Fig. 10. Radial power factor distribution.
4.1. Flow blockage at different position
Flow blockage at different position with a same blockage rate (0.2) are calculated to investigate the effect of the rod power distribution and inlet/outlet effect of flow. Fig. 11 gives the flow changes in the blocked channel. At the blockage, there is a large drop in flow rate, and then the flow rate in the channel gradually recovers until it reaches the initial level. In addition, because the full recovery of the flow rate requires a certain distance, the coolant flow rate cannot be fully recovered in the case of outlet blockage. Fig. 12 shows the radial temperature distribution of the fuel at the blockage. The highest fuel temperature occurs when there is a blockage in the middle due to the fact that the highest power density of the position. Therefore, in order to analyze the effect of blockage on fuel temperature distribution and heat split, the modelling of the middle blockage is carried out in the subsequent analysis.
Fig. 11. Flow rate distribution of three types of blockage of the outer channel.
Fig. 12. Radial temperature distribution of the fuel at the blockage.
4.2. Flow blockage of the outer channel
Flow blockage with different blockage rate are calculated to investigate the effect of the blockage rate. The flow blockage happens at the middle of the sub-channel. Due to the power of fuel rod 13 is bigger than others, the flow blockage assumed to occur around sub-channel surrounding the rod (sub-channel 21). Three different blockage rate (0.2, 0.4, 0.6) are considered in the calculation (Fig. 13).
Fig. 13. Flow blockage of the outer channel.
Fig. 14 gives flow rate changes in sub-channel 21 with different blockage rate. It can be seen that the larger the blockage rate, the greater the flow rate reduction. And the recovery of the flow rate is slower with a greater blockage rate. Fig. 15 shows the fuel temperature distribution of rod 13, the temperature of the outer cladding is greater than the inner cladding due to the additional thermal resistance caused by blockage, and the temperature of the fuel pellet will be higher with a greater blockage rate.
Fig. 14. Flow rate distribution with different blockage rate of the outer channel.
Fig. 15. Fuel temperature distribution with different blockage rate (The blockage rate is 0.2, 0.4, 0.6 from left to right).
Fig. 16 gives the radial fuel temperature distribution at the blockage, the outer surface temperature of the outer cladding will be higher with a greater blockage rate. Besides, it can be seen that the temperature gradient of the outer ring of the pellet changes and the position of the highest temperature changes. Because of the heat split of annular fuel, the heat flux of the inner ring and the outer ring will changes if the temperature of the fuel changes. As the blockage rate increases, the temperature of the outer ring of the pellet will be higher than that of the inner ring, the position of the highest temperature moves outward. Table 5 gives the heat split at the blockage. As the highest temperature position moves outward, the heat share of the outer channel will be smaller and the heat share of the inner channel will be greater. Therefore, the fuel temperature distribution and the gradient of the fuel temperature changes. Fig. 17 gives the distribution of the outer surface temperature of outer cladding, a greater blockage rate results in a higher surface temperature. When the outer channel is blocked, the flow rate of the non-blocking area does not change much, therefore, there is no significant change in the surface temperature of the outer cladding in the unblocked position. Fig. 18 gives the DNBR distribution of the blocked channel. In the upstream of the blockage, there is no change in mass flow, so there is no change in DNBR. At the blockage, even though the flow rate decreases, the heat flux of the outer ring decreases due to the change of the heat split of the fuel, resulting in an increase in DNBR. The larger the channel blockage rate, the smaller the heat share of the outer channel. Therefore, the heat flux on the outer surface of the fuel will be smaller, and the DNBR will be larger. In the downstream of the blockage, the flow rate will be smaller with a greater blockage rate and DNBR will be smaller.
Fig. 16. Radial fuel temperature distribution at the blockage.
Table 5. Heat split at the blockage (blockage of outer channel).
Fig. 17. Outer cladding outer surface temperature distribution at the blockage.
Fig. 18. DNBR distribution of the blocked channel.
4.3. Flow blockage of the inner channel
Besides the calculation of the flow blockage of the outer channel, the flow blockage of the inner channel are calculated to consider the difference between inner and outer channel blockage. The blockage rate is same as that of the outer channel and the sub-channel (sub-channel 49) that flow blockage happens are illustrated in Fig. 19.
Fig. 19. Flow blockage of the outer channel.
Fig. 20 gives the flow distribution of the blocked channel. Different with the outer channel, the inner channel is an isolated channel, and no mass exchange occurs in the axial direction. Therefore, the flow rate of the inner channel does not change from the inlet to the outlet. The higher the blockage rate, the smaller the mass flow rate in the channel. Fig. 21 shows the coolant temperature distribution of the blocked channel. Channel with higher blocking rate has smaller mass flow and higher coolant temperature.
Fig. 20. Flow rate distribution with different blockage rate.
Fig. 21. Coolant temperature distribution with different blockage rate.
Fig. 22 gives the radial temperature distribution of the fuel at the blocked position. The outer surface temperature of the inner cladding will be higher with a higher blockage rate. Since the blockage only occurs on the inner surface of the fuel, there is no significant change in the temperature of the outer cladding. However, the temperature of the pellet near the outer surface will rise significantly. As with the situation of outer channel blockage, changes in the inner ring temperature results in the change of fuel temperature distribution and heat split of the fuel. Table 6 gives the heat split of the blockage. Contrary to the outer channel blockage, changes in the inner ring temperature results in the change of fuel temperature distribution and heat split of the fuel. The higher the blocking rate, the closer the highest temperature position is to the inner surface of the pellet, and the smaller the heat share of the inner channel. As a result, the heat share of the outer channel increases, the heat flux of the outer surface of the fuel increases and the temperature gradient of the pellet near the outer surface increases, but the temperature gradient of the pellet near the inner surface decreases.
Fig. 22. Radial fuel temperature distribution at the blockage.
Table 6. Heat split at the blockage (blockage of inner channel).
Fig. 23 gives the fuel temperature distribution of rod 13. Compared with the situation of outer channel blockage, it is obvious that the inner channel blockage will result in higher fuel temperature at the blockage. Fig. 24 gives the outer surface temperature distribution of the inner cladding. In the upstream of the blockage, the flow rater will be smaller with a higher blockage rate and the cladding temperature will be higher owing to the insufficient cooling capacity of the coolant in the blocked channel. Besides, due to the additional thermal resistance caused by the blockage, the cladding temperature will have a large rise at the blockage. Fig. 25 gives the DNBR distribution of the blocked channel, the DNBR will be smaller in the channel with greater blockage rate due to the smaller flow rate. At the blockage, the DNBR will be larger due to heat split of the fuel which is consistent with the situation of the blockage of the outer channel. However, due to the different characteristics of the internal and outer channels, the flow rate of the inner channel will decrease and will not return to the normal levels, the DNBR will be significantly reduced with greater blockage rate.
Fig. 23. Fuel temperature distribution with different blockage rate (The blockage rate is 0.2, 0.4, 0.6 from left to right).
Fig. 24. Outer surface temperature distribution of inner cladding.
Fig. 25. DNBR distribution of the blocked channel.
Compared with the results of the outer channel blockage, it can be found that the mass flow rate in the inner channel is reduced and unrecoverable owing to the fact that there is no lateral mass exchange in the inner channel. The coolant temperature in the channel increases and the increase in fuel temperature is more severe than the blockage of the outer channel. In addition, the DNBR will become smaller due to the decrease of the mass flow rate in inner channel. Therefore, the blockage of inner channel is more serious than the blockage of outer channel.
<Section>5. Conclusion</Section>
In this paper, a sub-channel called SACAF-BF has been developed and verified by the experiment which have been done by Tapucu et al. (1984). Blockage at different position has been calculated and the middle blockage is selected as the calculation object due to its higher temperature distribution. At last, calculation of inner and outer channel blockage with different blocking rates has been calculated and the results has been analyzed. The conclusions are as follow.
(1)
The flow changes in the blockage channel are different in the case of inner and outer channel blockage. The flow rate of outer channel will decrease first and then increase, but the flow rate inner channel will not increase.
(2)
The cladding temperature at the blockage will have a large rise due to the additional thermal resistance caused by the blockage, which will cause a change in the heat distribution between the inner and outer channels.
(3)
The heat flow distribution at the blockage will change and the DNBR will increase. Blockage of outer channel has little effect on the DNBR, but blockage of inner channel will cause a sharp drop in the DNBR.
(4)
The consequences of the blockage of inner channel is more serious than that of the blockage of outer channel.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Hang Xia: Conceptualization, Methodology. Yingwei Wu: Data curation, Writing - review & editing. Wenxi Tian: Visualization, Investigation. G.H. Su: Supervision. Suizheng Qiu: Software, Validation.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 11775174).
<Section>A. Supplementary data</Section>
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:
Download : Download XML file (302B)
Supplementary data 1.
<Section>Research data for this article</Section>
Data not available / The data that has been used is confidential
About research data
<Section>References</Section>
Blinkov et al., 2010
V.N. Blinkov, E.A. Boltenko, I.V. Elkin, I. Melikhov, S.L. Solovev
Prospectsfor using annular fuel elements in nuclear power engineering
Therm. Eng., 57 (2010), pp. 213-218
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Di Piazza et al., 2014
Di Piazza, Ivan, Maguglianib, Fabrizio, Tarantinoa, Mariano, Alemberti, Alessandro, 2014. A CFD analysis of flow blockage phenomena in ALFRED LFR demo fuel assembly. Nucl. Eng. Design 276, 202–215.
Google Scholar
Feng et al., 2007
D. Feng, P. Hejzlar, M.S. Kazimi
Thermal-hydraulic design of high power density annular fuel in PWRs
Nucl. Technol., 160 (2007), pp. 16-44
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Xia et al., 2019
H. Xia, L.u. Chuan, W.u. Yingwei, W.u. Zhenxing, G.H.S. Wenxi Tian, S. Qiu
Development of a subchannel analysis code and its application to annular fuel assemblies
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 129 (2019), pp. 428-436
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jeong et al., 2009
H.-Y. Jeong, K.-S. Ha, Y.-M. Kwon, Y.-B. Lee, D. Hahn
Analysis of three different types of blockage in a sodium flow path with the MATRA-LMR-FB code
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 36 (2009), pp. 583-589
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Naveen Raj and Velusamy, 2018
M. Naveen Raj, K. Velusamy
Investigations on thermal hydraulic consequences of planar blockage in a prototype sodium cooled fast reactor fuel subassembly
Progr. Nucl. Energy, 104 (2018), p. 4759
Google Scholar
Tapucu et al., 1984
Tapucu, A., Gencay, S., Troche, N., 1984. Experimental study of the diversion cross-flow caused by subchannel blockages. Vol. I: single-phase flow. EPRI Report NP- 3459.
Google Scholar
Teyssedou et al., 1989
A. Teyssedou, A. Tapucu, M. Geçkinli, M. Merilo
Axial mass flow distribution in two laterally interconnected channels with blockages
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 15 (4) (July–August 1989), pp. 605-626
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Deng et al., 2016a
Deng, Yangbin, Wu, Yingwei, Zhang, Dalin, Tian, Wenxi, Qiu, Suizheng, Su, G.H., 2016. Development of a thermal–mechanical behavior coupling analysis code for a dual-cooled annular fuel element in PWRs. Nucl. Eng. Design 301, 353–365.
Google Scholar
Deng et al., 2016b
Y. Deng, W.u. Yingwei, Y. Li, D. Zhang, G.H. Su, Wenxi Tian, Suizheng Qiu
Mechanism study and theoretical simulation on heat split phenomenon in dual-cooled annular fuel element
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 94 (2016), pp. 44-54
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zaidabadi et al., 2017
M. Zaidabadi, G.R. Ansarifar, M.H. Esteki
Thermal hydraulic analysis of VVER-1000 nuclear reactor with dual-cooled annular fuel using K–x SST Turbulence model
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 101 (2017), pp. 118-127
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ma et al., 2018
Zhenhui Ma, Ronghua Chen, Maolin Tian, Jian Song, G.H.Su. Dalin Zhang, Xiaorong Li, Linglan Zhou, Suizheng Qiu
Analysis of flow blockage accidents in rectangular fuel assembly based on CFD methodology
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 112 (2018), pp. 71-83
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar