<title>Interfacial area concentration and bubble size distribution measurement using tomography technique</title>
<author>1,HengweiZhang,2,YaoXiao,3,HanyangGu</author>
<Affiliation>1,School of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>International Journal of Multiphase Flow</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.ijmultiphaseflow.2021.103741</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301932221001889</URL>
Interfacial area concentration and bubble size distribution measurement using tomography technique
HengweiZhang,YaoXiao,HanyangGu
School of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
IAC and BSD are important parameters for two-phase flow modeling.
The calculation methods for the IAC and BSD were developed.
The methods are validated using simplified two-phase flow data.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Interfacial area concentration (IAC) and bubble size distribution (BSD) are two important parameters in two-phase flow simulations. High-speed tomography techniques, mainly including wire-mesh sensor and ultrafast X-ray imaging in this stage, are advanced measurement devices, which can measure the instantaneous phase distribution in the cross-section with high spatial resolution. In previous studies, IAC and BSD can be estimated by the tomography measurement data. However, the estimated value of the IAC or BSD is not satisfied in some conditions like flows with low superficial liquid velocity. In this study, the methods of estimating IAC and BSD based on tomography measurement were developed, which is independent of the superficial liquid velocity. The new methods use the area surrounded by every four measurement pixels as the control volume, which has a small thickness. The thickness of the control volume is the product of interfacial velocity and the time of single frame imaging. The local instantaneous IAC and BSD for each control volume was calculated. The time-area-averaged parameters can be calculated by averaging the local instantaneous ones. For the time-volume-averaged parameters, it can be calculated by integrating the time-area-averaged parameters at multiple axial positions. An ideal bubbly flow data with pre-defined IAC and BSD was used to verify the new methods. The measurement results from the new methods and the old methods were also compared with each other.
Keyword:Gas-liquid two-phase flow;Tomography technique;Interfacial area concentration;Bubble size distribution
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
In a gas-liquid two-phase flow, the gas phase and liquid phase are strongly coupled together. The mass, momentum, and energy transfer between the two phases happen through the interface. The amount of transfer can be written as (Fu and Ishii, 2002):
@(1)
where f is the flux density on the interface, and ai is interfacial area concentration (IAC).
Bubble size distribution (BSD) is also an important parameter in a gas-liquid two-phase flow, which can affect the flow structure and flow characteristics. For example, in a bubbly flow with high liquid velocity, the direction of the lift force toward the low liquid velocity region for small bubbles and the high liquid velocity region for large bubbles. Small bubbles will migrate to the wall and the large bubbles migrate to the channel's core region (Tomiyama et al., 2002). The BSD can affect void fraction profiles in the channel's cross-section. Furthermore, the BSD contains information about IAC. Once the void fraction and BSD have been determined, the IAC can also be determined.
Since the mutual occlusion of bubbles, it is difficult to observe the interface structure of two-phase flow by an optical method. However, local time-averaged parameters like void fraction, interface velocity, and IAC can be measured by probe techniques (Ishii and Kim, 2001). These time-averaged parameters have been used for the development of many two-phase models like the drift-flux model and interfacial area transport model (Ishii, 2011). However, the probe techniques can only get local statistical values, but cannot obtain higher-order results, like the instantaneous cross-sectional phase distribution or BSD.
The gas-liquid two-phase flow tomography techniques can get the instantaneous phase distribution in the channel's cross-section. Usually, the instantaneous tomography techniques refer to the wire-mesh sensor (Prasser et al., 1998) and ultrafast X-ray imaging (Hampel et al., 2005). The temporal and spatial resolutions can up to 2 mm and 10k fps for a wire-mesh sensor (Prasser et al., 2019; Prasser and Häfeli, 2018; Zhang et al., 2020), 1–2 mm and 8k fps for ultrafast X-ray tomography (Banowski et al., 2017). With the development of technology, the spatial and temporal resolution of both techniques will become higher, as well as new measurement techniques emerge.
The bubble recognition algorithms have been developed for different tomography techniques based on their signal characteristics. It mainly identifies the connected domain of high void fraction elements caused by gas bubbles. Two sets of tomography sensors fixed along the axial direction of the channel can be used to get the time delay of the signal and further to calculate the interfacial velocity and bubble velocity (Banowski et al., 2017). Once the bubble's velocity being determined, the bubble's volume (or size) can be determined. The bubble's surface can also be reconstructed based on the high spatial resolution data.
The two-fluid model is widely utilized in nuclear safety analysis codes, like TRACE and RELAP. These 1D codes focus on area-averaged parameter predictions. 1D two-phase model was developed based on the conservation in the control volume, like mass conservation, momentum conservation, and energy conservation. Once the thickness of these 1D control volumes was thin enough, the control volume averaged parameters can be regarded as the area-averaged parameters. An example of the area-averaged IAC was given as follows.
A simple one-dimensional example of energy conservation within a control volume is shown in Fig. 1. Take a small section of the flow channel as the control volume. In unit time (1 s), enthalpy of liquid phase flowing into the control volume is H1 (W); enthalpy of liquid phase leaving the control volume is H2 (W); increased enthalpy of the liquid phase within the control volume is ΔH (W); the total interface area of bubbles in the control volume is A (m2); the volume of the control volume is V (m3); the heat flux on the interface is f (W/m2) and assuming gas is hotter than liquid.
Fig. 1. Energy conservation in a control volume.
The energy conservation of the liquid phase within the control volume can be written as:
@(2)
Interfacial transfer term can be rewritten as:
@(3)
is the IAC in m2/m3:
@(4)
The denominator is the volume of the control volume, which is fixed in the space; the numerator is the interface in the control volume. If the thickness of the control volume in Fig. 4 is small enough, the control volume averaged IAC would become area-averaged IAC. Therefore, the area-averaged IAC is the most appropriate definition for use in the 1D codes.
In previous research, the volume-averaged IAC was estimated by dividing the total area of all bubbles by the total volume of gas-liquid mixture that flows through the measurement plane during the measuring period:
@(5)
where A is the total area of all bubbles passed the measuring plane, 〈jg〉 and 〈 jf 〉 are the superficial gas and liquid velocity, respectively; t is the duration of measurement, and Aduct is the area of the cross-section of the channel.
Eq. (5) was attempting to recover the averaged IAC for the whole channel, and it contains two implied assumptions. The first implied assumption is that the superficial liquid velocity should be much higher than the bubble drift velocity. Consider the limiting conditions with 〈jf〉 = 0 m/s, Eq. (5) would become (interfacial area)/(gas volume). It only depends on the average bubble diameter and independent of the number of bubbles, which is unsuitable to estimate the IAC. The second implied assumption is that after the tomography measurement plane, the evolution of IAC is not significant along the channel. Since only one axial position was measured by the tomography device, the evolution of IAC caused by bubble coalescence and breakup after the measuring plane cannot be included in the upstream measured data, not to mention the non-adiabatic conditions where the bubble nucleation and condensation occurs. A practical example is that the flow evolution in a small vertical pipe (Dang et al., 2017; Wang et al., 2019), where a drastic decrease of IAC along the pipe was observed at the transform conditions of bubbly flow to slug flow. If the upstream flow parameter was measured by the tomography device, Eq. (5) would overestimate the averaged IAC of the whole pipe volume, and vice versa.
The BSD is another important parameter for two-phase flow modeling, which can be used to determine the radial void fraction profile and liquid velocity profile in an advanced 1D two-phase flow modeling code (Lucas et al., 2001). Like the area-averaged IAC, area-averaged BSD should also be the more appropriate definition for use in the 1D codes. However, in previous research, the BSD of bubbles that have passed through the measuring plane during the measuring period (i.e., BSD in the recorded data) was used for the modeling code validation. In order to illustrate the difference between the area-averaged BSD and BSD in the recorded data, a simplified example was introduced.
A sketch of a gas-liquid two-phase flow is shown in Fig. 2. Even if it is quite different from the actual two-phase flow, it is still explicable. Due to the lift force, the small bubbles migrate toward the wall and the large bubbles toward the channel center. The topography techniques can record all of the bubbles across the measurement plane. Take a short section of the channel under the measurement plane as a control volume. Within the control volume, there are 24 small bubbles and 2 large bubbles, the ratio of small bubbles to the large bubbles is 12:1. If the control volume is thin enough, the area-averaged bubble ratio can be considered as 12:1. Since the velocity of bubbles in the center region is higher than that in the wall region, after a while, 48 small bubbles and 6 large bubbles pass through the measurement plane and being recorded by the tomography technique. The ratio of small bubbles to the large bubbles in the recorded data is 12:1.5, which deviates from the area-averaged value (12:1).
Fig. 2. The difference of BSD between in the control volume and the record results of a tomography technique.
If the algorithm of bubble diameter calculation performs perfectly with no error, the BSD of the recorded data should deviate from the area-averaged BSD. There are more bubbles with a high axial velocity would be recorded than those with low velocities. In a real gas-liquid two-phase flow, there are various bubble configurations. As long as there are non-uniform bubble velocity and bubble size, it cannot directly use BSD in the recorded data as they are area-averaged.
Although in many cases, the deviations of the parameters (IAC and BSD) between that from the old methods and the precise values are not significant, some published literature had made a comparison of IAC between a tomography method and probe techniques and get a great agreement (Manera et al., 2009). However, in some conditions, the measurement results would be not satisfied (like in pool conditions or interfacial structure drastically changed along the channel). A new method should be established to estimate the IAC and BSD in these flowing conditions.
<Section>2. Measurement method</Section>
In this section, the calculation of the void fraction was briefly reviewed. Then, the measurement methods of IAC and BSD were introduced, subsequently.
2.1. Measurement method of the void fraction
It is generally considered that the measurement plane of a tomography technique has a very thin thickness dh, as shown in Fig. 3(b). Thus, each control volume has a volume of . The instantaneous local void fraction of is:
@(6)
where @ is the void fraction value within a control volume @ at the kth frame,is the area occupied by the gas phase in Fig. 3(a). The numerator and the denominator are the volume of gas and control volume, respectively. It is in accordance with the definition of void fraction: the volume of the gas phase in a unit control volume.
Fig. 3. Void fraction within a control volume, a) top view; b) left view.
In a circular tube, the control volume near the wall can be cut by the curved wall, as shown in Fig. 4. For the global void fraction calculation, a weight factor wi,j, is used to consider the area of the control volume in the measurement range:
@(7)
where Ainside is the area that the control volume inside the measurement range, andare the pixel width in x and y direction.
Fig. 4. Wt factor of void fraction in a circular tube (Kipping et al., 2016).
The instantaneous area-averaged void fraction can be calculated by:
@(8)
The time-area-averaged void fraction can be calculated by:
@(9)
The interfacial structure changes with the flow development along the channel. In order to evaluate the channel volume-averaged parameters, measurements at multiple axial positions are necessary. As shown in Fig. 5, the tomography measurements were carried out at six different axial positions. The volume-averaged void fraction of the whole channel can be calculated based on the area-averaged void fraction as follows:
@(10)
Fig. 5. Tomography measurement at the different axial positions to evaluate volume-averaged parameters.
2.2. Measurement method of the IAC
According to the definition of IAC, it should be the area of the interface in a unity control volume. Considering a bubble passing through the measurement plane, as shown in Fig. 6(a). The interface in a control volume is shown in Fig. 6(b). The length of the intersecting line produced by the intersection of the interface and the measurement plane, l, can be calculated by the algorithm of tomography technology, as shown in Fig. 6(c). The angle of the interface in the control volume, θ, as shown in Fig. 6(d), can be calculated based on the information of the interface velocity, which can be obtained by correlation calculation of two tomography sensor, and the intersecting line of the former and latter frame. The area of the interface in the control volume can be calculated by:
@(11)
where @ is the interfacial area within a control volume @ at the kth frame. The IAC within a control volume @ at the kth frame can be calculated by:
@(12)
Fig. 6. Interfacial area within a control volume, a) a bubble passing through the measurement plane; b) interface in the control volume; c) length of the intersection line between interface and measurement plane; d) angle of the interface.
It is interesting to note that Eq. (12) is very similar to the formula used in the four-sensor conductivity probe to calculate IAC (Ishii and Kim, 2001), which calculates the IAC based on the inclination angle of the incoming interface.
The time-area-averaged IAC can be calculated by averaging the local instantaneous IAC within all control volume:
@(13)
Assume the tomography measurements were carried out at six different axial positions as shown in Fig. 5, the time-volume-averaged IAC can be calculated as:
@(14)
2.3. Measurement method of the BSD
Firstly, carry out the bubble identification algorithm and calculate each bubble's volume equivalent diameter in the recorded data. Then, all the elements that belong to a bubble are remarked with the bubble's diameter. During the measurement, the tomography technology gets the section of a bubble, as shown in Fig. 7. The bubble volume in the control volume is:
@(15)
Fig. 7. Bubbles intersect with the measurement plane and form circles of gas phase.
If this control volume belongs to a bubble with a diameter range from @ to , the BSD in this control volume is:
@(16)
The instantaneous area-averaged BSD at kth frame can be calculated by summing all the bubble frequency with weight:
@(17)
Time-area-averaged bubble frequency can be calculated by:
@(18)
Assume the tomography measurements were carried out at six different axial positions as shown in Fig. 5, the time-volume-averaged BSD can be calculated as:
@(19)
<Section>3. Examples</Section>
In this section, a simplified example of two-phase flow was used to verify the calculation method of time-area-averaged IAC and BSD developed above. Since the accuracy of real experimental data is limited by the resolution of the measurement device and the uncertainty of the data processing program, synthetic data with known IAC and BSD is more suitable than the real experimental data for verification purposes.
The flow configuration of a bubbly flow is shown in Fig. 8. In a circular tube with a diameter of 50 mm, the tube was divided into five concentric annuluses with a width of 5 mm. In the outmost layer, there are 60 spherical bubbles with a diameter of 2 mm. The axial distance of bubbles is 2.4 mm. Turn inward, the number of spherical bubbles is 20, 5, 2, and 1; the bubble diameter is 3, 4, and 4; the axial distance of the bubbles is 5.1, 5.7, 4.6, and 8.5 mm, respectively. With this bubble configuration assumption, the evolution of the interfacial structure along the tube has been ignored. The two-phase flow parameter like the void fraction, IAC, and BSD remains constant at different axial positions. The time-volume-averaged parameters equal to the time-area-averaged parameters. Although a more complex bubble configuration assumption including interfacial structure evolution like Fig. 5 is more accurate, the simplified bubble configuration used in this section is sufficient to verify the new methods to determine the time-area-averaged IAC and BSD.
Fig. 8. Configuration of a bubbly flow, a) top view of bubbles; b) side view bubbles; c) void fraction and bubble velocity profiles.
With this bubble configuration, the void fraction profile is a typical wall peak like a bubbly flow at high liquid velocity. Since the bubble configuration was done, the time- area-averaged parameters can be determined, which is 0.1064 for void fraction, 254.8 1/m for IAC; 0.507, 0.263, and 0.230 for the frequency of bubbles with a diameter of 2 mm, 3 mm, and 4 mm, respectively.
In order to simulate the measurement process of a tomography technique, the bubble's axial velocity follows the 1/7 law with 1 m/s at the duct center. It should be mentioned that the parameters in the control volume are independent of the bubble velocity in terms of measurement. Assume the tomography technology can obtain the instantaneous void fraction distribution and bubble velocity without any measuring error. Although the realistic tomography must contain a certain measuring error due to the limitation of spatial and temporal resolution, even the intrusive effects of electrodes, it has to ensure that the parameters can be calculated with no systematic error if the tomography technology can perform a perfect measurement. Time-area-averaged IAC and BSD are calculated based on the method developed above.
The variation of the time-area-averaged void fraction is shown in Fig. 9. In the beginning, the measured value is oscillating due to the insufficient measuring period. Then @ is close to the pre-set value, 0.1065. The comparisons of the measured IAC from the new method with that from the old method are shown in Fig. 10. Since the information of the liquid velocity is needed in the old method (Eq. (5)), the liquid velocity profile is assumed to be the bubble velocity minus the bubble drift velocity. The drift velocity is set to 0.23 m/s, which is about the drift velocity of a distorted bubble in an air-water two-phase flow under room temperature and pressure (Zhang et al., 2021). As shown in Fig. 10, the measured data from the new method is close to the pre-set value, 254.8 1/m, while the data from the old method result is deviated from the pre-set value and close to 315.7 1/m.
Fig. 9. Measured time-area-averaged void fraction.
Fig. 10. Comparisons between the measured IAC from the new method with that from the old method (bubble drift velocity is 0.23 m/s).
Obviously, the IAC calculated by the old method depends on the bubble drift velocity. The relationship between the calculated IAC from the old method and the pre-set bubble drift velocity for the synthetic two-phase flow is shown in Fig. 11. When the drift velocity is 0, the old method slightly underestimated the IAC. It is because more large bubbles with higher axial velocity have passed the measured plane and being recorded, which leads to a lower IAC result. With increasing the bubble drift velocity, the total volume of the two-phase flow flux (the denominator of Eq. (5)) decreases, the measured IAC increase. For this simplified two-phase flow configuration, the measured IAC from the old method is consistent with the pre-set value at the bubble drift velocity at 0.06 m/s. For an air-water two-phase flow at room temperature and pressure, with a drift velocity of about 0.23 m/s, the deviation between the measured result and the pre-set value is about 24%. If the bubble drift velocity is set to 0.5 m/s (such a large drift velocity is rare encountered in practice), the deviation is 103%. However, the above analysis is based on the synthetic bubbly flow. For a practical bubbly flow at ambient temperature and pressure, the deviation should be within 20% as long as the superficial liquid velocity larger than 1 m/s.
Fig. 11. Variation of time-area-averaged IAC measured from the old method with bubble drift velocity.
Fig. 12 shows the measured results of BSD from the new method and the old method. Both measured results are statistically stable after 0.04 s. The BSD from the new method closes to the pre-set value, while the old method overestimates the proportion of large bubbles (4 mm in diameter) and underestimates the small bubbles (2 mm in diameter). It is because the large bubbles are in the core region with higher axial velocity. During the measured period, more large bubbles passed the measured plane and being recorded. On the contrary, fewer small bubbles are recorded in the measured data. Thus, the proportion of large bubbles would be overestimated and small bubbles would be underestimated by the old method.
Fig. 12. BSD from: (a) new method; (b) old method.
<Section>4. Conclusions</Section>
In this paper, new calculation methods for the IAC and BSD of gas-liquid two-phase flow for tomography techniques are developed. There is no information on the liquid phase be involved in the new methods. A synthetic bubbly flow was used with a simplified bubble configuration and a bubble velocity profile to verify the calculation method. Assume the tomography technique can perfectly measure the instantaneous phase distribution, interface velocity, and interfacial inclination. The time-area-averaged IAC and BSD were obtained by the developed method approach to the setting values.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Hengwei Zhang: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Writing – original draft. Yao Xiao: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Methodology, Funding acquisition. Hanyang Gu: Writing – review & editing, Funding acquisition, Resources.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
No conflict of interest exits in the submission of this manuscript
<Section>Acknowledgments</Section>
This work was financially sponsored by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51806141 and 12075150).
<Section>Reference</Section>
Banowski et al., 2017
M. Banowski, M. Beyer, L. Szalinski, D. Lucas, U. Hampel
Comparative study of ultrafast X-ray tomography and wire-mesh sensors for vertical gas–liquid pipe flows
Flow Meas. Instrum., 53 (2017), pp. 95-106
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Dang et al., 2017
Z. Dang, G. Wang, P. Ju, X. Yang, R. Bean, M. Ishii, S. Bajorek, M. Bernard
Experimental study of interfacial characteristics of vertical upward air-water two-phase flow in 25.4mm ID round pipe
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 108 (2017), pp. 1825-1838
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fu and Ishii, 2002
X.Y. Fu, M. Ishii
Two-group interfacial area transport in vertical air-water flow
Nucl. Eng. Des., 219 (2002), pp. 143-168
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hampel et al., 2005
U. Hampel, M. Speck, D. Koch, H.J. Menz, H.G. Mayer, J. Fietz, D. Hoppe, E. Schleicher, C. Zippe, H.M. Prasser
Experimental ultra fast X-ray computed tomography with a linearly scanned electron beam source
Flow Meas. Instrum., 16 (2005), pp. 65-72
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ishii, 2011
M. Ishii
Thermo-fluid Dynamics of Two-Phase Flow
(2011)
Google Scholar
Ishii and Kim, 2001
M. Ishii, S. Kim
Micro four-sensor probe measurement of interfacial area transport for bubbly flow in round pipes
Nuclear Eng. Design, 205 (2001), pp. 123-131
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kipping et al., 2016
R. Kipping, R. Brito, E. Scheicher, U. Hampel
Developments for the application of the Wire-Mesh Sensor in industries
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 85 (2016), pp. 86-95
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lucas et al., 2001
D. Lucas, E. Krepper, H.-.M. Prasser
Prediction of radial gas profiles in vertical pipe flow on the basis of bubble size distribution
Int. J. Therm. Sci. (2001)
Google Scholar
Manera et al., 2009
A. Manera, B. Ozar, S. Paranjape, M. Ishii, H.M. Prasser
Comparison between wire-mesh sensors and conductive needle-probes for measurements of two-phase flow parameters
Nucl. Eng. Des., 239 (2009), pp. 1718-1724
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Prasser et al., 1998
H.-.M. Prasser, A. Bottger, J. Zschau
A new electrode-mesh tomograph for gas–liquid flows
Flow Meas. Instrum., 9 (1998), pp. 111-119
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Prasser et al., 2019
H.-.M. Prasser, M. Beyer, D. Lucas
Improvement of TOPFLOW Void Fraction Data Using Potential Field Simulations of the Wire-Mesh Sensor Response
SWINTH, Livorno, Italy (2019)
Google Scholar
Prasser and Häfeli, 2018
H.-.M. Prasser, R. Häfeli
Signal response of wire-mesh sensors to an idealized bubbly flow
Nucl. Eng. Des., 336 (2018), pp. 3-14
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tomiyama et al., 2002
A. Tomiyama, H. Tamai, I. Zun, S. Hosokawa
Transverse migration ofsingle bubbles in simple shear flows
Chem. Eng. Sci., 57 (2002), pp. 1849-1858
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2019
G. Wang, Q. Zhu, Z. Dang, X. Yang, M. Ishii
Prediction of interfacial area concentration in a small diameter round pipe
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 130 (2019), pp. 252-265
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhang et al., 2021
H. Zhang, Y. Xiao, H. Gu
Experimental investigation of two-phase flow evolution in a tight lattice bundle using wire-mesh sensor
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 171 (2021), Article 121079
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhang et al., 2020
H. Zhang, Y. Xiao, H. Gu, D. Liu
Study on bubbly and cap-bubbly flow in a square channel using dual wire-mesh sensors
Int. J. Multiphase Flow, 133 (2020), Article 103461
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar