<title>The flexible programming of thermodynamic cycles: Application of supercritical carbon dioxide Brayton cycles</title>
<author>1,DongpengZhao,2,ShuaiDeng,3,RuikaiZhao,4,LiZhao,5,WeicongXu,6,XitingLong</author>
<Affiliation>1,Key Laboratory of Efficient Utilization of Low and Medium Grade Energy (Tianjin University), Ministry of Education, Tianjin 300350, China;2,Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Deep Earth Science and Geothermal Energy Exploitation and Utilization, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Energy Conversion and Management</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier Ltd.</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.enconman.2021.114624</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0196890421008001</URL>
The flexible programming of thermodynamic cycles: Application of supercritical carbon dioxide Brayton cycles
DongpengZhao,ShuaiDeng,RuikaiZhao,LiZhao,WeicongXu,XitingLong
Key Laboratory of Efficient Utilization of Low and Medium Grade Energy (Tianjin University), Ministry of Education, Tianjin 300350, China
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Deep Earth Science and Geothermal Energy Exploitation and Utilization, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
A method that integrates parametric and graphical analysis of cycles is proposed.
Three basic logical operations in the flexible programming of cycles are identified.
A complex cycle can be decomposed into several simple cycles using this method.
Parametric analyses of complex cycles only need physical models of simple cycles.
The method provides a new perspective to easily understand complex cycles.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
A growing number of complex thermodynamic cycles, such as different configurations of supercritical carbon dioxide (sCO2) Brayton cycles, have been recently proposed. However, the understanding and analysis of complex cycles are very arduous and time-consuming, due to the lack of a general theory for cycle analysis and numerous equations included in physical models of cycles. To address these challenges, a novel method named the flexible programming of thermodynamic cycles (FPTC) is developed based on the graphical analysis in the T-s diagram. Within the theoretical framework of the FPTC, the complex cycle can be obtained by performing logical operations of several simple cycles in the T-s diagram. Meanwhile, the type of logical operation also determines the relationship of the thermodynamic performance indexes (heat input, heat output, net-work output, and thermal efficiency) between the synthetic complex cycle and simple cycles. There are three basic types of logical operation (addition, subtraction, and interchange) in the FPTC, and the detailed rules in each logical operation are presented by using the Carnot cycle as the basic simple cycle. In the case study, four different configurations of sCO2 Brayton cycles are analyzed using the FPTC, and their evolutions from simple Brayton cycles to complex are shown. Meanwhile, the thermal efficiencies of different configurations can be calculated by efficiency formulas obtained from the FPTC. Results show this case analysis is an efficient approach to analyze complex cycles. The FPTC is not only a graphical analysis method to study the evolution of complex cycles, but also provides a simple method to calculate the performance of synthetic complex cycles. It allows researchers to evaluate the performance of synthetic cycles by physical models of simple cycles, instead of building physical models for complex cycles. Furthermore, the FPTC also provides a new perspective for constructing or designing complex thermodynamic cycles.
Keywords:Supercritical CO2 Brayton cycle;Graphical analysis;Thermodynamic analysis;Cycle design
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
1.1. Role of thermodynamic cycles
During the second industrial revolution, breakthroughs in power generation technology and the invention of various electrical devices brought human society into the age of electricity. Electricity has gradually become a necessary element to ensure the smooth running of social activities. Although many technologies can directly generate electricity from various fuels, such as fuel-cell technology [1], the main source of electricity remains conversing fuels into thermal energy, then into mechanical energy, and finally into electricity. These three conversions are achieved by fuel combustion, thermodynamic power cycle, and power generation technology based on electromagnetic induction, respectively. In terms of the current level of technology, combustion and power generation technologies are relatively mature and highly efficient (higher than 90% in most cases). The efficiency of the thermodynamic power cycle is relatively low (lower than 50% in most cases), although research on it has been going on for nearly 200 years. This is partly because of the limitation of Carnot’s law and partly because simple thermodynamic cycles are not very suitable for the real conditions of heat sources and sinks. Therefore, it could be claimed that the thermodynamic cycle is the current technical bottleneck and core of power generation.
To break through this bottleneck, scientists have been making various attempts. On the one hand, scientists are trying to circumvent the heat-work conversion process to avoid the limitation of Carnot’s law, such as thermoelectric devices [2], fuel cells [1], [3], thermoelectrochemical cells [4], [5], and so on. However, these technologies are currently unable to replace the thermodynamic cycle as the dominant technology for power generation due to their lower efficiency and smaller scale. On the other hand, scientists are trying to propose some new and complex thermodynamic cycles to improve the thermal efficiency of the energy system, such as the Kalina cycle [6], the supercritical carbon dioxide (sCO2) Brayton cycle with different configurations [7], [8], the composition adjustment Organic Rankine cycle (ORC) [9], [10], combined refrigeration and power cycle [11], [12], and so on. As things stand today, studies on complex thermodynamic cycles are more valuable for the foreseeable future.
1.2. The supercritical CO2 Brayton cycle
Among the many complex thermodynamic cycles, the sCO2 Brayton cycle is considered as a promising alternative in many applications, such as fossil fuel-fired power [13], nuclear power [14], concentrated-solar power [15], [16], and waste-heat recovery [17], [18]. Within the last decade, a large number of research papers have been published focusing on three aspects such as thermodynamic analysis and optimization of different cycle configurations or layouts [19], [20], key components design [21], [22], and the applications and experiments in different scenarios [23], [24].
Since the configuration has a great impact on cycle performance, there are many kinds of configurations that have been proposed for the sCO2 Brayton cycle. Most of the existing configurations are extended from the recuperated cycle by adding the process of reheating, recompression, precompression, inter-cooling, or any combination thereof. These modification measures were usually adopted empirically to overcome some of the shortcomings of the original cycle configurations. To overcome the mismatch of heat capacities between the hot and cold CO2 fluids in the recuperator, the recompression cycle was studied by Dyreby et al. [25]. To reduce the heat released in the cooler, Turchi et al. [26] recommend the inter-cooling cycle. To reduce the pressure at which the cycle absorbs heat from the heat source, the recompression cycle heated at low pressure was proposed by Linares et al. [27]. Recently, some more efficient methods have been introduced into the design of cycle configurations. Ma et al. [15] introduced the superstructure-based method into the design of sCO2 Brayton cycle configurations. This method is a heuristic approach and was previously used in the cycle configuration design of ORC and steam Rankine cycles. Carraro et al. [19] applied the methodology called “HEATSEP” in the evolution of the configurations of sCO2 Brayton cycles. These methods can identify many more complex configurations of sCO2 Brayton cycles with the help of computer and permutation and combination. However, the complex configurations of sCO2 Brayton cycles bring a great difficulty to the analysis of Brayton cycles. Researchers need to build more complex physic models to analyze cycles and find out the cause of change in cycle performance, which is very arduous and time-consuming. Thus, a generalized theory is missing for the sCO2 Brayton cycle but urgently needed to simplify the analysis and guide the design of configurations in the thermodynamic cycle.
1.3. Analysis methods for thermodynamic cycles
The analysis of thermodynamic cycles can be divided into two categories. One is parametric analysis, the other is graphical analysis. Parametric analysis generally divides the parameters involved in thermodynamic cycles into independent variables and dependent variables and then establishes physical models of thermodynamic cycles. By changing the values of independent variables within the ranges defined in advance, the effects of independent variables on dependent variables are studied. Parametric analysis of complex cycles is very time-consuming because the physical model of a complex cycle contains many equations. To reduce the computation time, heuristic algorithms, such as genetic algorithms and particle swarm optimization algorithms, are widely used in parameter analysis and optimization [28], [29]. With the rapid development of computer science, data-driven methods are also gradually adopted for parameter prediction and analysis [30], [31].
Graphical analysis usually focuses on the thermodynamic cycle diagram, which is the closed polygon constructed by the curves of the thermodynamic processes in a property diagram (such as the p-v or T-s diagram). By changing the shape of the polygon, the effects of processes on the performance of thermodynamic cycles are studied, and the measures to improve the performance of thermodynamic cycles are put forward. Clapeyron first introduced the graphical method into the analysis of thermodynamic cycles in 1843, when the Carnot cycle was expressed by a closed quadrilateral on a p-V diagram [32]. Later, the work of Gibbs and many other scientists on the physical properties, equation of state, and phase transitions of common fluids provided many diagrams of properties for graphical analysis of thermodynamic cycles [32], [33]. The T-s diagram is widely used in the graphical analysis of thermodynamic power cycles. For example, Xinguo Li [34] proposed a trapezoidal cycle by making some simplifications on ORC in the T-s diagram. Furthermore, the T-s-θ diagram [35] and T-h diagram [36] were also introduced into the graphical analysis of the modified power cycle.
Parametric analysis is mostly used in quantitative situations such as cycle analysis and optimization, while graphical analysis is mostly used in qualitative situations such as cycle design and modification. The integration of quantitative methods and qualitative methods will elevate the analysis of thermodynamic cycles to a higher level. A few meaningful attempts have been made to integrate parametric analysis and graphical analysis of thermodynamic cycles. Wang et al. [37] proposed a new thermodynamic cycle separating method to analyze the ORC on the T-s diagram. In their paper, an ORC can be separated into one Triangle cycle, one Carnot cycle, and one Brayton cycle. The thermal efficiency of ORC can also be expressed as a complex function of thermal efficiencies of the Triangle cycle, Carnot cycle, and Brayton cycle. Xin et al. [13], [38] proposed a thermodynamic cycle splitting analytical method to evaluate the performance of the modified steam Rankine cycle, and then extend this method to the analysis of the sCO2 Brayton cycle. In the method they proposed, the modified cycle is considered as the combination of the host cycle and one/several equivalent power cycles. The equivalent power cycles are added or deducted from the original cycles according to the increase or decrease of heat input and the power output caused by the modification measures. This method allows the modification process of thermodynamic cycles to be visually illustrated in the T-s diagram, and the efficiency improvement of modified cycles is expressed as a function of thermal efficiencies and heat inputs of the host cycle and equivalent cycles. These methods are very interesting and bring us a lot of inspiration. However, studies of Wang et al. [37] and Xin et al. [13], [38] are limited to the analysis of special cycles, rather than further theoretical development. Therefore, the generality of these methods is insufficient. Such a method is generalized only if it develops a complete methodology based on the ideal cycle.
1.4. The novelty of this work
In this study, to address the difficulty in understanding, designing, analyzing complex thermodynamic cycles, the flexible programming of thermodynamic cycles (FPTC) is developed based on the graphical analysis of Carnot cycles in the T-s diagram. Within the theoretical framework of the FPTC, a complex cycle (called the synthetic cycle) can be obtained by several simple cycles through specific logical operations, which can be visually illustrated in the T-s diagram. Meanwhile, the type of logical operation also determines the relationship of thermodynamic performance indexes (heat input, heat output, net-work output, and thermal efficiency) between the synthetic cycle and simple cycles, which provides a link between graphical analysis and parametric analysis. Therefore, the main contribution of this study will provide a general theory that, on the one side, help to understand the design and modification of complex thermodynamic cycles and, on the other side, simplify the analysis of complex thermodynamic cycles.
The structure of this paper is planned as follows: the description of the FPTC is presented in Section 2. Three basic types of logical operation in the FPTC are identified, and the detailed rules in different types of logical operation are presented by using the Carnot cycle as the basic simple cycle. The relationship of the thermodynamic performance indexes (heat input, heat output, net-work output, and thermal efficiency) between the synthetic cycle and simple cycles are revealed for different types of logical operation. Then, the applications of the FPTC on sCO2 Brayton cycles are presented in Section 3. Four main configurations of sCO2 Brayton cycles are chosen to demonstrate the implementation of the proposed method in the common complex cycles. Finally, Section 4 provides the main conclusion and future work.
<Section>2. Methodology</Section>
The Carnot cycle is the most classical ideal cycle, and other ideal cycles can be regarded as the evolution of the Carnot cycle. In this study, the Carnot cycle and T-s diagram are chosen to demonstrate the flexible programming of thermodynamic cycles. To facilitate subsequent descriptions, several basic definitions are given firstly. In this section, the red cycle is named Cycle 1, and the blue cycle is named Cycle 2. The heat input, heat output, net-work output, thermal efficiency, and mass flow rate of cycles are denoted by Qin, Qout, W, η, and m, respectively. In addition, C1, C2, and C represent Cycle 1, Cycle 2, and the synthetic cycle, as subscripts.
The flexible programming of thermodynamic cycles includes three basic types of logical operation, namely addition, subtraction, and interchange.
2.1. Addition
The addition of thermodynamic cycles means that two simple cycles share several processes, and the mass flow rate of these shared processes is the sum of the mass flow rates of two cycles. It is represented by the coincidence of process curves of two cycles in the T-s diagram. According to the relative position of Cycle 1 and Cycle 2, the addition of cycles is divided into internal addition and external addition. Internal addition means that Cycle 2 is inside of Cycle 1, while external addition means that Cycle 2 is outside of Cycle 1.
2.1.1. The internal addition
The internal addition can also be divided into three categories, including horizontal addition, vertical addition, and partial addition, which are shown in Fig. 1, Fig. 2, and Fig. 3 respectively.
Fig. 1. The internal-horizontal addition of thermodynamic cycles.
Fig. 2. The internal-vertical addition of thermodynamic cycles.
Fig. 3. The internal-partial addition of thermodynamic cycles.
For horizontal addition, the temperature differences of Cycle 1 and Cycle 2 are equal, and the high- and low-temperature reservoirs for the two cycles are the same temperature. As shown in Fig. 1, Cycle 2 is added to the left side of Cycle 1 to obtain the synthetic cycle (the rightmost cycle). The red and blue processes maintain the original mass flow rate and direction, while the mass flow rate of gold processes is equal to the sum of mC1 and mC2, and the direction of gold processes is the same as the direction of the two original processes before the addition because the direction of processes which are used to add is the same. In addition to the situation shown in Fig. 1, Cycle 2 can also be added to the right side of Cycle 1.
For vertical addition, the differences in specific entropy of Cycle 1 and Cycle 2 are equal, and one of the high- and low-temperature heat sources for the two cycles is the same temperature. This means the specific heat input or heat output of two cycles is equal. As shown in Fig. 2, Cycle 2 is added to the bottom of Cycle 1 to obtain the synthetic cycle (the rightmost cycle). The red and blue processes maintain the original mass flow rate and direction, while the mass flow rate of gold processes is equal to the sum of mC1 and mC2, and the direction of gold processes is the same as the direction of the two original processes before the addition because the direction of processes which are used to add is the same. In addition to the situation shown in Fig. 2, Cycle 2 can also be added to the top of Cycle 1.
For partial addition, the differences in temperature and specific entropy of Cycle 2 are smaller than those of Cycle 1, and the high temperature of Cycle 2 is lower than that of Cycle 1 while the low-temperature of Cycle 2 is not lower than that of Cycle 1. As shown in Fig. 3, Cycle 2 is added to the left-bottom corner of Cycle 1 to obtain the synthetic cycle (the rightmost cycle). The red and blue processes maintain the original mass flow rate and direction, while the mass flow rate of gold processes is equal to the sum of mC1 and mC2, and the direction of gold processes is the same as the direction of processes before the addition because the direction of processes which are used to add is the same. In addition to the situation shown in Fig. 3, Cycle 2 can also be added to other places inside Cycle 1, as long as Cycle 2 has at least one process that is shared with Cycle 1.
The logical operation of thermodynamic cycles not only establishes the graphical relationship between the synthetic cycle and simple cycles, but also establishes the relationship of performance index (heat input, heat output, and net-work output) between the synthetic cycle and simple cycles. Fig. 4 shows the relationships of heat input, heat output, and net-work output between the synthetic cycle and simple cycles in the case of internal-horizontal addition of thermodynamic cycles. The area of the light purple region represents the net-work output of Cycle 1 or Cycle 2, and the area of the light orange region represents the heat output of Cycle 1 or Cycle 2. When Cycle 1 and Cycle 2 perform the logical operation of internal-horizontal addition, the net-work output and heat output of the synthetic cycle is equal to the sum of those of Cycle 1 and Cycle 2, as shown in the far right of Fig. 4. Therefore, the heat input of the synthetic cycle is also equal to the sum of that of Cycle 1 and Cycle 2. The relationship of thermal efficiency between the synthetic cycle and simple cycles can be easily deduced. Due to the limitation of space, the detailed derivation of different cases will not be presented in this paper, only results are given. For all cases of internal addition, net-work output, the heat input, heat output, and thermal efficiency of the synthetic cycle can be deduced as:
@(1)
@(2)
@(3)
@(4)
where k1 is the ratio of heat input of Cycle 2 to Cycle 1, and k1 is calculated by using:
@(5)
Fig. 4. The relationships of heat input, heat output, and net-work output between the synthetic cycle and simple cycles (Take internal-horizontal addition as an example).
2.1.2. The external addition
The external addition can also be divided into two categories, including horizontal addition and vertical addition.
For horizontal addition, the specific entropy of the work-input process in Cycle 2 is equal to the specific entropy of the work-output process in Cycle 1, or the specific entropy of the work-output process in Cycle 2 is equal to the specific entropy of the work-input process in Cycle 1. And the temperature ranges of the two cycles must overlap. As shown in Fig. 5, Cycle 2 is added to the left side of Cycle 1 to obtain the synthetic cycle (the rightmost cycle). The red and blue processes maintain the original mass flow rate and direction, while the mass flow rate of gold processes is equal to the absolute value of mC1 minus mC2 because the direction of the process shared by two cycles is reversed. The direction of gold processes is determined by the direction of process with a larger mass flow rate. In addition to the situation shown in Fig. 5, Cycle 2 can also be added to the right side of Cycle 1.
Fig. 5. The external-horizontal addition of thermodynamic cycles.
For the case of external-horizontal addition, the net-work output, heat input, heat output, and thermal efficiency of the synthetic cycle can be deduced as follows:
@(6)
@(7)
@(8)
@(9)
It’s worth mentioning that if the mass flow rate of two cycles is equal, the golden process will disappear. A similar case was studied by Wang et al. in the analysis of the ORC [37].
For vertical addition, the differences in specific entropy of Cycle 1 and Cycle 2 are not equal. According to the relative vertical positions of two cycles, the vertical addition can be divided into two categories. The first category is that the smaller cycle (Cycle 2) is below the larger cycle (Cycle 1), which means that the low temperature of Cycle 1 is equal to the high temperature of Cycle 2, as shown in Fig. 6. The second category is that the smaller cycle (Cycle 2) is on the top of the larger cycle (Cycle 1), which means that the high temperature of Cycle 1 is equal to the low temperature of Cycle 2, as shown in Fig. 7. The red and blue processes maintain the original mass flow rate and direction, while the mass flow rate of gold processes is equal to the absolute value of mC1 minus mC2 because the direction of the process shared by two cycles is reversed. The direction of gold processes is determined by the direction of the process with a larger mass flow rate. In addition to the situation shown in Fig. 6 and Fig. 7, Cycle 2 can also be moved leftward and rightward.
Fig. 6. The external-vertical addition of thermodynamic cycles (the smaller cycle is below the larger cycle).
Fig. 7. The external-vertical addition of thermodynamic cycles (the smaller cycle is on the top of the larger cycle).
For the case of external-vertical addition shown in Fig. 6, the net-work output, heat input, heat output, and thermal efficiency of the synthetic cycle can be deduced below:
If
@(10)
@(11)
@(12)
@(13)
If
@(14)
@(15)
@(16)
@(17)
For the case of external-vertical addition shown in Fig. 7, the heat input, heat output, net-work output, and thermal efficiency of synthetic cycle can be deduced as:
If :
@(18)
@(19)
@(20)
@(21)
If :
@(22)
@(23)
@(24)
@(25)
It’s worth mentioning that if the mass flow rate of two cycles is the same, the external addition of thermodynamic cycles will obtain some duplicate cases with the subtraction of thermodynamic cycles. This will be explained in more detail after the introduction of the subtraction of thermodynamic cycles in the next subsection. So, the case that the mass flow rates of two cycles are equal is not described for vertical addition in this subsection.
2.2. Subtraction
The subtraction of thermodynamic cycles is to eliminate the overlap between two simple cycles, which requires that the mass flow rate of overlapping processes is the same. In the T-s diagram, it is represented by cutting a small polygon (the smaller cycle) out of a large polygon (the larger cycle). According to the relative position of Cycle 1 and Cycle 2, the subtraction of cycles is divided into three categories. The first category is subtracting a smaller cycle from the top of the larger cycle, and the second is subtracting a smaller cycle in the middle of a larger cycle, and the third is subtracting a smaller cycle from the bottom of the larger cycle.
2.2.1. Subtracting a smaller cycle from the top of the larger cycle
Subtracting a smaller cycle from the top of the larger cycle means that two cycles have the same high temperature. As shown in Fig. 8, Cycle 2 is subtracted from the top of Cycle 1 to obtain the synthetic cycle (the rightmost cycle). After the subtraction, the overlapping processes between two cycles disappear because the mass flow rate of these processes is the same. The red processes maintain the original mass flow rate and direction, and the mass flow rate of gold processes is equal to the mC1 or mC2 (mC1 = mC2). The direction of gold processes, which is the remaining processes (gold processes) of Cycle 2, becomes reverse. In addition to the situation shown in Fig. 8, Cycle 2 can also be shifted left and right.
Download : Download high-res image (92KB)Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 8. The subtraction of thermodynamic cycles (top).
For the case of subtraction shown in Fig. 8, the net-work output, heat input, heat output, and thermal efficiency of the synthetic cycle can be calculated as follows:
@(26)
@(27)
@(28)
@(29)
2.2.2. Subtracting a smaller cycle in the middle of a larger cycle
Subtracting a smaller cycle in the middle of the larger cycle means that the high temperature of Cycle 2 is lower than that of Cycle 1, while the low temperature of Cycle 2 is higher than that of Cycle 1. As shown in Fig. 9, Cycle 2 is subtracted in the middle of Cycle 1 to obtain the synthetic cycle (the rightmost cycle). After the subtraction, the overlapping processes between two cycles disappear because the mass flow rate of these processes is the same. The red processes maintain the original mass flow rate and direction, and the mass flow rate of gold processes is equal to the mC1 or mC2 (mC1 = mC2). The direction of gold processes, which is the remaining processes (gold processes) of Cycle 2, becomes reverse. In addition to the situation shown in Fig. 9, Cycle 2 can also be shifted to the right.
Fig. 9. The subtraction of thermodynamic cycles (middle).
For the case of subtraction shown in Fig. 9, the net-work output, heat input, heat output, and thermal efficiency of the synthetic cycle can be calculated as follows:
@(30)
@(31)
@(32)
@(33)
2.2.3. Subtracting a smaller cycle from the bottom of the larger cycle
Subtracting a smaller cycle from the bottom of the larger cycle means that two cycles have the same low temperature. As shown in Fig. 10, Cycle 2 is subtracted from the bottom of Cycle 1 to obtain the synthetic cycle (the rightmost cycle). After the subtraction, the overlapping processes between two cycles disappear because the mass flow rate of these processes is the same. The red processes maintain the original mass flow rate and direction, and the mass flow rate of gold processes is equal to mC1 or mC2 (mC1 = mC2). The direction of gold processes, which is the remaining processes (gold processes) of Cycle 2, becomes reverse. In addition to the situation shown in Fig. 10, Cycle 2 can also be shifted left and right.
Fig. 10. The subtraction of thermodynamic cycles (bottom).
For the case of subtraction shown in Fig. 10, the net-work output, heat input, heat output, and thermal efficiency of the synthetic cycle can be calculated as follows:
@(34)
@(35)
@(36)
@(37)
It’s worth noting that if the golden processes of the synthetic cycle in Fig. 6 disappear, the synthetic cycle in Fig. 10 will look exactly like the synthetic cycle in Fig. 6. The same applies to Fig. 7 and Fig. 8. That is, if the mass flow rate of the two cycles in Fig. 7 or 6 is equal, the external-vertical addition and subtraction will lead to the same result. The difference is that Cycle 1 and Cycle 2 for subtraction are selected differently in external-vertical addition and subtraction. As shown in Fig. 11(a) and (b), two smaller cycles are selected as Cycle 1 and Cycle 2 in external-vertical, while one largest cycle and one smaller cycle are selected as Cycle 1 and Cycle 2 in subtraction. Therefore, the two methods can be flexibly selected according to the actual situation during the analysis of thermodynamic cycles.
Fig. 11. Different choices of cycles in (a) addition and (b) subtraction of thermodynamic cycles.
2.3. Interchange
The interchange of thermodynamic cycles means that part of the simple cycle is moved from one side to another side, as shown in Fig. 12(a). In the process of the interchange of thermodynamic cycles, all cycles are considered reversible and there is no internal heat transfer. Therefore, the net-work output remains the same, while the heat input and heat output will change. The interchange of thermodynamic cycles can be achieved by using addition and subtraction at the same time. So, Fig. 12(a) can be illustrated by Fig. 12(b), and the mass flow rate of Cycle 1 and Cycle 2 is the same. In the synthetic cycle (the rightmost cycle), the red processes maintain the original mass flow rate and direction, and the mass flow rate of gold processes is equal to mC1 or mC2 (mC1 = mC2). The direction of gold processes is the same as the direction of red processes. Moreover, the position of the replaced part can also change, and will not be described in this study.
Fig. 12. The interchange of thermodynamic cycles (a), and the hybrid of addition and subtraction (b).
For the interchange of thermodynamic cycles shown in Fig. 12, the net-work output, heat input, heat output, and thermal efficiency of the synthetic cycle can be deduced below:
@(38)
@(39)
@(40)
@(41)
In general, the addition of thermodynamic cycles increases the net-work output of the synthetic cycle, and the subtraction of thermodynamic cycles results in a decrease in the net-work output of the synthetic cycle, while the interchange of thermodynamic cycles does change the net-work output of the synthetic cycle. For the interchange, the heat input and the heat output will change because the shape of the cycle will change. Although it can be considered as a special case of the hybrid of addition and subtraction, the interchange has the more important function that makes it a basic logical operation. Taking Fig. 12 (a) as an example, if the synthesis cycle is transformed into a Carnot cycle by using the interchange. The net-work output of the synthesis cycle does change, while the heat input of the synthesis cycle decreases. The actual effect of interchange is to achieve internal heat recovery. Therefore, the interchange of thermodynamic cycles is considered as a basic logical operation for the FPTC. However, for the real working fluids, the shapes of the curves of the endothermic process and exothermic process are different in the T-s diagram, so the interchange of thermodynamic cycles can not be directly used in the real case. To the authors’ knowledge, the Stirling cycle can be approximated into the Carnot cycle using the interchange. For the foregoing reasons, the application of the interchange of thermodynamic cycles in real cases will not be introduced in this study.
<Section>3. Case study of supercritical CO2 Brayton cycles</Section>
In this section, four configurations of sCO2 Brayton cycles are selected to demonstrate the application of the FPTC. There are many different configurations of the sCO2 Brayton cycle, and they can be used in a variety of situations. In this study, only four classical configurations are selected, namely reheating cycle, recompression cycle, recompression and reheating cycle, and partial-cooling and reheating cycle.
3.1. Supercritical CO2 Brayton cycle with reheating
The simple sCO2 Brayton cycle consists of only four reversible processes, namely adiabatic compression, isobaric heating, adiabatic expansion, and isobaric cooling. Due to the limitation of material stability, the maximum temperature of the sCO2 Brayton cycle cannot be too high. If the maximum temperature of the simple sCO2 Brayton cycle is directly lowered, this will result in a larger loss of net-work output. Therefore, to retain as much net-work output as possible, only the upper right corner of the simple sCO2 Brayton needs to be removed in the T-s diagram.
As shown in Fig. 13, the sCO2 Brayton cycle with reheating can be obtained by subtracting a smaller simple Brayton cycle (Cycle 2) from the upper right corner of the larger simple Brayton cycle (Cycle 1). In this case, only the net-work output of the smaller Brayton cycle is lost. The mass flow rate of these two cycles must satisfy the following relationship:
@(42)
Fig. 13. The flexible programming of sCO2 Brayton cycle with reheating.
And the net-work output and heat input of the sCO2 Brayton cycle with reheating can be calculated as follows:
@(43)
@(43)
The thermal efficiency of the sCO2 Brayton cycle with reheating can be calculated from:
@(44)
where k1 is the ratio of heat input of Cycle 2 to Cycle 1, and k1 is calculated by using:
(45)
A case study is carried out to show the relationship between the thermal efficiency of the sCO2 Brayton cycle with reheating and k1. The basic parameters of Cycle 1 and Cycle 2 are listed in Table 1. All processes in cycles are assumed to be ideally reversible. This assumption is made because the irreversibility of the processes would destroy the graphical rigor of the logical operation. Moreover, the analysis considering irreversibility can be obtained by degenerating based on the analysis of reversible cycles. This is also the approach that is often used in thermodynamic analysis of real cycles. The core of the FPTC is to build a general theory about the evolution from simple cycles to complex cycles, rather than to conduct accurate performance analysis of real complex cycles. Therefore, the assumption that all processes are reversible is acceptable.
Table 1. Basic parameters of Cycle 1 and Cycle 2 (for the sCO2 Brayton cycle with reheating).
Fig. 14 shows the variations of thermal efficiencies of Cycle 1, Cycle 2, and synthetic cycle with k1 at different t3. Under the condition that is specified by Table. 2, the ηC1 remains constant for each t3, while the ηC2 varies with tb. As shown in Fig. 12, when k1 is increasing, the ηC2 increases while the ηC decreases. According to the definition formula of k1, the value of k1 decreases as the reheating temperature (tb of Cycle 2) increases. For Cycle 1, subtracting Cycle 2 reduces the average temperature of heat absorption, therefore the ηC will be lower than ηC1. It should be noted that the thermal efficiency of the synthetic cycle in this study is lower than the thermal efficiency of the sCO2 Brayton cycle with reheating reported in other literature because internal heat recovery is not considered. Similar results will occur for the other three cases, which will no longer be described. In addition, the reasons for not considering the internal heat recovery will be discussed in Section 3.5.
Fig. 14. Variations of thermal efficiencies of different cycles with k1: Thermal efficiencies of Cycle 1, Cycle 2, and synthetic cycle at (a) t3 = 400 °C, (b) t3 = 500 °C, (c) t3 = 600 °C and (d) t3 = 700 °C; (e) Thermal efficiencies of the synthetic cycle at different t3.
Table 2. Basic parameters of Cycle 1 and Cycle 2 (for the S-CO2 Brayton cycle with recompression).
3.2. Supercritical CO2 Brayton cycle with recompression
Internal heat recovery is widely used to improve the efficiency of the sCO2 Brayton cycle. However, due to the huge difference in the heat capacity of sCO2 fluids between the high-pressure and low-pressure, there will be the temperature pinch-point problem in the recuperator which limits further improvements in cycle efficiency. Therefore, the sCO2 Brayton cycle with recompression (the rightmost cycle in Fig. 15) was proposed to address the temperature pinch-point problem in the recuperator by reducing the mass flow rate of sCO2 fluid at high pressure.
Fig. 15. The flexible programming of sCO2 Brayton cycle with recompression.
As shown in Fig. 15, the sCO2 Brayton cycle with recompression can be obtained by adding a smaller simple Brayton cycle (Cycle 2) to the right of the larger simple Brayton cycle (Cycle 1). In this case, the mass flow rate on the right side of the recompression cycle is the sum of Cycle 1 and Cycle 2. The net-work output and heat input of the sCO2 Brayton cycle with recompression can be calculated as follows:
@(46)
@(47)
The thermal efficiency of the sCO2 Brayton cycle with recompression can be calculated from:
@(48)
To study the relationship of thermal efficiency between the sCO2 Brayton cycle with recompression and k1, A case study is carried out. The basic parameters of Cycle 1 and Cycle 2 are listed in Table 2. Correspondingly, all processes in cycles are assumed to be ideally reversible.
The variations of thermal efficiencies of Cycle 1, Cycle 2, and synthetic cycle with k1 at different specific mass flow rates of Cycle 1 are shown in Fig. 16. Under the condition that is specified by Table. 2, the ηC1 remains constant for all cases, while the ηC2 varies with tb. As shown in Fig. 16, when k1 is increasing, the ηC2 increases while the ηC decreases firstly and then increases. According to the definition formula of k1, the value of k1 increases as the recompression temperature (ta of Cycle 2) or the specific mass flow rate of Cycle 1 decreases. For Cycle 1, adding Cycle 2 reduces the average temperature of heat absorption, therefore the ηC will be lower than ηC1. Meanwhile, the effect of adding Cycle 2 will wear off with the specific mass flow rate of Cycle 1 increasing.
Fig. 16. Variations of thermal efficiencies of different cycles with k1: Thermal efficiencies of Cycle 1, Cycle 2, and synthetic cycle at (a) mC1/(mC1 + mC2) = 0.2, (b) mC1/(mC1 + mC2) = 0.4, (c) mC1/(mC1 + mC2) = 0.6 and (d) mC1/(mC1 + mC2) = 0.8; (e) Thermal efficiencies of the synthetic cycle at different specific mass flow rates of Cycle 1.
3.3. Supercritical CO2 Brayton cycle with recompression and reheating
The reheating and recompression would be sometimes adopted together, and this is the sCO2 Brayton cycle with recompression and reheating (the rightmost cycle in Fig. 17). As shown in Fig. 17, the sCO2 Brayton cycle with recompression and reheating can be obtained by adding the yellow cycle (Cycle 2) to the right of the red cycle (Cycle 1) and then subtracting the blue cycle (Cycle 3) from the top right corner. In this case, the mass flow rate of these three cycles must satisfy the following relationship:
@(49)
Fig. 17. The flexible programming of sCO2 Brayton cycle with recompression and reheating.
The net-work output and heat input of the sCO2 Brayton cycle with recompression and reheating can be calculated as follows:
@(50)
@(51)
The thermal efficiency of the sCO2 Brayton cycle with recompression and reheating can be calculated from:
@(52)
where k2 is the ratio of heat input of Cycle 3 to Cycle 1, and k2 is calculated by using:
@(53)
A case study is carried out to show the relationship of the thermal efficiency between the sCO2 Brayton cycle with recompression and reheating and k1. The basic parameters of Cycle 1, Cycle 2, and Cycle 3 are listed in Table 3. Correspondingly, all processes in cycles are assumed to be ideally reversible.
Table 3. Basic parameters of Cycle 1, Cycle 2, and Cycle 3 (for the sCO2 Brayton cycle with recompression and reheating).
Fig. 18 shows the variations of thermal efficiencies of Cycle 1, Cycle 2, Cycle 3, and synthetic cycle with k1 at different specific mass flow rates of Cycle 1. Under the condition that is specified by Table. 3, the ηC1 and ηC3 remain constant for all cases, while the ηC2 varies with tb. As shown in Fig. 18, when k1 is increasing, the ηC2 and ηC increase. According to the definition formula of k1, the value of k1 increases as the recompression temperature (ta of Cycle 2) or the specific mass flow rate of Cycle 1 decreases. For Cycle 1, adding Cycle 2 and subtracting Cycle 3 reduce the average temperature of heat absorption, therefore the ηC will be lower than that of Cycle 1. Meanwhile, the effect of adding Cycle 2 and subtracting Cycle 3 will wear off with the specific mass flow rate of Cycle 1 increasing.
Fig. 18. Variations of thermal efficiencies of different cycles with k1: Thermal efficiencies of Cycle 1, Cycle 2, Cycle 3, and synthetic cycle at (a) mC1/(mC1 + mC2) = 0.2, (b) mC1/(mC1 + mC2) = 0.4, (c) mC1/(mC1 + mC2) = 0.6 and (d) mC1/(mC1 + mC2) = 0.8; (e) Thermal efficiencies of the synthetic cycle at different specific mass flow rates of Cycle 1.
3.4. Supercritical CO2 Brayton cycle with partial-cooling and reheating
The partial-cooling is another approach to modify the sCO2 Brayton cycle. As shown in Fig. 19, the sCO2 Brayton cycle with partial-cooling and reheating can be obtained by adding the gray cycle (Cycle 2) to the left of the red cycle (Cycle 1) and then subtracting the blue cycle (Cycle 3) from the top right corner. In this case, the mass flow rate of these three cycles must satisfy the following relationship:
@(54)
Fig. 19. The flexible programming of sCO2 Brayton cycle with partial-cooling and reheating.
The mass flow rate of the process shared between the gray cycle and red cycle can be calculated as follows:
@(55)
And the net-work output and heat input of the sCO2 Brayton cycle with partial-cooling and reheating can be calculated from:
@(56)
@(57)
The thermal efficiency of the sCO2 Brayton cycle with partial-cooling and reheating can be calculated from:
@(58)
To study the relationship of the thermal efficiency between the sCO2 Brayton cycle with partial-cooling and reheating and k1, a case study is carried out. The basic parameters of Cycle 1, Cycle 2, and Cycle 3 are listed in Table 4. Correspondingly, all processes in cycles are assumed to be ideally reversible.
Table 4. Basic parameters of Cycle 1, Cycle 2, and Cycle 3 (for the sCO2 Brayton cycle with partial-cooling and reheating).
The variations of thermal efficiencies of Cycle 1, Cycle 2, Cycle 3, and synthetic cycle with k1 at different te are shown in Fig. 20. Under the condition that is specified by Table. 4, the ηC1 and ηC2 remain constant for all cases, while the ηC3 varies with te. As shown in Fig. 16, when k1 is increasing, there has been a slight increase in the ηC. According to the definition formula of k1, the value of k1 increases as the specific mass flow rate of Cycle 2 increases. For Cycle 1, adding Cycle 2 and subtracting Cycle 3 mainly reduce the average temperature of heat absorption, therefore the ηC will be lower than ηC1. Meanwhile, the effect of adding Cycle 2 and subtracting Cycle 3 will enhance with the specific mass flow rate of Cycle 2 increasing.
Fig. 20. Variations of thermal efficiencies of different cycles with k1: Thermal efficiencies of Cycle 1, Cycle 2, Cycle 3, and the synthetic cycle at (a) te = 375 °C, (b) te = 400 °C, (c) te = 425 °C and (d) te = 450 °C; (e) Thermal efficiencies of the synthetic cycle at different te.
3.5. Discussion
In this section, four different configurations of sCO2 Brayton cycles are analyzed using the FPTC. Compared with the conventional analysis method, this study presents the evolution of the complex cycles intuitively. For all cases considered in this study, Cycle 1 has the highest thermal efficiency, which results in that the ηC is lower than ηC1. It’s worth noting that reheating cycle can also be obtained using the addition of two simple cycles, as mentioned at the end of Section 2.2. In this case, Cycle 1 will not have the highest thermal efficiency and the ηC will be higher than ηC1. When different operations are used to obtain the same synthetic cycle, the state points of the simple cycle will change, which will lead to the changes in thermal efficiencies of simple cycles. Therefore, the thermal efficiency of the synthetic cycle may be higher than those of simple cycles in some cases.
Meanwhile, the relationships of the thermodynamic performance indexes (heat input, heat output, net-work output, and thermal efficiency) between the synthetic cycle and simple cycles, which are revealed by the proposed method, are proved to be valid in thermodynamic analysis for sCO2 Brayton cycles. Both the thermal efficiencies of simple cycles and the ratio of heat input of simple cycles can affect the ηC. These relationships allow researchers to evaluate the performance of synthetic cycles using the physical models of simple cycles, instead of building complete physical models for complex cycles. For example, in the traditional method of parametric analysis, the physical model for the reversible sCO2 Brayton cycle with partial-cooling and reheating contains at least 10 equations (10 equations for 10 processes). However, only four equations (four equations for four processes, because three simple cycles, that make up the reversible sCO2 Brayton cycle with partial-cooling and reheating, are the same kind.) are required when the FPTC is used. In parametric analysis, it is often necessary to run the physical model of the cycle repeatedly. Therefore, reducing six equations will save a lot of computing resources.
It’s also worth noting that internal heat recovery is not considered in case study. Firstly, the internal heat recovery does not affect the shape of the thermodynamic cycle in the T-s diagram. Secondly, heat is represented as a region with a certain area in the T-s diagram. During the internal heat recovery, the heat transfer is the same, so the two regions have the same area. However, the shape of the region is different, so it is difficult to carry out the logical operation of the graph. Moreover, the internal heat recovery could be considered in the detailed optimization of the cycle. Therefore, the internal heat recovery is not considered for sCO2 Brayton cycles in this study.
It is also important to note that the core of the FPTC is to build a general theory about the evolution from simple cycles to complex cycles, and all cycles analyzed by the FPTC are reversible cycles. In the study of thermodynamics, a reversible cycle is an idealized model of a real cycle. The rules obtained from the analysis of idealized models can generally be applied qualitatively to the analysis of real cycles. Therefore, the FPTC is also valuable for the study of real cycles. In the FPTC, the logical operation between simple cycles depends on the sharing of certain processes, which is represented by the coincidence of process curves on the T-s diagram. If the irreversibility of some processes is considered, the shapes of processes curves will be different. This will result in the fact that it is impossible to achieve the logical operation between simple real cycles. The work will continue to advance to find a suitable approach to extend the FPTC to the application of real cycles.
<Section>4. Conclusions and further work</Section>
In this study, the flexible programming of thermodynamic cycles is proposed, and case studies on various configurations of sCO2 Brayton cycles are carried out to demonstrate the implementation of this method. Several specific conclusions are drawn as follows:
(1)
The flexible programming of thermodynamic cycles provides a special perspective, which makes it easier to understand complex thermodynamic cycles. A complex thermodynamic cycle can be obtained by performing logical operations on several simple cycles in the T-s diagram. Three basic types of logical operation for the synthesis of thermodynamic cycles are identified, including addition, subtraction, and interchange. The relationships of the thermodynamic performance indexes (heat input, heat output, net-work output, and thermal efficiency) between the synthetic cycle and simple cycles are revealed in different types of logical operation of thermodynamic cycles.
(2)
The flexible programming of thermodynamic cycles makes it easier to analyze the thermodynamic performance of complex cycles. When all thermodynamic processes of cycles are reversible, the thermal efficiency of the complex synthetic cycle can be easily calculated by using the thermal efficiencies and heat input of simple cycles, according to the simple formula determined by the type of logical operation. Instead of building physical models for complex cycles, researchers can evaluate the performance of synthetic cycles using the physical models of simple cycles.
(3)
The thermal efficiency of the synthetic cycle is affected by the thermal efficiencies of simple cycles and the ratio of heat input of simple cycles. As a case of subtraction, the thermal efficiency of the reheating sCO2 Brayton cycle could be lower than that of simple cycles. As a case of the addition, the thermal efficiency of recompression sCO2 Brayton cycle is between that of simple cycles. For recompression and reheating cycle, and partial-cooling and reheating cycle, the thermal efficiencies of synthetic cycles are between those of the simple cycles.
Moreover, the flexible programming of thermodynamic cycles also provides a new idea for constructing complex thermodynamic cycles. A new complex cycle can be obtained by adding or subtracting several simple cycles in a different order on the basis of one simple cycle or adding or subtracting several simple cycles at different positions of one simple cycle. The construction method of complex thermodynamic cycles will be further studied in the future.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Dongpeng Zhao: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Writing - original draft. Shuai Deng: Conceptualization, Writing - review & editing. Ruikai Zhao: Writing - review & editing, Funding acquisition. Li Zhao: Conceptualization, Supervision, Resources, Funding acquisition. Weicong Xu: Writing - review & editing. Xiting Long: Writing - review & editing.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgments</Section>
This work is supported by the National Key Research and Development Plan of China under Grant No. 2018YFB1501004, the Key Research and Development Program of Jiangsu Province, China under Grant No. BE2019009-4, and the Open Foundation Program of Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Deep Earth Science and Geothermal Energy Exploitation and Utilization under Grant No. 2020-04.
<Section>References</Section>
[1]
M. Winter, R.J. Brodd
What are batteries, fuel cells, and supercapacitors?
Chem Rev, 104 (10) (2004), pp. 4245-4270, 10.1021/cr020730k
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[2]
B. Yu, J. Duan, H. Cong, W. Xie, R. Liu, X. Zhuang, et al.
Thermosensitive crystallization-boosted liquid thermocells for low-grade heat harvesting
Science, 370 (6514) (2020), pp. 342-346, 10.1126/science:abd6749
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[3]
I. Staffell, D. Scamman, A. Velazquez Abad, P. Balcombe, P.E. Dodds, P. Ekins, et al.
The role of hydrogen and fuel cells in the global energy system
Energ Environ Sci, 12 (2) (2019), pp. 463-491, 10.1039/C8EE01157E
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[4]
X. Wang, Y. Huang, C. Liu, K. Mu, K. Li, S. Wang, et al.
Direct thermal charging cell for converting low-grade heat to electricity
Nat Commun, 10 (1) (2019), 10.1038/s41467-019-12144-2
Google Scholar
[5]
R. Chen, R. Zhao, S. Deng, L. Zhao, W. Xu
A cycle research methodology for thermo-chemical engines: From ideal cycle to case study
Energy, 228 (2021), p. 120599, 10.1016/j.energy.2021.120599
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[6]
Rogdakis E, Lolos P. Kalina cycles for power generation. Handbook of Clean Energy Systems 2015:1-25. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118991978.hces014.
Google Scholar
[7]
R. Zhang, W. Su, X. Lin, N. Zhou, L. Zhao
Thermodynamic analysis and parametric optimization of a novel S-CO2 power cycle for the waste heat recovery of internal combustion engines
Energy, 209 (2020), p. 118484, 10.1016/j.energy.2020.118484
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[8]
M.T. White, G. Bianchi, L. Chai, S.A. Tassou, A.I. Sayma
Review of supercritical CO2 technologies and systems for power generation
Appl Therm Eng, 185 (2021), Article 116447, 10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2020.116447
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[9]
W. Xu, S. Deng, L. Zhao, Y. Zhang, S. Li
Performance analysis on novel thermodynamic cycle under the guidance of 3D construction method
Appl Energ, 250 (2019), pp. 478-492, 10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.05.081
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[10]
W. Xu, S. Deng, Y. Zhang, D. Zhao, L. Zhao
How to give a full play to the advantages of zeotropic working fluids in organic Rankine cycle (ORC)
Energy Procedia, 158 (2019), pp. 1591-1597, 10.1016/j.egypro.2019.01.374
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[11]
L. Shi, H. Tian, G. Shu
Multi-mode analysis of a CO2-based combined refrigeration and power cycle for engine waste heat recovery
Appl Energ, 264 (2020), p. 114670, 10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.114670
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[12]
A. Yu, W. Su, X. Lin, N. Zhou, L. Zhao
Thermodynamic analysis on the combination of supercritical carbon dioxide power cycle and transcritical carbon dioxide refrigeration cycle for the waste heat recovery of shipboard
Energ Convers Manage, 221 (2020), p. 113214, 10.1016/j.enconman.2020.113214
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[13]
T. Xin, C. Xu, Y. Yang
Thermodynamic analysis of a novel supercritical carbon dioxide Brayton cycle based on the thermal cycle splitting analytical method
Energ Convers Manage, 225 (2020), p. 113458, 10.1016/j.enconman.2020.113458
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[14]
Z. Zhao, M. Liao, W. Wei, J. Wu, W. Wang
Optimization of supercritical nuclear power system based on sodium cooled fast reactor
IOP Conf Ser: Earth Environ Sci, 227 (2019), p. 22016, 10.1088/1755-1315/227/2/022016
Google Scholar
[15]
Y. Ma, T. Morosuk, J. Luo, M. Liu, J. Liu
Superstructure design and optimization on supercritical carbon dioxide cycle for application in concentrated solar power plant
Energ Convers Manage, 206 (2020), p. 112290, 10.1016/j.enconman.2019.112290
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[16]
K. Wang, Y. He, H. Zhu
Integration between supercritical CO2 Brayton cycles and molten salt solar power towers: a review and a comprehensive comparison of different cycle layouts
Appl Energ, 195 (2017), pp. 819-836, 10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.03.099
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[17]
B. Li, S. Wang, K. Wang, L. Song
Comparative investigation on the supercritical carbon dioxide power cycle for waste heat recovery of gas turbine
Energ Convers Manage, 228 (2021), p. 113670, 10.1016/j.enconman.2020.113670
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[18]
M. Saghafifar, A. Omar, K. Mohammadi, A. Alashkar, M. Gadalla
A review of unconventional bottoming cycles for waste heat recovery: Part I – Analysis, design, and optimization
Energ Convers Manage, 198 (2019), p. 110905, 10.1016/j.enconman.2018.10.047
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[19]
G. Carraro, P. Danieli, A. Lazzaretto, T. Boatto
A common thread in the evolution of the configurations of supercritical CO2 power systems for waste heat recovery
Energ Convers Manage, 237 (2021), p. 114031, 10.1016/j.enconman.2021.114031
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[20]
K. Wang, M. Li, J. Guo, P. Li, Z. Liu
A systematic comparison of different S-CO2 Brayton cycle layouts based on multi-objective optimization for applications in solar power tower plants
Appl Energ, 212 (2018), pp. 109-121, 10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.12.031
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[21]
L. Chai, S.A. Tassou
A review of printed circuit heat exchangers for helium and supercritical CO2 Brayton cycles
Therm Sci Eng Prog, 18 (2020), p. 100543, 10.1016/j.tsep.2020.100543
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[22]
J.E. Cha, J.H. Park, G. Lee, H. Seo, S. Lee, H.-J. Chung, et al.
500 kW supercritical CO2 power generation system for waste heat recovery: System design and compressor performance test results
Appl Therm Eng, 194 (2021), p. 117028, 10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2021.117028
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[23]
S. Lecompte, E. Ntavou, B. Tchanche, G. Kosmadakis, A. Pillai, D. Manolakos, et al.
Review of experimental research on supercritical and transcritical thermodynamic cycles designed for heat recovery application
Appl Sci, 9 (12) (2019), p. 2571, 10.3390/app9122571
CrossRefGoogle Scholar
[24]
U. Sultan, Y. Zhang, M. Farooq, M. Imran, A. Akhtar Khan, W. Zhuge, et al.
Qualitative assessment and global mapping of supercritical CO2 power cycle technology
Sustain Energy Technol Assess, 43 (2021), p. 100978, 10.1016/j.seta.2020.100978
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[25]
J. Dyreby, S. Klein, G. Nellis, D. Reindl
Design considerations for supercritical carbon dioxide Brayton cycles with recompression
J Eng Gas Turbines Power, 136 (2014), Article 101701, 10.1115/1.4027936
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[26]
C.S. Turchi, Z. Ma, T.W. Neises, M.J. Wagner
Thermodynamic study of advanced supercritical carbon dioxide power cycles for concentrating solar power systems
J Sol Energ-Trans ASME, 135 (2013), pp. 41001-41007, 10.1115/1.4024030
Google Scholar
[27]
J.I. Linares, M.J. Montes, A. Cantizano, C. Sánchez
A novel supercritical CO2 recompression Brayton power cycle for power tower concentrating solar plants
Appl Energ, 263 (2020), p. 114644, 10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.114644
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[28]
D. Zhao, S. Deng, L. Zhao, W. Xu, W. Wang, X. Nie, et al.
Overview on artificial intelligence in design of Organic Rankine Cycle
Energy and AI, 1 (2020), p. 100011, 10.1016/j.egyai.2020.100011
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[29]
S. Lin, L. Zhao, S. Deng, D. Zhao, W. Wang, M. Chen
Intelligent collaborative attainment of structure configuration and fluid selection for the Organic Rankine cycle
Appl Energ, 264 (2020), p. 114743, 10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.114743
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[30]
Y. Peng, W. Su, N. Zhou, L. Zhao
How to evaluate the performance of sub-critical Organic Rankine Cycle from key properties of working fluids by group contribution methods?
Energ Convers Manage, 221 (2020), p. 113204, 10.1016/j.enconman.2020.113204
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[31]
W. Wang, S. Deng, D. Zhao, L. Zhao, S. Lin, M. Chen
Application of machine learning into organic Rankine cycle for prediction and optimization of thermal and exergy efficiency
Energ Convers Manage, 210 (2020), p. 112700, 10.1016/j.enconman.2020.112700
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[32]
Carnot S, Clapeyron E, Clausius R, Mendoza E. Reflections on the motive power of fire, Sadi Carnot and other Papers on the Second Law of Thermodynamics by É. Clapeyron and R. Clausius. New York: Dover Publications; 1960.
Google Scholar
[33]
Kriz RD. Thermodynamic Case Study: Gibbs' Thermodynamic Graphical Method. https://esm.rkriz.net/classes/ESM4714/methods/Gibbs.html.
Google Scholar
[34]
X. Li
A trapezoidal cycle with theoretical model based on organic Rankine cycle
Int J Energ Res, 40 (12) (2016), pp. 1624-1637, 10.1002/er.v40.1210.1002/er.3528
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[35]
W. Xu, S. Deng, W. Su, Y. Zhang, L. Zhao, Z. Yu
How to approach Carnot cycle via zeotropic working fluid: Research methodology and case study
Energy, 144 (2018), pp. 576-586, 10.1016/j.energy.2017.12.041
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[36]
D. Zhao, R. Zhao, S. Deng, L. Zhao, M. Chen
Transcritical carbon dioxide power cycle for waste heat recovery: a roadmap analysis from ideal cycle to real cycle with case implementation
Energ Convers Manage, 226 (2020), p. 113578, 10.1016/j.enconman.2020.113578
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[37]
Y. Wang, J. Zhao, G. Chen, S. Deng, Q. An, C. Luo, et al.
A new understanding on thermal efficiency of organic Rankine cycle: cycle separation based on working fluids properties
Energ Convers Manage, 157 (2018), pp. 169-175, 10.1016/j.enconman.2017.11.079
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[38]
T. Xin, C. Xu, Y. Yang
A general and simple method for evaluating the performance of the modified steam Rankine cycle: thermal cycle splitting analytical method
Energ Convers Manage, 210 (2020), p. 112712, 10.1016/j.enconman.2020.112712
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar