<title>Numerical investigation of rod bundle thermal–hydraulic behavior during reflood transients using COBRA-TF</title>
<author>1,YueJin, 2, Fan-BillCheung，3，KoroushShirvan，4，Stephen M.Bajorek，5，KirkTien,6,Chris L.Hoxie</author>
<Affiliation>1，Department of Nuclear Science & Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, United States;2,Department of Mechanical Engineering & Department of Nuclear Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, United States;3,Office of Nuclear Regulatory Research, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC 20555, United States</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107708</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454920304060</URL>
Numerical investigation of rod bundle thermal–hydraulic behavior during reflood transients using COBRA-TF
YueJin, Fan-BillCheung，KoroushShirvan，Stephen M.Bajorek，KirkTien,6,Chris L.Hoxie
Department of Nuclear Science & Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, United States
Department of Mechanical Engineering & Department of Nuclear Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, United States
Office of Nuclear Regulatory Research, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC 20555, United States
<Section>Highlights</Section>
An comprehensive code evaluation and validation is carried out using COBRA-TF.
The predictions are validated by reflood data from the NRC/PSU RBHT test facility.
COBRA-TF agrees generally well with the RBHT data.
Prediction errors exist for specific thermal–hydraulic quantities, requiring further model improvement.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Accurate prediction of the reflood transients during LOCA has long been a challenging task. One reason for this is the substantial cost incurred to perform large-scale reflood tests, which are formidable in experimental expenditure and intensive in technology as well as program management. Another reason preventing a comprehensive understanding of reflood transients is the high-level complexity involved in the two-phase flow mass and heat transfer processes, which makes the measurement extremely difficult and inefficient. The situation has been significantly improved with the design and operation of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC)/Pennsylvania State University (PSU) Rod Bundle Heat Transfer (RBHT) test facility. A variety of advanced instrumentations were developed and used at this facility and very high-resolution data has been obtained, especially for the liquid droplet field. In the current study taking advantage of the unique NRC/PSU RBHT data, an extensive and comprehensive code evaluation and validation is carried out using the thermal–hydraulic sub-channel analysis code COBRA-TF. The system parametric effects investigated include: the system pressure, inlet liquid subcooling temperature, inlet flooding rate and rod bundle power. A variety of thermal–hydraulic quantities predicted by the numerical code are evaluated including: the quench front propagation, cladding, spacer grid and vapor temperature variations, two-phase pressure drop, liquid droplet velocity and coolant void fraction. In addition, the prediction errors are presented for each of the quantities in great detail in order to have a comprehensive understanding of the code performance. In general, COBRA-TF agrees relatively well with the experimental data in terms of the overall quench front propagation, only predicting slightly earlier quench. However, under low inlet subcooling and high flooding rate conditions, significant discrepancies are observed. The comparison with rod bundle thermal–hydraulic parameters indicates that COBRA-TF is able to predict the cladding temperature before quench well within a 15% range. The spacer grid and vapor temperature predictions are within 20% error. While the overall droplet velocity prediction is found to be within 30% error, COBRA-TF is able to capture the decreasing trend for droplet velocity during reflood. In addition, the prediction of the dispersed flow film boiling void fraction shows that the code always under-predicts the void fraction. While the most prediction discrepancy is found to be the two-phase flow pressure drop after quench, which involves more than 50% under-prediction for the bulk liquid boiling regime. The present study clarifies the effect of different system parameters on the various two-phase flow quantities during reflood. The results obtained provide answers for many existing code modeling issues and thus can be instructive and useful for future model development and code upgrading.
Keywords:Reflood;Two-phase flow and heat transfer;QuenchLiquid droplet;Numerical simulation;COBRA-TF
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Light water reactors (LWRs) have played a significant role in the commercial nuclear industry since their first appearance. Currently, of more than 400 reactors operating world-wide, about 95% are LWRs. Many of these plants were originally designed and licensed to operate for 40 years, but through advances in knowledge, their lives have been extended to 60 years. In 2019, the first plant in the US was even licensed to operate for 80 years. Despite a number of advanced nuclear technologies being developed, it can be expected that LWRs will continue to play an important role in the existing nuclear power generation fleet. One of the key safety issues that LWRs are still facing is how to maintain the reactor core integrity and coolability during postulated design basis accidents (DBAs) such as loss-of-coolant accident (LOCA). When the reactor core liquid inventory is depleted during the blowdown phase, additional liquid injection needs to be guaranteed to refill the core region such that the peak cladding temperature (PCT) exceeding the safety limit and the possible fuel rod damage could be prevented. For LWRs, the safety system responsible for the liquid injection is the emergency core cooling system (ECCS). Upon receiving the injection signal, it immediately feeds large amount of subcooled water into the reactor pressure vessel (RPV) to restore the liquid level in the empty core region and cool down the fuel rods. As can be expected, vigorous two-phase boiling and liquid carryover will take place when the quench front propagates along the rod surface. This process is called the reflood stage, which dictates the PCT variation. As a result, accurate prediction of the two-phase flow behavior and the fuel rod thermal–hydraulic response in the reflood stage is of crucial importance in assessing the safety of the nuclear reactor system. Moreover, detailed resolution of the accident scenario as well as the reliable prediction for timings of key thermal–hydraulic quantities such as the PCT and quenching also provide informative guidance for in-depth probabilistic risk assessment (PRA) study.
In order to have a better understanding of the fundamental physics involved during reflood, tremendous efforts and resources have been spent to perform thermal–hydraulic experiments that simulate the reflood stage of LOCA. However, such experiments are both technologically difficult to achieve and economically expensive to conduct. Some of the most famous tests include: THETIS (Pearson et al., 1983, Pearson et al., 1984, Cooper et al., 1984), FEBA (Ihle and Rust, 1984), SELFEX (Ihle and Rust, 1986, Ihle and Rust, 1987), ACHILLES (Pearson and Denham, 1989), REBEKA (Erbacher et al., 1990), QUENCH (Stuckert et al., 2009, Stuckert et al., 2010, Stuckert et al., 2020, Steinbrück et al., 2010), FLECHT-SEASET (Lee et al., 1982, Hochreiter, 1985), and most recently RBHT (Hochreiter et al., 2010, Hochreiter et al., 2012). The THETIS experiments investigated the boiling heat transfer behavior in a partially blocked (blockage ratios of 80% and 90%) rod bundle, simulating the large-break LOCA and medium-break LOCA. The FEBA experiments, with a full height 5 × 5 bundle of PWR type fuel rods encompassed in a stainless-steel housing, were carried out at KfK Karlsruhe, Germany. It is designed to study the reflood heat transfer mechanism considering the effects of flow blockage and spacer grid, as well as benchmark data for code validation. Later, the ACHILLES natural reflood experiment was launched to investigate the heat transfer process in the core during the accumulator injection phase. The test section consisted of 69 heater rods corresponding to Westinghouse 17 × 17 fuel assembly with a total length of 3.66 m and rod diameter of 9.5 mm. The series of QUENCH tests performed at KIT investigated various effects of cladding materials on the fuel performance during LOCA. On the other hand, the Full-Length Emergency Core Heat Transfer Separate Effects and Systems Effects Tests (FLECHT-SEASET) was constructed and conducted to identify the thermal hydraulics of forced and gravity reflooding in a 161-rod bundle without flow blockage (Lee et al., 1982). This test facility was modified from the FLECHT facility to apply a new heater rod bundle of which dimensions were typical of the Westinghouse 17 × 17 fuel bundle. The bundle contained 161 heater rods (93 non-instrumented and 68 instrumented), 16 thimbles, and 12 steam probes. There were also 8 solid triangular fillers and 8 spacer grids in the test bundle. The heater rods have an outside diameter of 9.5 mm with a heated length of 3.66 m and pitch of 12.6 mm.
Despite the various reflood tests conducted in the past few decades, very limited experimental data were obtained for the two-phase flow behavior and the rod bundle thermal–hydraulic response during reflood transients due to the insufficient instrumentation capability and large measurement uncertainties involved for two-phase flow characterization. Most of the data can neither be readily used for mechanistic model development nor for individual phenomena validation. Reflood transients consist of extremely complex two-phase flow behavior from subcooled boiling to quench front propagation, and to dispersed flow film boiling (DFFB) with presence of high thermal–hydraulic non-equilibrium. High-resolution measurements of reflood transients have been very challenging, if not impossible. Taking advantage of the continuous advancement in modern instrumentation and control technology, the most recent experimental effort on reflood phenomena is the Nuclear Regulatory Commission/Pennsylvania State University (NRC/PSU) Rod Bundle Heat Transfer (RBHT) tests. It is by far the most well maintained and heavily instrumented large-scale separate-effect test facility and has been under operation for various experimental and benchmark tasks. The RBHT test facility and test conditions are specifically designed to facilitate code development and validation. The current study is based on the unique reflood data obtained from the RBHT test facility. Detailed introduction will be given in the following sections.
Using existing experimental data, many numerical analyses, thermal–hydraulic code evaluations as well as code uncertainty quantifications during reflood stage of LOCA have been performed by previous researchers. The different system and/or sub-channel analysis codes used include but not limited to: SPACE (Moon, et al., 2011), TRACE (Jaeger and Espinoza, 2013, Berar et al., 2013, Wicaksono et al., 2015, Zakir, 2015, Huh et al., 2017, Huh et al., 2018, Garrett et al., 2019), RELAP5 (Choi and No, 2010, Choi and No, 2012, Berar et al., 2013), RELAP/SCDAPSIM (Gerova et al., 2048), CATHARE2 (Lutsanych et al., 2015), MELCOR (Jin et al., 2015), MARS (Seo et al., 2015, Hong et al., 2018), SOCRAT/V3 (Vasiliev and Stuckert, 2016), COBRA-TF (Paik et al., 1985, Todd et al., 1999, Ergun et al., 2008a, Ergun et al., 2008b, Holowach et al., 2003), ACOS-PB (Wang et al., March 2013), etc. Most of these codes were developed based on a two-fluid three-field (liquid, vapor and droplets) scheme, with each field having its own set of conservation equations and closures. In the study of Huh et al., 2017, Huh et al., 2018, the TRACE numerical analysis models were developed based on the FLECHT-SEASET and RBHT tests to investigate the reflood transients. Key reflood quantities such as the cladding temperature, heat transfer coefficient, pressure drop were compared. Large discrepancies were observed between code predictions and experiments. The work by Berar et al. (2013) was based on the ACHILLES natural reflood tests using both RELAP5 and TRACE. They also suggested further investigation on the numerical models. The studies of Seo et al., 2015, Hong et al., 2018 were performed using thermal–hydraulic code MARS. Although MARS code showed good prediction capability for general trend, it had certain limitations in accurately predicting quench behavior. The sub-channel analysis code COBRA-TF was also used for reflood prediction. While Paik et al. (1985) performed quite comprehensive study based on the FLECHT-SEASET data, Ergun’s work was mainly focused on the droplet field during reflood based on the RBHT data. Their works indicate that more comprehensive and accurate experimental data as well as higher fidelity and physics-based models are needed in order to accurately reproduce the reflood transients. Generally speaking, the code prediction accuracy and detailed resolution of the two-phase flow field as well as the quench front heavily depend on the various models incorporated into the calculation scheme. However, due to the fact that very limited experimental data is available for validation, especially for the DFFB regime and quench front region where measurements are difficult, those models are often subject to oversimplified assumptions and thus the reliable predictions of the cladding rewet, quench front velocity, vapor temperature variation, droplet dynamics, interfacial heat and mass transfer, spacer grid effect during reflood are still elusive at best. As a result, in-depth model development and extensive code evaluation are still difficult to be carried out comprehensively.
Recently, this situation has been greatly improved with the development of various advanced instrumentation into the RBHT test facility (Kim et al., 2018) at PSU, which observed many new phenomena and provided very comprehensive and detailed information during reflood that was previously not possible to obtain. With the more complete and comprehensive experimental data, extensive code validation is now possible, especially for the thermal–hydraulic response of liquid droplet field and spacer grid. The RBHT data has its unique advantages for the validation of numerical tools that adopt three-field solution scheme. In this paper, the two-phase flow mass and heat transfer behavior as well as the rod cladding thermal–hydraulic response are thoroughly studied using the sub-channel analysis code COBRA-TF. The parametric effects of various system parameters predicted by numerical models are compared with the RBHT data in detail. Moreover, many of the key flow quantities, such as the droplet velocity, two-phase void fraction, spacer grid quenching behavior, are compared with the unique experimental data. The results can be instructive and useful for future model development and code upgrading.
<Section>2. COBRA-TF Two-Phase flow thermal-hydraulic models</Section>
2.1. Introduction of COBRA-TF subchannel analysis code
COBRA-TF uses a two-fluid three-field (i.e., liquid field, vapor field and droplet field) solution scheme for the flow field calculations. Each field is modeled with its own set of conservation equations. The exception is that the liquid and droplet fields are assumed to be in thermal equilibrium and, thus, they share one energy conservation equation. These sets of conservation equations can be formulated either in a Cartesian coordinate system (3-D solution) or in a simplified sub-channel system. The equations are solved simultaneously using the Semi-Implicit Method for Pressure-Linked Equations (SIMPLE). There is a complete set of criteria incorporated into COBRA-TF for selecting different heat transfer regimes as needed. It is also able to simulate the droplet entrainment/de-entrainment dynamics as well as its breakup process on spacer grids. Moreover, a top-down quench model is used for its hot wall flow regimes such that the falling film from the top of the bundle can be captured (Paik et al., 1985). It has been experimentally confirmed that such top-down quench phenomenon may occur during reflood (Stuckert et al., 2010, Unal et al., 1988a, Unal et al., 1988b, Unal et al., 1991). For a given computational cell, mass, momentum, and energy are conserved by modeling each phase. The conservation equations, of course, are dependent on one another and are linked by interfacial mass, momentum and energy transfer terms (e.g. evaporation/condensation or entrainment/de-entrainment). The sub-channel approach is a simplification of the original three-dimensional conservation equations by only considering two flow directions: the axial flow and lateral flow. There are no fixed flow directions for the lateral flow. Instead, lateral flow covers any orthogonal direction to the vertical axis. Since the fixed coordinates are not defined for the lateral direction in the sub-channel approach, lateral flow has no direction once it leaves a gap and thus the sub-channel approach can be viewed as a quasi 3-D approach. The conservation equations are thus solved for the adjacent sub-channels specified by the user only. Each channel communicates flow and heat transfer information with its neighbor channels through gaps. It should be noted that this is a suitable assumption for the axially-dominated flow of a reactor fuel bundle because the relatively minuscule lateral flows transfer little momentum across sub-channel mesh cell elements.
COBRA-TF’s heat transfer package consists of a library of correlations as well as a selection logic that allows the code to predict a boiling curve as a function of the computational cell key parameters such as the void fraction, pressure, mass flow and the heated surface temperature. The heat transfer package calculates both the wall to fluid heat transfer as well as the interfacial heat transfer between the phases. Since separate energy equations are used for the phases, it has the capability to capture possible thermal–hydraulic non-equilibrium of the flow. Therefore, the interfacial heat transfer area and the interfacial heat transfer are calculated to determine the temperature of each phase. The heat transfer models incorporated into COBRA-TF cover the entire heat transfer regimes including single-phase liquid and vapor convection, nucleate boiling, subcooled nucleate boiling, critical heat flux (CHF), minimum film boiling temperature (), transition boiling, inverted annular film boiling (IAFB), and dispersed flow film boiling (DFFB). It is worth mentioning that based on the value of the wall surface temperature compared with the critical heat flux temperature, the COBRA-TF heat transfer and flow regime is further divided as the so-called “normal wall” and “hot wall” regimes. Different flow regime maps are applied accordingly.
The existence of spacer grid structures reduces the flow area, causing contraction and expansion that induce higher pressure drop. Thus, the effect of spacer grid on the flow and heat transfer needs to be accounted. In the current version of COBRA-TF, which involved an upgrade from the version developed in the dissertation of Holowach (2002), models for the grid convective heat transfer enhancement, grid rewetting, and droplet breakup upon spacer grid are used to capture these processes. In addition, the spacer grid pressure drop is modeled using a loss coefficient specified by the user.
2.2. NRC/PSU RBHT reflood tests
The NRC/PSU RBHT test facility is designed to perform thermal–hydraulic experiments in rod bundle geometry that simulates the normal operation as well as the accident scenarios of a LWR (Hochreiter et al., 2010, Hochreiter et al., 2012). Its main components include: the injection water supply tank, a vertical test section with upper and lower plenum, carryover tanks, steam separator and pressure oscillation damping tank. Fig. 1 shows a sketch of the RBHT test facility.
Fig. 1. Configuration of the RBHT Test Facility.
The test section, which is encompassed by a square shaped flow housing made of Inconel 600, is a 7 × 7 rod bundle assembly with 45 heated rods and 4 unheated corner rods. A linear power distribution with a peak at 2.74 m is applied to the heater rods. The power peaking ratio is designed to be 1.5. Each heater rod has a typical PWR rod outer diameter of 9.5 mm and a rod pitch of 12.6 mm. There are 12 quartz windows located on opposite sides of the flow housing for flow visualization and 7 spacer grids of mixing vane type. There are 256 thermocouples (TC’s) mounted inside the heater rods and additional TC’s on spacer grids to monitor the cladding and spacer grid temperature variations. The flow housing has 23 pressure taps (22 Differential Pressure Cells or DP Cells) and 13 stand-off penetrations for pressure drop and vapor temperature measurement, respectively. In addition, two sets of advanced laser imaging systems known as the Oxford Lasers Firefly System are adopted for the entrained liquid droplet measurement and analysis. It is capable of analyzing the liquid droplet velocity and size distribution in the vapor flow. Detailed description of each test component, instrumentation, droplet measurement configuration as well as the measurement uncertainties is referred to Hochreiter et al., 2010, Hochreiter et al., 2012, Kim et al., 2018, Jin et al., 2018a, Jin et al., 2018b, Jin et al., 2018c.
The uncertainties involved in the heater rod and steam probe temperature measurements using TC’s are ±1.11 K for a total range of 283.15–1644.15 K. The largest total probable error involved in the DP cell measurement is about ±10.84 mm of H2O (0.17%) for a total span of 0–6350 mm H2O. The inlet flow transmitter has a total probable error of ±0.395 g/sec for the total span of 0–1247 g/sec. On the other hand, the exhaust line steam flow transmitter has a total probable error of ±0.172 m3/min for a total rage of 0–12.7 m3/min. In addition, due to the fact that heater rod TC’s are attached on the inside surface of the heater rod cladding, the cladding surface temperature is thus deducted from a one-dimensional (1-D) inverse heat conduction code, DATARH, which is able to compute the transient surface temperature and heat flux in the radial direction.
During a reflood test, the rods are pre-heated to a prescribed initial peak cladding temperature, which is well above the Leidenfrost point, to reproduce the accident conditions during a LOCA in LWRs. Once the desired temperature is achieved, water at various subcooling temperatures and mass flow rates is pumped into the tests section from the bottom and all measurement channels are monitored and recorded. During the entire liquid injection period, the system pressure at the exit of the upper plenum and the power input are held constant. The entrained liquid droplet field above the quench front is measured by different techniques such as the carryover tanks and the laser imaging system. A series of constant reflood tests were performed at the RBHT facility to investigate the system parametric effects on key flow and heat transfer processes during reflood.
2.3. COBRA-TF model for RBHT reflood tests
In order to verify the various thermal–hydraulic models used in the COBRA-TF, it is necessary to perform an extensive code validation for a wide range of conditions such that the model’s overall performance could be evaluated. In the current study, the unique data generated at the NRC/PSU RBHT test facility is used. The reason of choosing the reflood transients for model validation is due to its high level of complexity as almost all flow and heat transfer regimes possibly encountered in a nuclear reactor core will take place during the reflood transients.
Fig. 2 presents the COBRA-TF modeling strategy for the RBHT test section discussed previously. Three sections were used in the current numerical analysis model with Section 1 (containing 4 sub-channels and 31 axial nodes) modeling the heated length (3.66 m) of the test section. Section 2 (containing 4 sub-channels and 2 axial nodes) and Section 3 (containing 1 sub-channels and 2 axial nodes) model the upper plenum geometry. Transport parameters between the sections are properly defined. In addition, mass and heat transfer across sub-channel within each section are also defined by the “gap” input according to the RBHT geometry.
Fig. 2. COBRA-TF Modeling Nodalization of the RBHT Test Section.
For each sub-channel, a certain number of heated rods as well as the un-heated structures (spacer grids, un-heated corner rods, flow housing) are specified. In total, the test section has been divided into 31 scalar nodes (32 momentum nodes) with varying lengths considering the actual TC’s locations on the heater rods as well as the DP cell arrangement on the flow housing. The seven (7) spacer grids used in the RBHT test are also modeled in the current study. The inlet boundary conditions are the flooding rate and inlet liquid enthalpy, which are applied to the first node for each sub-channel in Section 1 according to their geometries. The outlet boundary conditions specified as the pressure boundary is applied to the top node of Section 3. The initial boundary conditions such as the initial cladding temperature, flow housing temperature were obtained and specified according to the experiments.
In Fig. 3(a), a cross-sectional view of the COBRA-TF model for Section 1 is shown. It can be seen that four sub-channels are used to represent the entire rod bundle area assuming the calculation domain to be axisymmetric. Channel-1 (CH-1) is the central sub-channel in the heated section accounting for the hot channel within the inner 3  3 rod bundle geometry. CH-2 and CH-3 take the regions between 3  3 and 7  7 bundle geometry, respectively. While CH-4 accounts for the periphery flow region between the rod bundle and the flow housing. There is a gap defined between each pair of two sub-channels to account for any transverse exchanges of mass, momentum and energy. It should be mentioned that due to the lack of turbulent mixing information from the experimental measurement, the current COBRA-TF model does not model the turbulent mixing phenomenon during reflood transients. Shen et al. (2018) developed a mechanistic turbulent mixing model for sub-channel code, which showed extremely good results and can be used for future code improvement. In the current study, in order to simulate the 49 rods while at the same time reduce the computational time, based on their different radial locations and power input, five types of heated rods (HRs) together with one type of unheated support rods (SRs) are simulated. A unique multiplication factor has been applied to each of these rod types in order to maintain the correct power generation rate. Each type of heater rods has the same color as is shown in Fig. 3(a). These rods, either heated or unheated, will exchange energy with the fluid in their vicinity.
Fig. 3. Cross-Sectional View of COBRA-TF Model for Heater Rods.
Both the heated structures (heater rods) and the unheated structures (corner rods, flow housing) have been further divided into several radial temperature nodes to account for heat conduction within the geometry. Fig. 3(b) shows the nodalization for one heated rod. As the same with the heater rods actually used in the RBHT test facility, four material regions are divided for the COBRA-TF model. Material properties in Regions 1 and 3 are specified as the Boron-Nitride, in Region 2 as the heat coil (Monel K-500) and in Region 4 as the cladding (Inconel 600). Three temperature nodes are defined for each material region. In addition, the flow housing has been divided into three temperature nodes with an insulation material surrounding the flow housing. The outside boundary condition for flow housing is assumed to be adiabatic in the current calculation based on the results of pre-calculations indicating a power loss of about 0.8% for a total bundle power of 144 kW, which basically had no effect on the rod turnaround time and thermal–hydraulic responses within the inner 3  3 bundle region (Hochreiter et al., 2010, Hochreiter et al., 2012).
<Section>3. COBRA-TF calculation matrix and Transient reflood simulations</Section>
In this section, the COBRA-TF calculation results for selected RBHT reflood tests are shown and compared with the actual data. Extensive COBRA-TF runs were performed covering a wide range of system conditions explored in the experiments. Based on the available data (Jin, 2019), a comprehensive and detailed verification and validation were carried out for key thermal–hydraulic models related to the reflood transients including the quench front propagation, two-phase flow mass and heat transfer incorporated, two-phase flow pressure drop, liquid droplet entrainment, spacer grid heat transfer. In total, 13 tests were used for comparison. The test conditions are shown in Table 1. They cover the pressure range from 124.11 to 413.69 kPa, liquid injection rate from 0.0191 to 0.2032 m/sec, peak power from 1.31 to 2.30 kW/m and inlet subcooling from 5 to 83 K. A corresponding COBRA-TF calculation was performed for each of these tests in order to have a direct comparison for various two-phase flow and heat transfer phenomena involved.
Table 1. Test Conditions for Selected RBHT Constant Reflood Tests (Jin, 2019).
COBRA-TF is capable of calculating and providing transient information for many important flow and heat transfer quantities for all the cells and channels modeled, from rod surface temperature, heat flux, heat transfer regime, to two-phase flow void fraction, temperature, velocity, interfacial heat transfer, and to pressure drop, spacer grid quenching conditions, etc. Therefore, it is very convenient and quite useful to realistically present the transient variations of these quantities for the entire calculational domain. For reflood tests specifically, the visualization of certain parameters within the entire test section will greatly help the analyst to obtain a comprehensive picture of the cooling and quenching processes during reflood transients.
Visualization for two of the most important quantities, the two-phase flow void fraction and the rod cladding temperature, are presented for Exp. 8009 at four distinct times, which spans over the entire reflood transients. Due to the current heater rod specification and axisymmetric assumption, the results are presented only in the first quadrant as depicted in Fig. 3(a).
Fig. 4 first shows the transient variations for the void fraction and rod cladding temperature at 21 sec into reflood, which corresponds to the very beginning of liquid injection. At this moment, the subcooled liquid was just introduced into the test section. The majority portion of the upper rod bundle was still covered by vapor phase with the void fraction being unity. At the same time, the rod bundle axial temperature distribution generally followed the power profile applied, with the PCT being identified around the peak power location (2.74 m). Upon initial injection, the subcooled water quickly quenched the bottom portion of the rod bundle and a quench front was initiated rewetting the rod bundle surface. Note that the temperature of the support rod (labeled as HR-7) at the corner location is slightly lower than the other rods since it has no internal heat source.
Fig. 4. Transient Variations of the Sub-Channel Void Fraction and Rod Cladding Temperature at 21 sec after Reflood, Exp. 8009.
About 101 sec later, the quench front achieved an axial elevation of around 1 m along the rod bundle, as shown in Fig. 5. Due to the quench front propagation and the effect of pre-cooling achieved by the continuous vapor flow with liquid droplets entrained, the rod cladding temperature tended to decrease from their initial values, indicating that the rod temperature has turned around after reaching its peak. Such behavior can be clearly seen in later sections.
Fig. 5. Transient Variations of the Sub-Channel Void Fraction and Rod Cladding Temperature at 101 sec after Reflood, Exp. 8009.
The sub-channel based void fraction and rod cladding temperature distributions at the time of 301 sec are shown in Fig. 6. Up to this point, the quench front has propagated deep into the test section, successfully quenched the lower part of the rod bundle. The portion around peak power location was still hot due to much higher power generation rate. It is also noted that, the top-down quench front (top-deluge regime) was predicted by COBRA-TF for some heater rods, indicating that there was liquid falling back into the rod bundle from the outlet of the test section. In the current COBRA-TF model, the falling film regime consists of film flowing downward while vapor flowing upward. It occurs in a hot wall flow regime cell with a normal wall flow regime cell above and when the void fraction in the hot wall flow regime cell is larger than 0.8. Also, faster quench front propagation velocity can be observed for the support rod. The corresponding void fractions in four sub-channels are presented on the left-hand-side (LHS) of Fig. 6. Similar two-phase flow behavior was observed.
Fig. 6. Transient Variations of the Sub-Channel Void Fraction and Rod Cladding Temperature at 301 sec after Reflood, Exp. 8009.
Last, the channel void fraction and rod cladding temperature distributions at the end of reflood transient, 749 sec, are shown in Fig. 7. COBRA-TF predicted fully quench of the entire rod bundle at this time with the cladding temperature slightly above the saturation temperature. While the bottom portion of the rod bundle remained as single-phase liquid, two-phase flow dominated the rest of the bundle, as can be seen from the void fraction distribution. In addition, due to constant heat addition into the fluid, the void fraction near the outlet of the test section was still very close to unity. This indicated that a larger amount of vapor was generated through liquid evaporation.
Fig. 7. Transient Variations of the Sub-Channel Void Fraction and Rod Cladding Temperature at 749 sec after Reflood, Exp. 8009.
It was also found in analyzing the calculated results that large oscillations existed for the void fraction prediction. This is mainly due to the intrinsic solution of numerical problems as well as the two-phase flow thermal–hydraulic models such as the liquid droplet entrainment model, all of which will need separate verification and validation.
<Section>4. Code validation using NRC/PSU RBHT experimental data</Section>
4.1. Quench front propagation
The bundle overall quench front propagation is a key parameter that is crucial for accurate reflood transient prediction. This is because it is the integrated effect of various two-phase flow models adopted in the code. The quench front locations predicted by COBRA-TF are compared with the actual RBHT reflood experiments for different system condition parameters. Based on each temperature measurement from various TC’s installed within the rod cladding, the quench front location and time can be obtained by identifying the steep temperature drop during reflood. The current temperature sampling frequency is 2 Hz. Therefore, the experimental error in time is within 0.5 s. Fig. 8 first shows the effect of system pressure on the numerical predictions. All these reflood tests were performed at the same test conditions except for the system operating pressure. The inlet liquid injection rate was 0.0254 m/sec, with 22 K subcooling and 1.31 kW/m peak power, while the pressure was varied from 124.11 to 413.69 kPa. From the experimental data, slightly larger scatter in quench front profiles were observed at later reflood stage when the quench front approaching the top of the bundle. This is mainly because of the rod bundle radial temperature distribution affecting the quench front propagation at different radial locations, since the rod surface temperature is not perfectly uniform due to the presence of flow housing. The overall trends predicted by COBRA-TF agreed relatively well with the experimental data, except for the late phase of reflood. However, slightly earlier quench was identified for Exps. 8021, 8041 and 8009 once the quench front past the middle portion of the bundle. COBRA-TF also predicted top-down quench near the outlet of the test section for all the reflood tests, which was only observed for Exps. 8009 and 8023 at some particular locations. In the actual reflood tests, especially the ones with higher flooding rate, the top-down quench behavior may be induced by the backward flow resulted from the liquid droplet deposition and vapor condensation on the surface of test section upper plate. The top-down quench model needs to be further improved and validated in order to adequately capture the real situation during reflood.
Fig. 8. Comparison of COBRA-TF Quench Front Predictions with RBHT Experiments for Different System Pressures.
In the present study, it was noticed that the quench front behavior predicted by COBRA-TF varied significantly with the liquid injection rate under different inlet liquid subcooling conditions. Therefore, the effect of flooding rate was compared separately for low subcooling conditions and for high subcooling conditions. Fig. 9 first evaluates the COBRA-TF performance for various mass flow rates at low inlet liquid subcooling conditions (5–23 K). Large discrepancies were observed for these tests, especially for tests with higher liquid injection rates. The most significant difference occurred for the test Exp. 7140 with 0.2023 m/sec flooding rate and 5 K subcooling temperature. The top portion of the rod bundle had early quench due to much higher flooding rate. COBRA-TF predicted a bundle quench time about 50 sec after initial reflood whereas the actual test did not quench until a much later time (around 200 sec). For high flooding rate tests, the IAFB regime is expected to occur close to the quench front and pre-cool the rod surface. However, a close investigation of the calculation results shows that, for high flooding rate tests, COBRA-TF tends to predict a prolonged transition boiling regime above the quench front with very short or even no IAFB and DFFB regimes present. Such code behavior will increase the rod bundle cooling rate before the quench front approaches and thus increase the speed of quench front propagation. The code heat transfer regime selection logic is primarily based on the void fraction,  and  predictions. In COBRA-TF, the  is calculated using either the correlation based on homogeneous nucleation temperature or the modified Berenson’s correlation by Henry (1974), whichever value is larger. Under the forced convection boiling condition, calculation of the CHF is based on the correlations proposed by Biasi (1967), which consists separate correlations for low- and high-quality flow, respectively. It is also possible that droplet entrainment model used in the COBRA-TF for the liquid column is not reflecting the actual situation, leading to a faster quench. Therefore, systematic code inspection and model improvements are required for the quench front prediction especially under low subcooling conditions with high flooding rates.
Fig. 9. Comparison of COBRA-TF Quench Front Predictions with RBHT Experiments for Different Flooding Rates at Low Inlet Subcooling Conditions.
Effects of the flooding rate under high subcooling conditions (@) were much better captured by COBRA-TF, as shown in Fig. 10. It should be noted that, the subcooling temperature for these tests were not exactly the same due to the conditions of actual experiments performed. However, they are all considered to be of high liquid subcooling tests. For these tests, COBRA-TF was able to reproduce most of the quench front propagation, though slightly earlier prediction of the quench was still observed for some tests. In addition, under high flooding rate conditions, COBRA-TF was able to correctly model the top-down quench phenomenon that actually took place in Exps. 7138 and 8032. Such comparison for liquid injection rate shows that quench models and possibly the mass and heat transfer models used in COBRA-TF are quite sensitive to the inlet liquid subcooling condition. This suggests the need to perform a thorough and comprehensive uncertainty and sensitivity analysis for COBRA-TF predictions against RBHT data in terms of the inlet liquid subcooling temperature.
Fig. 10. Comparison of COBRA-TF Quench Front Predictions with RBHT Experiments for Different Flooding Rates under High Inlet Subcooling Conditions.
The capability of COBRA-TF to predict the quench front for different rod bundle power inputs are further shown in Fig. 11. Compared with Exp. 8009, COBRA-TF was able to capture the quench front behavior for Exp. 8013 with a higher peak power of 1.97 kW/m. Also, due to much higher power generation, no top-down quench was predicted by the code or observed in the actual test.
Fig. 11. Comparison of COBRA-TF Quench Front Predictions with RBHT Experiments for Different Rod Bundle Power Inputs.
It has been found that the predicted quench front fits the data quite well in early reflood stage. However, early quenching of the bundle was predicted for later times into reflood transients. The code is able to predict the quench front behavior with sufficient accuracy for various test settings including different system pressures, inlet mass flow rates and bundle power inputs, except for the reflood conditions with high flooding rate and low liquid inlet subcooling. Therefore, efforts need to be taken to investigate and evaluate various key flow and heat transfer quantities separately in detail, which will be discussed next. On the other hand, it is also identified that, for code verification and validation purposes, uncertainty and sensitivity analyses for various input parameters need to be performed.
4.2. Thermal-hydraulic responses during reflood
Having compared the overall quench front behavior, in this section, the rod bundle transient thermal–hydraulic response during reflood predicted by COBRA-TF is evaluated in greater details by dividing the thermal–hydraulic response into several parts, including the actual rod, spacer grid and vapor temperature variations at specific locations. Also studied is the two-phase flow pressure drop prediction over the entire reflood transient for the selected rod bundle region (between two spacer girds). Such direct comparison with experimental data is expected to provide useful information and valuable insight about the performance of COBRA-TF from different mass and heat transport aspects, based on which existing models can be validated and revised, new models can also be developed.
The current comparisons for rod cladding temperature were made at three separate locations, i.e., 2.02, 2.42 and 2.69 m from the inlet, respectively. The spacer grid temperature investigated is focused on the spacer grid 6 that is located at the 2.79 m along the rod bundle. There are six TC’s installed on the spacer grid 6 at different heights and radial locations. They were all plotted in the same figure for comparison. The axial location for vapor temperature evaluation was selected to be at 2.54 m elevation. Cautions need to be taken for vapor temperature comparison owing to the fact that early wetting of the steam probes during reflood may occur as a result of liquid droplets deposition. On the other hand, the DP cell used for pressure drop comparison is located at the bare bundle region from 2.54 to 2.74 m without spacer grid.
The rod bundle thermal–hydraulic responses for Exp. 7151 are shown in Fig. 12. It can be seen that the COBRA-TF predicted rod cladding temperature profiles (Rod Temp.) at three locations for Exp. 7151 generally had similar trends as compared with the experimental measurements. The initial temperature rise was well predicted since it was mainly the single-phase vapor convective heat transfer. However, the rod temperatures after transition into the DFFB regime were found to be under-estimated. The higher the temperature, the more significant the extent of under-estimation. The DFFB regime is known to involve a continuous vapor phase flow with entrained liquid droplets. The presence of these liquid droplets, which have wide distributions in size and velocity and serve as additional dispersed heat sinks, will significantly alter the mass and heat transport process within the rod bundle during reflood transients. In order to accurately predict the rod cladding temperature during the DFFB regime, advanced mass and heat transfer models are needed for the two-phase flow mixture, especially the models that are able to capture the liquid droplet entrainment/deposition, size and velocity distributions, interfacial mass and heat transport, etc. In the COBRA-TF simulation, the liquid droplet phase is modeled as two groups (large droplet group and small droplet group) with each group having a uniform size. Also incorporated into the code are liquid droplet entrainment models (Holowach, 2002) at the quench front and liquid droplet breakup model (Paik, et al., 1985) at each of the spacer grid locations, as well as the droplet de-entrainment models based on previous studies. It has also been found that the  and CHF are the two crucial parameters affecting the rod bundle quenching behavior. Due to the lack of actual experimental data, relatively large uncertainties may exist for these models, leading to overall under-prediction of the current rod bundle temperature and early quench. Such under-estimation in turn led to the inaccurate predictions of the value and time of PCT during reflood. On the other hand, comparison with the TC measurements for the spacer grid (SG Temp.) showed that COBRA-TF tended to over-predict the data, though the rod bundle temperature is under-predicted. Also, COBRA-TF predicted a later spacer grid quench time for this test. The vapor phase temperature (Vapor Temp.) at 2.54 m location is further compared. Large oscillations existed in the code prediction due to complex two-phase interactions. It can be observed that for Exp. 7151, the vapor temperature was slightly under-predicted before quenching. Large fluctuations also existed for the pressure drop prediction (DP). While the pressure drop for the post-dryout regime was found to be relatively close to the RBHT experimental data, the pressure drop predicted by COBRA-TF after quench had significant differences. The COBRA-TF uses a two-phase pressure drop model based on the work by Wallis (1969), in which the two-phase flow multiplier is defined as a function of the void fraction ( for normal wall condition;  for hot wall condition), which is not a very good two-phase flow multiplier model. The single-phase friction coefficient is calculated based on the Blasius correlation. The large oscillations in pressure drop prediction is mainly caused by the void fraction prediction upon which the two-phase multiplier is based. As will shown later, COBRA-TF predicts relatively large oscillations for the void fraction.
Fig. 12. Rod Bundle Transient Thermal-Hydraulic Response, Exp. 7151.
Fig. 13, Fig. 14, Fig. 15 show the rod bundle thermal–hydraulic responses for Exp. 8013 performed at high power input (1.97 kW/m), Exp. 8089 performed at low system pressure (124.11 kPa) and, Exp. 7138 performed under very high flow rate condition (0.2023 m/sec). For Exp. 8013, under-prediction of cladding temperatures and early quench of the rod were observed, indicating, again, that better capturing of the DFFB regime heat transfer behavior is needed. At the same time, the spacer grid temperature was initially over-predicted but eventually quenched earlier. It should be also noted that, while the predicted SG temperature closely followed the rod surface temperature variation, the actual SG temperature measured showed some different characteristics, for instance the initial temperature drop, as compared with the actual rod temperature. The vapor temperature was also under-predicted for Exp. 8018 and the two-phase flow pressure drop after quench, again, had major differences. The predictions for Exp. 8089 had similar trend for vapor and spacer grid temperatures but large fluctuations were observed. For Exp. 7138, COBRA-TF over-predicted the cladding temperature in the DFFB regime possible due to less droplet entrainment prediction. The early rod bundle quench was consistent with other tests. Prediction for the spacer grid temperature, however, agreed relatively well. Due to the fully wet of the steam probe by entrained liquid droplet at early times during experiment, the vapor temperature was not experimentally obtained and thus cannot be compared. For Exp. 7138, the general trend of the two-phase flow pressure drop can be somewhat better captured, when compared with a low flooding rate case. The detailed quantification of the prediction errors for these thermal–hydraulic quantities as well as other parameters will be presented in Section 4.5.
Fig. 13. Rod Bundle Transient Thermal-Hydraulic Response, Exp. 8013.
Fig. 14. Rod Bundle Transient Thermal-Hydraulic Response, Exp. 8089.
Fig. 15. Rod Bundle Transient Thermal-Hydraulic Response, Exp. 7138.
Despite of these differences, predictions of rod bundle early quenching was consistent for all the tests, indicating a systematic bias. On the other hand, both under- and over-predictions of the spacer grid and vapor temperatures were observed for these tests. It should also be noted that COBRA-TF predicted dryout of the spacer grid at a later time of reflood transient for Exp. 8089, which did not occur in the actual test. The spacer grid quench front model is used to track the fraction of the grid surface that is wet. The wet region heat balance calculation determines whether the quench front grows or recedes. This is done by comparing the liquid film evaporation rate on the spacer grid due to radiative and convective heat transfer with the liquid droplet deposition rate. The quench front velocity is then calculated using the two-region analytical conduction solution by Yamanouchi (Yamanouchi, 1968). COBRA-TF predictions for pressure drop were also found to be consistent with previous observations. That is, while slightly under-prediction existed for pressure drop in the post-dryout regime, large discrepancy occurred after the quenching. Apparently, further improvement of the two-phase flow pressure drop model is needed to better fit the data.
4.3. Liquid droplet velocity
The comparisons made in the previous section further highlight the important role played by the liquid droplet field during reflood transients. Due to the two-fluid three-field solution scheme adopted by the current two-phase flow calculation, COBRA-TF is also capable of modeling the liquid droplet behavior such as entrainment/de-detrainment, liquid droplet breakup at the spacer grid as well as the interfacial mass and heat transfer process. The liquid droplet entrainment model consists of two types of entrainment: entrainment from a liquid film (annular flow scenario) and entrainment from quench front (froth region scenario). The detailed model description can be found in the work performed by Holowach (2002). The interfacial drag between the liquid droplet and vapor phase is calculated based on the droplet Reynolds number and the two-phase mixture viscosity as proposed by Ishii (1977). While the interfacial heat transfer coefficient is determined based on the work performed by Yuen and Chen (1978), in which the vapor phase superheat is taken into account.
The COBRA-TF predicted liquid droplet velocity for various reflood tests were compared and evaluated. In order to have a direct comparison with the experimental measurement based on the laser imaging system, the COBRA-TF results have been averaged every 20 sec. Based on our previous studies (Jin et al., 2018a, Jin et al., 2018b, Jin et al., 2019a), the droplet size and velocity measurement for a single droplet is quite accurate using the laser imaging system (only limited by the camera resolution). While the uncertainty induced for obtaining the averaged value from a group of droplets is within 15% error. Fig. 16 first shows the numerical simulation results for reflood tests at various system pressures (137.9 to 413.69 kPa). It is seen that for a low system pressure test, the code predictions agreed with the experimental measurement well. However, for a high system pressure test, under-predictions were identified. Nevertheless, COBRA-TF was able to correctly capture the decreasing trend in the droplet velocity as the quench front propagating upward along the bundle. In addition, it can be observed from experiments that the droplet velocity tends to decrease with increasing system pressure. COBRA-TF can somewhat capture this behavior.
Fig. 16. Transient Variation of the Liquid Droplet Velocity under Different System Pressures.
The droplet velocity calculation results for high flooding rate tests are shown in Fig. 17. The significant increase in the two-phase mass flow rate further complicated the liquid droplet measurement, leading to less data points obtained. As the flooding rate increased from 0.0508 m/s to 0.2032 m/s, the prediction converted from under-prediction to over-prediction. An uncertainty and sensitivity analysis for liquid droplet models would be helpful in quantifying these prediction errors.
Fig. 17. Transient Variation of the Droplet Velocity under Different Liquid Injection Rates.
Lastly, the droplet velocity results for tests with different rod bundle power inputs are shown in Fig. 18. Note that Exps. 8009 and 8013 also had different inlet subcooling temperatures. However, previous studies (Jin et al., 2018a, Jin et al., 2019b) showed that liquid subcooling has minor effect in the DFFB regime. It appears that the low power tests may under-estimate the droplet velocity while the high power tests tended to give a good agreement. However, more experimental data is needed to further confirm the current observation.
Fig. 18. Transient Variations of the Liquid Droplet Velocity under Different Power Inputs.
4.4. Two-Phase flow void fraction
Void fraction is a very important two-phase flow quantity characterizing the two-phase flow mixture composition and is frequently utilized as an indicator for different interfacial geometry and heat transport regime. Existence of the liquid droplets has major effect on the void fraction in the DFFB regime. In COBRA-TF, the void fraction is calculated by solving the conservation equations for each phase and it is used to distinguish different flow and heat transfer regimes. Therefore, accurate prediction of the void fraction is crucial in the reactor core thermal–hydraulic and safety analysis. In the current study, the two-phase flow mass quality correlation for the DFFB regime developed by Jin et al. (2019b) is used to calculate the experimental void fraction for comparison. In their studies, this correlation was found to be able to predict the mass quality in the post-dryout regime within a 10% error. Due to the significant fluctuations in the code predicted void fraction data, a moving average of 5 sec was applied to both the experimental data and the numerical results.
Fig. 19 shows the COBRA-TF predictions for the two-phase flow void fraction variations at two different axial locations (2.54 and 2.74 m) under different system pressures. It can be seen that initially the void fraction was very close to unity since single-phase convective cooling by the vapor flow was the dominate heat transfer mechanism. As the liquid droplets gradually being entrained in the vapor flow, the void fraction started to decrease. In the COBRA-TF heat transfer regime selection logic, void fraction and surface temperature are very important criteria. For example. If the void fraction is larger than 0.9999, then single-phase vapor heat transfer is taken in the code calculation. On the other hand, if the void fraction is larger than 0.9 or if the void fraction is smaller than 0.9 but the surface temperature is higher than , then the code will use dispersed flow film boiling correlations instead. As a result, large and rapid variations in void fraction prediction may lead to frequent switch of heat transfer correlations used in the COBRA-TF heat transfer calculation and the code estimation for liquid droplet size in the DFFB regime, which further leads to inaccurate heat transfer and two-phase pressure drop predictions. By comparing with the corresponding RBHT reflood tests it can be observed that COBRA-TF tended to under-predict the experimental void fraction, indicating that COBRA-TF predicted more liquid presence within the vapor flow. With more heat sinks distributed in the vapor flow, the interfacial heat transfer and radiation heat transfer are enhanced, leading to lower vapor temperature and eventually lower rod bundle temperature in the DFFB regime. This confirms the observations made in previous section for the rod bundle surface temperature, for which COBRA-TF always under-predicts the rod surface temperature in the post-dryout regime. However, the values predicted were well above 0.9, indicating that DFFB was the major flow regime. Even though the current data has been averaged every 5 sec, large fluctuations still existed for the code predations, especially for the low system pressure tests.
Fig. 19. Comparison of Void Fraction in the DFFB Regime for RBHT Tests at Various System Pressures.
The void fraction comparisons for different liquid injection rates and rod bundle powers are shown in Figs. 20 and 21, respectively. In can be observed that, COBRA-TF initially had good prediction capability. But later when the quench front approaches gradually, it started to under-predicted the void fraction. This near quench front under-prediction eventually led to early quench behavior. For the high flooding rate test Exp. 7123 (0.1016 m/sec), the under-prediction was more significant. For high power test Exp. 8013 (1.97 kW/m), COBRA-TF did predict a longer duration for the DFFB regime as the actual experiment did.
Fig. 20. Comparison of Void Fraction in the DFFB Regime for RBHT Tests at Various Liquid Injection Rates.
Fig. 21. Comparison of Void Fraction in the DFFB Regime for RBHT Tests at Various Rod Bundle Power Inputs.
4.5. Overall prediction Errors for various thermal-hydraulic quantities
With the data gathered for all the RBHT tests selected, it is now very useful and informative to evaluate the overall code performance and uncertainties related to variables important to the two-phase mass and heat transfer. This section will investigate in detail the prediction uncertainties involved in the code for various flow and heat transfer quantities that include: the rod bundle surface temperature, spacer grid temperature, vapor phase temperature, pressure drop for bare bundle, liquid droplet velocity and the void fraction within the DFFB regime. Appropriate averages were performed in order to have a one-on-one comparison with the RBHT experimental data as well as to dampen the bias caused by fluctuations.
The COBRA-TF overall performance for rod bundle surface temperature prediction is shown in Fig. 22. As can be seen, COBRA-TF was able to predict more than 90% of the rod surface temperature points for the post-dryout regime well within a ±15% error range. Most of the tests only had moderate under-predictions while over-prediction was also occasionally observed. It is also found that COBRA-TF is able to capture the rod temperature variations in the early reflood period more accurately than those in the region right before quench. However, prediction of an earlier quenching contributed to the maximum uncertainty in Fig. 22, this is due to extremely complex two-phase mass and heat transport that exist near the quench front region, which significantly increased the modeling difficulty in numerical analysis codes. After quench, COBRA-TF was able to accurately predict the rod temperature near saturation.
Fig. 22. COBRA-TF Overall Prediction Errors - Rod Surface Temperature.
On the other hand, there was a ±20% error existing for the spacer grid temperature prediction, as shown in Fig. 23. For most of the time in the post-CHF heat transfer regime, the spacer grid temperature was over-predicted. It is possible that the droplet deposition and breakup model at spacer grid may contribute to this over-prediction. In addition, COBRA-TF predicted both early and later quenching time for spacer grid under different test conditions.
Fig. 23. COBRA-TF Overall Prediction Errors - Spacer Grid Temperature.
Next, both the BRHT measurements and COBRA-TF calculations on the vapor phase temperature variations have been averaged every 5 sec in order to eliminate fluctuations before comparison. It can be seen from Fig. 24 that the code was able to predict the vapor phase temperature within the ±20% error span. Similar to rod and spacer grid temperature predictions, the largest uncertainty was found to occur during the quenching period. Such discrepancy is partially due to the early quench of the steam probes.
Fig. 24. COBRA-TF Overall Prediction Errors - Vapor Phase Temperature.
The largest uncertainty for the COBRA-TF prediction, however, is found to be the pressure drop prediction. Fig. 25 presents the uncertainty associated with pressure drop prediction after an average of 5 sec for both calculated and measured pressure drop data. Uncertainties more than ±50% in pressure drop existed in the bulk liquid boiling regime. While the pressure drop for the post-CHF regime were relatively more accurately predicted, significant under-predictions were observed for the pressure drop calculation after quench. Large oscillations in the pressure drop prediction can be also observed since the two-phase flow pressure drop is closely related to the void fraction, which had significant fluctuations.
Fig. 25. COBRA-TF Overall Prediction Errors - Pressure Drop.
Based on the liquid droplet velocity data obtained through the laser imaging system, COBRA-TF was found to be able to predict the droplet velocity within  error span. Fig. 26 shows the comparison results. Note that the current comparison was performed based on a 20 sec average due to the way how liquid droplet data was collected in the experiment. More advanced liquid droplet models considering the droplet size and velocity distributions may further improve the accuracy of the current code predictions.
Fig. 26. COBRA-TF Overall Prediction Errors - liquid Droplet Velocity.
Last, the two-phase flow void fraction prediction in the DFFB regime is evaluated based on Jin’s model (Jin et al., 2019b) and the results are shown in Fig. 27. Even though the void fraction value was very close to unity (>0.99) for the DFFB regime, a clear trend of under-prediction can be observed. Such under-prediction will lead to more liquid presence in the vapor flow which will then lead to the under-prediction of the rod bundle temperature.
Fig. 27. COBRA-TF Overall Prediction Errors - DFFB Regime Void Fraction.
<Section>5. Summary and conclusions</Section>
An extensive and comprehensive code evaluation and validation is carried out in the present study. The thermal–hydraulic sub-channel analysis code COBRA-TF is used. It adopts a two-fluid three-field numerical solution scheme for the fluid flow and heat transfer. The numerical simulations are compared with the NRC/PSU RBHT reflood data, which provide detailed characterization of the reflood transients.
Based on the RBHT test section configuration, a detailed COBRA-TF numerical analysis model is developed using three sections and in total nine thermal–hydraulic sub-channels. The four channels representing the test section in Section 1 consist of 31 axial nodes. The lateral communication between each pair of channels is defined by the gap specifications. In total, there are 7 rods being modeled in the current model according to their different locations and heating condition. Each rod is multiplied by a certain number in order to maintain the same overall heat generation rate. The boundary and initial conditions are based on the actual tests. In the current study, individual numerical calculations are performed for each of the 13 RBHT reflood tests selected, covering a wide range of test conditions. The system parametric effects investigated include: the system pressure, inlet liquid subcooling temperature, inlet flooding rate, and rod bundle power. A variety of thermal–hydraulic quantities that are evaluated include: the quench front propagation, cladding, spacer grid and vapor temperature variations, two-phase pressure drop, liquid droplet velocity, and two-phase flow void fraction. Comparison of theses thermal fluid quantities has provided invaluable insights into the various models used in COBRA-TF. The prediction errors are also presented for each of the quantities in order to have a general understanding of the code performance.
In general, COBRA-TA agrees relatively well with experimental data on the overall quench front propagation with only slight early prediction. However, under low inlet subcooling and high flooding rate conditions, significant discrepancies are observed. This might be due to the fact that when the liquid temperature is close to saturation, it is easily to be evaporated, which leads to significant change in the void fraction variation as well as the heat transfer regime selection with large uncertainties. Therefore, the code prediction capability near the saturation condition with high mass flow rate need to be further evaluated and improved.
The comparison with rod bundle thermal–hydraulic parameters indicates that COBRA-TF is able to predict the cladding temperature before quench within a 15% range. However, early quench behavior is predicted for all the reflood tests selected. This trend in code performance, together with the quench front prediction, indicates that the mass and heat transfer calculation models used near the quench front region need to be improved, such as the  model, CHF model, heat transfer coefficient model in the transition boiling regime. On the other hand, the spacer grid and vapor temperature predictions are within 20% error. Both under- and over-prediction are observed. To further improve the prediction accuracy for spacer grid and vapor phase, more detailed spacer grid heat transfer and quench models as well as interfacial drag and heat transfer models need to be developed. This requires an accurate characterization of the liquid droplet field for which the RBHT can provide unique droplet data for modeling. The overall liquid droplet velocity prediction is found to be within 30% error. COBRA-TF is able to capture the decreasing trend for droplet velocity during reflood. However, for high system pressure tests, under-prediction is observed. While for high inlet flooding rate tests, both under- and over-prediction are observed. In addition, the prediction of the DFFB void fraction shows that the code always under-predicts the void fraction. This leads to more liquid droplet presence in the vapor flow thus increasing the cooling capability of the two-phase mixture, eventually leading to faster quench of the rod bundle. Future study will further compare the liquid droplet size in the DFFB regime prediction. Also, the void fraction comparison will be extended to the bulk liquid boiling regime.
The largest discrepancy, however, is found to be the two-phase flow pressure drop prediction after quench. That is, the pressure drop prediction in the nucleate boiling regime. Significant under-prediction is identified with uncertainties more than 50%. Therefore, more efforts are needed for the two-phase flow pressure drop model development during reflood conditions.
As the next step, separate model evaluation and uncertainty quantification will be performed for various two-phase flow mass and heat transfer models, especially the two-phase flow pressure drop model, such that the overall code performance can be significantly improved.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Yue Jin: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software. Fan-Bill Cheung: Supervision. Koroush Shirvan: Writing - review & editing. Stephen M. Bajorek: Writing - review & editing. Kirk Tien: Writing - review & editing. Chris L. Hoxie: Writing - review & editing.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgments</Section>
The work performed at the Pennsylvania State University was supported by the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission under Contract Number: NRC-HQ-60-16-T-0002.
<Section>Appendix A. Supplementary data</Section>
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:
Download : Download XML file (305B)
Supplementary data 1.
<Section>Research data for this article</Section>
Data not available / The authors do not have permission to share data
<Section>References</Section>
Berar et al., 2013
O.A. Berar, A. Prošek, B. Mavko
RELAP5 and TRACE assessment of the Achilles natural reflood experiment
Nucl. Eng. Des., 261 (2013), pp. 306-316
ISSN: 0029-5493
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Berar et al., 2013
O.A. Berar, A. Prosek, B. Mavko
RELAP5 and TRACE assessment of the Achilles natural reflood experiment
Nucl. Eng. Des., 261 (2013), pp. 306-316
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Biasi, 1967
L. Biasi, et al.
Studies on Burnout, Part 3
Energia Nucleare, 14 (9) (1967), pp. 530-536
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Choi and No, 2010
T.S. Choi, H.C. No
Improvement of the reflood model of RELAP5/MOD3.3 based on the assessments against FLECHT-SEASET tests
Nucl. Eng. Des., 240 (2010), pp. 832-841
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Choi and No, 2012
T.S. Choi, H.C. No
An improved RELAP5/MOD3.3 reflood model considering the effect of spacer grids
Nucl. Eng. Des., 250 (2012), pp. 613-625
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Cooper et al., 1984
Cooper, C.A., Pearson, K.G., Jowitt, D., 1984. The THETIS 80% blocked cluster experiment. Part 3. Forced reflood experiments. UKAEA Report AEEW-R1765.
Google Scholar
Erbacher et al., 1990
Erbacher, F.J., Neitzel, H.J., Wiehr, K., Cladding Deformation and Emergency Core Cooling of a Pressurized Water Reactor in a LOCA. Summary Description of the REBEKA Program, Scientific report KFK-4781, Karlsruhe, 1990, doi: 10.5445/IR/270029557.
Google Scholar
Ergun et al., 2008a
S. Ergun, L.E. Hochreiter, J.H. Mahaffy
Modifications to COBRA-TF to model dispersed flow film boiling with two flow, four field Eulerian-Eulerian approach – part 1
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 35 (2008), pp. 1663-1670
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ergun et al., 2008b
S. Ergun, L.E. Hochreiter, J.H. Mahaffy
Modifications to COBRA-TF to model dispersed flow film boiling with two flow, four field Eulerian-Eulerian approach-part 2
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 35 (2008), pp. 1671-1676
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Garrett et al., 2019
Garrett, G.R., Beck, F.R., Jin, Y., Cheung, F.B., Bajorek, S.M., Tien, K., Hoxie, C., 2019. Effects of System Parameters on the Two-Phase Flow and Heat Transfer Behavior in a Rod Bundle. Proceedings of the 4th Thermal and Fluid Engineering Conference, TFEC2019, April 14-17, 2019, Las Vegas, Nevada.
Google Scholar
Gerova et al., 2048
Gerova, G., Spasov, I., Allison, C., Steinbrück, M., 2018. Modeling and simulation of the QUENCH 12 experiment with the RELAP/SCDAPSIM/ MOD3.5 code. AIP Conference Proceedings 2048, 020019.
Google Scholar
Henry, 1974
R.E. Henry
A Correlation for the Minimum Film Boiling Temperature
AIChE Symp. Ser., 138 (1974), pp. 81-90
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hochreiter et al., 2010
Hochreiter, L.E., et al., 2010. Rod Bundle Heat Transfer Test Facility Test Plan and Design, NUREG/CR-6975, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC.
Google Scholar
Hochreiter et al., 2012
Hochreiter, L.E., et al., 2012. RBHT Reflood Heat Transfer Experiments Data and Analysis, NUREG/CR-6980, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC.
Google Scholar
Hochreiter, 1985
L.E. Hochreiter, FLECHT-SEASET program final report, NUREG/CR-4167, 1985.
Google Scholar
Holowach et al., 2003
Holowach, M.J., Hochreiter, L.E., Mahaffy, J.H., Cheung, F.B., 2003. A Model for Predicting Droplet Entrainment at a Quench Front in Thermal Hydraulic Analysis Codes. Proceedings of IMECE’03, Washington, DC, USA, November 16-21, 2003.
Google Scholar
Holowach, 2002
Holowach, M.J.. 2002. A physical model for predicting droplet entrainment in transient two-phase fluid flow and heat transfer systems analysis computer codes, PhD Dissertation, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA, Dec. 2002.
Google Scholar
Hong et al., 2018
S.H. Hong, S. Kang, J. Kim, J.K. Park, S.K. Moon
Reflood experiments at elevated pressures using intact and deformed rod bundles to simulate small and medium break loss-of-coolant accidents
Nucl. Eng. Des., 338 (2018), pp. 209-217
ISSN: 0029-5493
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Huh et al., 2017
Huh, B.G., Cheong, A.J., Lee, K.W., 2017. Evaluation of TRACE Spacer Grid Model with FLECHT-SEASET Reflood Test. NUREG/IA-0481.
Google Scholar
Huh et al., 2018
Huh, B.G., Cheong, A.J., Lee, K.W., 2018. TRACE Assessment for Effect of Spacer Grid in RBHT Reflood Heat Transfer Experiments. NUREG/IA-0480.
Google Scholar
Ihle and Rust, 1984
Ihle, P., Rust, K., 1984. FEBA-flooding experiments with blocked arrays evaluation report. Karlsruhe (Germany): Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Kernforschungszentrum Karlsruhe. (KfK 3657).
Google Scholar
Ihle and Rust, 1986
Ihle, P., Rust, K., 1986. SEFLEX, fuel rod simulator effects in flooding experiments. Part 1. Evaluation Report. KfK-4024.
Google Scholar
Ihle and Rust, 1987
P. Ihle, K. Rust
PWR reflood experiments using full length bundles of rods with Zircaloy cladding and alumina pellets
Nucl. Eng. Des., 99 (1987), pp. 223-237
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ishii, 1977
Ishii, M., 1977. One-dimensional drift-flux model and constitutive equations for relative motion between phases in various two-phase flow regimes. Technical Report, ANL-77-47, Argonne National laboratory, United States: N. Web. doi:10.2172/6871478.
Google Scholar
Jaeger and Espinoza, 2013
W. Jaeger, V.H.S. Espinoza
Uncertainty and Sensitivity Study in the Frame of TRACE Validation for Reflood Experiment
Nucl. Technol., 184 (3) (2013), pp. 333-350, 10.13182/NT184-333
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jin et al., 2015
Y. Jin, W. Xu, X.J. Liu, X. Cheng
In- and ex-vessel coupled analysis of IVR-ERVC phenomenon for large scale PWR
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 80 (2015), pp. 322-337
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jin et al., 2018a
Y. Jin, F.B. Cheung, S.M. Bajorek, K. Tien, C.L. Hoxie
Investigation of the Thermal-Hydraulic Non-Equilibrium in a 7 × 7 Rod Bundle During Reflood
Int. J. Heat Mass Trans., 127 (2018), pp. 266-279
ISSN: 0017-9310
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jin et al., 2018b
Y. Jin, D.J. Miller, S.X. Qiao, A. Rau, S. Kim, F.B. Cheung, S.M. Bajorek, K. Tien, C.L. Hoxie
Uncertainty Analysis on Droplet Size Measurement in Dispersed Flow Film Boiling Regime during Reflood Using Image Processing Technique
Nucl. Eng. Des., 326 (2018), pp. 202-219
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jin et al., 2018c
Y. Jin, F.R. Beck, B.R. Lowery, D.J. Miller, F.B. Cheung, S.M. Bajorek, K. Tien, C.L. Hoxie
Experimental Study of Droplet Sizes across a Spacer Grid Location under Various Reflood Conditions
Exp. Therm Fluid Sci., 94 (2018), pp. 246-257
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jin et al., 2019a
Y. Jin, F.B. Cheung, K. Shirvan, S.M. Bajorek, K. Tien, C.L. Hoxie
Development of a droplet breakup model for dry spacer grid in the dispersed flow film boiling regime during reflood transients
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 143 (2019)
Google Scholar
Jin et al., 2019b
Y. Jin, F.B. Cheung, S.M. Bajorek, K. Tien, C.L. Hoxie
Development of a two-phase flow mass quality correlation in the post-dryout DFFB regime during reflood transients
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 137 (2019), pp. 1076-1087
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jin, 2019
Jin, Y., 2019. Investigation of two-phase flow thermal-hydraulic behavior in rod bundle during reflood transients based on the RBHT experiments. PhD Dissertation, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA.
Google Scholar
Kim et al., 2018
Kim, S., Qiao, S., Rau, A., Beck, F., Lowery, B.R., Eberly, M.K., Cheung, F.B., 2018. Final Report on Advanced Instrumentation Development, NUREG/CR Report.
Google Scholar
Lee et al., 1982
Lee, N., Wong, S., Yeh, H.C., Hochreiter, L.E., 1982. PWR FLECHT-SEASET unblocked bundle, forced and gravity reflood task data evaluation and analysis report. Monroeville (PA): Westinghouse Electric Corporation. (EPRI NP-2013; NUREG/CR-2256; WCAP-9891).
Google Scholar
Lutsanych et al., 2015
Lutsanych, S., Moretti, F., Auria, F.D., 2015. Validation of CATHARE TH-SYS Code against experimental reflood tests. Proceedings of NURETH-16, Chicago, IL, August 30-September 4, 2015.
Google Scholar
Moon et al., 2011
Moon, S.K., et. al., 2011. Assessment of the KAERI 66 reflood experiment using the SPACE code. Proceedings of ICAPP 2011, Nice (France); 2-5 May 2011.
Google Scholar
Paik et al., 1985
Paik, C.Y., et al., 1985. Analysis of FLECHTSEASET 163-Rod Blocked Bundle Data Using COBRA-TF, NUREG/CR-4166, 1985.
Google Scholar
Pearson and Denham, 1989
Pearson, K.G., Denham, M.K., 1989. Achilles Unballooned Cluster Experiments – Part 1: Description of the Achilles Rig, Test Section and Experimental Procedures. Technical Report, AEEW-R 2336, United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority, Winfrith Technology Centre.
Google Scholar
Pearson et al., 1983
Pearson, K.G., Cooper, C.A., Jowitt, D., 1983. Reflooding experiments on a 49-rod cluster containing a long 90% blockage. UKAEA Report AEEW-R1591.
Google Scholar
Pearson et al., 1984
Pearson, K.G., Cooper, C.A., Jowitt, D., 1984. The THETIS 80% blocked cluster experiment. Part 4. Gravity reflood experiments. UKAEA Report AEEW-R1766.
Google Scholar
Seo et al., 2015
G.H. Seo, H.H. Son, S.J. Kim
Numerical Analysis of RBHT reflood experiments using MARS 1D and 3D modules
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 52 (1) (2015), pp. 70-84
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Shen et al., 2018
D.H. Shen, X.J. Liu, X. Cheng
A new turbulent mixing modeling approach for sub-channel analysis code
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 121 (2018), pp. 194-202
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Steinbrück et al., 2010
M. Steinbrück, M. Große, L. Sepold, J. Stuckert
Synopsis and Outcome of the QUENCH Experimental Program
Nucl. Eng. Des., 240 (2010), pp. 1714-1727
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Stuckert et al., 2010
J. Stuckert, J. Birchley, M. Grosse, B. Jaeckel, M. Steinbrück
Experimental and calculation results of the integral reflood test QUENCH-14 with M5 cladding tubes
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 37 (2010), pp. 1036-1047, 10.1016/j.anucene.2010.04.015
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Stuckert et al., 2009
Stuckert, J., Große, M., Sepold, L., Steinbrück, M., 2009. Experimental results of reflood bundle test quench-14 with M5 cladding tubes. Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Nuclear Engineering (ICONE-17), July 12-16, 2009, Brussels, Belgium.
Google Scholar
Stuckert et al., 2020
J. Stuckert, M. Grosse, M. Steinbrueck, M. Walter, A. Wensauer
Results of the QUENCH-LOCA experimental program at KIT
J. Nucl. Mater., 534 (2020), Article 152143, 10.1016/j.jnucmat.2020.152143
ArticleDownload PDFGoogle Scholar
Todd et al., 1999
Todd, D.R., Frepoli, C., Hochreiter, L.E., 1999. Development of a COBRA-TF model for the Penn State University – Rod Bundle Heat Transfer program. Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Nuclear Engineering; 1999 Apr 19–23; Tokyo (Japan).
Google Scholar
Unal et al., 1988a
C. Unal, K. Tuzla, J.C. Chen, S. Neti, O. Badr
Convective film boiling in rod bundle: axial variation of nonequilibrium evaporation rates
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 31 (10) (1988), pp. 2091-2100
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Unal et al., 1988b
C. Unal, K. Tuzla, O. Badr, S. Neti, J.C. Chen
Parameter trends for post-CHF heat transfer in rod bundles
J. Heat Transfer, 110 (1988), pp. 721-727
CrossRefGoogle Scholar
Unal et al., 1991
C. Unal, K. Tuzla, O. Badr, S. Neti, J.C. Chen
Convective boiling in rod bundle: transverse variation of vapor superheat temperature under stabilized post-CHF conditions
Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 34 (7) (1991), pp. 1695-1706
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Vasiliev and Stuckert, 2016
A. Vasiliev, J. Stuckert
Application of Thermal Hydraulic and Severe Accident Code SOCRAT/V3 to Bottom Water Reflood Experiment QUENCH-LOCA-1
J. Nucl. Eng. Rad. Sci. (2016)
vol. 2/021024-1
Google Scholar
Wallis, 1969
Wallis, G.B.. 1969. One-Dimensional Two-Phase Flow. McGraw-Hill.
Google Scholar
Wang et al., March 2013
J. Wang, W.X. Tian, Y.H. Tian, G.H. Su, S.Z. Qiu
Sub-channel analysis code for advanced lead bismuth fast reactor
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 63 (2013), pp. 34-48, 10.1016/j.pnucene.2012.09.010
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wicaksono et al., 2015
Wicaksono, D., Zerkak, O., Pautz, A., 2015. A Methodology for Global Sensitivity Analysis of Transient Code Output Applied to A Reflood Experiment Model Using TRACE. Proceedings of NURETH-16, Chicago, IL, August 30-September 4, 2015.
Google Scholar
Yamanouchi, 1968
A. Yamanouchi
Effect of Core Spray Cooling in Transient State after Loss-of-Cooling Accident
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 5 (1968), pp. 547-558
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yuen and Chen, 1978
M.C. Yuen, L.W. Chen
Heat-Transfer Measurements of Evaporating Liquid Droplets
Int. J. Heat Mass Trans., 21 (1978), pp. 537-542
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zakir, 2015
Zakir, M., 2015. On the development of a TRACE model for the study of reflooding in BWR parallel channels. Master thesis. Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden.
Google Scholar