<title>Heat transfer characteristics of redan structure in large-scale test facility STELLA-2</title>
<author>1,JungYoon,2,JewhanLee,3,HyungmoKim,4,Yong-BumLee,5,JaehyukEoh</author>
<Affiliation>1,Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, 989-111 Daedeok-daero, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-353, Republic of Korea</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2020.09.006</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1738573320308688</URL>
Heat transfer characteristics of redan structure in large-scale test facility STELLA-2
JungYoon,JewhanLee,HyungmoKim,Yong-BumLee,JaehyukEoh
Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, 989-111 Daedeok-daero, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-353, Republic of Korea
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Supercritical water has great potential as a coolant for nuclear reactor. Its use will lead to higher thermal efficiency of Rankine cycle. However, in certain conditions heat transfer may get deteriorated which may lead to undesirable high clad surface temperature. It is necessary to estimate the operating conditions in which heat transfer deterioration (HTD) will take place, so as to establish thermal margins for safe reactor operation. In the present work, the heat flux corresponding to onset of HTD for vertically upward flow of supercritical water in a pipe is obtained over a wide range of system parameters, namely pressure, mass flux, and pipe diameter. This is done by performing large number of simulations using an in-house CFD code, which is especially developed and validated for this purpose. The identification of HTD is based on observance of one or more peak/s in the computed wall temperature profile. The existing correlations for predicting the onset of HTD are compared against the results obtained by present simulations as well as available sets of experimental data. It is found that the prediction accuracy of the correlation proposed by Dongliang et al. is best among the existing correlations.
Keywords:Supercritical water;Heat transfer deterioration;Numerical analysis;Evaluation of correlations
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The construction of STELLA-2 facility is on-going to demonstrate the safety system of PGSFR and to provide comprehensive understanding of transient behavior under DBEs. Considering that most events are single-phase natural circulation flow with slow transient, STELLA-2 was designed with reduced-height of 1/5 length scale. The ratio of volume to surface area in the vessel can relatively increase resulting in excessive heat transfer. Therefore, a steady-state thermal-hydraulic analysis was performed and the effect of design change to reduce the heat transfer through redan was investigated. The heat transfer through single wall redan in STELLA-2 was 3% of the core power, comparable to 1% of the core power in PGSFR. By applying the insulated redan, about 70% of decrease effect was observed. The effect on transient behavior was also evaluated. The conclusion of this study was directly applied to the STELLA-2 design and the modified version is under construction.
Keywords:PGSFR;STELLA-2;Scaling distortion;Surface area to volume ratio;Redan heat transfer
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The second phase of Sodium Integral Effect Test Loop for Safety Simulation and Assessment (STELLA-2) program was launched to support the Prototype Gen IV Sodium-cooled Fast Reactor (PGSFR) licensing and it aims for the comprehensive understanding of the transient behavior, especially under the Design Basis Events (DBEs) conditions. Through identification of safety-related events and classification of the major events, a priority was given on each item to be tested experimentally. The key events of concern are basically the Loss of Flow (LOF), the Loss of Heat Sink (LOHS), the pump discharge pipe break, and the total loss of Decay Heat Removal System (DHRS). Notably, the Transient Over Power (TOP) was excluded due to limitation of the experiment facility. In each event, various initiating incidents are included to compose an extensive test matrix for the experiment covering the single/dual pump failure, the SG feedwater trip, the multiple DHRS loop failure and so on.
To achieve a successful experiment data, the STELLA-2 facility started its first step in 2015 with its basic design [1] and at the end of 2019, the hardware construction and installation was finished. The overall facility is expected to be completed in mid-2020 and after several tests and inspections, the main experiments will be followed. The experiment results will be used not only for the PGSFR but also for the various basic R&D and investigation of other issues and also for the international collaboration.
Most of the events simulated are limited to the simulation of single-phase natural circulation phenomena after reactor shutdown that does not involve rapid mass and energy transfer between each system. Thus, fast transient is limited to within a few seconds immediately after reactor shutdown and most of the events are relatively influenced less by the time and velocity scale. It appears as a slow transient in pressure equilibrium or quasi-steady state. In addition, in terms of conservation of similarity, it is easy to maintain the ratio of buoyancy/friction force for the given length scale which is the most important for the overall natural circulation behavior by adjusting the pressure loss through the system component even if the 1/1 length scale is not maintained. Based on such consideration, the STELLA-2 was decided to be designed with reduced-height.
In order to simulate the natural circulation in a reduced-height test facility, an appropriate scaling analysis methodology is required. The three-level scaling method proposed by Ishii et al. [2], which is known to be most suitable for deriving the similarity requirements of the test facility for the simulation of passive decay heat removal performance using liquid metal through previous studies [[3], [4], [5]], was applied to the design of STELLA-2.
The three-level scaling method was developed to facilitate the conservation of natural convection phenomena in single-phase and two-phase flows. In the first step of global scaling, the overall similarity requirement between the model and the prototype is derived from the conservation equations based on continuity equations, momentum equations, energy equations in the fluid and solid domains, and boundary conditions related to the heat transfer at the interface between fluid and solid. At this stage, similarity requirements for geometrical condition, time scale, and various thermal-hydraulic variables are determined so that steady-state and transient behavior can be conserved between the model and the reference. The second step of boundary flow and inventory scaling simulates the flow between each system or component, and the mass and energy inventory changes of each system or component. The last step of local phenomena scaling ensures that the important thermal-hydraulic phenomena in each component are conserved. In general, the first and second step satisfy the overall system similarity, but local thermal-hydraulic phenomena within a particular component may not satisfy the overall law. Therefore, it is important to conduct a similarity analysis on the local major thermal-hydraulic phenomenon.
It is known that if the volumetric scale ratio of a reduced-height test facility is less than 1/400 of the reference, the thermal-hydraulic distortion is increased, thereby reducing the reliability of the experimental data [6]. Especially, the test facility needs to conserve the internal geometry and the aspect ratio of the reference as much as possible. Most of the major thermal-hydraulic test facilities related to the sodium-cooled fast reactor have been designed to conserve the aspect ratio of reference [7,8].
The length scaling ratio of STELLA-2 based on the similarity requirement described above is 1/5, and the other key scaling factors are shown in Table 1 [9].
Table 1. Key scaling factor for STELLA-2.
One of the major problems associated with scale distortion in the scaled-down test facility is the heat loss between the fluid and structure. The ratio of the surface area of structure to the volume of fluid is one of the important criteria for the heat loss from wall to outside and/or for the heat addition to the fluid due to the accumulated energy of the structure. In general, the accumulated energy of the structure is transferred to the fluid due to the increased volume ratio of the structure in the fast transient, whereas abnormal heat loss is caused by the increased surface area ratio of the structure in the slow transient [6]. Especially, the reactor vessel inside including internal structure and heat exchangers must satisfy both global scaling and local phenomena scaling in the design process, so that the volume to surface area ratio is much higher than that of the reference. In addition, the heat addition to the fluid by the energy stored in the structure is proportional to the thickness of the structure. Although the absolute thickness of the down-scaled test facility is small compared to the reference, the relative thickness compared to the fluid volume increases, and the energy stored in the structure increases. It acts as a factor to deepen the heat transfer from the structure to the fluid.
The region where this scale distortion is most prominent in STELLA-2 facility is the redan structure. If the heat transfer from the hot side to the cold side through the redan structure increases, heat balance is achieved at completely different point from reference, which is undesirable and must be minimized. Therefore, this issue must be addressed with an appropriate solution to assure the value of the experiment data of STELLA-2 facility.
In this paper, the heat transfer characteristic of redan structure in STELLA-2 facility was investigated with commercial CFD tool and several options to minimize the heat loss were suggested with the quantitative analysis. The result was applied to the original design of STELLA-2 and the design change was also analyzed by a system code, MARS-LMR to check the changes in transient behavior. However, the change is only bound to STELLA-2 facility and the PGSFR design is not the scope of this paper.
<Section>2. Heat transfer through redan</Section>
2.1. Structure inside the vessel
The schematic of the PHTS of STELLA-2 is shown in Fig. 1. The PHTS consists of a reactor vessel, a reactor head, an internal structure including the Electric Core Simulation System (ECSS), four Intermediate Heat Exchangers (IHXs) and four Decay Heat Exchangers (DHXs). The sodium circulates within this system following the flow path of;
(1)
The mechanical pump simulation loop intake to the inlet plenum
(2)
From inlet plenum through the core to the hot pool
(3)
From hot pool through IHX to pump simulation loop intake
Fig. 1. STELLA-2 PHTS schematic.
The hot pool and cold pool is separated by the redan and the pressure drop by the IHXs causes the level difference between hot pool and cold pool. The top part of vessel is covered up with Argon and it works as a damper for pressure change inside the vessel.
The heat balance of PHTS for reactor design assumes that there is no heat transfer between hot and cold pool through the redan, although there is actually the heat loss. As mentioned earlier, the effect of this heat loss in STELLA-2 facility is larger than that in the reference due to relatively large surface area of redan.
2.2. CFD analysis of sodium pool
The sodium flow in the pool of PHTS is very complicated multi-dimensional phenomena including the flow re-distribution due to heat exchangers and the geometrical structure of hot/cold pool, the pressure drop due to the core and the internal structure, and etc. However, the currently available CFD tools have enough capability to analyze this problem and are also very effective. At the design stage of the STELLA-2, thermal-hydraulic analysis considering all structures inside the pool and comparison with PGSFR have already been performed [10], and it was confirmed that the thermal-hydraulic analysis using CFD is useful.
2.2.1. Analysis domain
The analysis domain is illustrated in Fig. 2; the sodium pool inside the vessel. Both fluids of liquid sodium and argon were modeled. The conjugated heat transfer was considered to include the vessel, and the single wall redan. Since the purpose and focus of this analysis is to investigate the heat transfer characteristics through redan the internal structures including UIS(Upper Internal Structure), IHX solid parts, DHX, and miscellaneous parts were excluded. The effect of these structures and solids were negligible according to previous studies. The heat transfer through the IHX wall was less than 0.4% of the core power and does not influence the IHX outlet temperature [10]. The porous media approach was adopted to model the complicated structure, such as the simulated core and IHXs with same pressure drop across the flow direction and this simplification saved the calculation time in great manner.
Fig. 2. CFD analysis domain of STELLA-2.
2.2.2. Governing equations
The following governing equations of mass, momentum, and energy are required to analyze the flow and energy transfer. In addition, the turbulence model must be included to solve the momentum equation.
(1)
Mass
Where.
ρ: Density
t: Time
ui: Velocity component in corresponding direction
Sm: Mass Source due to chemical reaction
(2)
Momentum
Where.
p: Static pressure
@: Stress tensor
@: Gravitational and external body force
μ: Molecular viscosity
(3)
Energy
Where.
h: Enthalpy
K: Thermal conductivity of mixture
T: Temperature
@: Flow velocity of j species
@: Viscous stress tensor
Sh: Enthalpy rising due to chemical reaction and radiation
@: Reference temperature
Cp: Specific heat at constant pressure
(4)
Realizable k-ε Turbulence model
Where.
k: Turbulent kinetic energy
@: Turbulent dissipation rate
@: Eddy viscosity
σk: Turbulent Prandtl number for k
σε: Turbulent Prandtl number for : Generation of turbulence kinetic energy due to the mean velocity gradients
Gb: Generation of turbulence kinetic energy due to buoyancy
@: User-defined source terms
C1=@
C@: 1.44, C2 : 1.9, σk : 1.0, σε : 1.2
2.2.3. Boundary conditions
There were several assumptions for optimized calculation and better results.
(1)
Physical properties of fluid (sodium, argon) and structure material (SS316L) are given as a function of temperature
(2)
The level change due to the temperature is not considered and the free surface is set to be a baffle interface at slip wall condition
(3)
The simulated core and IHXs were replaced by the porous media with same pressure drop
(4)
The heat generated in the simulated core is “heat source” and the heat rejected in the IHX is “heat sink”
(5)
The structure of no flow impact was simplified and the DHX is not included for the calculation (DHX is located in the cold pool)
The detailed boundary condition for each region is shown in Table 2. The reference condition was based on the scaled power and scaled flowrate of PGSFR, whereas the temperature distribution was same as the actual reactor. This corresponds to the design data of STELLA-2 facility. The ambient temperature and the convective heat transfer coefficient was arbitrarily set to be 25 °C and 5 W/m2·K. Each simulated core and IHX consists of a single porous cylinder block with same pressure drop as the actual geometry and boundary condition, and the heat source is applied uniformly over the entire block. In Fig. 3, major parameters are illustrated at each region.
Table 2. Boundary condition for CFD analysis.
Fig. 3. Major parameters for the boundary condition.
Numerical analyses were performed by STAR-CCM + V11.02, and following numerical algorithms were used in these analyses: 1) the finite volume method to discretize the Navier-Stokes equation, 2) the SIMPLE algorithm to couple the pressure and velocity equations, 3) the 2nd order upwind scheme to solve the velocity vectors, and 4) under-relaxation factors to iteratively obtain converged results. The realizable  turbulence model, which is capable of wall treatment for all Y+, was used for calculating turbulent flows.
In order to proceed with the numerical analysis, it is necessary to consider the number of grids and the method of grid generation. In the fluid region, polyhedral mesh was used to minimize the information loss and deformation at the boundary and interface of each domain. Since the solid region is mostly thinner and has a larger aspect ratio than the fluid region, the number of grids may abnormally increase in case of using a polyhedral mesh. Therefore, the thin mesher suitable for generating a prismatic type volume mesh was used for the solid region. If Y+ is high in a specific region during thermal-hydraulics analysis, the reliability of the analysis result may decrease and convergence problems may occur. Accordingly, only the flow analysis was performed first to compare Y+ in each region, and the prism layer thickness was adjusted so that Y+ was less than 100 in all regions. In this way, the final number of grids wass determined approximately 5.2 million.
The porous media approach used for the simulated core and IHXs is a general method to analyze the flow characteristic through complicated structures simulating a similar flow resistance without actual geometrical models. In the porous media model, the pressure drop of flow can be defined as a function of porosity and resistance where it can be set as isotropic or anisotropic according to the direction. For this study, the resistance was set to be isotropic regardless of the direction.
The pressure drop per unit length is expressed with the resistance tensor and it can be calculated by the curve fitting with several data of velocity and pressure drop at different conditions. As can be seen in the following equation, there is the second-order velocity term and therefore at least three different conditions of flow are required to solve three variables.
Where.
ΔP: Pressure drop
L: Length
Pv: Viscous resistance
Pi: Inertial resistance
Regarding the IHX, the real geometry information was used to calculate at least three pressure drop data at three different flowrate conditions and the resistance value was figured out by the curve fitting. The pressure drop data for the core simulator was achieved at the stage of specific design [11]. In Table 3, the resistance values of the porous media for IHX and core simulator are listed. As convergence criteria, when the residuals for continuity, momentum, turbulence, and energy are 1.0e-5 or less and the mass flow rate discrepancy at IHX outlet is 0.01 kg/s or less, it is judged that the analyses is converged.
Table 3. Porous Resistance used in Each Component.
2.2.4. CFD analysis result
The graphical results of the CFD analysis of thermal-hydraulic phenomena in the pool are shown in Fig. 4, Fig. 5. In Fig. 4, the flow distribution at each cross section is illustrated. The flow path starting from the pump loop through the inlet plenum, the simulated core, the hot pool, the IHX and to the cold pool can be observed by the velocity profile. The sodium flow near the surface level is generally not included in the main flow path and shows relatively lower velocity where the natural circulation is dominant due to temperature difference. Similarly, the cover gas region is also closed space and only the natural convection exists, and hence low velocity profile is observed compared to the sodium region.
Fig. 4. Flow distribution of each section inside the vessel.
Fig. 5. Temperature distribution of each section inside the vessel.
Fig. 5 shows the temperature distribution at each cross section. It is clearly shown that the sodium passes through the core simulator and heated up to 545 °C in the hot pool. It flows through IHXs and gives out most of the heat to be cooled down to 390 °C in the cold pool. Notably, the heat loss due to the cover gas and the redan can be observed in the same figure. This is undesirable phenomena for the reactor as well as the experiment facility.
Since the simulated core has a single cylindrical flow path, and the width of the simulated core inlet is narrower than that of the simulated core itself, the flow passing through the model core has a parabolic velocity profile. Accordingly, the velocity at the center of simulated core is the fastest, and the sodium temperature passing through the simulated core has a profile in which the center is low and increases toward the periphery. In addition, flow stagnation occurs in the rest of the region except the main flow path leading from the simulated core outlet to the IHX inlet, and a relatively low temperature portion is generated in the center of the hot pool. However, the temperature becomes uniform by mixing toward the hot pool sodium level.
The comparison of the average temperature data at major points between PGSFR and STELLA-2 is listed in Table 4. Although the core outlet temperature for both case is same (approximately 543.6 °C), the IHX inlet temperature and the hot pool average temperature show difference of 0.8 °C and 7.3 °C, respectively. This is a clear proof of difference in heat loss due to the cover gas and redan structure. The amount of heat transferred, or loss to the cover gas region was ∼6.7 kW and the heat transfer through redan to cold pool was ∼210 kW which is over 3% of the core simulator power. Comparably, the heat loss through redan in PGSFR is approximately 1%. It can be pre-concluded that the heat loss through redan in STELLA-2 is significant and the additional insulation means need to be considered to prevent un-wanted effect on the facility.
Table 4. Average temperature at major points.
<Section>3. Effect of redan insulation</Section>
3.1. Design change of redan
In the original design phase of STELLA-2 facility, the effect of heat loss through redan was not considered and it may cause mal-distribution of temperature disturbing the natural circulation flow of sodium. Consequently, the redan structure was modified to include an insulation. In Fig. 6, the detailed design change of redan in STELLA-2 is illustrated. The wall of redan was changed to double-wall concept to include insulator inside. Most of the top part of redan is covered to prevent sodium inflow and very small gap of 1 mm exists to have cover gas flow in and out. This also prevents the pressure build-up in the space between two walls.
Fig. 6. Detailed drawing of redan structure.
3.2. Options for insulation and effect
The primary option for the insulation was just to leave the space empty and fill with cover gas (Argon) because of the product-ability, install-ability, and handling. However, the FLEXTHERM [12] was newly suggested for its excellent work-ability with relatively thin shape as well as very stable performance at high temperature. The FLEXTHERM is a micro porous-type thermal insulator and it consists of compressed/formed micro-size silica particles in spherical shape. The thermal conductivity at 100 °C and 600 °C is less than 0.027 W/m-K and 0.045 W/m-K, respectively.
In Fig. 7, Fig. 8, Fig. 9, the temperature distribution inside the pool at each section for (1) single wall, (2) Ar gas covered double wall, and (3) FLEXTHERM insulated double wall are illustrated. The heat transfer through redan is obviously less in the case of double wall with Argon compared to the single wall and the FLEXTHERM insulated double wall shows the strongest thermal shielding.
Fig. 7. Temperature distribution in IHX section.
Fig. 8. Temperature distribution in PSLS section.
Fig. 9. Temperature distribution in 0° section.
The detailed results of three cases are listed in Table 5 including maximum, minimum and average temperature at various region for each case. The average temperature of hot pool for each cases is 523.4 °C, 537.2 °C, and 538.2 °C, respectively. This clearly shows the effect of insulating. Especially, the temperature difference (ΔT) of hot and cold pool for FLEXTHERM case is observed to be relatively large enough to conclude that the insulation is significantly influencing the system. Even Argon-filled insulation shows quite large effect compared to the single wall case.
Table 5. Comparison of temperature for each cases.
To be more specific, the amount of heat transferred at each region is shown in Table 6. The heat transfer from hot to cold pool for each cases is ∼210 kW, ∼83 kW, and ∼63 kW, respectively. From these results, it is obvious that the heat loss is much less in the cases of insulated redan. Although the heat loss to the cover gas increases on the contrary, the amount is negligibly small. The final effect of shielding the heat loss from hot pool to the cold pool turn up to be the increased ΔT and this means the increased efficiency of total system.
Table 6. Comparison of heat transfer for each cases.
3.3. System code analysis for transient effect
The effect of redan insulation on the transient behavior of the system is also important and it needs to be addressed and evaluated. To analyze the comprehensive thermal-hydraulic phenomena, it is more convenient to use the system code, such as MARS-LMR [13], rather than the CFD code. The MARS-LMR is an effective tool developed by KAERI and is used in various fields including the safety analysis, the experiment evaluation and so on. In previous work of STELLA-2 analysis using MARS-LMR [14], the most representative accident was selected and the transient behavior was observed. As an extension, the insulated redan effect was investigated by modeling the redan heat structure with insulation material.
The case of Loss Of Flow (LOF) with Loss Of Off-site Power (LOOP) was selected as a representative accident and the basic assumptions are as follows [14].
•
The transient starts from the steady-state condition of normal operation
•
A single failure for Decay Heat Removal System (DHRS) is assumed
-
One of active DHRS is not functioning
-
One of passive DHRS is under maintenance
•
The primary pump provides the coast-down flow for specified halving time after it stops
With the above assumptions, the accident occurs and the scenario is as follows.
1.
It starts with the primary pump and the intermediate loop pump stops due to LOOP
2.
At the same time, the signal for feedwater line isolation for Steam Generator is sent
3
The internal flowrate and temperature changes
4
The reactor trip signal is generated
5.
DHRS air damper opens and the heat removal starts
The detailed steady-state condition [14] is described in Table 7, Table 8, Table 9 and this corresponds to the starting point of the transient results. The total analysis time is up to 22,000 s after the transient starts and this corresponds to 50,000 s of real time. Due to the scaling effect of facility, the process time is faster in STELLA-2 by the ratio of 1/2.24.
Table 7. Steady-state condition (temperature).
Table 8. Steady-state condition (flowrate).
Table 9. Steady-state calculation results (heat transfer).
The main results of transient analysis are shown in Fig. 10 – 12. The major differences of the single wall redan and the double wall redan (FLEXTHERM) are compared. Although there are many aspects which shows the difference between two options, the most important three factors were selected and they are (1) core outlet temperature, (2) natural circulation flowrate inside the primary system, and (3) heat rejection through sodium-to-air heat exchangers in the DHRS.
Fig. 10. Comparison of core outlet temperature.
In Fig. 10, the core outlet temperature are compared and the trend starts deviate gradually. After long enough time, the difference seems quite large. The flowrate in Fig. 11 seems relatively small difference but it can be noted that the change is gradually increasing. In Fig. 12, the final heat rejection by the DHRS is shown. The result clearly indicates the heat removal is less in the case of insulated redan system. This is mainly because of the position of DHRS in the sodium pool. The Decay Heat Exchanger (DHX) is located in the cold pool and the lower temperature of cold pool due to the insulated redan resulted in lower heat transfer. However, this does not mean that the DHRS performance is less than the other option. As long as the purpose of STELLA-2 facility is to simulate the PGSFR, the focus of the analysis must be put on which option is closer to the PGSFR behavior.
Fig. 11. Comparison of natural circulation flow in the pool.
Fig. 12. Comparison of heat rejection through HXs in DHRS
<Section>4. Conclusion</Section>
The design, fabrication, and installation of the STELLA-2 test facility were performed to demonstrate the performance of the PGSFR safety system and to provide a comprehensive understanding of the transient behavior under the Design Basis Events (DBEs). The scaling analysis was performed to simulate the thermal-hydraulic phenomena occurring in PGSFR without distortion and to construct it at a reasonable cost. Considering that most of the test items to be simulated using this facility are single-phase natural circulation flow, the STELLA-2 was designed with reduced-height (length scaling ratio is 1/5) by applying the 3-level scaling method. Applying this scaling method, the ratio of the surface of the structure to the volume of the fluid can be relatively increased, resulting in excessive heat transfer between the fluid and the structure. In particular, the ratio of the sodium volume to redan surface area in RV increases as compared to the reference, so it is necessary to check the effect of heat transfer in the Primary Heat Transport System (PHTS) quantitatively.
Steady-state thermal-hydraulic analysis of the pool of STELLA-2 was performed, and the effect according to the design changes for reduction of the heat transfer through redan were investigated. As a result, the heat transfer through single wall redan increased in comparison with the reference. However, it was confirmed that the heat transfer through the double wall redan inserted FLEXTHERM is decreased about 70% compared to the single wall redan. In addition, further analysis was performed using MARS-LMR to inspect the reduction effect of the heat transfer through the double wall redan on long-term transients. It was confirmed that the reduction effect of the heat transfer through the double wall redan is hardly seen at the beginning of transient, but gradually increases with time. Therefore, it can be seen that the double wall redan is much less affected by scaling distortion than single wall redan considering the transient behavior of PGSFR. Based on these results, the double wall redan was applied to the actual STELLA-2 design, and the analysis data will be used for comparison and verification with the experimental results using STELLA-2.
<Section>Declaration of competing interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgements</Section>
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation (NRF) of Korea grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT - No. 2012M2A8A2025635, MSIT – No. 2016M2B2B1944980, and MOE - No. 2018R1D1A1B07050341).
<Section>References</Section>
[1]
J. Eoh, et al.
Computer Codes V&V Tests with a Large-Scale Sodium Thermal-hydraulic Test Facility (STELLA)
ANS Annual Meeting, New Orleans, USA (2016)
June 12-16
Google Scholar
[2]
M. Ishii, et al.
The three level scaling approach with application to the Purdue university multi-dimensional integral test assembly (PUMA)
Nucl. Eng. Des., 186 (1–2) (1998), pp. 177-211
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[3]
M.P. Heisler
Development of scaling requirements for natural convection liquid-metal fast breeder reactor shutdown heat removal test facilities
Nucl. Sci. Eng., 80 (1982), pp. 347-359
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[4]
M.P. Heisler, R.M. Singer
Facility Requirements for Natural Convection Shutdown Removal System Testing, Decay Heat Removal and Natural Convection in Fast Breeder Reactor
(1981), pp. 113-127
Menisphere
Google Scholar
[5]
Watanabe, O., et al., Development of an evaluation methodology for the natural circulation decay heat removal system in a sodium cooled fast reactor, J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., Vol. 52, pp. 1102-1121.
Google Scholar
[6]
C.H. Song, et al.
Scaling Analysis of the Integral Test Loop to Simulate Korean PWR Plant
Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute (2001)
KAERI/TR-1783/2001
Google Scholar
[7]
Task group on advanced reactor experimental facilities (TAREF)
Experimental Facilities for Sodium Fast Reactor Safety Studies, 12 (2010), p. 2010
OECD/NEA, NEA/CSNI/R
Google Scholar
[8]
J. Lee, et al.
Technology Status to Support for the STELLA-2 Program Establishment
Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute (2014)
KAERI/AR-2037/2014
Google Scholar
[9]
J. Eoh, et al.
Basic Design Report of Sodium Thermal-hydraulic Integral Effect Test Facility (STELLA-2)
Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute (2016)
KAERI/TR-6705/2016
Google Scholar
[10]
J. Yoon, et al.
Evaluation of Thermal-hydraulic Behavior in a Large Sodium Pool of a Scaled-Down Sodium Integral Effect Test Facility, STELLA-2, the 11st International Topical Meeting on Nuclear Reactor Thermal Hydraulics, Operation and Safety
NUTHOS-11) (2014)
Google Scholar
[11]
J. Lee, et al.
Design of electric core simulator system (ECSS) for large-scale integral effect test facility
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 133 (2019), pp. 762-776
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
[12]
K.D. One
Thermal insulation materials, FLEXTHERM – high efficient quilted microporous insulation
http://en.kdone.net/ceratech/product_view?Seq=109
Google Scholar
[13]
K. Ha, et al.
Development of MARS-LMR and Steady-State Calculation for KALIMER-600
(2007)
Technical Report in Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, KAERI/TR-3418/2007
Google Scholar
[14]
Lee, J., et al., Design evaluation of large-scale sodium integral effect test facility (STELLA-2) using MARS-LMR, Ann. Nucl. Energy, Vol. 120, pp. 845-856.
Google Scholar