<title>Research on the influence of highly loaded design method on the stability of helium compressor</title>
<author>1,ZhitaoTian,2,PengRen,3,AdilMalik,4,JianchiXin,5,XiaozhiKong,6,LongWang</author>
<Affiliation>1,Naval Architecture & Ocean Engineering College, Dalian Maritime University, Dalian, Liaoning, China;2,College of Power and Energy Engineering, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, 150001, China</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2020.103599</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0149197020303450</URL>
Research on the influence of highly loaded design method on the stability of helium compressor
ZhitaoTian,PengRen,AdilMalik,JianchiXin,XiaozhiKong,LongWang
Naval Architecture & Ocean Engineering College, Dalian Maritime University, Dalian, Liaoning, China
College of Power and Energy Engineering, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, 150001, China
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The highly loaded design method of helium compressor can effectively resolve the problem of helium compression in high temperature gas cooled reactor (HTGR). However, the alteration in design method has led to the variation of its characteristics at the same speed. In order to resolve this issue, in this paper, a three-dimensional, multi-passage unsteady numerical analysis is conducted to develop the understanding of the performance of a 1.5 stages highly loaded helium compressor. At first, the influence of the highly loaded design method on the unsteady flow of helium compressor is analyzed at the design point. Then, the instability characteristics of highly loaded helium compressor are studied by analyzing the flow field near stall point. Finally, the main factors causing the instability of highly loaded helium compressor are discussed. The result shows that radial separation which is caused by the inverse pressure gradient at the stator root is the main factor causing instability in highly loaded helium compressor.
Keywords:Helium compressor;Unsteady numerical study;Instability characteristics
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The helium compressor is one of the core components of the power conversion unit of high temperature gas cooled reactor and its performance is directly related to the operational efficiency and power output of the high temperature gas cooled reactor power generation system (Mcdonald, 2012; Moore et al., 1982). The number of stages of helium compressor designed using air compressor design methodology is approximately 3–5 times that of air compressor in order to attain similar pressure ratio. Due to the higher specific heat ratio and higher specific heat at a constant pressure of helium than air. A large number of stages of the helium compressor not only induces serious rotor dynamic problems but also reduces the power density of the closed Brayton cycle system and limits its application (Brodt, 1995; Duan, 2011; No et al., 2007).
The highly loaded design method uses a high flow coefficient and negative prewhirl angle in order to improve helium compressor stage load, increase single stage pressure ratio and reduces the stage number of helium compressor (Ke and Zheng, 2012; Tian et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2010; Jiang et al., 2015). But the change of velocity triangle makes the speed-line of highly loaded helium compressor obviously different from that of the air compressor. Moreover, the total pressure ratio doesn't increase with the decrease of the mass flow, rather it decreases. It means the reverse pressure gradient in highly loaded helium compressor cascade doesn't increase with the increase of outlet pressure. Consequently, it will have an important effect on the rotating stall of the highly loaded helium compressor.
Rotating stall is considered as one of the most complex unsteady flow phenomena in the compressor. It can cause problems such as efficiency reduction, blade vibration and noise generation, which potentially leads to compressor breakdown (Righi et al., 2018; Hua et al., 2018). Moreover, the working range of the compressor is also limited by the unsteady flow of rotating stall (Kim et al., 2019). Therefore, many scholars have carried out an in-depth analysis of the rotating stall phenomenon of air compressors and many valuable conclusions have been obtained. One of the widely recognized achievement is that rotating stall can be divided into two types in axial compressors: the spike type (short length scale disturbances) and the modal type (long length scale disturbances) (Moore and Greitzer, 1986; Day, 1993; Camp and Day, 1997). A relatively accurate explanation and description of the modal stall which developed relatively slowly and linearly is given by Moore (Moore and Greitzer, 1986). However, spike stall is observed more acute and more often, initially observed by Cheshire in a centrifugal compressor (Cheshire, 1945). The tip clearance leakage of compressor rotor is considered to be the main factor to induce spike stall (Hoying et al., 1999). Hub corner separation has an important effect on the rotating stall of an air compressor (Kan et al., 2019).
At present, the research of the helium compressor is mainly aimed at improving its pressure ratio. Few studies are being conducted on its flow instability. In the GT-HTR300 project, a 1/3 size four-stage helium compressor test rig is constructed by Japan Atomic Energy Agency after numerical and experimental research on the characteristics of helium gas compressor (Yan et al., 2008). The Chinese Academy of Sciences is the only known scientific institution which conducted the experimental research on the stability of the helium compressor (Su et al., 2018). Comparing the instability characteristics of helium compressor and air compressor under similar conditions, it is concluded that the compressor stability depends on the compressor cascade and is independent of the working fluids. The experimental research on the high load helium compressor cascade is carried out by Yuan (Yuan et al., 1002) and the separation characteristics of highly loaded helium compressor cascade are studied.
The speed lines of highly loaded helium compressor are different from that of traditional air compressor and its stability is bound to be affected by this effect. Therefore, the research on the stability of highly loaded helium compressor is of great significance to its engineering application. Unfortunately, the study on instability characteristics of highly loaded helium compressor is still blank in the published literature. In this paper, a three-dimensional, multi-passage unsteady numerical study is conducted in order to develop the understanding of the performance of a 1.5 stages highly loaded helium compressor. The instability characteristics of highly loaded helium compressor are discussed and the main factors causing the instability of highly loaded helium compressor are studied. The understanding of the instability mechanism of highly loaded helium compressor will be broadened by this research.
<Section>2. Numerical models and methods</Section>
2.1. Description of the compressor
In this paper, a 1.5 stages subsonic compressor designed for the front stage of a multistage highly loaded helium compressor is selected for analysis. The primary design parameters of the 1.5 stages highly loaded helium compressor are shown in Table 1. The relative Mach number at the rotor inlet is 0.4 and the airfoils are double circle airfoil (DCA).
Table 1. Compressor design parameters.
2.2. Computational grid
The computational grid was generated using Autogrid 5. To ensure grid orthogonality, the HOH structured grid (H-block inlet, O-block blade and H-block outlet) was employed for the main channel of each blade, and the butterfly grid was applied to the gap region of the rotor. The entire region was separated into five blocks for a single blade passage. The grid near the wall was densified. The minimum grid spacing on the solid walls was 2 × 10−6 m, to ensure a minimum grid spacing of y+<3 at the walls. The total grid number for a single blades passage was approximately 1.46 million nodes (IGV: 0.38 million, Rotor: 0.58 million, Stator: 0.5 million). The Computational grid is shown in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. Computational grid: (a) overview and(b)partial details.
2.3. Flow solver and boundary conditions
ANSYS/CFX 18.0 software package was used for solving the Reynolds Average Navier-Stokes equations. The solution was advanced in time using second-order backward Euler temporal discretization. A coupled algebraic multigrid approach was used to solve the discrete system of flow equations (Selease 18.0, 2017). The flow was assumed to be turbulent and modelled using the shear stress transport (SST) turbulence model with reattachment modification (RM) (Menter, 1994; Tian et al., 2018), for better prediction of growth and decay of separated flow regions. A domain decomposition method was employed to permit parallel computations. Portions of the domain were solved in a rotating frame of reference (e.g., rotors), while all other components (stators, IGV, etc.) were solved in a stationary frame of reference. The two frames of reference were connected via flux conserving interfaces. The type of interface used defines the type of rotor-stator simulation.
The 1.5 stages highly loaded helium compressor calculations were performed using standard helium properties and the fluid was modelled as an ideal gas. The inlet boundary conditions for the CFD simulation were specified with constant total pressure and total temperature and a turbulence intensity of 5% was set at the inlet of the computational domain to match the inlet conditions. For steady-state, MP simulations, an exit corrected mass flow boundary was used in order to traverse the speed-line. On the other hand, for all transient simulations, a radial circumferentially constant static pressure profile was used. The same was extracted from the steady-state simulations. A smooth no-slip and adiabatic wall condition were specified for all walls. To more accurately determine the performance of the 1.5 stages highly loaded helium compressor, considering the limitation of computational resources, 10-passage (1/19 annulus) unsteady calculations were conducted. The computational grid of the multi-passage was formed by the replication of the single passage grid along the circumferential direction. In this paper, the time step was set according to the compressor speed. The time step was set to 1/20 of the time when the rotor turns a channel, so the time step of unsteady calculation was 4.386 × 10−6s. In addition, in the unsteady calculation, each transient time step contains a multi-step cycle iteration. Considering the calculation time and accuracy, it is necessary to give an appropriate internal cycle coefficient to ensure convergence. In this paper, the internal circulation coefficient is 4.
<Section>3. Results and discussion</Section>
3.1. Highly loaded design method
The isentropic index and the value of specific heat constant of helium are bigger than that of air, so helium compressor has a lesser single stage pressure ratio. In order to resolve these difficulties, a highly loaded design method for helium compressor was proposed. It changes the association of traditional air compressor element stage velocity triangle. As shown in Fig. 2, the velocity triangle of highly loaded helium compressor increases both the axial velocity and the torsional velocity greatly by using a negative prewhirl. Therefore, if the circumferential velocity is unchanged, the stage loading will also increase. However, the performance map of highly loaded helium compressor is different from the conventional air compressor. The total pressure ratio does not increase with the decrease of the flow rather it decreases which can be seen in Fig. 3. In off-design calculation of compressor, due to the variation of the outlet flow angle of rotor, the inlet flow angle of stator becomes smaller. If we assume that it does not change, when the outlet static pressure increases, the mass flow will be reduced. Consequently, in conventional air compressor torsion speed  does not increase rather decrease in the premise of the circumferential velocity which is unchanged. Thus the amount of work reduces and the total pressure ratio of highly loaded helium compressor decreases. In order to study the effect of such changes on the stability of highly loaded helium compressor, the flow field characteristics of design point and near stall point at design speed are studied in this paper.
Fig. 2. Velocity diagram in highly loaded helium compressor (Tian et al., 2017).
Fig. 3. Performance maps of highly loaded helium compressor: (a) Efficiency characteristics, (b) Pressure ratio characteristics.
3.2. Flow field characteristics at the design point
The oscillation of the dimensionless static pressure at the blade 5 leading edge of the rotor tip is shown in Fig. 4 and it is normalized by the inlet static pressure of guide vane. As shown in Fig. 4, the static pressure periodic fluctuation is clearly visible and the fluctuation period is 200 iterative steps. The 10 channels are a fluctuation cycle because the iterative steps of each channel are 20.
Fig. 4. Oscillations of the dimensionless static pressure at the leading edge of the rotor tip.
Fig. 5 displays the instantaneous Cp contours at the upper end wall of the rotor during an oscillation period at the design point. Cp is the static pressure coefficient which is defined as:
Fig. 5. Instantaneous static pressure coefficient (Cp) distribution at the design point.
As shown in Fig. 5, although the fluctuation of static pressure coefficient is small, it can still reflect the periodical variation of blade load. At this time, the load of blade increased from blade 1 to blade 4 and gradually decreased from blade 5 to blade 10. That's why blade 4 has the highest load, and blade 1 has the smallest load. This happened due to the interaction between the tip leakage flow and the load. When the load of blade 4 is high, the tip clearance leakage flow is stronger and the load on the trailing edge of the blade 5 is lesser. The smaller load of the blades will cause the tip clearance leakage of blade 5 to weaken. The load of the blade will gradually increase until the influence of tip clearance leakage on the next blade load is reduced to a certain extent.
The FFT results for the static pressure in the rotating coordinate system at the tip leading edge of blade 5 is shown in Fig. 6. As shown in Fig. 6, both the IGV and stator affect the fluctuation of static pressure at the tip leading edge of blade 5. The fundamental frequencies of IGV and stator acting on the tip leading edge of blade 5 are 10,300 Hz and 12,500 Hz, respectively. Because the guide IGV is closer to the tip leading edge of blade 5, its influence is greater than the stator. There is no disturbance affecting static pressure fluctuation at the tip leading edge of blade 5 except for IGV and stator.
Fig. 6. FFT result of the static pressure fluctuation at the tip leading edge of blade 5.
Fig. 7 shows the static entropy distribution at the rotor outlet. As shown in Fig. 7, losses of highly loaded helium compressor rotors are mainly concentrated in the top, wake and root regions of blades. There is no significant flow separation at the corner of the highly loaded helium compressor rotor. The difference in leakage loss at the tip of each blade passage is not obvious, which shows that the fluid flow in the blade passage is weakly unstable at the design point.
Fig. 7. Transient static entropy solution at rotor outlet.
The transient static entropy solution at the stator outlet is shown in Fig. 8. As shown in Fig. 8, There is also no significant flow separation at the corner of highly loaded helium compressor stator. However, passage vortex formed in the tip region of the stator. This is because of the trailing edge of the helium compressor stator blade, which is designed by a highly loaded design method. It is in a positive pressure state and positive pressure state is conducive to the formation and development of passage vortex. At this time, the flow in the stator blade also does not produce large-scale separation. Figs. 7 and 8 show that the helium compressor designed with highly loaded design method has excellent loss characteristics at the design point.
Fig. 8. Transient static entropy solution at stator outlet.
3.3. Flow field characteristics near the stall point
Fig. 9 shows the time history of the normalized mass flow based on steady state calculation stall point at stator outlet. As shown in Fig. 9, when the accumulated time step increases to 10,800, the normalized mass flow begins to decrease significantly and this highly loaded helium compressor begins to enter in an unstable state. In order to fully study the cause of highly loaded helium compressor unstable state and the characteristics of flow field during the unstable state, 04 time steps A, B, C and D are selected.
Fig. 9. Time history of mass flow (based on steady stall point).
Fig. 10 displays the instantaneous static pressure coefficient distribution at the rotor shroud wall for different time step near the stall point. As shown in Fig. 10, the static pressure coefficient distributions at the compressor rotor shroud wall do not change significantly with the change in mass flow. There was no leading edge overflow and trailing edge reflux in the rotor of this highly loaded helium compressor near stall point. The FFT results for the static pressure in the rotating coordinate system at the tip leading edge of blade 5 near the stall point is shown in Fig. 11. The disturbance amplitude of the IGV and stator to the static pressure at the tip leading edge of blade 5 increases significantly near the stall point in comparison with the design point as shown in Fig. 11. It happened due to a decrease in mass flow rate, which increases the attack angle. Consequently, the unsteady tip leakage increases with the increase in external interference. There is also no disturbance affecting static pressure fluctuation at the tip leading edge of blade 5 except IGV and stator. Therefore, for highly loaded helium compressor, tip clearance leakage is not the main factor leading to its instability.
Fig. 10. Instantaneous static pressure coefficient (Cp) distribution of Point A and Point D.
Fig. 11. FFT result of the static pressure fluctuation at the tip leading edge of blade 5.
Fig. 12 shows two snapshots of the static entropy distribution at the rotor outlet. As shown in Fig. 12, the static entropy distributions of the compressor rotor outlet do not change significantly with the variation in mass flow. The high loss area is mainly concentrated near the tip of rotor blades and this happened mainly due to tip clearance leakage vortexes. It can be seen that the tip clearance leakage vortex consists of two parts: the main leakage vortex and the auxiliary leakage vortex. The main leakage vortex interacts with the auxiliary leakage vortex, when the main leakage vortex is strong, auxiliary leakage vortex merges in main leakage vortex. It is highlighted that there is no significant separation in the corner of the rotor blade. Therefore, for highly loaded helium compressor, the rotor is not the main factor leading to its instability.
Fig. 12. Transient static entropy solution at rotor outlet, when the normalized mass flow is moved from point A to point D.
Fig. 13 shows four snapshots of the static entropy distribution at the stator outlet. As shown in Fig. 13, the static entropy distributions at the compressor stator outlet change significantly with the variation in mass flow. This is clearly visible in the radial separation of compressor's stator blade roots. Flow separation is obvious at the root of the stator blade with the reduction in the mass flow rate. This is mainly due to the increase of the turning angle of the helium with the reduction in the mass flow and this leads to an increase in circumferential inverse pressure gradient. Under the combined action of axial and circumferential reverse pressure gradients, serious separation of helium occurs on the suction surface, which can be seen in Fig. 14. As shown in Fig. 14, when the mass flow decreases, the working fluid started to separate at the trailing edge of the stator and with further reduction in the mass flow, the separation point of the working fluid moves toward the leading edge of the blade. The separation vortex is formed at the leading edge of the blade and then moves towards the trailing edge of the blade. During this process, the intensity of vortex gradually decreases and the scale of the vortex increases gradually due to dissipation. When the large scale vortex moves to the trailing edge of the blade, it blocks the cascade and further reduces the mass flow. Therefore, for highly loaded helium compressor, a radial separation which is formed at the root of the stator blades is the main factor leading to its instability.
Fig. 13. Transient static entropy solution at stator outlet, when the normalized mass flow is moved from point A to point D.
Fig. 14. Instantaneous pressure gradient (PG) distribution at stator hub for Point A and Point D.
Fig. 15 shows the FFT result of the static pressure fluctuation at the root of the trailing edge of rotor blade 5. As shown in Fig. 15, both inlet guide vane and stator will interrupt the pressure distribution in the rotor passage. In the frequency range of 0 Hz–5000 Hz, strong low frequency disturbance exists in the flow field. It can be seen in Fig. 12 that there is no obvious separation at the root of the rotor blade. Therefore, it is concluded that the pressure disturbance at the rotor blade root is caused by the pressure disturbance of the stator blade.
Fig. 15. FFT result of the static pressure fluctuation at the root of the trailing edge of the rotor blade 5.
The FFT result of the static pressure fluctuation at the root of the trailing edge of the stator blade is shown in Fig. 16. The rotor rotation has created strong disturbance to the static pressure at the root of the trailing edge of the stator blade, and the frequency of pressure disturbance is about 11400 Hz. In addition, low-frequency disturbances in the frequency range of 0 Hz–7000 Hz occur at the root of the trailing edge of the stator blade. This phenomenon is particularly evident in blade 10. The magnitude of the disturbance is as high as 9000Pa, which is much higher than the disturbance produced by the rotor. Collectively with Figs. 13 and 16, it can be seen that the corner separation at the root of the stator is the main factor causing the aerodynamic instability of highly loaded helium compressor.
Fig. 16. FFT result of the static pressure fluctuation at the root of the trailing edge of the stator blade.
<Section>4. Conclusions</Section>
In this paper, the unsteady flow in 1.5 stages highly loaded helium compressor was investigated numerically at a fixed speed. The main factors causing the instability of highly loaded helium compressor are also studied. The results are summarized as follows.
1
At the design point, the highly loaded helium compressor can operate stably and efficiently. The highly loaded design method of helium compressor will not lead to large-scale separation at the rotor or stator.
2
Due to the reduction in the specific power and adverse pressure gradient of highly loaded helium compressor, while increasing backpressure, the aerodynamic stability of a highly loaded helium compressor is not significantly worse than that of a conventional air compressor.
3
In the highly loaded helium compressor, the stall starts from the separation on the hub side instead of the leading-edge separation near the tip commonly observed in the spike stall.
4
The frequency of disturbance causing instability of highly loaded helium compressor is in the range of 0 Hz–7000 Hz, which is much lower than that of the rotor. The corner separation at the root of the stator is the main factor causing the aerodynamic instability of highly loaded helium compressor.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution statement</Section>
Zhitao Tian: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software. Peng Ren: Writing - original draft. Adil Malik: Visualization, Investigation. Jianchi Xin: Software, Validation. Xiaozhi Kong: Writing - review & editing. Long Wang: Project administration.
<Section>Declaration of competing interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgement</Section>
The authors wish to thank the financial support of Research Funds for the Central Universities of China (3132020118,3132020122), National Natural Science Foundation of China (52006021,51676023) and Natural Science Foundation of Liaoning Province (2020-BS-069).
<Section>References</Section>
Brodt, 1995
I.A. Brodt
Summary Report on Technical Experiences from High-Temperature Helium Turbomachinery Testing in Germany
(1995), pp. 177-248
IAEA-TECDOC-899
Google Scholar
Camp and Day, 1997
T.R. Camp, I.J. Day
A study of spike and modal stall phenomena in a low-speed axial compressor
ASME J. Turbomach., 120 (1997), pp. 393-401
Google Scholar
Cheshire, 1945
L.J. Cheshire
The design and development of centrifugal compressors for aircraft gas turbines
Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng., 153 (1945), pp. 426-440
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Day, 1993
I.J. Day
Active suppression of rotating stall and surge in axial compressor
ASME J Turbomach, 115 (1993), pp. 40-47
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Duan, 2011
Y.J. Duan
Status of development and deployment scheme of HTR-PM in the people's Republic of China
Interregional Workshop on Advanced Nuclear Reactor Technology for Near Term Deployment (July 2011), pp. 4-8
Vienna, Austria
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hoying et al., 1999
D.A. Hoying, C.S. Tan, H.D. Vo, E.M. Greitzer
Role of blade passage flow structures in axial compressor rotating stall inception
ASME J. Turbomach., 121 (1999), pp. 735-742
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hua et al., 2018
J.G. Hua, Q.S. Li, T.Y. Pan, Y.F. Gong
Numerical investigations on stator hub initiated stall in a single-stage transonic axial compressor
Aero. Sci. Technol., 80 (2018), pp. 144-155
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Jiang et al., 2015
B. Jiang, Z.L. Chen, H. Chen, H. Zhang, Q. Zheng
Similarity and cascade flow characteristics of a highly loaded helium compressor
Nucl. Eng. Des., 286 (2015), pp. 286-296
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kan et al., 2019
X.X. Kan, S.T. Wang, L. Yang, J.J. Zhong
Vortex dynamic mechanism of curved blade affecting flow loss in compressor cascade during corner stall process
Aero. Sci. Technol., 85 (2019), pp. 443-452
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ke and Zheng, 2012
T.F. Ke, Q. Zheng
Highly loaded aerodynamic design and three dimensional performance enhancement of a HTGR helium compressor
Nucl. Eng. Des., 249 (2012), pp. 256-267
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kim et al., 2019
S. Kim, K. Kim, C. Son
Three-dimensional unsteady simulation of a multistage axial compressor with labyrinth seals and its effects on overall performance and flow characteristics
Aero. Sci. Technol., 86 (2019), pp. 683-693
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Mcdonald, 2012
C.F. Mcdonald
Helium turbomachinery operating experience from gas turbine power plants and test facilities
Appl. Therm. Eng., 44 (2012), pp. 108-142
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Menter, 1994
F.R. Menter
Two-equation eddy-viscosity turbulence models for engineering applications
AIAA J., 32 (1994), pp. 1598-1605
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Moore and Greitzer, 1986
F.K. Moore, E.M. Greitzer
A theory of post-stall transients in axial compression systems: Part I – development of equations
J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, 108 (1986), pp. 68-76
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Moore et al., 1982
R.A. Moore, M.E. Kantor, H.L. Brey, H.G. Olson
HTGR experience, programs, and future applications
Nucl. Eng. Des., 72 (1982), pp. 153-174
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
No et al., 2007
H.C. No, J.H. Kim, H.M. Kim
A review of helium gas turbine technology for high temperature gas cooled reactors
Nucl Eng Technol, 29 (2007), pp. 21-30
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Righi et al., 2018
M. Righi, V. Pachidis, L. Könözsy, L. Pawsey
Three-dimensional through-flow modelling of axial flow compressor rotating stall and surge
Aero. Sci. Technol., 78 (2018), pp. 271-279
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Selease 18.0, 2017
ANSYS, ANSYS Release 18.0
ANSYS Inc, Canonsburg, PA (2017)
Su et al., 2018
Y. Su, W.G. Huang, J.X. Zhang, Y.B. Zhu
Experimental study of the instability of the flow inside a multi-stage axial flow type helium compressor
J. Eng. Therm. Energy Power, 33 (2018), pp. 12-19
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tian et al., 2017
Z.T. Tian, Q. Zheng, B. Jiang
Research on the design method of highly loaded helium compressor based on the physical properties
J. Nucl. Sci. Technol., 54 (2017), pp. 837-849
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tian et al., 2018
Z.T. Tian, Q. Zheng, A. Malik, et al.
Numerical investigation of the effect of highly loaded design on the tip leakage in helium compressor rotors
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 105 (2018), pp. 263-270
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yan et al., 2008
X. Yan, K. Takizuka, H. Kunitomi, et al.
Aerodynamic design, model test, and CFD analysis for a multistage axial helium compressor
J. Turbomach., 130 (3) (2008)
031018–031029
Google Scholar
Yuan et al., 1002
Z. Yuan, Q. Zheng, G.Q.Yue, Y.T. Jiang. Cascade experiment and analysis on blade profile of modular high temperature gas‐cooler reactor compressor. Int. J. Energy Res.,10.1002/er.5749, 2020.
Google Scholar
Zhu et al., 2010
R.K. Zhu, J. Wang, Q. Zheng, Y.Z. Ming
Off-design performance research of an axial helium compressor for HTGR-10 power conversion unit
Nucl. Eng. Des., 240 (2010), pp. 2914-2919
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar