<title>Experimental study of transient friction characteristics and velocity distribution of pulsatile flow in rod bundles</title>
<author>1,XingLi, 2, PeiyaoQi,3,SichaoTan,4,DongyangLi,5,YitungChen,6,XiaoyuWang</author>
<Affiliation>1,Fundamental Science on Nuclear Safety and Simulation Technology Laboratory, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin 150001, PR China;2,Wuhan Second Ship Design and Research Institute, Wuhan, Hubei 430205, China;3,Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, 4505 Maryland Pkwy, Las Vegas, NV 89154, USA；4,Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, 4505 Maryland Pkwy, Las Vegas, NV 89154, USA</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan,HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2019.107124</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454919306346</URL>
Experimental study of transient friction characteristics and velocity distribution of pulsatile flow in rod bundles
XingLi, PeiyaoQi,ichaoTan,DongyangLi,YitungChen,XiaoyuWang
Fundamental Science on Nuclear Safety and Simulation Technology Laboratory, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin 150001, PR China
Wuhan Second Ship Design and Research Institute, Wuhan, Hubei 430205, China
Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, 4505 Maryland Pkwy, Las Vegas, NV 89154, USA
Science and Technology on Reactor System Design Technology Laboratory, Nuclear Power Institute of China, Chengdu 610041, PR China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
The transient friction characteristics of pulsatile flow in rod bundles are analyzed.
The transient flow fields of pulsatile flow in rod bundle are visualized using PIV.
The evolution characteristics of pulsatile flow pattern in rod bundles are analyzed.
The velocity gradient and turbulent shear stress in the whole period are analyzed.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Rod bundles are widely used in various devices and energy engineering including heat exchangers, nuclear fuel assembly and so on. The transient fluctuation of flow rate in the thermal devices is a common phenomenon under accident scenarios or ocean condition, the study of pulsatile flows has significant practical relevance for the design and safety of thermal devices. In order to determine the flow characteristics of pulsatile flows in rod bundles, the experimental investigations for transient friction loss and evolution of flow field of pulsatile flows of a 5 × 5 rod bundle (P/D = 1.326) are performed. The experiments were conducted under the ranges of time-averaged Reynolds number Reta = 2000–7000, pulsatile amplitude Au = 0.2–0.6 and pulsatile period T = 10 s–100 s. A comparison of friction factors under steady flows and pulsatile flows is performed to determine the influence of pulsatile flows on frictional characteristics. The results show that the transient friction factors versus flow rate under pulsatile flow presents an “oval” shape, and the “oval” shape has a variation with pulsatile parameters changing. To further reveal the details of pulsatile flow fields, the evolution of flow pattern in the pulsatile flow of Reta = 5200, Au = 0.6, T = 10 s is visualized in rod bundles by Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV). The velocity distribution in different stages of pulsatile flows are displayed and discussed. The influence of velocity gradient and turbulent shear stress in the whole pulsatile period for frictional loss is analyzed, and the variation of transient friction factors under different pulsatile parameters is revealed. The results describe transient behaviors to contribute a better understanding for transient flows in fuel assemblies.
Keywords：Rod bundle；Pulsatile flow；PIV；Velocity distribution；Frictional losses
<Section>Nomenclature</Section>
General symbols
D
Rod diameter, mm
Dh
Hydraulic diameter
ID
Inner diameter
OD
Outer diameter
N
Image number
L
Length of test section, mm
P
Rod pitch, mm
U
Instantaneous velocity, mm/s
Um,os
Amplitude of the cross-sectional mean velocity
Um
Cross-sectional mean velocity, mm/s
Au
Pulsatile amplitude
Re
Instantaneous Reynolds number
T
Pulsatile period, s
St
Stokes number
dP
Pressure drop, Pa
dPa
Acceleration pressure, Pa
dPf
Frictional pressure drop, Pa
u
Lateral velocity, mm/s
v
Longitudinal velocity, mm/s
u’
Lateral fluctuation velocity, mm/s
v’
Longitudinal fluctuation velocity, mm/s
u’v’
Reynolds stress, mm2/s2
w
Dimensionless frequency of oscillation, R2ω/v
w‘-1/2
Dimensionless frequency parameter
Greek letters
p
Density, kg/m3
w
Pulsatile frequency, (-)
m
Kinematic viscosity
tp
Particle response time
tk
Kolmogorov time scale
tv
Viscous shear stress
tt
Additional shear stress
tw
Shear stress
Subscripts
st
Steady-state value
ta
Cycle-averaged value
os
Pulsatile component
i
Pulsaitle phase
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Rod bundles have been widely applied in various fields of heat exchanger, nuclear reactor core and other thermodynamic devices as its high heat transfer efficiency. Fluid flow in rod bundles has been a significant area under discussion in science and industry for numerous decades due to its huge applicability in the engineering and science. The coolant flow in rod bundles is very important for evaluating enthalpy distribution and thermal margin. A lot of investigations have previously been devoted to identify with the velocity distribution and pressure drop in rod bundle geometries under steady states. Rehme, 1973a, Rehme, 1973b, Marek, 1973, Cheng and Todreas, 1986 experimentally studied frictional characteristics of steady states for rod bundles in different flow regimes, and established correlations for predicting the steady-state pressure drop in rod bundles. Chang et al., 2014, Li et al., 2018, Li et al., 2019 performed visualization researches for rod bundles, and analyzed the characteristics of velocity distribution of rod bundle under steady flows. Although quantities of research on steady-state flow behaviors in rod bundles have been done, there is very few experimental or numerical investigations focused on transient flow dynamics in rod bundles.
In accident scenarios or ocean conditions, unsteady flows are common physical phenomena frequently encountered in such engineering applications as heat exchanger, nuclear reactors, and other thermal systems. Pulsatile flow, as a typical unsteady flow, is a common fluctuation phenomenon in thermodynamic devices, such as pump suddenly stopped and additional inertia force caused by earthquakes or ocean condition (Tan et al., 2009). Pulsatile flow is a type of time dependent flow composed of a steady component and a superimposed periodical time-varying oscillation. Pulsatile flow may go through three flow regimes: laminar, transitional and turbulent, the flow pattern of each regime is rather complicated. Therefore, the deep understanding of the physical process of the pulsatile flow is critical for better designing the engine and improving the performance of thermoacoustic devices.
To study the hydrodynamic characteristics for pulsatile flow, the pulsatile flow is classified into three characteristic parameters, dimensionless frequency , pulsatile velocity amplitude Au, time-averaged Reta. The studies of the effect of pulsatile flow on the thermal–hydraulic behaviors of simple channels have received growing attentions in recent years. Ohmi et al., 1980, Ohmi et al 1981 classified pulsatile turbulence flow patterns into three regions with respect to dimensionless frequency (), i.e., quasi-steady (1.32< < 28), intermediate (1.32< < 28), and inertia dominant ones (). In the three regions, the quasi-steady region is such that the flow nature is in conformity with that of steady flow, the intermediate region can be identified as the passage from steady to pulsatile field with observable influences of flow oscillation, and the inertia-dominant region is one in which flow inertia itself plays the dominant influence overcoming the influence of oscillation on flow field. Zhuang et al., 2016, Zhuang et al., 2017 testified pulsatile friction characteristics have remarkable distinction in different flow regimes. They analyzed that the friction characteristics of laminar, transitional or turbulent flow, and concluded the larger the pulsatile amplitude (Au) induces the larger time-averaged friction factor. Due to the limits of measuring technique, previous studies focus on friction characteristics, some influence of pulsatile parameters is still unclear, thus there is a need for velocity field and turbulence statistics to verify theory and reveal mechanisms. As a non-intrusive velocity measuring technique, PIV measurement can visualize the flow patterns of pulsatile flow. Velocity profiles of circular pipe flow under pulsatile flows have been studied by many research (Große et al., 2008, Brito et al., 2014)). The transient velocity distribution is essential to comprehensive understand the dissipation mechanism in pulsatile flows.
In unsteady flows, the study of shear-stress variation is crucial for revealing the mechanism of pressure drop fluctuation. Shuy (1996) studied wall shear stress in accelerating and decelerating turbulent pipe flows. They found that unsteady wall friction increases in decelerating flows and decreases in accelerating flows, and the phenomenon is possible to occur laminar during flow acceleration inducing the reduction of wall shear stress. Zidouh and Labraga (2013) measured the wall shear stress in unsteady turbulent pipe flows, and analyzed the applicability of quasi-steady approach under decelerating and accelerating flows. He et al. (2011) investigated wall shear stress in accelerating turbulent pipe flows, divided wall shear stress in acceleration turbulent flows into three stages, and analyzed the combined influences of inertia and turbulence response for transient behaviors at the wall. Therefore, the studies of wall shear stress in channels have a remarkable significance for revealing mechanism in unsteady flows.
Quantities of research on pulsatile flows in circular channels and rectangular channels have been done, nevertheless, very few investigations of transient flow dynamics in rod bundles under pulsatile flows have been explored in details so far. The complex structure of rod bundle induced the uneven velocity distribution compared with circular channels. The studies in circular and rectangular channels have consultative value for rod bundle, but the detailed studies for rod bundle under pulsatile flows is necessary to implement. Ala et al. (2019) focuses on comparison of steady and pulsatile flow in rod bundles to explore the response of flow to changing pulsatile parameters in terms of the frictional pressure drops and frictional factors. However, the detailed studies for pulsatile flow field in the rod bundle is still lacking, the studies of pulsatile flow should been conducted.
With respect to the analysis of flow resistance characteristics in simple channels, it’s reasonable to assume that the turbulent fluctuation and the shear stress distribution may also be influenced by the pressure drop in rod bundles. The purpose of the present work is to investigate the friction characteristics and velocity distribution of pulsatile flow in a rod bundle, ascertain the scope of theory and expand the scope of experimental investigation. The friction characteristics among different pulsation parameters are analyzed. This study is to determine the influences of acceleration and deceleration upon the formation of a sectional velocity profile, the shear stress and turbulent statistics are performed to improve the understanding of pulsatile flow flows in rod bundles.
<Section>2. Experimental details</Section>
2.1. Experimental facility
The experimental loop and measurement equipment used in this investigation is shown in Fig. 1. There are three main parts including the experimental loop, the PIV measurement device and the data collection system. It was designed for a study of pulsatile flow in a rod bundle. A detailed description of experimental loop can be found in Li et al. (2018). Steady flows and pulsatile flows were generated by altering the rotational speed of a centrifugal pump controlled by a frequency converter (SIMENS, M430). The test section was equipped with a large entrance chamber to ensure calm entrance conditions. An electro-magnetic flow meter (KROHNE), a pressure difference transmitter (Honeywell, STD810) and a temperature sensor were applied. The parameters of experimental loop are recorded by a NI data acquisition system (NI, PCI-6280).
Fig. 1. Experimental facility.
The PIV system consisted of a continuous laser, light sheet optics, a high-speed camera, a post-processing software and a computer. The continuous laser, light sheet optics and the high-speed camera were fixed in the optical platform, the location of optical platform can be adjusted to adopt the various measured planes in the test section. The flow fields were visualized using the time-resolved PIV system with Lavison data processing software. The laser sheet is generated by a continuous Nd:YAG laser with a wavelength of 532 nm. The laser energy could reach 12 W with energy stability of 1%, which is powerful enough to illuminate the seeding particles. The camera is an high-speed camera with a 1024 × 1024 pixels and 64 GB of on-board memory, which is installed on a multi-degrees tripod with a Nikon AF MICRO-NIKKOR 105 mm 1:2.8 D lenses. Data collection system is used to capture the pressure drop and flow rate. A two-channel signal generator is used to control the camera and data collection system synchronously. One channel of signal generator is connected with the camera, the other channel is connected with data collection system. In the experiment, the two-channel signal generator send signals to camera and data collection system to achieve to measure synchronously. The frequency accuracy and the frequency stability of the two-channel signal generator are ±20 ppm and ±1 ppm per 3 h, respectively.
2.2. Test section
The detailed construction of the test section is indicated in Fig. 2. Fig. 2(a) shows a schematic diagram of test section. Fig. 2(b) is the cross-section view of test section. the rod bundle pitch is 12.6 mm, rod diameter is 9.5 mm. Rods (ID 8.8 mm, OD 9.5 mm, Length 1100 mm) in the test section were made up from Fluorinated Ethylene Propylene (FEP), which is a transparent material and refractive index is 1.338. The refractive index of working fluid is 1.333. The refractive index matching error between working fluid and EFP was 0.375%. The test sections are polished Plexiglas channel with 10 mm thickness. The channels are 1000 mm long and the maximum variation in the cross-sectional area is well within 1%. There is a uniform flow orifice in the inlet chamber to provide a uniform velocity distribution for the rod bundle. Two pressure ports are centered on one side of the rod bundle and the locations of them are shown in Fig. 2(b). Two pressure ports with inner diameter of 0.5 mm allow a precise determination of the local pressure drop. The distance of upstream pressure measuring port to the entrance is 300 mm, thus the entrance effect could be neglected. The distance of the downstream pressure port to the upstream pressure measuring port is 450 mm, as shown in Fig. 2(a).Fig. 3.
Fig. 2. Test section and measured planes.
Fig. 3. Effect of the number of instantaneous measurements.
The measurements for velocity distribution in the rod bundle were performed as two planes using PIV. In order to effectively and accurately measure the flow field, a three-dimensional coordinate system in the rod bundle was constructed, as shown in Fig. 2(a) and (b). The origin of x-z plane (x = 0, z = 0) is defined at the right edge of rod 3(as shown in Fig. 2(a)), the z-axis direction is paralleled to the axis of rod, and it is also paralleled to the flow direction. The y-axis direction is paralleled to the orientation of camera lens, as shown in Fig. 2(b). The measurement areas were located between the pressure ports. The measured planes for the test section are shown in Fig. 2(c) and (e). The planes were formed by the laser light where the light passes through the test section. Fig. 12(d) and Fig. 2(f) are colored velocity contours in plane A and plane B. From the pictures, it can be found that the flow fields in the bare rod bundle have a better axial symmetry. On account of the symmetric geometry of rod bundle and symmetrical flow fields (as shown in Fig. 2(c), (d), (e), (f)), one side flow velocity of rod bundle were selected in order to reach the desired resolution of the velocity fields. The plane B corresponding to 27.75 mm × 27.75 mm was the laser sheet covered the rods and their respective sub-channels. The plane A corresponding to 32.5 mm × 32.5 mm was the laser sheet passed through gaps.
2.3. PIV details
For visualizing the velocity field in the rod bundle under pulsatile flows, particle image velocimetry (PIV) is used. The principles of PIV are only briefly described here because the details are available in numerous publications (Keane and Adrian, 1990, Bresson et al., ,2003). The camera is controlled by pulse signal generator. The output signal frequency of pulse signal generator is 4 Hz. 200 PIV images were taken by the high-speed camera when a signal is received. The deionized water channel was seeded with polyamide resin particles. The particles had an average diameter () of 10 um and a specific weight () of 1.04 g/cc. These particles were naturally buoyant in water and remained suspended as water oscillated through the channel. The Stokes number was calculated to check the behavior of particles suspended in the rod bundle. The Stokes number is the ratio of the particle response time to the Kolmogorov time scale as
@(1)
and
@(2)
where @ is the particle response time,@  is the Kolmogorov time scale, @ is the dynamic viscosity of the working fluid, and @ is the particle density. The  is defined as ratio of the characteristic length of the fluid (Dh = 9.752) to the fluid velocity (Um). The Stokes number was calculated to be 0.003 implying that the particles could follow the fluid very well (Flagan, 1988). Since this value was much less than one, the seeding particles motion were deemed to be representative of the flow behavior. In order to improve the resolution ratio for flow field, the view field of the PIV images has two dimensions: 27.75 × 27.75 mm, 25 × 25 mm.
In order to prevent seeding particles from moving out of plane during the adjacent frames, the photo-frequency was adopted 4000 fps to ensure the maximum displacement of the particles should be controlled about 1/4 of the interrogation area. In the pulsatile flows, the velocity of seeding particles changes over time. In order to decrease the post-processing error, the interrogation area should be adjusted to various velocity. The experiments aimed to identify the velocity distribution and turbulence characteristics of pulsatile flows in the rod bundle, the flow filed in a whole pulsatile period is measured repeatedly to obtain sufficient samples. Every period was divided into 40 phases, the 200 PIV images were averaged as a phase. PIV images were processed with the LaVision Davis. The size of the interrogation window used to compute the cross-correlation function was 16 × 16 pixels and 32 × 32 pixels which corresponded to the valley and peak of the pulsatile flows, the particle displacement between two consecutive images was found to be from 2.95 pixels to 5.90 pixels, and a window grid overlap factor of 50% was adopted.
2.4. Uncertainty analysis
Three fundamental parameters are required for the data processing, the velocity, pressure drop and the temperature of working fluid. The measurement errors of the flowmeter, the differential pressure gauge and the thermometer are ±0.09 m3/h, ±2 Pa and ±0.5 °C, respectively.
PIV is an establish optical diagnostic technique for measuring a velocity field. The PIV uncertainties considered in the measurement assessed: particle lag, coordinates calibration, equipment and processing algorithm, etc. The sources of error were evaluated by the guidelines for PIV error analysis of Visualization Society of Japan (VSJ) (Nishio et al., 2009, Nishio and Murata, 2003), the combined error is within 6%.
The number of instantaneous images should be established for a reliable determination of mean velocity and turbulence statistics. The effect of the number of instantaneous images, N, on the flow statistics in the present measurement has been assessed by computing the statistics using up to 1000 frames (Mao and Jaworski, 2010). The 1000 images are taken for plane A, at phase Φ4. It is observed that a very good convergence is obtained for 1000 frames. For only 500 images, the convergence is not rigorously reached, yet is judged sufficient to obtain a good representation of the flow over the whole flow field, and a reasonable representative of the convergent statistics.
<Section>3. Data processing and analysis</Section>
Due to the periodic nature of pulsatile turbulent flow, the instantaneous velocity and the instantaneous pressure drop are made up of three components, a long-time averaged value, a pulsatile component due to the pulsation, and a turbulent fluctuating component, which are denoted by subscripts “ta” and “os”, respectively. Therefore, the instantaneous values can be written as:
@(3)
@(4)
@(5)
In the rod bundle, the u and v are lateral velocity and axial velocity, respectively. In the case of laminar flow, the turbulent fluctuating component should be neglected.
In the experiment, the flow field and pressure drop were synchronized acquired. To analyze the hydraulic behaviors of pulsatile flows in a bare rod bundle, a general momentum integral equation for transient flows, which is described by Melda (2001), is used to make a brief introduction for the resistance sources and characteristics. The following momentum balance equation is employed.
<Section>(6)
where ,  @and  @are pressure drop gradient, fluid acceleration and shear stress, respectively. L and Dh denote the distance between two pressure port and the hydraulic diameter, respectively. Then, assuming the density is constant, the value of pressure drop is depended on acceleration and shear stress. From the Eq. (6), it indicates the differential pressure drop in pulsatile flows consisted of acceleration pressure drop and frictional pressure drop. In pulsatile flows, the acceleration pressure drop is closely related with pulsatile parameters, such as pulsation period and amplitude. The frictional pressure drop in pulsatile flows is mainly related to velocity distribution within the rod bundle. Therefore, the study of hydraulic characteristics in rod bundles intended to be conducted from two aspects, (1) the effects of fluid acceleration; (2) the effects of velocity distribution.
3.1. Pressure drop
The pressure drop and flow rate were collected synchronously by the electromagnetic flowmeter and the differential pressure transducer. The pressure ports were built in wall of rod bundle. The transient velocity and pressure drop were shown in Fig. 4. From Fig. 4, it is found that the transient pressure drop and flow rate show a sinusoidal fluctuation, and there is a significant time lag between pressure drop and flow rate, the time lag is related to momentum transfer in the radial direction (Ohmi et al., 1980).
Fig. 4. Transient pulsatile parameters.
The pulsatile flow in the loop is driven by a sinusoidal displacer with a mean velocity Uta, the pulsatile velocity Uos, generated by this system in the rod bundle, can be written as
@(7)
where ω is the pulsatile frequency, which is defined as , and T is pulsatile period. The equation for the pulsatile pressure drop (△p) can be written as
@(8)
where pos and pta are the amplitude of pressure drop and time-averaged pressure drop, respectively.  is the response time between transient pressure drop and transient flow rate, as shown in Fig. 4. The pulsatile acceleration as a differential of Eq. (7) results in
@(9)
Fig. 5 is the fluctuation of pressure drop with velocity under pulsatile flows, the fluctuation shows an “oval” on account of periodic fluctuation of flow rate.  is total pressure drop, which consists of acceleration pressure drop and frictional pressure drop. The acceleration pressure drop, which is generated by the pulsatile acceleration of flow rate, is obtained from the following integral (),
@(10)
Fig. 5. The fluctuation of pressure drop.
The black lines in the Fig. 5 correspond to acceleration pressure drop, the blue lines correspond to frictional pressure drop. The frictional pressure drop is defined as . It can be seen that even if the acceleration pressure drop is subtracted from the total pressure drop, the frictional pressure drop is still an “oval” shape. Therefore, the evolution of flow field is necessary to collect for revealing the resistance characteristic in pulsatile flows.
3.2. Ensemble averaging of velocity field
In the turbulent flows, the turbulent shear stress consists of the viscous shear stress caused by the relative slip between the fluid layers and the additional shear stress caused by the random movement of the fluid particles, namely:
@(11)
where@ is the viscous shear stress between the fluid layers, it is calculated according to velocity distribution in the rod bundle. @ is the additional shear stress, which is defined as  based on Prandtl mixing-length theory, and  is Reynolds stress obtained by PIV. The dominant one of two kind of shear stress depends on Reynolds number. When at lower Reynolds number, the turbulent fluctuation is weaker, the contribution of  is dominant. As the Reynolds number increases, the turbulent fluctuation increases and  gradually increases. When at larger Reynolds number, in the fully developed turbulent flow, the contribution of  is much larger than that of , when  can be neglected.
In order to intuitively display instantaneous flow fields in the whole pulsation period, one whole period is divided into 40 phases, every phase consists of 100 images, thus the data set obtained for each period consists of 40 × N instantaneous flow fields. Each instantaneous flow field provides two velocity components u (x, y, Φ, i) and v (x, y, Φ, i) in a spatial point (x, y), at phase Φ of each acoustic oscillation cycle i.
@(12)
@(13)
where u (x, y, Φ) and v (x, y, Φ) are time-averaged lateral velocity and time-averaged axial velocity at phase Φ, respectively. N represents the number of images at every phase.
In order to obtain plenty of images for turbulence statistics, based on the assumption that the mean velocity fields are the same at any time corresponding to the same phase in the acoustic cycle, from a group of instantaneous flow fields of the same phase, the fluctuation velocity u'(x, y, Φ) and v'(x, y, Φ), and Reynolds stresses , for each phase Φ can be calculated as follows:
@(14)
@(15)
@(16)
where the summation is over i = 1, …, N images taken at a phase Φ, and the prime indicates the fluctuation of a variable. The instantaneous flow fields are divided into mean flow fields and their fluctuations.
<Section>4. Results and discussion</Section>
There are plenty of experiment cases tested. Section 4.1 discusses the resistance characteristics of rod bundle in pulsatile flows, and analyzes the effect of acceleration for frictional pressure drop. In section 4.2, the pulsatile flow fields in the rod bundle are visualized and investigated using PIV. The results presented so far lead to some interesting questions related to the flow behaviors in the rod bundle.
4.1. Transient friction characteristics
4.1.1. Comparison of friction factor under steady flows and pulsatile flows
The detailed flows in complex rod bundle geometries show significant differences with simple channels. In order to obtain the relationship between the frictional factor and Reynolds number in pulsatile flows, steady flow experiments were conducted in advance verification and datum reference. Fig. 6 shows the friction factor in different channels under steady flows, such as the circular pipe (Kurokawa and Morikawa, 1986), the rectangular channels (Zhuang et al, 2016), and the rod bundle. The curve of λ against Re is a discontinuous curve and there was an evident ‘discontinuity’ region from laminar to turbulence like in pipes and rectangular channels where the transition is often clear from the plot.
Fig. 6. Comparison of friction factor in different channels.
The boundary of transition Reynolds number in circular pipes and rectangular channels is about 2300. However, the transition in the rod bundle does not have a strict boundary, a smooth ‘discontinuity’ of frictional factor is observed from laminar to turbulence. The discrepancies of transition between rod bundles and simple channels are attributed to that: (1) the velocity distribution in pipes and rectangular channels is uniform, the transition in the whole pipes or rectangular channels nearly occurs in the same inlet condition, thus the influence of transition can be displayed intuitively. (2) the velocity distribution in the rod bundle is nonuniform, the transition in different subchannels may correspond to different inlet conditions, for example, transition Reynolds number in center subchannels is smaller than that in edge subchannels, the influence of transition in local position is weakened by the flow behaviors in the whole rod bundle, thus the strict boundary of transition is unclear. In a word, the flow behaviors in the steady condition still have significant differences between rod bundle and simple channels, the flows behaviors of rod bundle in the pulsatile flows is well worth exploring.
The transient frictional resistance of rod bundle was obtained in pulsatile flows. As seen in Fig. 7, the transient friction factor shows in an “oval” shape, the friction factor under steady condition is nearly smaller than that under the acceleration stage, and larger than that under the deceleration stage (Qi et al., 2019). It is also found that a smooth ‘discontinuity’ of frictional factor is observed in the steady condition, but there is no discontinuity in the pulsatile flows. This is attributed to pulsatile driving force causing the more complex flow fields, which will be discussed in Section 4.2.1, the influence of transition in rod bundles is weakened further. Fig. 7 depicts the friction factor for two pulsation periods in different flow regimes. The results presented so far also lead to some interesting questions related to the flow behaviors. These in particular include: (1) The “oval” shape has a change with variation of pulsatile periods. With pulsatile periods decreasing, the width of “oval” has an increasing, it is possible to the variation of pulsatile period changes the acceleration of fluid, the acceleration changes the frictional pressure drop in the rod bundle, the influence of acceleration for the width of “annulus” will be explored in the following Section 4.1.2. (2) The “oval” has an excursion in laminar region (Re < 2000), but the excursion is unclear when Re > 3000, and the degree of excursion decreases with pulsatile period increasing. The reasons for the behaviors will be investigated further in subsequent sections of pulsatile flow field (Section 4.2).
Fig. 7. Comparison of flow characteristic between pulsatile flows and steady flows.
4.1.2. Analysis of acceleration under pulsatile flows
To determine the relationship between pulsatile period and the width of “oval” shape, experiments with the same averaged Reynolds number (Reta = 5500) and amplitude (Au = 0.6), varying periods (T = 10 s, 50 s, 100 s) were conducted. As shown in Fig. 8, the width of “annulus” of frictional pressure drop increases with the pulsatile period decreasing. In fact, the variation of pulsatile period mainly induces the variation of fluid acceleration, and then acceleration varies flow fields inducing the variation of transient pressure drop.
Fig. 8. The transient pressure drop under different pulsation periods.
In order to determine the relationship between the width of “oval” shape and acceleration, according to Eqs. (8)–(10), frictional pressure drop  at certain moment is defined as follows:
@(17)
At the other moment when the same flow but opposite acceleration,  is represented by Eq. (18).
@(18)
Using Eqs. (17), (18), introducing the averaged frictional pressure drop , which is defined as:
@(19)
Consequently, the averaged frictional pressure drop could be expressed as follow.
@(20)
where a and b are expressed as@
In Fig. 9, the averaged pressure drops in the pulsatile flow are presented. As shown in Fig. 9, in both cases, the averaged pressure drops have a different trend with Re increasing. In Fig. 9(a), the averaged pressure drops have a linear growth when the pulsation period is 10 s, there are significant deviations between the steady pressure drop and averaged pressure drop. The above theoretical analysis results are verified by experimental results. But for Re < 6500, the averaged pressure drop is higher than pressure drop in the steady condition, for Re > 6500, the averaged pressure drop is smaller than that in the steady condition. However, in Fig. 9(b), the averaged pressure drop under pulsation period 100 s has an overlap with one in steady conditions. It is because the influence of acceleration under long term for flow field can be neglected, when the flows can be quasi-steady, the flow nature is in conformity with that of steady flow.
Fig. 9. Comparison of averaged pressure drop.
The width of “oval” is calculated by subtracting averaged frictional pressure drop from transient frictional pressure drop, as shown in Eq.(21).
@(21)
From the Eq. (19), it is found that the relationship between the frictional pressure drop and the averaged pressure drop is linear with acceleration, where the “width” increases with acceleration increasing.
4.2. Pulsatile flow fields
4.2.1. The evolution of flow field in the plane a
In this section, a typical experimental case is discussed in detail, which is the pulsatile flow of T = 10 s, Reta = 5200 and Au = 0.6, as shown in Fig. 10. For convenience of explanation for the pulsatile flow can be further subdivided into acceleration and deceleration stages: φ1-φ5 and φ6-φ10, respectively. In the range of flow rate fluctuation, the three steady flows (Rest = 4300, 5200, 7100) were performed, coincident points between steady conditions and transient conditions are φ2, φ3, φ5, φ7 and φ8. In order to display clearly to the evolution of flow field in the whole pulsatile period, the transient velocity in the measured plane A (the location of measured plane A is shown in Fig. 2) is normalized by averaged velocity at the moment, as shown in Fig. 11.
Fig. 10. Flow fluctuation in a period.
Fig. 11. The evolution of normalized velocity of plane A in a pulsation period.
Fig. 12. The evolution of velocity distribution of plane B in a pulsation period.
Transient velocity distribution for plane A is observed successively. Fig. 11 presents the velocity fields at different phases. At the beginning of the pulsatile flow, as shown in Fig. 11a (φ1), the fluid velocity in subchannels is higher than that in gaps, but the velocity distribution seems to be unstable, the fluid in subchannels has a movement trend to the sideward gaps, when the velocity of flow in gaps has an increase. As the flow rate gradually increases, the velocity distribution seems to became stable, the movement trend to the sideward gaps is weakened. From the point of view of the whole rod bundle, the velocity distribution in Fig. 11b (φ2) gradually becomes symmetrical relative to the centerline of the total channel. The flow continues to accelerate and the flow rate nearly reaches its peak, then the flow enters the deceleration stage, the velocity distributions in the next three stages (φ4-φ6) become steady and show the same trend in Fig. 11d-f. In the deceleration stage, the flow rate slows down and the relative symmetrical structure gradually become weaker, the trend to the sideward gaps arises again. At the end of the deceleration stage-see Fig. 11i (φ9)-the velocity distribution seems to lose their stability again, which is the same as velocity distribution in Fig. 11a (φ1) on account of periodicity of pulsatile flow. The reasons for the above phenomenon are that, (1) in the acceleration stage, the inertia force is larger than the viscous force to maintain positive acceleration, thus the contribution of the inertia force for the flow field is dominant, the movement direction of working fluid is parallel to the inertial force, thus the velocity distribution shows some stability; (2) in the deceleration stage, the viscous force is larger than the inertia force to maintain negative acceleration, the influence of inertia force is weakened, the influence of viscous force improves and other influence factors are magnified, the combination of above factors induces the flow instability increasing, the velocity distribution begins to became unstable.
Furthermore, the Re in the phase of φ3 and φ7 has the same value of acceleration but opposite direction, when the velocity distribution in the two phases has different trend. The flow in φ3 has a positive acceleration, the velocity distribution near the rod 3 is higher than that in φ7. However, it is not intuitive to display the effects of acceleration for colored velocity contours in the plane A, the velocity profiles in the plane B will be displayed and discussed in Section 4.2.2.
4.2.2. The evolution of flow field in the plane B
In the section, the velocity distribution in the plane B (the location of measured plane B is shown in Fig. 2) will be examined and discussed in detailed, Fig. 12 shows velocity distribution near the wall of rods, thus this can be displayed intuitively the influence of wall in pulsatile flows. In the following, Fig. 12 shows a comparison between the transient velocity distribution and steady-state velocity distribution. Fig. 12a-c show the velocity profiles in developed steady flows, they have almost the same distribution trend that the speed in subchannel 4 and subchannel 5 is same and higher than that in subchannel 6. Fig. 12d-i show the velocity profiles in the deceleration and acceleration stages. In the different stages of the pulsatile flow, there is different velocity distribution in the subchannels. In the acceleration stage, the velocity in subchannel 4 is higher than that in subchannel 5, in view of the symmetrical structure of flow field, the velocity distribution in the whole rod bundle shows a “convex” shape, as shown in Fig. 12f. On the contrary, in the deceleration stage, the velocity in subchannel 4 is lower than that in subchannel 5, as shown in Fig. 12h. However, in the phase of φ2 and φ6, the velocity presents the opposite distribution trend. The reasons of phenomenon would be described in the following.
At the beginning of the pulsatile flow, the flows is in the valley value of flow rate when no acceleration, the velocity distribution in the plane B shows a “concave” shape in the whole rod bundle, as shown in Fig. 12d(φ1), and then the flow starts to accelerate and the velocity difference between gap 4 and gap 5 has been weakened, as shown in Fig. 12e(φ2), namely, the “concave” shape gradually becomes weakened. As the flow rate continues to increase, the acceleration improves accordingly. When the flow increases to the phase of φ3, the flow has the maximum positive acceleration of the pulsatile flow, and the velocity distribution becomes a “convex” shape in the whole rod bundle. As the flow rate arrives at the peak, the velocity in gap 4 and gap 5 is nearly same. Then the flow enters to deceleration stage, the velocity distribution shows a “concave” shape again. From the perspective of whole rod bundle, the velocity profiles in the phases of φ7 and φ8, clearly, the typical “annular effect” can be observed, this effect usually occurs in the deceleration stage.
From the above description for velocity distribution of pulsatile flow in the rod bundle, it seems to be different from that in the circular pipe or the rectangular channel. As indicated by velocity profiles in the phase of φ1-2 and φ6-8, clearly, the typical “annular effect” can be not only observed in the deceleration stage, but also in the initial acceleration stage. For the “annular effect” in the initial acceleration stage, the main reasons are as follows: (1) in the initial acceleration stage of pulsatile flow, the value of acceleration is lower so that the influence of acceleration is weaker. (2) the velocity in the valley of flow rate is almost laminar, the viscous effect is dominating in the channel over inertia forces, the further evolution of flow patterns would be suppressed, thus the evolution of flow patterns lags behind the variation of flow rate. The phenomenon is one of reasons for the excursion of “oval” shape of frication factor in low Reynolds number. However, in high Reynolds number, the hysteresis between flow rate and flow pattern is insignificant, it is because the turbulent fluctuation enhances momentum transfer among the different subchannels and gaps so that the velocity difference between gap 4 and gap 5 is reduced. (3) There are a lot of wall surfaces in rod bundles, the special geometry of rod bundle makes the influence of pulsatile flow more complex.
In summary, in the valley of flow rate, the evolution of flow pattern lags behind the variation of flow rate. Note that the velocity distribution in the rod bundle effects heat transfer, when the heat-transfer characteristics in the rod bundle wound have a significant change with that in steady states. Therefore, heat-transfer characteristics in pulsatile flows will be performed in the further studies.
4.2.3. The evolution of Reynolds stress and velocity gradient
As far as the hydraulic behaviors are concerned, the flow pulsation not only affects the velocity distribution in the rod bundle, but also turbulence characteristics. From the section 4.1.1, it is found that the “oval” shape of friction factor has an excursion in laminar, but the excursion of friction factor in turbulence is insignificant, the reasons for above phenomenon are explained further in the following.
Pulsatile flow may go through the three flow regimes: laminar, transition, turbulence, when the resistance characteristics is constantly changing. From Section 3.2, the viscous shear stress and the additional shear stress are closely related with friction loss. At low Reynolds number, the turbulent fluctuation is weak, the influence of the viscous shearing stress for friction loss is dominant. With the increase of Reynolds number, the additional shear stress increases gradually. When the Reynolds number is larger and the turbulence is sufficiently developed, the former term is negligible compared with the latter term in Eq. (11). Fig. 13 shows the variation of Reynolds stresses and viscous shear stress of pulsatile flows in the plane A and plane B. Normalized velocity gradient and normalized Reynolds stress in Fig. 13 is sum of in the two planes and obtained by phase averaging.
Fig.13. The variation of normalized Reynolds stresses and normalize viscous shearing stress.
According to Fig. 13, in the low Re, the normalized Reynolds stress is lower, it indicates momentum transfer among fluid layers is weaker, but the velocity gradient is higher, it illustrates that the viscous effect plays an important role, thus the response of flow patterns for flow rate is slower, then causing the excursion of “oval” shape of friction factor, but in the long period, the acceleration changes slowly, the working fluid has enough time to response the variation of flow rate. In the high Re, the normalized Reynolds stress is higher, the normalized velocity gradient is lower, the momentum transfer among fluid layers is enhanced. In turbulence, the flow behaviors can response quickly the variation of flow rate, thus excursion is weakened in turbulent condition.
<Section>5. Conclusion</Section>
In the paper, the transient frictional loss and evolution of flow field of pulsatile flows are investigated experimentally in rod bundles. The detailed velocity measurements of pulsatile flows were conducted using PIV technique in the rod bundle. The PIV technique in combination with the MIR technique could visualize the velocity distribution as well as flow structure among subchannels. From the above investigations the following conclusions can be drawn.
(1)
In steady condition, the transition in the rod bundle does not have a strict boundary, a smooth ‘discontinuity’ of frictional factor is observed from laminar to turbulence. However, the influence of transition of pulsatile flows in rod bundle is further weakened. The frictional factor of pulsatile flows shows an “oval” shape, of which width has a linear with acceleration, namely, it increases with acceleration increasing.
(2)
In the acceleration stage, the velocity distribution in whole rod bundle shows a “concave” shape, and in the deceleration stage, the velocity distribution shows a “convex” shape, the typical “annular effect” can be observed. However, in the initial acceleration stage, the velocity distribution still shows a “convex” shape, it indicates that near the valley of flow rate the evolution of flow pattern lags behind the variation of flow rate of working fluid.
(3)
The “oval” shape of frictional factor has an excursion in laminar flow, but that in turbulence has not excursion. The reasons for phenomenon are that the viscous effect in laminar is dominated compared with turbulent stress, thus the momentum transfer among flow layers is weaker. In turbulent flow, the momentum transfer among fluid layers is enhanced the flow behaviors can response quickly the variation of flow rate.
Additionally, it should be mentioned that turbulence characteristic is analyzed based on the PIV data in present work. In future work, we will carry out the temperature measurement using laser induced fluorescence (LIF) such that the heat transfer behaviors inside the rod bundle can be revealed.
<Section>Conflict of interest</Section>
The authors declared that they have no conflicts of interest to this work. We declare that we do not have any commercial or associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in connection with the work submitted.
<Section>Acknowledgement</Section>
This work is financially supported by National Key R&D Program of China (2017YFE0106200), Heilongjiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (JQ2019A001) and the Fundamental Research Funds of Key Projects for the Central Universities (No. GK2150260167).
<Section>References</Section>
Rehme, 1973a
K. Rehme
Simple method of predicting friction factors of turbulent flow in noncircular channels
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 16 (1973), pp. 933-950
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Rehme, 1973b
K. Rehme
Pressure drop correlations for fuel element spacers
Nucl. Technol., 17 (1973), pp. 15-23
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Marek, 1973
Marek J, M., 1973. Heat transfer and pressure drop performance of rod bundles arranged in square arrays. Int. J. Heat Mass Tran. 16, 2215–2228.
Google Scholar
Cheng and Todreas, 1986
S. Cheng, N. Todreas
Hydrodynamic models and correlations for bare and wire wrapped hexagonal rod bundles - bundle friction factors, subchannel friction factors and mixing parameters
Nucl. Eng. Des., 92 (1986), pp. 227-251
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Li et al., 2018
X. Li, Z. Mi, S. Tan, et al.
PIV study of velocity distribution and turbulence statistics in a rod bundle
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 117 (2018), pp. 305-317
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Li et al., 2019
X. Li, Z. Mi, S. Tan, et al.
Experimental investigation of fluid mixing inside a rod bundle using laser induced fluorescence
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 110 (2019), pp. 90-102
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chang et al., 2014
S.K. Chang, S. Kim, C.H. Song
Turbulent mixing in a rod bundle with vaned spacer grids: OECD/NEA–KAERI CFD benchmark exercise test
Nucl. Eng. Des., 279 (2014), pp. 19-36
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tan et al., 2009
S. Tan, G.H. Su, P. Gao
Experimental study on two-phase flow instability of natural circulation under rolling motion condition
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 36 (1) (2009), pp. 103-113
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ohmi et al., 1980
M. Ohmi, M. Iguchi, T. Usui
Flow pattern and frictional losses in pulsating pipe flow. Part 1: effect of pulsating frequency on the turbulent flow pattern
Bull. JSME, 23 (186) (1980), pp. 2013-2020P
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ohmi et al 1981
M. Ohmi, M. Iguchi
Flow pattern and frictional losses in pulsating pipe flow. Part 6: frictional losses in a laminar flow
Bull. JSME, 24 (196) (1981), p. 1756
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhuang et al., 2016
N. Zhuang, S. Tan, H. Yuan
The friction characteristics of low-frequency transitional pulsatile flows in narrow channel
Exp. Therm Fluid Sci., 76 (2016), pp. 352-364
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zhuang et al., 2017
N. Zhuang, S. Tan, H. Yuan, et al.
Flow resistance of low-frequency pulsatile turbulent flow in mini-channels
Int. J. Heat Fluid Flow, 65 (2017), pp. 21-32
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Große et al., 2008
S. Große, S. Burgmann, W. Schröder
Time-resolved PIV measurements of oscillating flow in a non-collapsing flexible
pipe (2008)
Google Scholar
Brito et al., 2014
M. Brito, P. Sanches, R.M. Ferreira, et al.
Piv characterization of transient flow in pipe coils
Procedia Eng., 89 (2014), pp. 1358-1365
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Shuy, 1996
E.B. Shuy
Wall shear stress in accelerating and decelerating turbulent pipe flows
J. Hydraul. Res., 34 (2) (1996), pp. 173-183
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Zidouh and Elmaimouni, 2013
H. Zidouh, L. Elmaimouni
Wall shear stress in transient turbulent pipe flow[C]//2013 International Renewable and Sustainable Energy Conference (IRSEC)
IEEE (2013), pp. 130-135
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
He et al., 2011
S. He, C. Ariyaratne, A.E. Vardy
Wall shear stress in accelerating turbulent pipe flow
J. Fluid Mech., 685 (2011), pp. 440-460
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ala et al., 2019
A.A. Ala, S. Tan, A. Eltayeb, Z. Mi
Effects of low- re, pulsatile flow on friction characteristics in bare square array rod bundles
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 120 (2019), pp. 630-641
Google Scholar
Keane and Adrian, 1990
R.D. Keane, R.J. Adrian
Optimization of particle image velocimetry
Meas. Sci. Technol., 2 (1990), pp. 1202-1215
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bresson et al., ,2003
Bresson, A., Brossard, C., Gicquel, P., Grisch, F., 2003. Simultaneous temperature, concentration, and velocity fields measurements in a turbulent heated jet using combined laser-induced fluorescence and PIV, in: Proceedings of the SPIE 5191, Optical Diagnostics for Fluids, Solids, and Combustion II, vol. 75.
Google Scholar
Flagan, 1988
K.W. Flagan
Fundamentals of Air Pollution Engineering
Prentice Hall, Engle-wood, NJ (1988), pp. 296-304
Google Scholar
Nishio et al., 2009
S. Nishio, K. Okamoto, T. Kobayashi, T. Saga
Evaluation of system per-formance and uncertainty analysis of PIV (PIV-STD project)
Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on Particle Image Velocimetry (2009), pp. 465-470
Google Scholar
Nishio and Murata, 2003
Nishio, S., Murata, S., 2003. A Numerical approach to the evaluation of error vector appearance possibility in PIV. In: Proceedings of the 5th International Sympo-sium on Particle Image Velocimetry, 2003, pp. 3321.1–3321.9.
Google Scholar
Mao and Jaworski, 2010
X. Mao, A. Jaworski
Application of particle image velocimetry measurement techniques to study turbulence characteristics of oscillatory flows around parallel-plate structures in thermoacoustic devices
Meas. Sci. Technol., 21(21) (2010), Article 035403
CrossRefGoogle Scholar
Kurokawa and Morikawa, 1986
J. Kurokawa, M. Morikawa
Accelerated and decelerated flows in a circular pipe: 1st report, velocity profile and friction coefficient
Bull. JSME, 29 (249) (1986), pp. 758-765
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Qi et al., 2019
Peiyao Qi, Xing Li, Xin Li, Shouxu Qiao, Sichao Tan, Yitung Chen
Experimental study on the resistance characteristics of the rod bundle channel with spacer grid under low-frequency pulsating flows
Ann. Nucl. Energy (2019), pp. 80-92
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar