<title>Development of a two-fluid based thermal-hydraulic subchannel analysis code with high-resolution numerical method</title>
<author>1,MinyangGui,2,WenxiTian,3,DiWu,4,RonghuaChen,5,MingjunWang,5,G.H.Su</author>
<Affiliation>1,School of Nuclear Science and Technology, Shanxi Key Laboratory of Advanced Nuclear Energy and Technology, State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710049, China</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2021.103671</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0149197021000421</URL>
Development of a two-fluid based thermal-hydraulic subchannel analysis code with high-resolution numerical method
MinyangGui,WenxiTian,DiWu,RonghuaChen,MingjunWang,G.H.Su
School of Nuclear Science and Technology, Shanxi Key Laboratory of Advanced Nuclear Energy and Technology, State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710049, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
•
A new eight-equation two-fluid based analysis module of SACOS is developed.
•
The high-resolution scheme with nonlinear flux limiter is implemented into code.
•
The validity of the higher-order scheme is verified with linear advection flow problem.
•
The two-fluid model is validated based on reported bundle experiments.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The SACOS code is thermal-hydraulic subchannel analysis code designed to meet steady-state conditions and operational transients in different types of reactor cores. It uses a homogeneous flow or drift-flux model to simulate single-phase and two-phase flow characteristics. In order to achieve a more refined two-phase flow modeling for LWR cores, a new eight-equation two-fluid based analysis module of SACOS is developed in this study. The phasic equations for mass continuity, momentum, and energy are spatially discretized by the finite volume method (FVM) with a staggered grid structure. To reduce numerical diffusion and improve numerical accuracy, the high-resolution scheme with nonlinear flux limiter is implemented. The code assessment is performed with linear advection flow problem and the preliminary code validation is presented by comparing with the experimental results of Weiss 14 × 14 blockage test, CNEN 4 × 4 mixing test, Studsvik 3 × 3 mixing test, and ISPRA 4 × 4 mixing test covering single/two-phase and unheated/heated conditions. The application of SACOS implies that the code can be used to model and perform assembly-level core safety analysis with visualization capabilities for hexagonal and rectangular geometry.
<Section>Graphical abstract</Section>
Development of a two-fluid based thermal-hydraulic subchannel analysis code and its application.
Image 1
Keywords:SACOS;Reactor core thermal-hydraulics;High-resolution scheme;Two-fluid model;Preliminary assessment and validation
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Reactor performance is largely limited by core thermal-hydraulic design. In order to improve the economy and safety of the reactor, related thermal-hydraulic analysis of the reactor core is required to calculate the pressure, flow and enthalpy distribution in the reactor core as accurately as possible. Especially for light water reactors (LWRs), the core consists of hundreds of fuel assemblies with rod-bundle geometry, the potential boiling crisis may cause the temperature of the cladding wall to soar and thus lose its integrity, and the accurate prediction of critical heat flux ratio (CHFR) is a priority to ensure the safety of the reactor core under various normal operation and accident conditions. In general, aside from the high-resolution computational fluid dynamics (CFD), which still need huge computational resources, the methods of rod-bundle thermal-hydraulic analysis can be classified into three broad categories (William, 1980): (1) subchannel analysis; (2) porous medium formulation; (3) benchmark rod-bundle thermal-hydraulic analysis.
Compared to the other two methods, the subchannel analysis method is more widely used in thermal-hydraulic evaluation and safety analysis for LWR cores. Usually the coolant channel, namely subchannel, naturally form between the rods and there will be a natural mixing (i.e. crossflows) due to turbulence, pressure gradient across adjacent subchannels. For subchannel analysis method, it explicitly assumes that the velocity component of axial direction is dominant compared to that of cross-flow direction. Thus in the establishment of mathematical-physical model, the axial momentum and transverse momentum equations are considered separately, but the latter is greatly simplified. So far, many subchannel analysis codes based on subchannel analysis method have been developed and reported in the existing literature, such as COBRA (Rowe, 1967), VIPRE (Stewart et al., 1989), MATRA (Yoo et al., 1999), FLICA (Toumi et al., 2000), SUBCHANFLOW (Imke and Sanchez, 2012) and ASSERT (Rao et al., 2014). Among all these codes, COBRA type of subchannel codes are the most widely used in the world, and the first version of which was developed by the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL) in 1960s. Over the years, it has been modified continuously by different research institutes (COBRA-IIIC, -IV, -WC, -EN, etc.) to optimize and add corresponding models. Many of the other subchannel codes are based on COBRA as well. For example, VIPRE-01 was developed on the strengths of the COBRA codes with upgrading the code's capabilities and improving the code's numerical schemes. The MATRA code was created based on the CDC Cyber mainframe version of the COBRA-IV-I code with a combination of improved code design, implemented functions and models. The ASSERT code, which originated from the COBRA-IV code but modified some of the original models, can consider the effect of gravity-driven lateral recirculation flows, gravity-driven phase separation and buoyancy drift in horizontal bundles.
In general, most of the above codes are developed based on homogeneous flow model and drift flux model, which have been proven to play a great role in the safety assessment of reactors. However, the homogeneous flow model has its inherent shortcomings, that is, it ignores the possible thermal and hydraulic non-equilibrium between phases. Especially for the certain conditions of low pressure, high quality and rapid transient change, etc., the prediction error of the model would be amplified. And the drift flux model is similar to the homogeneous flow model except that the vapor-liquid two-phase averaging method is changed. Therefore, the current development of subchannel analysis codes concentrates on refined modeling of two-phase flow, such as VIPRE-02 (Kelly et al., 1992), FLICA-OVAP (Fillion et al., 2011) and CTF (Salko and Avramova, 2014). In these codes, the two-fluid model is applied which separates the conservation equations of mass, energy, and momentum to vapor and liquid, and phase interaction is modeled using empirical and semi-empirical interfacial correlations for vapor generation and heat and mass transfer. In particular, CTF, whose original version is the core module of COBRA/TRAC (Thurgood, 1983), solve the two-fluid, three-field equations. In three-field formulation, the liquid phase is divided into continuous liquid field and the dispersed liquid droplet field, and the behavior of droplet entrainment and deposition has to be described by additional physical models. In fact, currently several of droplet entrainment and deposition models are developed based mainly on air-water adiabatic annular flow experiment at specific pressures, in which more empirical constants and closure terms would increase the overall uncertainties (Gui et al., 2019). In addition, to solve the basic governing equations, most of the subchannel codes use the 1st-order upwind difference scheme to deal with convection terms, which may lead to excessive numerical diffusion. And for the six-equation two-phase flow model, the fundamental equation is usually not strongly hyperbolic, which means that some of its eigenvalues are not real. In the past few decades, much work has been done to improve the numerical stability and reduce numerical diffusion for the two-phase flow model. Some higher-order schemes have been applied in system codes (Tiselj and Petelin, 1997; Bertolotto et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2013), such as RELAP5 and TRACE, with varying degrees of success. The comparisons show that some higher-order schemes not only have better numerical accuracy than the 1st-order upwind scheme but also preserve great robustness and efficiency (Wang et al., 2013). In comparison, similar work is rarely done on subchannel codes, especially for those based on a two-fluid model. Refer to previous work, some similar attempts based on subchannel code would also be effective.
Our research groups (XJTU-NuTheL) have devoted to the numerical simulation and thermal-hydraulic analysis of the reactor core for several years. In the process, a series of Subchannel Analysis Codes Of Safety (SACOS) for different types of reactors have been developed. Chaudri et al. (2012, 2013) developed a subchannel code for Supercritical Water Reactor (SCWR) and then applied it to the coupled neutronics/thermal hydraulics analyses of High Performance Light Water Reactor (HPLWR). Based on the original subchannel code, Wu et al. (2013) conducted thermal-hydraulic analysis for Sodium-cooled Fast Reactor (SFR) fuel assembly with modified auxiliary models. Considering the influence of inter-wrapper flow (IWF) on core thermal-hydraulics characteristics, a subsequent 2D layered IWF model was developed and added (Yue et al., 2018). In order to explore the thermal hydraulic characteristics in Advanced Lead Bismuth Fast Reactor (ALBFR) subchannel, Wang et al. (2013) extended the flow and heat transfer models and thermodynamic properties of liquid lead bismuth based on the original SACOS. Then Wang et al. (2018) further optimized some constitutive models in the code, including heat transfer correlations, friction coefficient, liquid lead-bismuth properties, cross-flow mixing model and space grids effect. Due to the traditional thermal-hydraulic analysis codes are designed for land-based reactor, Cai et al. (2016) considered the influence of the additional force introduced by the moving conditions on the basic equations and the auxiliary models. In particular, the flow and heat transfer models as well as the Critical Heat Flux (CHF) model, whose original forms were developed for the land-based reactor core, have been modified to take into account the effects of moving conditions.
The different versions of SACOS mentioned above are all based on homogeneous flow model or drift-flux model, which fully meet the requirements of core thermal-hydraulic analysis with different coolant working media, especially for liquid metal and supercritical fluid. But for the LWRs, a more refined two-phase flow modeling is beneficial. Thus, in this paper, a new two-fluid based analysis module of SACOS is developed and introduced. To reduce numerical diffusion and improve numerical accuracy, the high-resolution scheme with different nonlinear flux limiters are implemented and initially tested. The preliminary validation of the code is presented by comparing with the experimental results of Weiss 14 × 14 blockage test, CNEN 4 × 4 mixing test, Studsvik 3 × 3 mixing test, and ISPRA 4 × 4 mixing test, which proves the accuracy and reliability of the code. Then application of code is presented. In this regard, the structure of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the basic physical and mathematical equations of two-fluid model; Section 3 shows the numerical method and solution procedure; Section 4 presents the preliminary assessment and validation of the code; Section 5 presents the application of the code; Section 6 concludes the paper with the preliminary calculated results of the two-fluid based code and suggestions for future research directions.
<Section>2. Basic mathematic-physical models</Section>
2.1. Two-fluid governing equations
The eight-equation two-fluid model is applied for setting up the governing equations of SACOS. To illustrate them more clearly, several important assumptions must be emphasized: (1) Volumetric force only take into account gravity. (2) Ignore the viscous stress between fluid elements and the surface tension at the interface. (3) Ignore the heat conduction through the fluid. (4) Ignore the inter-cell liquid-vaper drag and heat transfer; (5) Ignore the turbulence mixing and void drift effect in the transverse momentum equation; (6) The pressure work in energy equation only take into account the change of pressure with respect to time; (7) The pressure is uniform across each subchannel cross section. (8) The interface is at saturation conditions at the local pressure. For the specific structure of the LWR core, the basic governing equations include the mass conservation equation, the transverse momentum equation, the axial momentum equation, and the energy conservation equation for the vapor phase (v) and the liquid phase (l), respectively. The schematic diagram of the conventional subchannel control volume and the transverse momentum control volume is shown in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. Schematic of the subchannel axial and transverse momentum control volume.
2.1.1. Mass conservation equation
For each subchannel control volume, the mass conservation equation for the i-phase is given as:
@(1)
where ρ, α, U and V represent the density, volume fraction, axial velocity and transverse velocity for one phase. z is the axial position, A is the cross-sectional area of the subchannel and S is the gap width. For the mass equation, the subscript i represents the different phases, i.e. v or l. The third term on the left-hand-side (LHS) represents the transverse mass convection. The terms on the right-hand-side (RHS) indicate the mass exchanges due to phase transition and turbulent mixing and void drift, respectively.
2.1.2. Axial momentum equation
The axial momentum equation for the i-phase is:
@(2)
where i' represents the other phase, i.e. l if i = v. Subscript I and w represent interfacial and wall. The third term on the LHS represents the transverse momentum convection. The terms on the RHS are the force by pressure gradient, wall friction force, interfacial friction force, momentum exchanges due to phase transition and turbulent mixing and void drift, and the body force.
2.1.3. Transverse momentum equation
The transverse momentum equation for the i-phase is:
@(3)
where l is the centroid length between two adjacent subchannels. The terms on the RHS are the force by pressure imbalance between adjacent channels, gap friction force, interfacial friction force, and momentum exchange due to phase transition. It should be noted that convection term in the transverse direction has been simplified because of the dominant axial flow in the typical rod bundle of the LWR.
2.1.4. Energy conservation equation
For the vapor phase, the energy conservation equation is:
@(4)
and for the liquid phase, the energy conservation equation is:
@(5)
where h represents the specific enthalpy, subscript f and g represent saturated fluid and saturated vapor, respectively. The basic form of the energy conservation equation is the same as that employed for the mass conservation equation. In addition, additional definitions have been specified to describe the effects of wall heat transfer, interfacial heat transfer and pressure work, corresponding to the first three terms on RHS.
2.2. Constitutive relations
In order to close the eight equations described above, a series of auxiliary models are necessary, including pressure drop model, wall heat transfer model, mixing model, interfacial resistance and heat transfer model and water property model.
2.2.1. Pressure drop models
Considering the influence of the spacer grid, the total friction pressure drop can be divided into two parts, i.e. frictional drop and form pressure drop. For the single-phase flow, the frictional drop is:
@(6)
where the friction factors for single-phase flow fiw (including the liquid and vapor friction factor) are selected based on the flow regime, including laminar, transition and turbulent flow, which has been used in previous versions of the SACOS. But in general, the friction factor is a function of the Reynolds number:
@(7)
The constants in the above equation are given in Table 1. And specifically, the vapor friction factor, fvw, is set to zero for most flow regimes except single-phase vapor (that is, the wall is basically attached to the liquid). For the two-phase flow, the two-phase multiplier method is widely applied in various thermal-hydraulic analysis codes, which can be expressed as:
@(8)
where@ is the pressure gradient for the liquid phase considered to flow alone in the channel,@ is the two-phase multiplier, which is given by @.
Table 1. The constants in the friction factor correlation.
The form pressure drop can be evaluated by:
@(9)
where Ki is the form loss factor, which is a user-input constant for particular grid type. Besides, the pressure loss in lateral flow is also treated as a form of drag loss rather than the wall friction loss. The lateral resistance loss coefficients default to a constant uniform value of KGi = 0.5 in al1 gaps.
2.2.2. Wall heat transfer models
Wall heat transfer models are required for closure of both the mass and energy equations, the wall heat transfer rate from wall to the liquid is calculated by:
@(10)
where the heat transfer coefficient ht is closely related to the heat transfer regime, and there are a large number of correlations to choose from in the published literature. Due to different application scopes, it is very important to apply appropriate correlations for each heat transfer regime. In SACOS, the user can select from among the several correlations available in each heat transfer regime the ones best suited to the specific problem. In practical application, the ranges of the data each of the correlations were derived from need to be considered. Table 2 presents a rough classification of heat transfer correlations based on flow rate.
Table 2. Heat transfer correlations in SACOS.
2.2.3. Mixing models
Aside from the cross flow caused by pressure gradient between adjacent subchannels, these are two other important forms of flow mixing, namely turbulent mixing and void drift, which are important in determining the mass flux and enthalpy distributions in rod bundles. In essence, turbulent mixing is non-directional mixing caused by the diffusion of natural vortex group during fluid pulsation between subchannels, which belongs to natural mixing. The flow tends to lose its quantity by spreading it to the neighboring cells that have smaller values and to be evenly distributed throughout the rod bundle. For the void drift, however, it has been observed that vapor tend to drift towards the highest velocity regions. Void drift is believed to be the result of turbulent pressure fluctuations in the liquid driving the relatively massless vapor.
In general, there are two methods that can be used to characterize the above flow mixing characteristics in the subchannel code, i.e. equal-mass exchange and equal-volume exchange. For the former, there is no net mass transfer between adjacent subchannels, but momentum and energy transfer. For the latter, non-equal mass exchange of fluid may occur. In SACOS, the equal-volume exchange turbulent mixing with the void drift (EVVD) model proposed by Lahey (1979) is implemented. For example, the vapor mass exchange can be given as:
@(11)
where superscript TM and VD represent turbulent mixing and void drift. ε, S and zT are the eddy diffusivity, gap width and the turbulent mixing length, respectively. Km is the scaling factor supplied by input and Θ is two-phase multiplier proposed by the model of Beus (1972).
The ratio of eddy diffusivity and turbulent mixing length can be defined as a function of mass flux, which has been applied in CTF, that is:
@(12)
where β is the turbulent mixing coefficient, which is also supplied by user input.
For energy and momentum exchange, their basic form is similar to Eq. (11). And the flow mixing for liquid and vapor phases are considered separately. However, it should be noted that the direction of the void drift term for vapor phase and liquid phase is opposite.
2.2.4. Interfacial resistance and heat transfer models
The interfacial resistance coefficient and heat transfer coefficient are closely related to the flow regimes in the channel. In SACOS, the interfacial models mainly refer to those of RELAP5 (Dimenna et al., 1988) and COBRA-TF. Four main flow regimes are considered: bubble flow, slug flow, churn flow, and annular mist flow. The transition criteria are based on void fractions depending on geometry, flow conditions, and fluid properties according to models by Mishima and Ishii (1984).
2.2.5. Property models
A consistent set of correlations in IAPWS-IF97 has been integrated into the SACOS to calculate the properties of water and steam, which have been widely used in the engineering and previous thermal-hydraulic analysis codes.
<Section>3. Numerical method of the two-fluid equations</Section>
As mentioned earlier, SACOS consists of eight basic equations with a total of nine primary variables, namely volume fraction (αv, αl), velocity (Uv, Ul, Vv, Vl), enthalpy (hv, hl) and pressure (p). The two-fluid solution in SACOS uses a semi-implicit scheme to solve the phasic equations for mass continuity, momentum, and energy, which are spatially discretized by the Finite Volume Method (FVM) employing a staggered grid structure. Schematic of the axial and transverse computational mesh is shown in Fig. 2 and the corresponding discrete forms of the governing equations are shown in Table 3.where the superscript n+1 represents new time. The subscripts J and j denote the axial position of the scalar cell and axial momentum cell, respectively. The surface values of a control volume marked by superscript * are determined by the donor cell along the flow direction.
Fig. 2. Schematic of the axial and transverse computational mesh.
Table 3. The discrete form of the governing equations.
The angle brackets in Table 3 denote the convective fluxes. For the axial momentum equation, the upwind scheme is:
@(13)
Correspondingly, 2nd-order scheme with a flux limiter function @ is given by:
@(14)
where
@(15)
For mass and energy equations, the discrete scheme of convection terms is the same as above. However, because the fixed coordinate is not defined for the lateral direction in the subchannel approach, lateral flow has no direction once it leaves a gap, the convection term in transverse momentum equation is still retained as a first-order scheme.
Note that flux limiter  is a function of r, which can reduce spurious oscillations of higher-order schemes. In this study, six nonlinear flux limiters were selected as summarized in Table 4.
Table 4. Nonlinear flux limiters (Wang et al., 2013).
Based on SIMPLE algorithm, the solving procedure of SACOS is described as follow:
(1)
Assuming an initial pressure field p', which can be determined by the outlet pressure boundary and the basic equations of fluid statics. In this step, the heat transfer equation and rod heat conduction equation are solved.
(2)
Solve the transverse and axial momentum equations with current pressure field to obtain the tentative fluid velocity U′ and V'. In this step, the equation between mass flow rate and pressure gradient can be obtained with the Gaussian elimination method in each cell:
@(16)
(3)
Obtain the pressure correction equation through solving the mass continuity equation and energy equation. In this step, the mass equations and the energy equations are processed into the form of the residual error:
@(17)
@(18)
where Df is the Jacobian matrix. For each scalar cell, Eq. (17) can be reduced by Gaussian elimination method, and the bottom equation of the matrix contains only the pressure term, which is:
@(19)
Eq. (19) indicates that the pressure of each scalar cell is affected by the pressures of all adjacent scalar cells around it. And a global pressure correction matrix for all computational meshes is finally determined, which can be solved by direct elimination or Gauss–Seidel method.
(4)
Calculate the corrected pressure field p' = p'+δp, and solve other parameters of the current iteration by back-substitution, such as volume fraction and enthalpy.
(5)
Obtain the new velocity field with the modified pressure field.
(6)
Judge whether the subchannel thermal-hydraulic parameters converge or not. If so, the current time calculation ends; otherwise, the iteration will be carried out again with a smaller time step.
<Section>4. Preliminary assessment and validation of the code</Section>
In order to ensure the accuracy and reliability of the code, preliminary code assessment and validation work was performed. The emphasis of code assessment is to analyze the performance of high-resolution scheme with different nonlinear flux limiters, including numerical convergence and computational cost, while code validation is centered on evaluating the overall performance of two-fluid model. A validation test matrix has been set up with several flow and heat transfer experiments for rod bundles under steady state, as shown in Table 5.
Table 5. Experimental parameters of rod bundle test for SACOS validation.
4.1. Code assessment
The first assessment is based on a linear advection flow problem in simple pipe, which is to evaluate these above nonlinear flux limiters. A ramp-up inlet enthalpy is applied, i.e. inlet liquid enthalpy linearly increases to 1.5 times the original value within 1s. The pipe is 3 m in lengh and has 20 uniform nodes of 0.15 m spacing. Enthalpy varies over time near the exit calculated with different flux limiters is described in Fig. 3. As expected, it can be found that all of the flux limiters can effectively reduce numerical diffusion and improve numerical accuracy compared with upwind scheme.
Fig. 3. Linear advection flow problem in simple pipe.
The second assessment is performed using the model of ISPRA-4x4 test shown in Table 5. One of two-phase cases is calculated to show the convergence of different flux limiters. 45 nodes are evenly divided along the axial height and the mesh number of the rod-bundle model is 1125. The wall time results are compared between upwind scheme and those high-resolution schemes for different time-step sizes, which ranges from 0.001s to 0.01s. Fig. 4 shows that in term of wall time, VA2 and ENO perform worst while the other flux limiters can significantly reduce the computation time compared with upwind scheme especially at smaller time-step size. With the increase of time step, the difference between different schemes decreases. Table 6 further describes the calculation results of the code under different numerical schemes, with the time step set at 0.01s. It can be seen that the outlet flow rate distribution and channel pressure drop results are identical under these schemes. Compared with the upwind scheme, the application of some flux limiters (e.g., VA, MUSCL and OSPRE) can make the calculation converge in fewer iterations. It should be noted that the conclusion is consistent for other two-phase cases, which implies that some flux limiters can enhance the overall numerical stability and improve convergence of subchannel code. For some transient conditions that change dramatically, the high-order scheme with flux limiter is expected to show more efficient computational performance when the time step is very small.
Fig. 4. Convergence performance for 4 × 4 rod-bundle model.
Fig. 5. Nodalization sensitivity study for upwind scheme.
Table 6. Calculation results in different schemes.
Furthermore, based on ISPRA-4x4 bundle model, another nodalization sensitivity evaluation is carried with a sawtooth-pulse inlet enthalpy condition. Three axial nodalizations (20, 50 and 100 nodes) are chose and calculated with the upwind scheme and the flux limiter OSPRE. Enthalpy change results of the corner subchannel near the exit are shown in Fig. 5, Fig. 6, Fig. 7. For the upwind scheme, the numerical diffusion appears and the results are very much dependent on nodalization. On the contrary, for the flux limiter OSPRE, the calculation results are less affected by the number of nodes and the coarser mesh can obtain better accuracy. It can be concluded that high-resolution scheme with flux limiter (OSPRE for example) can achieve good numerical accuracy on a coarse nodalization of core subchannel analysis, which is obviously beneficial for improving computational efficiency. As an advantageous candidate flux limiter, the OSPRE is therefore applied to the code for subsequent validation calculations.
Fig. 6. Nodalization sensitivity study for 2nd-order flux limiter OSPRE.
Fig. 7. Comparison between upwind and high-resolution scheme.
4.2. Code validation
4.2.1. Weiss 14 × 14 blockage test
The Weiss 14 × 14 blockage test is mainly used to investigate the flow redistribution characteristics between open assemblies, which has been used for validation of subchannel codes such as COBRA-IV and VIPRE-01. As shown in Fig. 8, inlets of assemblies 1 and 2 are given different cooling water flow rates, at the same time, a number of pitot tubes are installed in Rows 1, 2, and 3 at different axial levels to measure the radial velocity distributions.
Fig. 8. Schematic of Weiss 14 × 14 blockage test configuration (Top and side views).
In this paper, the test is modeled by SACOS, 38 nodes are evenly divided along the axial height, and the mesh number of the whole model is 6,530, i.e. 29 × 15 x 38 (Row x Column x Height). Two kinds of working conditions are calculated: (1) the assembly 2 is partially blocked corresponding to the inlet velocities of the two assemblies are 3.52 m/s and 1.76 m/s, (2) and the assembly 2 is completely blocked corresponding to velocities of 4.16 m/s and 0 m/s. The inlet velocity of the control volume in the middle of the two assemblies is set to the average value of the two sides. The outlet pressure of the channel is set to atmospheric pressure and the turbulent mixing model is set to on or off, respectively.
Fig. 9 shows the comparison between the average local velocities calculated along rows 1, 2, and 3 at the axial levels 2–7 and the experimental values. It can be seen from the figure that within a certain error range, the calculated values of the code show the same trend as the experimental values, which indicates that the flow mixing occurs between two assemblies is effectively simulated. In comparison, the turbulent mixing (TM) model has little influence on the velocity distribution in the center subchannel, but mainly affects the flow rate in the side and corner subchannel. The above phenomenon indicates that the pressure drop model is the main driving force to determine the flow distribution for this case. In addition, it should be pointed out that for the 2nd level, the radial velocity distribution calculated by the code is slightly different from the experimental value, which may be caused by the channel entrance effect during the experiment, and it cannot be reflected in the subchannel code. Overall, however, the calculated values agree well with the experimental values, indicating the capability of SACOS to simulate single phase cross-flow can be validated. In particular, for the condition of full block of assembly 2, the subchannel code simulates the reverse flow near the entrance of assembly 2, which is visually presented in Fig. 10. It can be concluded that the subchannel code SACOS based on SIMPLE numerical algorithm is also applicable to the calculation of the reverse flow condition.
Fig. 9. Averaged local velocity at different axial levels under different inlet boundary conditions.
Fig. 10. The velocity vector diagram of the longitudinal section of the channel.
4.2.2. CNEN 4 × 4 mixing test
The CNEN 4 × 4 mixing test was performed by V. Marinelli et al. at Studsvik to study the flow mixing between subchannels under cold and single-phase conditions. The experimental section is a square-geometry, 16 rod bundle channel, as shown in Fig. 11. The experiment was conducted at 0.1 MPa, 20 °C, and with five different inlet mass flux conditions: 647, 1334, 2614, 3829, and 5166 kg/m2s. In the calculation of the SACOS, the axial height of the channel is divided into 20 nodes, and the outlet flow rate of the typical subchannel, namely corner subchannel, side subchannel and center subchannel, is extracted and compared with the experimental value. To reflect the deviation between them, three statistical parameters, R (average value), RMS (root mean square error), and STD (standard deviation), are defined as:
@(14)
@(15)
@(16)
Fig. 11. Schematic of CNEN 4 × 4 mixing test configuration.
Fig. 12 depicts the comparison between the code calculated values and the experimental values of the typical subchannels at the outlet under different inlet mass fluxes. Two types of calculation settings were compared, namely (1) the flow turbulent mixing effect is not considered, and the crossflow is caused entirely by the lateral pressure difference; (2) the turbulent mixing model is applied, and the turbulent mixing coefficient β was set to 0.02. It can be found that when turbulent mixing is not considered, the outlet mass flow rates are obviously underestimated at the corner and side subchannels and overestimated at the center subchannels, as shown in Fig. 7(a). Especially for corner subchannels, the average deviation reaches 13.3%. Once the turbulent mixing model is applied, the average deviation between the calculated results and the experimental values is significantly reduced, and the corresponding deviation values of the corner, side, and center subchannels are reduced from 13.3%, 5.7%, 2.9%–1.1%, 3.7%, 1.7%, respectively. Therefore, it can be considered that SACOS can better simulate the lateral mixing of single-phase water in rod bundle with the turbulent mixing model embedded.
Fig. 12. The calculated/measured value of subchannel mass flow rate at outlet.
4.2.3. Studsvik 3 × 3 mixing test
The Studsvik 3 × 3 test was performed by Gustafsson et al. to investigate the two-phase flow mixing effect due to a non-uniform power distribution. Fig. 13 shows the test section of 3 × 3 rod bundle. The outlet of the test section was equipped with flow split devices arranged so that four sampled channels are formed. In the test, the average bundle outlet mass fluxes as well as equilibrium qualities of the four combined channels were specified as the measured values. In order to form a large heat flow gradient in the rod bundle, a very high radial power gradient was applied. That is, the power generated was set to 0 in the rods of the first row, 30% of the total power in the second row and 70% in the third one. Therefore, the flow and boiling regimes may be very distinct across the bundle even for adjacent subchannels due to the occurrence of various boiling modes at the same axial position.
Fig. 13. Schematic of Studsvik-3x3 mixing test configuration.
The studsvik-3x3 test includes seven types of working conditions with different boundary parameters. However, as Faya et al. (1979) mentioned, the cases 1–4 were given the highest priority in the report specifying the benchmark exercise, and the remaining three cases present the same trends as observed in the first four cases. Therefore, in this paper, the calculated results of SACOS are only compared with the experimental values of the first four cases reported by Faya et al. Fig. 14 and Fig. 15 show the predicted and measured outlet mass fluxes as well as equilibrium qualities of the combined channels for different cases. For all cases, the same turbulent mixing and void drift model is applied with same user input parameters. As can be seen from the figures, for the outlet mass fluxes, the deviation between calculated values and experimental values of is within 10%, while for equilibrium quality, the absolute error between calculated values and experimental values is less than 0.05. The equilibrium qualities at the outlet for different combined channels are depicted in Fig. 16. The calculated and experimental values show the same variation trend with the position, while the outlet equilibrium qualities are underestimated by SACOS at hot channels (split channels 1 and 2) and overestimated at cold channels (split channels 3 and 4). The above phenomenon is due to the influence of the mixing model on the void distribution in the subchannels, especially for the condition of high quality. In fact, if the mixing coefficients were further adjusted, it can be expected that the predicted values of SACOS would be closer to the experimental ones.
Fig. 14. Mass fluxes at the outlet of the combined channels for different cases.
Fig. 15. Equilibrium qualities at the outlet of the combined channels for different cases.
Fig. 16. Equilibrium qualities at the outlet for different combined channels. (e.g. 1 and 1′ represent measured value and calculated value, respectively.)
4.2.4. ISPRA 4 × 4 mixing test
ISPRA 4 × 4 mixing test was carried out at the CCR Ispra for validating the enthalpy and mass flow exchange between parallel channels with water two-phase flow. The test data have been fully published and widely used in the validation of LWR subchannel codes over the past few decades. All of tests can be divided into two types of conditions based on two different 4 × 4 rod bundle configurations: BWRs (70 bars; PELSO-S) and PWRs (160 bars; EUROP). Each test-section was uniformly heated in axial and radial directions, and the enthalpy and flow mass rate of the typical subchannel at channel outlet were measured. In this paper, the test data under PWR conditions (i.e. EUROP) are selected for validation, the geometric layout of the test section is shown in Fig. 17.
Fig. 17. Schematic of EUROP 4 × 4 mixing test configuration.
In the modeling of SACOS, 50 nodes are evenly divided along the test-section axial height, and the mesh number of the whole model is 1250 (25 × 50). The calculated parameters of five typical subchannels in the test-section, i.e. CH25, CH10, CH7, CH23, and CH13 are extracted and compared with the experimental values. Fig. 18 shows the ratio of the calculated mass flow rate to the measured value for each typical subchannel at outlet. The x coordinate is the outlet quality, ranging from −0.2 to 0.25, which indicates that the experimental conditions include single-phase water and two-phase flow states. As one can see, SCAOS underestimates the values of the corner subchannel and overestimates those of the center subchannel. Overall, however, it can be found that the calculated values of mass flow at the exit of various typical subchannels are in good agreement with experimental data, whose absolute deviation is within 10%. Since each subchannel in the experimental section has the same entrance enthalpy, the outlet enthalpy distribution can be described with the enthalpy rise of different subchannels. Fig. 19 shows the comparison between the calculated enthalpy rise of each subchannel and the experimental measured value. As is shown, the relative deviations are also within ±10%. At the same time, it can be found that the calculation deviation has little dependence on the outlet quality. In conclusion, it can be considered that SACOS can better simulate the two-phase enthalpy and mass flow exchange in the rod bundle under the typical operation conditions of PWR.
Fig. 18. The calculated/measured value of subchannel mass flow rate at outlet.
Fig. 19. The calculated/measured value of enthalpy rise.
<Section>5. Application of the code</Section>
This section presents the results obtained with SACOS for two selected test cases: hexagonal and rectangular assembly. A separate script has been created to generate input card and visualize the results. Fig. 20 shows a typical VVER subchannel model with coolant-centered approach, which is comprised of 666 channels, 996 gaps, 312 regular fuel pins and 19 guide tubes. The fuel assembly has 13 spacer grids along the active length, the main geometric parameters and boundary conditions are shown in Table 7. Fig. 21 shows the coolant density, temperature and mass flux distribution with code.
Fig. 20. Typical VVER subchannel model and mesh.
Table 7. Geometric and boundary parameters of VVER model.
Fig. 21. Thermal parameters distribution of VVER model.
Fig. 22 shows the subchannel mesh and number of a typical PWR 17 × 17 assembly. The geometry contains 264 regular fuel pins and 25 guide tubes. The main geometric and boundary parameters are shown in Table 8 and the power distribution is derived from MCNP. Corresponding to Figs. 21 and 23 describes the coolant density, temperature and mass flux distribution within assembly.
Fig. 22. Typical PWR subchannel model and mesh.
Table 8. Geometric and boundary parameters of PWR model.
Fig. 23. Thermal parameters distribution of PWR model.
To conclude, these results imply that the SACOS can be used to model and perform assembly-level core safety analysis with visualization capabilities. Based on the two-fluid module validated in the SACOS code, more detailed thermal-hydraulic safety analysis for the real assembly of the LWR core can be carried out.
<Section>6. Conclusion and future work</Section>
SACOS series of subchannel analysis codes have been developed in XJTU-NuTheL for many years and are being used for the thermal-hydraulic safety analysis of various reactor cores. In order to achieve a more refined two-phase flow modeling for LWR core, a new two-fluid based analysis module of SACOS has been developed. In this paper, the basic physical and mathematical equations of the two-fluid model as well as the numerical method are introduced.
To reduce numerical diffusion and improve numerical accuracy, the high-resolution schemes with six different nonlinear flux limiters are implemented and compared. Initial assessments show that the high-resolution method (1) can improve the overall numerical stability and convergence of subchannel code with fewer computational costs (except for VA2 and ENO); (2) can obtain better numerical accuracy with coarse nodalization for subchannel analysis (OSPRE for example), which is obviously beneficial for improving computational efficiency. To preliminary evaluate overall performance of two-fluid model, the further validation calculation has been performed by two-fluid based SACOS with several benchmark tests, including Weiss 14 × 14 blockage test, CNEN 4 × 4 mixing test, Studsvik 3 × 3 mixing test, and ISPRA 4 × 4 mixing test. The validation conditions include single-phase and two-phase, uniform and non-uniform power distribution, low and high pressure. Comparison results shows that the implemented two-fluid model work properly and can predict the flow and enthalpy distribution in the rod bundle geometry at the subchannel scale.
The application of SACOS implies that the code can be used to model and perform assembly-level core safety analysis with visualization capabilities for hexagonal and rectangular geometry.
Of course, it must be emphasized that the current assessment and validation work is far from enough. For the high-resolution scheme with nonlinear flux limiters, it has not been validated based on the available transient bundle experiments, and for the important constitutive correlations of two-fluid model, they have not been analyzed and discussed in detail. This paper presents only a preliminary introduction and evaluation, in the near future, more work will be conducted and required theoretical models will be improved.
<Section>Author contribution</Section>
Minyang Gui: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Investigation, Writing – original draft. Wenxi Tian: Supervision, Conceptualization, Writing – review & editing. Di Wu: Validation, Formal analysis, Software. Ronghua Chen: Investigation, Resources, Writing – review & editing. Mingjun Wang: Validation, Visualization. G.H. Su: Project administration
<Section>Declaration of competing interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgement</Section>
The authors appreciate the support from National Science and Technology Major Project of the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (Grant No. 2019ZX06002033).
<Section>References</Section>
Bertolotto et al., 2011
D. Bertolotto, A. Manera, R. Macián-Juan, R. Chawla
Improvement of the one-dimensional dissolved-solute convection equation using the QUICKEST–ULTIMATE algorithm
Nucl. Eng. Des., 241 (1) (2011), pp. 245-256
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Beus, 1972
S.G. Beus
Two Phase Turbulent Mixing Model for Flow in Rod Bundle
(1972)
WAPD-T-2438
Google Scholar
Cai et al., 2016
R. Cai, N. Yue, R. Chen, W.X. Tian, G.H. Su, S.Z. Qiu
Development of a thermal-hydraulic subchannel analysis code for motion conditions
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 93 (2016), pp. 165-176
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chaudri et al., 2012
K.S. Chaudri, Y. Su, R. Chen, W. Tian, G. Su, S. Qiu
Development of sub-channel code SACoS and its application in coupled neutronics/thermal hydraulics system for SCWR
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 45 (2012), pp. 37-45
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Chaudri et al., 2013
K.S. Chaudri, W. Tian, G. Su, S. Qiu
Coupled neutronics/thermal hydraulics evaluation for thorium based fuels in thermal spectrum SCWR
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 68 (2013), pp. 55-64
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Dimenna et al., 1988
R.A. Dimenna, J.R. Larson, R.W. Johnson, T.K. Larson, C.S. Miller, J.E. Streit, R.G. Hanson, D.M. Kiser
RELAP5/MOD2 Models and Correlations
Web, United States: N (1988), 10.2172/7099198
Google Scholar
Faya et al., 1979
A.J.G. Faya, L. Wolf, N.E. Todreas
Development of a Method for BWR Subchannel Analysis
MIT Energy Laboratory (1979)
Google Scholar
Fillion et al., 2011
P. Fillion, A. Chanoine, S. Dellacherie, A. Kumbaro
FLICA-OVAP: a new platform for core thermal–hydraulic studies
Nucl. Eng. Des., 241 (11) (2011), pp. 4348-4358
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gui et al., 2019
M. Gui, W. Tian, D. Wu, R. Chen, G.H. Su, S. Qiu
Review of the AFD-type CHF mechanistic model and its application to rod bundle
Prog. Nucl. Energy (2019), Article 103168
Google Scholar
Gustafsson, 1971
B. Gustafsson
TWO-PHASE flow IN A NINE-ROD BUNDLE WITH TILTED POWER DISTRIBUTION AND FLOWSPLIT IN THE OUTLET (No. STU--70-407/U-338)
Aktiebolaget Atomenergi (1971)
Studsvik (Sweden)
Google Scholar
Herkenrath et al., 1981
H. Herkenrath, W. Hufschmidt, U. Jung, F. Weckermann
Experimental Investigation of the Enthalpy and Mass Flow Distribution in 16-rod Clusters with BWR-PWR Geometries and Conditions
Final Report Joint Research Centre of the European Communities (1981)
Ispra (Italy)
Google Scholar
Imke and Sanchez, 2012
U. Imke, V.H. Sanchez
Validation of the subchannel code SUBCHANFLOW using the NUPEC PWR tests (PSBT)
Science and Technology of Nuclear Installations (2012)
2012
Google Scholar
Kelly et al., 1992
J.M. Kelly, C.W. Stewart, J.M. Cuta
VIPRE-02-a two-fluid thermal-hydraulics code for reactor core and vessel analysis: mathematical modeling and solution methods
Nucl. Technol., 100 (2) (1992), pp. 246-259
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lahey, 1979
R.T. Lahey
The Thermal-Hydraulics of a Boiling Water Reactor
ANS (1979), pp. 172-175
Google Scholar
Marinelli et al., 1972
V. Marinelli, L. Pastori, B. Kjellen
EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION ON MASS VELOCITY DISTRIBUTION AND VELOCITY PROFILES IN AN LWR ROD BUNDLE
CNEN, Rome (1972)
Google Scholar
Mishima and Ishii, 1984
K. Mishima, M. Ishii
Flow regime transition criteria for upward two-phase flow in vertical tubes
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 27 (5) (1984), pp. 723-737
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Rao et al., 2014
Y.F. Rao, Z. Cheng, G.M. Waddington, A. Nava-Dominguez
ASSERT-PV 3.2: advanced subchannel thermalhydraulics code for CANDU fuel bundles
Nucl. Eng. Des., 275 (2014), pp. 69-79
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Rowe, 1967
D.S. Rowe
Cross-Flow Mixing between Parallel Flow Channels during Boiling Part-I COBRA-Computer Program for Coolant Boiling in Rod Arrays
(1967)
BNWL-371-Pt-I
Google Scholar
Salko and Avramova, 2014
R.K. Salko, M. Avramova
CTF Theory Manual
The Pennsylvania State University (2014), p. 521
Google Scholar
Stewart et al., 1989
C.W. Stewart, J.M. Cuta, S.D. Montgomery, J.M. Kelly, K.L. Basehore, T.L. George, D.S. Rowe
VIPRE-01: a Thermal-Hydraulic Code for Reactor Cores
(1989)
Google Scholar
Thurgood, 1983
M.J. Thurgood
COBRA/TRAC-A Thermal-Hydraulic Code for Transient Analysis of Nuclear Reactor Vessels and Primary Coolant Systems. Pacific Northwest Lab
(1983)
Rept, NUREG-CR-3046
Google Scholar
Tiselj and Petelin, 1997
I. Tiselj, S. Petelin
Modelling of two-phase flow with second-order accurate scheme
J. Comput. Phys., 136 (2) (1997), pp. 503-521
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Toumi et al., 2000
I. Toumi, A. Bergeron, D. Gallo, E. Royer, D. Caruge
FLICA-4: a three-dimensional two-phase flow computer code with advanced numerical methods for nuclear applications
Nucl. Eng. Des., 200 (1–2) (2000), pp. 139-155
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2013
D. Wang, J.H. Mahaffy, J. Staudenmeier, C.G. Thurston
Implementation and assessment of high-resolution numerical methods in TRACE
Nucl. Eng. Des., 263 (2013), pp. 327-341
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2013
J. Wang, W.X. Tian, Y.H. Tian, G.H. Su, S.Z. Qiu
A sub-channel analysis code for advanced lead bismuth fast reactor
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 63 (2013), pp. 34-48
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wang et al., 2018
C. Wang, S. Wei, W. Tian, S. Qiu, G.H. Su
Sub‐channel analysis for Pb‐Bi‐cooled direct contact boiling water fast reactor
Int. J. Energy Res., 42 (8) (2018), pp. 2643-2654
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Weiss et al., 1971
E. Weiss, R.A. Markley, A. Battacharyya
Open duct cooling-concept for the radial blanket region of a fast breeder reactor
Nucl. Eng. Des., 16 (4) (1971), pp. 375-386
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
William, 1980
T.S. William
An overview on rod-bundle thermal-hydraulic analysis
Nucl. Eng. Des., 62 (1–3) (1980), pp. 1-24
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Wu et al., 2013
Y.W. Wu, X. Li, X. Yu, S.Z. Qiu, G.H. Su, W.X. Tian
Subchannel thermal-hydraulic analysis of the fuel assembly for liquid sodium cooled fast reactor
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 68 (2013), pp. 65-78
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yoo et al., 1999
Y.J. Yoo, Dae Hyun Hwang, Dong Seong Sohn
Development of a subchannel analysis code MATRA applicable to PWRs and ALWRs
J. Korean Nucl. Soc., 31 (3) (1999), pp. 314-327
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Yue et al., 2018
N. Yue, D. Zhang, J. Chen, P. Song, X.A. Wang, S. Wang, et al.
The development and validation of the inter-wrapper flow model in sodium-cooled fast reactors
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 108 (2018), pp. 54-65
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar