<title>MARS best-estimate evaluation using ATLAS test data on 8.5″ cold leg break LOCA</title>
<author>1,Yeon-SikKim,2,Jong-HwanKim</author>
<Affiliation>1,Innovative System Safety Research Division, Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, 111 Daedeok-daero 989 Beon-gil, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34057, Republic of Korea</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107729</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454920304278</URL>
MARS best-estimate evaluation using ATLAS test data on 8.5″ cold leg break LOCA
Yeon-SikKim,Jong-HwanKim
Innovative System Safety Research Division, Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, 111 Daedeok-daero 989 Beon-gil, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34057, Republic of Korea
<Section>Highlights</Section>
A MARS best-estimate evaluation was performed for 8.5″ cold leg break LOCA test of the ATLAS.
Best-fitted CCFL options for inlet of the SG U-tube and the inlet plenum bottom, and the FAP were obtained.
Compared to the LSTF, quite different CCFL options were needed for the ATLAS.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
A MARS best-estimate evaluation was performed for 8.5″ cold leg break loss-of-coolant accident (LOCA) in the advanced thermal–hydraulic test loop for accident simulation (ATLAS) facility. The ATLAS system was modeled in one-dimensional manner and the break nozzle was modeled by a break valve using the Henry-Fauske critical flow. First, a best-fitted critical flow discharge coefficient was obtained by comparing the test data and the calculations especially on the pressurizer (PZR) pressure and integrated break flow. Then, for a trial calculation related to the counter-current flow limit (CCFL) phenomena for the three locations, all the same options adopted in the LSTF (large scale test facility) evaluation were used. No good agreements were obtained between the test data and the calculations on the core collapsed water level and core cladding temperature. Another approach for the CCFL options was selected: Wallis model for inlets of the SG U-tube and the SG inlet plenum bottom; Bankoff model for the fuel alignment plate (FAP). From trial calculations, best-fitted CCFL options were obtained by comparing the test data and the calculations on the core collapsed water level and core cladding temperature.
Keywords：SBLOCA；CCFL；FAP；MARS；ATLAS
<Section>Nomenclature</Section>
APR1400
Advanced power reactor 1400 MWe
ATLAS
Advanced thermal–hydraulic test loop for accident simulation
CEA
Control element assembly
CCFL
Counter-current flow limit
CL
Cold leg
DVI
Direct vessel injection
ECCW
Emergency core cooling water
HL
Hot leg
FAP
Fuel alignment plate
KAERI
Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute
KINS
Korea Institute of Nuclear Safety
LOCA
Loss-of-coolant accident
LSC
Loop seal clearing
LSTF
Large scale test facility
MARS(-KS)
Multi-dimensional analysis of reactor safety(, KINS version)
PZR
Pressurizer
RELAP5
Reactor excursion and leak Analysis program
RPV
Reactor pressure vessel
SBLOCA
Small-break loss-of-coolant accident
SG
Steam generator
TRACE
TRAC/RELAP advanced computational engine
Symbols
c
Intercept constant
Cd
Discharge coefficient of critical flow
D
Flow hole’s diameter (m)
g
Gravitational constant (9.81 m/s2)
Hk*
Dimensionless group for k-phase, defined as
jk
Superficial velocity for k-phase (m/s)
jk*
Non-dimensional volumetric flux, defined as
kc
Critical wave number (m−1), defined as 2π/tP
Lc
Laplace capillary constant (m), defined as
m
Slope constant
n
Number of holes
t
Thickness (mm) in Fig. 2
tP
Thickness of flow hole plate (m)
w
Interpolation length (m), defined in Eq. (3)
β
Trial function, defined in Eq. (4)
γ
Perforation ratio, defined as the fraction of the plate area occupied by flow holes
ϕ
Diameter (mm) in Fig. 2
ρ
Density (kg/m3)
σ
Surface tension (N/m)
Subscripts
f
Liquid phase
g
Vapor or gas phase
k
Type of phase
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Many of best-estimate analyses have been conducted for the ATLAS cold leg break LOCA test by using the MARS, RELAP5, and TRACE, etc. To perform an uncertainty evaluation, a good best-estimate input is prerequisite first, which can simulate the test data within a reasonable error bound. Unfortunately, there still is no good best-estimate MARS input for cold leg break LOCA test data from the ATLAS. As discussed in an authors’ previous studies (Kim et al., 2013, Kim et al., 2015, and Kim and Kang, 2017), their trial calculations for a best estimation using Wallis and/or Kutateladze model for the effect of CCFL phenomena on the ATLAS cold leg break LOCA tests showed a unsatisfied trend especially in the core cladding temperature. (In many sensitivity and uncertainty analyses in cold leg break LOCA tests, the cladding surface temperature is adopted as the key parameter for the evaluation in terms of pre-selected uncertain parameters.)
In a cold leg break LOCA scenario, it is well-known that the effect of a CCFL phenomenon on the core behavior until the loop seal clearing (LSC) is significant. As discussed in authors’ previous study (Kim and Kang, 2017), the reactor coolant system (RCS) undergoes a blowdown phase first and then a pressure plateau phase followed by an LSC. In general, the pressure plateau is kept for a while at a primary pressure slightly higher than the secondary pressure until the LSC. This pressure plateau phase is transferred to a boil-off phase of natural circulation and finally the core water level begins to recover after safety injection tanks (SIT’s) are actuated, whose phase is called a long-term cooling. Typically, CCFL phenomena can occur at the bottoms of the steam generator (SG) U-tube and inlet plenum and the FAP during the pressure plateau. During the pressure plateau phase, the steam flow from the core condenses within the SG U-tube and the condensate returns to the core through the SG inlet plenum, the hot leg, the upper plenum, and the FAP by gravity, as conceptually shown in Fig. 1. And the FAP is the final component where the reflux condensate returns to the top of the core under upward steam flows from it. In a MARS evaluation of the cold leg break LOCA, It is well known that the CCFL models are important for three regions in the RCS, e.g., the FAP, the bottoms of the SG U-tube and the inlet plenum, as depicted by dotted circles in the figure.
Fig. 1. Schematic drawing of the reflux condensate behavior during the pressure plateau phase.
In this study, a best-estimate MARS evaluation was obtained using 8.5″ cold leg break LOCA test data. (In an advanced nuclear power plant design, e.g., advanced power reactor 1400 MWe (APR1400), a direct vessel injection (DVI) concept was adopted for emergency core cooling water (ECCW) injection during small break LOCA’s. In the APR1400, 100% of DVI line break LOCA – whose break size is equivalent to 8.5″ – is a very important scenario for safety analyses. In this respect, the 8.5″ cold leg break LOCA provides a counterpart accident to the 100% of DVI line break LOCA, and thus its best-estimate evaluation can be an informative one for small break LOCA analyses in the APR1400.)
<Section>2. Discussions on CCFL option in MARS analysis</Section>
Considering the CCFL phenomena in the cold leg break LOCA test, there are three candidates in the RCS, e.g., the FAP, the inlet of the SG U-tube and the inlet plenum bottom, as discussed in the previous section. In many uncertainty evaluations on a large-scaled integral-effect test facility like the LSTF (Takeda and Ohtsu, 2017), Wallis correlation (Wallis, 1969) was applied to simulate the CCFL phenomena at the upper core plate in the upper plenum, the inlet of the SG U-tube, and the inlet plenum bottom. It is noteworthy that the upper core plate in the large scale test facility (LSTF) consists of two components, e.g., the upper core plate and the upper end box (Suzuki et al., 2003). Each one is like a horizontal perforated plate. Thus, the CCFL phenomenon in the upper core region occurs through the combination of two horizontal perforated plates in the LSTF and this seems the reason that they adopted the Wallis correlation for the CCFL phenomena at the upper core plate. Compared to the LSTF, there is only one horizontal perforated plate in the upper core region in the ATLAS, e.g., the FAP. In this respect, a different CCFL model for a single horizontal perforated plate, i.e., Bankoff model (Bankoff et al., 1981), can be adopted for the CCFL phenomena at the FAP in the ATLAS. Thus, in this study, Wallis model was adopted to the inlet of the SG U-tube and the SG inlet plenum bottom and Bankoff model, to the FAP, respectively. (It is noteworthy that the Wallis model is generally applied to inlets of vertical or inclined channel type flow paths (Issa and Macian, 2011) and the Bankoff model, to inlet of a horizontal perforated plate, respectively. Thus, the CCFL phenomena at the upper core plate in the LSTF, the inlet of the SG U-tube, and the SG inlet plenum bottom tend to be related to the Wallis model. The FAP in the ATLAS, on the other, is a single horizontal perforated plate and so the Bankoff model is closer for its CCFL phenomenon.)
Wallis correlation is:
@(1)
where, @ is a non-dimensional volumetric flux defined as@, m is a slope constant, and c is an intercept constant. In the dimensionless group, jk, is the superficial velocity of phase k (f for liquid and g for gas), g is the gravitational constant, respectively.
In the LSTF evaluation (Takeda and Ohtsu, 2017), the slope m and the intercept c of the CCFL correlation at the inlet of the SG U-tube were adopted as 1.0 and 0.75, respectively, which were obtained from their separate-effect test. For the SG inlet plenum bottom, 1.0 and 0.8 for the slope m and the intercept c were obtained from their trial evaluation for the best estimation due to no empirical constants were available. A similar approach was tried to the upper core plate, from which was obtained 1.0 and 0.85 for the slope m and the intercept c, respectively.
Bankoff correlation is a very useful model for the CCFL phenomena occurring at a horizontal perforated plate. The FAP is a horizontal perforated plate installed between the top of the core and the upper plenum, as shown in Fig. 1. A detailed configuration of the FAP is shown in Fig. 2 (Kang et al., 2015). As shown in the figure, there are five flow holes of 57.3 mm in diameter on a circular stainless steel plate, whose diameter and thickness are 317.5 mm and 70 mm, respectively. Now, it is noteworthy that a short description of the Bankoff model should be a useful information to understand its application to the FAP in this study.
Bankoff et al. (1981) suggested a simple relation for counter-current flow through a horizontal perforated plate as follows:
@(2)
where, H* is a dimensionless group defined as and c is an intercept constant. In the dimensionless group, jk, is the superficial velocity of phase k (f for liquid and g for gas), g is the gravitational constant, and w is an interpolation length. (Compared to the Wallis correlation, the slope m was set equal to 1.0 in the Bankoff correlation.) The interpolation length w is defined as follows:
@(3)
where, D is the flow hole diameter, Lc, the Laplace capillary constant defined as , and@ , a trial function. The trial function is defined as follows:
@(4)
where, γ is a perforation ratio, which equals to the fraction of the plate area occupied by flow holes,@ , a critical wave number defined as 2π/tP, tP, the thickness of a flow hole plate, and D, the flow hole diameter. The trial function  is a value between 0.0 and 1.0. In a physical sense, there are two extreme values in , e.g., 0.0 and 1.0. If  equals to 0.0, Eq. (2) becomes the Wallis model and the CCFL phenomenon tends to be governed by a flow hole diameter effect. And if  equals to 1.0, Eq. (2) becomes the Kutateladze model and the CCFL phenomenon tends to be governed by a surface tension effect. In this respect, the Bankoff model is an interpolative model between the Wallis and the Kutateladze models determined by the trial function . And Bankoff et al. (1981) also suggested that the intercept c in the equation is a value between 1.0 and 2.0 determined by the Bond number defined as  and here, n is the number of holes.
According to the Bankoff correlation, the trial function  is totally dependent on the geometrical information and thus,  for the FAP in Fig. 2 becomes about 0.58.
Fig. 2. Configuration of the fuel alignment plate.
<Section>3. Best-estimate MARS evaluation on 8.5″ cold leg break LOCA</Section>
Fig. 3 shows a nodalization of ATLAS for MARS analysis. The ATLAS system is modeled in one-dimensional manner including a reactor pressure vessel (RPV), primary loops, a pressurizer (PZR), two SGs, and a secondary-side system. The break nozzle connected to the bottom of a cold leg (1A) in loop-1 was modeled by a break valve (V596 in the figure) using the Henry-Fauske critical flow with a discharge coefficient (Cd) of 0.71. The discharge coefficient was obtained from trial calculations comparing the test data and the calculations especially on the PZR pressure and integrated break flow (Kim et al., 2015, Kim and Kang, 2017). Fig. 4, Fig. 5 show comparisons between the test data and the calculations on the PZR pressure and integrated break flow, respectively. As can be seen in the figures, there are good agreements between them. (In this study, a single break valve was modeled to simulate the break simulation system of the ATLAS. Thus, the best-fitted Cd of 0.71 is an overall discharge coefficient including effects of the break nozzle and the connected pipes, etc.)
Fig. 3. MARS nodalization for the simulation of cold leg break LOCA.
Fig. 4. Comparison of the PZR pressures between the test data and calculations.
Fig. 5. Comparison of the integrated break flows between the test data and calculations.
Considering the CCFL options for the three locations in the ATLAS, for first trial, all the same CCFL options of the Wallis model were used as those of the LSTF’s, e.g., for the slope m = 1.0 and the intercept c = 0.75 for the inlet of the SG U-tube; m = 1.0 and c = 0.8 the SG inlet plenum bottom; m = 1.0 and c = 0.85 for the FAP, respectively. No good agreements were obtained between the test data and the calculations especially on the core collapsed water level and core cladding temperature, as shown in Fig. 6, Fig. 7, respectively. As can be seen in the figures, the LSTF’s options for CCFL phenomena tended to under-estimate the core collapsed water level and, as a result, to exaggerate the core cladding temperature.
Fig. 6. Comparison of the core collapsed water levels between the test data and calculations.
Fig. 7. Comparison of the core cladding temperatures between the test data and calculations.
As discussed in the previous section, different CCFL models were adopted, e.g., the Wallis option for inlets of the SG U-tube and the inlet plenum bottom and the Bankoff option for the FAP, respectively. (First, the best-fitted CCFL options for the inlet of SG U-tube and the inlet plenum bottom were obtained by comparing the collapsed water level behavior in the SG inlet plenum between the test data and the calculation.) Trial calculations using this concept showed quite good agreements between the test data and the calculations on the core collapsed water level and core cladding temperature, as shown in Fig. 8, Fig. 9, respectively. Compared to those of the LSTF’s options, the options obtained in this study for CCFL phenomena tended to over-estimate the core collapsed water level and, as a result, to urge the core cladding temperature to approach the test data. (It is note that the tendency of over-estimation of the core collapsed water level is necessary as a further work to this study.) In this paper, the obtained options were considered as the best-fitted CCFL options for a best-estimate calculation, e.g., the Wallis model of default options, i.e., m = 1.0 and c = 1.0, for inlets of the SG U-tube and inlet plenum bottom; the Bankoff model of m = 1.0 and c = 1.79 with = 0.58 for the FAP. In Table 1, a summary of best-fitted CCFL options obtained from this best-estimate analysis was presented for the three locations. It is noteworthy that although geometrical configurations of the three locations in the RCS were quite similar between the LSTF and the ATLAS facilities, quite different CCFL models were used for their best-estimate RELAP5 and MARS evaluations, respectively.
Fig. 8. Comparison of the core collapsed water levels between the test data and calculations.
Fig. 9. Comparison of the core cladding temperatures between the test data and calculations.
Table 1. Summary of best-fitted CCFL options for MARS best-estimate analysis.
<Section>4. Summary and conclusion</Section>
A MARS best-estimate evaluation was performed for 8.5″ cold leg break LOCA in the ATLAS facility. The ATLAS system was modeled in one-dimensional manner and the break nozzle was modeled by a break valve using the Henry-Fauske critical flow. First, a best-fitted critical flow discharge coefficient was obtained by comparing the test data and the calculations especially on the PZR pressure and integrated break flow, i.e., Cd = 0.71. Then, for a trial calculation related to the CCFL phenomena for the three locations, all the same options adopted in the LSTF evaluation were used. No good agreements were obtained between the test data and the calculations on the core collapsed water level and core cladding temperature. Another approach for the CCFL options was selected: Wallis model for inlets of the SG U-tube and the SG inlet plenum bottom; Bankoff model for the FAP. From trial calculations, best-fitted CCFL options were obtained by comparing the test data and the calculations on the core collapsed water level and core cladding temperature. The CCFL options for a MARS best-estimate evaluation are: Wallis model with default option (m = 1.0 and c = 1.0) for inlets of the SG U-tube and the inlet plenum bottom; the Bankoff model of m = 1.0 and c = 1.79 with = 0.58 for the FAP. Here, it is noteworthy that although geometrical configurations of the three locations in the RCS were quite similar between the LSTF and the ATLAS facilities, quite different CCFL models were used for their best-estimate evaluations.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Acknowledgement</Section>
The authors would like to express their sincere thanks to the previous ATLAS experimental group at KAERI.
<Section>Appendix A. Supplementary data</Section>
The following are the Supplementary data to this article:
Supplementary data 1.
<Section>References</Section>
Bankoff et al., 1981
S.G. Bankoff, R.S. Tankin, M.C. Yuen, Hsieh
Counter current flow of air/water and steam/water through a horizontal perforated plate
Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 24 (8) (1981), pp. 1381-1395
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Issa and Macian, 2011
S. Al Issa, A. Macian
A review of CCFL phenomenon
Annal. Nucl. Energ., 30 (2011), pp. 1795-1819
Google Scholar
Kang, et al., 2015
Kang, K.-H. et al., 2015. Revised Description Report of ATLAS Facility and Instrumentation, KAERI/TR-5974/2015.
Google Scholar
Kim et al., 2013
Y.-S. Kim, K.-Y. Choi, S. Cho, H.-S. Park, K.-H. Kang, C.-H. Song, W.-P. Baek
Second ATLAS domestic standard problem (DSP-02) for a code assessment
Nucl. Eng. Tech., 45 (7) (2013), pp. 871-894
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kim et al., 2015
Y.-S. Kim, S. Cho, K.-Y. Choi
An analytical investigation of cold leg small break accidents of the ATLAS facility
Nucl. Eng. Des., 291 (2015), pp. 145-153
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Kim and Kang, 2017
Y.-S. Kim, K.-H. Kang
Overview of an investigation into SBLOCA tests of ATLAS facility
Ann. of Nucl. Energy, 102 (2017), pp. 386-401
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Takeda and Ohtsu, 2017
T. Takeda, I. Ohtsu
RELAP5 uncertainty evaluation using ROSA/LSTF test data on PWR 17% cold leg intermediate-break LOCA with single-failure ECCS
Ann. of Nucl. Energy, 109 (2017), pp. 9-21
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Suzuki, et al., 2003
Suzuki, M., et al., 2003. ROSA-V Large Scale Test Facility (LSTF) System Description for the Third and Fourth Simulated Fuel Assemblies, JAERI-Tech 2003-037, pp. 1-5; 120-212.
Google Scholar
Wallis, 1969
G.B. Wallis
One-dimensional Two-phase Flow
McGraw-Hill, New York, USA (1969)
Google Scholar