<title>Evaluations and classifications of the bundle effects on steam condensation based on broad pressure range experiments</title>
<author>1,ShuhangZhou,2,YiLi,3,YanSun,4,HaozhiBian,5,MingDing</author>
<Affiliation>1,Fundamental Science on Nuclear Safety and Simulation Technology Laboratory, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, 150001, China;2,Science and Technology on Reactor System Design Technology Laboratory, Nuclear Power Institute of China, Chengdu, 610213, China</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2021.103695</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0149197021000652</URL>
Evaluations and classifications of the bundle effects on steam condensation based on broad pressure range experiments
ShuhangZhou,YiLi,YanSun,HaozhiBian,MingDing
Fundamental Science on Nuclear Safety and Simulation Technology Laboratory, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, 150001, China
Science and Technology on Reactor System Design Technology Laboratory, Nuclear Power Institute of China, Chengdu, 610213, China
<Section>Highlights</Section>
The 3 × 3 bundle condensation experiment was conducted at pressures up to 1.6 MPa.
The tube bundle both has enhancement and inhibition effects on condensation.
The enhancement effect will exceed the inhibition effect with pressure increases.
The bundle average condensation performance can be greater than that of single tube.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
Steam condensation consisting of noncondensable gas has been broadly investigated on external surfaces of various single tube and plates. Previous numerical analyses revealed that the high concentration air layer (HCAL) is the main thermal resistance for condensation. Comparing with the single tube/plate, condensation for bundle can be more complex. The HCAL near the adjacent tube surfaces may interfere and then influencing flow and heat transfer characteristics in the bundle. To evaluate the bundle effect, this study conducted experiments based on a 3 × 3 tube bundle at a wider pressure range (0.15–1.6 MPa). The results indicate that the bundle effect can be divided into two sub-effects: the enhancement effect and the inhibition effect, and the enhancement effect can make the average heat transfer performance of the bundle better than that of the single tube. The parameter thresholds for the two sub-effects were determined according to the broaden parameter scope. Generally, at small subcooling and low pressures, the inhibition effect dominants, and the bundle condensation heat transfer coefficient (CHTC) can be 22% less than that of the single tube; at large subcooling and high pressures, the enhancement effect dominants, and the bundle CHTC can be 71% greater.
Keywords:Steam condensation;Noncondensable gas;Bundle effectInhibition effect;Enhancement effect
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
Condensation is a broadly applied in various industrial devices, e.g., refrigeration (López-Belchía and Illán-Gómez, 2017), energy conservation (Fan et al., 2016), power plants (Li et al., 2016), seawater desalination (Ming et al., 2017) and chemistry (Gunukula et al., 2018). For pure steam condensation, large amounts of experimental and theoretical studies have been performed (Bonneau et al., 2019; Noori Rahim Abadi et al., 2018; Mazed et al., 2018; Lo Frano et al., 2018). In this phase, the generally used Nusselt analytical solution was obtained and further modifications were made for different application conditions (Nusselt, 1916). The condensation features for steam condensation in the presence of air can differ greatly from pure steam condensation (Sparrow and Lin, 1968).
In the design of condensers, experimental studies revealed that a small amount of air can lead to greatly decrease in condensation. Steam condensation heat transfer coefficient (CHTC) can decrease to one third, even if there only exists one percent of air (Othmer, 1929). The later theoretical and numerical studies (Sparrow and Lin, 1968; Shang and Zhong, 2008; Peterson et al., 1993; Martín-Valdepeñas et al., 2005; Bian et al., 2018a) indicate that when a large amount of steam condenses on the outer surface of tubes, air may retain and form a HCAL. Before condensation, the bulk region steam must be transferred through the HCAL. As a result, the HCAL may become the main thermal resistance for condensation in the presence of air (Bian et al., 2017). To improve condensation, air extractors were applied in condensers.
With the wide application of condensing heat exchangers and the rapid development of various industries, scenarios for steam condensation in the presence of large amounts of non-condensable gases need to be considered, e.g., Passive Containment Cooling System (PCCS) for nuclear industry, Latent Heat Recovery (LHR) heat exchanger in boiler plants, the suppression system in Boiling Water Reactor (BWR) and the Vacuum Vessel Pressure Suppression System (VVPSS) in fusion reactor. In order to evaluate the heat transfer property for steam condensation consisting of a large amount of air, several experiments were performed on external surfaces of a plate or single tube (Dehbi et al., 1991; Park et al., 1996; Paci and Forgione, 2005; Tong et al., 2015).
With the renovating design of the condensing heat exchanger, steam condensation in the presence of air needs to be evaluated in greater pressure and subcooling ranges. Su (Su et al., 2013) performed experiments at broader parameter ranges with pressures from 0.2 to 0.6 MPa, subcooling from 13 to 70 °C, and air mass fractions from 0.07 to 0.8. An experimental correlation was fitted on the basis of pressure, air mass fraction and subcooling. Later, Fan (Fan et al., 2018) proposed that when using power function to represent the relationship between CHTCs and subcooling, the power exponent is not a constant.
It is clear that the previous experiments were carried out on external surfaces of single tube or plates. However, in engineering applications, e.g., the passive containment cooling system for nuclear reactor containment in HPR1000 (Xing et al., 2016) (Hua-long Pressurized Reactor), the heat exchangers in gas space are tube bundle heat exchangers. The conclusions drawn from single tube cases may not applicable for tube bundle heat exchangers. When steam condensates on the tube external surface, air will retain and then forming a HCAL. At certain tube bundle geometrical (tube pitch S = 1.5 to 5 d) and thermal-hydraulic (air mass fraction of 0.5, a subcooling of 40 °C and a pressure of 0.2 MPa) conditions, the HCAL of adjacent tubes will overlap and further forming a higher concentration air layer region (Bian et al., 2019). This will affect the flow and heat transfer property in the bundle.
Kang (Kang et al., 2016) firstly carried out experimental studies on steam condensation in the presence of air for the tube bundle experiment on PCCS at pressures from 0.15 to 0.4 MPa, subcooling from 12 to 33 °C and air mass fractions from 0.3 to 0.85. The tube bundle is a 3 × 4 array. The results indicate that there is no obvious difference for the CHTCs of the tube bundle and the single tube. Later, Bae (Bae et al., 2020) conducted experimental studies on steam condensation in the presence of non-condensable gas for the tube bundle experiment in the CLASSIC test facility at pressures from 0.195 to 0.509 MPa, subcooling from 13.7 to 61.1 °C and non-condensable gas mass fractions from 0.20 to 0.71. The tube bundle consists of 18 tubes. The results indicate that the heat transfer inhibition effect dominates the tube bundle region, and the bundle CHTC is around 0.939 of that for the single tube. The two papers mentioned that the CHTC for outside tubes can be greater and for inside tubes can be smaller than that of the single tube. Nevertheless, the reasons and regularities were not discussed.
To reveal the mechanisms of the bundle effects on condensation heat transfer, Bian (Bian et al., 2018b) initiatively performed numerical simulations on various tube bundles at an air mass fraction of 0.5, a subcooling of 40 °C and a pressure of 0.1 MPa. Based on the diffusion boundary layer steam condensation model, the detailed local heat and mass transfer characteristics of the mixture gas and the local CHTCs of various types of tubes were obtained and analyzed. The bundle heat transfer enhancement effect and the inhibition effect were defined, and their mechanisms were revealed sufficiently. In addition, it is referred that by properly arranging tube bundle, the average heat transfer performance of the whole tube bundle can be greater than that of the single tube. However, this conclusion has not been validated by direct experiments.
It is clear that the previous experimental and numerical research was carried out at low pressure and small subcooling conditions, the effects of the influencing parameters (e.g., pressure and subcooling) on the bundle effect have not been clarified according to the limited parameter scope. Therefore, the boundary of the condensation heat transfer enhancement effect over the inhibition effect should be further evaluated in broader parameter ranges. Moreover, whether the bundle average CHTC can be greater than that of the single tube should be verified experimentally.
To solve the mentioned problem and fully analyze the mechanism of the tube bundle effects, the present work carried out experimental studies on steam condensation in the presence of air on external surfaces of a 3 × 3 tube bundle at a wider parameter range (pressures from 0.15 to 1.6 MPa, subcooling from 35 to 105 °C). Detailed comparisons on CHTCs were made between the bundle and the single tube.
<Section>2. Experimental facility</Section>
2.1. Facility components
In order to grasp the heat transfer regularity of steam condensation in the presence of air under the condition of bundle structure, the COAST (condensation and species transport) facility (as shown in Fig. 1) was built. The COAST facility mainly was made up of a pressure vessel, a tube bundle, a forced convection cooling system, a water tank, a temperature control system, and an auxiliary system including an air compressor, a data acquisition system, and several groups of heaters.
Fig. 1. The COAST facility layouts.
The pressure vessel which has an internal diameter of 1.5 m and a total height of 5 m is used to imitate the pressure boundary of the nuclear containment. The space inside the pressure vessel is classified into two spaces: the upper gas space and the bottom water space. The gas space is initially full of room temperature air at atmospheric pressure. Below the water surface, there immersed several groups of heaters. In operations, the water is heated by the heaters to generate steam. The steam goes upward and get mixed with the air in the gas space. By properly control the heating power, the mixture gas can reach to the desired pressure and air concentration.
The 3 × 3 tube bundle consists of 9 stainless steel tubes of which the tubes have a diameter of 19 mm and a length of 1 m. It was vertically installed in the central part of the pressure vessel. The tube pitch is 2 times of the tube outer diameter. The tubes have a vertical segment and two horizontal segments. The vertical segment is in the central of the pressure vessel, and the horizontal segments are properly insulated. In tests, steam condensates on external surfaces of the vertical tubes and release latent heat.
The cooling system is employed to provide forced convection cooling water for the tube bundle inside. The water in the tank (12 m3) is driven by a centrifugal pump. The water is divided into 9 branches in the splitter and then flow to the tubes in the bundle. The water volume flowrate and the temperature rise for each tube were measured individually. After heating up, the water in individual tubes is collected by a header and then flow bank to the water tank.
In long-term operation conditions, in order to maintain the water temperature within the required ranges, the temperature control system was designed. The air-cooling tower which is the main heat transfer device in the temperature control system has a total cooling power of 1 MW. This capability meets the requirement for all the experimental conditions.
2.2. Measuring points layouts
To evaluate steam CHTCs for tube bundle, parameters including mixture gas temperature, gas concentration, pressure, water inlet and outlet temperature and water volume flowrate are required. The corresponding measuring points were installed in the pressure vessel gas space and the cooling system, respectively (as shown in Fig. 2).
Fig. 2. Measuring points layouts.
In the pressure vessel, the gas temperature was measured by 12 thermistors. The thermistors were placed at 6 cross sections along vertical direction with equal spacing. At each cross section, two thermistors were installed oppositely. Based on a generally used assumption that the mixture gas temperature equals to the steam saturation temperature at its partial pressure, the steam concentration can be determined by Dalton's law of partial pressures. The mixture gas pressure is surveyed by a pressure sensor on the top side of the pressure vessel.
In the refrigeration system, the inlet water temperature was measured via a thermistor installed in the splitter. The outlet temperature for the 9 tubes in the tube bundle was measured individually via a thermistor. The volume flow measurement of the water for each tube was completed by an electromagnetic flowmeter in each tube. The information about each measuring instrument in the system is shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Information about each measuring instrument in the system.
2.3. Test matrix and experiment procedure
The test matrix (as shown in Table 2) consists of 100 tests that combines the following main parameters:
Table 2. Experimental cases for bundle external steam condensation in the presence of air.
The experimental procedure consists of the following parts. Step 1: record the initial temperature and pressure in the pressure vessel; Step 2: calculate the initial gas concentration in the pressure vessel and provide air to the pressure vessel until meets the requirements of the experimental conditions; Step 3: circulation of cooling water inside the circuit at a high flow rate and through the data acquisition system to monitor whether the parameters are normal. Step 4: to control the pressure/gas concentration by adjusting the power of heaters; to control the subcooling by adjusting the cooling water flow in the tube. Step 5: recording 2 min data via data acquisition system at each stable operating condition. Step 6: turn off the heater and reduce the pressure to atmospheric pressure after completing the experiment.
2.4. Tube bundle and classification of heat transfer tubes
Fig. 3 shows the cross-sectional view of tube bundle. In order to obtain the overall characteristics and variation regularities of the tube bundle heat transfer, this study numbered tubes from 1 to 9. Based on the analysis, when steam condensates on the tube external surface, air will retain and then forming a HCAL. At certain tube bundle geometrical (tube pitch S = 1.5 to 5 d) and thermal-hydraulic (air mass fraction of 0.5, a subcooling of 40 °C and a pressure of 0.2 MPa) conditions, the HCAL of adjacent tubes may influence and further forming a greater HCAL region (Bian et al., 2019). Therefore, we classified the tube bundle into three types according to the similarity of influence regularity between heat transfer tubes and the symmetry of the geometric arrangement. The corner tubes (CTs) are located at the four corners of the bundle (tube 1, 3, 7, 9), and are mainly influenced by two nearby tubes; The side tubes (STs) are located at outside the tube bundle except the CTs (tube 2, 4, 6, 8), and are mainly influenced by three nearby tubes; The internal tube (IT) is located at the heart of the bundle (tube 5), and is mainly influenced by four nearby tubes.
Fig. 3. Bundle tube classification.
<Section>3. Data processing and uncertainty analyses</Section>
3.1. Data processing
In data analyses process, CHTCs and the corresponding influencing gas side parameters including total pressure, mixture gas temperature, and gas concentrations are required. The CHTC was obtained via thermal equilibrium equation, thermal conduction equation of tube wall and forced convective heat transfer equation of the water coolant, and the gas side parameters were obtained via directly measured results and some generally applied assumptions. After the test, the maximum deviation of the gas temperature in the tube height direction is only 0.50 °C, it indicates that the concentration of the mainstream gas is uniform. and the average value of these parameters can also be used to investigate the condensation capacity.
a)
Condensation heat transfer coefficient
The CHTCs for the 9 tubes in the tube bundle were obtained following the same rule. The subsequent evaluation uses the single tube as an example. Obviously, the condensation from the tube outer side to the tube inner side mainly via three processes: steam condensation on tube external surfaces, thermal conduction via tube wall, and forced convective heat transfer of the water coolant. The relation between the total heat transfer coefficient, CHTC, thermal conductivity, and convective heat transfer coefficient can be expressed by thermal equilibrium equation.
@(1)
where k is the total HTC, do is the tube outer diameter, di is the tube inner diameter, λs is the tube thermal conductivity, hf is the water convective HTC.
The total heat transfer coefficient is calculated by
@(2)
where Q is the total heat flux, A is the heat transfer area and ΔTm is the mean temperature difference between the gas side and the water side.
The convective heat transfer coefficient is computed by the Gnielinski equation (Gnielinski, 1975)
@(3)
where λf is the water thermal conductivity, Ref is the Reynolds number of water, Prf is the Prandtl number of water, l is the tube length, ct is a correction factor, f is a resistance coefficient.
The tube thermal conductivity λs is determined by table look-up (Holman, 1985).
Based on Eq. (1), the CHTC can be calculated by
@(4)
b)
Gas parameters
It is generally considered that the main parameters that affect the CHTC are the mixture gas pressure, subcooling and air mass fraction.
The gas absolute pressure is calculated by
@(5)
where P is the absolute pressure, P0 is the normal atmospheric pressure, Pm is the gage pressure.
The air mass fraction is calculated by
@(6)
where ωa is the air mass fraction, Ma is the molar mass of air, Xa is the molar concentration of air, Mv is the molar mass of steam, Xv is the molar concentration of steam.
The molar concentration of air and steam is calculated by Dalton's law of partial pressures.
@(7)
where the subscript i represents the gas component, air or steam.
The subcooling is calculated by
@(8)
3.2. Uncertainty analysis
There will always be uncertainty in the experiment, which will cause a certain error between the experimental data and the true value, which may be caused by the accuracy of measuring instrumentations. Moreover, the measuring errors may propagate through data reduction equations such as Eq. (4). In order to evaluate the potential uncertainty, the Taylor Series Method as shown in Eq. (9) and Eq. (10) was applied.
@(9)
@(10)
In this experiment, the uncertainty may be from measurement errors, including thermistor, electromagnetic flowmeter, tube wall thickness measurement and tube height measurement. In combination with the experimental parameter scopes, installation conditions, and instrumentation specifications, the uncertainty for the inlet water temperature is within ±0.21 °C, the outlet water temperature is within ±0.55 °C, the electromagnetic flowmeter is within ±0.5% of reading, the pressure sensor is within ±0.5% of full scale, the tube inner diameter is within ±0.07 mm, the tube outer diameter is within ±0.05 mm, the tube length is within ±1 cm.
According to the particular experimental conditions as shown in Table 3, the uncertainties of the CHTCs are assessed by using the error transmit formula of Eq. (4). As shown in Fig. 4, the results show that the uncertainties of the CHTCs reduce quickly with the enlarge of pressure. The uncertainties are usually within ±15% at the pressure of 0.2 MPa; and the uncertainties are usually within ±5% at pressures larger than 0.8 MPa.
Table 3. Experimental conditions for bundle external steam condensation in the presence of air.
Fig. 4. Relative deviation of the condensation heat transfer coefficient.
<Section>4. Results analyses and discussions</Section>
4.1. Condensation heat transfer characteristics of bundle tubes
CHTCs under different subcooling conditions are shown in Fig. 5. It shows that the CHTC of the tube in the center (tube 5) is obviously lower than those of the surrounding tubes, and the reduction of CHTC is up to 25%. Thus, it can be concluded that the bundle arrangement has a visible effect on the CHTC. In addition, the results of this experiment and previous numerical simulations (Bian et al., 2019) show that tubes in each type also have similar CHTC. This shows that the tube bundle classification is reasonable.
Fig. 5. The CHTCs for the 3 × 3 tube bundle.
Fig. 5 (a) and Fig. 5 (b) also demonstrate that the CHTCs increase rapidly with pressure under the same subcooling conditions and decrease with the enlarge of the subcooling under same pressure condition. These tendencies are consistent with those of a single tube (Su et al., 2013; Fan et al., 2018), and not affected by the tube bundle structure. Combined with the previous investigations, it demonstrated that the CHTCs of tube decrease with the enlarge of the subcooling under same pressure condition when steam condensation on tube external surfaces.
4.2. Tube bundle effect on condensation
4.2.1. Definition of tube bundle impact factor (BIF)
The CHTC of each type tubes are obtained by arithmetically averaging based on its included tubes, and the calculation method is shown in Eq. (11). The CHTC (for example, hi-1) of each heat transfer tube is obtained by the method described in Section 3. For example, for the CTs (tube 1, 3, 7, 9) in Fig. 3 h1 is the average CHTC of the CTs, h1-1, h1-2, h1-3, h1-4 is the CHTC of tube 1, 3, 7, 9, respectively.
@(11)
where, hi is the average CHTC of a certain type tubes, W/(m2·K); hi-1, hi-2, hi-3, …, hi-n is the CHTC of each tube in a certain type of tube bundle, W/(m2·K).
When analyzing the heat transfer characteristics of the tube bundle, in addition to considering the differentia among each type tubes, the differentia among each type tubes and the single tube also need to be evaluated. For the convenience of comparison, the BIF was defined as: the ratio between the CHTC of a certain type tubes and the CHTC of the single tube. Eq. (12) gives the expression of Bi for a certain type of bundle tubes. It is obvious that when the BIF is less than 1, the CHTC of this type tubes are smaller than that of the single tube; when the BIF is equal to 1, the CHTC of this type tubes are equal to the single tube; When the BIF is greater than 1, the CHTC of this type tubes are higher than that of the single tube. The CHTC of the single tube hsingle in Eq. (12) is calculated from the CHTC of Bian-Ding correlation.
@(12)
The Bian-Ding correlation is obtained from a wide range of single tube experimental data including our data and the Su (Su et al., 2013), Fan (Fan et al., 2018), Dehbi (1991) experiments, which has great continuity and is convenient for data comparison. The Bian-Ding experimental correlation for steam CHTC is concluded as
@(13)
where, hsingle is the condensation heat transfer coefficient of the single tube, W/(m2·K); L is the tube length, m; d is the tube diameter, m; e is the value of logarithmic base; P is pressure, MPa; ωa is mass fraction of air; ωs is mass fraction of steam; △T is subcooling.
It is applicable in much broader parameter range as shown in Table 4.
Table 4. The applicability of Bian-Ding correlation.
96% of the predicted results are within ±15% deviation from experimental data. Therefore, it is reasonable to use the Bian-Ding correlation to analyze the bundle impact factor. This work is carried out under the same experimental facility named the COAST facility and is a continuation of the Bian-Ding experiment.
4.2.2. Condensation heat transfer characteristics of various tubes
As shown in Fig. 6, the CHTC and BIF of the CTs are concluded from the 3 × 3 tube bundle at the tube pitch S = 2d. Fig. 6 (a) and Fig. 6 (b) exhibit the variation regularity of the CHTC with gas pressure and subcooling. Each data point in the figure is the experimental result, and each curve is the calculation result of the single tube experimental correlation. It indicates that the CHTC of the CTs increases with the increase of pressure and reduces with the enlarge of subcooling. The variation regularity is consistent with the results of the single tube experiments.
Fig. 6. CHTCs and BIFs for the CTs.
By comparing the results between the CTs and the single tube, it shows that the CHTC of the CTs is slightly smaller than the single tube under low pressure conditions, and it is only 16% less than that of the single tube at P = 0.15 MPa. As the pressure increases, the CHTC of the CTs gradually approaches the single tube. At P = 0.4 MPa, its CHTC is equivalent to that of the single tube. The CHTC of the CTs is mostly larger than that of the single tube when P ≥ 0.6 MPa. It can also be concluded from Fig. 6 that under the same pressure condition, as subcooling increases, the absolute value of the curve slope of the CTs become smaller. This makes the CHTC of the CTs gradually approach to the single tube with the enlarge of subcooling when P < 0.4 MPa. When P ≥ 0.6 MPa, the CHTC of the CTs is obviously higher than that of the single tube with the enlarge of subcooling, and it is 79% greater than that of the single tube at the subcooling of 79 °C.
In order to visually compare the difference between the CTs and the single tube, the BIFs at different pressures and subcooling conditions are arranged into a nephogram as shown in Fig. 6 (c). Each black dot in the figure represents the experimental data point, and the enclosed area is the experimental parameter range. Obviously, the BIF of the CTs increases with the enlarge of subcooling and pressure. In the experimental parameter range, the influence of pressure on the BIF is more obvious. When the pressure enlarges from 0.15 MPa to 1.6 MPa, the enlargement of the BIF can be greater than 0.6. Under the same pressure condition, the effect of the subcooling on the BIF is relatively small and the changes are mostly within 0.1.
It was two regions with the BIF equal to 1 as the boundary that the influence of pressure and subcooling in Fig. 6 (c) was divided into: the left side of the boundary is the inhibition region; and the right side of the boundary is the enhancement region. When P < 0.4 MPa, the BIFs are mostly in the inhibition region, with a minimum value of 0.84; When P = 0.4 MPa, the BIF is greater than 1 at high subcooling; As the pressure rises, the subcooling required for the BIF to enter the enhancement region is lower; at P = 1.6 MPa, the BIF reaches 1.79.
The CHTCs and BIFs of the STs and IT are shown in Fig. 7 and Fig. 8, respectively. Fig. 7 demonstrates that the CHTCs and variation regularity of BIFs of the STs are consistent with those of the CTs. Within the experimental parameter scope, the STs can also be classified into two regions: the enhancement region and the inhibition region. However, the inhibition region of the STs is greater than that of the CTs, and the degree of inhibition effect is stronger. This is mainly because the CTs has a larger contact area with the mainstream gas, and it is relatively weakly inhibited by the HCAL; however, the STs is closer to the tube bundle area and it is more likely to be inhibited by the HCAL. According to the comparison between Figs. 6 and 7, the minimum BIF of the STs is 0.75 when P = 0.15 MPa, which is 0.09 lower than the minimum value of the CTs. In addition, the enhancement region of the STs begins when the pressure exceeds 0.6 MPa. In the enhancement region of the STs, the BIF can reach a maximum of 1.68, which is less than the 1.79 of the CTs.
Fig. 7. CHTCs and BIFs for the STs.
Fig. 8. CHTCs and BIFs for the IT
The CHTCs and BIFs of the IT are consistent with the previous two types. As shown in Fig. 8, the CHTC of the IT can also be classified into two regions: the enhancement region and the inhibition region. The minimum BIF is 0.64 at P = 0.15 MPa. With the increase of gas pressure, the BIF gradually increases with a maximum value of 1.53 at P = 1.6 MPa. It is clear that the IT has the largest inhibition region and the strongest inhibition effect. The reason for the special tendency of the IT is because the tube is isolated by the surrounding tubes and cannot fully contact the mainstream gas, which means it is more influenced by the HCAL.
The BIFs and average BIFs of the three types of tube bundle are summarized in Fig. 9. The average BIFs of the tube bundle is the ratio of the bundle average CHTC to the single tube CHTC. The bundle average CHTC is calculated by weighted average of CHTCs of all type tubes. As is shown in Eqs. (14), (15).
@(14)
@(15)
where, hav is the average CHTC of tube bundle, W/(m2·K); h1, h2, h3 is the average CHTC of a certain type tubes, W/(m2·K); hi-1, hi-2, hi-3, …, hi-n is the CHTC of each tube in a certain type of tube bundle, W/(m2·K); Bav is the average BIF of the tube bundle.
Fig. 9. Each type BIFs and the average BIF.
It is indicated from Fig. 9 that the BIFs of various types tubes increase with the enlargement of pressure and subcooling. Among the three types tubes, the BIFs of the CTs are the largest, the BIFs of the STs are the second, and the BIFs of the IT are the smallest. The average BIFs of the CTs is 0.2 higher than that of the IT under the condition of P = 0.15 MPa; the average BIFs of the CTs is 0.26 higher than the IT under the condition of P = 1.6 MPa. According to the average BIFs shown in Fig. 9 (b), for the whole tube bundle, the average CHTC is inhibited at low pressures, however, with the increase of pressure, and the bundle average CHTC can be obviously larger than that of the single tube.
Within the range of experimental parameters (pressures from 0.15 to 1.6 MPa, subcooling from 35 to 105 °C), the average CHTC of the tube bundle (hav) is at most 22% (at a subcooling of 39.4 °C and a pressure of 0.15 MPa) smaller than that of the single tube and 71% (at a subcooling of 82.3 °C and a pressure of 1.6 MPa) larger than that of the single tube.
From the discussion on section 4.2.2, it indicates that the influence of tube bundle on condensation can be classified into two sub-effects: the enhancement effect and the inhibition effect. For the inhibition effect, it is mainly created by the HCAL. This is because with the continuous consumption of steam, the air concentration near each type tubes will be gathered, especially for the IT. Thus, the air concentration can be obviously higher than that in the external mainstream region. Moreover, the HCAL can have mutual disturbance between nearby tubes, and then forming a larger HCAL in the outer surface of tubes. It is indicated from Fig. 10 that the previous numerical simulation study can also prove that this analysis is reasonable. Based on the mechanisms of multi-component gas diffusion mass transfer, it can be revealed that increasing the concentration of the air layer can decrease the efficiency of steam diffusion mass transfer, and further inhibit the steam condensation.
Fig. 10. The aggregation of the high concentration air layer.
The enhancement effect is mainly caused by the high-density mixture gas. According to the mechanism analysis of the inhibition effect, it is clear that the high-density mixture gas will be formed in the tube bundle area after steam condensation. As shown in Fig. 11 (Bian et al., 2019), by the force of gravity, the high-density mixture air-steam will accelerate in the direction of gravity. As a result, the flow velocity of the gas in the bundle region is obviously higher than that in the mainstream area. This process reduces the pressure inside the bundle area, and then promotes the gas in the mainstream area to move laterally to the bundle area. The lateral disturbance of the gas reduces the HCAL thickness and strengthens condensation. Because of the lateral disturbance of steam is created by convergent flow induced by the density difference, therefore we call this effect as the stack effect.
Fig. 11. Local velocity and concentration distribution (Bian et al., 2019).
In addition, Fig. 9 (b) shows that the BIFs increase with the enlarge of pressure and subcooling. It can be concluded from the previous analysis that the CHTCs reduce with the enlarge of subcooling. However, as the subcooling increase, the amount of condensation will increase, so the flow and the lateral disturbance of gas will also be enhanced. Consequently, the stack effect will be better.
Based on the experimental results and analysis, it indicates that the air concentration in the pressure vessel is high under low pressure and subcooling conditions, which can result in a relatively thick HCAL near the tube, so the BIF at P = 0.15 MPa is the lowest. It also can be considered from Fig. 9 (b) that the subcooling has increased obviously when 0.15 MPa < P < 0.4 MPa, which means that the driving force of natural convection is obviously increased. Compared with the single tube, the accumulation of high-density gas in the tube bundle area will be more conducive to increasing the intensity of natural convection, which promotes the BIF to increase obviously in this pressure range. With the further increase of pressure, the BIF will continue to increase. Based on the concluded bundle stack effect, the tube bundle exhibits apparent heat transfer enlargement (P = 0.8 MPa–1.6 MPa). In addition, it can be concluded that the inhibition effect dominants at low subcooling and pressure, and the stack effect dominants at high subcooling and high pressure.
<Section>5. Conclusions</Section>
The present work carried out experimental studies on steam condensation in the presence of air on outside surfaces of a 3 × 3 tube bundle. Based on the experimental results, the impacts of the tube bundle on the condensation performance were delicately analyzed and classified at a wider parameter range (pressures from 0.15 to 1.6 MPa, subcooling from 35 to 105 °C), and the mechanisms of the tube bundle influencing condensation were summarized. Detailed comparisons on condensation heat transfer coefficient (CHTCs) were made between the tube bundle and the single tube. The main conclusions obtained are as follows:
(1)
The results of broad parameter scope reveal that the tube bundle has both stack effect and inhibition effect on steam condensation with non-condensable air. The stack effect can make the average heat transfer performance of the whole tube bundle better than that of the single tube, and it increases with the enlargement of subcooling and pressure. In addition, this study verified the tube bundle stack effect and inhibition effect of the previous numerical simulations (Bian et al., 2019).
(2)
For the inhibition effect, it is mainly caused by the high concentration air layer (HCAL). The HCAL will be superimposed among adjacent tubes to decrease the efficiency of steam diffusion mass transfer, and further inhibit the steam condensation. The stack effect is primarily induced by the high-density mixture gas. The high-concentration mixture air-steam will be formed in the tube bundle area after steam condensation and it will accelerate in the direction of gravity to reduces the pressure inside the bundle area, and then promote the lateral disturbance of the gas to enhance condensation.
(3)
According to the geometrical symmetry and heat transfer similarity, tubes in the bundle are classified into three types (the corner tubes, the side tubes, the internal tube) and the impact factor B for evaluating the difference between each type tubes and the single tube is defined. Taken B = 1 as the dividing line, the influence of bundle on condensation is divided into the enhancement region (B > 1) and the inhibition region (B < 1). It is found that all three types of tubes have the enhancement region, and the corner tubes have the largest enhancement region, but the internal tube has the largest inhibition region.
(4)
According to the tube bundle experiment results, it indicates that the condensation heat transfer coefficients (CHTCs) of the tube bundle increases with the increase of pressure and reduces with the enlarge of subcooling. This is consistent with the results of the single tube experiments. However, the bundle CHTC can be 22% less than that of the single tube under low pressure. With the increase of pressure and subcooling, the CHTC of the tube bundle gradually approaches the single tube. The bundle CHTC is equivalent to the single tube at P = 0.6 MPa. When P > 1.0 MPa, the bundle CHTC is obviously greater than that of the single tube, and the bundle CHTC can be 71% greater. Consequently, the inhibition effect dominants at low pressure and subcooling, and the stack effect dominants at high pressure and high subcooling.
<Section>Declaration of competing interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>Nomenclature</Section>
General notation
A
heat transfer area, m2
ct
correction factor
d
diameter, m
f
resistance coefficient
g
gravitational acceleration, m/s2
hc
heat transfer coefficient for steam condensation in the presence of air, W/(m2·K)
hf
water convective heat transfer coefficient, W/(m2·K)
hsingle
the condensation heat transfer coefficient of the single tube, W/(m2·K)
hi
the average condensation heat transfer coefficient of a certain type tubes, W/(m2·K)
hi-n
the condensation heat transfer coefficient of each tube in a certain type of tube bundle, W/(m2·K)
hav
the average condensation heat transfer coefficient of tube bundle, W/(m2·K)
Bi
the ratio between hi and hsingle
Bav
the average impact factor of the tube bundle
S
tube pitch, m
k
total heat transfer coefficient, W/(m2·K)
l
length, m
M
molar mass, g/mol
n
the number of variables
P
absolute pressure, Pa
P0
normal atmospheric pressure, Pa
Pm
gage pressure, Pa
Q
total heat flux, W/m2
Pr
Prandtl number
Re
Reynolds number
T
temperature, K
ΔT
subcooling, K
ΔTm
mean temperature difference, K
x
independent variable
X
volume concentration
y
dependent variable
Greek letters
Δ
Uncertainty
λ
thermal conductivity, W/(m·K)
ω
mass fraction
Subscripts
a
air
f
fluid
i
inner
i
gas component/variable
o
outer
s
steel/saturation
v
vapor
Abbreviations
HCAL
high concentration air layer
CHTC
condensation heat transfer coefficient
PCCS
passive containment cooling system
CT
corner tube
ST
side tube
IT
internal tube
BIF
bundle impact factor
<Section>Credit author statement</Section>
Shuhang Zhou: Formal analysis, Investigation, Writing – original draft, Visualization; Yi Li: Resources, Funding acquisition; Yan Sun: Data curation, Funding acquisition; Haozhi Bian: Writing – review & editing, Conceptualization, Supervision, Methodology; Ming Ding: Writing – review & editing, Project administration, Validation
<Section>References</Section>
Bae et al., 2020
B.U. Bae, S. Kim, Y.S. Park, K.H. Kang
Experimental investigation on condensation heat transfer for bundle tube heat exchanger of the PCCS (Passive Containment Cooling System)
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 139 (2020)
Google Scholar
Bian et al., 2017
H. Bian, Z. Sun, M. Ding, N. Zhang
Local phenomena analysis of steam condensation in the presence of air
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 101 (2017), pp. 188-198
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bian et al., 2018a
H. Bian, Z. Sun, N. Zhang, Z. Meng, M. Ding
A preliminary assessment on a two-phase steam condensation model in nuclear containment applications
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 121 (2018), pp. 615-625
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bian et al., 2018b
H. Bian, Z. Sun, X. Cheng, N. Zhang, Z. Meng, M. Ding
CFD evaluations on bundle effects for steam condensation in the presence of air under natural convection conditions
Int. Commun. Heat Mass Tran., 98 (2018), pp. 200-208
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bian et al., 2019
H. Bian, Z. Sun, N. Zhang, Z. Meng, M. Ding
Numerical investigations on steam condensation in the presence of air on external surfaces of 3× 3 tube bundles
Prog. Nucl. Energy, 111 (2019), pp. 42-50
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bonneau et al., 2019
C. Bonneau, C. Josset, V. Melot, B. Auvity
Comprehensive review of pure vapour condensation outside of horizontal smooth tubes
Nucl. Eng. Des., 349 (2019), pp. 92-108
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Dehbi, 1991
A.A. Dehbi
The Effects of Noncondensable Gases on Steam Condensation under Turbulent Natural Convection Conditions
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (1991)
Google Scholar
Dehbi et al., 1991
A. Dehbi, M.W. Golay, M.S. Kazimi
Condensation experiments in steam-air and steam-air-helium mixtures under turbulent natural convection
International Heat Tranfer, AIChe, Minneapolis (1991), pp. 19-28
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fan et al., 2016
S. Fan, Z. Xiao, M. Li, S. Li
Pervaporation membrane bioreactor with permeate fractional condensation and mechanical vapor compression for energy efficient ethanol production
Appl. Energy, 179 (2016), pp. 939-947
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fan et al., 2018
G. Fan, P. Tong, Z. Sun, Y. Chen
Development of a new empirical correlation for steam condensation rates in the presence of air outside vertical smooth tube
Ann. Nucl. Energy, 113 (2018), pp. 139-146
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gnielinski, 1975
V. Gnielinski
New equations for heat and mass transfer in the turbulent flow in pipes and channels
Nasa Sti/recon Technical Report A, 75 (2) (1975), pp. 8-16
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Gunukula et al., 2018
S. Gunukula, S.J.W. Klein, H.P. Pendse, W.J. DeSisto, M.C. Wheeler
Techno-economic analysis of thermal deoxygenation based biorefineries for the coproduction of fuels and chemicals
Appl. Energy, 214 (2018), pp. 16-23
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Holman, 1985
B.J.P. Holman
Heat Transfer
Osborne McGraw-Hill (1985)
Google Scholar
Kang et al., 2016
J.H. Kang, B.J. Yun, D.W. Jerng
Experimental investigation of condensation with bundle geometry for the passive containment cooling system
Transactions of the Korean Nuclear Society Spring Meeting, Jeju, Korea (2016)
Google Scholar
Li et al., 2016
Y. Li, M. Yan, L. Zhang, G. Chen, L. Cui, Z. Song, J. Chang, C. Ma
Method of flash evaporation and condensation - heat pump for deep cooling of coal-fired power plant flue gas: latent heat and water recovery
Appl. Energy, 172 (2016), pp. 107-117
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Lo Frano et al., 2018
R. Lo Frano, D. Mazed, M. Olcese, D. Aquaro, D. Del Serra, I. Sekachev, G. Giambartolomei
Investigation of vibrations caused by the steam condensation at sub-atmospheric condition in VVPSS
Fusion Eng. Des., 136 (2018), pp. 1433-1437
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
López-Belchía and Illán-Gómez, 2017
A. López-Belchía, F. Illán-Gómez
Evaluation of a condenser based on mini-channels technology working with R410A and R32. Experimental data and performance estimate
Appl. Energy, 202 (2017), pp. 112-124
Google Scholar
Martín-Valdepeñas et al., 2005
J.M. Martín-Valdepeñas, M.A. Jiménez, F. Martín-Fuertes, J.A.F. Benítez
Comparison of film condensation models in presence of non-condensable gases implemented in a CFD Code
Heat Mass Tran., 41 (11) (2005), pp. 961-976
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Mazed et al., 2018
D. Mazed, R. Lo Frano, D. Aquaro, D. Del Serra, I. Sekachev, M. Olcese
Experimental investigation of steam condensation in water tank at sub-atmospheric pressure
Nucl. Eng. Des., 335 (AUG) (2018), pp. 241-254
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Ming et al., 2017
T. Ming, T. Gong, R.K.d. Richter, C. Cai, S.A. Sherif
Numerical analysis of seawater desalination based on a solar chimney power plant
Appl. Energy, 208 (2017), pp. 1258-1273
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Noori Rahim Abadi et al., 2018
S.M.A. Noori Rahim Abadi, M. Mehrabi, J.P. Meyer
Numerical study of steam condensation inside a long, inclined, smooth tube at different saturation temperatures
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 126 (2018), pp. 15-25
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Nusselt, 1916
W. Nusselt
Die oberflachenkondensation des wasserdamphes
VDI, 60 (1916), pp. 541-569
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Othmer, 1929
D.F. Othmer
The condensation of steam
Ind. Eng. Chem., 21 (6) (1929), pp. 576-583
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Paci and Forgione, 2005
S. Paci, N. Forgione
Computational analysis of vapour condensation in presence of air in the TOSQAN facility
International Journal of Heat and Technology, 26 (1) (2005), pp. 1-14
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Park et al., 1996
S.K. Park, M.H. Kim, K.J. Yoo
Condensation of pure steam and steam-air mixture with surface waves of condensate film on a vertical wall
Int. J. Multiphas. Flow, 22 (5) (1996), pp. 893-908
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Peterson et al., 1993
P.F. Peterson, V.E. Schrock, T. Kageyama
Diffusion layer theory for turbulent vapor condensation with noncondensable gases
J. Heat Tran., 115 (4) (1993), pp. 998-1003
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Shang and Zhong, 2008
D.-Y. Shang, L.-C. Zhong
Extensive study on laminar free film condensation from vapor-gas mixture
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 51 (17–18) (2008), pp. 4300-4314
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Sparrow and Lin, 1968
E.M. Sparrow, S.H. Lin
Condensation heat transfer in the presence of a noncondensable gas
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 11 (1) (1968), pp. 15-26
Google Scholar
Su et al., 2013
J. Su, Z. Sun, G. Fan, M. Ding
Experimental study of the effect of non-condensable gases on steam condensation over a vertical tube external surface
Nucl. Eng. Des., 262 (2013), pp. 201-208
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Tong et al., 2015
P. Tong, G. Fan, Z. Sun, M. Ding
Experimental study of steam-air condensation over a vertically longitudinal finned tube
Int. J. Heat Mass Tran., 89 (2015), pp. 1230-1238
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Xing et al., 2016
J. Xing, D. Song, Y. Wu
HPR1000: advanced pressurized water reactor with active and passive safety
Engineering, 2 (1) (2016), pp. 79-87
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar