<title>Influence of the radial neutron reflector efficiency on the power of fast nuclear-burning-wave reactor</title>
<author>1, S.P.Fomin, 2, A.I.Kirdin,3,M.S.Malovytsia,4,V.V.Pilipenko,5,N.F.Shul’ga</author>
<Affiliation>1,National Science Center Kharkov Institute of Physics and Technology, 1, Akademicheskaya St., Kharkov 61108, Ukraine；2,V.N. Karazin Kharkiv National University, 4 Svobody Sq., Kharkiv 61022, Ukraine</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>XiaFan,HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107699</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454920303972</URL>
Influence of the radial neutron reflector efficiency on the power of fast nuclear-burning-wave reactor
S.P.Fomin, A.I.Kirdin,M.S.Malovytsia,V.V.Pilipenko,N.F.Shul’ga
National Science Center Kharkov Institute of Physics and Technology, 1, Akademicheskaya St., Kharkov 61108, Ukraine
V.N. Karazin Kharkiv National University, 4 Svobody Sq., Kharkiv 61022, Ukraine
<Section>Highlights</Section>
Reactor operating in the nuclear burning wave mode has inherent safety mechanisms.
Nuclear reactor power can be regulated by changing neutron reflector width.
Power regulation can be performed starting certain power level.
With the increase of the reflector width power has saturation-like behavior.
<Section>Abstract</Section>
The influence of the radial neutron reflector efficiency on the power of the prospective fast reactor operating in the self-sustained nuclear-burning-wave mode has been studied by means of numerically solving the neutron multigroup diffusion equation together with the set of the fuel burnup equations in the 2D cylindrical reactor geometry. Calculations have been performed for the time evolution of the spatial-energy distributions of the neutron flux and fuel components of U–Pu cycle during the reactor campaign. It has been shown that by changing the radial reflector efficiency (thickness) it is possible to change the reactor power in a wide enough range, up to the reactor shut down without intervening in its core. A principle possibility of the power control for the reactor working in the nuclear-burning-wave mode by changing the radial reflector efficiency is discussed.
Keywords：Fast reactorIntrinsic safety；Nuclear burning wave；Neutron reflector；Power control
<Section>1. Introduction</Section>
The advance in the development of world nuclear power engineering is in a greater part due to going to a wide use of fast breeder reactors (FR), which could solve the problem of nuclear fuel supply in a long-term prospect. At present, the priority requirements in the development of new nuclear reactors are their safety improvement as well as the increase of effectiveness of nuclear fuel usage. In this respect, of great interest is the development of new concepts of the fission nuclear reactors with the so-called intrinsic safety, in which the outburst of uncontrolled chain reaction is impossible owing to the physical principles underlying the reactor design.
One of the promising inherent-safety FR concepts is the fast breeder reactor of the U–Pu fuel cycle, which operates in the self-sustained mode of the running nuclear burning wave (NBW), proposed by L.P. Feoktistov (Feoktistov, 1988, Feoktistov, 1989). This concept consists in the combination of the processes of production and burnup of the fissile nuclides, without reloading the fuel elements and reprocessing the produced fuel. In this case, the nuclear burning initiated in a certain reactor zone (the ignition zone) is shifted to the breeding zone due to the fissile nuclide production in the region adjacent to the ignition zone. By this means, the NBW is formed, which slowly moves along the breeding zone. The “intrinsic safety” property of a steady-state self-sustaining NBW mode is based on the fact that the reactivity margin in such a reactor is zero at any time, which makes the NBW reactor runaway, caused, for example, by operator’s mistake, impossible. This is one of the main advantages of this reactor concept over the conventional ones, in which the reactivity control is realized by an “external” system using absorbing rods.
The concept of fast reactor with the NBW was further developed by the groups of Edward Teller, Hiroshi Sekimoto and others (see papers (Akhiezer et al., 2001, Chen and Maschek, 2005, Fomin et al., 2005, Fomin et al., 2008, Fomin et al., 2009, Fomin et al., 2011, Fomin et al., 2013, Fomin et al., 2014, Fomin et al., 2015, Fomin et al., 2019, Hejzlar et al., 2013, Khotyayintsev et al., 2015, Pilipenko et al., 2003, Sekimoto et al., 2001, van Dam, 2000, Khotyayintsev et al., 2010, Sekimoto, 2005, Teller, 1998, Teller et al., n.d.) and the references therein). The Monte-Carlo simulation, carried out by Teller’s team, was concerned with the feasibility of the NBW mode (called the “nuclear deflagration wave”) in the Th-U fuel cycle reactor with the use of lithium thermostating modules (Teller, 1998, Teller et al., n.d.). The results obtained by the Sekimoto team in the deterministic approach are based on the search for the solutions in the form of the steady-state wave moving with a constant velocity for a set of multigroup diffusion neutron-transport equations in the cylindrical two-dimensional geometry and the equations of burnup of the U–Pu nuclear fuel components (see Refs. Sekimoto et al., 2001, Sekimoto, 2005). This method enabled them to find the characteristics of the steady-state mode of the NBW (called there as “CANDLE”), however it gives no way of modeling the NBW evolution and the transient processes in the reactor under consideration. Attempts were made in Refs. Chen and Maschek, 2005, van Dam, 2000 to perform an analytical analysis in the framework of essentially simplified models for describing the NBW mode (called there as “criticality wave” and “solitary burn-up wave”, respectively) in the steady-state wave approach. In Refs. Khotyayintsev et al., 2010, Khotyayintsev et al., 2015, analytical expressions were proposed for solutions of the steady-state NBW type in the one-group approach for the set of equations which includes the diffusion equation in the planar one-dimensional geometry and the equations of nuclide burnup in the small wave velocity approximation. During the last decade, the problems of practical realization of the reactor known as the Travelling Wave Reactor, which operates in the mode similar to the NBW, were taken up by the private company called TerraPower (Hejzlar et al., 2013).
In our papers, the NBW mode was first studied in the framework of the simplest Feoktistov model (Feoktistov, 1988, Feoktistov, 1989) by means of both the analytical analysis in the steady-state wave approach, and the simulation of the NBW-mode initiation and evolution by numerically solving the corresponding nonstationary problem (Akhiezer et al., 2001, Pilipenko et al., 2003). In particular, a consideration was given to the variant of the NBW mode realization with the use of an external neutron source that accompanies and irradiates the actual nuclear burning zone (Pilipenko et al., 2003), under the conditions when the NBW mode would be impossible without this source.
In our further studies (Fomin et al., 2008, Fomin et al., 2009, Fomin et al., 2011, Fomin et al., 2013, Fomin et al., 2014, Fomin et al., 2015, Fomin et al., 2019), an original deterministic approach was developed to describe nonstationary processes occurring in the cylindrically-shaped fast reactor with two axial zones (ignition and breeding zones) at the stages of the NBW initiation and its propagation along the reactor axis. This approach is based on numerically solving the nonstationary diffusion equation of neutron transport in the reactor environment, along with the equations of fuel components burnup as well as with the nuclear kinetics equations for the delayed neutron precursors with the use of realistic nuclear constants and cross sections. In Ref. Fomin et al. (2008) a simplified model was used, where the transverse neutron leakage was described by employing the radial buckling approximation (Waltar and Reynolds, 1981). In that case, the calculations were performed in the effective multigroup diffusion approximation, in which the nonstationary one-dimensional diffusion equation was solved with the use of effective neutron-nucleus cross-sections averaged by the local neutron spectra found from the corresponding stationary multigroup criticality problem for the current time moment. The drawback of this radial buckling scheme is the fact that the approximate allowance for the radial neutron leakage leads to ignoring the effects of nonuniform burnup of fuel components in the radial direction. Besides, this scheme gives no way to describe reactor systems with radial inhomogeneity, particularly, in the presence of the radial neutron reflector. Therefore, in these cases there is a need to consider the two-dimensional cylindrical problem of neutron transport in the FR under discussion. This two-dimensional problem with the use of the 26 neutron-energy groups approach has been considered in our previous study (Fomin et al., 2009) for a simple cylindrical FR model with a single radial zone without the radial reflector. The comparison between the results of calculations in these two approaches (Fomin et al., 2008, Fomin et al., 2009) has shown that the simplified approach using the radial buckling concept and the effective multigroup approximation provides a reasonable qualitative description of the considered processes during the evolution of the NBW mode but with some quantitative discrepancies with the exact two-dimensional multigroup approach (Fomin et al., 2009). However, the calculations in the exact approach [16] are time-consuming and call for much more computational resources. For this reason, in Refs. Fomin et al., 2009, Fomin et al., 2011, Fomin et al., 2013, Fomin et al., 2014, Fomin et al., 2015, Fomin et al., 2019, for analyzing different transient processes in the NBW reactor and for the investigation of the NBW mode stability, the simplified approach (Fomin et al., 2008) was used. A detailed study of the stability of the NBW mode performed in Fomin et al. (2014) showed the existence of a special mechanism of negative reactivity feedback inherent in this mode, which is based on the relatively slow production of plutonium and the almost instantaneous burning out of its excess.
The present work is concerned with studying the radial neutron reflector effect on the NBW mode characteristics in the cylindrical FR with the metal U–Pu fuel. For adequate description of the essential radial inhomogeneity of the reactor composition because of the presence of the neutron reflector, we use the approach in the two-dimensional cylindrical geometry, similar to that used in Ref. Fomin et al. (2009), but with taking into account the radial zones with different compositions. The computer simulation of the processes under study has been carried out using the original numerical two-dimensional code FANTENS-2D, developed by the authors, in which the mathematical model described in detail in Sections 2 Mathematical model for describing the NBW mode in a cylindrical fast reactor, 3 The calculation scheme for numerical simulation of the nuclear burning wave mode is implemented. In Section 4, the dependence of the power of the fast NBW reactor on the radial reflector efficiency (thickness) is investigated basing on the results of the performed simulation. A principle possibility of the power control for the reactor working in the nuclear-burning-wave mode by changing the radial reflector efficiency is discussed. Such an opportunity can be very useful, for example, in the case of a forced transition of the reactor to the reduced power mode and subsequent return to the nominal mode.
<Section>2. Mathematical model for describing the NBW mode in a cylindrical fast reactor</Section>
Now we describe the mathematical model employed here for numerical simulation of the evolution of time-spatial distributions of the neutron flux and of the concentrations of nuclides in the nuclear fuel of the U–Pu cycle in the cylindrical FR operating in the NBW mode. The schematic design of such a reactor is shown in Fig. 1. The NBW in this reactor is supposed to be propagating along the cylinder axis (the axial direction  itOz). The FR under consideration is symmetrical relative to the central plane (@) and is composed of three zones of two types. On the left- and right-hand sides of the cylinder, there are two identical homogeneous breeding zones (zone 2), which occupy the main volume of the reactor and are filled with the fertile isotope U as a fuel. At the center of the reactor, there is the initial active zone (ignition zone 1), which comprises U enriched with plutonium of the usual isotopic composition: Pu:Pu:Pu:Pu  = 0.70:0.22:0.05:0.03 (e.g., see Waltar and Reynolds (1981)). In the present model version, the chain reaction is considered to be initiated by means of a volume neutron source Q in the enriched ignition zone. In particular, such a neutron source is caused by the spontaneous fission of Pu and Pu, mainly.
Fig. 1. Schematic of the cylindrical FR with the radial reflector.
The described fuel-containing zones 1 and 2 of radius R are surrounded by the radial neutron reflector of thickness . In the numerical simulation, the calculations take into account the presence of constructional material Fe and the coolant (Pb-Bi eutectic) both in the ignition and breeding zones. The radial neutron reflector consists of the Pb-Bi eutectic and the constructional material Fe.
The initial active zone is schematically shown in Fig. 1 as a homogeneous section of the cylinder at , which corresponds to a simple ignition zone with homogeneous composition. However, the use of this simplified ignition zone leads to an excessive increase of the neutron flux and the FR power (e.g., see Fomin et al., 2008, Fomin et al., 2009, Fomin et al., 2011), which is unacceptable from the practical point of view. This effect can be precluded by using an optimized ignition zone, which has a more complicated inhomogeneous structure. It has been demonstrated in our previous papers (Fomin et al., 2013, Fomin et al., 2015, Fomin et al., 2019) on the basis of calculations in the radial buckling approximation. The analysis of the problem in the exact two-dimensional model of the FR should be performed separately. In this paper, we shall focus attention on investigating the characteristics of the NBW mode at the stage of steady-state wave propagation depending on the radial reflector efficiency, and therefore, we will not consider the optimized scheme of the FR start up and the specific features of the NBW initiation.
We simulate the space–time NBW-mode evolution in the FR under study on the basis of the diffusion approach by solving the set of partial differential equations, containing the nonstationary diffusion equation of neutron transport, the burnup equations for fuel components, and the equations of nuclear kinetics for the delayed neutron precursor concentrations. Thermal effects are not taken into account in our simulation at this stage of studies of the problem.
In the diffusion approach, the space-energy distributions of the neutron flux in the fast reactor are calculated by means of solving the following set of two-dimensional multigroup diffusion equations of neutron transport for the cylindrical geometry:
@(1)
@(2)
@(3)
Here,  and  are the scalar flux and the radial and axial components of the vector neutron flux in the energy group  is the group diffusion coefficient;  , , and  are the macroscopic cross-sections for: absorption, fission, radiative capture, inelastic neutron scattering, moderation, and transport, respectively;  is the macroscopic cross-section for the inelastic neutron scattering with transition from group  to  is the neutron fission group spectrum;  is the average number neutrons in the group g per fission;  is the neutron group velocity; , and  are the fraction of delayed neutrons, the concentration, and decay constant of precursor nuclei in the j-th group for the l-th fissile nuclide;  is the delayed-neutron energy spectrum for the j-th group of precursors (it is assumed that the delayed-neutron energy spectra are identical for all fissile nuclides); G is the total number of used neutron energy groups;  is the above-mentioned volume neutron source in the group  is the effective neutron multiplication factor. The number of delayed-neutron groups is commonly taken to be equal to six (e.g., see Waltar and Reynolds (1981)).
In Eq. (1) for solving the nonstationary evolutionary problem, one should put , while in the case of the stationary problem on the  eigenvalues (search for critical parameters of the initial FR assembly) one should put .
When solving the set of two-dimensional multigroup diffusion Eqs. (1), (2), (3), we take into account the symmetry of the problem relative to z = 0 and consider only one half of the reactor for . For the neutron flux at  (the central plane), the boundary condition corresponding to the system symmetry is specified, and on the right-hand end (), the following condition is written for the free boundary
@(4)
The conditions for the central axis of the cylindrical FR and the external surface of the radial reflector are taken in the form
@(5)
where R is the radius of the fuel-containing cylindrical zones of the FR,  @ is the radial reflector thickness, and @ is the so-called radial extrapolation length for the group g. In the solution of the non-stationary problem, these boundary conditions are fulfilled at each instant of time. Besides, a certain distribution of the initial neutron flux  at the time point  should be also specified. Since the initial FR assembly includes different axial and radial zones, the continuity conditions of scalar and vector neutron fluxes should be fulfilled at the boundaries between these zones.
The analysis of space–time evolution of the NBW mode in the FR under discussion requires to simultaneously solve the set of non-stationary two-dimensional multigroup diffusion equations of neutron transport (1), (3), the equations of burnup and production of the fuel nuclides, as well as the equations of kinetics of the delayed neutron precursors. As time goes on, the fuel-component composition changes in accordance with the chain of nuclear transformations. We now consider the scheme of transformations for the U–Pu cycle shown in Fig. 2.
Download : Download high-res image (68KB)Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 2. Nuclear transmutation chain for U–Pu fuel cycle.
Here, we adopt that the nuclides Np and Pu, after a neutron capture, are immediately transformed into Pu and Am and we drop the intermediate nuclei Np and Pu from consideration. As a result, we include in the main chain of transformations 10 nuclei, whose numbering used in the fuel burnup equations is given in Table 1. Five nuclei with numbers 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 are considered as fissile ones. The pair of fragments produced in each fission event is considered in our calculations as one nucleus, denoted as FP (Bondarenko, 1964).
Table 1. U–Pu cycle nuclide indices.
The change of concentrations of the nuclides in this transformation chain is described by the following equations:
@(6)
@(7)
@(8)
@(9)
where @  are the group microscopic cross sections for absorption, radiative neutron capture, and fission of the l-th nuclide in the group g, respectively;  is the -decay constant of the l-th nucleus, and  is the corresponding half-life;  in (7) is the Kronecker symbol. The constants , and  are considered to be non-zero, while . In this scheme, we neglect the burnup of U, Am, and Am nuclei (), because the decrease of their concentrations due to the absorption reactions is small, as compared to the considered processes. The change in the neutron fission products due to the neutron absorption is neglected. At the initial time point, we assign the concentration distributions of the nuclei , which correspond to the composition of the initial reactor assembly.
In the analysis of the space–time behavior of the FR, one should take into account the delayed neutrons, which may play an important role in the transient processes. If the flux changes negligibly during the characteristic decay time of delayed neutron precursors, the kinetics equations for the precursor nuclei in the approximation of one equivalent group can be written as
@(10)
where . At the initial time, the concentrations of precursor nuclei should be assigned certain initial distributions . In the diffusion Eq. (1), in the approximation of one equivalent group of precursor nuclei, the last two terms in the left-hand part should be written as , where the delayed neutron spectrum is given by .
<Section>3. The calculation scheme for numerical simulation of the nuclear burning wave mode</Section>
For numerically solving the set of Eqs. (1), (2), (3) we use the so-called conservative finite-difference scheme, in which the two-dimensional pattern in the cylindrical coordinate system is chosen (see Fig. 3). This pattern is the element of the corresponding orthogonal mesh . Here the indices i and k are used for numbering the mesh nodes in the radial and axial directions. We ascribe the values of the corresponding macroscopic cross sections  and neutron fluxes  to the mesh points  (circles in Fig. 3), whereas the values of the vector currents  and  are assigned to the midpoints of the corresponding intervals  and  (the radial and axial half-integer nodes, oblique crosses in Fig. 3), respectively. Note that the boundaries along r and z correspond to the half-integer nodes  and , and the boundaries between different physical zones pass through the mesh nodes. We denote the interval lengths between the nodes on the axes z and r as  and , respectively. In the non-stationary problem, this computational mesh is used for each time layer (for the given time point ).
Fig. 3. Two-dimensional pattern of the orthogonal mesh in the cylindrical coordinate system.
Further, we integrate Eq. (2) over r on the intervals , and Eq. (3) over z on the intervals . Since the coefficients in Eqs. (1), (2), (3) are determined by the corresponding macroscopic cross sections, being continuous on the mentioned intervals, we obtain
@(11)
@(12)
In the stationary problem of searching for the critical FR parameters (i.e., at ), Eq. (1) should be integrated with respect to the volume element  over the intervals  and . Taking into account the continuity of neutron fluxes at physical zone boundaries, and assuming the macroscopic cross sections to be constant over the volume of the indicated cell, we write down the integral neutron conservation law in the form:
@(13)
Here, the coefficients  at inner mesh points of the physical zones are equal to:
@(14)
@(15)
where @, and the intervals  have been introduced.
In Eq. (13), the neutron source in the group g is defined as
@(16)
To take into account the boundary conditions (5) on the axis and on the lateral surface of the cylinder, we introduce the fictitious nodes  and . This yields:
@(17)
For the boundary conditions (4), at axial boundaries of the region under consideration we also introduce the fictitious points  and , which yields the expressions
@(18)
For the coefficients in Eq. (13) for the nodes at physical zone boundaries it is not difficult to derive the expressions, similar to those given in (14), (14), however, the difference between the macroscopic cross sections in the neighboring zones must be taken into account. If in the set of algebraic Eqs. (13) the right-hand side is considered as given, then the left-hand side of the set of equations is described by a tridiagonal matrix, and it can be solved by using effective direct methods (e.g., see Ref. Potter (1973)). Then, the solution of (13) can be sought by means of a certain iteration procedure.
To find the effective neutron multiplication factor , we define the quantity which describes the fission neutron source in the FR, as follows:
@(19)
Solving the equation, we use the iteration procedure similar to the one described in Waltar and Reynolds (1981), which provides the convergence of  and the scalar flux distributions . In the zero-order approximation, some starting distribution  is specified to be substituted into the expressions in the right-hand side of the set of Eqs. (13), and for finding  in Eq. (19), as well as the  value. New values of the flux  at the l-th iteration are determined from the set (13) according to the following scheme: first, for each group g, with making use of the  and  values determined at the previous iteration, internal iterations are performed by the double pass method (Crank et al., 1947) in the z-direction, sequentially for all radius values . The iterations are stopped when the prescribed computational accuracy of  is attained. The flux distributions , found in this way, are further used for calculating the new values of , and  using the relations: . The described iterative procedure is stopped upon fulfilling the convergence criterion , where  is the prescribed computational accuracy of . When choosing the initial reactor assembly configuration, it is necessary to determine its parameters so that they could provide the near-critical state conditions: .
In simulation of the time evolution of the space distributions of nuclide concentrations and group neutron fluxes in the FR occurring at initiation and propagation of the nuclear burning wave, the numerical calculations can be essentially simplified by using an approximate solution of the equations of fuel components burnup on the assumption that the neutron fluxes are fixed during the computation time step , which is acceptable if a sufficiently small  value is chosen. Similarly to the results of Refs. Fomin et al., 2005, Waltar and Reynolds, 1981, this makes it possible to find an analytical solutions of Eqs. (6), (7), (8), (9) for the fuel component concentrations at each spatial-mesh node  for the next time layer  starting from their values on the preceding time layer t. These solutions have the following form for each node of the spatial mesh (for simplicity, the indices i and k are omitted; the quantities on the next time layer  will be denoted by letters with “hat” (e.g., ) and the ones on the preceding time layer will be without “hat”):
@(20)
@(21)
@(22)
@(23)
@(24)
(25)
@where @ for @;@ for@ ;@ for@ ;@for @ .
For the concentrations of delayed-neutron precursors in the single equivalent group approximation, the following analytical expressions can be found from Eqs. (10) for the new time layer () for each spatial mesh node (at  the initial distribution of these concentrations has been chosen in the form of the stationary solution of Eq. (10)):
@(26)
@(27)
Thus, the solution of nonstationary multigroup diffusion problem of neutron transport in the cylindrical FR, with the allowance for the fuel-burnup and delayed-neutrons effects, has reduced to the search for numerical solutions of the nonlinear diffusion Eqs. (1) with the coefficients, the nonlinear dependence of which on the time and on the sought-for neutron flux is determined by expressions (20), (27).
The conservative finite-difference scheme for the set of nonstationary diffusion Eqs. (1) is built on the basis of the Crank-Nicolson implicit difference procedure (Crank et al., 1947). This symmetric-in-time scheme is characterized by the unconditional stability at any ratio between values of the space and time steps and is the only implicit scheme which has the second-order approximation of accuracy in  and . Integrating Eq. (1) with respect to the volume element rdrdz on the intervals  and , and also over the time interval , we find the finite-difference scheme in the following form
@(28)
@(29)
@(30)
In Eqs. (28), the coefficients  and  for the preceding and new time layers are given by the formulas similar to Eqs. (14), (15), (17), (18).
As in the case of criticality problem for the reactor, the neutron flux values on the new time layer  are found by solving the set of algebraic Eqs. (28) by using the double pass method in the axial direction sequentially for all values of the radius  . The procedure is repeated until the performed iterations provide the prescribed accuracy of the neutron flux computations. For the initial neutron flux distribution  at , we take the neutron flux , preliminarily found from the solution of the criticality problem for the initial assembly, being normalized to a certain small absolute magnitude.
All numerical calculations were performed in the approximation of 26 energy groups of neutrons () using the group constants taken from the BNAB Nuclear Data Library (see Ref. Bondarenko (1964)).
<Section>4. Radial neutron reflector effects on the NBW parameters</Section>
The above-described two-dimensional multigroup diffusion approach has been realized in our original numerical computer code FANTENS2D (FAst Neutron Transport in Evolving Nuclear Systems 2-Dimensional cylindrical geometry), which takes into account the presence of the radial neutron reflector. Using the code, we have carried out a number of numerical computations, which describe the behavior of the basic characteristics of the NBW mode for a set of variants of the considered FR with different radius values, which also differ in the thickness of the radial reflector. In the computations, first we solved the stationary criticality problem in order to determine the sizes of the plutonium-enriched ignition zone which provide the FR state close to the critical one (), suitable for initiating the NBW mode. Then, on the basis of the obtained critical FR configurations, computations were performed for the time evolution of space-energy neutron flux distributions during the NBW initiation and propagation along the breeding zone, as well as for the processes of burnup and production of the fuel components in the course of the reactor campaign. For initiating the NBW mode, we have used an optimized ignition zone of special configuration, which precludes the above-mentioned excessive increase in the FR power. However, at the initial stage of the computations we observed some power variations, which can be also removed. But here we do not consider the optimization of the FR start-up process, because here the objective of this work is only the study of characteristics of the steady-state NBW mode.
In our calculations of neutronics, we used rather simplified ideas about the material composition of the reactor core, the type of fuel, without taking into account thermohydraulic and radiation processes. The volume fractions of materials contained in the FR composition were chosen to be:  for the metal U–Pu fuel,  for the structural material, and  for the Pb-Bi coolant. The volume fraction of voids in the fuel is . These volume fraction values are approximately in agreement with the composition of real fast reactors. It is assumed that in the radial reflector the volume fractions of Pb-Bi and Fe are 90% and 10%, respectively.
For the chosen radius values of the fuel-containing core (zones 1 and 2 in Fig. 1), several variants of computations have been performed for the nuclear burning process in the FR with different radial-reflector thickness values. In the computations, we have studied the NBW-mode feasibility, as well as the dependence of the reactor power on the thickness of the used reflector. By way of example, Fig. 4, Fig. 5, Fig. 6, Fig. 7, Fig. 8, Fig. 9, Fig. 10 show the results calculations for the main characteristics of nuclear burning for some of the FR variants.
Fig. 4. Axial NBW profiles (z in cm) on the cylinder axis: the summed over groups scalar neutron flux  (); Pu concentration relative to the U concentration ; the fuel burnup depth B. The FR variant with  cm at points in time ,  years.
Fig. 5. Axial NBW profiles (z in cm) on the cylinder axis: the summed over groups scalar neutron flux  (); Pu concentration relative to the U concentration ; the fuel burnup depth B. The FR variant with  cm at points in time ,  years.
Fig. 6. Reactor thermal power P (GW) (a), and the NBW velocity V (cm/year) (b) versus time t (years) for different reflector thickness values.
Fig. 7. Reactor thermal power P (GW) in the steady-state NBW mode versus the radial reflector thickness  (cm).
Fig. 8. Two-dimensional distributions of the summed over groups scalar neutron flux  (@) ;@for the FR variant with the breeding zone radius  cm and the reflector thickness  cm at time points: 10 years (a), 13 years (b), 16 years (c), 19 years (d).
Fig. 9. Two-dimensional distributions of the Pu concentration, , for the same FR variant and the same time points, as in Fig. 8.
Fig. 10. Two-dimensional distributions of the U concentration, , for the same FR variant and the same time points, as in Fig. 8.
Fig. 4, Fig. 5 show the time evolution of the axial profiles (at ) for the neutron flux, the plutonium concentration and the fuel burnup depth during the NBW propagation for two variants of the FR configuration with the cylinder length  cm ( cm) and the core radius  cm, differing in the radial reflector thickness values being  and 60 cm. It should be emphasized that the NBW mode cannot be realized at the chosen radius R value, in the absence of the neutron reflector ().
It can be seen from Fig. 4, Fig. 5, that the mode of stable NBW propagation in this reactor exists at the both considered values of the radial reflector thickness . After forming the burning wave front and the onset of the steady-state NBW mode, the position of the flux maximum gradually shifts along the breeding zone. The shape of the neutron flux distribution remains practically unchanged with time; moreover, the mode of the steady-state NBW motion is characterized by an approximately constant flux level. The increase in the reflector thickness from 53 cm up to 60 cm results in nearly the twofold increase in the neutron flux, and the wave travels two times faster (cf. Fig. 4, Fig. 5). The corresponding changes in the plutonium concentration distribution with the wave front advance along the FR axis (see Fig. 4, Fig. 5) indicate that at each point of time the maximum of this concentration is located near the NBW front. In this case, the level of plutonium concentration produced both in its maximum and behind the wave front, does not practically change for different values of the radial reflector thickness . The level of fuel burnup also remains unchanged. We also note that if we define the axial size of the active zone of nuclear combustion in the wave region as full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the neutron flux distribution, then, as seen from a comparison of Fig. 4 (upper) and Fig. 5 (upper), it practically does not depend on the value of the neutron flux (wave amplitude) and is approximately 100 cm. The shape of the NBW front and the fuel burnup depth are also practically independent of the neutron flux value.
Fig. 6 shows the time behavior of the FR thermal power and the NBW propagation velocity for several thickness values of the radial neutron reflector. The NBW velocity V is defined as the velocity of the shift of the scalar neutron flux maximum along the z axis. The curves in Fig. 6 (except for  cm) demonstrate the presence of a durable stage of the steady-state NBW mode, which terminates as the wave reaches, for  cm, the reactor end, where it dies out. The reactor lifetime essentially differs for different variants of the FR. In the case of  cm, the calculations show that NBW-like mode exists during a relatively long time period, but the true steady-state mode is not established and the process dies out before reaching the end of the reactor. Fig. 6 clearly shows the essential dependence of the NBW power and velocity on the radial reflector thickness, thereby demonstrating the potential possibility to control the reactor power in the NBW mode by varying the reflector efficiency, without any direct intervention in the reactor core. There is a certain minimum value of the reflector thickness, , below which the steady-state mode of the NBW is not realized for the given composition and radius of the breeding zone. From Fig. 6 it is obvious that this value approximately is  cm. As we emphasized above, the reactor behavior and variations in the FR power at the beginning of the reactor campaign are not considered in this article.
Fig. 7 presents the dependence of the reactor power in the steady-state NBW mode on the radial neutron reflector thickness . It is evident from Fig. 7 that the power decreases monotonically and rapidly with a decrease in  and it slumps near the mentioned critical value of the thickness  cm, below which the nuclear burning wave in the FR under study does not propagate. Fig. 7 also shows that, at high enough  values, the rise of the NBW-mode power with the increasing reflector thickness slows down, i.e., saturation takes place, and the power tends to the constant (maximum) level for the given FR. In Fig. 7, the FR thermal power varies in a rather wide range from 1.5 GW to 8 GW. This can be used for the power control in the NBW reactor by varying the radial reflector efficiency, which can be implemented by different methods.
More detailed information on the spatial distributions of the neutron flux and the Pu and U concentrations in the FR under study can be obtained from the two-dimensional plots given in Fig. 8, Fig. 9, Fig. 10 at cm for different points of time.
The special feature of the radial dependence of the neutron flux distribution is its certain backbending in the peripheral region relative to the flux maximum position on the cylinder axis (see 8).
Note that the residual Pu concentration behind the NBW front is minimal on the reactor axis and has its maximum near the cylindrical surface of the breeding zone near the radial reflector (see Fig. 9). Unlike the central region of the reactor, the residual plutonium concentration near the reflector only slightly differs from the maximum Pu concentration at the wave front. Similarly to the neutron flux distributions in Fig. 8, the plutonium distributions also demonstrate the wave front backbending. Fig. 10 shows that in the concentration distributions of fertile uranium isotope, the maximum U burnup depth is observed on the reactor axis, but the burnup level considerably decreases when approaching the reflector.
<Section>5. Conclusions</Section>
In the present work, the possibilities of controlling the power of the prospective cylindrical fast nuclear reactor operating in the self-sustained mode of nuclear burning wave, which propagates in the axial direction, by means of varying the radial neutron reflector efficiency have been investigated. The studies have been carried out on the basis of numerical solution of the nonstationary multigroup equations of neutron diffusion along with the set of equations of fuel component burnup and the equations of nuclear kinetics for delayed neutron precursors with the use of the two-dimensional cylindrical model of the reactor. The detailed description is presented for the mathematical model and the employed numerical scheme of computations, which were realized in the original computer code FANTENS-2D, developed by the authors. The code has been used in the work for simulating the neutron-nuclear processes in the reactor having two physical homogeneous zones (the ignition and breeding zones) with the metal fuel of the U–Pu cycle, taking into account the presence of the constructional material (Fe) and the eutectic Pb–Bi as a coolant. The volume fractions of the reactor components approximately correspond to the composition of real fast reactors. The mentioned zones are surrounded by the radial neutron reflector which consists of the Pb–Bi eutectic and the constructional material Fe.
The numerical simulation has been carried out for different variants of the FR under discussion in order to explore the possibility of initiating the steady-state NBW mode, and to investigate its characteristics depending on the geometric parameters of the reactor. In the computations, first the basic variant of the FR with the core radius  cm has been chosen. This R value is somewhat smaller than the critical one, below which the steady-state NBW mode does not exist without the radial neutron reflector. Then the studies of the influence of the radial reflector efficiency (thickness) on the possibility of the steady-state NBW existence and on the reactor power in this mode have been performed. We have also investigated the characteristics of the two-dimensional spatial distributions of neutron flux and concentrations of basic fuel components in the NBW.
It has been shown that in the FR under consideration (with  cm), for the radial reflector thickness greater than a certain critical value,  cm, establishing the steady-state NBW mode becomes feasible. The increase in the reflector thickness leads to a rather fast increase of the reactor power and the NBW velocity. However, at sufficiently high  values the saturation takes place and the power tends to a constant (maximum) level for the given FR. Thus, the results of our calculations prove that theoretically one can change the reactor power in very wide range by means of varying the radial reflector efficiency. For example, at the core radius  cm, the reactor thermal power P in the steady-state NBW mode is varied approximately between 8 and 1.5 GW when changing the radial reflector thickness  from 70 to 52 cm. The wave velocity decreases proportionally to the reactor power, and accordingly, the reactor campaign duration increases in the same proportion. Note that at  cm the campaign of the reactor with cylinder length  cm lasts for about 40 years. Nevertheless, in the steady-state NBW, the fuel burnup degree and the level of plutonium production only slightly change for all considered FR variants. With the use of the reflector thickness less than  (e.g., at  cm) the process of nuclear burning dies out the quicker, the smaller  is. This proves the possibility of controlling the power of the reactor until its complete shutdown by changing the reflector efficiency without intervening in the reactor core.
The results obtained here give a basis for further studying the possibilities of smooth power control in the NBW reactor, its shut down and the reactor restart using the variable-efficiency radial neutron reflector.
<Section>CRediT authorship contribution</Section>
S.P. Fomin: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Data curation. A.I. Kirdin: Resources, Writing - review & editing. M.S. Malovytsia: Software, Visualization, Investigation. V.V. Pilipenko: Methodology, Validation, Formal analysis, Writing - original draft. N.F. Shul’ga: Supervision.
<Section>Declaration of Competing Interest</Section>
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
<Section>References</Section>
Akhiezer et al., 2001
A. Akhiezer, N. Khizhnyak, N. Shul’ga, V. Pilipenko, L. Davydov
Slow nuclear burning
Problems of Atomic Science and Technology, 6 (2001), pp. 272-275
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Bondarenko, 1964
I. Bondarenko
Group Constants for Nuclear Reactor Calculations
Consultants Bureau Inc., New York, USA (1964)
Google Scholar
Chen and Maschek, 2005
X.-N. Chen, W. Maschek
Transverse buckling effects on solitary burn-up waves
Annals of Nuclear Energy, 32 (2005), pp. 1377-1390, 10.1016/j.anucene.2005.01.012
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Crank et al., 1947
J. Crank, P. Nicolson
A practical method for numerical evaluation of solutions of partial differential equations of the heat-conduction type
Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, vol. 43, Cambridge University Press (1947), pp. 50-67
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Feoktistov, 1988
Feoktistov, L., 1988. An analysis of a concept of a physically safe reactor, Preprint IAE-4605/4.
Google Scholar
Feoktistov, 1989
L. Feoktistov
Neutron-induced fission wave
Soviet Physics Doklady, 34 (1989), pp. 1071-1073
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fomin et al., 2005
S. Fomin, Y. Mel’nik, V. Pilipenko, N. Shul’ga
Investigation of self-organization of the non-linear nuclear burning regime in fast neutron reactors
Annals of Nuclear Energy, 32 (2005), pp. 1435-1456, 10.1016/j.anucene.2005.04.001
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fomin et al., 2008
S. Fomin, Y. Mel’nik, V. Pilipenko, N. Shul’ga
Initiation and propagation of nuclear burning wave in fast reactor
Progress in Nuclear Energy, 50 (2008), pp. 163-169, 10.1016/j.pnucene.2007.10.020
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fomin et al., 2009
S. Fomin, Y. Mel’nik, V. Pilipenko, N. Shul’ga
Safe fast reactor based on the self-sustained regime of nuclear burning wave
Proc. of First Intern. Conf. “Global 2009”, paper #9456, Paris, France (2009)
Google Scholar
Fomin et al., 2011
S. Fomin, O. Fomin, Y. Mel’nik, V. Pilipenko, N. Shul’ga
Nuclear burning wave in fast reactor with mixed ThU fuel
Progress in Nuclear Energy, 53 (2011), pp. 800-805, 10.1016/j.pnucene.2011.05.004
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fomin et al., 2013
O. Fomin, S. Fomin, Y. Mel’nik, V. Pilipenko, N. Shul’ga
Nuclear burning wave reactor: smooth start-up problem
No 1041 Journal of Kharkiv National University, physical series «Nuclei, Particles, Fields», 58 (2) (2013), pp. 49-56
https://periodicals.karazin.ua/eejp/article/view/13512
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fomin et al., 2014
S. Fomin, O. Fomin, Y. Mel’nik, V. Pilipenko, N. Shul’ga
Specific mechanism of negative reactivity feedback in nuclear burning wave reactor
Topical Issues in Fast Reactors and Related Fuel Cycles, Vienna, Austria, IAEA (2014), pp. 333-342
https://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/Publications/PDF/SupplementaryMaterials/P1665CD/Track3_Safety.pdf
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Fomin et al., 2015
O. Fomin, S. Fomin, Y. Mel’nik, V. Pilipenko, N. Shul’ga
Transient processes in the nuclear burning wave reactor
Proc. of Intern. Conf. “Global 2015”, paper #5254, Paris, France, In CD (2015)
Google Scholar
Fomin et al., 2019
S. Fomin, A. Kirdin, M. Malovytsia, V. Pilipenko, N. Shul’ga
Optimization of ignition zone of advanced fast reactor, working in Nuclear Burning Wave mode
Problems of Atomic Science and Technology, 71 (2019), pp. 80-85
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Hejzlar et al., 2013
P. Hejzlar, R. Petroski, J. Cheatham, N. Touran, M. Cohen, B. Truong, R. Latta, M. Werner, T. Burke, J. Tandy, M. Garrett, B. Johnson, T. Ellis, J. Mcwhirter, A. Odedra, P. Schweiger, D. Adkisson, J. Gilleland
TerraPower, LLC traveling wave reactor development program overview, Nuclear
Engineering and Technology, 45 (2013), pp. 731-744, 10.5516/NET.02.2013.520
ArticleDownload PDFCrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Khotyayintsev et al., 2010
Khotyayintsev, V., Pavlovych, V., Khotyayintseva, O., 2010. Travelling-wave reactor: velocity formation mechanisms. In: Proceeding of Int. Conf. “Advances in Reactor Physics to Power the Nuclear Renaissance”, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
Google Scholar
Khotyayintsev et al., 2015
V. Khotyayintsev, A. Aksonov, O. Khotyayintseva, V. Pavlovych, V. Gulik, A. Tkaczyk
Velocity characteristic and stability of wave solutions for a candle reactor with thermal feedback
Annals of Nuclear Energy, 85C (2015), pp. 337-345, 10.1016/j.anucene.2015.04.044
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Pilipenko et al., 2003
V. Pilipenko, D. Belozorov, L. Davydov, N. Shul’ga
Some aspects of slow nuclear burning
Proceedings of ICAPP 03, Cordoba, Spain, In CD (2003), Article 3169
View Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Potter, 1973
D. Potter
Computational Physics
John Wiley & Sons, London - New York - Sydney - Toronto (1973)
Google Scholar
Sekimoto, 2005
Sekimoto, H., 2005. A Light of CANDLE: New Burnup Strategy, Tech. Rep., Tokyo Institute of Technology.
Google Scholar
Sekimoto et al., 2001
H. Sekimoto, K. Ryu, Y. Yoshimura
CANDLE: the new burnup strategy
Nuclear Science and Engineering, 139 (2001), pp. 306-317, 10.13182/NSE01-01
CrossRefView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Teller, 1998
Teller, E., 1998. Nuclear Energy for the Third Millennium, Springer US, Boston, MA, ISBN 978-1-4899-1546-7, 47–52, doi:10.1007978-1-4899-1546-7_7.
Google Scholar
Teller et al., n.d.
Teller, E., Ishikawa, M., Wood, L., 1996. Completely automated nuclear reactors for long-term operation. In: Proceedings of ICENES’96, vol. 96., Obninsk, Russia (June 24–28 1996), pp. 151-158.
Google Scholar
van Dam, 2000
H. van Dam
Self-stabilizing criticality waves
Annals of Nuclear Energy, 27 (2000), pp. 1505-1521, 10.1016/S0306-4549(00)00035-9
ArticleDownload PDFView Record in ScopusGoogle Scholar
Waltar and Reynolds, 1981
A. Waltar, A. Reynolds
Fast Breeder Reactors
Pergamon Press, New York, USA (1981)
Google Scholar