<title>Corrosion of Zircaloys: Relating the microstructural observations to the corrosion kinetics</title>
<author>Mhairi Gass; Mark Fenwick; Helen Hulme; Michael Waters; Paul Binks; Alexandra Panteli; Mark Chatterton; Victoria Allen; Aidan Cole-Baker</author>
<Affiliation>Corrosion and Materials Science, Wood. PLC, Walton House, 404 Faraday Street, Birchwood, WA3 6GA, UK</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Materials</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.jnucmat.2018.07.017</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022311517314708</URL>
Highlights
Detailed autoclave corrosion data for Zircaloy corroded in a PWR environment are presented and interrogated.
Extraction of corrosion rate data demonstrates that the transition period occurs over approximately 50% of a corrosion cycle.
Development of oxide is characterised through SEM and confirms the continued cyclic nature of the corrosion process.
A clear relationship between the metal – oxide interface roughness and onset of cracking is observed.
Large scale cracking, associated with transition, is found to occur after the corrosion rate has increased, not before.
Abstract
Understanding the corrosion behaviour of zirconium alloys is essential in providing cost effective and safe operation of nuclear power plant. Long-term corrosion testing of Zircaloy-4 and Zircaloy-2 in 350 °C pressurised water is presented with detailed analysis of the oxide's development. The correlation of the corrosion and analytical data provides a detailed understanding regarding the point at which different microstructural features, such as cracking, occur during the cyclic corrosion process. The results from this work show that the large scale cracking, which is often associated with the cyclic transitions, evolve following, rather than prior to, the onset in rapid corrosion.
Keywords:Zircaloy-2 (A);Zircaloy-4 (A);Corrosion (C);Pressurised water reactor (B);Autoclave (B);SEM (B)
1. Introduction
Over the many years of research into the corrosion behaviour of zirconium alloys, used as fuel cladding in the nuclear industry, there have been numerous publications detailing results from research programmes investigating corrosion behaviour in out-of-pile autoclaves [e.g. Refs. [[1], [2], [3], [4]]]. Accompanying these research programmes were a number of papers presenting microstructural characterisation [e.g. Refs. [5,6]] on the oxides formed during the corrosion process and the underlying metal. Various interpretations of the data have been provided over the years giving several different, and often contradictory, understandings regarding the corrosion process of such alloys.
In recent years, the interest in developing a mechanistic understanding of the corrosion of zirconium alloys has been re-established, with research groups applying a range of state-of-the-art characterisation techniques to a range of zirconium alloys [e.g. Refs. [[7], [8], [9]]]. The combination of developments in characterisation techniques with the multidisciplinary approach between research groups (e.g. the MUZIC consortium1) has enabled significant steps in understanding to be made [e.g. Refs. [[8], [9], [10]]]. These techniques are also being applied to a range of irradiated material, both proton and neutron. However, notwithstanding the developments made, there has been little recent work providing detailed interrogation of the corrosion data, and the direct comparison of this to the latest understanding from the characterisation work to demonstrate, unequivocally, whether microstructural observations, such as the cracking in the oxide parallel to the interface often associated with transition, are a cause or consequence of the change in corrosion rate at transition.
This paper consists of two parts. The first part presents the corrosion programme at Wood PLC, which consists of long-term corrosion testing of a large number of Zircaloy-4 and Zircaloy-2 coupons which have all undergone a similar processing history. The coupons have been corroded in 350 °C pressurised water with a raised pH commensurate with PWR conditions. The introduction of the coupons into the test programme has been staggered, and regular weight gain measurements taken which allows for a detailed interrogation of the corrosion behaviour. To support the corrosion data, coupons have been periodically removed from test for destructive characterisation; these form the basis of the second part of this paper, which presents the microstructural observations obtained from the application of detailed SEM characterisation, and aims to correlate these observations with the corrosion data.
2. Material
All the material presented in this paper is Zircaloy-4 or Zircaloy-2; the chemical compositions sit within the ranges required by ASTM B353. The coupons are a recrystallised annealed (RXA) microstructure, processed according to Fig. 1 following the beta quench. The number, types of coupons and their dimensions are presented in Table 1 where material with ID ‘A’ is Zircaloy-4 and was removed following the first hot roll and anneal post-beta quench; material with IDs ‘B’ and ‘C’ are Zircaloy-4 and Zircaloy-2, respectively, and have undergone further processing, as presented in Fig. 1a; Fig. 1b shows representative examples of the two coupon types tested. The annealing parameter, calculated from Ref. [11], has also been included in Table 1. A total of 122 coupons have been put on test. Prior to testing, all coupons have been prepared in accordance with ASTM G2; in summary they were mechanically polished and then pickled in an HF and HNO3 solution to remove 50 μm from all surfaces, followed by immediate rinsing in demineralised water.
Fig. 1. Zircaloy material tested. a) Processing history of the reference Zircaloy sheet material; b) representative photos of the two coupon types used (the coupon in the left hand image is going through transition and has the distinctive ‘patchy’ appearance).
Table 1. Material tested, dimensions and number of coupons.
3. Methods
3.1. Testing
Corrosion testing was carried out at 350 °C ± 0.5 °C in 316H stainless steel autoclaves with an internal volume of 8 l. The coolant is commensurate with PWR chemistry at a raised pH level and is recirculated through an ion exchange column with a flow of 10–15 ml/min. A hydrogen overpressure is applied; the average dissolved hydrogen content has been measured to be 3.65 ppm using a calibrated hydrogen orbisphere. The coupons have been added into recirculating isothermal autoclaves in batches to avoid the mass introduction of fresh material, and to stagger the data to capture different aspects of the corrosion process. Following each test, the coupons were removed, washed with deionised water and dried in an oven at 40 °C; each coupon was then weighed three times on a 5 point balance. During the testing, some coupons have been removed from the test for destructive characterisation.
3.2. Characterisation
A total of 33 coupons have been removed from test for destructive characterisation. For each of these coupons, a cross-sectional SEM sample was prepared. An FEI Quanta SEM was used and images were acquired in backscattered electron (BSE) mode at a magnification of 8000×. Across each sample, 26 BSE images were acquired with a spacing of ∼1 mm between each image. Following acquisition, the images were input into an analysis program developed in-house, ZOAP (Zirconium Oxide Analysis Program). This program has been developed with the Enthought EPD Python package specifically to allow the detailed interrogation of the oxide films and permits consistent thresholding of the images prior to measuring a range of microstructural parameters and features. This software has previously been applied to coupons corroded in steam by Platt et al. [12] to investigate the development of the metal – oxide interface roughness. The measurements are acquired along every pixel column within each image (with the oxide aligned horizontally across the image, as per Fig. 5). Currently, the available outputs are (per SEM image): minimum, maximum and mean oxide thickness, Rdq as a measure of the interface roughness, number of cracks in the oxide, and percentage of the oxide cracked. Each of these parameters is output per image, with up to 26 images analysed per coupon,2 this permits clouds of data to be plotted.
Fig. 2. Corrosion curve for all coupons corroded in 350 °C pressurised water (markers) with predicted corrosion from the Kass and Hillner solutions (lines) [[2], [3], [4]].
Fig. 3. Corrosion rates of all coupons a) as a function of time b) as a function of weight gain. The coloured points in b) indicate the locations of the coupons taken for characterisation, presented in Fig. 5, Fig. 9, Fig. 10.
Fig. 4. Trend in corrosion rate as a function of time.
Fig. 5. Representative cross-sectional BSE images for a range of oxide thicknesses (from weight gain).
4. Results
4.1. Corrosion results
The weight gain (WG) plots for the Zircaloy-4 and -2 coupons, which have undergone long-term isothermal corrosion at 350 °C, are presented in Fig. 2. This dataset comprises 122 coupons, of which 54 have been removed at various points during the test programme for further testing such as isotopic spiking (21 in total, not discussed here) or for destructive characterisation (33 in total). The oxide thickness is plotted on the right hand axis and has been derived using the approximation 15 mg/dm2 = 1 μm [13]. From an initial investigation of the corrosion curve, it can be seen that little WG difference between Zircaloy-2 and Zircaloy-4 can be observed. The first transition in corrosion kinetics commences at around 2.2 μm, as would be expected from the wealth of literature on the Zircaloys, and observed early on by Bryner [14]. The second kinetic transition appears to commence at an oxide thickness of approximately 4.4 μm. Beyond this point, the cyclic nature becomes less clear. As the corrosion proceeds, slight divergence in the corrosion data between the various batches of material with nominally similar chemistry, processing and preparation conditions becomes evident. By the time the oxides have a thickness approaching 10 μm, the range in oxide thickness from WG between all the material types is approximately 1.5 μm, and for the lead coupons, which consists of 7 coupons from the same source, an oxide thickness of ∼16 μm has been achieved, with a range of approximately 0.5 μm.
Previously, Kass [2] had proposed a general expression for the pre-transition corrosion behaviour (up to approximately 2 μm) through the empirical fitting to corrosion data for Zircaloy-2 and Zircaloy-4; Hillner [3] subsequently proposed temperature dependent time-to-transition, oxide thickness at transition, and post-transition corrosion rate equations established from data from the same test programme. With further long-term corrosion data, this was developed to encompass two expressions for post-transition corrosion rates; the second post-transition rate occurring at oxide thicknesses exceeding approximately 27 μm and applicable to oxide thicknesses up to 114 μm [4]. It is worth noting that the material investigated in this work was Zircaloy-2 and -4, predominately in the recrystallised annealed alpha phase with an equiaxed grain structure, but with some material quenched from the prior beta phase; the corrosion testing was carried out in static autoclaves with pH 7 pressurised water at temperatures ranging 232–360 °C.
Using the initial engineering solutions proposed by Hillner in Ref. [3], time-to-transition and WG at transition have been calculated and combined with the pre- and post-transition equations to predict the corrosion at 350 °C; these solutions have been superimposed onto the corrosion data in Fig. 2 (solid line). It can be seen that during pre-transition there is generally a good fit to the current data. At 350 °C, whilst the pre-transition curve fits the current data well, the time-to-transition appears to be under-predicted, at 134 days, compared to the test data. The subsequent post-transition rate fits the current data well (noting that it is linear) up to an oxide thickness of approximately 9 μm; beyond this thickness Hillner's post-transition solution under-predicts the corrosion, with the difference increasing with oxide thickness. The application of the modified post-transition rates proposed in Ref. [4] (dashed line in Fig. 2) uses the same pre-transition rate and time-to-transition as proposed in Ref. [3], therefore the predicted transition point is the same as for the solid line. The post-transition corrosion rate results in an over-prediction of the post-transition oxide thickness over the available experimental data. However, when comparing the current data to the modified solution beyond ∼400 days, there is a convergence between the prediction and experiment, indicating that long-term the current data will eventually meet the modified Hillner solutions proposed in Ref. [4]. It is noted that the oxide thicknesses achieved to date are significantly below that where the introduction of the second, more rapid, post-transition rate would be expected (∼27 μm).
4.2. Corrosion rate as a function of time
From the corrosion data as plotted in Fig. 2 (i.e. WG versus time), little more information can be extracted. However, by plotting the corrosion rate from WG versus both time and WG, further interrogation can be carried out, Fig. 3a and b respectively.
The plot of corrosion rate versus time for the same coupons is presented in Fig. 3a. From this plot, the minima are interpreted as the points in time at which transitions commence, i.e. the time at which subsequent exposure results in an increase in rate; these are summarised in Table 2. From this plot, four transitions in rate can be identified; the first two are clear, the third and fourth become less evident as the corrosion behaviour of the various batches diverge. It is interesting to note that by taking the minima in rate to be the onset of transition, the time to onset of first transition occurs at approximately 120–130 days (depending on material type). This is considerably shorter than has been identified from the corrosion plot in Fig. 2, but is closer to the value of 134 days predicted by Hillner [3]. A further point of interest is that the first corrosion cycle is shorter than the duration of the second corrosion cycle, which takes approximately 180–230 days (depending on material type); in fact, the first, pre-transition, corrosion cycle is the shortest of the four cycles captured during the test programme to date. This is contrary to previous observations where the pre-transition corrosion cycle has been determined to have the longest duration, with subsequent cycles all being shorter in time [14].
Table 2. Onset of transition identified (by eye) from the corrosion rate plots as time; the values in brackets donate the duration of each corrosion cycle.
4.3. Corrosion rate as a function of weight gain
The plot of corrosion rate versus WG is presented in Fig. 3b. The minima in the plot indicate the WGs at which transitions commence; these are summarised in Table 3. From this plot, as with the corrosion rate versus time plot, four minima can be identified; however, this time the spread of data is much tighter, with the deviation between batches with increasing oxide thickness greatly reduced. As such, identification of the thickness at which the transitions commence is easier than identifying a time at which transitions commence. From Table 3 it is found that from the available data, the cycle with the lowest WG is the initial, pre-transition oxide, averaging at just below 30 mg/dm2, with the second cycle supporting a WG averaging 34 mg/dm2. This is in agreement with the observed duration of the cycles, i.e. the first, pre-transition cycle is the shortest and thinnest, and the second cycle the longest and supporting the thickest oxide.
Table 3. Onset of transition identified (by eye) from the corrosion rate plots as WG; the values in brackets donate the WG of each corrosion cycle.
Whilst the rate plots in Fig. 3 clearly show the cyclic nature of the corrosion behaviour, and that the clarity of the cycles decreases with increasing oxide thickness, the general trend in rate behaviour is difficult to interrogate. Averaging the rate data over a number of time steps (11 were chosen for this example as it exceeds the data within a corrosion cycle) from a selection of coupons that have been on test for the longest duration (Material ID ‘A’), smoothes out the cycles allowing the general behaviour to be investigated. This is plotted in Fig. 4, where a gradual trend of increasing rate with time is observed over the available data range, up to a maximum rate of ∼0.32 mg/dm2/d. It is noted that the work carried out by Garzarolli [11] indicated that, for Zircaloy-4 with a comparable annealing parameter to that used in the current study, a post-transition corrosion rate of approximately 0.2 mg/dm2/d is observed after ∼500 days; for the Hillner work, an average post-transition corrosion rate of ∼0.26 mg/dm2/d can be calculated from the equations, noting that this is derived from data acquired over a longer time period and the annealing parameter for this work is not known. Further time at temperature would be required to determine whether the rate continues to increase, or stabilises; however, the data presented here is in general agreement with previous observations.
4.4. Comparison between rate plots
By presenting the data as a rate and plotting it against both time and WG, it becomes apparent that, whilst there is variability between the time-to-transition for the various batches of coupons on test, it is very clear that after the oxide has exceeded a certain thickness the onset of transition commences, regardless of batch variability. This observation strongly suggests that stress in the oxide layer (and presumably in the metal immediately below the oxide) plays an important role on the onset of transition; this has been proposed numerous times, with experimental evidence such as transmission X-ray diffraction (t-XRD) supporting it [e.g. 15], but, to the authors' knowledge, has not previously been clearly demonstrated from the corrosion data alone.
A further observation from the rate data is that following the onset of transition, there is a delay in the corrosion achieving its maximum rate. Whilst the onset of the first transition, from the rate data, occurs at ∼29.3 mg/dm2 (∼1.9 μm), or ∼123 days, the maximum rate is not reached until an approximate weight gain of 43.5 mg/dm2 (2.9 μm) or approximately 210 days. On further inspection of the corrosion plot (Fig. 2), this trend is apparent, but not clear. It is proposed that this maximum rate is the point at which the full surface of the coupon has passed through transition, and is a result of the local nature of the corrosion process at a metal grain by metal grain level, a phenomenon that has previously been reported [16] and has been observed within this programme as a patchiness of the coupon surface. As a result of this localised behaviour, it is not possible to capture the actual rate of the rapid corrosion immediately following the onset of transition as it is dampened by the spread of behaviours locally within the same coupon. The points at which the corrosion rate minima occur will therefore be identified as the ‘onset of transition’, and the period between the corrosion rate minimum and maximum within a cycle will be referred to as the ‘transition period’ herein.
Whilst the local nature of the corrosion process, and the averaging of data have previously been discussed and observed microstructurally, the link back to detailed corrosion data had not clearly been made. The characterisation presented in this work intends to provide the microstructural confirmation of these observations.
4.5. Characterisation of corroded coupons
A total of 33 coupons have been removed from test over a range of different WGs and destructively characterised. A number of characterisation techniques have been applied to these coupons. For all coupons that have been removed from test, cross-sectional SEM has been carried out in a systematic manner, and the data analysed using in-house software to provide statistically relevant data. For selected coupons, further advanced characterisation has been carried out, including (scanning) transmission electron microscopy ((S)TEM), electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS), secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) and t-XRD. Some of the results from this programme have previously been published [15,17] and will be referred to in the discussion section.
Representative BSE SEM images are presented from coupon cross-sections for a range of oxide thicknesses (Fig. 5). The coloured boarder around each SEM image identifies where it has been taken from the corrosion rate plot (Fig. 3b): red = first cycle; blue = second cycle; green = third cycle; yellow = fifth cycle and grey = oxide thickness beyond five cycles. Where the data are available, the cycles have been split into a light shade, to represent the corrosion region between the rate minimum and maximum (i.e. where corrosion rate is increasing within a cycle), and dark shade, to represent the corrosion region between the rate maximum and minimum (i.e. where the corrosion rate is slowing down within a cycle).
As the oxides increase in thickness, a band of lateral cracks are observed which are associated with transition; from visual inspection these bands of cracks repeat at approximately 2 μm intervals; however, are not clearly developed in oxides thinner than ∼3 μm.
The following sections present the data extracted from the ZOAP analysis, which provides a more detailed understanding of the microstructural evolution of the oxides. It is noted that for all the oxide analyses presented in this work, no differences have been observed between Zircaloy-2 and -4. As such, no reference is made to the specific Zircaloy being characterised.
4.6. Oxide thickness
It is recognised that the corrosion process has local variations which can be related to the individual metal grains that the oxide is growing into; several examples of this can be seen in Fig. 5 and are highlighted by the arrows. What is initially unclear is whether the oxide continues advancing into the same grain at a comparable rate following transition, hence continually increasing the step difference locally between metal grains.
To investigate further, the delta in oxide thickness (i.e. maximum minus minimum), for each image, was plotted versus the mean oxide thickness from each image extracted from ZOAP. The results are plotted in Fig. 6. The average minima in corrosion rates, i.e. onset of transition (taken from Table 3), are indicated by the vertical dashed lines; the transition period (i.e. between minima and maxima) are identified by the blue regions. Variation in oxide thickness increases until the onset of first transition at around 2 μm. Following this point, the variation in range of oxide thickness increases at a steady rate over the available data range. There is an indication, above 10 μm, that the range may start to increase again; however, the data are limited and further analysis, once material is available, would be required to confirm this observation. The initial sharp increase in oxide thickness variation over the first transition, followed by a significant reduction in rate of increase in thickness range indicates that, whilst the underlying grain is important to the local corrosion in pre-transition material (likely to be related to local orientation of the metal grain), the significance of the underlying metal grain is much less important following transition and that there appears to be a balancing of local advances in corrosion rate. This again would indicate that the local stresses associated with the corrosion process play an important role in defining the rate. Interestingly, recent work by Garner et al. [18] has demonstrated that there is no clear orientation effect of the underlying zirconium crystal structure on corrosion of low-Sn ZIRLO at the full specimen scale over the initial 70 mg/dm2 of WG.
Fig. 6. Plot of delta oxide thickness as a function of mean oxide thickness per SEM image from ZOAP.
4.7. Roughness (Rdq) of the metal – oxide interface
The Rdq parameter was used to interrogate the roughness of the metal – oxide interface. Rdq is a hybrid parameter that measures the average absolute slope of the interface, taking into account changes in both the amplitude and wavelength using the equation:
@Where, N is the number of intervals across the interface and Δ is the slope of a given interval.
The data are presented in Fig. 7 for the coupons under investigation here; again, the transition periods are highlighted by the blue boxes. It is noted that the results present the roughness from a cross-sectional 2D image, and therefore are likely to underestimate the actual interface roughness; nonetheless, the trends extracted provide a useful means to understand the evolution of roughness. As with the work presented previously [12,19], which used the same software and developed the script for interrogating the interface roughness, a clear cyclic nature is evident. In this case, the roughness increasing approximately linearly up to an oxide thickness of 2 μm, followed by a decrease in roughness following the onset of transition; at around 3 μm, after the transition period, a new minimum in roughness is observed, which increases again until the following onset of transition. There is a scarcity of data in the thickness ranges over the transition periods; however, some data points are apparent for the first transition sitting between approximately 2–3 μm; these data sit scattered at intermediate roughnesses, and may indicate that the flattening of the metal – oxide interface following the onset of transition is a process that occurs over a period of time and thickness, rather than an instantaneous process. The cyclic nature of these data agrees well with the corrosion rate data, which both indicate that the transition process occurs over a period of time and growth of oxide.
Fig. 7. Roughness of the metal – oxide interface as a function of mean oxide thickness per SEM image from ZOAP.
4.8. Cracking in the oxide
Significant lateral cracking is often associated with transition; however, the point at which cracking occurs in the oxide, i.e. a build-up of cracks approaching the onset of transition, or a band of cracks forming as a result of the transition in corrosion, is still unclear. Although it is generally accepted that these bands of lateral cracks will not provide pathways for the oxidising species to travel from the oxide surface through to the metal – oxide interface, understanding how and when they form could provide greater insight to the controlling steps in the transition process.
The total fraction of oxide that appears as cracking in the SEM images has been calculated and is plotted against the mean oxide thickness per SEM image in Fig. 8a with the transition periods indicated by blue boxes. Whilst it is possible that cracking could be introduced into the oxide during sample preparation, due to experience with FIB cross-sectioning of the same coupons, plus the care taken during preparation (both cutting and subsequent polishing), it is not thought that this is significant. Furthermore, all SEM samples have been prepared in the same manner, so if there were to be a small effect, it would likely result in an offset to the calculated values, thus observed trends would still be appropriate.
Fig. 8. Fraction of the oxide that is cracked for coupons corroded at 350 °C, a) as a function of mean oxide thickness per SEM image from ZOAP, and b) as a function of the metal – oxide interface roughness per SEM image from ZOAP.
It is apparent that there is very little cracking in oxides with a thickness below approximately 1.75 μm in thickness. Above this thickness there is an almost step-like increase in the percentage of oxide that is cracked, above which point there is a large spread in the amount of cracking within an oxide at any given thickness ranging between 2 and 8%. When the percentage oxide cracked is plotted against the roughness of the metal – oxide interface, Fig. 8b, a clear relationship is established where cracking occurs once the interface roughness exceeds an Rdq value of 0.2. It is proposed that as the metal-oxide interface roughness increases, local stresses build up in the oxide associated with the undulations; above the delays in the oxidation front, high local out-of-plane tensile stresses develop. When the interface roughness exceeds an Rdq of 0.2, the magnitude of the stress present is too great for the oxide to support; this results the oxide failing with Mode I type cracking locally above the delays in the oxidation front, relaxing the local stresses.
Beyond the onset of first transition, there is a large range in the amount of oxide that is cracked for any given mean oxide thickness. However, a trend can be observed showing a drop in % cracking over the transition period (i.e. within the blue regions) and subsequent rise at approximately 2 μm intervals. Whilst less defined, this continues the same trend as observed pre-transition, indicative of the mechanical breakdown of the oxide resulting in increased cracking. When compared to the roughness plot in Fig. 7, it can be postulated that the percentage cracking drops because fresh oxide, with a smoother interface is growing, which results in fewer cracks initiating; as the interface roughens, the frequency of cracking also increases close to the metal – oxide interface. What cannot be extracted from these plots is whether the increase in % cracking is a result of coarsening of existing cracking, an increase in the actual number of cracks, or both. Nor does it provide information as to when the cracking in the oxide occurred.
To this end, the areas of all defects (for this example we can refer to defects as cracks) from the analysed SEM data have been extracted (rather than obtaining a value per image), and plotted relative to their local oxide thickness and their location from the oxide surface. The outputs for a selection of oxide thicknesses have been plotted in Fig. 9a–i; the size of the data points are indicative of the relative defect area. The selected oxides are a subset of those presented as SEM images in Fig. 5; again, the colour of the data points refers to where the oxide sits on the corrosion rate plot in Fig. 3b. Fig. 9a and b presents the cracks for pre-transition oxides. It can be seen that, as expected, initially there are very few cracks,3 which develop to a distribution of small cracks through the oxide just prior to transition; this is in agreement with Fig. 8a. Beyond the onset of transition, within the transition period, Fig. 9c and d shows that cracking continues to develop, but predominately at the metal – oxide interface. It is not until after the transition period (i.e. the maximum in corrosion rate has been passed), and the rate starts to decrease again, that the mass of cracking, occurring approximately 1–2.5 μm from the oxide surface, becomes apparent. This cracking consists of the large band of cracks that lie parallel to the metal – oxide interface and are associated with the cyclic transitions. This observation is clarified in Fig. 10, where a selection of the data from the first (pre-transition) and second corrosion cycles are plotted together. It can be clearly seen that the band of cracking is not observed for the red (pre-transition), or light blue (transition period) and only occurs for the dark blue data points, i.e. after the rapid corrosion associated with transition has occurred. From Fig. 9, Fig. 10 it is demonstrated, unequivocally, that the transition in corrosion kinetics occurs prior to this band of cracking becoming established. Such behaviour has previously been observed by Ni et al. [20], who, through FIB sectioning, observed the continuous production of cracks, both before and after the transition in kinetics.
Fig. 9. Location of all defects identified from the ZOAP analysis plotted as a function of depth from the oxide surface for oxides of increasing thickness (the oxide thicknesses quoted are from weight gain). The metal – oxide interface is indicated by the blue dotted line on each plot. a) – b) pre-transition, c) – f) second cycle (split into light blue for increasing rate, dark blue for decreasing rate); g) third cycle; h) fifth cycle; i) ∼sixth cycle. Note, the x- and y-axes increase in range for each row to accommodate the increasing oxide thicknesses. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
Fig. 10. Selection of defect data from Fig. 9 from first (pre-transition) and second cycle to depict the evolution of the large scale cracking associated with transition. Red = pre-transition; light blue = second cycle, increasing rate (i.e. between minimum and maximum); dark blue = second cycle, decreasing rate (i.e. after the maximum in rate has been achieved). (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
Beyond the second corrosion cycle (Fig. 9e–i), periodic increases in the cracking are apparent at an approximately 2 μm frequency for the entirety of the oxide thicknesses investigated here. Furthermore, for a given oxide, there is a dependency between the exact location of cracking relative to the oxide surface and whether the local oxide thickness is higher or lower than the mean oxide thickness. Where the local oxide thickness is greater than the mean, the cracking occurs at a thicker local oxide than for a region where the local oxide thickness is lower than the mean.
The spread of data along the x-axis of Fig. 9 also demonstrates the evolution of the range in oxide thicknesses, as described in Fig. 6; i.e. for thin oxides the range over the x-axis is small, but extends significantly over the pre-transition region, then gradually thereafter.
It is noted that whilst the corrosion cycles become less clear from the corrosion data presented in Fig. 2, Fig. 3, at the microstructural scale the cyclic nature is still apparent, even for oxides that are beyond their fifth cycle. It is likely that it is the increase in range in oxide thickness, and hence the spread in thickness at which cracking is observed within the oxide, which is the dominant contributor to this blurring.
5. Discussion
Previously, Kass and Hillner [2,3] proposed a general expression for the pre-transition (up to approximately 2 μm) and post-transition corrosion rates through the empirical fitting to corrosion data from Zircaloy-2 and Zircaloy-4. Following this, and with further long-term corrosion data, this was developed to encompass two expressions for post-transition corrosion rates, with the second post-transition rate occurring at oxide thicknesses exceeding approximately 27 μm and applicable to oxide thicknesses up to 114 μm [4].
From work presented here, both the post-transition corrosion solutions are found to under-predict the experimental rate data. However, the earlier predicted time-to-transition results in an apparently good fit to the data for the first post-transition expression for the initial ∼8 μm before the prediction falls below the experimental oxide thickness. The modified solution over-predicts the post-transition oxide thickness, but the experimental data converges to the prediction with increasing oxide thickness. The interrogation of the corrosion rates demonstrates that the onset of transition occurs at an earlier point in time and thickness than would be extracted from the standard corrosion curves. Furthermore, the transition period, deemed to be the region over which the corrosion rate increases, occurs over a period of time, with the highest corrosion rate occurring at a point previously thought to be mid-cycle (i.e. approximately 3 μm for the first transition). The observation of the transition period taking a period of time has previously been demonstrated through electrochemical analyses, where the resistance of the dense oxide layer has been observed to decrease over numerous days (alloy dependent), before increasing again (e.g. Refs. [[21], [22], [23]]). In addition, it has been identified that both the time to first transition, and the oxide thicknesses at first transition are lower than the subsequent cycles over the available data range, with the second cycle having the longest duration and supporting the thickest oxide.
The detailed interrogation of SEM data shows that as well as there being a cyclic nature to the corrosion rate of Zircaloy material, there is also a cyclic nature to the development of the metal – oxide interface roughness and cracking, with both showing an increase in regions of oxide associated with slow corrosion, i.e. oxide approaching transition. In synchrotron t-XRD work performed on material from this programme [15], a cyclic nature of the monoclinic in-plane stress is observed. Within the pre-transition oxide, with the exception of very thin oxide (∼0.5 μm), the monoclinic in-plane compressive stress is observed to build up at the metal – oxide interface and then, around transition, the stress is significantly relaxed. This process then repeats with subsequent corrosion cycles. The work presented in Ref. [15] also observed that the tetragonal phase fraction is greatest in the actively growing oxide, increasing towards the metal – oxide interface, i.e. where the monoclinic in-plane stress is also greatest, indicating that the tetragonal phase is, at least in part, stabilised by the local compressive stresses. Furthermore, a build-up of an oxygen rich region below the metal – oxide interface has been observed within corrosion cycles, which is then consumed during the transition in corrosion rate. This region has been confirmed through EELS to consist of a continuous layer of oxygen rich metal and initially discrete regions of ZrO, which builds up into a continuous ZrO layer just prior to transition [17,24]. As the material passes through the transition region, the local consumption of these layers occurs.
Given the information discussed here, it is proposed that, rather than the transition being an event that is a discrete point in time or oxide thickness, it occurs locally at a microstructural level over a period of time. The onset of transition can be identified by the minima in the rate plots and completion of transition by the subsequent maxima, noting that these measurements are a representation of the whole coupon behaviour, rather than local microstructural observations. For the material in this programme, this results in transitions which occur over approximately 15 mg/dm2 of weight gain (or ∼1 μm oxide growth), and take in the region of 100 days to complete over the coupon. Investigation of material which sits in this transitory region may result in apparently contradictory information, as at a microstructural level it will consist of regions of material that is pre-, post- and going-through transition, whilst measurement of the bulk properties is likely to result in averages from the various regions investigated.
The previously proposed, and generally accepted, theory of the build-up of stress during a corrosion cycle, and subsequent mechanical breakdown of oxide resulting in cracking to relieve these stresses, is supported by the current work. However, further information as to when the breakdown in oxide occurs can be extracted from this work. From a mechanical perspective, it can be concluded that the significant cyclic lateral cracking, which is often associated with transition, predominately occurs subsequent to the increase in kinetic corrosion rate, as demonstrated through the detailed analyses presented in this work. This does not suggest that pathways allowing oxidising species have not developed prior to transition, rather, that the gross cracking in the oxide is not associated with the instigation of kinetic transition, and is a result of the changing stress state and rapid corrosion experienced by the oxide post-transition. Further work is planned to directly link the understanding being developed with the tetragonal to monoclinic phase change and stress evolution through t-XRD with the detailed cracking information presented in this work. This should further inform the mechanisms, and rate controlling steps, involved in the corrosion of zirconium alloys.
Whilst this interpretation has been applied to Zircaloy-4 and Zircaloy-2 corroded in PWR conditions, such techniques could be applied to a range of other zirconium alloys, or material corroded in different environments, to understand factors such as: the duration of the transition period (time and oxide grown), i.e. period of increasing rate; interface roughness; and amount of cracking, on the overall corrosion performance. Such information would aid the interpretation of the detailed characterisation programmes by providing a stronger link between the microstructural observations and corrosion, hence further the development of the mechanistic understanding.
6. Conclusions
The work presented here has provided a detailed investigation of the corrosion behaviour of Zircaloy-4 and Zircaloy-2. The corrosion data presented show that there is little difference between the weight gains over the available range between Zircaloy-4 and Zircaloy-2 or the processing that has been applied to material ID A compared to B and C. The plotting of the corrosion data as rates allows more detailed interrogation of the data and shows that transition is not a discrete event, rather, it occurs over a period of time and oxide thickness. From these plots it can be observed that following a corrosion rate minimum, there is a significant period of increasing rate before the maximum corrosion rate is achieved, and the regions between minima and maxima can define the period over which transition occurs. In fact, following the pre-transition region, up to 50% of subsequent cycles consist of the transitory period (i.e. period between minima and maxima). It therefore follows that microstructural investigation of oxides greater than ∼2 μm may be difficult to interpret without a detailed understanding of the associated corrosion performance. Furthermore, with increasing oxide thickness, the corrosion cycles become less defined. This has previously been explained to be a result of the averaging effect of WG data, i.e. at a microstructural level the corrosion process becomes out of sync. This explanation is confirmed by the continued cyclic observations in the SEM data, in particular for the presentation of the cracking in Fig. 9, Fig. 10, which pictorially demonstrate how the coupon average WG data will lose any periodicity as the range in oxide thickness and range over which cracking occurs within a cycle become more overlapped with increasing thickness.
The detailed investigation of SEM images has demonstrated that the manifestation of lateral cracking appearing as bands within the oxide, and associated with transition, predominately occurs after the rapid corrosion associated with transition; as such, does not play a role in events leading up to transition. Furthermore, it is demonstrated that ‘transition’ as an event, occurs between the corrosion rate minima and maxima, and consists of up to 50% of the time and material that is corroded.
The complex nature of the corrosion behaviour presented here demonstrates the importance of understanding such information when interpreting the microstructural behaviour of zirconium alloys.
Funding
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the fruitful and ongoing discussions with staff at the National Nuclear Laboratory, Rolls-Royce and Michael Preuss and his research team at Manchester University regarding the interpretation of the data presented in this paper.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
