<title>Efficient removal of uranium from diluted aqueous solution with hydroxypyridone functionalized polyethylene nonwoven fabrics</title>
<author>Mingxing Zhang; Mengjia Yuan; Maojiang Zhang; Minglei Wang; Junchang Chen; Rong Li; Long Qiu; Xinxin Feng; Jiangtao Hu; Guozhong Wu</author>
<Affiliation> CAS Center for Excellence on TMSR Energy System, Shanghai Institute of Applied Physics, No. 2019 Jialuo Road, Jiading District, Shanghai, 201800, China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China; State Key Laboratory of Radiation Medicine and Protection, School for Radiological and Interdisciplinary Sciences (RAD-X) and Collaborative Innovation Center of Medicine of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions, Soochow University, Suzhou, 215123, China; School of Physical Science and Technology, Shanghai Tech University, Shanghai, 200031, China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier Ltd.</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radphyschem.2020.108742</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0969806X19314227?via%3Dihub</URL>
Highlights
•
Hydroxypyridone (HOPO) groups were first grafted onto PENWF by radiation technology.
•
PENWF-HOPO removes low uranium concentration completely in a wide pH (3–10) range.
•
PENWF-HOPO efficiently removes uranium from complex diluted aqueous solution.
•
PENWF-HOPO has excellent regeneration and reuse for low uranium concentration removal.
Abstract
It is still a challenge that directly reducing the uranium concentration of wastewater or radioactive wastes by adsorption to or below the criterion (30 ppb), especially from the system of low uranium concentration due to weak affinity and bad collection. Herein we have successfully introduced hydroxypyridone (HOPO) groups onto polyethylene nonwoven fabric (PENWF) surface denoted as PENWF-HOPO by radiation graft technology and follow-up two-step chemical reactions to deeply remove uranium from low-concentration (500 ppb) aqueous solutions. The chemical structures, surface morphologies, and thermal stabilities of the original and modified PENWF were characterized in detail by FT-IR, XPS, SEM, and TGA, with the results indicating successful preparation and good thermal stability of the adsorption material used under ambient conditions. Batch adsorption results show that the adsorbent removes the uranium almost completely within 12 h in a wide pH (3–10) range, and the adsorption obeys the Langmuir isotherm. Desorption and regeneration confirms its excellent regeneration and reusability (5 cycles). Importantly, this adsorbent could efficiently remove uranium (more than 97% removal ratio) from diluted aqueous solution, in which contains a serial of competing metal ions (La3+, Cr3+, Ba2+, Mn2+, Pb2+, Ni2+, Co2+, Cu2+, Zn2+, Sr2+, Cs+) or high NaF, Na2SO4, and NaH2PO4 concentrations (40 g/L).
Keywords
Radiation graft technologyLow uranium concentrationHydroxypyridone groupsPolyethylene nonwoven fabricAdsorption
1. Introduction
Uranium has radioactivity and chemical toxicity that can cause serious health hazards and life threats once ingested. Unfortunately, uranium has been released into the environment due to uranium mining, nuclear accident, nuclear experiment and research, and many more (Bhalara et al., 2014). Therefore, uranium recovery from wastewater or radioactive wastes not only can reduce pollution and protect the environment, but also can realize the possible reusability of uranium. Many technologies including adsorption (Carboni et al., 2013; Sun et al., 2018; Yuan et al., 2018), solvent extraction (Kushwaha and Sudhakar, 2012), membrane processing (Kimaro et al., 2001), ion exchange (Das et al., 2009), biosorption (Bagda et al., 2017) have been extensively developed to remove uranium from aqueous solution, while adsorption is an optimal alternate due to simplicity, convenience, and versatility. Until now, various adsorbents containing chelating resins (Choi et al., 2003; Solgy et al., 2015), magnetic composites (Tan et al., 2015b; Zhang et al., 2013), mesoporous molecular sieve (Wang et al., 2014; Yuan et al., 2011), metal organic frameworks (MOFs) (Carboni et al., 2013; Feng et al., 2013), covalent organic frameworks (COFs) (Sun et al., 2018; Zhang et al., 2016b), porous aromatic frameworks (PAFs) (Li et al., 2017; Yuan et al., 2018) have been studied for uranium recovery from aqueous solution. However, these adsorbents are hard to simultaneously combine the merits of mild preparation process, affordable raw materials, convenient operation process, and nontoxicity. In addition, it is still a challenge that directly reducing the uranium concentration of wastewater or radioactive wastes by adsorption to or below the prescribed criterion that no more than 30 ppb of uranium concentration from World Health Organization (WHO) in drinking water (Anirudhan and Rijith, 2012), especially removal of uranium from the system of low uranium concentration. Thus, it is desirable that preparation of an economic adsorbent with suitable functional groups to remove low uranium concentration with high efficiency and selectivity by a simpler and mild process.
Hydroxypyridone (HOPO) and its derivatives, which are effective chelating agents and have strong coordination and high affinity with actinides, have attracted extensive attentions by chemists for recovery actinides from radioactive wastes or recovery uranium from seawater and biochemists for actinides decorporation agents in the body in the past few decades (Davidson et al., 2012; Gorden et al., 2003; Szigethy and Raymond, 2011). First synthetic HOPO ligand, tetradentate 3-LI(1.2-HOPO), was used for effectively chelating plutonium(IV) in vivo in mice(White et al., 1988). Then twelve HOPO derivatives as extraction agents were synthesized and studied for rapidly removing plutonium(IV) from nitric acid solutions as well as solutions containing high iron(III) or ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) concentration (Veeck et al., 2004). Later, HOPO groups were grafted onto mesoporous silica for selective actinide sequestration from radioactive wastes (Lin et al., 2005), nanoporous silica for collection of actinides and lanthanides from natural waters(Johnson et al., 2012), and nanostructured silica for uranium recovery from seawater (Chouyyok et al., 2016). Recently, a new molecular HOPO derivative including two HOPO groups (5LIO-1-Cm-3,2-HOPO) (Wang et al., 2019) and HOPO-grafted chitosan (COS-HOPO) (Shi et al., 2018) were synthesized as decorporation agents for uranium in vivo. Although these small composites can show adsorption advantages derived from immobilization of HOPO groups, recovery adsorbent from solution-based media remains as a serious problem. If HOPO groups can be introduced on the surface of large supports such as fabric or polymers, the resulting material can resolve the recovery issue but maintain its excellent adsorption function. However, to the best of our knowledge, grafting HOPO groups onto commercial synthetic polymer materials such as polyethylene, nylon, and polypropylene for removal of low uranium concentration from aqueous solutions has not been investigated yet.
Herein, polyethylene nonwoven fabric (PENWF), an affordable commercial material, is used as the matrix for grafting HOPO groups by pre-irradiation induced emulsion graft polymerization, and follow-up two-step chemical reactions. Comparing with other polymer materials and particular adsorbents, this fabric has many advantages such as high chemical stability, random network of overlapped fibers, affordable raw materials, convenient operation process, manipulation into needed shapes to match practical process (Ma et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2016a). The chemical structures, surface morphologies, and thermal stabilities of the original and modified PENWF were characterized by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). Batch of adsorption experiments for low uranium concentration by PENWF-HOPO were investigated in detail, including effects of pH, adsorption kinetics, sorption isotherms, adsorption selectivity, effects of coexisting anions, and desorption and regeneration studies.
2. Methodology and materials
2.1. Materials and reagents
Polyethylene nonwoven fabric (PENWF, Tyvek, 1443R) was provided from Dupont Company, USA. Glycidyl methacrylate (GMA) and manganese chloride are obtained from Sigma-Aldrich Co. Ltd, maltol is obtained from Adamas Reagent Co. Ltd, uranyl nitrate is obtained from Xi'an Dingtian Chemical Co. Ltd, anhydrous 1,2-ethylenediamine (EDA), sodium hydroxide, hydrochloric acid, 1,4-dioxane, acetone, N, N-dimethylformamide (DMF), anhydrous ethanol, polysorbate 80 (Tween 80), lanthanum nitrate, chromium nitrate, copper nitrate, lead nitrate, barium nitrate, zinc nitrate, cobalt nitrate, strontium chloride, nickel chloride, cesium chloride, sodium fluoride, sodium sulfate, sodium dihydrogen phosphate, and sodium carbonate are all obtained from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co. Ltd. All reagents used are without further purification. The deionized water was obtained from a Water Purification system.
2.2. Preparation of polyethylene nonwoven fabric (PENWF) adsorbents
Modified PENWF with functional hydroxypyridone (HOPO) groups for low uranium concentration adsorption was prepared through three procedures as shown in Scheme 1.
Scheme 1. Preparation of HOPO-based PENWF.
Firstly, poly(glcidyl methacrylate) (PGMA) chains were grafted on the surface of PENWF using pre-irradiation emulsion grafting method (Ma et al., 2012). Namely, PENWF (2.0 g) was irradiated using electron beam accelerator (1.5 MeV, Shanghai Institute of Applied Physics) at an absorbed dose rate of 625 Gy/s for 160 s and the controlled adsorbed dose was 100 kGy. The irradiated sample was added into a 250 mL Erlenmeyer flask containing 200 mL of GMA emulsion that was prepared by mixing 10 mL of GMA, 190 mL of deionized water and 1.0 g of Tween 80 together and stirring for 8 h. Then the Erlenmeyer flask was sealed and put into a constant temperature water bath at 65 °C for 1 h after bulging N2 about 15 min for removal of O2. The grafted PENWF denoted as PENWF-g-PGMA was transferred into a Soxhlet and extracted with acetone for about 24 h to remove homopolymers and residual monomers and solvent, and then dried in a vacuum oven at 60 °C until a constant weight. The degree of grafting (Dg) was defined as Eq. (1) and Dg was about 302%.
@(1)
where W0 and W1 represent the weight of samples before and after grafted surface modification, respectively.
Then, the epoxy groups existing on the PGMA chains reacted with 1,2-ethylenediamine (EDA) via a ring opening reaction (Gao et al., 2016). Specifically, PENWF-g-PGMA (1.0 g) was added into 150 mL Erlenmeyer flask containing 30 mL of EDA and 70 mL of 1,4-dioxane. After bulging N2 to remove O2 for 15 min, the Erlenmeyer flask was sealed and heated to 80 °C for 6 h by oil bath device. Then the amination of PENWF-g-PGMA denoted as PENWF-EDA was washed by ethanol and deionized water for several times to remove residual EDA and solvent, subsequently dried in a vacuum oven at 60 °C until a constant weight. NH2 group density was evaluated as follows:
@(2)
where W2 is the weight of PENWF-EDA, and the 60.12 is molecular weight of EDA. NH2 group density was determined to be 3.49 mmol g−1.
Finally, functional hydroxypyridone (HOPO) groups were introduced onto the PENWF surface by reaction between maltol and primary amine (Sebestik et al., 2012). PENWF-EDA (1 g) and maltol (3 g) were added into 150 mL Erlenmeyer flask containing 50 mL of deionized water and 50 mL of DMF. Then NaOH (0.04 g) was added into the solution to adjust the pH value to 12. After bulging N2 to remove O2 for 15 min, the Erlenmeyer flask was sealed and heated to 100 °C for 24 h by oil bath device. Later, the modified PENWF denoted as PENWF-HOPO was washed by ethanol and deionized water for several times to remove residual maltol and solvent, then dried in a vacuum oven at 60 °C until the weight is constant. HOPO group density was evaluated as follows:
@(3)
where W3 is the weight of PENWF-HOPO, and the 126.11 is molecular weight of maltol. HOPO group density was determined to be 1.46 mmol g−1.
2.3. Characterization of the original and modified PENWF
The Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra of initial PENWF, PENWF-g-PGMA, PENWF-EDA, and PENWF-HOPO were recorded using a Thermo Scientific Nicolet iS50 FT-IR spectrometer in the model of iso-ATR and the range of 400–4000 cm−1 with a resolution of 4 cm−1. The X-ray photoelectron spectra of PENWF-g-PGMA, PENWF-EDA, and PENWF-HOPO were measured using a Thermo SCIENTIFIC ESCALAB 250Xi instrument with monochromatization of an exciting X-ray radiation to analyze the elemental composition and chemical states. The surface morphologies of initial PENWF, PENWF-g-PGMA, PENWF-EDA, and PENWF-HOPO were observed under the vacuum using a scan electron microscope (SEM, Merlin Compact, Zeiss) at a 7.5 kV acceleration voltage, the magnification was controlled at 1000 times, and all samples were coated with gold to improve the electronic conductivity. The thermogravimetric analyses of initial PENWF, PENWF-g-PGMA, PENWF-EDA, and PENWF-HOPO were carried out using a NETZSCH STA 449F3 Instrument in the range of 30–900 °C with a heating rate of 10 °C/min under a N2 atmosphere.
2.4. Batch adsorption experiments
The adsorption properties of PENWF-HOPO for low uranium concentration from aqueous solution were studied through a batch adsorption method. The batch adsorption experiments were implemented in 10 mL of centrifuge tube and shaken on an oscillator (NTS-4000C, TOKYO RIKAKIKAI) at 90 strokes per min at room temperature. Specifically, 10 mg of PENWF-HOPO was added into a centrifuge tube containing 5 mL of low uranium concentration (about 500 ppb) solution, and the pH value of the solution was primarily adjusted by negligible volumes of NaOH and HCl solution. The original and equilibrium uranium concentrations were measured to calculate the uranium removal ratio using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS, Thermo Scientific, ELEMENT 2) and atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES, Thermo Scientific, iCAP 7000 SERIES). The uranium removal ratio (%) was calculated by the following Eq. (4) (Tan et al., 2015a):
@(4)
where C0, Ce are the original and equilibrium uranium concentration (mg/L), respectively.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Preparation and characterization of original and modified PENWF
Radiation induced graft polymerization (RIGP) technology is a mature technology in the laboratory and in industry to prepare functional materials, usually used as surface modification of polymer materials such as fibers of nylon, PET, PE, and cotton (Nasef, 2004). In this work, we adopt pre-irradiation induced emulsion graft technology to introduce functional hydroxypyridone (HOPO) groups on the surface of PENWF. Comparing with simultaneous radiation induced graft polymerization, this technology can avoid large amounts of homopolymer production, be easy to operate, and avoid the use of toxic organic solvents in the process of grafting polymerization (Ma et al., 2012). The chemical structures, surface morphologies, and thermal stability were studied by FT-IR, XPS, SEM, and TG analyses.
3.1.1. FT-IR and XPS spectra for chemical structures analysis
Fig. 1 presents the FT-IR spectra of original and modified PENWF, obviously stating the changes of chemical structures. In the spectrum of pristine PENWF, adsorption peaks at 2854 and 2915 cm−1 belong to the –CH2- stretching vibration(Ma et al., 2012). After grafting PGMA chains, three new peaks at 910, 1129, and 1727 cm−1 are observed, which are assigned to epoxy group, -C-O, and –Cdouble bondO stretching in PGMA chains (Ma et al., 2012), respectively, indicating the successfully grafting of PGMA on the surface of PENWF. After the reaction between PGMA and EDA, the epoxy group stretching peak at 910 cm−1 disappears due to the ring opening of epoxy group, and one new peak at 3278 cm−1 appears, which is due to the –NH2 stretching vibration in EDA (Gao et al., 2016), respectively. After introducing HOPO groups, one new peak at 1652 cm−1 emerges, which is ascribed to the –Cdouble bondO stretching vibration in HOPO (Biswal et al., 2013). Above results indicate that every step of the modification went smoothly and PENWF-HOPO was successfully prepared. In addition, XPS spectra of PENWF-g-PGMA, PENWF-EDA, and PENWF-HOPO were shown in Fig. 2a. The peak at 531.9 eV belong to O 1s again indicates the successfully grafting of PGMA chains on the surface of the PENWF. After the reaction between PGMA and EDA, a new peak at 400.0 eV ascribed to N 1s also proves the introduction of the EDA fragments on the PENWF. The C 1s, N 1s, and O 1s core level spectra of PENWF-HOPO were shown in Fig. 2b, c, and 2d, respectively. The C 1s spectra (Fig. 2b) contain four peaks at 284.7, 285.2, 286.3, and 289.0 eV attributed to C-C, C-O/C-N, Cdouble bondC, Odouble bondC-O (Xu et al., 2019), respectively. The N 1s (Fig. 2c) spectra has two peaks at 399.7 and 400.6 eV corresponding to tertiary amine in EDA fragments and secondary amine in HOPO groups (Guo et al., 2018), respectively. The O 1s spectra (Fig. 2d) consist of three peaks at 531.8, 532.6, and 533.6 eV belong to Cdouble bondO, C-O, and C-OH (Xu et al., 2019), respectively. All above results further verify that the HOPO functionalized-PENWF was successfully fabricated.
Fig. 1. FT-IR spectra for PENWF, PENWF-g-PGMA, PENWF-EDA, and PENWF-HOPO.
Fig. 2. (a) Wide XPS spectra for PENWF-g-PGMA, PENWF-EDA, and PENWF-HOPO. The C 1s, N 1s, and O 1s (b, c, and d, respectively) core-level spectra of PENWF-HOPO.
3.1.2. SEM for surface morphologies analysis
The surface morphologies of original and modified PENWF were observed by SEM under vacuum and shown in Fig. S1. The surface was smooth for pristine PENWF, then PGMA chains were smoothly coated on the surface without agglomerated homopolymers adhering to the surface after grafting, and the surface still remained smooth after subsequent two-step chemical modifications, implying that radiation and chemical modifications proceeded smoothly and evenly, and no damages to substrates occurred in subsequent modification process.
3.1.3. TG for thermal stability analysis
The thermal stability of original and modified PENWF were analyzed by TG under N2 atmosphere, and presented in Fig. 3. The initial decomposition temperature was 420 °C and it completed 100% weight degradation at about 500 °C for pristine PENWF. In the cases of modified PENWF, their initial decomposition temperatures are 190, 205, 220 °C for PENWF-g-PGMA, PENWF-EDA, and PENWF-HOPO, respectively. These modified PENWF introduce a three-step degradation pattern from the DTG curves. The degradation of the grafting chains occurred in the first two temperature ranges. The last decomposition temperature ranges of these modified PENWF are ascribed to the degradation of the matrix. Apparently, the thermal stability decreases for modified PENWF, but it still possesses higher thermal stability and has no effect on normal adsorption system.
Fig. 3. TG and DTG curves for PENWF, PENWF-g-PGMA, PENWF-EDA, and PENWF-HOPO.
3.2. Effect of solution pH on adsorption of uranium
The formation of uranium species are greatly affected by the pH value in aqueous solution. It is important to study the pH effect on adsorption properties during an adsorption process. The pH effects on removal of low uranium concentration (500 ppb) from aqueous solution by PENWF-HOPO were studied in the range of pH 2 to 10 at room temperature for 20 h. The removal ratios of uranium at different pH values are shown in Fig. 4. In the range of pH 3–10, PENWF-HOPO had an almost 100% removal ratio for low uranium concentration, indicating that HOPO groups have strong coordination with varied uranium species in aqueous solution in the range of pH 3–10. Even at pH 2, the removal ratio of uranium can achieve 86.5%. The reason for the decreased removal ratio at lower pH may be that fractional HOPO groups are protonized and further form dihydroxypyridine derivatives (Fig. S2) which exhibit weak ability to chelate uranyl ion. The pH 4 is selected as optimal pH for subsequent adsorption studies due to that UO22+ ion is the main uranium species under this condition from the relative species distribution of uranium (Fig. S3).
Fig. 4. Effect of pH on adsorption of uranium by PENWF-HOPO (initial uranium concentration 0.5 mg L−1, 10 mg of PENWF-HOPO, retention time 20 h, T = 20 °C, V = 5 mL, and pH = 2–10).
3.3. Adsorption kinetics
Fast removal of uranium from aqueous solution not only manifests the efficiency of an adsorbent, but also saves the time and reduces the cost in real application. The effect on removal ratio for low uranium concentration (500 ppb) from aqueous solution by PENWF-HOPO to time was investigated at the pH 4 and room temperature under different adsorption times as shown in Fig. 5. The removal ratio of uranium was 8.7% in 1 min and achieved 58.5% in 30 min, which is faster than previous reported phosphate-based UHMWPE fibers (Li et al., 2018), UHMWPE-AM fibers (Pang et al., 2017), and amidoxime-based nylon 66 fibers (Zhang et al., 2016a). As time increases, adsorption rate slows down gradually due to the decrease of uranium concentration and adsorption sites. The removal ratio of uranium increases slowly and finally reaches a platform. The removal ratio of uranium reaches 96.6% in 8 h and the residual uranium concentration is only about 17 ppb, which is lower than the strict criterion determined by World Health Organization that the uranium concentration in aqueous solution is not more than 30 ppb. When the adsorption time increased to 12 h, the residual uranium concentration is below the ICP-MS detection limit, stating the removal ratio of uranium almost attains 100% in 12 h. Amounts of adsorbents published before are hard to attain 100% of removal ratio of uranium from aqueous solution, especially for low uranium concentration. The possible coordination mode between HOPO groups and uranium is that two HOPO groups can undergo deprotonation, then -O- and = O on HOPO groups combine with uranium to form stable chelates as shown in Fig. S4 (Wang et al., 2019). Our uranium adsorbent can breakthrough it and achieve 100% of uranium recovery, which indirectly instates the strong coordination and high affinity of HOPO groups with uranium. Further, the experimental data of uranium removal by PENWF-HOPO were simulated by pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order models (Zhang et al., 2016a) as shown in Fig. S5 and Table S1. Obviously adsorption kinetics of uranium removal by PENWF-HOPO obeys the pseudo-second-order model.
Fig. 5. Effect of reaction time on the adsorption of uranium by PENWF-HOPO (initial concentration 0.5 mg L−1, 10 mg of PENWF-HOPO, pH = 4.0, T = 20 °C, and V = 5 mL).
3.4. Sorption isotherms
In practical, higher adsorption capacity can deal with more waste solution for an adsorbent. To assess the adsorption capacity, batch of adsorption experiments with different uranium concentrations in the range of 5–100 ppm proceeded at room temperature with pH 4 for 20 h. The graph of adsorption equilibrium capacity (qe) to equilibrium concentration (Ce) is shown in Fig. 6. Adsorption equilibrium capacity increases and reaches a platform gradually with the increase of initial of uranium concentration. In addition, the Langmuir and Freundlich equilibrium models (Zhang et al., 2016a) are used to analyze the equilibrium data to further investigate the adsorption mechanism of PENWF-HOPO as shown in Fig. 7. The Langmuir Eq. (5) and Freundlich Eq. (6) are given as follow:
@(5)
@(6)
where b is the Langmuir constant, and Ce, qe, qm are adsorption equilibrium concentration (mg/L), adsorption equilibrium capacity (mg/g), and the maximum adsorption capacity (mg/g), n and KF are the Freundlich constants, representing adsorption intensity and adsorption capacity, respectively. The specific values of b and qm, n and KF can be deduced from the slope and intercept of the plots consistent with Eqs. (5), (6), respectively, as shown in Table 1. The value of correlation coefficient R2 (0.9978) obtained from the Langmuir model is higher than that (0.9165) obtained from the Freundlich model, and the maximum adsorption capacity qm (20.74 mg/g) determined from the Langmuir model is more corresponding to the experimental adsorption equilibrium capacity qe (20.25 mg/g). Thus we conclude that the adsorption experimental results of PENWF-HOPO are in good obedience to the Langmuir model, the uranium is removed by uniform monolayer adsorption from aqueous solution, and the maximum monolayer adsorption capacity is 20.74 mg/g at room temperature.
Fig. 6. Adsorption isotherm of PENWF-HOPO for uranium (10 mg of PENWF-HOPO, retention time 20 h, pH = 4.0, T = 20 °C, and V = 5 mL).
Fig. 7. Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms for removal of uranium by PENWF-HOPO.
Table 1. Isotherm parameters of uranium adsorbed by PENWF-HOPO.
Isotherm model	Langmuir	Freundlich
T (oC)	qm (mg•g−1)	b (L•mg−1)	R2	KF	1/n	R2
20	20.74	0.5	0.9978	5.73	0.37	0.9165
3.5. Adsorption selectivity
To investigate the high selectivity and affinity of PENWF-HOPO toward uranium, the selective adsorption experiment was carried out in aqueous solution containing UO22+ (500 ppb), La3+ (5 ppm), Cr3+ (5 ppm), Ba2+ (5 ppm), Mn2+ (5 ppm), Pb2+ (5 ppm), Ni2+ (5 ppm), Co2+ (5 ppm), Cu2+ (5 ppm), Zn2+ (5 ppm), Sr2+ (5 ppm), and Cs+ (5 ppm) with different solid-to-liquid ratio at room temperature with pH 4 for 20 h. The adsorption data were measured by ICP-MS for U, Sr, Cs and ICP-AES for other mental ions and calculated with above denoted Eq. (4). The specific adsorption results are shown in Fig. 8. It is seen that (1) PENWF-HOPO has high selectivity and affinity toward uranium at different solid-to-liquid ratio; (2) the ion selectivity and affinity order for adsorption at the solid-to-liquid ratio of 2 g/L is UO22+ > Cr3+ > Cu2+ > Pb2+ » La3+ > Zn2+ > Mn2+ > Ni2+ > Sr2+ > Co2+ > Ba2+ > Cs+; (3) the removal ratio of PENWF-HOPO toward uranium increases with the increase of solid-to-liquid ratio. The removal ratio is about 25.2% at low solid-to-liquid ratio (0.1 g/L) and reaches 88.6% at 1 g/L of solid-to-liquid ratio. With a solid-to-liquid ratio of 2 g/L, the removal ratio of uranium has reached 97.6% and the residual uranium concentration is about 12 ppb, which is lower than the strict criterion (30 ppb) of WHO in aqueous solution.
Fig. 8. Adsorption selectivity of PENWF-HOPO for uranium (10 mg of PENWF-HOPO, retention time 20 h, pH = 4.0, T = 20 °C, and V = 5 mL).
3.6. Effects of coexisting anions
Some anions such as fluoride (F−), sulfate (SO42−), dihydrogen phosphate (H2PO4−) and carbonate (CO32−) ions coexist in alkaline uranium waste solution and coordinate with uranium to change the form of uranium species, which to some extent influence the removal of uranium by adsorbents (Li et al., 2018). Therefore, the effects of these coexisting anions on the uranium removal ratio by PENWF-HOPO were studied at room temperature with different concentrations of sodium fluoride (NaF), sodium sulfate (Na2SO4), sodium dihydrogen phosphate (NaH2PO4) and sodium carbonate (Na2CO3) for 20 h. The dependence of removal ratios on the concentrations of various salts are shown in Fig. 9. In the case of NaF, the removal ratio slightly decreases with the increase of NaF concentration and the removal ratio decreases to 97.9% at 40 g/L of NaF, but the residual uranium concentration is merely 10.5 ppb, which is lower than the strict criterion (30 ppb) of WHO in aqueous solution. For Na2SO4 and NaH2PO4, PENWF-HOPO still remains almost 100% removal ratio and almost no influences are observed on the removal ratio at different concentrations of Na2SO4 and NaH2PO4. However, negative effect occurs in the system of Na2CO3, the removal ratio decreases to 74.6% with the increase of Na2CO3 concentration to 40 g/L, which is due to strong coordination between uranium and CO32− ion and more CO32− concentration comparing HOPO groups. Comparing with the previous reported resins (Ladeira and Morais, 2005) and phosphate-based UHMWPE fibers (Li et al., 2018), which have low or zero removal ratio of uranium at the high concentrations of F−, H2PO4− and CO32− ions, PENWF-HOPO exhibits absolute advantages to remove low uranium concentration with the coexistence of these competitive anions.
Fig. 9. Effect of coexisting anions on the adsorption of uranium by PENWF-HOPO (initial concentration 0.5 mg L−1, 10 mg of PENWF-HOPO, retention time 20 h, T = 20 °C, and V = 5 mL).
3.7. Desorption and regeneration studies
It is necessary to carry out desorption experiment for the regeneration of the adsorbent from the view of economy. In this study, the reusability of PENWF-HOPO was studied in five continuous sorption/desorption cycles, and 1 mol/L of HCl solution was used as desorption agent for vibrating to desorb uranium for 3 h. The sorption/desorption ratios versus cycle number is shown in Fig. 10. The sorption ratio almost remains 100% after five cycles, and uranium also can be totally desorbed with 1 mol/L of HCl solution, stating PENWF-HOPO has excellent regeneration and reusability.
Fig. 10. Desorption and reusability of PENWF-HOPO for uranium.
4. Conclusion
Hydeoxypyridone (HOPO) and its derivatives, which have high affinity toward uranium, can efficiently remove low uranium concentration from radioactive wastes or be used as decorporation agents for uranium in vivo in mice. In this work, we have prepared HOPO-based PENWF by pre-irradiation induced emulsion graft polymerization technology and follow-up two-step simple chemical modifications. It can deeply remove low uranium concentration and reduce the residual uranium concentration below the criterion from diluted aqueous solutions containing competing metal ions or coexisting anions and have excellent regeneration and reusability. We believe that PENWF-HOPO could be served as an excellent adsorbent for efficient removal of low uranium concentration from real wastewater or radioactive wastes, and has a potential industrial application in the near future.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Mingxing Zhang: Methodology, Writing - original draft, Conceptualization, Formal analysis. Mengjia Yuan: Investigation. Maojiang Zhang: Software. Minglei Wang: Data curation. Junchang Chen: Visualization. Rong Li: Project administration. Long Qiu: Validation. Xinxin Feng: Resources. Jiangtao Hu: Methodology, Formal analysis. Guozhong Wu: Conceptualization, Writing - review & editing, Supervision.
Declaration of competing interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgments
We greatly appreciate supports from the National Key R&D Program of China No. 2016YFB0303004, National Natural Science Foundation of China (11675247, 11305243, 11605275), Science Challenge Project, No. TZ2018004.
