<title>Continuous extraction and separation of Am(III) and Cm(III) using a highly practical diamide amine extractant</title>
<author>Hideya Suzuki; Yasuhiro Tsubata; Tatsuya Kurosawa; Hiroshi Sagawa; Tatsuro Matsumura</author>
<Affiliation> Nuclear Science and Engineering Center , Japan Atomic Energy Agency , Naka-gun , Ibaraki , Japan; Nuclear Engineering Co., Ltd. , Tokai-mura , Ibaraki , Japan</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2017.1299050</DOI>
<URL>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/00223131.2017.1299050</URL>
ABSTRACT
A highly practical diamide-type extractant, which is an alkyl diamide amine with 2-ethylhexyl alkyl chains (ADAAM(EH)), was investigated for the mutual separation of Am(III) and Cm(III). ADAAM(EH) is a multidentate ligand with one soft N-donor atom and two hard O-donor atoms as part of its central frame. This tridentate arrangement of donor atoms provides selective binding to Am(III) compared to that with Cm(III) in highly acidic media (1.5 M HNO3), resulting in separation factors of up to 5.5. A continuous liquid–liquid extraction and stripping test was conducted using a multistage countercurrent mixer-settler extractor with ADAAM(EH) in n-dodecane. In this test, the separation of Am(III) and Cm(III) was achieved with very high yield.
KEYWORDS: Minor actinide；Am/Cm separation；soft N-donor；hard O-donor；continuous extraction test；multistage countercurrent mixer–settler；separation factor
1. Introduction
Reducing the radioactive toxicity of high-level radioactive liquid waste (HLLW) is very important for decreasing the environmental impact of nuclear waste disposal deep underground. The main contributors to the total radioactive toxicity of HLLW are the minor actinides (MAs), i.e. Np, Am, and Cm. Partitioning and transmutation (P&T) aims to decrease the radioactive toxicity of the nuclear waste, thereby minimizing the cost of and the time required for its storage. Japan Atomic Energy Agency initiated a basic study on P&T technology in the mid-1970s [1]. One of the schemes developed to reduce radioactive toxicity involves separating these MAs from the lanthanides present in HLLW, after which MAs can be transmuted or burned using advanced nuclear reactors or accelerator-driven system (ADS) to shorter-lived radionuclides or more stable nonradioactive elements [2–4].
After the trivalent MAs, Am(III) and Cm(III), are separated from HLLW, additional refinement, including the separation of Am(III) from Cm(III) (Am/Cm separation), can be conducted. Am and Cm can be transmuted together in an advanced nuclear reactor or an ADS; however, Cm produces a large amount of heat during its decay. Therefore, the removal of the pyrogenic Cm nuclide would reduce difficulties in MA fuel fabrication.
Am/Cm separation is challenging because of their similar chemical properties, with both species having the same charge and ionic radius. Although various ligands and separation methods have been studied for the Am/Cm separation, an effective, practical approach has not yet been developed [5–8]. Most ligands used for MA separation are heterocycles containing soft N-donor atoms. However, N-donor ligands can be less effective when used in highly acidic solutions because of their deactivation as a result of their protonation. Furthermore, N-donor ligands often have poor solubility in nonpolar solvents, slow extraction kinetics, difficult syntheses, and high costs, which limits their usefulness [9–13].
ADAAM(EH), which is a highly practical reagent with a simple structure, i.e. an alkyl diamide amine with 2-ethylhexyl alkyl chains (Figure 1), was developed for the separation of Am(III) from Eu(III) as trivalent lanthanides in a previous study [14]. ADAAM(EH) is a tridentate ligand with one soft central N-donor atom and two hard carbonyl O-donor atoms in its skeleton. It exhibits high solubility in aliphatic solvents such as n-dodecane, a widely used diluent in reprocessing plants for large-scale nuclear separations. ADAAM(EH) extracts Am(III) ions effectively by using hard O-donation from the ligand in highly acidic solutions [14]. Furthermore, ADAAM(EH) satisfies the CHON principle, that is, it contains only C, H, O, and N atoms, allowing it to be incinerated at the end of its lifecycle [15].
Figure 1. Structural formula of ADAAM(EH).
In the present study, ADAAM(EH) was tested for the mutual separation of Am(III) and Cm(III).
2. Experimental
2.1. Reagents and chemicals
ADAAM(EH) was obtained from Chemicrea, Inc. (Tokyo, Japan). The radioactive isotopes Am(III) and Cm(III) were purchased from Japan Radioisotope Association (Tokyo, Japan). All other chemical reagents, for instance, HNO3 and n-dodecane, were of analytical grade.
2.2. Extraction procedure
HNO3 solutions (2.0 mL) of different concentrations were mixed with equal volumes of ADAAM(EH) in n-dodecane, after having been pre-equilibrated with the same concentration of HNO3 by shaking for 10 min using a YS-8D shaker (Yayoi Co., Ltd) at 298 K. It was confirmed that equilibrium was attained in less than 1 min [14]. After phase separation using centrifugation, and 0.1 mL aliquots of the organic and the aqueous phases were subject to analysis on an α-silicon semiconductor detector (Alpha Ensemble SEIKO EG&G). The α-lines at 5.49 and 5.80 MeV were examined for 241Am and 244Cm, respectively. The distribution ratios of Am (DAm) and Cm (DCm) were calculated as the ratio of the radioactivity of the α-activity of each isotope in the organic phase to the α-activity in the aqueous phase. The selectivity for Am(III) over Cm(III) is expressed using the separation factor SFAm/Cm (SFAm/Cm = DAm/DCm). The equilibrium HNO3 concentrations in the aqueous phase were also measured. The extraction capacity and the extraction kinetics of ADAAM(EH) were measured by performing Nd(III) extraction, and it can be evaluated that those for Am(III) are the same as for Nd(III) (they have the same charge and ionic radius). The concentration of Nd(III) was measured using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS, Agilent 7500).
2.3. Continuous extraction test
A continuous, liquid–liquid extraction and stripping test was conducted for 5 h using a multistage countercurrent mixer-settler extractor (MS) with ADAAM(EH) in n-dodecane. Figure 2 shows the operating conditions of the two MS units, along with the composition of the feed solution for the continuous extraction test with ADAAM(EH). The units comprised 8-stage extraction, 8-stage scrub, and 16-stage strip sections. A solvent comprising 0.25 M ADAAM(EH) in n-dodecane was used. The concentrations of HNO3 in the feed and scrub solutions was 1.5 M. The HNO3 concentration in the strip solution was 0.05 M. The feed solution contained Am(III) and Cm(III) in concentrations of 10 kBq/mL and 4.7 kBq/mL, respectively.
Figure 2. Operating conditions of the two mixer-settler units in the HOT test. The values in the figure are those observed in the test.
3. Results and discussion
The separation of Am(III) from Cm(III) using ADAAM(EH) was investigated. The effect of the ADAAM(EH) concentration (0.04–0.4 M in n-dodecane) with 1.5 M HNO3 on the extraction is shown in Figure 3. The DAm and DCm values show a linear relationship with ADAAM(EH) concentration. All the DAm values are higher than the DCm values, and SFAm/Cm is about 5. Am and Cm are separated mutually using multistep extraction for this SFAm/Cm values. The D values provide slopes with gradients of about 1.0 for both Am(III) and Cm(III); therefore, under these conditions, the extracted species are 1:1 metal–ligand complexes under these conditions.
Figure 3. Dependency of MA extraction on ADAAM(EH) concentration in n-dodecane. Aqueous phase: [HNO3]aq = 1.5 M.
The DAm and DCm values plotted as a function of acid concentration (0.1–3 M HNO3 and 0.2 M ADAAM(EH) in n-dodecane) are shown in Figure 4. The SFAm/Cm values are high (up to 5.5) across the examined HNO3 concentration range. The DAm and DCm values increase with increasing HNO3 concentration from 0.1 to 1.5 M, peaking at about 1.5 M and then decreasing drastically from 1.5 to 3 M. The N-donors are likely protonated under high HNO3 concentrations, resulting in the observed decrease in the D values. ADAAM(EH) showed unparalleled extractability and selectivity for the separation of Am(III) and Cm(III) from highly acidic media.
Figure 4. Dependency of MA extraction on HNO3 concentration in n-dodecane. Extraction phase: [ADAAM(EH)]org = 0.2 M.
Like diglycolamide (DGA) and tributyl phosphate (TBP), ADAAM(EH) is also an electrically neutral extractant that can extract metal ions from acidic media [16–18]. The mechanism of extraction is thought to result from general ion-pair extraction with accompanying counter anions, such as NO3−. Upon increasing [NO3−]aq, the distribution ratios of trivalent MAs (DMA) also increases linearly with a slope of 3.0; however, the corresponding logarithmic plot shows a slope of <3.0 (Figure 4). In the high of H+ concentration range (>2.0 M), a decrease in DMA results from an increase in the amount of protonated extractant. This characteristic behavior explains both the increasing and decreasing trends in DMA caused by ion-pair extraction and protonation of the nitrogen donor, respectively [14].
The extraction capacity, or the maximum concentration of the extracted metal ion in the organic phase that can be achieved without the formation of a third phase, is very important. The extraction capacity of ADAAM(EH) in n-dodecane was measured using Nd(III) extraction (Figure 5). The obtained results indicate an extraction capacity of 40 mM using 0.2 M ADAAM(EH) in n-dodecane with 1.5 M HNO3 without the formation of a third phase. The extraction capacity for Am(III) is expected to be the same as that for Nd(III), given that Am(III) and Nd(III) both possess the same charge and are nearly of the same size.
Figure 5. Extraction capacity of Nd(III) in 0.2 M ADAAM(EH) with n-dodecane. Aqueous phase: [HNO3]aq = 1.5 M.
The extractability of Nd(III) as a function of shaking time is shown in Figure 6. The solution conditions for the extraction were fixed at 1.5 M HNO3 and 0.2 M ADAAM(EH) in n-dodecane, while those for the stripping were 0.05 M HNO3 and 0.2 M ADAAM(EH) in n-dodecane. Equal volumes of the organic and the aqueous solutions were mixed and shaken at 240 revolutions per min. The extractability of Nd(III) became constant after 20 s and 90 s for extraction and stripping, respectively, indicating that the reaction rapidly reaches chemical equilibrium rapidly. This further confirms that ADAAM(EH) exhibits fast reaction kinetics in practical use.
Figure 6. Extraction and stripping kinetics of Nd(III) in 0.2 M ADAAM(EH) with n-dodecane. Aqueous phase: [HNO3]aq = 1.5 M.
A continuous extraction MS test was performed for 5 h using 0.25 M ADAAM(EH) in n-dodecane (Figure 2). Figure 7 shows the concentration profiles of Am(III) and Cm(III) in the first and the second MSs plotted as the concentrations. Am(III) is extracted and stripped with a very high yield of almost 100%; however, Cm(III) is extracted with a yield of about 10% and stripped at 100%.
Figure 7. Concentration profiles of Am(III) and Cm(III) in the first and second mixer-settlers.
The distributions of Am(III) and Cm(III) in the three fractions observed in the MS test are shown in Table 1. The amount of Am(III) in the product, compared with the feed solution (%), is greater than 99.8% (almost 100%). The concentrations of Am(III) in the raffinate and in the used solvent are lower than the detection limit (0.20% of the feed). The amount of Cm(III) in the product, compared to the feed solution, is 9.6%. Am(III) and Cm(III) are stripped completely from the used solvent. A decrease to 10% Cm(III) in the extracted Am(III) is sufficient to enable its use as an MA fuel in an ADS transmutation reactor. In contrast, Am(III) is almost completely removed from the Cm(III) that remains in the raffinate, facilitating the disposal of pyrogenic Cm(III). Better separation would be possible through further optimization of the separation conditions.
Table 1. Fractional distribution of Am(III) and Cm(III) in the MS test as a ratio of the feed solution (%).
4. Conclusion
A new extractant ADAAM(EH) was tested for the mutual separation of Am(III) and Cm(III) from HNO3 into n-dodecane. Am(III) and Cm(III) were separated with high SFAm/Cm values (5.5) from highly acidic solutions (1.5 M HNO3). Furthermore, ADAAM(EH) exhibited a high extraction capacity (i.e. it did not form a third phase), good solubility in diluents, clear and fast phase separation, fast extraction and back-extraction kinetics, high chemical stability, ease of synthesis, and low cost [14].
A countercurrent extraction test using 0.2 M ADAAM(EH) in n-dodecane was performed using a small-scale MS. A high feed decontamination factor was obtained for Am(III) (>500), and recovery after stripping was almost 100%. The resulting Am(III) product was contaminated with only 9.6% Cm(III), which is acceptable from the viewpoint of its use as an MA fuel for ADS transmutation reactors. Almost 100% of the Am(III) was removed from the raffinate, and Am(III) contamination in the Cm(III) was very low. Am(III) and Cm(III) separation was demonstrated with a very high yield through the extraction process using ADAAM(EH). In addition, good phase separation was observed without the third phase formation.
This study shows that ADAAM(EH) is a highly practical, high-performance extractant for partitioning Am(III) from Cm(III).
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the help of the staff of Chemicrea Industries for the organic synthesis, and T. Kashimura, M. Shibata, T. Kawasaki, T. Onizawa, and S. Urabe of Japan Atomic Energy Agency for performing the extraction test.
