<title>Computational model‐based design of molten salt electrorefining process for high‐purity zirconium metal recovery from spent nuclear fuel</title>
<author> Sohn Sungjune; Choi Sungyeol; Park Jaeyeong; Hwang Il Soon</author>
<Affiliation>School of Mechanical, Aerospace and Nuclear Engineering Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology ; Decommissioning Technology Research Division Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute ; Department of Nuclear and Quantum Engineering Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>International Journal of Energy Research</Journal>
<Publishing_house>John Wiley & Sons Inc. </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1002/ER.5724</DOI>
<URL>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/er.5724</URL>
Summary
Effective decontamination methods for spent nuclear fuel (SNF) cladding are required to recycle Zr, which is a valuable resource, by separating high purity Zr from the actinides. In this study, computational modeling is performed on an electrorefiner to achieve high-purity Zr metal recovery without ZrCl and U from SNF Zircaloy-4 cladding utilizing a commercial fluid dynamics code. A three-dimensional (3D) electrorefining model specialized in simulation of multistep electrochemical reduction (eg, two-step reduction of Zr(IV) to Zr via ZrCl) is developed by coupling the numerical models of the Butler-Volmer equation and fluid dynamics. This model is validated by benchmarking the chemical formula of cathode deposits obtained from lab-scale electrorefining experiments utilizing fresh Zircaloy-4. The computational results are consistent with the compositions of Zr and ZrCl in the cathode deposits, depending on the initial ZrCl4 concentrations. Based on the developed 3D model, a pilot-scale electrorefiner for the SNF cladding is simulated with several derived design parameters. The effects of rotating anode and cathode, potential range, molten salt weight, and the number of anode baskets are determined to optimize the electrorefiner design to achieve the suppression of ZrCl and U codeposition. The electrorefiner throughput when employing the optimized design and operating conditions is predicted to be 0.1 to 0.2 ton/y, as only pure Zr metal is recovered.
1 INTRODUCTION
Spent nuclear fuel (SNF) Zircaloy-4 cladding is classified as the intermediate-level waste in the IAEA standard due to the deeply penetrated actinides during the reactor operation.1-4 Effective decontamination methods for SNF cladding are required to recycle Zr, which is a valuable resource in not only the nuclear industry, as lowering the radioactive waste level. Volume decontamination separating high purity Zr from the whole cladding materials is preferred for SNF cladding since it is difficult to remove the contaminated actinides by surface decontamination completely.
For volume decontamination, electrochemical studies have been performed in molten LiCl-KCl electrolyte based on a difference in the Gibbs free energy of formation.5, 6 The compositions and purities of the cathodic products have been experimentally observed to depend on the initial ZrCl4 concentration and electrorefining methods, because of the disproportionate redox behavior of Zr in LiCl-KCl and redox tendencies of alloyingelements.5-10 Although high-purity Zr metal has been recovered without ZrCl and alloying elements in the electrorefining of fresh Zircaloy-4, further investigations for the SNF cladding are still required to demonstrate the actual electrorefining performance in terms of the decontamination efficiency and throughput. Numerical simulation can improve the cost and time effectiveness prior to the experimental approach. Multiphysics computational modeling has been extensively performed for electrorefining in high-temperature molten salt systems.11-18 However, the electrorefining model involving the complicated Zr behavior has not yet been investigated.
Herein, a three-dimensional (3D) computational model for the electrorefining of SNF Zircaloy-4 cladding is developed based on the commercial computational fluid dynamics (CFD) code. A multistep electrochemical reaction model for Zr was established using the Butler-Volmer equation. To verify the numerical model and determine the material constants, which can significantly affect the current and potential calculation, benchmark simulations were performed for the lab-scale fresh Zircaloy-4 electrorefining conducted with five different initial concentrations of ZrCl4 in LiCl-KCl. Pilot-scale electrorefiner was employed for the SNF Zircaloy-4 cladding using the developed and validated model. The design parameters, which could influence the mutual deposition behavior of Zr metal, ZrCl, and U were investigated to optimize the electrorefiner design. As performing several electrorefining simulations, a specific range of applied current was derived for recovering the Zr metal without ZrCl and U at the cathode. Based on the optimized design and operating conditions, the capability of the electrorefiner was evaluated.
2 METHODS
2.1 Reference experiment data for benchmarking lab-scale Zircaloy-4 electrorefining
The results of the lab-scale electrorefining test for fresh Zircaloy-4 in LiCl-KCl-ZrCl4 conducted by Seoul National University were utilized to develop and validate the computational model for Zircaloy-4 electrorefining.6 The electrorefining focused on both the chemical formula in the cathode deposit and purity of the recovered Zr. The final chemical formula of Zr after electrorefining was investigated depending on the initial ZrCl4 concentration as an initiator of electrorefining since Zr has complicated disproportionate reactions. Five different molten salts were prepared with ZrCl4 concentrations of 0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, and 4.0 wt% in the LiCl-KCl base electrolyte. To obtain a high Zr purity, selective anodic dissolution of Zr was conducted to fundamentally prevent the alloying elements of Zircaloy-4 from being oxidized at the anode to molten salt during electrorefining. The anode potential between the apparent standard potentials of Zr and alloying elements such as Sn, Cr, Fe, and Co were determined as −0.9 V (vs Ag/AgCl 1 wt%).With an increase in the ZrCl4 concentration, Zr(IV) reduced to ZrCl on the cathode with the suppression of metallic Zr deposition. Both Zr and ZrCl coexisted in the cathodic deposits with 1.0 wt% of ZrCl4. When 0.1 and 0.5 wt% of ZrCl4 was present in the initial molten salt, only Zr metal was observed at the cathode based on X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. The alloying elements were not detected in the cathodic deposits by employing inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry in all electrorefining cases. Therefore, it was experimentally determined that Zr was the only oxidized element at the anode. The purity of Zr deposits exceeded 99.9%.
2.2 Modeling strategy
The formation of cathodic deposits, which are classified into three types, that is, only Zr metal, both Zr metal and ZrCl, and only ZrCl, can be explained as ZrCl and Zr formation reactions caused by the multistep reduction of Zr(IV) which originally exists in the molten salt as given by Reactions (1) and (2). Computational modeling should comprise a numerical model, which includes these reactions to examine the variation in the chemical formula at the cathode. Thereafter, the model could be validated by the experimental benchmark of Zircaloy-4 electrorefining results, depending on the initial ZrCl4 concentration.
@(1)
@(2)
In LiCl-KCl salts, Zr could have four oxidation states with two insoluble forms (Zr metal and ZrCl) and two soluble forms (Zr(II) and Zr(IV)). In this study, Zr(II) was not taken into account since it has been identified that Zr(II) is not a necessary intermediate product when Zr metal is electrochemically reduced from Zr(IV) in the ZrCl4 concentration range from 0.1% to 4%. In addition, it was aimed to enhance the convergence of computational modeling by reducing electrochemical reactions considered.7-10
To simulate the lab-scale Zircaloy-4 electrorefining experiment more precisely, the electrorefining model should perform transient calculations for both the anodic dissolution and cathodic deposition, which are coupled with each other. However, it has been reported that the anodic dissolution modeling could result in high uncertainty and complexity.11 In addition, it was experimentally verified that the alloying elements of Zircaloy-4 was not dissolved via the control of the anode potential. For this reason, in the computational modeling on the lab-scale electrorefining of the fresh Zircaloy-4, verification of the multistep reduction model for Zr was focused rather than the anodic dissolution.
When the computational model is utilized to evaluate an electrorefining of SNF claddings, the dissolution of the actinides existing inside the SNF cladding would be required to consider since the actinides are more oxidative than Zr, and it could result in the contamination of the cathode deposits. In this article, to reduce the uncertainties from the calculation of anodic behavior, it was assumed that all actinides are almost immediately dissolved into the molten salts at the initial stage of electrorefining.
Steady-state model focusing on the cathodic deposition was utilized by adopting the current measured at the initial stage of electrorefining rather than the fixed anode potential. As the anodic dissolution model did not directly affect the total current, the computational model could appropriately simulate the multistep reduction of Zr in this approach. The potential distribution outside the anode basket was determined by considering the Gaussian cage effect, which means the potential and current distribution around the cathode depends on not the geometry of the specimens loaded in the anode basket but that of the anode basket. Thereafter, the potential distribution over the cathode could be calculated regardless of the anodic reaction simulation.
Table 1 includes various thermodynamic, kinetic, and fluid dynamic parameters utilized for the modeling of the multistep reduction of Zr(IV).The k-ω model was adopted to simulate turbulent and steep concentration profiles near the electrode wall. Among these properties, there are several reported the diffusion coefficient and the apparent standard potential easily obtained by electrochemical methods such as cyclic voltammetry and chronopotentiometry. The transfer coefficient and the rate constant for Zr multistep reduction are hardly to be found.
TABLE 1. Thermodynamic, kinetic, and fluid dynamic properties utilized to computational modeling for Zr multistep reduction simulation
Properties for ZrCl formation reaction	Properties for Zr formation reaction
nZrCl a	3	nZr a	1
urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er5724:er5724-math-0003 b	−0.994 (V vs Ag/AgCl 1 wt%)	urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er5724:er5724-math-0004 b	−1.15 (V vs Ag/AgCl 1 wt%)
αZrCl	0.5 (assumed)	αZr c	0.5 (assumed)
k0, ZrCl	1.69E-4 (m/s) (assumed)	k0, Zr d	1E-6 to 1E-1 (m/s)
Fluid dynamic properties of molten salts
Dynamic viscosity	1.551 (Ns/m2)	Density	1.551 (g/cm3)
Molar mass	68.121 (g/mol)	Temperature	773 K
a The number of electron participating in the redox reaction.
b Apparent standard potential.
c Transfer number.
d Rate constant.
The apparent standard potential for ZrCl formation reaction was considered as −0.994 V (vs Ag/AgCl 1 wt%).8 As the rate constant for the reaction between Zr(IV) and ZrCl has not been reported, the rate constant derived from the reaction between U(III) and U in LiCl-KCl at 773 K, that is, 1.69E-4 m/s, was utilized as the rate constant of ZrCl formation reaction.19 This assumption was made because the numbers of electrons participating in the reactions of Zr(IV)/ZrCl and U(III)/U were both three and both reactions are between soluble and insoluble species. The apparent standard potential for Zr formation reaction was considered as −1.15 V (vs Ag/AgCl 1 wt%), which was the median of the potential range estimated by cyclic voltammogram.9 The transfer coefficient was assumed to be 0.5 for both ZrCl and Zr formation reactions. Various rate constants ranging from 1E-6 to 1E-1 m/s were employed to determine the most suitable value for simulating the chemical formula of the deposit, which could be compared with the experimental results. Based on this approach, the rate constant of Zr formation reaction, which could explain the transition of the cathode deposit composition depending on the ZrCl4 concentration, was selected and utilized for pilot-scale electrorefiner design and modeling.
2.3 Numerical model for Zr multistep reduction
A numerical model for the multistep reduction of Zr was developed using the correlation between the molar production rate, current density, and electrode potential. The molar production rate and current density for ZrCl formation reaction can be determined using Equation (3) based on the Butler-Volmer equation.
@(3)
where m'ZrCl is the molar production rate of ZrCl (mol/m2/s), iZrCl is the current density produced by ZrCl formation (A/m2), nZrCl is the number of electron participating in ZrCl formation (dimensionless), F is the Faraday constant (C/mol), k0,ZrCl is the rate constant for ZrCl formation (m/s), CZr(IV)(0,t) is the surface concentration of Zr(IV) (mol/m3), αZrCl is the transfer coefficient for ZrCl formation (dimensionless), E is the electrode potential (V), urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er5724:er5724-math-0006 is the apparent standard potential of ZrCl formation (V), R is the universal constant (J/mol/K), and T is the temperature (K).
As ZrCl formation reaction progresses, Zr(IV) is consumed on the cathode surface. To satisfy the mass balance of Zr(IV), the molar consumption rate of Zr(IV) in ZrCl formation reaction should be equivalent to the mass transfer rate of Zr(IV) from the bulk to the cathode surface, which can be expressed by the Fick's first law as shown in Equation (4).
@(4)
where JZr(IV) is the mass transfer rate of Zr(IV) (mol/m2/s), DZr(IV) is the diffusion coefficient of Zr(IV) (m2/s), Cb, Zr(IV) is the bulk concentration of Zr(IV) (mol/m3), δ is the diffusion boundary layer thickness near the cathode (m), and urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er5724:er5724-math-0008 is the molar consumption rate of Zr(IV) (mol/m2/s).
By combining Equations (3) and (4), a modified relation between the current and voltage for ZrCl formation reaction can be described by Equation 5.
@(5)
The molar production rate and current density of Zr based on Zr formation reaction can be described by Equation (6).
@(6)
where m'Zr is the molar production rate of Zr (mol/m2/s), iZr is the current density generated by Zr formation (A/m2), nZr is the number of electron participating in Zr formation (dimensionless), k0,Zr is the rate constant for the Zr formation (m/s), αZr is the transfer coefficient for Zr formation (dimensionless), and urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er5724:er5724-math-0011 is the apparent standard potential of Zr formation (V).
Figure 1 shows the molar production rates and current densities resulting from ZrCl and Zr metal formation described in Equations (5) and (6), respectively, depending on the applied potential at an arbitrary diffusion boundary layer thickness. The black solid line in Figure 1B corresponds to Equation (5). As the applied potential becomes negative in Equation (5), the current density generated by ZrCl formation converges to a specific value, which can be explained by Zr(IV) depletion at the cathode surface. As shown by red dashed line in Figure 1B; however, the current density generated by Zr metal formation increases infinitely as the applied potential becomes negative because the current density is not dependent on Zr(IV) concentration in Equation (6). Then, the ZrCl consumption rate defined in Zr formation reaction is higher than the ZrCl production rate defined in ZrCl formation reaction, below a certain electrode potential. Understandably, this phenomenon cannot occur in the steady-state modeling. To overcome this contradiction, a restriction was established for Equation (6). If the calculated molar consumption rate of ZrCl in Equation (6) is higher than the calculated molar production rate of ZrCl in Equation (5), it can be assumed that the molar consumption rate of ZrCl is equivalent to the molar production rate of ZrCl, as shown in Figure 1A. This shows that ZrCl produced by ZrCl formation reaction is completely reduced to Zr metal, if the electrode potential is more negative than the potential region where the developed restriction is valid. The current density, where the ZrCl consumption rate becomes equivalent to the production rate, greatly depends on the initial concentration of ZrCl4 and operating conditions, which could influence the diffusion boundary layer thickness (eg, rotating speed, the geometry of electrode, and stirrer).
FIGURE 1
Molar production rates and current densities generated from Zr metal and ZrCl formation depending on applied potential at arbitrary diffusion boundary layer [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
The geometry and mesh of the lab-scale electrorefining cell were generated for benchmark modeling, as shown in Figure 2. The configuration inside the anode basket and shape of the Zircaloy-4 specimens were not considered to increase the mesh quality and address the convergence issue. For similar reasons, the geometry of the reference electrode was assumed as cylindrical instead of the actual corn shape geometry. A tetrahedral mesh with high resolution was produced with a minimum size of 1 μm to calculate the sharp concentration profiles near the electrodes. The total number of elements and nodes were 314 783 and 84 725, respectively.
FIGURE 2
A, Geometry and B, mesh grid generated for computational modeling of lab-scale Zircaloy-4 electrorefining [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
2.4 Hydrodynamic-electrochemical calculation algorithm
The 3D computational modeling for Zircaloy-4 electrorefining was performed using a CFD software package, ANSYS-CFX. The electrochemical model was developed and combined with the CFD model to simulate the cathodic reactions, and a flowchart of the simulation algorithm is shown in Figure 3. The software was utilized to calculate the diffusion boundary layer thickness by solving the Navier-Stokes equation, mass transport equation, and continuity equation at a specific operating condition of the electrorefiner. After the fluid dynamics modeling, a computational model for electrochemical reaction was introduced to derive the electrochemical information such as the over potential distribution over the cathode surface and current density for each element. Equations for the electrochemical reactions, which can occur in the spent Zircaloy-4 cladding electrorefining cell were selected to develop an electrochemical model involving multistep and multielement components.
FIGURE 3
Flowchart of hydrodynamic-electrochemical simulation algorithm for electrorefining of spent nuclear fuel (SNF) Zircaloy-4 cladding [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
As shown in Figure 3, the developed model has two iteration options to combine the CFD code and electrochemical model. In the first iteration option, fluid dynamics are repeatedly simulated after calculating the electrochemical model if the convergence criteria are not satisfied in electrostatics. Since the local current density along the electrode changes during the electrochemical calculation, the diffusion boundary layer thickness is re-estimated by simulating the fluid dynamics with updated the local current density distribution. This iteration method can derive more exact results than those obtained by the other method; however, it requires considerable computational time and resources. Furthermore, the convergence issue can worsen with the first option since the fluid dynamics simulation is conducted for the bulk medium, which is accompanied by a large number of nodes.
In the second iteration option, only the electrochemical model is repeatedly calculated, even though the electrostatics is not converged. This option is based on the assumption that the local current density distribution, which is directly converted to mass sink, and source distribution do not significantly affect the diffusion boundary layer thickness. Thereafter, the diffusion boundary layer thickness is primarily determined by the convection in the bulk electrolyte. This method is expected to produce less exact results. However, it has an advantage as requiring less time and resources for computation because the calculations are conducted not in the bulk electrolyte but instead on the electrode surface. For this reason, the second iteration option was chosen to simulate the electrochemistry with improved convergence in this modeling approach.
3 BENCHMARK RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Lab-scale Zircaloy-4 electrorefining tests were simulated with initial ZrCl4 concentrations of 0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, and 4.0 wt%, and the results are shown in Table 2. The current values utilized for the steady-state modeling were 30, 90, 57, 27, and 5 mA, which were measured at the beginning of electrorefining for each concentration. The eight rate constants for the Zr metal production from ZrCl by Zr formation reaction were employed to benchmark the chemical formula of cathode deposit for each case. For all rate constants, the cathode deposits recovered with the initial ZrCl4 concentrations of 0.1 and 0.5 wt% comprise only the Zr metal, whereas only ZrCl is obtained without metallic Zr by the simulation using ZrCl4 concentration of 4.0 wt%. These results are identical to the experimental results of the lab-scale Zircaloy-4 electrorefining. However, the chemical formula varies with the variation in the rate constant applied in the simulation with ZrCl4 concentration of 1.0 and 2.0 wt%. As the rate constant of Zr formation reaction increases, the concentration of Zr metal in the cathode deposit increases. When the rate constants in the range of 1.0E-3 to 1.5E-3 m/s are employed, the computational results show good agreement with the experimental results, that is, the cathode deposit with 1.0 wt% ZrCl4 is composed of Zr metal and ZrCl, while that for 2.0 wt% ZrCl4 concentration only comprises ZrCl without Zr metal.
TABLE 2. Computational modeling results on Zr metal composition in cathode deposit depending on the rate constant of Zr formation in the five initial ZrCl4 concentrations
Rate constant (m/s)	Composition of Zr metal in cathode deposit (wt%)
k0,ZrCl	k0,Zr	Initial ZrCl4 concentration in LiCl-KCl
0.1 wt%	0.5 wt%	1.0 wt%	2.0 wt%	4.0 wt%
1.69E-04	1.00E-06	100	100	0	0	0
1.00E-05	100	100	0	0	0
1.00E-04	100	100	0	0	0
1.00E-03	100	100	45	0	0
1.50E-03	100	100	50.55	0	0
2.00E-03	100	100	57	10.04	0
1.00E-02	100	100	90	62.18	0
1.00E-01	100	100	100	72.01	0
Experimental results	100	100	>0	0	0
Figure 4 shows the computational modeling results for the local mass production rates of ZrCl and Zr metal at the cathode based on five ZrCl4 concentrations, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, and 4.0 wt%. The mass production rates were calculated using a rate constant of 1.5E-3 m/s for Zr formation reaction. When the calculated mass production rates of Zr and ZrCl are compared with the experimentally measured XRD patterns of the cathode deposits, those do not match quantitatively with the XRD results. This can be attributed to the experimental loss, which occurred when the cathodic deposits were obtained by scrapping the cathode for XRD analysis.
FIGURE 4
Computational modeling results on the mass production rates of ZrCl and Zr at the cathode in initial ZrCl4 concentration of A, 0.1 wt%; B, 0.5 wt%; C, 1.0 wt%; D, 2.0 wt%; and E, 4.0 wt% after electrorefining [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
From the benchmark results, it is identified that the rate constants between 1E-3 and 1.5E-3 m/s are preferred for Zr formation reaction to align the computational modeling results with the experimental results. As the rate constant for ZrCl formation reaction is assumed to be 1.69E-4 m/s, the estimated range of the rate constant for Zr formation reaction is a few times higher than that of ZrCl formation reaction. This indicates that Zr formation reaction is significantly faster than ZrCl formation reaction. It is electrochemically feasible because Zr formation reaction occurs between the insoluble reactants, while ZrCl formation reaction is related to the ionic reactants. ZrCl produced from Zr(IV) is attached to the cathode, so the over potential caused by the ionic mass transfer from the bulk to the electrode surface is almost zero. In other words, the current density generated from Zr formation reaction increases rapidly as the electrode potential increases.
The transition of the Zr metal composition in the cathode deposit, depending on the ZrCl4 concentration, was estimated using the rate constants ranging from 1E-3 to 1.5E-3 for Zr formation reaction, and other material properties that are included in Table 2. Therefore, these properties are utilized for the pilot-scale electrorefiner designing and evaluation for SNF Zircaloy-4 cladding. However, there are still uncertainties for the benchmark modeling, which are brought about the assumption of the rate constant for the reaction between ZrCl/Zr and the transfer coefficient of 0.5. As both the transfer coefficient and rate constant would significantly influence the tendency of redox reaction, uncertain material properties can afford unreliable computational modeling results. Therefore, additional experimental and atomic scale modeling studies are necessary to obtain precise material properties in molten salts, which make it possible to improve the computational modeling accuracy.
In this study, the benchmark for ZrCl and Zr metal deposition was performed qualitatively because of the lack of information on the Zr metal to ZrCl ratio of the deposits. In addition, the rate constant for the ZrCl formation from Zr(IV) was assumed as the value of U deposition from U(III), and it could increase uncertainties of the computational modeling results. For enhancing the benchmark accuracy quantitatively, the following experiments can be performed. First, the cathode deposits can be quantitatively investigated by various analytical methods (eg, mass spectroscopy and elemental analyzer) after removing the trapped salts by a polar organic solvent without an oxygen atom (eg, pyridine). Second, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy can be conducted for the ZrCl formation reaction from Zr(IV) to obtain the rate constant.
4 DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE OF PILOT-SCALE ELECTROREFINER FOR SNF ZIRCALOY-4 CLADDING
Various pilot-scale electrorefining simulations for SNF Zircaloy-4 cladding were performed by utilizing the developed and validated 3D computational model. Since the objective of using the pilot-scale electrorefiner was to achieve high-purity Zr metal recovery without ZrCl and actinides, the potential window was investigated by calculating the mass production rate of Zr metal, ZrCl, and U to determine the possibility of achieving pure Zr recovery. Then, the design parameters such as rotating electrode, salt weight, and the number of anode baskets were determined. The effects of these design parameters were analyzed to optimize the electrorefiner design.
The capability of the designed electrorefiner was evaluated by predicting the throughput when pure Zr could be recovered without the deposition of U and ZrCl. The throughput was investigated under galvanostatic operation to quantitatively predict the amount of dissolution and deposition.11, 20-22 Electrorefining simulations were performed to estimate the mass production rates of Zr, ZrCl, and U, depending on the applied current under various cathode rotating speeds. The optimized operating conditions that enable only Zr metal deposition were determined and the corresponding electrorefiner throughput was derived.
4.1 Design characteristics and assumptions
Table 3 shows the parameters for the design of derived pilot-scale electrorefiner and its configuration is described in Figure 5. It is considered that spent Zircaloy-4 claddings of 10 kg is loaded into the anode baskets, based on the geometry of Mark-IV electrorefiner for used metallic fuel reprocessing from EBR-II reactor.23 Assuming that the cylindrical shape fuel cladding has an inner diameter of 0.836 cm and an outer diameter of 0.950 cm, the total surface area is estimated as 53 820 cm.2, 24 The volume of cladding is calculated to be 6799 cm,3 including the hollows. The anode basket volume is estimated as 9081 cm,3 with the assumption that the loading efficiency of the cladding is 75%. LiCl-KCl salts with ZrCl4 concentration of 0.5 wt% are determined as the initial electrolytes to obtain Zr metal with the suppression of ZrCl deposition, as revealed by the experimental and computational results.
TABLE 3. Design of the pilot-scale electrorefiner for SNF Zircaloy-4 cladding
Reactor vessel
Height	35 cm
Diameter	80 cm
Volume (including anode basket)	175 929 cm3
Anode basket
Height	25 cm
Inner diameter of anode basket	75 cm
Angle of anode basket	37°
The number of anode baskets	3
Total volume of anode baskets	9081 cm3
Weight of Zircaloy-4 claddings	10 kg
Volume of Zircaloy-4 claddings including hollow	6799 cm3
Surface area of Zircaloy-4 claddings	53 820 cm2
Anode loading efficiency	75%
Cathode
Height	25 cm
Diameter	15 cm
Surface area	1355 cm2
Electrolyte
Base electrolyte	LiCl-KCl eutectic
Initial ZrCl4 concentration	0.5 wt%
Weight of electrolyte	250 kg
FIGURE 5
Configuration of pilot-scale electrorefiner for spent nuclear fuel (SNF) Zircaloy-4 cladding [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
The molten salt container is designed to have a cylindrical shaped vessel and fan-shaped anode basket is fixed on the electrorefiner side wall, as shown in Table 3. If the anode basket rotates itself during electrorefining, the cross flows can be generated near the cathode and local mass transfer becomes complicated.12, 25 This may cause the local depletion of Zr(IV) and local deposition of U on the cathode. In addition, the rotating anode can intensify the global mass transfer over the cathode. Thereafter, Zr(IV) mass transfer is promoted to the cathode. As a result, ZrCl becomes dominant since high Zr(IV) concentration at the cathode surface can enhance ZrCl formation reaction, which produces ZrCl from Zr(IV) according to Equation (3). In contrast, the reaction rate for Zr metal formation is determined not by the Zr(IV) concentration, but by an over potential according to Equation (6). Therefore, the anode basket was designed not to rotate but to be fixed at the side wall to focus on the Zr metal formation with the suppression of ZrCl and U deposition by minimizing the cross flow. Instead, a cylindrical cathode was designed to be placed at the center of the electrorefiner to provide a circumferential electric field symmetry near the cathode. The surface area of the cathode is decided to as 1355 cm,2 which is significantly smaller than those of the anode baskets to maintain a sufficiently low current density at the anode during electrorefining. A steady-state was assumed since the surface area changes in the anode and cathode could not be easily handled in a 3D computational model. The diffusion boundary layer thickness was assumed to be uniform due to the quasi-symmetric geometry of the designed electrorefiner.
Alloying elements and some fission products nobler than Zr were not included in the pilot-scale electrorefiner design since it was identified that the dissolution of these elements could be prevented by anode potential control.6 To decrease the complexity of computational modeling, U was considered as a representative of actinides, which can penetrate into the fuel cladding during the reactor operation. In addition, it was assumed that all U existing in the cladding is immediately dissolved into the molten salts and U(III) is uniformly distributed in the electrolyte at a very early stage of electrorefining. These assumptions can be conservative since the actinides concentration, which is over-estimated in the molten salt can result in the reduction potential of actinides and Zr to be narrowed down. Moreover, U has the most similar reduction potential to that of Zr among the actinides. If U cannot be deposited on the cathode, other actinide elements are hardly deposited. Additionally, Cs-137 and Sr-90 are important isotopes, which should be decontaminated from the cladding. These are not included in this design and modeling as their oxidative tendencies are much higher than those of U and Zr. If U is not electrodeposited, neither can be Cs and Sr.
4.2 Potential window for high-purity Zr metal recovery without U and ZrCl
A specific potential window was developed employing the relation between electrode potential, current density, and molar production rate. To evaluate the molar production rate of ZrCl and Zr metal, the relation derived in Equations (5) and (6) and the identical restriction for Equation (6) were applied for the pilot-scale electrorefiner modeling to prevent that ZrCl consumption rate resulting from Zr formation reaction second reduction reaction can be larger than ZrCl production rate resulting from ZrCl formation reaction since this phenomenon cannot occur in this modeling.
In ZrCl formation reaction, ZrCl is obtained by the reduction of Zr(IV). The produced ZrCl is consumed to form Zr in Zr formation reaction. Therefore, the difference between the molar production rate of ZrCl in ZrCl formation reaction and the molar consumption rate of ZrCl in Zr formation reaction can be defined as the actual molar production rate of ZrCl during electrorefining. Since the molar consumption rate of ZrCl is equivalent to the molar production rate of Zr metal, the actual molar production rate of ZrCl can be expressed as Equation (7):
@(7)
where m'ZrCl,actual is the actual molar production rate of ZrCl (mol/m2/s).
A relation between the current density, electrode potential, and molar production rate at an arbitrary diffusion boundary layer thickness for U deposition can be expressed in the same manner as the derivation of Equation (5), and is described by Equation (8).
@(8)
where, m'U is the molar production rate of U (mol/m2/s), iU is the current density obtained by U formation (A/m2), nU is the number of electron participating in U formation (dimensionless), k0,U is the rate constant for the U formation reaction (m/s), CU(III)(0,t) is the surface concentration of U(III) (mol/m3), αU is the transfer coefficient for U formation (dimensionless), and urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er5724:er5724-math-0014 is the apparent standard potential of U (V).
The mass production rates of ZrCl, Zr metal, and U metal at an arbitrary diffusion boundary layer thickness are shown in Figure 6, based on the Equations (6), (7), and (8). The calculations were performed using the material properties of Zr included in Table 1. The standard reduction potential of −1.287 V (vs Ag/AgCl 1 wt%), the diffusion coefficient of 2.7E-5 m2/s, and rate constant of 1.69E-4 m/s were utilized to calculate Equation (8) for U.19, 26, 27The potential window related to Zr metal deposition without ZrCl and U is estimated to be between −1.26 and − 1.45 V (vs Ag/AgCl 1 wt%). This window can change with the variation in the diffusion boundary layer thickness, concentration of ZrCl4 and UCl3 in the molten salt, and other electrorefiner operating conditions. The molar production rate and starting potential of U reduction are related to the amount of U metal loaded on the anode and the weight of molten salt. When the objective of electrorefining is taken into consideration, design criteria to enlarge the potential window should be developed, where the highly pure Zr metal can be recovered without ZrCl and U.
FIGURE 6
Mass production rates of Zr metal, ZrCl, and U depending on applied potential at an arbitrary diffusion boundary layer thickness [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
4.3 Weight of molten salt
Considering the assumption that all U in the anode basket is immediately oxidized to molten salt at an early stage of electrorefining, the weight of the molten salt is closely associated with UCl3 concentration, which affects the potential window for pure Zr metal recovery. As the amount of U loaded into the anode is fixed, the initial concentration of UCl3 is inversely proportional to the salt weight. As UCl3 concentration decreases, the equilibrium potential of U(III)/U shifts toward the negative direction, which causes the broadening the potential window to achieve pure Zr recovery with ZrCl and U.
The effect of salt weight on the potential window can be estimated using various diffusion boundary layer thicknesses near the cathode, as shown in Figure 7. As the potential range increases, the salt weight increases. At a broad potential width with a fixed salt weight, the diffusion boundary layer thickness increases. This is not favorable because of the large driven over potential, which can affect the impurity deposition at the cathode.12 In contrast, the diffusion boundary layer thickness diminishes as the potential range becomes narrow. Therefore, the optimized condition in terms of the salt weight, potential range, and diffusion boundary layer thickness should be determined.
FIGURE 7
Potential range for Zr metal recovery without U depending on weight of molten LiCl-KCl salt and diffusion boundary layer thickness [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
To balance these variables, the width of the potential range is designed with a safety margin to prevent the codeposition of Zr and U since the cell potential can oscillate during electrorefining. The target width for the potential window is determined based on the experimental data obtained from the Mark-IV electrorefiner.11 The cell potential of the electrorefiner fluctuates within 0.1 V under the galvanostatic condition. The appropriate width of potential window for the spent Zircaloy-4 cladding electrorefining is established as 0.15 V to secure 50% margin compared to that with the Mark-IV electrorefiner.
It has been reported that the diffusion boundary layer thickness near the cathode in molten salt electrorefining system has a range between a few and few hundred micrometers depending on configuration of the electrorefiner and rotating speed of the cathode.12, 28 At the potential window width of 0.15 V, the minimum diffusion boundary layer thickness is determined as at least 50 μm, since the small diffusion boundary layer thickness results in a considerable salt weight, which makes the electrorefiner vessel large. Based on the defined potential window range and diffusion boundary layer thickness, the amount of molten salt is 250 kg, as depicted by the yellow circle in Figure 7. Considering the density of molten LiCl-KCl salts at 773 K, the geometry of the cylindrical reactor vessel is designed to have a diameter of 80 cm and height of 25 cm.29
4.4 Number of anode baskets
The number of fan-shaped anode baskets and their arrangement in the electrorefiner can affect the symmetry of the electric field in the circumferential direction at the cathode. If the number of anode baskets is small, it is difficult for the electric field generated near the cathode to have a circumferential symmetry. A large number of anode baskets can secure a uniform electric field formation; however, this makes the actual electrorefiner operation complicated. Consequently, the number of anode baskets is an important design parameter, which should be optimized through computational simulation.
Electrorefining simulations using four different anode basket numbers were performed to calculate the circumferential potential distributions at the cathode (Figure 8). The applied current and rotating speed are fixed as 50 A and 100 rpm, respectively. As shown, if a single anode basket is employed, the circumferential potential difference is 117.6 mV at the middle height of the cathode. The circumferential potential difference diminishes as the number of anode baskets increases, that is, 12.2 mV for two anode baskets, 1.8 mV for three anode baskets, and 0.29 mV for four anode baskets. As the variance in the vertical distribution of the cathode potential is approximately 30 mV, regardless of anode number in this modeling, more than two anode baskets are required to afford circumferential cathode potential symmetry in the electrorefiner.
FIGURE 8
Local cathode potential distributions in the circumferential direction at the middle height of the cathode depending on the number of anode baskets using applied current of 50 A and rotating speed of cathode of 100 rpm [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
The local mass production rates of Zr and U at the cathode were derived under an applied current of 50 A, and cathode rotation speed of 100 rpm (Figure 9). As shown, when a single anode is used, the Zr production rate distribution is not uniform in both the circumferential and vertical directions over the cathode. U is shown to slightly deposit at the cathode region close to the anode side. In the case of three anode baskets, U deposition cannot be observed. Zr metal is homogeneously deposited in the circumferential direction. Thus, three anode baskets were determined for the electrorefiner. The final geometry of each anode basket is designed to have a 75 cm inner diameter, a 80 cm outer diameter, a 25 cm height, and a fan-shaped basket angle of 37°.
FIGURE 9
Local mass production rate distributions over the cathode: one anode basket employed for (A) Zr and (B) U, and three anode baskets employed for (C) Zr and (D) U using applied current of 50 A and rotating speed of cathode of 100 rpm [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
4.5 Capability evaluation
The mass production rates of ZrCl, Zr, and U, depending on the applied current, were estimated under cathodic rotating speeds of 25, 50, 75, and 100 rpm. Figure 10 shows the current range in which Zr metal can be deposited without ZrCl and U, shown as the green region for all cathode rotating speeds. If the current depicted by the yellow region shown in Figure 10 is applied, ZrCl is codeposited with Zr metal. In contrast, if the applied current in the red region is applied, U is codeposited with Zr metal.
FIGURE 10
Mass production rates of ZrCl, Zr, and U depending on applied current using cathode rotating speed of A, 25 rpm; B, 50 rpm; C, 75 rpm; and D, 100 rpm [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
As the rotation speed increases, the current range represented by the green region shifts to a high current region. This is because the limiting current density is inversely proportional to the diffusion boundary layer thickness. If the cathode rotates at 25 rpm, the current range (in the green region) is 7.5 to 19.5 A. As the rotation speed of the cathode increases to 50, 75, and 100 rpm, the current ranges of 11 to 32 A, 17 to 42 A, and 38 to 51 A, respectively, are observed. This indicates that a high rotation speed is preferable to achieve a high throughput at the cathode.
As described in Section 4.3, the potential window for Zr metal recovery without ZrCl and U metal narrows as diffusion boundary layer thickness decreases. This is because a high surface concentration of Zr(IV) can be maintained with a small diffusion boundary layer thickness, even though a sufficiently negative potential is applied to the cathode. Thereafter, ZrCl formation becomes dominant due to a high Zr(IV) concentration. As a result, the current range for Zr recovery shown in green in Figure 10 diminishes under fast cathode rotation. For instance, if the cathode rotates at 100 rpm, which secures a small diffusion boundary layer thickness, the width of the current range is 13 A. In contrast, when the cathode rotates at 75 rpm, the width of the current range is 25 A. Fast rotating speed has an advantage in terms of throughput and a disadvantage of possible codeposition; therefore, the cathode rotating speed should be appropriately determined.
Figure 11 shows the local mass production rates of ZrCl, Zr metal, and U metal distributed over the cathode at 100 rpm under applied currents of 30, 40, and 50 A for the case shown in Figure 10D. A slight variation is shown in the circumferential direction, but the vertical distribution is clearly distinct, as the current density is concentrated at the bottom through the edge effect of the electric fields near the cathode. Accordingly, when the applied current is 30 A, Zr metal starts to deposit from the bottom to the top of the cathode, while ZrCl deposits are mainly found near the top. With an increase in the applied current, U metal deposits are likely observed at the bottom of the cathode.
FIGURE 11
Local mass production rate distributions of ZrCl, Zr, and U depending on applied current density at cathode rotating speed of 100 rpm [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Table 4 shows two electrorefiner operating conditions for Zr recovery from the SNF Zircaloy-4 cladding with different cathode rotating speeds of 50 and 75 rpm. The diffusion boundary layer thicknesses are calculated as 76.75 and 57.79 μm, respectively, for the corresponding speeds. These thicknesses can satisfy the minimum criteria of 50 μm, derived from the relation between the molten salt weight and diffusion boundary layer thickness. At the first operating condition, a current range of 11 to 32 A and throughput of 0.06 to 0.16 ton/y can be obtained. A current range of 17 to 42 A and throughput of 0.09 to 0.21 ton/y can be obtained for the second operating condition. The alloying elements, fission products, and activation products nobler than Zr would remain in metallic forms in the anode basket. In contrast, other oxidative elements such as Cs, Sr, and actinides would exist in ionic states in the molten salts. Their deposition can be prevented by managing the cathode potential.
TABLE 4. Two operating conditions of the designed pilot-scale electrorefiner for SNF Zircaloy-4 cladding
Condition 1	Condition 2
Throughput (ton/y)	0.06-0.16	0.09-0.21
Operating hours (h/d)	24	24
Operating days (d/y)	250	250
Applied current (A)	11-32	17-42
Rotating speed of cathode (rpm)	50	75
Diffusion boundary layer thickness (μm)	76.75	57.79
The designed throughput of the pilot-scale electrorefiner is 0.1 to 0.2 ton/y. This is estimated with an assumption of operating 24 hours a day and 250 days a year. The throughput can be improved by increasing the surface area ratio of the cathode to that of the anode. If a cathodic reaction is the rate-determining step, the throughput is proportional to the cathode area at a specific potential in electrorefining. As the cathode area of the designed electrorefiner is significantly smaller than the anode area, the throughput can be increased by enlarging the cathode area. However, if the cathode area is significantly increased, the noble elements can be dissolved from the anode because of an increase in the anodic current density as the total applied current increases. Therefore, experimental studies should be conducted to optimize the surface area ratio to balance the high throughput and decontamination factor.
In addition, the following limitations on the designed pilot-scale electrorefining should be noticed. First, the initial concentration of ZrCl4 is quite low as 0.5 wt% compared to general electrorefining for other metals. Low concentration could result in the local depletion of ZrCl4 and contamination from the codeposition of U and other radioactive elements in the irradiated Zircaloy-4 specimen, so the geometry and configurations of an electrorefiner and electrodes should be sophisticatedly arranged experimentally. Another limitation is that the pilot-scale electrorefining was designed and simulated with the assumption of a steady-state and two species (U and Zr). The initial stage of electrorefining behavior with the dissolution of more oxidative elements could influence the concentration at the steady-state. Also, the final stage of electrorefining behavior with the depletion of the target element (Zr) could cause the contamination of the deposits.
5 CONCLUSIONS
A 3D computational model based on the commercial CFD code was developed to optimize the electrorefining of SNF Zircaloy-4 cladding for high-purity Zr metal recovery without ZrCl and U. The computational model was focused on cathode deposition rather than anodic dissolution since the cathodic reaction was more important to investigate the competitive deposition behavior among Zr, ZrCl, and actinides. To simulate the complicated multistep Zr redox behavior in chloride salts, a numerical model for Zr multistep reduction was developed using the Butler-Volmer equation. For this purpose, benchmark simulations were performed for lab-scale fresh Zircaloy-4 electrorefining with different ZrCl4 concentrations in LiCl-KCl by comparing the chemical formula of the cathode deposits composed of Zr and/or ZrCl. Simulated cathodic compositions were consistent with the experimental observations. Therefore, it was verified that the developed numerical model could successfully predict the multistep electrochemical reaction of Zr in LiCl-KCl-ZrCl4 salt. In addition, a range of material constants, which significantly affect the calculated currents and potentials were estimated for utilization in the numerical model.
Based on the model and properties, the pilot-scale electrorefining of SNF Zircaloy-4 cladding was simulated to determine the electrorefiner design and operating conditions. The fixed anode baskets and rotating cathode were introduced to minimize the cross flow, which can cause ZrCl deposition, and to secure the uniform electric field and diffusion boundary layer. It was conservatively assumed that all the actinides from the cladding are immediately dissolved and exist in ionic states at the beginning of electrorefining. The optimal condition, including the appropriate salt weight, potential range, and the diffusion boundary layer thickness was determined to suppress the codeposition of actinides. The three anode baskets were found to reduce the circumferential potential difference over the cathode surface. The operating conditions for the derived pilot-scale electrorefiner design were obtained to determine the range of the applied current, which can reduce pure Zr metal without any ZrCl and U. The throughput of the pilot-scale electrorefiner with the optimized design and conditions was 0.1 to 0.2 ton/y.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by Korea Hydro & Nuclear Power Co., Ltd. (2018-Tech15).
