<title>Electrochemical Separation of Lanthanum Oxide in Molten FLiNaK Salt</title>
<author>Yang Qiufeng; Ge Jianbang; Wang Yafei; Zhang Jinsuo</author>
<Affiliation>Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Nulcear Engineering Program, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Blacksburg, Virginia 24061; University of Wisconsin–Madison, Department of Engineering Physics, Madison, Wisconsin 53706</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00295450.2020.1757976</DOI>
<URL>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00295450.2020.1757976</URL>
Abstract
The electrochemical behavior of La2O3 was investigated in LiF-NaF-KF (FLiNaK, 46.5-11.5-42.0 mol %) eutectic at 700°C. In the electrochemical tests, two kinds of working electrodes, i.e., tungsten and graphite, were utilized. The present study showed that La3+ ions can be deposited in the form of La metal on a tungsten cathode or LaC2 on a graphite cathode, and O2− can be removed in the form of CO/CO2 using a graphite anode. Therefore, a graphite or tungsten cathode (for La3+ removal), and a graphite anode (for O2− removal) are good options to remove both La3+ and O2− from the molten salts. In addition to the electrochemical tests, inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy analysis was used to measure the concentration of the lanthanum element and X-ray powder diffraction techniques were applied to determine the chemical forms of lanthanum in the salt. It turned out that the solubility of La3+ in the molten FLiNaK was 6.81 × 10−4 wt% at 700°C and LaOF was formed by the chemical reactions between La2O3 and alkali fluorides during the heating process.
Keywords: Electrochemical separation；La2O3；FLiNaK；molten salt
I. INTRODUCTION
Among the different kinds of molten salt reactors, one promising nuclear reactor type, fluoride-salt-cooled high-temperature reactors (FHRs), which are loaded with solid fuel and liquid molten salt coolant, have attracted lots of researchers’ interest in past decades due to their inherent safety and high thermal efficiency.1–3 Although FHRs have impressive advantages, there is still one issue that urgently needs to be solved: how to remove impurities in the coolant molten salt. During reactor operation, it is inevitable that some fission products may dissolve into the coolant in a stable chemical form, such as La2O3 (Refs. 4 and 5). These oxides may accumulate in the coolant once dissolved in the molten salts. The presence of oxygen ions may lead to the formation of insoluble compounds, and shift the corrosion potential of structural materials to be more positive as well.6 Therefore, to ensure the safe operation of FHRs it is necessary to develop efficient and economical methods to remove these fission product oxide impurities from the molten salt.
Electrochemical methods have been widely applied in the separation of oxides from molten salt systems.7–9 Sum et al. conducted an electrochemical study of aluminum deposition from molten NaF-AlF3-Al2O3 on a tungsten electrode at temperatures between 824°C and 902°C. The intermetallic compound of Al and W was produced, followed by bulk aluminum deposition.10 Zhu and Sadoway investigated the electrochemical process of a graphite anode in Na3AlF6-AlF3-CaF2-Al2O3 during electrolytic production of aluminum. They demonstrated that oxygen ions were separated in the form of carbon oxides, such as CO and CO2, and fluorine ions were oxidized with the formation of carbon fluorides, such as CF4 (Ref. 11). Chen et al. conducted a study on the electrochemical deposition of neodymium in the LiF-CaF2-AlF3-Nd2O3 system. They confirmed that Nd3+ was reduced on the tungsten electrode in the form of Al-Nd alloys.12 Based on these electrochemical separation studies, it is possible to apply electrochemical methods to remove the oxide impurities in FHR coolant salts. When removing oxide impurities in molten salts, a current can be applied in the system through which the target metal cations will be reduced to metal or alloys on a cathode. While for oxygen anions in the electrolyte, they can be oxidized to gas products on an anode, then removed easily from molten salts.
The present study focuses on the FLiNaK-La2O3 system because lanthanum is one the major fission products. Recently, Ambrova et al. studied the LiF-CaF2-La2O3 system and concluded that it is impossible to deposit La on an inert metal electrode, but La could form an alloy with an active Cu or Ni electrode.13 Another related study was conducted in molten LiF-NdF3-Nd2O3 salt by Stefanidaki et al.14 It was found that NdOF presented in the melts and Nd could be deposited on a tungsten cathode. The present study investigated the electrochemical behaviors of La2O3 on different electrodes and the possibility of removing La3+ and O2− simultaneously using an electrochemical method. All the experiments were conducted at 700°C. Both tungsten and graphite electrodes were utilized to study their performance in the separation of La2O3. The tungsten electrode was selected because previous studies conducted by Wang et al. have demonstrated the feasibility of depositing La metal on a tungsten cathode in molten FLiNaK-LaF3 salts.15 While for the graphite rod, our main purpose was to use it as a “sacrificial” anode to remove oxygen cations because available studies indicated that it could be oxidized in the electrochemical process to form gas products, such as carbon oxides (CO, CO2, or both).16,17 The results in this study provide useful insights into the separation of La2O3 from molten FLiNaK.
II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
The salt preparation and electrochemical tests were conducted in a glove box with O2 < 1.7 ppm and H2O < 2.0 ppm. The glove box was filled with circulating argon gas. Chemicals, i.e., LiF (BioUltra, ≥99.0%), NaF (ACS regent, ≥99.0%), KF (ACS regent, ≥99.0%), and La2O3 (≥99.9%) were procured from Sigma-Aldrich. Fifty grams of FLiNaK in the proportion of 46.5 mol % LiF-11.5 mol % NaF-42.0 mol % KF and 1.0 g of La2O3 were prepared and mixed evenly to ensure a uniform salt mixture. The salts were weighted by a precision balance with an accuracy of 10−5 g (MS 105DU Mettler Toledo). A muffle furnace with a temperature accuracy ±2°C was calibrated with a PtRh10-Pt thermocouple before the tests. The mixed salts were put into a nickel crucible, and the nickel crucible was then placed on an Al2O3 safety dish. The salts were heated at 700°C for 48 h to let the system equilibrate before any measurements. The three-electrode cell that was used in the electrochemical tests is shown in Fig. 1. Two experiments with different working electrodes were designed. In the first experiment, a tungsten rod (3.2 mm diameter, Midwest Tungsten Service) was used as the working electrode, while in the second experiment, the working electrode was a graphite rod (3.0 mm diameter, Sigma-Aldrich). In both experiments, the graphite counter electrode (3.0 mm diameter, Sigma-Aldrich) and the tungsten reference electrode (1.6 mm diameter, Midwest Tungsten Service) were applied. All the electrodes were bathed in deionized water and cleaned in the ultrasonic machine for 40 min, then dried with a ceramic stirring hotplate before use. The surface area of the working electrode was calculated according to the submerged depth into the salt melt measured by a Kobalt digital caliper with precision of 10−3 cm.
Fig. 1. Three-electrode cell in the electrochemical tests: 1 = quartz tube, 2 = working electrode, 3 = counter electrode, 4 = nickel crucible, 5 = reference electrode, 6 = alumina safety dish, and 7 = muffle furnace
The electrochemical measurements were performed with a Gamry interface 1000 controlled by Gamry Instrument Framework software. Electrochemical techniques, such as cyclic voltammetry (CV), chronopotentiometry (CP), and open-circuit potential (OCP), were used to study the electrochemical behaviors on the electrode surface. X-ray powder diffraction (XRD, PANalytical X’Pert PRO) and inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) analyses were conducted for phase identification and concentration determination, respectively. Salt samples were taken with a house-made spatula and quenched within 10 s in the glove box. The quenched solid salt samples were finely ground into homogenized powder in a ceramic mortar. Considering the strong hydroscopicity of the FLiNaK salts, an air-tight XRD powder sample holder was used to avoid air contamination during the XRD analysis. In the ICP-MS analysis, three identical ICP samples made from one salt sample were prepared to ensure data reliability, as the concentration deviation of the three samples had to be less than 5% or the results would be invalid.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
III.A. Concentration and Chemical Form Analysis
After heating the salts at 700°C for 48 h, it was observed that there was still a large amount of insoluble material on the bottom of the crucible. The white-gray insoluble material is shown in Fig. 2. To prepare the insoluble material sample for XRD analysis, first the liquid salt on the top was poured out to expose the insoluble material, then a house-made spatula was used to take the insoluble material sample from the bottom. One thing that needs to be noted is that even done in this way it was still impossible to completely avoid the liquid salt when taking the insoluble material samples. Therefore, the XRD analysis results shown in Fig. 3 indicate that the phase patterns in the liquid salt and insoluble material are exactly the same. Identification was made of La2O3, LaOF, and alkali oxides, such as Li2O, Na2O, and K2O, as well as alkali fluoride salts LiF, NaF, and KF. These oxides and oxyfluorides were produced in the reactions listed in Table I.18,19 The standard Gibbs energy of reactions at 700°C were calculated based on the database in HSC Chemistry 6 (Ref. 20). The negative Gibbs energy indicates that all three reactions are thermal favored. Moreover, comparing the peak area ration of La2O3/LaOF in Fig. 3, the ratio of the insoluble material sample is larger than that of the liquid salt sample.
TABLE I Chemical Reactions in FLiNaK-La2O3 at 700°C
Fig. 2. Insoluble materials on the bottom (a) during heating and (b) after cooling down
Fig. 3. XRD analysis of liquid salt sample on top in black and insoluble salt samples on bottom in red
To determine the concentration of La3+ in the molten salts, ICP-MS analysis was conducted for the liquid salt samples. The measured La3+ concentration is 6.81 × 10−4 wt%, which is much less than the La addition (1.67 × 10−2 wt%) when the salt mixture was prepared. The low La concentration indicates an extremely low solubility of La2O3 in the molten FLiNaK salt at 700°C. However, since LaOF is found in both the liquid salt and the insoluble materials, the dissolution of La2O3 can be through physical dissolution, chemical reaction, or both.
III.B. Results and Analysis of Electrochemical Tests
III.B.1. First Test with Tungsten WE
Even though only a small amount of La2O3 is dissolved in the melts, a CV scan with a tungsten rod as the working electrode shows two pairs of redox peaks, A1/R1 and A2/R2, and one oxidation peak, A3, as shown in Fig. 4a. The possible reactions are listed in Table II. To study the oxidation reactions at peak A3, the standard Gibbs energy of reactions and potentials (versus La3+/La) are calculated using the database in HSC Chemistry 6 (Ref. 20). The potential of the WO3 formation is less positive than that of the WO2 and WF4 formations. Therefore, WO3 should be produced at a less positive potential than WO2 and WF4, even though the potential difference of these three material formations is small. However, there are no separated oxidation peaks and the oxidation current tends to increase. Considering that the O2− concentration in the salt is low, the continuous increase of the current must be due to the oxidation of F− ions. After the electrochemical tests, the diameter of the tungsten working electrode immersed into the salts was measured and it turned out to be 0.882 mm less than the original diameter, which confirms the dissolution of tungsten into the salt. Therefore, tungsten cannot be applied as an anode for the removal of O2− due to the formation of tungsten oxides, not oxygen gas.
TABLE II Standard Gibbs Energy and Potential of Reactions in FLiNaK-La2O3 at 700°C
Fig. 4. (a) CV scan in FLiNaK-La2O3 at 700°C, scan rate: 100 mV/s, electrode immersion depth: 0.997 cm, electrode surface area: 1.082 cm2, working electrode: W, counter electrode: C, reference electrode: W. (b) CV scan in FLiNaK-La2O3 at 700°C, scan rate: 100 mV/s, electrode immersion depth: 0.786 cm, surface area: 0.871 cm2; and CV scan in FLiNaK at 700°C, scan rate: 200 mV/s, electrode immersion depth:1.038 cm, surface area: 1.124 cm2, working electrode: W, counter electrode: C, reference electrode: W
To investigate the reactions at the peaks of A1/R1 and A2/R2, another two CV scans were conducted in the molten FLiNaK and FLiNaK-La2O3 salt. As shown in Fig. 4b, the peaks A2/R2 correspond to the redox reaction of K. The peaks A1/R1 appear after the addition of La2O3, which indicates the redox reaction is related to La3+. Such a redox couple was also reported by Wang et al.15 and Chesser et al.21 in the FLiNaK-LaF3 system. The La3+ can be reduced to La metal in the cathodic scan, which means that the tungsten cathode can be applied in the removal of La3+.
III.B.2. Second Test with Graphite WE
As discussed in Sec. III.B.1, the tungsten electrode does not perform well in the removal of O2−. Therefore, in this section, graphite is applied to study the possibility of La2O3 separation. A CV curve in the potential range of −0.43 to 2.75 V (versus the reference electrode) is shown in Fig. 5a. There are two oxidation peaks, B1/B2, with different peak currents located in the range of 1.25 to 2.75 V (versus the reference electrode). In Fig. 5a, the peaks B1/B2 show strong oscillation, which may result from gas production on the electrode surface. A similar phenomenon was also reported by Zhu and Sadoway11 and Gong et al.22 The possible electrochemical reactions on the graphite surface are listed in reactions (1) through (4):
C+O2−−2e−→CO  ,(1)
C+2O2−−4e−→CO2  ,(2)
C+4F−−4e−→CF4  ,(3)
Fig. 5. (a) CV scan in FLiNaK-La2O3 at 700°C, scan rate: 100 mV/s, electrode immersion depth: 0.921 cm, surface area: 0.939 cm2, working electrode: C, counter electrode: C, reference electrode: Pt. (b) CV scan in FLiNaK-La2O3 at 700°C, scan rate: 1000 mV/s, electrode immersion depth: 0.828 cm, surface area: 0.851 cm2, working electrode: C, counter electrode: C, reference electrode: W
and
2C+6F−−6e−→C2F6  .(4)
As shown in Table III, the calculated potential of the carbon oxide formation is about 1.42 V less positive that of CF4 and 1.61 V less positive than that of the C2F6 formation. Therefore, CO2 or CO would be produced at a less positive potential than C2F6 or CF4, and the peaks B1/B2 correspond to the reaction of carbon oxides, which also coincides with the results reported by Tian et al.23 The lower current of peak B2 in the reverse scan results from the graphite anode effect in the molten salts.24,25 The graphite electrode could be passivated in the molten fluoride salts due to the carbon compound layer formed on the anode surface. Once a thick layer of carbon fluoride/oxide has covered the anode surface, it would block the transmission of the O2− or F− anion from the electrolyte to the graphite electrode, which is known as the anodic effect of the graphite electrode.
TABLE III Possible Anode Reactions on the Surface of Graphite Electrode in FLiNaK-La2O3 at 700°C
Figure 5b shows the results on the passivation properties of the graphite anode. The CV scans are conducted from 0 V (versus the reference electrode) to a different reverse potential Er. The peak currents of the reverse cathodic scans are listed in Table IV. It can be seen that the peak current of the reverse cathodic scan is lower than the anodic scan current and is almost the same in each measurement when Er is 3.5, 4.5, and 5 V (versus the reference electrode), respectively. However, when Er is increased to 5.5, 6, 6.5, 8, and 11 V (versus the reference electrode) at which carbon fluorides can be formed, the reverse cathodic peak current begins to decrease, which indicates that the formation of CF4 and C2F6 products on the graphite surface can reduce the discharge rate of O2−, thus leading to a stronger anode effect at a more positive Er.
TABLE IV Reverse Anodic Peak Current Ip and the Corresponding Reverse Anodic Potential Er in Figure 6b
Fig. 6. (a) CV scan in FLiNaK-La2O3 at 700°C, scan rate: 100 mV/s, electrode immersion depth: 1.151 cm, surface area: 1.155 cm2, working electrode: C, counter electrode: C, reference electrode: W. (b) CV scan in FLiNaK-La2O3 at 700°C, scan rate: 200 mV/s, electrode immersion depth: 1.235 cm, surface area: 1.235 cm2; and CV scan in FLiNaK at 700°C, scan rate: 200 mV/s, electrode immersion depth: 1.259 cm, surface area:1.257 cm2, working electrode: C, counter electrode: C, reference electrode: W
As for the reactions in the negative potential range, CV scans with different scan rates were conducted as shown in Fig. 6a. The peak current at A1 and A2 increases with the scan rate, and there is no visible peak current potential shift at the different scan rates. Compared with the results in Sec. III.B.1, there is only one reduction peak. Figure 6b shows the CV scans of FLiNaK with and without La2O3. Figure 6b indicates that A3/R3 and A2/R can be the same redox couple, which is K+/K. Therefore, it is possible that the reduction reaction of La3+ may have convoluted with the reduction reaction of K+, if the potential of these two reactions is close enough. To confirm this assumption, the possible electrochemical reactions in FLiNaK-La2O3 at 700°C are listed in Table V. And the corresponding standard Gibbs energy and potential of reactions were also calculated from the database in HSC Chemistry 6 (Ref. 20). The potential of LaC2 formation is less negative than that of La. It is highly possible that reaction (6) will be the dominant reaction. Furthermore, an XRD analysis was conducted for the graphite WE surface powder samples after deposition. As shown in Fig. 7, LaC2 is identified in the sample, which further confirms the production of LaC2 in reaction (6). Moreover, in Table V, the absolute potential difference of ΔE700° LaC2 in reaction (6) and ΔE700° K in reaction (5) is only 0.182 V, which is small enough to make the reduction reactions of La and K convoluting possible. In addition, a CP scan was conducted with a constant current 9 mA applied. There are two plateaus R1 and R2 observed in Fig. 8. The corresponding potential of plateau R2 is −0.42 V (versus the reference electrode), which matches well with the potential of peak R in Fig. 6b.
TABLE V Standard Gibbs Energy and Potential of Reactions in FLiNaK-La2O3 at 700°C
Fig. 7. XRD analysis of graphite cathode surface powder sample in FLiNaK-La2O3 at 700°C
Fig. 8. CP scan in FLiNaK-La2O3 at 700°C, applied constant current: 9 mA, electrode immersion depth: 1.011 cm, electrode surface area: 1.024 cm2, working electrode: C, counter electrode: C, reference electrode: W
Furthermore, it has been seen that the potential difference between peaks R and R3 in Fig. 6b is about 0.425 V. To eliminate the possible effect of the reference electrode potential shift, the final stable OCP before each CV scan in Fig. 6b was checked. The difference between the OCP in these two measurements is only 0.053 V, which is much less than 0.425 V and cannot be the main cause of that large potential difference. The reason why the reduction potential of K becomes less negative is not identified in this study. It may be due to the fact that LaC2 is a kind of metallic conductor and cannot be dissolved in the molten FLiNaK salt.26 It may adhere on the electrode and change the interfacial properties between the electrode and electrolyte, thus the reduction potential of K may be “pulled up” due to the production of LaC2 on the electrode surface.
IV. CONCLUSION
The feasibility of electrochemical removal and electrochemical behavior of La2O3 in FLiNaK at 700°C has been investigated using various electrochemical methods and spectroscopic techniques. Lanthanum ions in the molten salt can be deposited on a tungsten cathode in the form of La metal and on a graphite cathode in the form of LaC2, while oxygen ions can be removed from the salts in the form of carbon oxides using graphite as an anode. Therefore, the present study indicates that it is possible to remove lanthanum oxide impurities from FLiNaK electrochemically using tungsten or graphite as a cathode and graphite as an anode. This study also explores the anode effect on the graphite electrode in the molten fluoride salts. The anode effect, which is caused by the formation of stable carbon fluorides/oxides films on the electrode surface, may cut off the current and affect the efficiency of the removal of oxygen ions.
Acknowledgments
This work was financially supported by NEUP Award Number DE-NE0008306. The authors appreciate Weiqian Zhuo’s assistance on the XRD analyses.
