<title>Experimental study on hold-up, characteristic and slip velocities in a horizontal pulsed sieve-plate column and uranium reactive extraction condition in aqueous phase</title>
<author>Fereshte Khanramaki; Jaber Safdari; Amir Saeed Shirani; Rezvan Torkaman</author>
<Affiliation>Nuclear Engineering Faculty, Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran, Iran;Material and Nuclear Fuel Research School, Nuclear Science and Technology Research Institute, PO Box 14155–1339, Tehran, Iran</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2018.08.009</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0149197018301914</URL>
Highlights
Uranium extraction efficiency was investigated in the Horizontal pulsed column.
Holdup, slip and characteristic velocities of the reactive system were studied.
The holdup in reactive extraction system was smaller than the without reactive extraction system.
The Marangoni effect cussed to the slip velocity in reactive system was higher than the other system.
The Pratt model chosen for prediction of characteristic velocity because of simplicity and sufficient accuracy.
Abstract
The uranium extraction efficiency from sulfate leach liquor and the hydrodynamic behavior of the reactive extraction system was studied in the horizontal pulsed sieve-plated column. The effects of operating parameters and reactive condition were investigated. The obtained results showed that an increase in pulse intensity caused the decrease of dispersed phase hold-up and increase slip velocity. The slip velocity in the reactive uranium extraction situation was greater than that of the system without the reactive extraction due to the faster upward movement and more buoyancy of drops. The uranium extraction efficiency has a direct relationship with increasing pulse intensity and the dispersed phase flow rate, whereas has an indirect relationship with increasing continuous phase flow rate. Also, with comparison between experimental results and several empirical correlations for characteristic velocity, the Pratt model was chosen for prognostication of this parameter. The experimental results compared with the proposed correlations obtained from the previous studies demonstrated that the previous correlations have any reasonable accuracy to prognosticate the hold-up as well as the characteristic and slip velocities in this column. Therefore, the semi-empirical correlations were determined for prediction of hydrodynamic parameters as functions of the physical properties of systems and operating conditions. It can also be concluded that the horizontal pulsed sieve column is suitable for extraction of uranium from the sulfate liquor by Alamine 336 with extraction efficiency of approximately 99%. Therefore, it is a good alternative in radioactive processes, especially in places with height limitation.
Keywords：Uranium extraction；Horizontal pulsed sieve-plate column；Dispersed phase hold-up；Slip velocity；Characteristic velocity
1. Introduction
Uranium is an essential element in the nuclear fuel cycle. This vitally important element is found in nature in very limited ores. The extraction and separation of uranium from the sources are important processes because of chemical toxicity and radioactivity this metal can induce on ground and surface water (Kumar et al., 2011). The use of solvent extraction as a major technique on the industrial scale to recover uranium from the sulfuric acid leaching process is a known practice. Solvent extraction has various advantages because of its ease of handling, low cost for setup, high production capacity, zero waste generation and high product purity (Benedict et al., 1981).
The reported literature shows a large diversity of extractants based amines used for uranium separation from ores (Behera et al., 1993; Goldenberg and Abbruzzese, 1983). Tertiary amine extractants are the preferred reagents to the other compounds for uranium extraction from sulfate medium. Therefore, Alamine 336 is an effective extractant for uranium from the sulfuric acid liquor (Lapka et al., 2009; Quinn et al., 2013; Ramadevi et al., 2012).
Solvent extraction is a successful technique in the industry; therefore, recently a large number of extractors have been developed and extensively investigated (Godfrey and Slater, 1994). The interfacial area and system turbulence degree are directly proportional to increasing the mass transfer performance and efficiency of the liquid-liquid extractor (Jaradat et al., 2011; Samani et al., 2014). Generally, the pulsed columns are more suitable than the mixer-settlers because of their safety and economic perspective. The main advantages of the pulsed columns are: these columns do not have any moving parts, so its design is very simple; they have the least leakage, therefore, the cost of repair and maintenance in such columns is low. The contactors that have a minimal number of moving parts reduce the operating costs. Similarly, solvent extraction contactors must be efficient to reduce the capital costs associated with shielding and containing process equipment (Melnyk, 1992). The extraction efficiency in the pulsed columns is high because of the increasing breakage and random inter-droplet coalescence and decreasing axial mixing (Lorenz et al., 1990; Yadav and Patwardhan, 2008). According to advantages cited above, the pulsed columns were applied in biochemical, petrochemical, metallurgical, chemical and nuclear industries (Hussain et al., 1988). The pulsed columns for liquid-liquid extraction are classified as: vertical and horizontal types. The vertical types are suitable for industries that have surface area restrictions and the horizontal types are appropriate for industries that have height limitation (Hussain et al., 1988; Logsdail and Thornton, 1959; Melnyk, 1992). One solvent extraction contactor developed for the nuclear industry is the vertical pulsed column. Although these contactors meets most of the required criteria for this application, a horizontal configuration would have additional advantages. The major advantage is a substantial reduction in building height, resulting in lower shielding costs. Additional advantages associated with a horizontal pulsed column include improved process control and a possible reduction in radioactive contamination of process equipment. Therefore, in the nuclear industry, the horizontal type can be replaced with vertical type for the separation of heavy metals (Melnyk, 1992). The advantages of the vertical type surpass the merits of the horizontal type; and yet the horizontal pulsed extraction column has gained much attention in recent times in the nuclear industry because of the height limitation, especially in indoor applications and availability of quick and easy column in the radioactive processes.
The design of solvent extraction columns requires determination of the height needed to attain an appropriate cross-sectional area for flow and a specified degree of mass transfer performance (Godfrey and Slater, 1991). The essential parameters for design and scale up of the mentioned horizontal pulsed column are information of the mean drop size, hold-up of dispersed phase, characteristic and slip velocities. The extraction column diameter is measured by determination of the hold-up of the dispersed phase and slip velocity. The dispersed phase holdup variations in solvent extraction columns is necessary for the calculation of residence time distributions in the analysis of interphase mass transfer rates (Sehmel and Babb, 1963). The slip velocity and interfacial area are calculated by the hold-up behavior in the extraction column; the calculation being indicative of the beginning of flooding. In transferring a solute between the aqueous and organic phases, the especially important parameter leading to the estimation of the mass transfer coefficients as well as the controlling of the mass transfer performance is determination of the slip velocity. Knowing the maximum column capacity and the flooding time requires the determination of the characteristic velocity as an important hydrodynamic parameter (Godfrey and Slater, 1991; Khajenoori et al., 2015).
The hold-up is specified by the fraction of the dispersed phase to total phase volumetric as follows (Treybal, 1963):
@(1)
In pulsed sieve-plate extraction columns and the countercurrent two-phase flow condition, the slip velocity is defined as follows (Kumar and Hartland, 1994):
@(2)
The superficial velocities of the two phases are achieved by the each phase flow rate as follows:
@(3)
There are several equations for characteristic velocity have been summarized by Slater and Godfrey (Godfrey and Slater, 1991). This parameter is as a function of the slip velocity and dispersed phase hold-up, which is defined as follows:
@(4)
Some of the equations for determination of the characteristic velocity have been listed in Table 1.
Table 1. The empirical equations for determination of the characteristic velocity.
In the previous studies, there are no data for the design and scale-up of the horizontal pulsed columns in reactive extraction situations. Also, due to the importance of hydrodynamic parameters for the extraction columns design, the goal of the present survey is measuring the hold-up of the dispersed phase, characteristic and slip velocities in this column with changing operating parameters (intensity of the pulse, flow rates of disperse and continuous phase) for the two different systems in situations without reactive extraction and reactive uranium extraction situations with Alamine 336 as an extractant. The several available correlations in the previous studies were proposed according to the physical properties of the systems without reactive extraction situation. In the present survey, the obtained experimental results are evaluated with the previous correlations in the mentioned column. Furthermore, the new improved correlations were obtained for accurate prediction of hydrodynamic parameters including hold-up, characteristic and slip velocities in the horizontal pulsed column.
2. Experimental
2.1. Liquid systems
Two liquid-liquid systems studied in this research work included: (1) Alamine 336 (5% v/v)-isodecanol (5% v/v)-kerosene as a dispersed phase and diluted sulfuric acid (0.2 M) as a continuous phase for experiments without reactive extraction condition; (2) saturated Alamine 336 (5% v/v)-isodecanol (5% v/v)-kerosene with diluted sulfuric acid as a dispersed phase and sulfate leach liquor solution with uranium concentration of 250 mg L−1 as a continuous phase for the experiments with reactive uranium extraction condition (mass transfer direction: c→d). The physical properties for the two systems are summarized in Table 2. Commercial grade Alamine 336 purchased from NetSun Company of China and kerosene were used as an extractant and diluent in the extraction process without extra purification, respectively. Also, AR grade isodecanol from Merck was employed as a modifier. The sulfate leach liquor from Bandar Abbas was used in the solvent extraction experiments as a continuous phase. In addition, diluent sulfuric acid as an aqueous phase in the saturation dispersed phase without reactive extraction process was used as an analytical reagent grade. It can be said that the reactive extraction condition creates a degree of uncertainty along the column to predict the physical properties (especially interfacial tension). Therefore, in this survey, the averaged values of physical properties were obtained by the average uranium concentration in the dispersed and continuous phases at the inlet and outlet of the mentioned column.
Table 2. The average physical properties for two chemical systems.
2.2. Analysis apparatus
An Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectrophotometer (ICP-AES Perkin-Elmer-7300 DV) was used to determine the uranium concentration in the reactive situations. The viscosity and interfacial tension data were measured by DVI-Prime viscometer and a Krüss tensiometer, respectively. Also, the measurement of the solutions density data was carried out by the pycnometer method.
2.3. Description of pilot scale column
The pilot plant horizontal pulsed sieve column extractor was utilized in the experiments. In Fig. 1 a schema of the mentioned column is depicted. The column was made of Pyrex glass, with a bore of 6.2 cm and with a length of 150 cm. The active section of the column contained 25 pairs of sieve plates built of 304 stainless steel. Each plate with perforated 2 mm diameter was located in the column only over half of the available plate area with an open free area of 22%. It included 106 holes laid on the triangular-shaped notch of 4 mm. The spacing between each plate was 1.0 cm arranged as pairs in the active section of the column. The holes on the sieve plate near the inlets of the dispersed and continuous phases were placed down and up, respectively. Also, the spacing between the plate pairs was 5.0 cm. The general specific geometries of the column are given in Table 3. After the contact of two phases in the active section of column, the dispersed and continuous phases were separated and collected in two settlers with 5 cm radius. The inlet and outlet streams of the column were connected to four tanks with a capacity of 20 l. Also, the aqueous and organic phase flow rates were measured by a Rotameter. An air pulsing system created a pulse in the column. The controller of the interface location of the aqueous and organic phases at the top of the aqueous phase inlet and under the organic phase outlet in the upper settler was an optical sensor. A closed type of solenoid valve across the outlet stream of the aqueous phase received electronic signals from the optical sensor. When the interface location changed, a signal of the optical sensor was sent to the solenoid valve to allow the aqueous phase to leave the column. In addition, the organic phase was left the column by the overflow of this stream.
Fig. 1. A schematic diagram of the pilot plant horizontal pulsed sieve-plate column.
Table 3. General specific geometries of the Horizontal pulsed sieve-plate column.
2.4. Chemical procedure
The startup of the column in all the experimental runs without and with reactive extraction was far from flooding situations. First, the column was filled by using the continuous (aqueous) phase. Each experimental datum was compared with the predicted data, and the average absolute relative error (AARE) was utilized as Eq. (5). In this equation, m denotes the number of the experimental runs.
@(5)
2.4.1. Determination of mean drop size
The dispersed (organic) phase was then entered to the column. After reaching the steady-state situations depending on the phase flow rates and special liquid-liquid system used at the end of each experimental run in the extraction column, the drop diameters were measured by a photographic method (Nikon D5000 digital camera) in the four zones in the active section of the column. The drop diameter was measured by analyzing the recorded photos by means of Autocad2016 software. In each experiment, at least 500 drops were examined. The real drop diameter was obtained by a simple proportional relationship between an optical reference in the picture, such as the thickness of the sieve in the plate. In the extraction columns, the dispersed phase droplets were not always uniformly distributed. So, the Sauter mean drop diameter (d32) was utilized to represent the diameter size of the drops as calculated by Eq (6). In this equation, ni and di are the numbers of droplets and mean diameter within a narrow size range i.
@(6)
In the case of non-spherical droplets, the major and minor axes, d1 and d2, were measured and the equivalent diameter, de, was calculated by following equation:
@(7)
2.4.2. Determination of dispersed phase hold-up
The direct sampling, shut-down, ultrasonic and hydrostatic methods are usually used to measure the hold-up in the extraction columns. The shutdown method was used in the present study. After reaching the stable situation in the extraction system, the pulse and the inlet and outlet valves were simultaneously closed and the two phases were completely separated. In each experiment, the arc length (S) of the dispersed phase was measured by meter. The chord length of the interfacial two phases (Li) and the surface area of the dispersed phase (A0) in the cross section of the horizontal column were calculated by Eqs. (8), (9), respectively. Then, the dispersed phase hold-up could be calculated according to Eq. (10); ri represent the inner radius of the column.
@(8)
@(9)
@(10)
2.4.3. Determination of uranium extraction efficiency
Sulfate leach liquor with uranium concentration of 250 mg L−1 is a continuous phase in the reactive system, whereas saturated Alamine 336 (6% v/v), isodecanol (5% v/v) and kerosene is a dispersed phase. The uranium was extracted from sulfate leach liquor by Alamine 336 with a reaction at interfacial as follows (Khanramaki et al., 2017):
@(11)
This section of the present research work focuses on uranium concentration profile and uranium extraction efficiency from the sulfate leach liquor in the horizontal pulsed column with changing the operating parameters. After reaching the steady-state conditions at the end of each run, the sampling was done by means of the seven valves installed horizontally in 25 cm distances on the extraction column. The uranium extraction efficiency (%EU) is calculated by the following equation:
@(12)
where xin and xn are uranium concentrations of the aqueous phase at input stream and nth valve stream. Also, x∗n is the equilibrium uranium value of the aqueous phase across nth valve stream.
For determining uranium concentration profile in two phases against column length (Z), the performance was as follows: In each run, after reaching the steady state conditions, the uranium concentration during the valves installation at the column length (x1 to x7) was measured by ICP-AES spectrophotometer. For the sample taken from nth valve, the uranium concentration in the organic phase (yn) is calculated by the dissolved substance mass balance using Eq. (13) as follows:
@(13)
This investigation is an evidence of the equilibrium diagram obtained by shaking the samples of different ratios of the organic and aqueous phases with constant concentration of uranium. The equilibrium data of the uranium extraction from the sulfate leach liquor is presented in Fig. 2. It is worth mentioning that the value of m in the mass transfer calculations was obtained by the slope of this diagram.
Fig. 2. Equilibrium relationship of uranium extraction from leach liquor by Alamine 336.
(Exp. Conditions: 6% (v/v) Alamine 336, 5% (v/v) Isodecanol, 0.22 mol L−1 SO42−, 0.25 g L−1 U, 1.06 g L−1 Fe, pH = 1.5, time = 5 min, T = 25 °C).
3. Results and discussions
3.1. Investigation of dispersed phase hold-up
The interfacial area and the phases slip velocity are measured by determination of the dispersed phase hold-up. Also, this parameter indicates the beginning of flooding in the extraction column. The operating parameters in the pulsed columns including the pulse intensity, dispersed and continuous phase flow rates affect the hold-up parameter in the extraction system.
3.1.1. Effect of operational parameters on dispersed phase hold-up
The effect of the pulse intensity on the hold-up of the dispersed phase with and without reactive extraction situations is depicted in Fig. 3(a). The values of the hold-up in the reactive extraction system are lower than those of the other system, viz. without reactive extraction system. In this study, it was observed that the mean drops diameter in the without reactive extraction system is greater than in the reactive extraction system. Therefore, larger droplets would have a slower motion in the system and have a higher degree of coalescence. Consequently, the dispersed phase hold-up was higher in the without reactive extraction system at the horizontal pulsed column. According to this figure, with increasing the pulse intensity from 0.8 to 1.2 cm s−1, the dispersed phase hold-up decreases. As shown in this figure, the hold-up value of the system is increased by increasing pulse intensity more than 1.2 cm s−1 which is due to the change in the operating regimes of the column. More information on the operating regimes in this column is given in the previous researches (Khajenoori et al., 2015; Melnyk, 1992). In the present study, all experiments were carried out in the dispersion flow regime. The results from the changing the flow rate of the dispersed phase with a hold-up value of the dispersed phase are depicted in Fig. 3(b). In constant pulse intensity, the hold-up value of the dispersed phase is increased by an increment of the dispersed phase flow rate. The effect of the variation of the continuous phase flow rate on the hold-up value is illustrated in Fig. 3(c). With increasing the continuous phase flow rate, the residence time of the droplets and hold-up of the dispersed phase are increased due to the increment of the drag force between the droplets and the continuous phase. The influence of the solute and reactive situations at the extraction is shown in Fig. 3(a), (b) and (c). Also, it is clear that the dispersed phase hold-up without reaction extraction system has greater values than with reaction extraction system because of the improvement of interfacial tension with the direction of mass transfer (Marangoni phenomenon) (Eid et al., 1991).
Fig. 3. The effects of (a) pulse intensity, (b) dispersed phase flow rate and (c) continuous phase flow rate on the dispersed phase hold-up for the two chemical systems.
3.1.2. Predictive new correlation for dispersed phase hold-up
In this study, various correlations for prediction of the dispersed phase hold-up were investigated. The result of comparison between these correlations and the present experimental investigation outcomes is brought in Fig. 4 and Table 4. As can be seen, these correlations were not able to predict the hold-up value of the dispersed phase in the horizontal extraction column because of the high absolute relative error in the prediction of the hold-up value of the dispersed phase. Thus, for the reactive extraction system, the new empirical correlation was suggested for prediction of the hold-up in the horizontal pulsed column.
Fig. 4. A comparison of the calculated values of the dispersed phase hold-up of the previous correlation in Table 4 with the experimentally measured values for the two chemical systems.
Table 4. Correlations proposed for prediction the dispersed phase hold-up.
The dispersed phase hold-up was a function of the operating parameters (such as intensity of the pulse, flow rates of the continuous and dispersed phases) and physical properties of the systems (such as the density, viscosity and interfacial tension between two phases) as follows:
@(14)
Consequently, a novel correlation was obtained as a function of the operating parameters and physical properties of the systems by using the Buckingham's Pi theorem as follows:
@(15)
As shown in Fig. 5, the results obtained via the proposed correlation are closely matched with the experimental results. The value of the absolute relative error between the predicted hold-up values using Eq. (13) and the experimental results was 9.87%.
Fig. 5. A comparison of the calculated values of the dispersed phase hold-up by Eq. (15) with the experimentally measured values for the two chemical systems.
3.2. Investigation of slip velocity
3.2.1. Effect of operational parameters on slip velocity
Eq. (2) is applied to measure the slip velocity. The influence of operating conditions on the slip velocity is shown in Fig. 6(a), (b) and (c). As depicted in Fig. 6(a), the increasing of the pulsation intensity leads to an increase in the shear forces and intense droplet breaking. Also, the drop size diameter and dispersed phase hold-up would decrease in the higher pulse intensity. Therefore, the slip velocity increases with increasing the pulse intensity for both the investigated liquid-liquid systems. The changing of slip velocity with the flow rate of the continuous phase is presented in Fig. 6(b). The slip velocity slightly decreases with the increment in the continuous phase flow rate. The residence time of the droplets and hold-up in the extraction column is extended. This is due to an increase in the drag forces between the droplet and continuous phase. Consequently, the slip velocity is inversely proportional to the flow rate of the continuous phase. However, it is directly proportional to the flow rate of dispersed phase {see Fig. 6(c)}. The more than flow rate of dispersed phase, the less the droplets residence time. As a result, As a result, the slip velocity increases. The effect of the phases flow rate on the slip velocity shows that the dispersed phase flow rate has a more significant influence on the slip velocity. In addition, as seen in these figures, the slip velocity values of the reactive extraction situations are greater than those of the without reactive extraction situations. This is due to the lower hold-up value and generates smaller droplets in the reactive extraction system because of the lower interfacial tension.
Fig. 6. The effects of (a) pulse intensity, (b) continuous phase flow rate and (c) dispersed phase flow rate on the slip velocity for the two chemical systems.
3.2.2. Predictive new correlation for slip velocity
A great number of correlations for the prediction of the slip velocity have been suggested for the vertical pulsed extraction columns (Yadav and Patwardhan, 2008). However, these correlations could not be used in the horizontal types. This is due to the difference of the hydrodynamic behavior of the column type. Therefore, the empirical correlations in the previous studies cannot predict exactly the slip velocity for reactive extraction system in the horizontal pulsed column. An empirical correlation {Eq. (14)} was recommended for the prediction of the slip velocities in the horizontal pulsed column for the four physical systems (Kerosene-Water, Toluene-Water, n-Butyl acetate- Water, n-Butanol-Water) by Khajenoori et al. (2015).
@(16)
Fig. 7 shows a comparative observation of the predicted values of the slip velocity by the mentioned correlation {Eq. (14)} and the experimental results. The absolute average relative error value is 36.91%. Therefore, this correlation is not proper for the prediction of the slip velocities because the mentioned equation does not consider the reaction situations, whereas the reaction between uranium and Alamine 336 is included in the experimental data. Consequently, a novel modified correlation with consideration of reactive extraction situations (c→d) is derived by the Buckingham's pi-theorem as follows:
@(17)
Fig. 7. A comparison of the calculated values of the slip velocity by Eq. (16) with the experimentally measured values for the two chemical systems.
The average absolute relative error between the produced results by Eq. (15) and the experimental results for the research column is 8.27%. The experimental values in comparison with the predicted values of the slip velocity are shown in Fig. 8. As demonstrated in this figure, the experimental and predicted data were near enough to the bisector line which confirms the accuracy of the proposed correlation.
Fig. 8. A comparison of the calculated values of the slip velocity by Eq. (17) with the experimentally measured values for the two chemical systems.
3.3. Investigation of characteristic velocity
There are many models for prognostication of characteristic velocity that are functions of hold-up and slip velocity. In the present investigation, the models presented by Pratt and Gayler, Zaki and Richardson, Kehat and Letan, and Misek were utilized to prognosticate the characteristic velocity. Table 5 shows the parameters and characteristic velocity obtained by the mentioned models for the reactive extraction system and without reactive extraction system. According to the table, the characteristic velocity obtained by the Pratt model is directly proportional to the flow rate of the phases and pulse intensity. We also found that the reactive extraction situations have a considerable influence on the characteristic velocity. The characteristic velocity value in the reactive extraction system is larger than that of the system without the reactive extraction. The solute concentration was affected on the characteristic velocity by the influence on the interfacial tension. According to the results in Table 5, the characteristic velocity of system without the reactive extraction is lower than the system with the reactive extraction. Because the interfacial tension in the reactive extraction system is lower than that of the other system. In addition, the parameter value, m, calculated from Zaki and Richardson equation was between −5 and 4 (see Table 5). The previous studies on this parameter for various columns are summarized in Table 6. The difference in m values can be anticipated due to the difference in the physical properties of the systems and the construction of the column. Then, the obtained characteristic velocities and parameters are applied to measure the slip velocity by the cited models. The absolute average relative error of the slip velocity calculated by these equations is presented in Table 7. By adding more parameters to the characteristic velocity models, the prediction accuracy of the slip velocity does not significantly improve. Also, the diagram of  against  is depicted in Fig. 9 by changing the flow rate of the continuous phase from 1 to 5 l/h at constant the pulse intensity and flow rate of the dispersed phase. A linear diagram from the origin of coordinates is obtained, which indicates the accuracy of the Pratt model for the prognostication of the characteristic velocity. Therefore, in this investigation, the characteristic velocity is determined by the very simple Pratt model that is very simple.
Table 5. The calculated characteristic velocities and parameters of all models.
Table 6. The value of parameter m in various extraction column using Richardson and Zaki equation.
Table 7. The average absolute relative error between predicted and experimental of slip velocities.
Fig. 9. The characteristic velocity plot for the two chemical systems.
3.3.1. Predictive new correlation for characteristic velocity
An experimental correlation was proposed for the prognostication characteristic velocity in the horizontal pulsed column by Khajenoori et al. (2015). A comparative observation of the predicted values of the characteristic velocity by the mentioned correlation {Eq. (18)} and the experimental results is shown in Fig. 10. The absolute average relative error value was 57.86%.
@(18)
Fig. 10. A comparison of the calculated values of the characteristic velocity by Eq. (18) with the experimentally measured values for the two chemical systems.
Thus, a novel modified correlation for better prediction of characteristic velocity with consideration of reactive extraction situations (c→d) is concluded thanks to the Buckingham's pi-theorem in the present column as follows:
@(19)
The results of a comparison of the characteristic velocity between the experimental outcomes in the present investigation and the predicted values according to Eq. (19) are presented in Fig. 11. The results via the obtained correlation are closely matched with the experimental ones. The value of absolute relative error between the predicted characteristic velocity using Eq. (19) and the experimental results was 7.34%.
Fig. 11. A comparison of the calculated values of the characteristic velocity by Eq. (19) with the experimentally measured values for the two chemical systems.
3.4. Influence of operational parameters on the uranium extraction efficiency
First, the extraction process from the sulfate leach liquor at batch scale was performed under the optimum operating conditions: 0.125 mol L−1 Alamine 336 in kerosene, 5% isodecanol, contact time equal to 30 min and phase ratio of 1. Second, the results showed that the Alamine 336 was highly selective for uranium. Also, the selectivity of Alamine 336 for the other elements in Table 8 was very low. Consequently, the influence of changing operational parameters on uranium extraction efficiency is presented in Fig. 12. It should be noted that the pulse intensity had a strong effect on the extraction efficiency of uranium. As shown in Fig. 12(a), with an increase in the energy supplied via pulsation, the interfacial forces of the dispersed phase drops increase, the breakage of the drops occurs and the drop size decreases. The formation of smaller drops creates turbulence in the droplet. As a result, the interfacial area between the two phases increases, enhancing the extraction efficiency of uranium. The influence of the continuous and dispersed phase flow rates on the variation of uranium extraction efficiency are presented in Fig. 12(b) and (c), respectively. By increasing the flow rate of the continuous phase, the uranium extraction efficiency decreased, but the uranium extraction efficiency increased with the increasing dispersion phase flow rate. According to Fig. 12, the influence of pulsation intensity on the uranium extraction efficiency was greater than the volume flow rate of phases.
Table 8. The extraction efficiency for the elements from the sulfate leach liquor by Alamine 336.
Fig. 12. The effects of (a) pulse intensity, (b) continuous phase flow rate and (c) dispersed phase flow rate on the variation of uranium extraction efficiency along the column length.
3.5. Variation of uranium concentration in column
The main aim of this research work was the investigation and the usage of the horizontal pulsed extractor for the extraction process in nuclear industries. Thus, the uranium extraction from the real sulfate leach liquor in this column has been examined by Alamine 336 as extractant. Consequently, the uranium extraction efficiency and uranium concentration profile along the column length were scrutinized. According to Eq. (12), the equilibrium uranium value is essential for determination of uranium extraction efficiency. Therefore, uranium extraction isotherm (Fig. 2) was achieved by shaking the samples of different ratios of the aqueous and organic phases (such as O/A = 0.0025, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1 and 2) with a constant concentration of uranium equal to 250 mg L−1. The extraction efficiency and concentration profile of uranium in the two phases against along the column length were calculated by using Eqs. (12), (13), respectively. The experimental results are summarized in Table 9 and depicted in Fig. 13.
Table 9. The uranium extraction efficiency and uranium concentration profile at column length.
Fig. 13. The uranium concentration profile in two phases against column length. (af = 1 cm s−1, Qc = Qd = 3 l/h).
4. Conclusions
The uranium extraction efficiency and hydrodynamic parameters (including the characteristic velocity, slip velocity and hold-up) were investigated on the extraction of uranium from real sulfate solution by using Alamine 336 with the chemical reaction in the horizontal pulsed column. The following conclusions were drawn:
-
The hold-up in these systems is inversely proportional to the pulse intensity, while the hold-up was directly proportional to the flow rate of the dispersed and continuous phases.
-
The hold-up in the reactive extraction system was smaller than that in the system lacking in the reactive extraction.
-
The slip and characteristic velocities were largely dependent on the pulse intensity, flow rate of the dispersed phase and physical properties. Nonetheless, their dependence on the flow rate of the continuous phase was weak.
-
The system with the reactive extraction had a higher slip velocity than the system without the reactive extraction, due to the changes in the interfacial tension and Marangoni phenomenon.
-
The one-parameter model for the estimation of the slip velocity had a sufficient accuracy in composition to the two parameter models. Therefore, in the horizontal extraction column, the Pratt model was chosen for the prognostication of the characteristic velocity.
-
For the first time, the novel correlations were offered to prognosticate the hold-up of the dispersed phase as well as to the characteristic and slip velocities for the reactive uranium extraction situations in the horizontal column.
-
The horizontal pulsed sieve-plate column can be applied in the uranium extraction process in nuclear industries with extraction efficiency nearly %99.
