<title>Electrochemical measurements of diffusion coefficients and activity coefficients for MnCl 2 in molten eutectic LiCl-KCl</title>
<author>   D. Horvath; D. Rappleye; P. Bagri; M.F. Simpson</author>
<Affiliation>Department of Metallurgical Engineering, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, United States</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Materials</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI> 10.1016/j.jnucmat.2017.06.015</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022311517305548</URL>
Abstract
An electrochemical study of manganese chloride in molten salt mixtures of eutectic LiCl-KCl was carried out using a variety of electrochemical methods in a high temperature cell including cyclic voltammetry (CV), chronopotentiometry (CP), chronoamperometry (CA), and open circuit potentiometry. Single step reduction from Mn2+ to Mn(0) was observed on both W and Mo working electrodes. Using a combination of these methods, measurements were made of activity coefficient and diffusion coefficient for MnCl2 in LiCl-KCl as a function of concentration (3.54 × 10−4 to 3.60 × 10−3 mol fraction of MnCl2) at 773K. From OCP measurements, values for activity coefficient varied from 0.014 to 0.0071. Diffusion coefficients varied with concentration and differed based on measurement method (CV, CA, or CP). Based on cyclic Mn(II) ranged from 1.1 to 2.8 × 10−5 cm2/s depending on concentration.
Keywords:Voltammetry；Molten salt；Diffusion coefficient；Activity coefficient；Nuclear fuel reprocessing
1. Introduction
Molten LiCl-KCl eutectic salt is used as the electrolyte for electrorefining spent nuclear fuel in pyroprocessing systems. Pyroprocessing technology is currently being researched in several countries for potential implementation in a closed nuclear fuel cycle—including but not limited to the Republic of Korea and the United States [1], [2]. Within the pyroprocessing flowsheet, electrorefining serves the principal function of separating uranium or grouped actinides from spent fuel and recovering it as a purified cathode deposit. Purity of the cathode deposits depends on a number of factors, including the other metallic materials that contact the molten salt. In electrorefiner systems operated at Idaho National Laboratory, for example, primarily stainless or carbon steels are used in contact with the molten salt [3]. Provided that the salt is kept very dry, the chloride salts are known to be non-corrosive to these steels even at the relatively high operating temperature of 773 K. This is because the most oxidizing chloride in the molten salt mixture is normally UCl3. UCl3 is thermodynamically more stable than the chloride forms of the metals present in steels. Thus, there is no driving force for corrosion to occur. However, certain metals found in structural alloys have relatively close standard reduction potentials compared to U3+/U. These include Mn, Cr, and Fe. Table 1 summarizes the approximate standard reduction potentials for these metals at 773 K. It is, thus, important to understand the electrochemical properties of the chloride salts of these metals in order to understand how to effectively minimize contamination of the cathode product. This will be especially important when the electrorefining process is scaled up to be compatible with commercial operations. Higher throughputs require higher cell potentials, which may start to induce structural material corrosion. This ultimately impacts both the purity of the cathode deposits and the integrity of the hardware. While UCl3 and other components in the spent fuel have been subject to extensive electrochemical behavior studies [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], the transition metals found in stainless steel have relatively little published research for electrochemistry in molten LiCl-KCl. Iron chlorides in LiCl-KCl were studied by Khalaghi et al. [13]. Titanium chloride has been studied by Lantelme et al., Baboian et al., and Chassaing et al. [14], [15], [16]. And chromium chlorides in LiCl-KCl were studied by Cotarta et al. [17]. With the exception of a study on electrochemical formation of Mg-Li-Mn alloys from LiCl-KCl-MgCl2-MnCl2 salt mixtures by Ye et al. [18], no work to our knowledge has been published on MnCl2 in LiCl-KCl. As shown in Table 1, the Mn2+/Mn redox couple has a potential relatively close to U3+/U. Thus, it would be advantageous to have knowledge of the electrochemical properties of MnCl2 in LiCl-KCl that will affect corrosion.
Table 1. Standard reduction potentials for metals in supercooled pure chloride salts at 773 K, calculated based on data published by Barin [19].
The specific physical properties of interest include diffusion coefficients, activity coefficients, and apparent standard reduction potential. These physical properties are needed to apply fundamental equilibrium and kinetic relationships such as the Nernst Equation and Butler-Volmer Equation. While manganese is considered to be an unreactive metal during electrorefining of spent nuclear fuel, its presence in the anodic fuel baskets opens up the opportunity that it may become oxidized, especially when high efficiency of anodic dissolution is sought. This leads to potential accumulation of MnCl2 in the salt phase, which is expected to readily co-reduce with uranium onto cathode surfaces. To use models based on the Nernst and Butler-Volmer equations to simulate Mn electrotransport in spent fuel electrorefiners, the previously mentioned properties (diffusivity, apparent reduction potential, and activity coefficient) are needed. This paper presents results of a study to measure most of these properties at the normal electrorefiner operating temperature of 500 °C.
2. Experimental
All experiments were conducted in a PureLab HE4 glove box (Innovative Technologies) with inert argon (<1 ppm O2 and H2O) atmosphere. An Autolab PGSTAT302 N potentiostat controlled by Nova software was interfaced with the glove box and used to run electrochemical analysis tests--including cyclic voltammetry (CV), chronopotentiometry (CP), chronoamperometry (CA), and measuring open circuit potential (OCP). Mixtures of LiCl-KCl (99.99%, SAFC Hitech) and MnCl2 (Alfa Aesar 99.9%) were weighed out into alumina crucibles (99.6%, AdValue Technology) having an outside diameter of 40 mm, inside diameter of 33 mm, and an internal height of 92 mm. The salt was initially compromised of 59 g of eutectic LiCl-KCl and 0.03 g MnCl2 with incremental additions per test of 0.03 g of MnCl2 until the final concentration was achieved. The salt mixture was then heated to 773 K in a Kerr Electro-Melt furnace that had been modified by cutting a hole in its lid. Electrodes were inserted through the lid and into the furnace and into the salt from above as shown in the drawing in Fig. 1, Fig. 2. All electrodes were inserted such that each electrode had a separation distance of 1.5 cm (equilateral triangular insertion configuration). Two electrode configurations were used. The three-electrode setup in Fig. 1 was used for CV, CP, and CA. The two-electrode setup in Fig. 2 was used for OCP. Salt samples were taken for analysis using ICP-AES. Electrochemical measurements were made after the temperature of the salt was verified to be stable at 773 ± 6 K and a minimum of 30 min had passed since the addition of an incremental amount of MnCl2.
Fig. 1. Three electrode configuration of test cell featuring (a) working electrode, (b) thermocouple, (c) Ag/AgCl reference electrode, (d) tungsten counter electrode, (e) alumina crucible, (f) secondary graphite crucible (g) eutectic LiCl-KCl molten salt containing MnCl2, (h) furnace.
Fig. 2. Two electrode configuration of test cell featuring (a) thermocouple, (b) Ag/AgCl reference electrode, (c) tungsten counter electrode, (d) alumina crucible, (e) secondary graphite crucible (f) eutectic LiCl-KCl molten salt containing MnCl2, (g) furnace.
The reference electrode was comprised of a thin-walled Pyrex tube (Sigma-Aldrich, Wilmad NMR tubes 10 mm dia., precision) with one closed end containing a 1-mm diameter silver wire (99.9%, Alfa Aesar) inserted into 5 mol% silver chloride (99.997%, Alfa-Aesar) in eutectic LiCl-KCl mixture (99.99%, SAFC Hitech). Potentials measured relative to this Ag/AgCl reference electrode were converted to potentials versus Cl2/Cl− using the following equation from Yang and Hudson [20].
(1)EAgAgClVvs.Cl2Cl−=−1.00056+0.0598(Ж)+0.00014(T)
The working electrode consisted of a 1-mm diameter Molybdenum wire (99.94%, Alfa-Aesar) or a 2-mm diameter tungsten rod (99.95%, Alfa-Aesar). These tungsten rods were used as the working and counter electrode during CV and CA experiments. A stainless steel basket filled with manganese granules (<12 mm diameter, 99.98%, Alfa-Aesar) was used as the working electrode during OCP experiments. A mixed potential of Mn and stainless steel basket will not be observed, since stainless steel is less reactive than Mn. Therefore any mixed potentials will be minimal and can be neglected. If there were a non negligible mixed potential present, the couple Fe(II)/Fe(0) must proceed forward to oxidize into the salt. This would drive the Mn(II)/Mn(0) backwards to the reduced state. Salt analysis results indicate no detectable amount of Fe(II) was present, ensuring the mixed potential is negligible. Concentrations of Mn in the salt were initially estimated based on masses of chemicals added to the crucibles but were later verified via analysis of dissolved salt samples using inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES).
3. Results and discussion
3.1. WE immersion depth
For measurements described in this paper, stationary cylindrical electrodes were inserted into unstirred molten salt. For measurement of diffusivity, the precise area of contact between the salt and electrode surface is a key parameter. It figures directly into the calculation of D via the Berzins-Delahay equation, Cottrell equation, and Sand's equations given below. They are applied to data from CV, CA, and CP, respectively based on the reduction process [21], [22].
(2)Ipc=0.6105nFAC[nFvDRT]0.5(Berzins-Delahay)
(3)Id=nFACDπt(Cottrell)
(4)IdtC=nFADπ2(Sand)
It is, thus, critical to develop an accurate and repeatable method for establishing fixed working electrode immersion depth to determine the area term for these equations. The first approach involved dipping the WE into the salt and measuring the length of the salt coating. It was soon realized, however, that this method may yield inaccurate measurements due to the wetting phenomenon. Surface tension of the molten salt can cause the surface of the salt to be pushed down during immersion and pulled upwards during extraction. This can result in a misleading reading of the length of salt wetting on the electrode.
To understand our approach to more accurately determining immersion depth of the working electrode, refer back to the Berzins-Delahay equation. In this equation, cathodic peak height is directly proportional to interfacial surface area, which is directly proportional to immersion depth (disregarding the area of the bottom of the electrode rod). An automated vertical translator (Velmex Inc., Part No. XN10-0012-M02-71) was used to change the immersion depth of the WE via precise movements of known distance. The working electrode was attached to the vertical translator and lowered to an arbitrary initial depth into the salt. CV was performed with the cathodic peak recorded. Next the vertical translator raised the electrode height by a small incremental amount that was recorded. Then an additional CV was performed. Repeating these steps will eventually lead to the working electrode being pulled out of the salt, resulting in a CV failure when the working electrode does not complete the needed electrical circuit. The recorded values of vertical translator motor position and cathodic peak were plotted to determine initial immersion position based on the y-intercept (Fig. 3). A linear regression of these points yields a formula to determine the desired (or set) immersion depth, which avoids the surface tension effects. The equation calculated to be y = 0.0134(x)+0.182 with an R2 value of 0.9935, and the slope have a 95% confidence interval of ± 0.098 and the intercept to be ± 0.008.
Fig. 3. Correlation between cathodic peak height and WE immersion depth as a function of vertical translator motor position.
3.2. Oxidation/reduction mechanism
Fig. 4 shows a representative example of cyclic voltammetry of the LiCl-KCl-MnCl2 molten mixture using both a tungsten and molybdenum WE. For these scans, the starting potential is −1.2 V vs Cl2/Cl−, and the scan starts in the negative direction. The potential range is limited to avoid the Li+/Li peak, which would occur at a lower potential. In the negative direction potential scan, a single cathodic peak is always observed at about −2.3 V versus Cl2/Cl−. The standard reduction potential of Mn2+/Mn at 773 K is −1.934 V vs Cl2/Cl− as shown in Table 1. Since the peak was found to be a direct consequence of the addition of MnCl2 to the LiCl-KCl, it was deduced to be representative of a single two electron transfer from a soluble Mn2+ to an insoluble Mn. Further evidence that this peak corresponds with Mn2+ reduction was found in the effect of MnCl2 concentration on the peak heights shown in Fig. 5. In the positive direction potential scan, an anodic peak is observed with the expected characteristics for a stripping peak and steeper gradient due to the onset of oxidation of the metal. As seen in Fig. 4, a second, smaller anodic peak is also observed when using a W WE. A less prominent shoulder is observed when using a Mo WE. Typically a single reduction peak will have a corresponding single anodic peak. The cause of the second anodic peak/shoulder is currently unknown and is key to understanding the mechanism of the oxidation step.
Fig. 4. Cyclic voltammetry of LiCl-KCl-MnCl2 (2.96 × 10−5 mol/cm3) on a W electrode and LiCl-KCl-MnCl2 (5.79 × 10−5 mol/cm3) on a Mo electrode at 773 K; sweep rate of 0.4 V/s.
Fig. 5. Plot of cathodic peak current densities (IP) for Mn2+ reduction in eutectic LiCl-KCl-MnCl2 mixtures as a function of scan rate (0.1–0.5 V/sec) using a tungsten working electrode at 773 K at different concentrations given in mole fraction of MnCl2.
When oxidizing Mn from the working electrode, individual Mn atoms need to lose their electrons and diffuse away from the surface. If the substrate is not pure Mn, then there is the possibility of intermetallic alloy formation. The two metals used as the working electrode were W and Mo. No reported alloys have been found in the open literature for Mn-W, but a phase diagram is reported for Mo-Mn that includes an intermetallic Mo4Mn5 [23]. This may explain the shoulder to the right of the main oxidation peak when using a Mo WE. A closer examination of the second anodic peak stripped from W working electrodes is shown in Fig. 6. The CV's were magnified towards the second oxidation peak for three concentrations on a W electrode. While it appears that the peak heights increase with increasing MnCl2 concentration, close examination reveals that peak heights relative to the baseline are approximately equal. Thus, roughly the same amount of species is being oxidized in the second oxidation step, regardless of salt concentration. This could be representative of monolayer stripping or removal of Mn from a saturated W-Mn alloy.
Fig. 6. CV's from different concentrations of MnCl2 for the magnification of the second anodic peak on W at 773 K each with a scan rate of 0.1 V/sec.
3.3. Apparent standard reduction potential and activity coefficient
Activity coefficients (γ) for MnCl2 in LiCl-KCl were calculated based on measurement of the equilibrium potential (Eeq) of the Mn metal in contact with the salt. This was accomplished via open circuit potential tests. The relationship between equilibrium potentials and activity is given by the Nernst Equation below.
(5)Eeq=Eo+RTnFln(aOxaRed)
(6)Eeq=Eo+RTnFln(γ)+RTnFln(X)
It is convenient to group terms into an apparent standard potential (E′), as given below.
(7)E'=Eo+RTnFln(γ)
The measured equilibrium potential is, thus, equal to the apparent standard potential plus a term that includes the concentration (mole fraction) in the salt.
(8)Eeq=E'+RTnFln(X)
In Fig. 7, the apparent standard potential measured for Mn2+/Mn in LiCl-KCl-MnCl2 is plotted versus the mole fraction of MnCl2 in the salt mixture (LiCl-KCl-MnCl2). For comparative purposes, the apparent standard potentials measured using the Berzins and Delahay approach with CV peak potential [24] are also included in this plot.
(9)Ep=E0′+RTnFln(x0)−0.854RTnF
Fig. 7. Apparent standard reduction potential of MnCl2 in eutectic LiCl-KCl as a function of concentration at 773 K versus the Cl2/Cl− reference.
Note that the two different methods yield different values for the apparent standard potentials. The OCP method is believed to be more accurate, as it does not rely upon applying an iR potential drop or confirming the measurement was done under reversible conditions. The OCP measurement is inherently run as a reversible measurement, as the WE is always in equilibrium with the molten salt.
Because of the relationship between chemical potential and activity, it is very useful to determine the actual values of activity coefficients over a range of concentrations. One of the keys to calculating a meaningful activity coefficient is having a clearly defined standard state. We have chosen to define the standard state based on pure, liquid MnCl2 at 773 K. That is, in fact, a hypothetical super-cooled state, since the melting point of MnCl2 is 927 K. If the free energy change for the following reaction to form super-cooled MnCl2 can be determined at a temperature of 773 K, it can be used to calculate the standard state free energy and the standard reduction potential (E0), subsequently.
(10)Mns+Cl2g→MnCl2lifTi<TmΔGrxno=ΔGf,liqo
The equation for the standard reduction potential relative to a Cl−/Cl2 reference electrode is as follows, since the direction of reaction is reversed to represent Mn2+ reduction.
(11)Eo=ΔGf,liqo2F
Thermodynamics databases have the free energy change of formation for the solid MnCl2 at 773 K (ΔGf,solido). To determine ΔGf,liqo from ΔGf,solido, the following equation can be used.
(12)ΔGf,liqo(773K)=ΔGfusion(773K)+ΔGf,solido(773K)
The free energy of fusion is, of course, zero at the melting temperature for all substances. But it becomes non-zero when extrapolated to below the melting temperature. It can be calculated from extrapolated values of the enthalpy and entropy changes of fusion as given below.
(13)ΔGfusion(773K)=ΔHfusion(773K)−(773K)ΔSfusion(773K)
Extrapolation of ΔHfusion and ΔSfusion can be done by integrating heat capacity and heat capacity divided by temperature from the melting point (927 K) down to 773 K.
(14)ΔHfusion(773)=ΔHfusion(927)+∫927773[Cp(liq)−Cp(sol)]dT
(15)ΔSfusion(773)=ΔSfusion(927)+∫927773[Cp(liq)−Cp(sol)]TdT
Thus
(16)ΔGfusion(773)=ΔHfusion(773)−TΔSfusion(773)
Using data from Barin's thermochemical properties database [19], ΔGf,liqo was calculated to be −373.18 kJ/mol at 773 K. The standard reduction potential of super-cooled MnCl2 at 773 K relative to the Cl−/Cl2 reference electrode was thus calculated to be −1.934 V.
The final equation for activity coefficient can then be given in terms of the apparent reduction potential and the free energy of formation of super-cooled liquid MnCl2. Since apparent reduction potential varies with concentration, so does the activity coefficient. The activity coefficient values are listed in Table 2 and plotted versus concentration in Fig. 8.
(17)γ=exp[2FRT(E'−ΔGf,liqo2F)]
Table 2. Apparent standard reduction potentials and activity coefficients for MnCl2 in molten eutectic LiCl-KCl at 773 K. Activity coefficients based on standard reduction potential of −1.934 V.
Fig. 8. Measured activity coefficient of MnCl2 in molten eutectic LiCl-KCl as a function of MnCl2 concentration at 773 K.
The apparent potential and activity coefficient measurements are summarized in Table 2. It is important to point out that there is a strong effect of concentration on these properties, even at relatively dilute concentrations. It is sometimes assumed that activity coefficient and apparent reduction potential are constant in dilute solutions [25]. This data brings that assumption into question. The reporting of a single apparent reduction potential for low concentrations appears to be improper and misleading. Concentration dependence has also been reported for rare earth chloride activity coefficients in LiCl-KCl [26].
3.4. Diffusion coefficient
Three electrochemical methods were used to estimate the diffusion coefficient for Mn2+ ions in eutectic LiCl-KCl at 773 K—cyclic voltammetry (CV), chronoamperometry (CA), and chronopotentiometry (CP). The CV approach assumes that the Berzins-Delahay equation (2) is applicable for this system. The CA approach assumes the Cottrell equation is applicable (3). And the CP approach assumes the Sand equation (4) is applicable.
For each concentration of MnCl2 prepared for this study, CV, CA, and CP scans were performed at 773 K. Fig. 5 shows the cathodic peak current density (Ip) from the CV scans plotted versus the square root of the scan rate (υ) at different concentrations given in mole fraction of MnCl2. The linearity of these plots indicates the reaction is diffusion-limited. To determine the range of scan rates for which the reaction is also reversible, reduction peak potentials were plotted versus log of the scan rate in Fig. 9. The potentials were IR compensated using a measured resistance of 0.3 Ω for the electrochemical cell used for these tests. The criterion for reversibility is that the peak potential be independent of scan rate. This appears to be limited to scan rates of 0.2 V/sec or slower. Thus, only the 0.1 and 0.2 V/sec data points were used to calculate D from the Berzins-Delahay equation.
Fig. 9. Reduction peak height versus log of scan rate for 2.70 × 10−3 mol fraction of MnCl2 in LiCl-KCl at 773 K. The potentials have been corrected for solution resistance assuming 0.3 Ω.
The slopes of the linear fits from Fig. 5 were then plotted versus concentration in Fig. 10 to calculate diffusion coefficient for Mn2+ ions in eutectic LiCl-KCl. The data was divided into low (3.54 × 10−4–1.92 × 10−3 mol fraction of MnCl2) and high concentration (2.01 × 10−3–3.60 × 10−3 mol fraction of MnCl2) ranges. Using this approach, the calculated diffusion coefficients are 1.02 × 10−5 and 1.97 × 10−5 cm2/s for low and high concentrations, respectively. If the whole concentration range is used for a single linear fit, the average calculated diffusion coefficient is 1.7 × 10−5 cm2/s. This value compares closely to the diffusion coefficient of UCl3 in molten LiCl-KCl at 773 K reported by Zhang of 1.45 × 10−5 cm2/s [27]. This is comparable to other reported diffusion coefficients in molten LiCl-KCl. The authors could not find any literature of reported Mn(II) diffusion coefficient. The observed effect of concentration on diffusion coefficient is not a new revelation and has been reported previously for LaCl3 in eutectic LiCl-KCl [9], [28].
Fig. 10. Normalized cathodic peak height from CV as a function of MnCl2 concentration (3.54 × 10−4 to 1.92 × 10−3 and 2.01 × 10−3 to 3.60 × 10−3 mol fraction of MnCl2) at 773 K in molten LiCl-KCl-MnCl2 yielding two different slopes with diffusion coefficients of 1.09 × 10−5 and 2.14 × 10−5 cm2/s (respectively).
For using the CA approach to calculating diffusion coefficient of Mn2+, WE potential was held constant at a sufficiently negative value, −2.38 to −2.4 V vs. Cl−/Cl2 scale, to drive diffusion-limited cathodic reaction at the electrode. Current was then measured as a function of time. Three sample CA curves are shown in Fig. 11. These 3 potentials were selected, because I vs t responses were nearly identical. This indicates diffusion control and applicability of the Cottrell equation. These curves were fit to following form of the Cottrell equation.
(18)id(t)=I(t)/A=nFD1/2Cπ1/2⋅t−1/2=kCA⋅t−1/2
Fig. 11. Representative chronoamperometry tests at multiple potentials of MnCl2 1.92 × 10-3 mol fraction of MnCl2 in molten LiCl-KCl-MnCl2 using a W WE at 773 K.
In Fig. 12, kCA is plotted versus concentration of MnCl2. The same division between high and low concentration was used as with the CV-based calculations, and separate fits were calculated for each region. Data from all three applied potentials were included in the fits. The low concentration diffusion coefficient was 1.34 × 10−5 cm2/s, and the high concentration diffusion coefficient was 2.78 × 10−5 cm2/s. If the entire concentration range was used for a single fit, the calculated average diffusion coefficient was 2.5 × 10−5 cm2/s. However, at higher concentrations area growth will affect diffusion coefficient calculations due to a change in surface area. While the values differ in magnitude from the CV-based diffusion coefficients, the effect of concentration is consistent.
Fig. 12. Correlated KCA for LiCl-KCl-MnCl2 melt at 773 K as a function of concentration of MnCl2 yielding a diffusion coefficient of 1.11 × 10−5 cm2/s.
Finally, CP scans were also used to calculate diffusion coefficients. For this approach, a constant driving current was applied to the cell, and the potential of the working electrode was measured as a function of time. As shown in Fig. 13, there is a transition time (τ) before the potential drops to the next plateau. Using the following form of the Sand's Equation, the driving current density can be plotted versus the inverse of the square root of the transition time to yield a linear curve that is dependent upon concentration. Fig. 14 shows these linear correlations for different concentrations.
(19)id=Id/A=nFD1/2C∗π1/22⋅τ−1/2=kcp⋅τ−1/2
Fig. 13. Chronopotentiometry result for a driving current density of −0.034 A/cm2 using (3.60 × 10−3 mol fraction of MnCl2) in LiCl-KCl Eutectic onto W electrode with a 2.4 mol% AgCl/Ag RE at 773 K.
Fig. 14. Chronopotentiometry driving current as a function of τ−1/2 for different concentrations of MnCl2 in eutectic LiCl-KCl at 773 K.
The kcp values fit from Fig. 15 were then plotted versus concentration of MnCl2 to estimate the diffusion coefficient in Fig. 15. Because of the linearity of the plot over the entire range of concentrations, only a single fit was calculated to yield an average diffusion coefficient. Table 3 summarizes the MnCl2 diffusion coefficients calculated using each method and broken down into concentration ranges onto a tungsten electrode. Table 4 outlines diffusion coefficients onto a molybdenum electrode. Both CV and CA indicate that diffusivity increases with concentration. CA and CP methods yielded consistent results, though the CV method yielded a value about 32% lower.
Fig. 15. Correlated kcp for LiCl-KCl-MnCl2 at 773 K as a function of concentration of MnCl2.
Table 3. Comparison of diffusion coefficients on a W WE for MnCl2 in eutectic LiCl-KCl based on different electrochemical methods at 773 K.
Table 4. Comparison of diffusion coefficients on a Mo WE for MnCl2 in eutectic LiCl-KCl based on different electrochemical methods at 773 K.
4. Conclusions
Carefully controlled high temperature electrochemical measurements were made using LiCl-KCl-MnCl2 with varying concentrations of MnCl2. Experimental methods included using Mn metal as a working electrode for equilibrium potential measurements and using a vertical translator to precisely control the immersion depth of the working electrode for rate based measurements. The emphasis was on using these measurements to calculate certain key physical properties of MnCl2 in eutectic LiCl-KCl, including activity coefficient and diffusion coefficient. Open circuit potential measurements yielded apparent reduction potentials, which were used to calculate activity coefficients. These activity coefficients were affected by MnCl2 concentration and varied from 0.0071 to 0.014. The Berzins-Delahay, Cottrell, and Sand Equations were used to analyze cyclic voltammetry (CV), chronoamperometry (CA), and chronopotentiometry (CP) data to calculate MnCl2 diffusion coefficient in eutectic LiCl-KCl. Using CV and CA, there appeared to be an effect of increased concentration causing the diffusion coefficient to increase. CA and CP methods gave very similar average values for diffusivity over the full range of concentration (2.5–2.6 × 10−5 cm2/s), while CV yielded lower average D value (1.7 × 10−5 cm2/s). These properties can be used in kinetic models of Mn corrosion in molten LiCl-KCl based spent nuclear fuel electrorefining systems to assess potential impact of such corrosion.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the valuable assistance received from Lauryn Hansen, Milan Stika, and Professor Sang Mun Jeong (Chungbuk National University).
