<title>Laboratory-scale studies on the removal of cesium with a submerged membrane adsorption reactor</title>
<author>Fei Han; Cuiling Zhang; Kang Wang; Kai Wang</author>
<Affiliation> School of Civil and Transportation Engineering, Hebei University of Technology; School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Tianjin University</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10967-019-06763-8</DOI>
<URL>https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10967-019-06763-8?utm_source=cnki&utm_medium=affiliate&utm_content=meta&utm_campaign=DDCN_1_GL01_metadata</URL>
Abstract
This study developed a submerged membrane adsorption reactor system and conducted laboratory scale experiments to remove cesium using copper ferrocyanide (CuFC). The differences in cesium removal efficiency and membrane fouling by using a countercurrent two-stage adsorption (CTA) process and the conventional adsorption process were discussed. The 144 h of the continuous experiment showed that the effluent concentration remained constant with time, and the highest value of the decontamination factor approached 103. The CTA process possesses a higher concentration of suspended CuFC and a lower membrane fouling rate.
Introduction
Nuclear energy, as an alternative to fossil fuels, has the advantage of being economically available to human beings. However, it has risks and would lead to long-term radioactive contamination as evidenced by the accident in Japan’s Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant in 2011. It has been reported that approximately 3.5 ± 0.7 PBq of 137Cs and 15.3 ± 2.6 PBq of 134Cs were released directly into the North Pacific Ocean within 2 months of the accident [1, 2]. Radioactive cesium could cause potential harm to the human and ecological system because it is easily taken up by organisms if it enters the environment and its β decay results in continuous radiation exposure to the body [3]. In addition, its hydration radius is smaller and the diffusion coefficient is higher than other radioactive materials, so it is very difficult to remove it after it enters a water system [4].
So far, several methods for the removal of cesium from wastewater, such as chemical precipitation, solvent extraction, membrane separation, and adsorption have been widely studied. Chemical precipitation is regarded as a pretreatment method and has been adopted in emergency treatments for its low cost and suitability for large scale treatment projects. A typical process for precipitation of cesium is the isotope dilution-precipitation or co-precipitation [5, 6]. Cesium extraction has been considered as an efficient method for years, especially in high level radioactive wastewater. The commonly used extractants are the chlorinated cobalt dicarbollide, calixarene, and neutral multitopic ion-pair receptor [7,8,9]. Besides, ionic liquids, supercritical carbon dioxide and cucurbit[6]uril-based supramolecular have been regarded as a new type of extractants [10,11,12]. For membrane separation, reverse osmosis (RO) or membrane distillation (MD) has a very high decontamination coefficient, low energy consumption, and compatibility with existing systems [13]. RO has been used for the treatment of low level radioactive wastewater from Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant accident [14]. Verifying the potential application of MD in low level radioactive wastewater has been conducted in laboratories and pilot plants [15, 16]. The using of MD could also remove cesium and boron from highly saline radioactive wastewater [17]. Although RO and MD have many advantages, they also suffer from membrane fouling. The other membrane filtration methods can be applied as the pretreat stages before RO to prevent the membrane fouling [18, 19].
Compared with other methods, the adsorption has the advantages of simple operation, low cost, and high removal efficiency, especially for the low concentration contaminant. Cesium can be adsorbed by different types of adsorbents, including inorganic, organic, biomass, and composites [13]. Among these adsorbents, the transition metal hexacyanoferrates (MHCF) have long been regarded as the most promising adsorbents [20]. The efficient adsorption of cesium onto MHCF should be due to the similar size between structure lattices and hydrated cesium ions [21, 22]. However, the fine particles of MHCF result in low hydrodynamic stability and poor separation performance. Additionally, their microcrystalline structure makes them unsuitable for column operations [23]. Therefore, studies of immobilizing MHCF on various supporters, such as latex [24], chitosan [25], resin [26] walnut shell [27], silica [28], glass [29] and graphene oxide [30], have steadily progressed. Although immobilizing techniques can solve the problem of separation difficulties, the supporters may reduce the adsorption capacity and deteriorate the adsorption dynamic performance.
In order to overcome this disadvantage and allow the adsorbent to fully exert its adsorption, it is better to separate the MHCF after it fully reacts with cesium, and this can be achieved by adsorption combined with membrane filtration [31, 32]. Our previous study developed the countercurrent two-stage adsorption (CTA) process, which could increase the adsorption capacity of the adsorbent, followed by microfiltration to remove cesium [33]. We also discussed the influence factors such as pH, competition ions for the removal of cesium by copper ferrocyanide (CuFC) [34]. However, the continuous removal of cesium from wastewater with the CTA process still needs further research.
Therefore, in this study, the laboratory scale experiments were conducted in a submerged membrane adsorption reactor (SMAR) for the continuous removal of cesium. The difference in cesium removal efficiency between CTA and conventional adsorption (CA) processes were described, and membrane fouling of the different processes was also discussed. This paper may provide a reference for large-scale treatment of cesium containing wastewater by the using of adsorption.
Experimental
Chemical reagents
The cesium nitrate, sodium ferrocyanide, and copper nitrate were guaranteed reagents and were purchased from Tianjin Kermel Chemical Reagents Co., Ltd., China. The cesium containing wastewater was prepared by dissolving cesium nitrate into tap water. The cesium concentration and the pH were 104.5 μg/L and 6.7, respectively.
Preparation of the adsorbent
The synthesis of CuFC was mainly based on precipitation method [33]. Briefly, 0.130 L sodium ferrocyanide solution with a concentration of 0.125 mol/L and 0.124 L copper nitrate solution with a concentration of 0.375 mol/L were simultaneously added into a beaker containing 2 L ultrapure water while gently stirring at a rate of approximately 0.1 mL/min. The temperature of the solution was maintained at 55 °C with a water bath. After the addition, the precipitate in the beaker was washed eight times with 2 L ultrapure water. The CuFC suspension to be used can then be obtained.
The composition of the SMAR
The main reactor is the core component of the SMAR (Fig. 1). The hollow fiber microfiltration membrane with an area of 0.5 m2 and pore size of 0.22 µm is internally installed in the main reactor. The membrane could intercept the adsorbed saturated CuFC particles and produce the effluent at the same time. Two liquid level probes are equipped on the wall of the main reactor. The higher one is stationary and the lower one can be adjusted according to the value of the process’s dilution factor (F), which is defined as the ratio of low liquid volume to high liquid volume during the SMART operation. Compressed air provided by the air blower enters the main reactor through the air inlet and plays the role of stirring. The programmable logic controller (PLC) could ensure the SMAR continuous work 24 h per day. Both the CTA and the CA processes could be carried out in the SMAR, and the difference was the dosing procedure. The operation parameters are shown in Table 1.
Fig. 1
figure1
Schematic of the membrane adsorption reactor. 1—Adsorbent storage tank; 2—dosing pump; 3—wastewater tank; 4—feed pump; 5—air flowmeter; 6—air blower; 7—main reactor; 8—high liquid level probe; 9—low liquid level probe; 10—hollow fiber membrane; 11—air inlet; 12—drain valve; 13—liquid flowmeter; 14—effluent pump. PLC programmable logic controller
Table 1 The operation parameters of the SMAR system
Sample method
To make the results representative, the effluent was collected into a container daily and mixed homogeneously; 100 mL was then sampled from the container and stored in a sample bottle to determine the cesium concentration and turbidity. The results were considered as the average value of the effluent for every 24 h.
Analytical method
CuFC particle size distribution was analyzed by a laser size analyzer (Model Mastersizer 2000, Malvern, England). Cesium was analyzed via an X Series inductively coupled plasma mass spectrophotometer (ICP-MS) (Thermo Electron Corporation, USA). The concentration of suspended CuFC in the SMAR was determined using the weight method with an electronic balance (Modal AB104-S, Sartorius, Germany). The turbidity and pH were measured using a photoelectric turbidimeter (Model 2011Q, Hach, USA) and a precise pH meter (Modal PP-25E, Sartorius, Germany), respectively.
The decontamination factor (DF), which is often used in the treatment of radioactive wastewater, is calculated as Eq. (1):
DF = C0Ce
(1)
where C0 and Ce are the cesium concentrations at the beginning and in the effluent (μg/L), respectively.
Membrane specific flux (SF), which is defined as the membrane flux per unit operating pressure, is used to estimate membrane fouling. SF is calculated as Eq. (2):
SF = JTMP
(2)
where SF is the membrane specific flux, L/m2 h mH2O; J represents the membrane flux, L/m2 h; TMP is trans-membrane pressure, mH2O.
Measures to reduce membrane fouling
In general, membrane fouling involves the solutes or particles adsorption on the membrane surface, clogging the membrane pores, and depositing a filter cake layer [35]. In this study, three measures were taken to reduce membrane fouling during SMAR work.
First, continuous turbulence aeration was used. Turbulence aeration could generate flow shear stress and continuously washout the membrane surface to reduce the deposition of CuFC particles. Based on our previous research, the ratio of aeration quantity and capacity of the reactor was determined as 15:1 in this experiment.
Second, intermittent effluent was adopted. The effluent pump worked for 8 min and paused for 2 min, while the aeration system continues to work (Table S1-S3). Therefore, a gas–liquid two-phase flow could be formed on the membrane surface and resulting in a shear force, which would take away the particles deposited on the membrane surface and reduce the density of the cake layer.
Third, the SMAR maintains a constant flow and low membrane flux. The constant flow could increase the transmembrane pressure stable and avoid the membrane fouling occurs rapidly [36]. Besides, the membrane fouling may be intensified if the membrane flux exceeds the critical flux [37, 38].
Results and discussion
The particle size distribution of the CuFC
The particle size distribution of the CuFC was determined from the CuFC suspension that was used as the adsorbent in this study. The particle size follows a normal distribution. The minimum and maximum particle sizes are 1.91 μm and 363 μm, respectively, and the volume fraction of particles between 2.51 and 45.7 μm is greater than 90% (Fig. 2). The pore diameter of the microfiltration membrane is 0.22 μm, which is smaller than the particle size of CuFC, and therefore, it is ensured that the CuFC particles are completely trapped.
Fig. 2
figure2
The particle size distribution of the CuFC suspension
The adsorption time
In order to determine the adsorption time of CuFC when the SMAR working, the effect of adsorption time on the effluent cesium concentration was first investigated. 40 mg/L of CuFC was added into 100 mL cesium containing wastewater and stirred at different times. As can be seen in Fig. 3, the cesium concentration dropped sharply during the first 20 min, then it slowly decreased, and remains stable after 90 min. Therefore, the adsorption time was determined to be 20 min for engineering considerations.
Fig. 3
figure3
The effluent cesium concentration changes with time
Cesium removal effect in different processes
Experiments of the CTA process with F values of 0.7 and 0.4 were firstly conducted. The SMAR was continuously working for 144 h, and the volumes of treated water were 620 L and 814 L, respectively. The average value of the two parallel experiments was reported. The effluent cesium concentrations were approximately 0.16 μg/L and 0.10 μg/L with the average DFs of 592 and 964 respectively (Table 2). The results showed that a higher DF could be obtained at a lower F value. The reason will be further discussed in the following section.
Table 2 The effluent cesium concentration and DFs in the CTA process
To compare the CTA process with the CA process, a control experiment with the CA process at an F value of 0.7 was conducted. Figure 4 showed that the effluent cesium concentration remained stable throughout the experiment of the CTA process. In the CA process, however, the effluent cesium concentrations decreased gradually during the first 144 h. To further investigate the relationship between cesium concentration and time, the experimental time was extended to 240 h. The result showed that the concentrations of effluent cesium decreased almost linearly with time, and the values were much higher than the CTA process (Fig. 4). The average value of DF was only 356. These results indicated that the CTA process has greater practical value for contaminant concentration control.
Fig. 4
figure4
The effluent cesium concentrations in different processes
The influence of suspended CuFC on cesium removal efficiency
The reason for the high removal efficiency of cesium is the intimate mixing of CuFC with the wastewater, which can increase the possibility of ion exchange between ions in the CuFC crystal and the cesium in the wastewater. The suspended CuFC (SCuFC) in SMAR plays a key role.
The calculated concentration of SCuFC is equal to the ratio of the mass of SCuFC in SMAR to the high liquid volume. The mass of the SCuFC can be calculated by multiplying the 40 mg/L CuFC dose by the volume of the treated water, which can be calculated based on the capacity of the SMAR at a certain time.
In theory, all of the added CuFC should be completely suspended in the SMAR due to the continuous action of the updraft produced by the air blower. However, a part of the CuFC would deposit on the bottom of the SMAR and adhere to the surface of the membrane during the filtration. So, the experimental values of SCuFC were always less than the calculated ones (Fig. 5).
Fig. 5
figure5
The calculated and experimental values of SCuFC varies with time
In addition, the magnitude of the SCuFC shows the order of CTA (F = 0.4) > CTA (F = 0.7) > CA, and the difference increases with time. The reason is that during the feed of each cycle, the disturbance of the water flow causes the CuFC which has been deposited at the bottom of the SMAR and adhered to the surface of the membrane to become suspended again. The disturbance was more frequent in the CTA process because of the shorter interval time between dosing and feeding (Table S1 and Table S2). Therefore, the experimental values of SCuFC in the CTA process were higher than that in the CA process. Moreover, the experimental values of SCuFC at F value of 0.4 were higher than that of 0.7 in the CTA process. The reason is that both the values of hydraulic retention time and the volume of retention in each cycle are smaller at a lower F value, and that brings more disturbances by feeding. The reason is that at lower F values, the hydraulic retention time in each cycle and the volume of retained water in the SMAR are smaller, which makes the influent more dramatic disturbing to the precipitated CuFC. So, the cumulative effects in each cycle yielded the results discussed above. It could also explain the differences in cesium removal efficiency in the last section.
Membrane fouling
At the initial stage of the experiment, the values of SF dropped rapidly due to the membrane holes blocking by the adsorbed saturated CuFC particles. Then, the forming of the cake layer on the surfaces of the membrane result in the values of SF dropped slowly.
In order to evaluate the speed of membrane fouling at different processes, the membrane fouling rate (σ) was introduced in this study. σ was defined as the attenuation of SF per unit volume of treated water and calculated by the formula (3).
σ=SF0−SFtQt
(3)
where the σ is the membrane fouling rate (L/m5 h mH2O); SF0 and SFt are the membranes specific flux at initial and time t (L/m2 h mH2O), respectively; Qt is the volume of treated water at time t (m3).
The CTA process has a lower σ than the CA process, and the lowest σ appeared in the CTA process with an F value of 0.7 (Fig. 6). The reason is that the values of SCuFC in the CTA process are higher, as discussed in the last section, which means that the amount of CuFC particles adhering to the surface of the membrane is relatively small. Therefore, the membrane fouling appears as a relatively slow process. Furthermore, the SMAR has a higher capacity at a lower F value in the CTA process (Table 1), which means that the working time of the membrane in each cycle will be prolonged, resulting in increased membrane fouling.
Fig. 6
figure6
The membrane fouling rate varies with treated water
The effluent turbidity
The continuous turbulence aeration may lead to the fracture of the hollow fiber membrane and cause the turbidity increasing in the effluent. In this study, the effluent turbidity remained stable over time, with values between 0.06 NTU and 0.08 NTU (Fig. 7). This indicated that the membrane was not broken during the working of the SMAR, so the process is reliable.
Fig. 7
figure7
The variations of effluent turbidity with time
Conclusions
Both the CTA and the CA processes could be achieved in the SMAR to continuously remove cesium. The CTA process has high cesium removal efficiency over the CA process. The values of effluent cesium concentration kept constant over time in the CTA process and the highest value of DF approached approximately 103 when the F value was 0.4. SCuFC plays the role of adsorption cesium in the SMAR. The experimental values of SCuFC were closer to the calculated ones in the CTA process, especially with a lower F value. The CTA process possesses a lower membrane fouling rate than the CA process under the conditions of this study. The effluent cesium concentration and the turbidity shows the using of SMAR with the CTA process is reliable for the removal of cesium.
