<title>Review of conceptual design and fundamental research of molten salt reactors in China</title>
<author>Dalin Zhang; Limin Liu; Minghao Liu; Rongshuan Xu; Cheng Gong; Jun Zhang; Chenglong Wang; Suizheng Qiu; Guanghui Su</author>
<Affiliation>School of Nuclear Science and Technology Xi'an Jiaotong University (XJTU) Xi'an China</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>International Journal of Energy Research</Journal>
<Publishing_house>John Wiley & Sons Inc. </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1002/er.3979</DOI>
<URL>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/er.3979</URL>
Summary
Molten salt reactor (MSR) as 1 candidate of the generation IV advanced nuclear power systems attracted more attention in China due to its top ranked in fuel cycle and thorium utilization. Two types of MSR concepts were studied and developed in parallel, namely the MSR with liquid fuel and that with solid fuel. Abundant fundamental research including the neutronics modeling, thermal-hydraulics modeling, safety analysis, material investigation, molten salts technologies etc. were carried out. Some analysis software such as COUPLE and FANCY were developed. Several experimental facilities like high-temperature fluoride salt experiment loop have been constructed. Some passive residual heat removal systems were designed, and 1 test facility is under construction. The key MSR techniques including the extraction and separation of molten salt and construction of N-base alloy have been mastered. Based on these fundamental research, Chinese Academy of Sciences has completed the design of thorium-based MSRs with solid fuel and liquid fuel and is promoting their construction in the near future. In China, future efforts should be paid to the material, online fuel processing, Th-U fuel cycle, component design, and construction and thermal-hydraulic experiments for MSR, which are rather challenging nowadays.
1 INTRODUCTION
Molten salt reactor (MSR) is one of the 6 candidate reactors of the generation IV advanced nuclear power systems. From 40s to 70s of 20th century, Oak Ridge National Laboratory made great contributions to MSR development and accumulated a wealth of experiences.1, 2 Since 2002, GIF selected MSR among 6 generation IV reactors for deployment in second half of 21st century, MSR was revisited worldwide because of its attractive advantages and fuel management features: the inherent safety without risk of core melting, lower pressure of primary loop, on-line fuel processing, and a wide choice of fuel cycle. Especially, MSR can be designed either in a thermal-spectrum Th-U breeder cycle, which can extend the fuel resources to a large extend. And fast-spectrum MSRs fueled with plutonium and even minor actinides from LWR make possible nuclear waste burning.3Compared with other fourth generation reactors, no solid fuel is necessary to be fabricated or used. Online processing can minimize the fissile inventories and the radiation damage limit on the fuel burnup. The above characteristics enable the MSR with extremely special economics compared with other fourth generation reactors. New MSR concepts are, eg, the molten salt actinide recycler and transmuter (MOSART)4 proposed in Russia and the molten salt fast reactor (MSFR) proposed in the EVOL (Evaluation and Viability of Liquid Fuel Fast Reactor System) project of EURATOM.5 The fluoride-salt-cooled high temperature reactor (FHR) is another advanced MSR concept, which combines attractive attributes from previously developed reactor classes and power plants.6 It adopts low-pressure liquid salt and high-temperature coated particle fuel. In addition, the FHR is expected to improve economics through air-Brayton combined cycle.7
Because thorium could be a good alternative nuclear fuel8 and it has 3 times more abundant reserves than the natural uranium reserves, China has initiated a thorium-based moltensalt reactor (TMSR) program, which was proposed by the Chinese Academy of Sciences in the strategic pilot science and technology special project “future advanced nuclear fission energy,”, aimed at opening up a road of innovation in line with China's national conditions for large-scale development of nuclear energy.9 Earlier before this national TMSR project launching, XJTU was financially supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China to perform the fundamental research on the neutronics, thermal-hydraulic modeling, and safety analysis of MSRs. In the framework of the MSR concepts development, abundant fundamental research including the neutronic modeling, thermal-hydraulic modeling, safety analysis, material investigation, molten salts technologies etc. were carried out. Some corresponding software such as COUPLE were developed to perform the studies. Several experimental facilities like high-temperature fluoride salt experiment loop in Shanghai Institute of Applied Physics (SINAP) and passive residual heat removal system (PRHRS) test facility in XJTU have been constructed, aiming to provide experimental data for MSR thermal-hydraulics and gain operation experiences of key equipment. Some key techniques have been mastered including the extraction and separation of molten salt and construction of N-base alloy, helping the experiment process and reactor design. In addition, the development of general design criteria and licensing for MSR has been in process. This paper will introduce the China TMSR project and review the main achievements of the solid-fuel and liquid-fuel MSRs research and development in China.
2 CHINA THORIUM-BASED MOLTENSALT REACTOR PROJECT
China national TMSR project was launched in January 2011 as a strategic pilot project and is in charged by SINAP. This project struggles for realizing effective thorium utilization and hydrogen production by nuclear energy within 20 to 30 years. As 1 part of the pilot project, the TMSR plan focuses on the fabrication of Th-U nuclear fuel, construction of TMSR, and disposal of nuclear waste. The TMSR is a compact nuclear power system, which uses the molten salt fluid to cool the thorium-based nuclear fuel and provides high-temperature output. The TMSR plan will guarantee the long-term development of Chinese nuclear industry and help reduce the waste emissions. Figure 1 presents the strategy of China TMSR R&D.10
Figure 1
Strategy of China TMSR R&D [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
The TMSR project adopts a technical route of developing the solid-fuel and liquid-fuel TMSR (TMSR-SF and TMSR-LF, respectively) at the same time, aiming at the thorium usage and complex utilization of nuclear energy. Table 1 presents the main technical characteristics of TMSR-SF and TMSR-LF. The online fuel processing endows the TMSR-LF of advantages in the utilization of thorium fuel and fuel breeding. If designed as a fast-spectrum reactor, TMSR-LF can be used to burn the minor actinides. However, the liquid TMSR faces challenges, caused by the much higher radiation environment, high neutron and thermal flux on the wall, and fewer barriers to radionuclide releases. The online fuel processing lacks sophisticated experience. Maintenance and inspections of the reactor are rather tough. As a result, TMSR-SF is taken as the first step into MSRs, adopting the well-developed once-through fuel cycle, rather than the online fuel processing. It combines the existing technologies, including the HTR pebble fuel and molten salt reactor experiment (MSRE) molten salt, increasing several barriers to the radionuclide and reducing the radioactive level in the containment. It provides a realistic option for building a TMSR under the present nuclear industry technology. In conclusion, the solid-fuel type MSRs are simpler in design and without the ambition of breeding and buring actinides that the liquid-fuel MSRs aims at. TMSR-SF has a higher power density than HTR and shall provide high-temperature application due to its high operation temperature. The experience gained from the TMSR-SF shall lay a basis for the ultimate TMSR-LF. Figure 2 shows the China TMSR project roadmap and main milestones.11 Hopefully, the TMSR will help provide an advantageous energy option for the arid areas and realize the highly efficient utilization of thorium fuel, which will endow China with the leadership in the nuclear energy. By 2020, a perfect research platform will be built to grasp the existing related technologies and perform investigation on the key technical problems. By 2025, both of a liquid fuel demonstration reactor (TMSR-LF2) and a solid-fuel demonstration reactor will be constructed, which will be the first TMSR demonstration system. By 2050, TMSR-related scientific and technical problems will be solved, and the commercial TMSR will be operated.
Table 1. Comparison of TMSR-SF and TMSR-LF
TMSR-SF	TMSR-LF
Fuel	Solid pebble fuel, with TRISO particles.	Liquid fuel, no solid fuel fabrication (LiF-BeF2-UF4-ThF4(19.75% U-235))
Fuel cycle	Once-through	Reprocessing and recycle (online degassing (Xe, ke, T), off-line remove solid fission products)
Neutron spectrum	Thermal spectrum
Thermal spectrum
Fast spectrum
Application
High-temperature application:
Electricity production;
Seawater desalination
Hydrogen or methyl alcohol production;
Steam supply;
Utilization of thorium fuel
Near term:
High-temperature application;
Utilization of thorium fuel;
Burning minor actinides
Figure 2
China TMSR roadmap and main milestones [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
The near-term goal of the TMSR project can be divided into 2 parts: (1) The first 10 MW solid-fuel TMSR and 2 MW liquid-fuel TMSR will be constructed, respectively. The liquid-fuel TMSR will adopt the fuel post-processing technologies; (2) related research platforms will be formed to support the TMSR future development. Capabilities will be enhanced including the design and construction of TMSR, fabrication of molten salt and construction of molten salt experiment loops, Th-U fuel pre-processing and post-processing, developing high-temperature-resistant material, formation of TMSR safety criteria and licensing, high-temperature hydrogen production, and Bryton-cycle pre-processing.
The TMSR is a novel reactor concept, demanding numerous new technologies and solutions to the existing technical difficulties. No sophisticated design process, safety evaluation, and licensing method can be directly applied to the TMSR. Before the newly developed alloy can be adopted to the commercial TMSR, sufficient tests are necessary to validate its resistance to high temperature, severe corrosion, and irradiation. The nuclear fuel is compatible with the graphite and molten salt chemically while the physical penetration effect needs evaluation through a series of experiments. The nuclear data library is not sufficient for the Th-U fuel cycle, which requires a large amount of basic research on this type of fuel cycle. The fuel dry reprocessing technology is still at the experiment stage, and it will take a long time before the application of this technique in the industry.
3 SOLID-FUEL MOLTEN SALT REACTOR
3.1 Conceptual design
The design and built of a solid-fueled TMSR (TMSR-SF) is one of the near-term goals in the TMSR pilot project. The nominal power of the first solid-fuel test reactor was initially designed with power of 2 MWth, and it was increased to 10 MWth in 2013. The solid-fuel 10 MWth test reactor will be constructed by 2020 as the initial step with the expectation of a larger 100 MWth FHR shortly thereafter. This reactor designated as TMSR-SF will be a Pebble-Bed FHR (PB-FHR) concept developed by the University of California, Berkeley (UCB), which may be the first FHR ever built in the world.7
Figure 3 shows the vertical and horizontal view of 2 MW TMSR-SF core. It is composed of graphite blocks and can be divided into several zones: (1) central channels, including 2 channels for control rods and 2 channels for B4C absorber balls; (2) active zone, where fuel pebbles and the coolant located; (3) graphite reflector, which can be divided into 3 parts including the side reflector with control rod channels, B4C absorber ball channels, top reflector, and bottom reflector; and (4) core vessel. The 10 MW TMSR-SF concept design is much different from the 2 MW one as shown in Figure 4. The prismatic core is replaced by the cylinder design. In the 2 MW design, fuel pebbles are in ordered packing while random packing is adopted in the 10 MW design. The former design uses the central controls to make the power density distribution more uniform, while the new design only keeps the surrounding control rods. The primary coolant, FLiBe, takes away the generated heat from the reactor core and transfers it to the secondary side air through the salt-air heat exchanger. The operation parameters of the above concept designs are listed in Table 2.
Figure 3
Vertical and horizontal view of the 2 MW TMSR-SF reactor core [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Figure 4
Flow diagram of 10 MW TMSR-SF concept design [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Table 2. Operation parameters of 2 MW TMSR-SF and 10 MW TMSR-SF
2 MW	10 MW
Power	2 MWt	10 MWt
Inlet temperature	600°C	600°C
Outlet temperature	620°C	650°C
Massflow rate	42.3 kg/s	84 kg/s
Primary coolant	FLiBe	FLiBe
The TMSR-SF adopts fuel pebbles with a 0.5-cm-thick shell outside and the graphite matrix inside where large numbers of tri-structural isotropic (TRISO) fuel particles are contained.12 The TRISO fuel particle, from inside to outside, includes a fuel kernel, porous pyrolytic carbon (PyC) buffer, dense inner PyC (IPyC), chemically vapor deposited carbidedsilicon (SiC), and dense outer PyC (OPyC). Figure 5 shows the details of the fuel pebbles,7 and the geometric parameters are listed in Table 3.13
Figure 5
Graphite-matrix coated-particle fuel [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Table 3. Geometric parameters of the TMSR-SF pebble fuel
Region	Dimension	Value, cm
Fuel pebble	Fueled region	Outer radius	2.5
Pebble shell	Thickness	0.5
Pebble	Outer radius	3.0
TRISO particle	Fuel kernel	Outer radius	0.025
PyC	Thickness	0.0095
IPyC	Thickness	0.004
SiC	Thickness	0.0035
OPyC	Thickness	0.004
TRISO	Outer radius	0.046
3.2 High-temperature molten salt test loops
In SINAP, the experimental forced-circulation test loop using the nitrates has been completed and in operation for over 10 000 hours (Figure 6)14 and investigate the heat transfer characteristics of molten salts. Another forced-circulation test loop using the real fluoride salt, FLiNaK, has been the first industrial-scale high-temperature experiment facility and operated for tens of thousands of hours (Figure 7).15 The FLiNaK test loop was constructed to study the heat transfer and corrosion between FLiNaK molten salt and fuel pebbles. The comparison of the loops design and operation parameters is given in Table 4. The FLiNaK test loop was of more difficulties in construction and operation due to its higher operation temperatures and the severe corrosion to the structural material, compared with the one using nitrates. So, Hastelloy C 276 alloy was adopted to fabricate the pipe in the FLiNaK loop, rather than the Inconel 600 used in the nitrates loop. The first prototypes of the specific pump, heat exchanger, flowmeter, and manometer for the molten salt have been completed and tested the FLiNaK experiment loop. The molten salt freezing phenomenon is easy to occur due to the high melting point. It can cause some damage to the components of the loops. So, heaters are installed in every component and at the surface of the pipe lines of the experiment loops, to prevent the freezing occurrence. The frozen valve has been developed and installed in the loop, which can adjust its opening through the appropriate molten salt freezing.16 With the 2 molten salt loops, thermal-hydraulic and mechanical characteristics have been investigated deeply. Abundant operation experience has been gained as well as the thermal-hydraulic experimental data.17
Figure 6
Schematic diagram of HTS molten salt test loop in SINAP
Figure 7
Schematic diagram of FLiNaK molten salt high temperature testing loop in SINAP [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Table 4. The design and operation parameters of nitrate and FLiNaK forced circulation test loops in SINAP
Nitrate Forced Circulation Test Loop	FLiNaK Forced Circulation Test Loop
Salt	KNO3-NaNO2-NaNO3(53–40-7 mol%)	LiF-NaF-KF(46.5–11.5-42 mol%)
Design temperature	450°C	650°C
Operation temperature	200–450°C	500–600°C
Design flow rate	<2 m3/h	<15 m3/h
Structural material	Inconel 600	Hastelloy-C276
To research the natural circulation phenomenon in the MSR PRHRS, several experimental facilities were built in some institutes. A nitrate natural circulation loop was set up in SINAP to help design and validate the PRHRS in MSR (Figure 8).18 In Xi'an Jiaotong University, another experimental test facility was constructed and operated using the FLiNaK, to test the possibility of using the high-temperature heat pipes in the PRHRS, to enhance the heat removal capability(Figure 9).19Table 5 gives the operation and structural parameters used in the previous natural circulation facility. The nitrate natural circulation loop operates at a lower temperature than the one using the FLiNaK. Both of the experimental facilities adopted Stainless Steel 316 as the material, which is not recommended structural material like Hastelloy or Inconel 600. The corrosion caused by the molten salts, especially the FLiNaK, needs further investigation after long operation. Liu et al19 investigated the heat transfer characteristics under natural circulation with the high-temperature heat pipes through the experiments in the FLiNaK experimental facility. However, the comparison between the natural circulation with heat pipes and the one without heat pipes is necessary to research the effects of the heat pipes on the PRHRS.
Figure 8
Nitrate natural circulation loop in SINAP [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Figure 9
The FLiNaK experimental system using high-temperature heat pipes in XJTU [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Table 5. The operation parameters of the nitrate and FLiNaK natural circulation test facilities in SINAP and XJTU
Nitrate Natural Circulation Test Facility	FLiNaK Natural Circulation Test Facility
Salt	Nitrate	FLiNaK
Operation temperature	200–400°C	470–650°C
Structural material	Stainless steel 316	Stainless steel 316
3.3 Safety evaluation and licensing analysis
Difficulties of building the reactor on the soft bedrock have been solved with sufficient scientific and acceptable basis for supporting the design and licensing.11 The evaluation of aseismic design criteria has been completed for constructing MSRs on soft bedrock. The international safety criteria (ANSI/ANS-20.1) is being composed for the solid-fuel TMSR with the participation of SINAP. Based on the safety design criteria proposed by SINAP, the safety-related systems are designed for the molten salt experiment reactors.
Initial events analysis is necessary to be performed before the reactor safety analysis and the probabilistic safety assessment (PSA). Referring the initial events of the light water reactors, high temperature gas-cooled reactors, and SFRs, the initial events lists of the TMSR-SF, containing 37 initial events, were determined and grouped into 6 types using the Master Logic Diagram.20 Through the PSA analysis of the Loss Of Offsite Power using the PSA process risk spectrum, accident sequences of the radioactive material release to the core and its frequency were obtained.21
Three types of transient conditions including the Unprotected Loss Of Flow (ULOF), Unprotected Over Cooling accident (UOC), and Unprotected Transient Over Power were examined on the TMSR-SF by a FHR safety analysis code named FHR Safety Analysis Code.22 The Station Blackout Anticipated Transient Without Scram (SBO-ATWS) accident was analyzed by the modified RELAP5/MOD 4.0 code with the responses of the PRHR.23
The reactor physical characteristics were also studied for the preliminary licensing analysis. The control rod worth, including the differential worth and integral worth, was calculated by MCNP for the 2 MW TMSR-SF.24 ORIGEN2 was applied to study the variation of the xenon and krypton fission gases varying with neutron spectrum and flux in TRISO fuel particles.25The measurement of neutron energy spectrum was studied theoretically and experimentally as well.26 Parametric study of the thorium-uranium conversion rate was conducted to optimize the core structure for the improvement of the economics of the TMSR-SF using the SCALE code.27
4 LIQUID-FUEL MOLTEN SALT REACTOR
4.1 Neutronics and fuel management
The most important neutronic characteristics of the liquid-fuel MSRs are that the delayed neutron precursors (DNPs) released from the fission actions can flow with the fuel salts out of the active core into the outer loop system and decay out of the core.28 Such flow effect of the DNPs with the fuel salts in liquid-fuel MSRs induces a big challenge in the neutronics modeling, while it provides a great capability to reprocess the fuel salts online. In the 232Th-233 U fuel cycle, 233Pa online reprocessing can improve the fuel breeding significantly, which is the main reason that the liquid-fuel MSRs are recommended as the top-ranked reactor for the thorium-uranium fuel cycle.
For the neutronics analyses, many effects are focused on the modeling approaches and tool development.
Zhang et al derive the fundamental balance equations of the multi-group neutrons and the DNPs based on the particle conversation law considering the fuel salts flow effects.29 Furthermore, it is figured out that these equations have the same format with the conversation equations in the computational fluid dynamics. Based on this understanding, they developed COUPLE,30 a time-spatial-dependent coupled neutronics and thermal-hydraulics code, which can as well perform the neutronics calculation and thermal-hydraulics, respectively. COUPLE was verified by diverse methods and applied to MOSART, MSFR etc. The common conclusion is that the liquid-fuel flow influences the neutron fluxes very slightly while affects the DNPs significantly, and the effects are much stronger for the precursors with smaller decay constants.
In the liquid-fuel MSRs, the fuel salts circulate in the primary loop, which can be reprocessed and refueled online; thus, the fuel management of liquid-fuel MSRs differs from the conventional solid-fuel reactors. Some studies on the Th-U conversion performance and the online refueling and reprocessing design of liquid-fuel MSRs are carried out.27 Wu et al adopted SCALE program to calculate the Th-U conversion ratio, 233U concentration, and total temperature feedback coefficient etc. with different lattice parameters based on a ZrH-moderated MSR design.31 The results show that the Th-U conversion ratio and total temperature feedback coefficient can be improved significantly by reducing lattice size or increasing salt volume ratio. Compared with the graphite-moderated MSR, ZrH-moderated MSR reduces initial 233U inventory and transuranium production and makes its core more compact. Based on the MCNP5 and ORIGEN2.1 code, Sun et al developed a new fuel management code to suit for liquid-fuel MSRs.32 Five operation modes for both the continuous online refueling and batch online refueling are proposed and studied. The simulation results show that the small modular MSFR can be operated within a small keff fluctuation both under the continuous refueling scheme with variable feed rating and under the constant batch refueling scheme. Bei et al analyzed depletion features of a thorium-based MSR by using the home-made lattice and core code SONG/TANG-MSR with considering the online processing of the fuel salt.33 The results show that the TMSR with online fuel processing has high breeding ratio, short doubling time, and long-term stable operation.
4.2 Thermal-hydraulics analysis
The Oak Ridge National Laboratory experimental studies have confirmed that the molten salts such as FLiBe, FLiNaK etc. used in liquid-fuel MSRs are typical Newton fluid, which has some similar characteristics with water.1, 2 Therefore, the general modeling approaches of thermal-hydraulics used in conventional light water reactors can be introduced to the MSR thermal-hydraulic analysis. However, 2 differences should be point out: (1) the energy conservation equation for liquid-fuel MSR has the inner heat source in the fuel salt rather than the surface heat flux from the fuel rods; (2) the liquid-fuel MSR has a large margin from the 2-phase boiling; thus, the 2-phase heat transfer modeling can be ignored.
Several types of thermal-hydraulic models from simple to complex were developed to calculate the temperature and flow distributions in the MSR core. Zhang et al34 proposed a 1-dimensional single-phase multi-channel model to simulate the flow and heat transfer of the fuel salt in the graphite-moderated channel-type liquid-fuel MSR. In this study, the axial and radial power distributions necessary for the thermal-hydraulic calculation were calculated by the DRAGON code separately. The results indicate that the multi-channel model is well suitable for channel-type MSR simulation. Later on, the multi-channel model was applied to MSRE and MSR-LF by Guo et al35 and Zhuang et al,36 respectively, which confirm the model capability furthermore. For the fast-spectrum MSRs such as MOSART, MSFR etc., the computational fluid dynamic method was proposed to perform the thermal-hydraulics analysis. Zhang et al firstly developed a 2-dimensional thermal-hydraulics model to calculate the flow and heat transfer in a generic MSR core, then coupled the thermal-hydraulics model with the 2-group neutron diffusion model to develop the home-made COUPLE code.37 COUPLE was applied to MOSART and MSFR, and verified by the other partners' calculations. Based on the 2-dimensional COUPLE code, Zhou et al developed the 3-dimensional version to study the MOSART steady thermal-hydraulic characteristics and to optimize the MSFR design.38
4.3 Neutronics and thermal-hydraulics coupling and safety analysis
Due to the flow effects of the DNPs, it can be realized that the neutronics were strong coupling with the thermal-hydraulics. Many efforts have been focused on the neutronics and thermal-hydraulics coupling for the safety analysis of MSRs. Neutronic models based on the multi-group diffusion theory while considering the flow effects of the liquid fuel were proposed to couple the flow and heat transfer models in performing the steady and transient analysis of the MSR.38-42 The DNP movement including its turbulence was especially considered in these analysis as well.28, 43 COUPLE, a time-dependent coupled neutronics and thermal-hydraulics code, was developed on the basis of the previous work.30 In addition, the general Monte Carlo code for neutron and photon transport, MCNP, is coupled with a Multiple-channel Analysis Code by a linking code to perform parametric studies of the MSRE.40, 44 Compared with the COUPLE, the coupling of MCNP with Multiple-channel Analysis Code can hardly simulate the transients with a proper speed. Traditional safety analysis code CATHARE was also modified to perform the study of a single-channel in the MSR core.45
The COUPLE was also simplified by establishing a kinetic model to consider the flow effects of the fuel salt, coupled with a simplified heat transfer model in the core. The safety characteristics of the MOSART were investigated by simulating 3 types of basic transient accidents including the ULOF, UOC, and Unprotected Transient Over Power.42 The results indicate that the conceptual design was an inherently safe one. The ULOF and the combination of ULOF and Unprotected Loss Of Heat Sink were studied on the MOSART by supplementing a heat sink model.46, 47 Using the conceptual design of the TMSR-LF as the reference case, a pump stop accident was simulated at nominal power of 2 MWth by Cinsf1D code.41 Besides, the reactivity initiated transients of the TMSR-LF without thorium fuel including the step reactivity initiated event, ramp reactivity initiated event, UOC, and ULOF were analyzed as well as those of the reactor with thorium fuel.39 The previous safety studies indicate the inherent safety of the liquid-fuel MSRs.
5 DEVELOPMENT OF THE COMMON TECHNOLOGIES
5.1 Th-U fuel cycle
“Three-stage” Th-U fuel cycle strategy was proposed based on the special TMSR fuel cycle pattern and optimization (Figure 10).11 This strategy targets at highly efficient utilization of thorium, fuel breeding, and transmutation, which will help reduce the nuclear waste emission and improve the proliferation resistance. According to the strategy, the easier fuel cycle pattern and related technologies will be taken into consideration firstly. The efficiency of the thorium usage will be improved step by step, and the nuclear waste emission will be reduced similarly. Finally, the Th-U fuel cycle can be self-breeding sustainably and burn the MA or transuranium produced by itself or other reactors, which will minimize the heavy-metal radioactive waste. The initial loading needs the new fission fuel, and only the breeding fuel is necessary for other fuel cycles. The utilization efficiency will be improved with the increasing fuel cycles. Hopefully, the closed Th-U fuel cycle will be realized. The neutronic models have been set up to optimize the post-processing of Th-U fuel cycle. A nuclear data library, CENDL-TMSR, has been built, specific for Th-U fuel cycle. A new dry pyro-processing has been obtained including the fluoride volatility method and low-pressure distillation techniques.47 Th-U fuel cycle based on the online fuel processing is rather challenging as it was researched and verified poorly for several decades. The “three-stage” strategy should be a realistic step to the Th-U fuel cycle, which is the ultimate goal of the liquid MSR. More experimental and analysis work are necessary to realize and validate this type of strategy.
Figure 10
Closed Th-U fuel cycle based on TMSR technologies [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
5.2 Passive residual heat removal systems
Several types of PRHRS have been proposed to enhance the inherent safety of the MSRs. Based on the residual heat removal system for the MSRE developed by Oak Ridge National Laboratory, a conceptual design with passive characteristics was completed using natural air cooling rather than the forced water circulation to cool the condenser (Figure 11).48 The passive heat removal system is composed of 3 natural circulation loops including (1) the 2-phase natural circulation in the bayonet cooling thimble transferring the decay heat to the second loop; (2) the 2-phase natural circulation between the air cooler and the steam drum; and (3) the open loop where steam in the air cooler was condensed by the circulation of air in the chimney.48 A more detailed design was put forward with the L-type fin tube chosen as the heat exchanger tube of the air cooler.49 Thermal-hydraulic characteristics of this type of PRHRS were investigated through a natural circulation experimental facility using the water 2-phase fluid.50 Due to the huge difference in thermo-physical properties of fluoride salts and water, the application of the previous PRHRS design needs further experimental validation of fluoride salt thermal-hydraulic experiments.
Figure 11
Schematic diagram of the passive residual heat removal system
Using heat pipes might help to improve the heat dissipation performance of PRHRS of MSRs. Two types of conceptual designs of PRHRS, using high temperature sodium heat pipes and sodium-potassium alloy ones, respectively, were proposed as shown in Figure 12. Transient analysis results indicate that high temperature sodium heat pipe had a successful startup and could remove the residual heat of fuel salt rapidly in the MSR accidents.51 Liu et al19 has conducted experiments on the natural circulation facility with heat pipes, which will provide validation of the previous PRHRS conceptual design.
Figure 12
Schematic diagram of the new concept PRHRS of MSR using heat pipes [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
5.3 Molten salt technology
Methods have been obtained to prepare and purify fluoride salts coolant and fuel salts in the TMSR project.16 A facility using the H2-HF bubble method has been developed for the preparation and purification of fluoride salts, with a ton-scale capacity. The boron equivalent is less than 2 ppm in the nuclear grade FLiBe used in the primary system, while the total oxygen is no more than 100 ppm in the high purity FLiNaK in the secondary primary system. The specific device has been developed for the measurement of thermal-physical and transport properties of molten salts, obtaining the viscosity, density, thermal conductivity, and other key property data of high-temperature.52 An experimental device was constructed by SINAP for measuring the density and liquidus temperature of molten fluorides typically used in the TMSR project. A candidate molten salt coolant, LiF-NaF-KF (46.5–11.5-42 mol%), was investigated.53 Thermodynamic database has been established for the research on the molten salt. Series studies have been done on the fluoride salts corrosion including the corrosion mechanism, evaluation of the structural material corrosion, and corrosion prevention.54-56 A solution has been provided to solve the corrosion issue through the optimization of the alloy composition, purification of the salt, and surface modification. The static corrosion rate was observed less than 2 μm per year for the structural material immersed in the highly purified FLiNaK.
5.4 Structural materials research
Key technologies have been mastered for the batch production, processing, and welding of a nickel-based high-temperature alloy.16 Consequently, the corrosion-resistance nickel-based alloy used for the MSRs can be produced in China. Ten tons of ingot of alloy have been successfully manufactured, whose mechanical performance and corrosion resistance are as good as the Hastelloy-N alloy.56-59 The ultrafine grain nuclear graphite specific for MSR has been successfully developed, and difficulties have been dealt with in the scale-up process. The performances of this type of nuclear graphite, including the mechanical performance, thermodynamic, purity, and uniformity, meets the requirements of MSR. Its molten salt infiltration resistance is better than the existing graphite.60 The database has been built for the conventional performance of the nuclear grade graphite, pushing the establishment of international specifications for the nuclear grade graphite used in the MSR. The structural material can be brittle in contact with high neutron flux in the MSR.61 Consequently, the newly developed nickel-based alloy and the nuclear-grade graphite should be tested weather they are effective enough, or not under the long-time high neutron flux.
The immersion corrosion of ZrC-SiC based ceramics was performed in molten fluoride salt FLiNaK, with the goal of assessing their capability with candidate materials in molten fluoride preparation, thermal storage, and transfer application. Results show that the ZrC-SiC composites represented better corrosion resistance than the single content of ZrC or SiC. With an increase in the SiC content, the corrosion resistance could be improved.27, 62, 63 Another type of candidate high temperature material, MAX phases materials, was also investigated on their corrosion resistance in molten fluoride salts at the temperature of approximately 850°C, approximately to the operating temperature of the MSR.64 Alloys including the Chinese Hastelloy-N alloy were also examined on its performance in the high temperature FLiNaK molten salt. It can be found that temperature and the existence of water in the molten salt had significant impact on the corrosion.65
Irradiation resistance of the structural materials used in the MSRs is of great importance. The PyC coating adopted in the TRISO fuel particles was studied in the ion irradiation and static FLiNaK molten salt experiments. The results showed that irradiation defects might increase the fluorination of PyC coating in FLiNaK salt.66 As a candidate structural material for MSRs, the 316 austenitic stainless steel (316SS) was investigated in a high temperature environment with Xe ion irradiation. The temperature effect of Xe ion irradiation to the 316SS was obvious.67
The permeation behaviors of tritium in the candidate structural materials of the TMSR were studied as the tritium can easily diffuse through the structural materials at high temperatures and go into the atmosphere. The permeation process of tritium at the temperature of 400°C to 700°C was simulated using the hydrogen and deuterium with the method of gas-driven permeation. Experimental results of the permeation are similar in Hastelloy N and GH3535.68 Furthermore, the solubility and diffusivity of tritium in molten salts were evaluated in a 2-chamber permeability apparatus separated by a nickel plate.69 A method of removing the tritium from the molten salts has been proposed. Through turbulent diffusion, the tritium can be transferred into the injected helium bubbles and stripped after the bubbles are removed.70 The effects of injected helium bubbles to the reactor operation are not evaluated. Besides, the tritium removing method should be further researched, especially combined with the online molten salt fuel processing.
6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
MSR is one of the most attractive fourth generation reactors. The liquid-MSR offers charming features like no fuel fabrication, online fuel processing, and minimized fissile inventories. The Th-U fuel cycle adopted by the liquid MSR will extend the fuel resources. With the fast-spectrum design, the MSR can burn the long-life actinides. The solid-fuel MSR is a realistic step for the development of MSR in China. The fuel pebbles with TRISO fuel particles provide the MSR with extra barrier to fission products. The large heat capacity of molten salt and high temperature output endow MSR with feasible high-temperature application like hydrogen production.
In this paper, the conceptual development of MSRs in China is introduced briefly. The fundamental research work for MSRs including the neutronics modeling, thermal-hydraulics modeling, safety analysis, material investigation, molten salts technologies etc. for both liquid-fuel MSR and solid-fuel MSR were reviewed. From the literature review, one can see that intensive research has been performed from the aspects of software development, experimental facilities construction, and material development. Some PRHRSs were designed and tested as well. All these research indicates that China is promoting the MSR development in China comprehensively.
The high neutron and thermal flux on the components in the reactor core poses a huge challenge for the structural material of the MSR. The corrosion caused by the fluorides has been tough for the material for several decades. The high radiation in the MSR risks the maintenance and inspection of the MSR. The online fuel processing technology still requires much research before it can be applied to the construction and operation of MSR. The challenge in producing the nuclear-grade FLiBe with its high melting point and operation temperatures brings barriers for more thermal-hydraulic and other experiments. Consequently, research and development in China should be focused on the following aspects:
Structural material resistive to high neutron and thermal flux environment and corrosion shall be developed and validated for the MSR
Main reactor components like the molten salt pump, heat exchanger, and pressure vessel shall be developed and validated for the MSR
The online fuel processing and Th-U fuel cycle should be researched more to obtain a realistic application to the MSR.
More thermal-hydraulic and material test experiments should be conducted to validate the analysis codes and improve the main systems designs.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank the support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 11475132 and 91326201) and the Chinese TMSR Strategic Pioneer Science and Technology Project (XDA02050500).
