<title>Distillation of Lithium Chloride From the Products of Uranium Dioxide Metalization</title>
<author>A. B. Salyulev; A. V. Shishkin; V. Yu. Shishkin; Yu. P. Zaikov</author>
<Affiliation>Institute of High-Temperature Electrochemistry, Ural Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Atomic Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Springer Nature </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10512-019-00541-1</DOI>
<URL>http://sci-hub.ren/10.1007/s10512-019-00541-1</URL>
The possibility of purifying the metalized products of pyrochemical operations by removing the electrolyte by distilling off lithium chloride is checked experimentally. This study is performed in connection with the development of promising variants of an industrial method of metalizing uranium dioxide, which is the main component of the spent nuclear fuel after its voloxidation. The electrolyte was distilled from metalized pellets and powders based on uranium dioxide with their continuous evacuation at 700–900°C. It was found that the main component of the sublimates is lithium chloride; the content of rare-earth elements and uranium is very low. The distillation regimes where 98.8–99.9% of the LiCl can be removed from the metalized products were determined.
An important process in the operations of opening spent mixed uranium-plutonium nitride nuclear fuel is voloxidation (oxidation of the fuel) with the removal of nitrogen and production of oxides of fi ssile materials as well as fi ssion products. Uranium is the main element of such fuel. At the present time, a promising variant of the reduction of uranium oxides is considered to be their interaction with metalic lithium, which is formed during electrolysis of LiCl–Li2O melt [1]. The lithium precipitated at the cathode interacts with the uranium dioxide, which is present in the form of powder or compact pellets, with the formation of metalic uranium and lithium oxide dissolved in the melt. Oxygen is released at the anode at the same time.
The described process can be used for an industrial method of metalization of uranium dioxide in the technological uranium extraction chain during reprocessing of spent fuel and its recycling in the reactor.
After the reduction of uranium dioxide and extraction of the cathode from the electrolyzer, porous metalized pellets and powder with different particle size can contain up to 25–35 wt.% of solidifi ed electrolyte whose main component is lithium chloride. This electrolyte should be removed before subsequent operations are performed in order to prevent any changes to the eutectic composition of the LiCl–KCl melt in which electrorefi ning of metalized products is conducted [1–3].
An acceptable method could be the removal of the electrolyte by distillation in a vacuum at heightened temperature [1–4].
At temperatures of 700–900°C, the lithium chloride saturated vapor pressure is equal to 0.03–0.8 kPa, so that it can be distilled off quite easily at reduced pressure [5, 6]. However, distilling salts from the pores of metalized products is more diffi cult and proceeds more slowly than from the open surface of the melt. Raising the temperature promotes more rapid evaporation. However, the interaction of the metalic uranium with most structural materials and the lithium chloride remaining in the electrolyte is intensifi ed in the same direction [2, 4, 7]:
U + 2Li2O → UO2 + 4Li. (1)
Reaction (1) starts to proceed most intensively at temperatures above 910°C, so that a compromise variant limiting the distillation temperature is chosen [2, 5].
Of the remaining substances that can be present in the metalized products of the oxidized spent fuel after electrolysis,metalic lithium in the interval 700–900°C possesses saturated vapor pressure approximately two times higher than that of
TABLE 1. Mass Change upon Distillation of Electrolyte from Metalized Uranium-Dioxide Powders TABLE 2. Elemental Composition of Sublimates and Mass Change of Pellets upon Distillation of Electrolyte from Metalized Uranium Dioxide Pellets with Porosity 40%, Containing 5–15 wt.% Oxides of Rare-Earth Metals
lithium chloride while the volatility of lithium oxide, metalic uranium, and rare-earth elements and their chlorides and oxides is a factor of 102 –1017 lower [5, 6]. However, the interaction of the components in the condensed and vapor phases can change the relative volatility and affect the results of distillation.
Experimental part. To determine more accurately the potentials of this method, experiments were performed on distillation of electrolyte from metalized products with their continuous evacuation under different conditions. Metallization of uranium dioxide was conducted at 650°C in the LiCl–Li2O with lithium oxide content 0.8–1.5 wt.%. In certain cases, oxides of fi ssion-product simulators La2O3, CeO2, and Nd2O3 taken in equal fractions with total concentration up to 5–15 wt.% were added to the uranium dioxide. The uranium dioxide powders were of different granulometric composition with particle size in the range 0.063–0.5 mm; the oxide pellets possessed porosity about 4 and 40%. The metalized products, containing solidifi ed electrolyte, in a hermetic glove box in an atmosphere of purifi ed dry argon with water vapor content not exceeding 1 ppm and oxygen not exceeding 5 ppm, were loaded into containers fabricated in the form of boats or beakers made from nickel or molybdenum foil. The containers were placed in quartz test tubes, which were heated in a vertical or horizontal position in an electric furnace with continuous evacuation with the aid of a VVP-150 high vacuum station (NPF Progress,
St. Petersburg) with residual pressure 1.2–2.5 mPa. The test tubes with the metalized products were fi rst gradually heated in 1 h to the prescribed temperature 700–900°C at which distillation of salts continued for 1–3 h and then rapidly cooled. The mass change the metalized products before and after distilling the salt electrolyte from them was fi xed in a dry box by weighing (to within ±1 mg). The content of Li, U, La, Ce, and Nd in the sublimates of the salts and metalized pellets and powders
based on metalic uranium after their dissolution in acids (HCl, HNO3, HF) was determined with the aid of an OPTIMA 4300 DV (USA) atomic emission spectrometer with inductively coupled plasma.
Results and discussion. The experimental results are presented in Tables 1–6. The basic parameters of distillation(temperature, time), the content of the elements in the sublimates and metalized products (powders, pellets) after sublimation,and the mass change are given in the tables.
TABLE 3. Elemental Composition of Sublimates and Mass Change upon Distillation of Electrolyte from Metalized Uranium Dioxide Pellets with Porosity 4%
TABLE 4. Elemental Composition of Metalized Powders of Uranium Dioxide after Distillation of Electrolyte from Them
TABLE 5. Elemental Composition of Metalized Pellets of Uranium Dioxide with Porosity 4%, Containing 5–15 wt.% Oxides of Rare-Earth Metals after Distillation of Electrolyte from Them
TABLE 6. Elemental Composition of Metalized Pellets of Uranium Dioxide with Porosity 4% after Distilling Electrolyte from Them
It follows from Tables 2 and 3 that the main component of the sublimates is lithium chloride. According to the experimental results and [7], the hardly-volatile lithium oxide almost does not co-evaporate together with lithium chloride from their melted mixtures upon distillation. The content of rare-earth elements in the sublimates is equal to thousandths and ten-thousandths of milligrams; the concentration of the uranium completely or almost completely comprising the metalized products (pellets and powders) is likewise very low (≤0.1 mg).
It follows from Tables 4–6 that upon distilling-off electrolyte, whose concentration in the products of metalization of
uranium dioxide was equal to 10–36 wt.%, almost complete removal of lithium compounds (98.8–99.9%) is achieved at temperatures above 780–800°C in 1.5–3 h. In the metalized products, after distillation under the indicated conditions, the content
of lithium predominantly in the almost non-volatile Li2O form decreases to hundredths of a percent by weight. At lower
temperatures, the fraction of the lithium initially present in the products of metalization of uranium dioxide and permeated by
undrained electrolyte distilled off in the form of its chloride decrease (see Tables 4 and 6); photographs obtained of the pellets
with the aid of a TESCAN MIRA 3 LMU (Czechoslovakia) fi eld-emission electron microscope show fi lms of solidifi ed lithium chloride (see Fig. 1a). After distillation at temperatures above 800°C, the cleaned metalized surface of the pellets is
clearly visible (see Fig. 1b).
An investigation (INCA Energy 350 X-max 80 x-ray energy dispersive microanalysis system from Oxford Instruments, Great Britain) of the outer and inner post-cleavage surfaces of the same pellets before and after distilling off electrolyte showed for the fi rst one the presence of almost pure lithium chloride on different sections, while for the second pellet the average chlorine content in the form of lithium chloride did not exceed tenths of a percent by weight. This confi rms the high degree of purifi cation of the metalized products by removal of lithium chloride.
Conclusion. The experiments showed that for properly chosen regimes for distilling off lithium chloride it is possible to remove 98.8–99.9% of the lithium chloride from the metalized products of pyrochemical operations, lowering in the process the residual content of lithium predominantly in the form Li2O to hundredths of a percent by mass. The distillation method permits purifying the metalized products of oxidized spent fuel by removal of lithium chloride.
We thank TsKP IVTE UrO RAN for high-quality analysis.
