<title>Separation of uranium (VI) using dispersive liquid-liquid extraction from leach liquor</title>
<author>Meysam Hadadian; Mohammad H. Mallah; Mohammad A. Moosavian; Jaber Safdari; Mehrdad Davoudi</author>
<Affiliation>School of Chemical Engineering, University of Tehran, Enqelab Square, Tehran, Iran；Nuclear Fuel Cycle Research School, Nuclear Science &Technology Research Institute, End of North Karegar Ave, Tehran, Iran</Affiliation>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2016.03.024</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0149197016300701</URL>
Highlights
The conditions for the batch extraction performance were optimized; Furthermore, the continuous packed tower was applied.
The results showed that for 41.2% and 90% recovery factors of uranium (VI), one equilibrium stage and five equilibrium stages are needed, respectively.
The technique can be regarded as a method between liquid-liquid extraction and dispersive liquid-liquid microextraction.
The total extraction time in technique consists of whirling before centrifugation, to enhance the mass transfer coefficient.
Abstract
A dispersive liquid–liquid extraction technique was applied for evaluation of optimal conditions of uranium (VI) separation from aqueous solution (It is actual leach liquor, containing uranium (VI), thorium (IV), iron (III), Cl−, , etc). In this procedure, an appropriate mixture of the disperser and extraction solvents was added rapidly to the aqueous sample containing uranium ion; as a result, a cloudy solution was formed which consisted of fine droplets of extraction solvent dispersed entirely throughout the aqueous phase. The cloudy solution was centrifuged and the fine droplets of the extraction solvent were settled at the bottom of the conical test tube. The analytes were extracted from the source solution into the receiving phase and were concentrated to a small volume of the settled phase and finally, the inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry was used to determine the analyte concentration in the settled phase. The conditions for the batch extraction performance were optimized; Furthermore, the continuous packed tower with 5 cm of diameter and 30 cm of height was applied to examine the batch results of continuous condition on an industrial-scale. The results showed that for 41.2% and 90% recovery factors of uranium (VI) from the leach liquor solution, one equilibrium stage and five equilibrium stages are needed, respectively.
Keywords：Dispersive liquid-liquid extraction；Uranium (VI)；Industrial-scale；Leach liquor；Separation；Recovery factors；Extraction recovery
1. Introduction
Uranium is a relatively rare metal element often found in association with other elements in the earth's crust. It plays an important role in daily life because of its use in nuclear power plants. Different processes are available for uranium extraction and separation from the associated elements in natural resources as well as from nuclear wastes. Conventional methods such as liquid-liquid extraction (LLE) (Kumar et al, 2010a, Sahoo et al, 2002, Takahashi et al, 2009, Mohanty et al, 1991, Lin and Freiser, 1983) and solid-phase extraction (SPE) (Shamsipur et al, 1999, Sadeghi and Sheikhzadeh, 2009, Funda and Soylak, 2007) have been used for extraction of uranium. However, these techniques are tedious and time also solvent consuming. Recent research activities are oriented towards the development of efficient, economical, and miniaturized sample preparation methods. Therefore, extraction methods such as supercritical fluid extraction (SFE) (Yuehe. et al, 1995, Yuehe et al, 2003), supported liquid membrane (SLM) (Kenichi and Takuji, 2006, Surajit et al, 2009), cloud point extraction (CPE) (Hadla et al, 2006, Alain et al, 2006, Ghasemi et al, 2012), solvent microextraction (SME) (John, 2012, John, 2013), and single drop microextraction (SDME) (Michael et al., 2010) were used. For the fist time, a novel, simple and efficient solvent extraction technique, termed dispersive liquid-liquid extraction (DLLE), has been developed by the authors.
This technique, in principle, is similar to the dispersive liquid-liquid microextraction (DLLME) introduced by Assadi et al., in 2006 (Rezaee et al., 2006a). In this method, the appropriate mixture of extraction solvent and disperser solvent is injected into the aqueous sample by a syringe rapidly. Thereby, a cloudy solution is formed. The dispersing solvent, in DLLME, is applied to create fine droplets of the extracting solvent in the extraction media. In such a process, as the mass transfer area between the extracting solvent and analytes increases, the yield of extraction would be much higher than that of the conventional extraction methods (Rezaee et al, 2006b, Mallah et al, 2009, Mallah and Davoudi, 2012, Maya et al, 2014). The volume of aqueous solution in DLLE is much larger than the required volume in DLLME; consequently, the volumes of the extracting and disperser solvents are also more than their volumes in DLLME. In other words, the DLLE technique can be regarded as a method between LLE and DLLME which simultaneously provides the advantages of both techniques. The use of a centrifuge for separation of organic phase in DLLE could be avoided due to the increase in volumes.
The recovery of the small amount of the extractant solvent after the phase separation is troublesome, particularly when the solvents with lighter molecular weights than water are used. Moreover, the handling of the minute amounts of an extractant solvent influences the reproducibility of the technique, albeit unsuitable for the routine analysis due to the low analysis throughputs, a laborious and time-consuming procedure. In addition, it requires manual glassware cleaning or disposal, implying an increase in costs and waste generation. In order to overcome these limitations, different approaches have been developed for the automation of the DLLME technique using flow-analysis techniques (Ruzicka and Hansen, 1975, Ruzicka and Marshall, 1990, Silvestre et al, 2009) such as flow-injection analysis (FIA) (Ruzicka and Hansen, 1975) and sequential-injection analysis (SIA) (Ruzicka and Marshall, 1990).
In this research, DLLE technique was investigated for the first time to remove uranium from the leach liquor. Therefore, this work has been done in two stages: The first section deals with the batch processing through which the optimum parameters can be specified by DLLE technique for uranium separation. The second section is the industrial scale and continuous status of the first section in a packed tower which has a porosity of 60%. The number of equilibrium stages and packed tower height for uranium separation can be determined at this step by McCabe-Thiele technique. Several extractants have been used for uranium extraction using DLLE technique. These extractants are categorized into four types:
1.
Nitrogen-based extractants (Gupta et al, 2000, Zhu et al, 2004, Kumar et al, 2010b),
2.
Phosphorous-based extractants (Stas et al, 2005, Singh et al, 2009, Sahu et al, 2000),
3.
Sulfur-based extractants (Gamare et al, 2009, Sato et al, 2006, Khan et al, 2008),
4.
Other extractants (Reddy et al, 2000, Banerjee et al, 2003, Guo et al, 2006, Agrawal et al, 2006).
2. Experimental
2.1. Reagents and chemicals
All chemicals used in the present experiment such as tri-octylamine (TOA), di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (DEHPA), amines, methanol, ethanol, acetone, and so on, were of analytical grade reagents produced by Merck Co. (Darmstadt, Germany). Vessels used for the trace analysis were kept in a 1.0 mol L−1 HNO3 solution at least 24 h, and subsequently washed twice with distilled water before use. Sample holders were polyethylene bottles which were rinsed with concentrated nitric acid, then washed with distilled water.
2.2. Apparatus
An inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) was used for the uranium (VI) ion determination. The stock solution of uranium (VI) was prepared from the standard solutions of 1000 ppm. The phase separation was assisted by a centrifuge (Mistral 1000, MSB 100/CE 1.4). The pH values were measured with a Schot pH-meter (CG 841) equipped with a glass-combined electrode. The pH measurements were done in the wake of the compensation of deviations caused by the ionic strength by following these steps:
1.
Prepare 100 mL each of 2.0, 1.5, 1.0, 0.5, 0.1 and 0.001 M of aqueous NaCl solutions. Start with the 1 L of the 2.0 M solutions and make more dilute samples by dilution.
2.
Provide a buffer solution from Sigma 79 tris (hydroxymethyl) aminomethane (TRIS') by adding 0.124 g to 100 mL of distilled water.
3.
Adjust the pH meter using appropriate calibration buffer solutions. If the value shown is different from that of the standard solution, continue this adjustment procedure until the indicated value is within ±0.02 of the pH of the standard solution.
4.
Measure the pH of each of the NaCl solutions. Plot the measured pH versus the ionic strength of the solution.
2.3. Procedure
Under the optimal conditions, 10 mL of a solution containing uranium (VI) at a concentration of 45.71 mg L−1 as the source phase (s.p.: aqueous sample) was placed into a 15 mL sample holder with a conic bottom. Then 1.2 mL of methanol as a disperser solvent which contained 0.4 mL of DEHPA as extraction solvent, whose pH was fixed by the aqueous hydrochloric (11.8 mol L−1) solution within the range of 1–1.5, was added rapidly to the aqueous sample solution. A cloudy solution was formed in the sample holder. At this step, uranium ion reacted with the extraction solvent and was transferred into the fine droplets of DEHPA. The mixture was whirled for 3 min and then centrifuged for 10 min at 4000 rpm.
Accordingly, the dispersed fine droplets of uranium oxide (VI) were precipitated at the bottom of the conical sample holder. After separating the upper phase including aqueous phase, the receiving phase (r.p.: the sum of dispersive solvent and organic extractant solvents), was dried in a furnace at 160 (±5 °C), near the boiling point of the extraction solvent (DEHPA), then were diluted to 5 mL by adding distillated water (Davoudi and Mallah, 2013) and finally, were analyzed under the ICP-OES operating conditions for determination of Uranium (VI), (Table 1) and the wavelength of 409.014 nm in curve uranium (VI).
Table 1. Operating conditions of ICP-OES in measurement of uranium (VI).
The measurements of precision and accuracy management of the matrix effects are very important. Although, among all commonly used analytical atomic spectrometry techniques, ICP-OES is probably the one with the fewest interferences, the most common interference problem in ICP-OES is the spectral interference. These interferences can be listed into four categories:
1
Simple background shift,
2
Sloping background shift,
3
Direct spectral overlap,
4
Complex background shift.
There are two approaches to deal with this background problem. The first is to select a different analytical line at a wavelength with no background interference. The second is to correct the background by measuring it as close as possible, but not falling on, the profile of the analytical line of the analyte element. Two background correction points, one on each side of the profile of the analytical line, are used to correct the sloping background shift. This means that the average signal measured at the two points is subtracted from the total signal measured at the analytical line. In the worst case, a direct spectral overlap occurs. This can be corrected if the magnitude of the interference is known as a function of the concentration of the interfering element. A correction factor can be calculated and used to correct the signal measured at the analyte wavelength. This can be best achieved by making simultaneous measurements of both signals at the analyte wavelength and at a different wavelength for the interfering element. This method is referred to as the concentration ratio method or interelement correction. The basic requirement is that the concentration of the interfering element can be accurately measured at another wavelength. With the advanced detector system, all spectral lines are present, so interelement correction is possible. A complex background shift is a shift in a background intensity that varies significantly on both sides of the analytical line. This is usually caused by the occurrence of a number of intensity, closely spaced emission lines nearby, and perhaps directly overlapping the analyte wavelength. Also, in this research, for handling the matrix influences, sometimes, we can rely on different approaches such as various calibrations as matrix matching, internal standardization, and standard addition technique.
2.3.1. Equilibrium data generation procedure
Uranium (VI) equilibrium data in the two phases were necessary to obtain the number of theoretical stages by McCabe-Thiele method. Therefore, the leach liquor solution was diluted from three to ten times in separate conical test tubes and the multiple samples of the leach liquor solution were prepared in different concentrations of uranium (VI). Then, uranium (VI) was extracted from all of the samples in optimal conditions and uranium (VI) recovered by the organic phase was obtained for each sample by ICP-OES analysis method. Indeed, uranium (VI) analyzed by ICP-OES method was the sole content in the organic phase that was in equilibrium with the residual uranium (VI) ion in the aqueous phase.
To measure the equilibrium time, the aqueous phases were sampled at different times. Then, the concentration of uranium per unit of time was plotted. Due to the straight line obtained, it was concluded that the extraction time was short. Therefore, the formation and disappearance of the cloudy of solution in comparison with the standard solution that appears very rapidly, is an indication of a stage equilibrium, because the colloid composed of the fine particles in the sample solution is extracted, which represents a large contact surface of the droplets of the sample solution. Characteristically, the extracted time is very short and rapid when the dispersive liquid-liquid method is concerned (Rezaee et al, 2006a, Rezaee et al, 2006b). Finally, each analyzed sample was an equilibrium point as shown in the Table 2.
Table 2. The equilibrium data of uranium in the aqueous phase and extraction solvent (DEHPA).
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Mathematical relationships
The authors optimized the conditions of uranium separation from the leach liquor by DLLE to achieve high extraction recovery (ER) and preconcentration factor (PF). The equations below can be used for calculation of ER % and PF:
@(1)
@(2)
where, the variables of Csed and C0 are concentrations of the analyte in the sedimented and initial phases, respectively. Vsed and V0 are the volumes of the sedimented phase and aqueous solution, respectively.
The parameters optimized by one-variable at-a-time method are as follows: the extraction solvent type and its volume, the disperser solvent type and its volume, pH of the source and receiving phases, the extraction time before doing centrifugation and at the final step, the centrifuging time.
3.2. Selection of extractant solvent
The most important parameters that affect the selection of the extraction solvent are distribution coefficient and selectivity. The selectivity between the 2 solutes A and B is defined as the ratio of the distribution coefficient of A to the distribution coefficient of B. For all useful extraction operations, the selectivity must exceed unity. Distribution coefficient is the ratio (at equilibrium) of the concentration of solute in the extract and raffinate phases. It gives a measure of the affinity of the solute for the two phases. In general, the extraction solvent must be able to extract the solute satisfactorily. That means the extraction solvent must have low solubility in the aqueous solution and higher density than that of it.
Based on these considerations, in the present research, a variety of organic extraction solvents was investigated as the possible ones. To evaluate the effect of extraction solvent, a series of sample solutions were tested by using 0.5 mL of different kinds of extraction solvents. Because of different solubility of extraction solvents in water, after the addition of TOA a cloudy state without sediment was formed after centrifugation, but the cloudy states with small sediment and large sediment at the bottom of the conical sample holder were formed when amides and DEHPA were added respectively. The recovery factor of the formed sediment by DEHPA was more than that of the other tested extraction solvent. It was probably due to higher solubility of this solvent that causes formation of more fine droplets of DEHPA in water, and more formation of complex between DEHPA and uranium (VI) ions. The stoichiometry of the reaction is as follows:
Five replicated tests were performed for each solvent under the same conditions. The results are summarized in Fig. 1. According to the procedures discussed, DEHPA was selected as an optimum extraction solvent for the subsequent experiments.
Fig. 1. Selection of extractant and disperser solvents for uranium (VI) extraction, experimental conditions: aqueous phase: 10 mL of 45.71 mg L−1, uranium (VI); extractant solvent, 0.5 mL; disperser solvent, 1 mL; extraction time: 15 min; 2 h setting.
3.3. Effect of extractant solvent volume
The concentration of the target solute in the organic extraction solvent is an important factor that governs the extraction solvent volume, because the concentration of the solute and therefore enrichment factor decrease when high volumes of extraction solvent are used. Thus, an extraction solvent volume would be optimum when it increases the sediment phase after centrifuging for the relevant solute. In order to examine the influence of the extraction solvent volume, solutions containing various volumes of DEHPA were subjected to the same DLLE procedures. The experimental conditions were fixed and included 1.0 mL methanol containing different volumes of DEHPA (0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7 mL). Three replicated tests were performed for the same solvent under the same conditions, the results of which are shown in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2. Effect of extractant solvent volume on the ER% of uranium (VI), experimental conditions: disperser solvent, 1.0 mL of methanol; extraction solvent, (0.2–0.7 mL) of DEHPA; Other conditions are the same as Fig. 1.
3.4. Selection of disperser solvent
The most important factor affecting the selection of the disperser solvent is relative miscibility of the disperser solvent with the extraction solvents and aqueous phase. The extraction solvents with high interfacial tension factor, form tiny droplets and the extraction efficiency would not be uniform. Therefore, the disperser solvent plays an important role in decreasing the interfacial tension between the aqueous solutions and extracting solvents and thus atomizes the extraction solvent. For the sake of acquiring these characteristics, three kinds of disperser solvents: acetone, methanol and ethanol were tested. A series of sample solutions was prepared by adding 1.0 mL of each disperser solvent containing 0.4 mL of DEHPA (as an extractant solvent) to the sample solution containing uranium (VI) ion at a concentration of 45.71 mg L−1 ion. Although the three solvents were very effective, methanol had a higher percentage recovery factor. Therefore, it was selected for further studies. The average of five repeated results is summarized in Fig. 1 that shows the comparison between the percentages of recovery factors of the three solvents.
3.5. Effect of disperser solvent volume
The disperser solvent volume directly affects the formation of the cloudy solution, the degree of the dispersion of the extraction solvent in the aqueous phase, and subsequently, the extraction efficiency. Low volumes of the disperser solvent could not disperse the extraction solvent properly and therefore, the cloudy solution cannot be formed completely. Reversely, in high volumes of the disperser solvents, the solubility of analytes in the aqueous phase increases by increasing the volume of the disperser solvent, thus, the extraction process is incomplete. Accordingly, it was necessary to optimize the methanol volume. For this purpose, the experimental conditions were fixed and included different volumes of methanol (0.6, 0.8, 1.0, 1.2, 1.4 and 1.6 mL) containing 0.4 mL of DEHPA, respectively. The results are shown in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3. Effect of disperser volume on ER% of uranium (VI), separation conditions: extractant solvent: DEHPA (0.4 mL); dispersive solvent: (0.6–1.6 mL) of methanol; Other conditions are the same as Fig. 2.
According to the curve, at first the extraction efficiency increases and then decreases by increasing the volume of methanol. The cloudy state is not formed completely at the low volumes of methanol. Thereby, the extraction recovery decreases. In the high volume of methanol, the solubility of uranium (VI) in the aqueous phases increases, as a result, the extraction efficiency decreases. The1.20 mL of the methanol was chosen as an optimum volume.
3.6. Effect of pH
As in the LLE, the pH of the source phase and receiving phase play an important role in DLLE. Consequently, the effect of the pH is evaluated in the range of 1.0–6.0 with addition of hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide solutions to the sample solution (Fig. 4).
Fig. 4. Effect of pH on the ER% of uranium (VI), experimental conditions are the same as Fig. 3.
According to the obtained results, higher concentrations of HCl in the source phase and NaOH in the receiving phase provided the highest separation factors for the analytes. It should also be noted that the solution formed precipitation at pH over 7 for the both aqueous and organic phases. However, as it can be seen from Fig. 4, the highest extraction efficiency of uranium (VI) ion was obtained at pH: 1 in the s.p. and pH: 5 for r.p. Hence, pH: 1 and pH: 5 were used in the following experiments for s.p. and r.p. respectively.
3.7. Effect of extraction time
Extraction time is one of the most important factors in DLLE like the other extraction procedures. The total extraction time in DLLE is defined as an interval time between the addition of mixture of disperser solvent (methanol) and extraction solvent (DEHPA) to the aqueous sample and the moment to sit. In fact, the extraction time consists of whirling before 2 h sitting. When said whirling, that means just shaking the solution by hand. After the addition of the mixture of extraction solvent (DEHPA) and disperser solvent (methanol) to the aqueous sample, the resulted solution was whirled for 3 min by hand to enhance the mass transfer coefficient between the two phases before centrifugation. The effect of extraction time was studied within the time range between 3 and 40 min. The experiment was repeated three times. The average of the results is summarized in Fig. 5.
Fig. 5. Effect of extraction time on the ER% of uranium (VI), extraction time: (3–40 min); other conditions are the same as Fig. 4.
The results indicated that the extraction time has no effect on the extraction recovery percentage. Because the equilibrium state can be achieved very quickly in DLLE (about after 3 min), the required extraction time can be very short. The very short time of extraction procedure, as one of the remarkable advantages of the DLLE technique, is mostly attributed to an infinitely large surface area between the extraction solvent and the aqueous solution.
3.8. Effect of centrifugation time
To obtain the two distinguishable phases in the extraction tubes, usually, centrifugation is indispensable, therefore in DLLE, it has been done for reach to the time of appropriate sitting instead of centrifugation. After a certain centrifugation time, DEHPA phase can be separated from the aqueous phase quite satisfactorily. In order to achieve the best extraction efficiency, centrifugation time was considered in the range of 0–25 min at constant speed of 4000 rpm (the order of zero means that no centrifugation takes place and uranium (VI) separation just does by 3 min whirling as extraction time, then followed by 2 h of sitting) (Fig. 6).
Fig. 6. Effect of centrifugation time on the ER% of uranium (VI), Cen: 4000 rpm; centrifugation time: (0–25 min); other conditions are the same as Fig. 5.
Evidently, the extraction performance reached a better level in 10 min. When the centrifugation time was shorter than 10 min, the peak area decreased and when it was longer than 10 min, the peak area was constant. Presumably, it was because of shorter centrifugation time resulted in the incomplete sedimentation of DEHPA drops and the longer centrifugation time resulted in heat generation, which led to the dissolving of parts of DEHPA phase and the loss of sensitivity. Therefore, 10 min was adopted for optimum centrifugation time.
3.9. Effect of interferent thorium
One of the major potential interferences in the present method was investigated. The interference was due to the competition of other metal ions with the extraction solvent and their subsequent co-extraction with uranium (VI). Actual leach liquor, contains uranium (VI), thorium (IV), iron (III), Cl−,SO42- , etc. It should be noted that these metal ions generally go into leach liquor solution because of mineral processing (in this study, only the interference of thorium (IV) was investigated, because it had the remarkable extraction behavior similar to uranium (VI) in comparison with the other metal ions in the leach liquor solution). In order to demonstrate the selectivity of the developed method of DLLE for the determination of uranium (VI) and influence of Th+4 interferent concentration on the extraction recovery, 45.71 mg L−1 aqueous solution of U6+ with four different concentrations of Th4+ (45.71, 50, 55 and 60 mg/L) were provided and the previous procedures were accomplished under the optimized conditions. The results are summarized in Fig. 7.
Fig. 7. Effect of different concentrations of Th (IV) on the ER% of uranium (VI) under the optimized conditions, 4 samples of Th (IV) with the concentrations of 45.71, 50, 55 and 60 mg L−1. Other conditions are the same as Fig. 6.
As seen, the presence of thorium (IV) ions can lessen the extraction recovery percentage of uranium (VI) from 92.36 to 81.92.
3.10. Equilibrium concentration
Equilibrium data for uranium (VI) concentration in the aqueous and organic phases were determined according to Sec. 2.3.1. By assuming that the organic extraction phase and aqueous phase are immiscible, McCabe-Thiele method can be applicable for specifying the equilibrium stages. According to Table 2, the equilibrium curve can be plotted and the number of equilibrium stages can also be determined by applying McCabe-Thiele method in these data.
3.11. McCabe-Thiele extraction and stripping isotherms
By assuming that the temperature, pressure and molar flow rates of the organic and aqueous phases are constant along the tower, the McCabe-Thiele method can be applicable for the used packed tower in this study. The equilibrium data for uranium in the two phases and an operation line of the tower are also necessary to use McCabe-Thiele method. The equilibrium data were calculated in Sec. 2.3.1 and were plotted in Fig. 8, Fig. 9; and according to Table 2, the operating lines of the tower were plotted in Fig. 8, Fig. 9. Thanks to the McCabe-Thiele method, 41.2% recovery and 90% recovery of uranium (VI) could be reached at one equilibrium stage and five equilibrium stages respectively. Additionally, the height of each equilibrium stage was found to be about 0.3 m.
Fig. 8. Equilibrium stages for the extraction recovery percentage equal to 41.2% of uranium (VI) by continuous packed tower.
Fig. 9. Equilibrium stages for the extraction recovery percentage equal to 90% of uranium (VI) by continuous packed tower.
3.12. Continuous operation
In this section, a semi-continuous packed tower, having 0.3 m of height and 0.05 m of diameter and porosity of 60% was used for continuous experiments. The void space of the tower that was equal to 0.226 L was filled with aqueous solution (leach liquor solution); and according to the organic and aqueous phases ratio in batch experiments, the extractant and disperser volumes were fixed at 0.009 L and 0.027 L in the continuous experiments. Indeed, the semi-continuous tower was filled with the aqueous phase and organic phases passing throughout the aqueous phase in the tower at constant flow rate. Hence, another parameter that had to be kept constant was the flow rate of the mixture of the disperser and extractant solvents. These parameters were calculated by Eq. (4).
@(3)
@(4)
where V is the velocity of the mixture of the disperser and extractant (organic phase), x is the height of the tower, t is the residue time of the organic phase in the tower, Q is the flow rate of the organic phase, and A is the cross area of the tower.
The experiment was performed by the residue time (t) equal to 60, 120, 180 and 240 s separately; and it was found that the highest recovery factor of uranium (VI) (41.2%) could be reached at extraction time (180 s); while the recovery factor was decreased at other time. Although the tower currents were semi-continuous, their operation was like that of the continuous state. Because the leach liquor solution had natural downward movement due to higher density than the organic phase (density about 1.15 and 0.923 mg L−1 respectively), the McCabe-Thiele method was used to specify the number of equilibrium stages. In the end, the results were obtained (Table 3) and the operation line of the tower was drawn on Fig. 8.
Table 3. The data for the plot of operating lines.
Thanks to the McCabe-Thiele method, a tower according to these specifications can be considered as one equilibrium stage. Hence, five equilibrium stages are required for uranium (VI) extraction from the leach liquor solution by assuming 90% recovery factor of uranium (VI). i.e, a tower 1.5 m in height, 0.05 m in diameter, albeit with 60% porosity is needed for 90% recovery of uranium (VI) (Fig. 9). Theoretically, if the single stage model gives a 41.2% recovery factor, then by having five identical stages we should expect a lot more than around 93% recovery, but most likely there is a loss of “efficiency” between the stages because of different currents and parameters through the column with five stages, such as eddy diffusion, longitudinal current, resistance against the phases mass transfer and so on.
4. Conclusion
In this research work, DLLE as an effective process with a high recovery and the separation factors within a very short time incorporated with ICP-OES was studied to extract and measure uranium (VI) ion from the leach liquor solution. The observations revealed that in the batch section, the principles of DLLME method could generally be used in DLLE method and for the first time, optimum parameters of uranium (VI) separation from the leach liquor solution were determined. It was found that DEHPA as an extractant solvent is more effective than TOA and amines. The optimal pHs determined for the aqueous and organic phases were 1 and 5 respectively. The studies also showed that the best recovery factor was achieved by using methanol as a disperser solvent and by setting time at 10 min for centrifugation and 3 min for the extraction before centrifugation. It was also found that the optimum volumes for DEHPA and methanol were 0.4 mL and 1.2 mL, respectively. In the next series of the experiments, the continuous packed tower was used after evaluation of optimum conditions of uranium (VI) separation in batch extraction procedure. According to the discussed processes and via applying McCabe-Thiele method, we came to the conclusion that 90% of the extraction recovery of uranium from the leach liquor solution could be reached by the packed tower with 150 cm of height and 5 cm of diameter and 60% of porosity. It should be noted that the height of this tower was equivalent to 5 equilibrium stages.
