<title>Influence of electron beam irradiation on the morphology and mechanical properties of styrene/butadiene triblock copolymers</title>
<author>Shankar P. Khatiwada; Uwe Gohs; Andreas Janke; Dieter Jehnichen; Gert Heinrich; Rameshwar Adhikari</author>
<Affiliation> Research Centre for Applied Science and Technology, Tribhuvan University, Kirtipur, Kathmandu, Nepal; Nepal Polymer Institute (NPI), P. O. Box 24411, Kathmandu, Nepal; Leibniz-Institut für Polymerforschung Dresden e.V., Hohe Str. 6, D-01069 Dresden, Germany; Technische Universität Dresden, Institut für Textilmaschinen und Textile Hochleistungswerkstofftechnik, D-01069 Dresden, Germany</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier Ltd.</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radphyschem.2018.07.012</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0969806X18301488?via%3Dihub</URL>
Highlights
•
cross-linking of the butadiene segments of styrenic block copolymer was observed.
•
mechanical properties of the copolymer have been found to increase.
•
insignificant changes of nature and size of the morphological features.
Abstract
The crosslinking of a styrene/butadiene triblock copolymer via electron beam (EB) treatment and its influence on morphology and mechanical properties were studied. Different doses were applied to study the effect on the modification of polybutadiene segments of the triblock copolymers whereby the highly ordered hexagonal packed type of the morphology of the block copolymers was not notably modified. However, the glass transition temperature of the soft phase was significantly shifted towards higher temperatures implying the crosslinking of the polybutadiene chains resulting in the decrease in the mobility of the corresponding chains. Moreover, the EB treatment of the copolymer significantly changed the tensile elongation at break, modulus and strength. The changes were attributed to the dose dependent crosslinking of the polybutadiene chains.
Keywords
Electron beam irradiation；Triblock copolymer；Gel content；Morphology；Mechanical properties
1. Introduction
Thermoplastic elastomers (TPEs) are a class of polymer materials largely used in a wide range of industrial and domestic applications. Their crosslinking is one of the very common methods for improving the chemical and physical properties (Bicerano et al., 1996, Hou et al., 2015). As thermoplastic elastomers show low thermal conductivity, special heating methods are required for their crosslinking. Among the various methods using chemicals and thermal treatment as well as radiations (Daeker and Viet, 1999, Sakurai et al., 1993, Wu et al., 2011, Jiang et al., 1999, Zhan et al., 2008), the crosslinking via electron beam (EB) is considered as an effective and sustainable method for improving and modification of TPEs properties. In comparison to chemical crosslinking (phenolic resin, peroxide and silane), EB crosslinking offers some distinct advantages. These are fast processing, the absence of contaminations by thermal initiators and high homogeneity (Naskar et al., 2009). In addition, the process can be controlled precisely and undesired phenomena such as side reactions, moisture absorption, releases of unpleasant gases and blooming effect can be avoided (Hassanpour et al., 2002, Song et al., 2013, Song et al., 2011, Banik and Bhowmick, 1999, Frounchi et al., 2006). Furthermore, the EB treatment can be useful in bringing desirable changes in block copolymers structures and properties. Thickness of sample, structure of polymer as well as the number and type of reactive groups need to be considered to fix the electron energy, electron current and electron treatment time before crosslinking.
The principle of EB crosslinking is based on the interaction of free electrons with the electrons of atoms or molecules of the polymer (Makuuchi and Cheng, 2012). The polymers respond generally by forming of reactive species which are then converted into radicals by homolytic scission of excited molecules. The polymer radicals can react by connecting the polymer chains directly or initiating grafting reactions as well as by chain scission. The ratio of crosslinking to scission reaction depends on the constitution of polymer, the polymer chain segment mobility and the EB treatment conditions. The outline of reaction mechanisms starting from polymer chain (PH) is shown in Scheme 1 (Makuuchi and Cheng, 2012).
Please change the PH0 for PH• for the mention of free radicals. Ans: CorrectedScheme 1
Download : Download high-res image (113KB)Download : Download full-size image
Scheme 1. Outline of some reactions illustrating the typical physico-chemical electron beam induced transformation on polymerchains (PH).
It was found that radiation crosslinking of diene based thermoplastic elastomers is an effective method for enhancing the physical and mechanical properties (Jamal et al., 2011). Some widely used diene based TPEs are poly(acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene) (ABS), poly(styrene-butadiene-styrene) (SBS), poly(styrene-acrylonitrile) (SAN), poly(styrene-isoprene-styrene) (SIS) (Hamley, 2004). SBS is a special type of TPE composed of hard blocks (glassy domains) of polystyrene at both ends of a copolymer chain and soft blocks (rubbery domain) of polybutadiene in the middle (Adhikari et al., 2002, Adhikari and Michler, 2004, Buonomenna et al., 2012, Huy et al., 2002, Michler et al., 2003, Spontak and Williams, 1988).
In SBS triblock copolymer, each butadiene block is bonded to styrene blocks at both ends of its chain. The bulky styrene segments would tend to restrict the mobility of the butadiene segments more by being at both ends. In the case of irradiations at room temperature, the styrene segments are below their glass transition temperature (Tg), but the butadiene segments are above their Tg. Therefore, the free radicals on the butadiene segments acquire sufficient mobility to recombine at room temperature and it gets crosslinked (Adhikari et al., 2004, Adhikari et al., 2012, Basheer, 1982, Khatiwada et al., 2017, Huy et al., 2004). Structurally, the irradiated block copolymer (BC) contains a crosslinked rubbery butadiene phase and un-crosslinked styrene plastic phase. So, EB treatment with suitable dose is a convenient method of crosslinking of SBS triblock copolymer. The impact of EB treatment can be characterized by the evaluation of the gel content using the Charlesby-Pinner equations (Charlesby and Pinner, 1959). Several studies have reported crosslinking effects in rubber, rubber blends and thermoplastic elastomers using EB treatment (Zhan et al., 2008, Manshaie et al., 2011, Bhowmick and Vijayabaskar, 2006, Chowdhury and Banerji, 2005, Abou Zeid et al., 2008, Sui et al., 2013, Chmielewski, 2006, Chmielewski et al., 2005).
Most of the recent works mainly focused on different types of elastomers such as natural rubber (NR), styrene-butadiene rubber (SBR), nitrile rubber (NBR), polychloropropene rubber (CR), fluorocarbon rubber (FKM), ethylene propylene diene rubber (EPDM)), their kinetics and applications (Wu et al., 2016, Cui and Yong Zhang, 2018, Shiraishi et al., 2017, Wu et al., 2016). However, the use of EB crosslinking for high butadiene and high styrene content SBS triblock copolymers is still not well explored. The objective of the present work was the crosslinking of styrene/butadiene based linear triblock copolymer by EB treatment and its influence on the morphology and mechanical properties.
2. Experimental
2.1. Materials
The basic material in this study was styrene/butadiene based linear triblock copolymer commercially known as KRATON D1101 containing 31% by wt% of styrene. The general structure of the triblock copolymer is shown in Scheme 2.
Scheme 2. Schematic chemical structure of KRATON D1101 triblock copolymer.
2.2. Methods
Sheets of KRATON D1101 having the dimension 2 mm × 10 mm× 100 mm were prepared by compression molding of the available polymer pellets at a temperature of 180 °C and pressure of 20 MPa.
2.2.1. Electron beam treatment
Electron beam induced crosslinking of styrene/butadiene triblock copolymers requires high polymer chain segment mobility in styrene and butadiene phases as well as in the diffuse butadiene/styrene interphase. Consequently, an irradiation temperature of 215 °C, significantly higher than the glass transition temperature of polystyrene phase, was selected which is to ensure the ease of the desired cross-linking process. All EB treatments were performed under nitrogen atmosphere with doses of 0 kGy, 50 kGy, 100 kGy and 200 kGy using an ELV-2 electron accelerator (Budker Institute of Nuclear Physics, Novosibirsk, Russia) in order to prevent the oxidative degradation of the polymer. The sheets of KRATON D1101 were placed on an electrically heated plate in an irradiation vessel which was mounted on the conveyor system of the electron accelerator. All treatments were performed with 1.5 MeV at an electron current of 4.0 mA. Immediately after irradiation, test specimens were prepared and characterized after 24 h of storage at room temperature. The samples were denoted as Kraton-0, Kraton-50, Kraton-100 and Kraton-200, where the suffix represents the dose in kGy.
2.2.2. Gel content analysis
The gel content of samples was measured by extraction in boiling chloroform at a temperature of ~ 61 °C for 24 h. The residual gel contents were dried at 60 °C for 5 h in vacuum. After vacuum drying, all samples were weighed. The gel content (Xg) in percentage was calculated in accordance to,
(1)
where m0 and m1 are the sample mass before and after extraction, respectively. Further analyses were carried out using the Charlesby-Pinner equation.
(2)
where s represents the sol fraction, p0is the scission density per unit of dose; q0 characterizes the density of crosslinked units per unit of dose and p0/q0is the ratio of scission density to density of crosslinked units. D is the dose in kGy and u1 is the number average degree of polymerization. The experimental values of sol fraction were analyzed using Eq. 2 by plotting s + s1/2vs. 1/D, which should produce a straight line, whose intercept represents the ratio of p0/q0, while the slope is 1/q0u1. The absorbed dose (D), at which an insoluble gel (polymer network) is just being formed, is called gel dose (Dg). Dg can be determined using s + s1/2 = 2. If the absorbed dose (D) is less than the gel dose (D<Dg), long chain branching and/or polymer degradation dominate and no crosslinking occur. In the case of D>Dg, a network is formed and a gel content is detectable. The amount of crosslinked polymer chains increases with increasing dose. Consequently, the gel fraction (g) increases and the sol fraction decreases.
2.2.3. Dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA)
DMA measurements have been carried out on test specimens with dimensions of 30 mm × 10 mm× 2 mm using a DMA Q800 V21.1 rheometer in torsion mode to characterize the effect of dose on the glass transition behavior of EB modified linear triblock copolymer. Standard oscillatory temperature sweeps was maintained between − 70–200 °C. Storage modulus (G'), loss modulus (G′') and damping coefficient (tan δ) have been measured as a function of temperature.
2.2.4. Morphological characterization
The atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements were performed in tapping mode by a Dimension ICON (Bruker-Nano, USA). Using silicon-SPM-sensors Multi 75 (Budget Sensors, Bulgaria) with a spring constant of ~ 4 N/m and resonance frequency of ~ 75 kHz, the tip radius is lower than 10 nm. Height images (surface morphology) and phase images were taken simultaneously. According to Magonov (Magonov et al., 1997) we chose the scan conditions (free amplitude > 100 nm, set-point amplitude ratio 0.5) in order to get stiffness contrast in the phase image, that means bright features in the phase image are stiffer than dark areas. All measurements were carried out under ambient conditions to reveal the bulk morphology. The samples were prepared at − 100 °C by cryo-cutting using an ultramicrotome (Leica EMUC-6/EM FC-6; Leica Mikrosysteme GmbH, Vienna, Austria).
Furthermore, SAXS measurements were done with the multi-range device Ganesha 300 XL + (SAXSLAB ApS, Kopenhagen, Denmark) equipped with a 2D-detector Pilatus 300 K. SAXS were performed in transmission through the bulk material from compression molding with a thickness of about 2 mm at room temperature under vacuum. The collected data were normalized to the intensity of the transmitted beam. For calculation of 1-dimensional scattering curves, the Lorentz-corrected curves I·q2vs.d was plotted.
2.2.5. Scanning electron microscopy
The phase morphology of the irradiated surfaces of the block copolymer samples were investigated by a scanning electron microscope ZEISS ultra plus combined with a SE2 detector.
Prior to the SEM analysis the specimen was notched by means of a razor blade, dipped in to liquid nitrogen for 2 min and then broken quickly with the help of tweezers. The fracture surfaces were then sputter-coated with a platinum layer of about 3 nm.
2.2.6. Tensile testing
Tensile tests were carried out at 23 °C using a Z010 Zwick universal testing machine equipped with a MultiXtens extensometer according to DIN EN ISO 527-2/S2/5and a load of 1 kN. For each sample, five dog bone shaped specimens of 50 mm × 5 mm× 2 mm cut from the compression molded sheets, were tested.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Sol gel analyses
Fig. 1 shows the experimental and calculated values of gel content as a function of dose. At low dose values (˂ 6.2 kGy), no gel formation can be observed. However, the gel content increases rapidly in the dose range from 10 to 50 kGy and then levels off. At a dose of 50 kGy, the gel content amounts to (88 ± 3) %. Within the experimental uncertainty, similar values of gel content were observed for 100 ((93 ± 3) %) and 200 kGy ((94 ± 3) %). Consequently, a dose of 50 kGy is sufficient to crosslink butadiene phase of the polymer. Similar finding has been also reported by Lee et al. (2013), as the gel fraction of radiation-induced crosslinking of styrene/butadiene block copolymers reached up to 93% at a dose of 100 kGy.
Fig. 1. Gel content of Kraton as a function of dose.
Fig. 2 represents the plot of s + s1/2 as a function of the reciprocal dose, where s stands for sol fraction (see Eq. (2)). Here, the experimental data fit the straight line predicted by the Charlesby-Pinner equation.
Fig. 2. Charlesby-Pinner plot for Kraton according to Eq. (2); the solid square stands for experimental values.
The gel dose (Dg) of the polymer amounts to (6.2 ± 0.6) kGy. The ratio of fracture density to density of crosslinked units (p0/q0) amounts to (0.24 ± 0.01) and confirms the dominance of crosslinking reaction over chain scission during EB treatment at a temperature of 215 °C. Likewise, the slop of the Charlesby-Pinner equation was also studied and it amounts to (11.0 ± 1.0) kGy−1. The slop depends on the number average degree of polymerization and the density of crosslink unit per unit of dose.
3.2. Phase behavior and morphology
The dynamic thermomechanical behavior of polymer and its irradiated versions was investigated by DMA. As KEATON D1101 is a triblock copolymer with heterogeneity in the molecular architecture from PS and PB chain segments. The thermodynamic incompatibility between PS and PB segments results in two distinct Tg values. The Tg value of butadiene rich domain can be observed at around − 90 °C (Spaans et al., 1999, Kennedy et al., 2009, Mohammady et al., 2002). In this study, Kraton-0 and its irradiated versions are measured over a temperature range from − 100–120 °C. The temperature dependence of damping coefficient (tan δ) (left) and its enlarged form enclosed by square (right) are shown in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3. Tan δ versus temperature curves for the samples subjected to different doses of EB irradiation(left), enlarged form of the same plot from − 93 to − 71 °C (right).
In the case of virgin Kraton (Kraton-0), the Tg of PB segment (Tg-PB) determined by the low temperature peak of tan delta curve amounts to −88 °C. This value is in agreement with the results of Spaans et al. (1999) and Kennedy et al. (2009). However, after irradiation, the Tg-PB values were shifted towards higher temperature which is shown in Fig. 3 in an enlarged form. The shifted values amount to-84 °C, − 81 °C and − 79 °C for Kraton-50, Kraton-100 and Kraton-200, respectively.
In summary, the EB treatment of PB chains leads to a distinct increase of Tg-PB by + 4 °C, + 7 °C and + 9 °C for Kraton-50, Kraton-100 and Kraton-200, respectively. After EB treatment, After EB treatment, the PB chains lose their flexibility due to the crosslinking of the segment leading to an increase in the Tg-PB. In contrast, the glass transition of the PS-rich phase (Tg-PS) remains constant at about + 96 °C within the experimental uncertainty. The increase in Tg-PB with increasing dose is attributed to an enhanced network density. The crosslinked PB phase hinders co-operative segmental motions and requires higher temperature for segmental relaxation. The morphology of EB modified triblock copolymers is expected to be strongly dependent on the amount of crosslinked butadiene segments of the triblock copolymer. Therefore, the influence of dose on morphology was studied by AFM analyses.
The AFM micrographs of Kraton-0, Kraton-50, Kraton-100 and Kraton-200 are shown in Fig. 4(a-d). From the AFM micrograph, it was observed that irradiated triblock copolymer with different dose shows two phase morphology, the dark phase belongs to soft block and bright phase corresponds to hard block. In EB treatment only butadiene part is sensitive to crosslinking. Consequently, we focus on the change in morphology of bright phase with dose. A worm-like morphology is observed in Kraton-0, Kraton-50 and Kraton-100. However, a distinct phase separation was not clearly reflected in Kraton-200. After EB treatment in the molten state, deformation and agglomeration of crosslinked butadiene segments was observed. High crosslink density might hinder the crystallization process due to reduced polymer chain segment mobility. The phase separation of Kraton was preserved for 50 and 100 kGy, whereas at 200 kGy the agglomeration like PB phase were observed and traces of clear separation were masked. These results are in agreement with the DMA results. The plot of SAXS data of Kraton-0 and its irradiated versions are presented in Fig. 5.
Fig. 4. AFM phase micrographs of a) Kraton-0, b) Kraton-50, c) Kraton-100 and d) Kraton-200.
Fig. 5. Lorentz-corrected SAXS (I·q2vs. d) curves of Kraton-0 and its irradiated versions.
It is observed that the SAXS pattern appears to be identical with a single Bragg reflection arising from a phase segregated structure (Fig. 5). The appearance of similar scattering pattern in all samples shows that crosslinking of PB phase in Kraton has no significant influence on the crystalline structure. The SAXS measurement shows an ordered morphology of hexagonally close packed cylinders for all samples. The first reflection (100) was seen at ~33.3 nm (giving ahex ~ 38.4 nm).
3.3. Mechanical properties
Fig. 6 shows the stress-strain curves of various EB modified samples of Kraton at different doses in comparison to virgin Kraton. There is an increase of tensile stress as the dose is changed from 0 to 200 kGy. However, the elongation at break values decreases as the doses increases. This effect is well known for highly crosslinked polymers. The tensile strength, modulus and elongation at break were calculated from these curves. It can be seen that the stress value increases and strain value decreases for the sample irradiated with a dose of 50 kGy. After further increase of dose, stress and strain values slightly change in agreement with the leveling off the values of gel content beyond 50 kGy irradiation (see Fig. 1). Detailed values of tensile modulus, elongation at break and tensile strength of Kraton-0 and its irradiated versions are presented in Fig. 7.
Fig. 6. Tensile stress-strain plots of the triblock copolymer samples irradiated with EB at different doses.
Fig. 7. Variation of tensile strength at break (Image 1), elongation at break (Image 2) and tensile modulus (■) of Kraton at different dose.
It is observed that the tensile strength increases in the initial stage, reaches a maximum at around 50 kGy and then remains almost constant. The elongation at break decreases continuously with increasing dose. This effect is pronounced up to 50 kGy and ascertains the network formation i.e. crosslinking of the polymer chain (gel content amounts to 88%).
Accordingly, there is a small change in mechanical properties at higher dose. The tensile strength of a polymer is a function of crosslink density and energy dissipation. At higher crosslinked density the network is so high and contributes a little energy dissipation in the matrix. The polymer chain segments become less flexible leading to less elastomeric properties imparted by crosslinked butadiene units. Hence, the tensile modulus increases as the EB dose increases. Therefore, the value of enhanced mechanical properties is in agreement with gel content values but does not depend on the morphologies.
Fig. 8 presents the SEM images of microtomed surfaces of the Kraton-0 and its irradiated versions with different doses. The phase separation was not observed in SEM images, but irregular fractured surface can be observed. Smooth fracture surface can be observed in Fig. 8a; this perhaps due to high content of rubbery butadiene parts for Kraton-0. However, irregular fracture patches with stretched fibrils appearing bright edges of the terraces in SEM images (Fig. 8b) and the patch spread around for Kraton-100, because after EB treatment plasticity increases due to the crosslinking between butadiene parts. This might be the sign of plastic deformation of crosslinked polymer chains. The effect of plastic deformation further increases with increasing dose.
Fig. 8. SEM micrographs showing fracture surface morphology of a) Kraton-0, b) Kraton-50, Kraton-100 and d) Kraton-200 at 20 µm scale bar.
In summary, the changing trend of the deformed surface from more or less smooth surface to distinct fracture surface was a sign of increasing embrittlement due to crosslinking and possible plastic deformation. Furthermore, increasing the EB doses increases the number of fibrillar strips implying the increased plasticity (permanent deformation) of the irradiated samples may contribute to enhance the stiffness and strength. This observation is in agreement with the tensile stress-strain curves.
4. Conclusions
The present work reports the crosslinking of styrene/butadiene triblock copolymers by electron beam treatment. The crosslinked samples were characterized by gel content analysis, DMA, AFM, SAXS and tensile tests. The following conclusions can be drawn:
1.
At a dose of 50 kGy, a gel content of 88% was obtained. Within the limit of experimental uncertainty, the maximum value of tensile modulus and strength were achieved at this gel content.
2.
The ratio of fracture density to density of crosslinked units (p0/q0) amounts to (0.24 ± 0.01) and confirmed the dominance of crosslinking over chain scission in PB phase during EB treatment.
3.
The irradiation dose has no significant effect on phase size and morphology of the polymer until 100 kGy irradiation.
4.
Significantly enhanced tensile modulus and strength were observed at gel values> 88%, while the values of elongation at break decreased with increasing gel content.
Acknowledgments
SPK would like to thank German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD) (57129430) for providing the sandwich Ph.D. Scholarship. The author further acknowledges Carsten Zschech, Jaqueline Hampel, Maria Auf der Landwehr (Leibniz-Institut für Polymerforschung Dresden e.V.) for electron beam treatment, gel content analysis and SEM investigations.
