<title>Recovery of actinides from actinide-aluminium alloys by chlorination: Part III - Chlorination with HCl(g)</title>
<author>Roland Meier; Pavel Souček; Olaf Walter; Rikard Malmbeck; Alcide Rodrigues; Jean-Paul Glatz; Thomas Fanghänel</author>
<Affiliation>European Commission, Joint Research Centre, P.O. Box 2340, 76125 Karlsruhe, Germany;European Commission, Joint Research Centre, Marsveldstraat 21, 1050, Brussels, Belgium;Heidelberg University, Institute of Physical Chemistry, Im Neuenheimer Feld 253, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Materials</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.jnucmat.2017.09.045</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022311517307985</URL>
Highlights
•Efficient recovery of U, Np and Pu by chlorination of An-Al alloys with HCl(g) was achieved.
•Actinide separation from An-Al alloys succeeded without their volatilization by careful selection of the process temperature.
•Calculations based on Gibbs energy minimization predicted correctly the formation of UCl4(g) above 400 °C.
•The main chlorination products were solid UCl4, NpCl3 and PuCl3, while full evaporation of AlCl3 was achieved.
•Contrary to chlorination with Cl2(g), using HCl(g) enables higher process temperature without volatilization of actinides.
Abstract
Two steps of a pyrochemical route for the recovery of actinides from spent metallic nuclear fuel are being investigated at JRC-Karlsruhe. The first step consists in electrorefining the fuel in molten salt medium implying aluminium cathodes. The second step is a chlorination process for the separation of actinides (An) from An-Al alloys formed on the cathodes. The chlorination process, in turn, consists of three steps; the distillation of adhered salt (1), the chlorination of An-Al by HCl/Cl2 under formation of AlCl3 and An chlorides (2), and the subsequent sublimation of AlCl3 (3). In the present work UAl2, UAl3, NpAl2, and PuAl2 were chlorinated with HCl(g) in a temperature range between 300 and 400 °C forming UCl4, NpCl4 or PuCl3 as the major An containing phases, respectively. Thermodynamic calculations were carried out to support the experimental work. The results showed a high chlorination efficiency for all used starting materials and indicated that the sublimation step may not be necessary when using HCl(g).
1. Introduction
The sustainable progress of nuclear power relies on a safe and secure management of the spent fuel. The implementation of a partitioning and transmutation scenario involving recycling of plutonium and the minor actinides can significantly reduce the amount and the radiotoxicity of the spent fuel [1]. At JRC-Karlsruhe (formerly the Institute for Transuranium Elements, ITU), a pyrochemical process in molten salt media for the homogeneous recovery of the actinides (An) from An-Zr based fuel is being investigated [2]. The method fulfils the requirements of non-proliferation as all actinides can be recovered group selectively. The core separation technique is electrorefining, which consists of anodic oxidation of all actinides from the spent nuclear fuel into a molten LiCl-KCl eutectic salt and group selective electrochemical reduction on solid aluminium cathodes forming An-Al alloys [3], [4], [5]. Aluminium has been identified as the most convenient solid reactive cathode material due to the formation of stable An-Al alloys and the sufficient difference in the respective reduction potentials of actinides and lanthanides in order to separate them [6], [7], [8].
For the recovery of the actinides from the An-Al alloys a subsequent chlorination process is being investigated [9]. It consist of three steps: 1) the distillation of salt adhered to the cathode; 2) the chlorination of the An-Al alloys with HCl(g) or Cl2(g) under conditions ensuring a full chlorination to form solid actinide chlorides and aluminium chloride; 3) the sublimation to remove the remaining AlCl3. An overview of the process is given in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. Overview of the chlorination route investigated at JRC-Karlsruhe. The last step - the chemical reduction - was not studied.
Previous chlorination studies using Cl2 gas as chlorination agent and investigating the recovery of U and Pu from U-Al [10] or U-Pu-Al alloys [11] have achieved a high chlorination efficiency when employing temperatures around 150 °C. However, partial evaporation of uranium has been observed, as well as sublimation of the aluminium chloride already during the chlorination step.
Similar studies with HCl(g) as chlorination agent have shown high efficiency in the chlorination of U-Al alloys [12]. Due to the higher temperatures that can be employed in the chlorination, the sublimation step may not be necessary when using HCl(g).
This work builds up on the previous study [12], while the experimental setup for the chlorination was improved by the installation of a vacuum system and – for safety reasons – a pressure gauge. This led to a better control of the amount of chlorination gas that can be involved in the reaction and enabled the possibility to monitor the pressure evolution during the reaction. Experiments using uranium-aluminium alloys and additional experiments with plutonium- and neptunium-aluminium alloys as starting materials were conducted. Part of the results of these experiments was published in Ref. [13] and the experiments with neptunium- and plutonium-aluminium alloys as starting materials are described in the PhD thesis [14]. Thermodynamic calculations were carried out prior to the experiments in order to determine the best experimental parameters.
2. Thermodynamic calculations
Thermodynamic calculations were performed yielding equilibrium compositions of the chlorination products under different conditions in order to optimise the experimental parameters. The calculations employing the software HSC-Chemistry 6.0 were based on the Gibbs energy minimization method as explained in detail in Ref. [15]. The thermodynamic database included in the software was used for several well-known species. In addition, data for some actinide species involved in the experiments were collected from literature and added to the database. An overview of all references is given in Table 1.
Table 1. Literature sources for the thermodynamic data of relevant species.
For the calculations the amount of HCl corresponded to the volume of the reactor of 1 l at a temperature of 300 °C and a pressure of 1 bar. Fig. 2 presents the calculated equilibrium composition when using 300 mg of starting material (UAl3 + UAl2). The onset of formation of gaseous uranium products is expected at temperatures around 500 °C. In order to avoid the evaporation of uranium compounds while ensuring a full chlorination, the temperature range to be tested experimentally was chosen to be between 300 °C and 400 °C. The main uranium product in this temperature range is expected to be UCl4(s). More detailed calculations are given in Ref. [14].
Fig. 2. Calculated equilibrium composition with the following starting conditions: UAl3: 8.0 x 10−4 mol; UAl2: 1.5 x 10−4 mol (300 mg UAlx alloy); HCl: 2.1 x 1−2 mol (1 l at 300 °C). Unreacted HCl(g) is not plotted.
The calculated equilibrium composition of the chlorination products when using about 100 mg of pure uranium, neptunium or plutonium metal as starting materials is shown in Fig. 3. The metals were entered as starting materials, since thermodynamic data for Np-Al alloys are not available. For Pu-Al alloys data were available for a temperature range from 477 to 627 °C. However, results of calculations with these data were omitted as higher uncertainties are expected and the results are not different regarding the actinide products.
Fig. 3. Calculated equilibrium composition with the starting conditions: An: 4.2 x 10−4 mol (ca. 100 mg); HCl: 2.1 x 10−2 mol (1 l at 300 °C). The calculations were carried out each actinide separately. Unreacted HCl(g) is not plotted.
The volatilization of uranium as UCl4(g) was predicted at temperatures above 400 °C. This is lower compared to the calculations using 300 mg of UAl3 as starting material. The formation of NpCl4(g) is expected above 600 °C and the volatilization of plutonium as PuCl3(g) close to 900 °C. However, even if these calculations indicate that higher chlorination temperatures would be possible, the experiments with NpAl2 and PuAl2 were carried out using the same temperature range as the experiments with UAlx, because it is UAlx that determines the real process maximum temperature.
3. Experimental
3.1. Chlorination setup
The experiments were carried out in a glove box kept under nitrogen atmosphere. The glove box is equipped with a vertical furnace and with a gas line, which can supply HCl or argon for the experiments. Gas sensors are installed inside and outside of the glove box to detect leakage of HCl(g).
The experiments were performed in a quartz reactor which was placed in the furnace. The reactor can be closed by a quartz lid which is equipped with gastight feedthroughs for a thermocouple, a pressure gauge, a vacuum pump, and the gas in- and outlet.
A schematic of the fully equipped quartz reactor is given in Fig. 4. A boron nitride (BN) crucible with an inner diameter of 35 mm was used as the reaction container. In our previous investigations [10], [11], [12], the argon gas was always removed by flushing the reactor with Cl2 or HCl and, therefore, the exact amount of chlorination gas inside the reactor during the reaction was not defined. In the present work, a vacuum pump was connected to the reactor and used to remove the argon gas before the reactor was filled with the chlorination gas. In addition, a newly installed pressure gauge and the thermocouple were connected to a data logger, enabling us to monitor the pressure evolution during the reaction. Due to these modifications, i.e. the addition of a vacuum pump and a pressure gauge, a more exact determination of the amount of chlorination gas that reacted was possible. The gas outlet of the reactor was connected to an off-gas treatment system with two wash bottles containing 4 M and 8 M KOH solution.
Fig. 4. Schematic of the reactor dedicated to the chlorination experiments.
3.2. Chlorination experiments
The starting material was prepared from ITU stock material by arc melting of the pure metals at 1000 °C. The composition of the U-Al alloys was a mixture of 85 wt. % UAl3 and 15 wt. % UAl2 as determined by XRD. The plutonium- and neptunium-aluminium alloys were pure PuAl2 and NpAl2 respectively.
A total of seven chlorination experiments were carried out. Four experiments, each of which consisting of two runs with the same material, used U-Al alloys (referred to as UAlx). About 300 mg of UAlx was used for one experiment. In each experiment a different temperature between 300 °C and 400 °C was applied.
Two experiments employed NpAl2 and one experiment PuAl2 as the starting material. Around 100 mg of material was used in each of these experiments. Due to the smaller amount of available material, only one chlorination run was carried out each time. A temperature of 350 °C was applied for PuAl2, and temperatures of 350 °C and 400 °C for NpAl2.
An overview of all chlorination experiments is given in Table 2. Runs are labelled according to starting material, temperature, and run number.
Table 2. Overview of all chlorination experiments carried out.
Each starting material was ground in an agate mortar in order to increase its surface. The material was weighed in the BN crucible and placed in the reactor. The reactor was closed, evacuated and filled with argon. The oven was then heated to the experimental temperature under argon flow. After stabilisation of the reaction temperature, the reactor was evacuated, and filled with HCl(g) up to 1100 mbar. The reactor was then isolated for 20 h at the reaction temperature at static conditions. Afterwards the oven was cooled to room temperature within 6 h while the HCl was removed by flushing argon through the reactor.
The product was weighed and a sample was taken. In case of the experiments with UAlx the rest of the product was returned to the reactor for a second chlorination run, carried out with the same experimental parameters as the first one, in order to ensure completeness of the chlorination.
After the end of each experiment the material that had evaporated and condensed at the cold parts of the reactor was scraped off and collected. In case of the experiments applying NpAl2 and PuAl2 as starting material, the amount of condensed material was very small. To recover this material, the lid was washed with 6M HNO3, which was then poured in a mortar to let the liquid evaporate. The remaining material was collected and analysed.
3.3. Analytical methods
The product material from the crucible was analysed by X-ray diffraction (XRD). The amount of the evaporated material condensed at the reactor lid was insufficient for XRD, except one sample (UAlx, 350 °C; U350-2 (lid)).
The actinide chlorides are sensitive to moisture present in the glove box atmosphere. In order to protect the samples a special designed sample holder was used. The holder includes a silica crystal wafer on which the sample was placed and covered with silicone oil. A Kapton foil was fixed by a ring to the sample holder and protected the sample from the surrounding atmosphere.
The measurements were carried out on a Bruker D8 Bragg-Brentano Advance diffractomter with monochromated CuKα-radiation. The measurement time was typically 8 h covering a 2θ range from 10 to 100°. The samples were rotated during the measurements. In order to quantify the different crystalline phases Rietveld refinement was performed using the software HighScore Plus.
At a later stage of the experimental campaign, a second approach for the XRD measurement was implemented, using a glass capillary with a diameter of 0.3 mm as a sample holder. To protect the sample the capillary was closed with silicone oil. An advantage of this method is that only 1–2 mg of the sample is needed. These XRD were performed on a Bruker Apex II Quazar diffractometer with monochromated MoKα-radiation. A rotation frame with and irradiation of 600 s was registered using the φ-scan technique covering 2θ-range from 1.5 to 56.5°. Detector corrections were applied and evaluation of the data was performed with HighScore Plus.
Other analytical technique used for quantification of the chlorination products was inductively coupled plasma - optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES). About 10–100 mg of the sample was dissolved in 1M nitric acid. To some of the samples 1–2 ml of 0.1 M hydrofluoric acid was added to achieve a complete dissolution. The samples were analysed by ICP-OES for U, Np, Pu and Al as required. The analytical methods were following the procedures described in Refs. [24], [25] for neptunium and plutonium, respectively.
4. Results and discussion
4.1. Chlorination of U-Al alloys
Immediately after filling the reactor with HCl(g), a white deposit started to condense on the non-heated reactor lid. A photography of the reactor lid before and after the start of the reaction is shown in Fig. 5. The calculations predicted the formation of AlCl3, described as white powder in its condensed state [26]. The deposition of AlCl3 was indicated by ICP-OES and confirmed by XRD.
Fig. 5. Photographs of the installed reactor lid before the start of the reaction (a) and after introduction of HCl(g) to the reactor at a temperature of 400 °C (U400-1) (b).
The temperature and the pressure evolution during the first chlorination run of UAlx at 400 °C (U400-1) are shown in Fig. 6. The start of the chlorination can be seen from a peak on the pressure curve, when the reactor was evacuated and then refilled with HCl to a pressure of around 1100 mbar. After regulation of the temperature to stabilise it, the temperature was constant during the experiment.
Fig. 6. Temperature and pressure evolution during the first chlorination run with U-Al alloy at 400 °C (U400-1).
After filling the reactor with HCl the pressure dropped by 80 mbar within 5 min and approximately 110 mbar in less than 1 h and remained constant below 1000 mbar. Assuming consumption of HCl(g) by the reaction as the reason, it indicates that the reaction was completed before the end of the 20 h. The above mentioned immediate formation of a white deposit on the reactor lid supports this assumption. However, no kinetic study was done as it was not in the scope of the present work. The pressure and temperature evolutions during further chlorinations were similar to the described run and are given in Ref. [14].
4.1.1. Chromatoscopic investigation and mass balance
The uranium-aluminium alloy was a brittle grey and metallic shiny material. After chlorination a green sticky powder was obtained, which corresponds to the appearance of UCl4 [27] and UCl3 [28]. Photographs of the material before and after the chlorination are given in Fig. 7. For the colour photos, please refer to the online version of the article.
Fig. 7. Photographs of the starting material (a), the material after 20 h chlorination at 300 °C (U300-1) (b), and the material after chlorination at 375 °C (U375-1) (c). In c unreacted starting material is seen. For the colour photos, please refer to the online version of the article. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
The masses of the starting materials and of the products, as well as the theoretical masses calculated based on the assumption of a full chlorination, are given in Table 3. The masses of the products after the second chlorination run were omitted, because no changes were observed.
Table 3. Masses of the starting material and the products when using UAlx as starting material after the first chlorination run. The theoretical mass was calculated on the assumption of a complete chlorination leading to UCl4 and UCl3, and full evaporation of the AlCl3.
The masses of the solid products at temperatures of 300 °C (U300-1), 350 °C (U350-1), and 375 °C (U375-1) were larger than that of the starting materials. The difference at 375 °C was very small, which can be explained by an incomplete reaction. When using a temperature of 400 °C (U400-1), the mass decreased. Evaporation of uranium was proven in this run by ICP-OES of the green deposit formed on the reactor lid.
4.1.2. XRD
The available XRD results of the chlorination products are given in Table 4. The expected formation of uranium chlorides, mainly UCl4 and UCl3 was confirmed.
Table 4. XRD results of the experiments with UAlx as starting material as determined by Rietveld refinement. All values are given in wt. %.
Only when using UAlx as starting material at a temperature of 350 °C (U350-2 (lid)), the material recovered from the reactor lid was sufficient for XRD analysis, which yielded one phase corresponding to pure aluminium chloride. Since the background of the diffractogram was high with only few intensive peaks, an amorphous material formed by reaction of AlCl3 with moisture from the glove box atmosphere was very likely present in the sample.
In several experiments, when using UAlx as starting material, XRD analysis revealed the uranium oxychlorides UOCl2 and UO2Cl2 in the product. The formation of these oxychlorides during the chlorination experiments can be excluded due to the absence of oxygen (see section 3.1 Chlorination setup, 3.2 Chlorination experiments). UOCl2 has green colour [29] like UCl3 and UCl4, and UO2Cl2 would be present as yellow material [26] in the chlorination products. During the observation of the product directly after the reaction, no yellow phase was seen, but it is not considered as a proof of absence of UO2Cl2, as it was determined by XRD as a minor phase only. On the other hand, the XRD sample preparation and measurement were carried out in a glove box under nitrogen atmosphere, which contained some oxygen and moisture. It is therefore assumed, that the formed UCl4 reacted according to equations (1), (2) with oxygen or according to equation (3), (4) with moisture during the preparation of the samples.
@(1)
@(2)
@(3)
@(4)
The detection of uranium oxychlorides in the product was therefore regarded as a successful chlorination of uranium-aluminium followed by unwanted reaction during sample preparation.
In Fig. 8, a diffractrogram of the chlorination product of UAlx from the crucible after 20 h at 300 °C (U300-1) is shown as an example, indicating UCl4 as the only chlorination product. Additional diffractograms are shown in Ref. [14].
Fig. 8. XRD diffractogram (CuKα)of the sample after the first chlorination run at 300 °C (U300-1) using UAlx as starting material. As only phase UCl4 was detected. The difference plot obtained by Rietveld refinement is given as grey line.
In the chlorination at 375 °C, unreacted starting material was determined after the first run (U375-1). This is in line with the observation of the product, in which a grey powder was seen.
4.1.3. ICP-OES
The result of the ICP-OES are summarised in Table 5. The content of aluminium was in most of the samples from the crucible below the detection limit (LOD), which was typically between 0.3 and 0.6 wt. % in the case of aluminium. However, when using a temperature of 300 °C a small amount of aluminium was determined in the product after the first chlorination run (U300-1). After the second chlorination run (U300-2) aluminium was not detected anymore. Aluminium was as well detected in the sample after the second chlorination run at 400 °C (U400-2). As it was the highest temperature used – and the first chlorination run did not contain any aluminium – this was not expected and the source is probably cross-contamination.
Table 5. ICP-OES results of the chlorination products and the starting material. UAlx denotes the mixture of UAl3 + UAl2. All values are given in wt. %.
A small amount of uranium was determined in each of the samples from runs at 375 (U375-2(lid)) and 400 °C (U400-2(lid)) obtained from the material deposited on the reactor lid, indicating partial evaporation of uranium as uranium chloride at these temperatures.
4.2. Chlorination of NpAl2 and PuAl2 alloys
4.2.1. Chromatoscopic investigation and mass balance
The PuAl2 alloys and the NpAl2 alloys were of similar consistence than the above described UAl3 alloys (§4.1.1). A photograph of the crushed PuAl2 alloy is shown in Fig. 9a. After 20 h of chlorination at 350 °C a dark green powder was obtained as seen in Fig. 9 b. This correlates to the colour of PuCl3 as recorded in Ref. [30] as emerald green.
Fig. 9. a: The starting material PuAl2; b: product after 20 h of chlorination of PuAl2 at 350 °C (Pu350); c: product after 20 h of chlorination of NpAl2 at 350 °C (Np350).
Fig. 9 c provides a photograph of the material after 20 h of chlorination of NpAl2 at 350 °C. In Ref. [31] NpCl3 is described as green and NpCl4 as red-orange powder. In Ref. [27] NpCl4 is characterised as brown and NpCl3 as green. However, both experiments using NpAl2 as starting material yielded grey, but not shiny looking powder.
The masses of the starting materials and the products and the theoretical mass calculated on the assumption of a full chlorination are given in Table 6.
Table 6. Amounts of the products and the starting material (NpAl2 and PuAl2). The theoretical mass was calculated assuming a full chlorination forming NpCl3 or PuAl3, while the AlCl3 evaporated completely.
The mass of the products decreased when using NpAl2 as starting material. As neptunium was not detected by ICP-OES in the samples obtained from the reactor lid, evaporation of neptunium chloride cannot serve as an explanation for this. Therefore a weighing error could be possible. When using PuAl2 as starting material an increase in the mass was measured, as expected.
4.2.2. XRD
When using NpAl2 as starting material the main product at both temperatures was NpCl3. In addition NpCl4 was detected as minor product in the chlorination at 400 °C (Np400), as shown in the diffractogram in Fig. 10. In the product from the chlorination of PuAl2 (Pu350) only PuCl3 was detected as seen in the diffractogram in Fig. 11. Neither unreacted starting material nor non-evaporated AlCl3 was determined by XRD in any products from these experiments. This result is in disagreement to the grey colour of the product (§ 4.2.1). Quantifications of the products by Rietveld refinement are given in Table 7.
Fig. 10. XRD diffractogram (MoKα) of the sample from the chlorination of NpAl2 at 400 °C (Np400). The difference plot obtained by Rietveld refinement is given in grey.
Fig. 11. XRD diffractogram (MoKα) of the chlorination of PuAl2 with HCl. The only product determined is PuCl3 (Pu350). The difference plot obtained by Rietveld refinement is given as grey line.
Table 7. XRD results of the experiments with NpAl2 and PuAl2 as starting material as determined by Rietveld refinement. All values are given in wt. %.
4.2.3. ICP-OES
A small amount of aluminium was detected in the samples of the chlorination products from the crucibles of the experiments with both NpAl2 and PuAl2 by the ICP-OES analyses. This is in disagreement with the experiments using UAlx as starting material.
Analysis of this product from the chlorination of NpAl2 at 400 °C (Np400) is not available due to reaction of the product with moisture present in the glove box atmosphere. In this experiment only the material obtained from the reactor lid provided results. Table 8 summarises the ICP-OES results.
Table 8. ICP-OES results of the experiments with NpAl2 and PuAl2 as starting material. All values are given in wt. %.
In the samples from the reactor lid neptunium was not determined. The neptunium detection limit (LOD) was below 0.2 wt. %. However, the detection limit for plutonium was substantial lower than the detection limit for neptunium, and traces of plutonium were determined in the sample from the reactor lid (Pu350). This was not expected in the calculations and can be due to evaporation of PuCl3 or cross contamination.
5. Conclusion and outlook
In the present work we have demonstrated that U-Al alloys, Np-Al alloys, and Pu-Al alloys are chlorinated with HCl(g) at 300–400 °C with high yields and selectivity forming UCl4, NpCl4, and PuCl3 as the main actinide products.
The higher temperatures that are possible in the HCl chlorination process, as compared to the chlorination using Cl2, ensure the completeness of the reaction, enable higher reaction rates and, therefore, a faster conversion, which facilitates the development of large-scale processes that ideally would run continuously. In addition, the AlCl3 separation can already be integrated in the chlorination step. This is an added value compared to earlier experiments using Cl2 as chlorinating agent [10], which, however, were carried out at lower temperatures to avoid the formation of UCl5(g) or UCl6(g).
On the other hand, the production of H2 when using HCl(g) might raise some additional safety concerns. Therefore, both chlorination agents would have to be carefully considered taking into account all aspects before application in an industrial process.
It is also noteworthy that the absence of water in this process prevents issues stemming from the corrosivity of HCl and simplifies the use of reactor materials other than quartz. This could be, for instance, stainless steel in a scaled-up process or an industrial process.
Acknowledgement
The authors wish to thank D. Bouexière and R. Eloirdi for the preparation of the starting material and M. Krachler and R. Alvarez for performing the ICP-OES analysis. Part of this work was carried out with European Commission financial support within the 7th Framework programme, under the contract 211267 “ACSEPT”.
