<title>Resilience of nuclear fuel cycle scenarios: Definition, method and application to a fleet with uncertain power decrease</title>
<author> Zhou Weifeng; Krivtchik Guillaume; Blaise Patrick</author>
<Affiliation>CEA, DES, IRESNE, DER, SPRC, Cadarache ; CEA, DES, EC, Scientific Division Energies, Saclay</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>International Journal of Energy Research</Journal>
<Publishing_house>John Wiley & Sons Inc. </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1002/ER.5724</DOI>
<URL>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/er.6185</URL>
Summary
Nuclear fuel cycle scenario studies can be of benefit for decision-making in nuclear power industry development, thanks to their abilities to make projections of industrial strategies and to assess the associated impacts on the nuclear fuel cycle system. In scenario studies, according to imposed constraints, one proposes trajectories, which are defined as fully characterized evolutions of the studied nuclear fuel cycle system, to represent different prospective developments for the nuclear power industry. However, the scenario studies are usually subject to uncertainties because of the lack of knowledge or information about the future at the time of study. As a result, the real situation can differ from the expectation as the real-world time goes, and the trajectories proposed by the previous scenario studies can be disrupted without satisfying the imposed constraints anymore. The first method to overcome this problem is the resistance strategy, which consists in finding the trajectories that can bear any disruption caused by the uncertainties to meet the imposed constraints. But this resistance strategy may not always be sufficient for scenario studies as the uncertainties in scenario studies are generally so high that the associated impact of disruptions can be too strong to guarantee the existence of said resistant trajectories. As a complementary solution, a resilience strategy is proposed in this study. The goal of this paper is to propose a resilience assessment method for scenario problems. In a resilience study, the resilience of a trajectory is defined as a capability to be readjusted to avoid the constraint violations caused by disruptions. The readjustment is carried out by changing the predesigned levers. A scheme is developed based on the Kriging surrogate models and the state-of-the-art Stepwise Uncertainty Reduction (SUR) algorithm to evaluate the resilience of trajectories. The developed resilience assessment method is applied to a scenario problem with uncertain power decrease as a demonstration. The results show that this method is an efficient tool to deal with the failure of trajectories caused by disruption.
1 INTRODUCTION
Nuclear fuel cycle systems, composed of reactors with various fuels and different cycle facilities, such as enrichment, fabrication and reprocessing plants, interim, and waste storages, are complex and in constant evolution. Thanks to their ability to make projections of industrial strategies and assess the associated impacts on the nuclear fuel cycle system, nuclear fuel cycle scenarios are considered a powerful decision-making assistant tool by decision-makers. For example, in the frame of the development of the French nuclear fleet these last years, scenario studies have been used to evaluate different strategies to deploy sodium fast reactors (SFRs),1 and the possibility to apply multi-recycling of plutonium (Pu) and recycling of uranium in pressurized water reactor (PWR)2 as well as their impacts on waste management.
By identifying the strengths and weaknesses of different strategies for a nuclear reactor fleet evolution through nuclear fuel cycle scenarios, one aims to propose possible prospective developments of nuclear industry according to requirements of decision-makers such as saving natural uranium resources and keeping Pu inventory in spent fuel stockpiles at equilibrium. Scenario studies are generally performed within the limits of given constraints to integrate these requirements. These constraints contribute to making the scenario study problem realistic regarding the current knowledge and industrial feedback. An answer to the study problem is called trajectory, which is defined as a perfectly identified evolution history of a nuclear fuel cycle system consisting of all the units and facilities defined without ambiguity. In other words, a trajectory represents a concrete and determined evolution of the studied system with a set of specific values of scenario parameters. The trajectories that satisfy the constraints are designated as valid, while those that violate any one of the constraints are invalid. One of the most important tasks for the scenario studies is to identify these valid trajectories.
However, due to the lack of knowledge about the future at the time of study, scenario studies are subject to uncertainties, which may lead to failure, that is, the violation of constraints, by degrading the study results, as illustrated by Figure 1. Beginning with the endpoint of history modeling, a trajectory (represented by the green curve in Figure 1) that satisfies the scenario constraints is proposed through a scenario study as a prospective development. The analysis and research are based on present knowledge and available information. The future is unknown at the time of study. For the prospective scenario parameters that characterize a prospective nuclear fuel cycle system, their values are obtained via trends or prospective technical studies. But as real-world time passes, the real situation can differ from the previous expectation, and some of these values can become quite different from the initial ones. These unexpected changes are the result of uncertainties and are defined as disruptions in this study. In this case, the initial trajectory deviates into another different one (represented by the red curve in Figure 1) that can finally violate the constraints, and hence, the failure of the initial trajectory arises. The prospective developments of nuclear energy found in the previous study can no longer meet the requirements, and the study efforts are in vain.
FIGURE 1
Failure of trajectory under impact of disruption [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
A resilience study of nuclear fuel cycle scenarios is proposed in this paper to overcome such a disruption problem caused by uncertainties. First, a definition and an evaluation method of the resilience of the nuclear fuel cycle scenario trajectories will be given. Then, as a demonstration, the resilience study will be applied to an academic nuclear fuel cycle scenario problem. Finally, conclusions will be made based on the analyses.
2 RESILIENCE ASSESSMENT METHOD
2.1 Definitions
The resistance strategy comes naturally in terms of methods to get over the disruption problem caused by uncertainties. This resistance strategy consists in finding the trajectories that can bear any uncertainty by themselves and still satisfy the constraints without taking any action after the disruption of scenario parameters. However, the existence of such resistant trajectories is not ensured. The resistance of a trajectory is usually limited for a certain restricted impact level of disruption and is held only when this limitation is not exceeded. Nonetheless, the uncertainties in scenario studies are generally so high that the associated impact of disruptions could be too strong to respect this limitation. Furthermore, numerous constraints in scenario studies can make this limitation stricter and more difficult to respect. Hence, the resistance strategy is not sufficient. This point will be demonstrated in Section 3.2.
As a complementary solution, a resilience strategy is proposed in this study. Depending on the research areas, there are different points of view on the definition of resilience. Nonetheless, according to the work of Reference 3, when defining resilience, two elements should be generally considered: (a) if the disruptions appear and the failure danger manifests itself and (b) there is a way to restore the trajectory, that is, bouncing back to an acceptable state. The first element emphasizes the trajectory itself cannot undergo the impact of disruption, and the resistance strategy will not suffice. The second element refers to the capacity to emerge stronger from a disruption, which infuses resilience with the idea of taking actions to readjust the trajectory.
A definition of resilience for the nuclear fuel cycle scenario trajectories is proposed in this study inspired by these ideas. For a valid trajectory, resilience is considered as a flexibility capacity to be readjusted to avoid the failure caused by the disruption. More precisely, for a scenario resilience study problem, scenario parameters can be divided into two sorts:
Controlled parameters: parameters whose values can be freely chosen in a variation range according to the requirements of decision-makers. Due to their role in resilience studies, controlled parameters are also referred to as levers, noted as L in the following discussion.
Uncontrolled parameters: parameters that include uncertainties and whose values may change according to the circumstances without this being a desired choice of decision-makers. In other words, they can be disrupted. We note the uncontrolled parameters as U for the following discussion.
The general idea of resilience is to readjust the levers to counterbalance the impact of disruptions on scenario parameters caused by uncertainties to avoid the failure of disrupted trajectories.
A detailed illustration is given in Figure 2. The parameters of interest in a resilience study are the levers L and the uncontrolled parameters U. Their variation ranges, usually determined by expertise, constitute the study domain (represented by the zone surrounded by the light blue lines in Figure 2). We consider M ≥ 1 scenrio constraints expressed such that:
@(1)
where Ii(∙) is the constraint indicator of the ith constraint and Ti is a corresponding constraint threshold value. In the study domain, there is one or several regions where the constraints are all satisfied simultaneously. These regions are referred to as valid regions (represented by the orange zone in Figure 2). We assume that a valid initial trajectory (Uinitial, Linitial) is proposed by a scenario study (represented by the black point in Figure 2). Since the initial trajectory is valid, it stays inside the valid regions, and one has Equation (1) satisfied. However, due to the uncertainties, uncontrolled parameters may be disrupted. In this case, the initial trajectory may be brought out of the valid regions, becoming an invalid disrupted trajectory (Udisrupted, Linitial) (represented by the red point in Figure 2) such that ∃1 ≤ i ≤ M, Ii(Uinitial, Linitial) > Ti (ie, one or several constraints are violated). In order to counterbalance the impact of disruption, one can readjust the values of levers while keeping the disruption (ie, keeping Udisrupted unchanged). The resilience of the initial trajectory vs the said disruption is demonstrated if the trajectory is successfully brought into a valid region again, forming a valid readjusted trajectory (Udisrupted, Lreadjusted) (represented by the blue point in Figure 2). In this situation, the valid initial trajectory (Uinitial, Linitial) is resilient.
FIGURE 2
Formalization of resilience of nuclear fuel cycle scenario trajectory [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
The readjustment of invalid disrupted trajectories is accomplished by changing the values of levers. As the achievement of readjustment depends on the levers, their selection is important. The detailed discussion for this selection can be found in Reference 4.
2.2 Resilience evaluation method
According to the definition of resilience given in Section 2.1, the key point to evaluate the resilience of a given valid trajectory is to indicate how the levers change after the disruption. One of the most common methods is random sampling. More precisely, one can randomly sample the values of levers in their variation ranges to propose numerous trajectories as candidates of readjusted trajectories and then call the scenario code to verify their validity one by one. However, this method is usually impractical due to the characteristics of the nuclear fuel cycle scenario studies. First, the execution of scenario simulation codes is usually time consuming when a dynamic fuel cycle is simulated as it may involve a large number of fuel depletion calculations. Second, a scenario problem is usually very constrained, leading to the fact that the valid regions can be very narrow compared to the whole study domain. The chance to get a valid trajectory by random sampling of levers can be very small. Consequently, one may need to test thousands of candidate readjusted trajectories before a valid one is finally found, which brings a non-reasonable scenario simulation cost. Hence, the random sampling method is generally not adapted, and a more efficient method is required.
In this study, a method based on Kriging surrogate models5 is proposed as an alternative. Kriging model, also known as Gaussian process regression, is an interpolation method that returns both the 1-D output predictor of the result of interest and the associated statistical variance at the same time. With the outputs of the Kriging models, one can build a fast trajectory validity estimator to estimate rapidly, without calling the time-consuming scenario code, the validity of a given trajectory (U, L) vs the imposed scenario constraints as shown in Equation (1). More precisely, this Kriging-based trajectory validity estimator, which is denoted as pn(∙), can be expressed as follows:
@(2)
where:
urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er6185:er6185-math-0003 are n observations (ie, n trajectories simulated with the scenario code);
mi,n(∙) is the Kriging result predictor corresponding to the ith constraint indicator Ii(∙) and constructed with the observations urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er6185:er6185-math-0004;
si,n(∙) is the Kriging SD associated with the Kriging result predictor mi,n(∙);
Φ(∙) is the cumulative distribution function of a standard normal distribution;
urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er6185:er6185-math-0005, usually called excursion probability,5 is the conditional probability that the given trajectory (U, L) satisfies the i-th constraint Ii(U, L) < Ti when n observations urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er6185:er6185-math-0006 are known.
A trajectory with a high value of pn is very likely to satisfy all the imposed constraints at the same time. As the evaluation of the Kriging-based validity estimator pn is fast, the search for valid trajectories by vast exploration in the whole study domain is possible.
Based on this advantage, a resilience evaluation scheme is constructed, as shown in Figure 3. For an initial trajectory given in the early scenario study, it is valid in the sense of satisfying all the imposed constraints. However, due to uncertainties, the uncontrolled scenario parameters are disrupted as time passes, that is, their values become quite different from those in the previous study. As a result, the disrupted trajectory may fail as one or several constraints are violated. According to the definition of resilience given in Section 2.1, if the initial trajectory is resilient, one can readjust the values of levers to counterbalance the impact of disruption and get one or several valid readjusted trajectories. To find such readjusted trajectories, one can keep the values of uncontrolled parameters after disruption unchanged and sample the values of levers in their variation ranges to propose numerous candidate trajectories. Then, one uses the fast Kriging-based validity estimator pn to estimate the validity of these sampled candidate readjusted trajectories rapidly. With the validity estimation results, one filters out the potential trajectories (ie, the trajectories with high confidence of validity that wait to be verified by the scenario code) among all sampled candidate trajectories according to their values of pn. Finally, one uses the scenario code to verify a posteriori these potential trajectories, and in this case, the scenario simulation cost is quite slight as the number of potential trajectories is small. After the execution of the scenario code, if one can get valid readjusted trajectories, then the resilience of the initial trajectory is demonstrated; if no valid trajectory is found, then the resilience of the initial trajectory is not demonstrated. The last case does not mean that the initial trajectory is not resilient. The resilience evaluation scheme in Figure 3 depends on many factors. In particular, the database urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er6185:er6185-math-0007 used for the construction of Kriging-based validity estimator pn is the most important factor of all since its selection determines the validity estimation quality for the sampled candidate trajectories and the filtering to find the potential trajectories. For instance, a validity estimator constructed with urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er6185:er6185-math-0008 of sparse valid trajectories may badly estimate the validity of a given trajectory as the database urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er6185:er6185-math-0009 contains less knowledge about the valid cases.
FIGURE 3
Resilience evaluation scheme [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
To get an appropriate database urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er6185:er6185-math-0010, the state-of-the-art Stepwise Uncertainty Reduction (SUR) algorithm5 is applied in this study. This algorithm is based on the idea of the sequence of experiments where the observations are sequentially added. The choice of each observation point fully benefits from the information brought in each step of the previous algorithm iterations. This way allows choosing the experimental observations that bring the most valuable information about the valid regions vs constraints in each iteration step. Instead of finding the valid observations directly, this algorithm aims to identify the frontiers between the valid and invalid regions corresponding to the scenario constraints. As a by-product of achieving this aim, the SUR algorithm can give out a database urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er6185:er6185-math-0011 rich in knowledge about both valid and invalid cases. In the frame of scenario resilience study, a multi-constraint version of the SUR algorithm has been developed. One can refer to References 4 and 5 for more details about the SUR algorithm and its further development.
Note that for the resilience evaluation scheme in Figure 3, the most time-consuming step is constructing the validity estimator with the SUR algorithm since optimization computation and scenario code execution are required. However, once the validity estimator is built, the computation costs of the rest steps are almost negligible. Moreover, this validity estimator is reusable for different initial trajectories unless the scenario constraints or the definitions of uncontrolled parameters and levers are changed.
2.3 Scenario simulation model
To demonstrate the definition and the resilience assessment method described in Sections 2.1 and 2.2, we consider an academic scenario problem in this study. This academic scenario problem is a theoretical study case, which is not as complex as the industrial scenarios. Several simplifications have been made, such as using fixed and average values of load factors, fuel burnups and net yields. However, this academic scenario problem is still representative of real situations. For example, the reactors are individually modeled; the fuel loading successions concerning the MOXing and de-MOXing processes in reactor cores are considered; the lifespans of reactors are limited.
2.3.1 General assumptions
In the scenario simulation model, the nuclear reactor fleet is initially composed of 58 PWR. These reactors can be divided into three electrical power classes: the 900-MWe class with 34 reactors, the 1300-MWe class with 20 reactors, and the 1450-MWe class with 4 reactors. Among them, 22 reactors from the 900-MWe class are 30% partially fueled with MOX fuels, and the rest of the reactors load 100% UOX fuels. All of these 58 PWR were commissioned between 1978 and 2000. The detailed dates for commissioning these 58 reactors and loading the first MOX fuel batches in the 22 30%-MOXed reactors can be found in Reference 6. In this study, it is supposed that Gen-III+ reactors are gradually commissioned to replace the PWR as the scenario simulation goes, and the nuclear reactor fleet is fully composed of Gen-III+ reactors at the end of simulation. The reactors are individually modeled, and their characteristics are shown in Table 1.
TABLE 1. Characteristics of reactors6, 7
Reactor type	PWR	Gen-III+ reactors
900 MWe	1300 MWe	1450 MWe
Power (MWth)	2800	3800	4300	4500
Power (MWe)	900	1300	1450	1530
Net yield (%)	32.1	34.2	33.7	34.0
Load factor (%)	75.2	75.2	75.2	83.0
Mass in core (tHM)	72.5	104	110	120
Irradiation time (EFPD)	3 × 423	3 × 410.5	3 × 392.2	3 × 460
Average burnup (GWd/tHM)	49	45	46	51.8
The recycling strategy is exposed in Figure 4 and is kept unchanged during the simulation. The fuel fabrication time is fixed at 2 years for both UOX and MOX fuels. The minimum cooling time before the spent fuel reprocessing is 5 years. The reprocessing is in chronological order, that is, first in first out. Only spent UOX fuels are reprocessed.
FIGURE 4
Fuel recycling strategy [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
2.3.2 Evolution of nuclear reactor fleet
In the scenario simulation model, several assumptions are considered during simulation:
The energy production of the nuclear reactor fleet can go through an uncertain reduction;
All PWR are gradually replaced by Gen-III+ reactors;
The reactors can be MOXed (from a 100% UOX-fueled core to a [30% MOX + 70% UOX]-fueled core) or de-MOXed (from a [30% MOX + 70% UOX]-fueled core to a 100% UOX-fueled core), and the reprocessing capacity is adjustable.
When defining a trajectory, hundreds of parameters have to be set up. For instance, to characterize a reactor in scenario simulation, one needs to precise the commissioning and decommissioning dates, successions of loadings, load factors, and so on. However, in a resilience study, a large number of scenario trajectory simulations are required. It is impossible to set the values of all these parameters one by one manually in each simulation. One needs a way of allowing the automatic set-up of these parameters.
As a solution, a fleet driving model is included between the scenario code and the decision-making as an intermediate layer to determine the fleet evolution, as sketched in Figure 5. In this fleet driving model, a set of rules, which involves the reactors commissioning and decommissioning and the deployment of MOX fuel in selected reactors, are implemented in the form of an algorithm. In this case, one can use a small number of parameters of interest to determine the evolution of the nuclear reactor fleet, reducing the number of input parameters and making the resilience study possible. More details about the fleet driving model can be found in Reference 8.
FIGURE 5
Fleet driving model as an intermediate layer to drive evolution of nuclear reactor fleet
Assumptions on energy production
In the scenario simulation model, a severe reduction of the nuclear reactor fleet energy production is considered, as illustrated in Figure 6. It is supposed that the reduction in energy production starts in 2023 with an annual electricity production D0 = 409.2 TWe∙h. The reduction is linear with respect to time and ends in 2035. During the reduction, certain PWR are decommissioned to meet the setpoints of energy production. There is no commissioning of new Gen-III+ reactors during the reduction period. After 2035, the annual electricity production is assumed to stay stable at the level of α ∙ D0 where α is defined as the ratio between the total annual electricity productions after and before the reduction and can variate in the interval [0.7, 1.0]. In the period between 2035 and 2060, PWR are gradually decommissioned due to the maximum lifespan limitation, and Gen-III+ reactors are commissioned to maintain energy production. The scenario simulation ends in 2080.
FIGURE 6
Assumptions on total annual electricity production [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Several rules to determine the decommissioning and commissioning of reactors are implemented in the fleet driving model to follow these setpoints. The rules for decommissioning reactors are the following:
A reactor can only be decommissioned at the ends of the irradiation cycles.
The reactor lifespan cannot exceed 60 years.
After a decennial visit,1 the reactor has to operate for at least 7 years (arbitrarily chosen duration) for economic performance.
The oldest reactors are decommissioned preferentially for economic considerations.
The decision to decommission reactors is made according to the imposed total annual electricity production setpoints (see Figure 6).
Correspondingly, the rules for the commissioning of new Gen-III+ reactors are given as:
The commissioning dates of Gen-III+ reactors are determined by the difference between the simulated annual electricity production and the imposed setpoints.
The commissioning rate cannot exceed two Gen-III+ reactors per year to smooth the investments. The decommissioning dates of old reactors can be adjusted if necessary.
It is noteworthy that building a reactor in the real world is a long process that takes at least 10 to 15 years. However, in the simulations of this study, the commissioning of a new reactor is assumed instantaneous (ie, its building phase is anticipated).
Assumptions on deployment of MOX fuels in reactors
As the reduction in electricity production goes on, certain reactors consuming MOX fuels may be decommissioned, and the proportion of UOX/MOX reactors could no longer be maintained, which may lead to a spent fuel storage challenge.9 A MOX fuel deployment strategy is taken into account and implemented in the fleet driving model to solve this problem. The MOXing of UOX-fueled reactors and the de-MOXing of MOX-fueled reactors into UOX-fueled ones are possible in this scenario simulation model.
The deployment of MOX fuels in reactors is driven by the setpoints of annual electricity production from MOX fuels, shown in Figure 7. The electricity production from MOX fuels is kept constant before 2035 with a value urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er6185:er6185-math-0012 = 39.1 TWe∙h and then goes through a linear reduction during the period between 2035 and 2060. After 2060, this production is again kept constant at the level of β ∙ D0 where β is defined as the ratio between the annual electricity productions from MOX fuels after and before the reduction and can variate in the interval [0, 1.0].
FIGURE 7
Assumptions on annual electricity production from MOX fuels [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
To realize the deployment of MOX fuels according to these setpoints, several rules are implemented in the fleet driving model to MOX and de-MOX reactors. The rules for MOXing reactors (including Gen-III+ reactors) are the following:
The reactors can only be MOXed at the ends of the irradiation cycles.
The reactor to be MOXed should have gone through at least one equilibrium irradiation cycle (in fact, start-up fuel batches are considered in the model when commissioning a reactor) when the first MOX fuel is loaded.
Once a reactor is MOXed, it has to go through at least one ‘nominal’ irradiation cycle where the whole core is MOXed at 30%.
A longer operating time with MOX fuel is preferable to reduce the number of times to MOX and de-MOX reactors.
A reactor cannot be MOXed more than once in its life.
The decision to MOX reactors is made according to the imposed setpoints (as in Figure 7).
The rules to de-MOX the MOX-fueled reactors into UOX-fueled ones are given as:
The MOX-fueled reactors can only be de-MOXed at the ends of the irradiation cycles.
Once a MOX-fueled reactor is de-MOXed, it has to go through at least one “nominal” irradiation cycle where the whole core is 100% fueled with UOX fuels. Otherwise, the MOX-fueled cannot be de-MOXed and will be decommissioned with a 30%-MOX-fueled core.
A shorter operating time with UOX fuels after de-MOXing is preferable to reduce the number of times to MOX and de-MOX in the nuclear reactor fleet.
The decision to de-MOX reactors is made according to the imposed setpoints (as in Figure 7).
Assumptions on reprocessing capacity
In the scenario simulation model, it is supposed that there are two periods in which the reprocessing capacity stays constant, as described in Figure 8. The reprocessing capacity is kept constant from 2019 to the date Tc with a value C0 = 930 tHM/year and then is changed into another constant level γ ∙ C0 where γ is defined as the ratio between the reprocessing capacities after and before the date Tc. It is supposed that 2023 < Tc < 2060 and 0.0 < γ < 1.0.
FIGURE 8
Assumptions on reprocessing capacity [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Characterization of a trajectory
After Sections “Assumptions on energy production”, “Assumptions on deployment of MOX fuels in reactors” and “Assumptions on reprocessing capacity”, one can completely characterize a scenario trajectory with the four parameters (α, β, γ, Tc) shown in Table 2. The fleet driving model uses these parameters to determine the evolution of the studied nuclear reactor fleet, that is, to set up all the scenario parameters according to the implemented rules.
TABLE 2. Parameters to characterize a scenario trajectory
Parameter	Meaning	Variation range
Minimum	Maximum
α	Ratio of total electricity productions after and before reduction	0.7	1.0
β	Ratio of electricity productions from MOX fuel after and before reduction	0.0	1.0
γ	Ratio of reprocessing capacity after and before reduction	0.0	1.0
Tc	Time to start the reduction of reprocessing capacity	2023	2060
2.3.3 Definition of valid trajectory
To define the validity of a trajectory, we consider five constraints in this study as follows:
C1: The reprocessing plant must work at full capacity during the simulation for economic benefits. In the scenario simulation, for a year in which there are not enough spent UOX fuels in the stock to meet the reprocessing goal defined by the presetting yearly reprocessing capacity, the reprocessing plant is supposed to be in an under-capacity operation. In this case, the simulated quantity of reprocessed spent UOX fuels in this year is smaller than the presetting reprocessing capacity. To evaluate this constraint, we calculate the utilization ratio of the reprocessing plant during simulation defined as followed:
urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er6185:er6185-math-0013
and impose IReprocessing = 1.0.
C2: There is always enough Pu in the separation stockpile to supply the fresh MOX fuel fabrication. To evaluate this constraint, the minimum Pu inventory in the separation stockpile during simulation, noted as IMinPu, is used as an indicator, and one impose IMinPu > 5 tons.
C3: The inventory of Pu in the separation stockpile can never surpass 55 tons due to limited storage capacity. This constraint can be expressed as IMaxPu < 55 tons where IMaxPu is the maximum Pu inventory in the separation stockpile during the simulation.
C4: The Pu contents in fresh MOX fuels (whatever its isotopic composition) can never go beyond 12% during the simulation for safety reasons. Indeed, the Pu content in the fresh MOX fuel is an unfixed variable determined as a function of the Pu isotopic composition and the target fuel burnup.10 To interpret this constraint, the maximum Pu content in all fresh MOX fuels during simulation, noted as IMaxPuContent, is used as an indicator, and one impose IMaxPuContent < 12%.
C5: The total spent fuel (MOX + UOX) inventory can never exceed 24 000 tHM because of a limited spent fuel storage capacity.11 This constraint is translated into an inequality IMaxSF < 24 000 tHM where IMaxSF is the maximum total spent fuel inventory during the simulation.
In summary, a given trajectory (α, β, γ, Tc) is valid if and only if:
urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er6185:er6185-math-0014
A trajectory that violates any one of these five constraints is considered invalid. It is noteworthy that the resistance and resilience characteristics depend on the constraints, and the imposed constraints are supposed to remain unchanged in the resistance and resilience studies.
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
As a study plan, first, a valid initial trajectory is given, and its results are shown. Then, a disruption is introduced by changing the α into different values, that is, by modifying the total energy production, to study the resistance of the initial trajectory. After that, the resilience study is applied to the invalid non-resistant disrupted trajectories.
All scenario simulations in this study are carried out with the COSI6 scenario code developed by the CEA.10, 12 As a dynamic fuel cycle simulation tool, the COSI6 code simulates the whole nuclear reactor fleet and its associated fuel cycle plants and takes a lot of physics (eg, fuel enrichment, depletion, cooling, etc.) into account. Depending on the scenario problems, the dynamic fuel cycle simulations in the COSI6 code may be very nonlinear. The main outputs of the fuel cycle simulations are the evolution of isotopic inventories and material flows in each fuel cycle unit (eg, reactors, fabrication plant, storage, etc.). In our study, we use the COSI6 code to model the transition from a PWR reactor fleet to a Gen-III+ reactor fleet. As information, the computation time of a trajectory defined in this study using the COSI6 code is around 2 minutes.
3.1 Valid initial trajectory
In this study, a valid initial trajectory is given a priori with characteristic parameters (α = 1.0, β = 1.0, γ = 1.0, Tc = 2035). It means that the total annual electricity production of the nuclear reactor fleet, the annual electricity production from MOX fuels and the reprocessing capacity are all supposed to be constant from the beginning of simulation (2019) to the end of simulation (2080), and their initial values in 2019 are used throughout the simulation. We assume that this valid initial trajectory is a result of a nuclear fuel cycle scenario study before the resilience study.
The setpoints and simulation results for the total annual electricity production in the nuclear reactor fleet and the annual electricity production from MOX fuels are shown in Figures 9 and 10. First, one can observe that, in both figures, there are some fluctuations in the period between 2031 and 2060. This period is a transitional one during which the decommissioning, commissioning and MOXing of reactors happen. Before and after this period, the nuclear reactor fleet is static, and the simulation results generally coincide with the setpoints in both figures. Moreover, one can also find that, during the transitional period, the following of setpoints in Figure 10 is worse than that in Figure 9. This phenomenon comes from the fact that the minimization of the reactor MOXing and de-MOXing operation times is of higher priority than the setpoint conformity of electricity production from MOX fuels. One can improve the setpoint conformity in Figure 10 while it is not chosen in this study as it can make the MOX fuel deployment of the whole fleet more complex.
FIGURE 9
Annual electricity production of nuclear reactor fleet for initial trajectory [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 10
Annual electricity production from MOX fuels for initial trajectory [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
After the simulation, the indicator values corresponding to the five constraints are the followings:
urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er6185:er6185-math-0015
The initial trajectory is valid as the five constraints are all satisfied. The fact that IReprocessing = 1.0 means that the reprocessing plant always works with full capacity during the simulation, and the reprocessing capacity is always kept at 930 tHM/year as γ = 1.0. The Pu inventory in the separation stockpile for the initial trajectory is given in Figure 11. It reaches its maximum value of 35.7 tons in 2039 and its minimum value of 11.1 tons in 2020. Figure 12 shows the Pu contents in fresh MOX fuels. In this study, the decommissioning of MOX-fueled reactors is carried out in their last irradiation cycle with specific MOX fuel batches whose Pu contents are reduced according to their shorter residence time in the reactor core. As a result, one can see in Figure 12 that the Pu content can approach 6% during the transitional period (2031-2060), corresponding to the loading of specific shutdown MOX fuel batches in the cores. Generally, the Pu content always stays below 12% during the simulation. Figure 13 shows the spent UOX and MOX fuel inventories for the initial trajectory. During the simulation, the spent UOX fuels are recycled with a constant 930 tHM/year capacity while the spent MOX fuels are stored without reprocessing. At the end of simulation in 2080, the total inventory of both spent fuels reaches its maximum value of 16 458 tHM, that is, smaller than the limit value of constraint C5.
FIGURE 11
Inventory of Pu in separation stockpile for initial trajectory [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 12
Pu content inside fresh MOX fuels for initial trajectory [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 13
Inventories of spent fuels for initial trajectory [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
3.2 Resistance study
In this resistance study, it is supposed that the total energy production of the whole nuclear reactor fleet may be disrupted, and α is an uncontrolled parameter. This disruption is assumed to be a transcription of the following information:
At the time of a scenario study, the total electricity production of the nuclear reactor fleet is assumed to remain constant with the level in 2019 during the simulation. Through the scenario study, the valid initial trajectory shown in Section 3.1 is proposed. However, in the future, the economic, societal and political context, which is the study background, may be different from that supposed in the scenario study due to the uncertain future. As a result, the political decision-makers (e.g., government) may decide to reduce the total electricity production of the nuclear reactor fleet according to the profile in Figure 6 to cope with the disrupted context. This change in electricity production is unexpected and unforeseen in the scenario study in which the valid initial trajectory is proposed. Thus, this change in electricity production constitutes disruptions for the previous scenario study.
The aim of this Section 3.2 is to study the resistance of the initial trajectory given in Section 3.1 vs the disruption of α. To model the disruption and get a disrupted trajectory derived from the initial one, the value of uncontrolled parameter α is randomly sampled according to the uniform distribution in its variation range [0.7, 1.0]; the values of the other three characteristic parameters of the disrupted trajectory are the same as those in the initial trajectory, that is, ., (β = 1.0, γ = 1.0, Tc = 2035). It means that while the total electricity production is decreasing, all other parameters related to MOX recycling and reprocessing are kept unchanged.
In this study, Ndisrupted = 500 disrupted trajectories with different sampled values of α are defined and simulated with the COSI6 scenario simulation code. The five constraint indicators as functions of the α values are given in Figure 14 (each point corresponds to a disrupted trajectory). First, one can observe that all disrupted trajectories satisfy the constraints C3, C4 and C5 (see Figure 14C-E). The disruption of α has less impact on the satisfaction of these three constraints. However, this disruption can lead to violations of the constraints C1 and C2. In Figure 14A,B, it is observed that, when the value of α is only slightly disrupted, both constraints can still be held. As the value of α continues to decrease and becomes smaller than a certain threshold value (respectively, α < 0.81 for the constraint C1 and α < 0.75 for the constraint C2), these two constraints fail. (The negative IMinPu means the lack of Pu in the separation stockpile to support the fresh MOX fuel fabrication during the simulation and that a fictive Pu stockpile with infinite quantity is triggered to complete the simulation). To understand this failure, one should first notice that the spent fuel inventory has a positive correlation with the energy production level of the nuclear reactor fleet, that is, the value of α, which is illustrated by the Figure 14E. If the value of α becomes too small, the production rate of spent UOX fuels can be smaller than the reprocessing capacity setpoints after the reduction of total energy production, and as a result, there is not enough available spent UOX fuel for reprocessing at the end of simulation, leading to the under-capacity operation for the reprocessing plant and thus, the violation of the constraint C1. As an example, the inventory of spent UOX fuels and the reprocessing capacity of the disrupted trajectory (α = 0.70, β = 1.0, γ = 1.0, Tc = 2035) are, respectively, given in Figures 15 and 16. As there is not enough spent UOX fuel to be separated, there is a lack of Pu in the separation stockpile to supply the nuclear fleet, making the violation of the constraint C2.
FIGURE 14
Impact of disruption of α on validity of the initial trajectory (each point in the same subfigure corresponds to a disrupted trajectory) [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 15
Inventory of spent UOX fuel for disrupted trajectory (α = 0.70, β = 1.0, γ = 1.0, Tc = 2035) [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 16
Reprocessing capacity for disrupted trajectory (α = 0.70, β = 1.0, γ = 1.0, Tc = 2035) [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
According to the simulation results, after the disruption of α value, Nresistant = 318 out of Ndisrupted disrupted trajectories stay valid, all of which have a α value greater than 0.81. It implies that the initial trajectory is resistant to the defined disruption when α value is greater than 0.81. However, the rest Nnon − resistant = Ndisrupted − Nresistant = 182 disrupted trajectories, with a α value smaller than 0.81, are invalid. One can conclude that the initial trajectory resistance is limited for a certain impact level of disruption of α and can no longer be held if the disruption impact is too strong, as mentioned in Section 2.1. The resistance strategy, in which the initial trajectory is supposed to stay valid by itself without taking any action after disruption, does not suffice. A resilience strategy is needed to avoid the failure of the initial trajectory under the strong impact of disruption.
3.3 Application of resilience
The aim of this Section 3.3 is to apply the scheme shown in Figure 3 to evaluate the resilience of the initial trajectory vs the disruption of α. The three characteristic parameters β, γ and Tc, that is, the annual electricity production from MOX fuels and the reprocessing, are used as levers for readjustment. The definition of the levers is assumed to be a transcription of the following information:
If the initial trajectory is not resistant facing the disruption of the total electricity production, the industrial decision-makers (eg, nuclear industry manager) may decide to readjust the MOX fuel loadings and reprocessing capacity to cope with the impact of disruption. The readjustments are following the profile shown in Figures 7 and 8.
For the sake of applying the resilience evaluation scheme, we launch the multi-constraint version of the SUR algorithm and get a database composed of n = 3100 trajectories and rich in knowledge about valid and invalid cases. We construct five Kriging models with this database corresponding to the five imposed constraints shown in Section 2.3.3. Using the outputs of these five Kriging models, we construct a trajectory validity estimator pn according to Equation (2).
3.3.1 Application of resilience to one invalid disrupted trajectory
First, the scheme is applied to one invalid non-resistant disrupted trajectory derived from the initial one in Section 3.2. The characteristic parameters of the selected invalid non-resistant disrupted trajectory are (α = 0.70, β = 1.0, γ = 1.0, Tc = 2035) and its validity is as follows:
urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er6185:er6185-math-0016
The constraints C1 and C2, that is, the full use of the reprocessing plant and the feasibility in terms of having enough Pu in the separation stockpile, are violated since there are no enough spent UOX fuels to be reprocessed (see Figures 15 and 16). One should adapt the deployment of MOX fuels and the reprocessing, that is, ., β, γ, and Tc, according to the disrupted total electricity production. For this end, the resilience evaluation scheme in Figure 3 is applied to this invalid disrupted trajectory, and β, γ, and Tc are used as levers. More precisely, the following steps are done:
Ncandidates = 8 × 105 candidate readjusted trajectories are proposed by randomly sampling β, γ and Tc on their variation ranges and keeping α = 0.70, without being verified by the scenario code.
The values of the trajectory validity estimator pn for each of these Ncandidates candidate readjusted trajectories are rapidly calculated.
According to the filtering condition pn > Tfilter with Tfilter = 0.9999, Npotential = 462 among the Ncandidates candidate trajectories are selected as the potential ones with high confidence of validity.
The scenario code COSI6 is called to verify the validity of the Npotential potential trajectories.
After the steps given above, Nvalid = 452 from these Npotential trajectories are verified valid. The pair plots of β, γ, and Tc of the Nvalid successfully readjusted trajectories are given in Figure 17. In the first place, it can be seen that there are two different groups of readjustment ways, respectively, with (0.30 < β < 0.55, 0.39 < γ < 0.51, 2036 < Tc < 2050) and (0.82 < β < 0.86, 0.83 < γ < 0.87, 2036 < Tc < 2041), showing the high flexibility to readjust the chosen disrupted trajectory by adapting β, γ, and Tc. However, in other variation domains of β, γ, and Tc, our method gives no valid readjusted trajectory. But it does not mean that there is no valid readjustment way in these domains. One should notice that the selection of these Nvalid readjustment ways shown in Figure 17 depends on the database for the construction of Kriging models and the choice of filtering condition. With a different database or a different filtering condition, there can be other different readjustment ways. Indeed, the resilience evaluation scheme in Figure 3 is not an exploration method to figure out all successful readjustment ways while its goal is to demonstrate the possibility to achieve successful readjustments. The results shown in Figure 17 are only a part of all possible successful readjustments for the chosen invalid disrupted trajectory.
FIGURE 17
Pair plots of β, γ and Tc for Nvalid = 452 successfully readjusted trajectories (each point in the same figure corresponds to a successfully readjusted trajectory) [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
A successfully readjusted trajectory with characteristic parameters (α = 0.70, β = 0.84, γ = 0.84, Tc = 2038) is chosen as an example. Compared with the initial trajectory (α = 1.0, β = 1.0, γ = 1.0, Tc = 2035), the total electricity production is reduced to 70% since 2035; the electricity production from MOX fuels decreases to 84% since 2060; the reprocessing capacity is readjusted to 84% from 2038 on. The simulation results of this valid readjusted trajectory are shown in Figures 18-22-18-22, and the values of constraint indicators are as follows:
FIGURE 18
Annual electricity production in nuclear fleet for successfully readjusted trajectory (α = 0.70, β = 0.84, γ = 0.84, Tc = 2038) [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 19
Annual electricity production from MOX fuels for successfully readjusted trajectory (α = 0.70, β = 0.84, γ = 0.84, Tc = 2038) [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 20
Inventory of Pu in separation stockpile for successfully readjusted trajectory (α = 0.70, β = 0.84, γ = 0.84, Tc = 2038) [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 21
Pu content inside fresh MOX fuels for successfully readjusted trajectory (α = 0.70, β = 0.84, γ = 0.84, Tc = 2038) [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
FIGURE 22
Inventories of spent fuels for successfully readjusted trajectory (α = 0.70, β = 0.84, γ = 0.84, Tc = 2038) [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
In this application, the false-positive rate, defined as the proportion of invalid ones among all potential trajectories that are considered valid by the scheme and verified by the scenario code, is (1 − Nvalid/Npotential) × 100% = 2.2%. A low false-positive rate implies that the scheme is efficient in terms of finding valid readjusted trajectories. Moreover, one can remark that there can be many different readjustment ways for a given invalid disrupted trajectory (see Figure 17). However, it is difficult to take all of them into account during the decision-making process. A solution is to establish preferences to choose one readjustment way among different possibilities. Generally, these preferences are given by the decision-makers like the nuclear energy industry heads and governments. Their construction integrates different considerations such as the economic cost, the impact of nuclear waste on the environment, and natural resource consumption.
3.3.2 Application of resilience to different invalid disrupted trajectories
The resilience evaluation scheme is then applied to different invalid disrupted trajectories. We remind that Nnon − resistant = 182 invalid non-resistant disrupted trajectories are produced in Section 3.2 by disrupting the valid initial trajectory (α = 1.0, β = 1.0, γ = 1.0, Tc = 2035) with different values of α. This time, the resilience evaluation scheme in Figure 3 is applied to each of these invalid disrupted non-resistant trajectories, and the levers are still β, γ, and Tc. As said in Section 3.3.1, there are usually many different successful readjustment ways for a given invalid disrupted trajectory. During the decision-making process, one needs preferences to select only one valid readjusted trajectory among different possibilities. In this Section 3.3.2, we choose two opposite preferences to readjust each of these Nnon − resistant disrupted trajectories separately to show the impact of preference. They are as follows:
P1: Among different possibilities, choosing the one that can maximize the γ value, that is, the reprocessing capacity after readjustment.
P2: Among different possibilities, choosing the one that can minimize the γ value, that is, the reprocessing capacity after readjustment.
The following steps are performed for each of the Nnon − resistant disrupted trajectories to apply the resilience evaluation scheme:
Ncandidates = 8 × 105 candidate readjusted trajectories are proposed by randomly sampling β, γ, and Tc on their variation domains and keeping the disrupted α value unchanged, without being verified by the scenario code.
The values of the trajectory validity estimator pn for each of these Ncandidates trajectories are rapidly calculated.
According to the filtering condition pn > Tfilter with Tfilter = 0.90, potential trajectories with high confidence of validity are obtained. Comparing with the filtering condition in Section 3.3.1, the value of Tfilter at this time is chosen smaller to ensure the existence of potential trajectories.
These potential trajectories with high confidence of validity are ranked according to the value of γ. A larger (or smaller) value of γ is preferred by preference P1 (or by preference P2).
The COSI6 scenario code is called to verify the validity of the selected potential trajectories one by one according to the ranking order until a successful readjusted trajectory is found.
After the steps given above, all Nnon − resistant invalid disrupted trajectories are successfully readjusted with both preferences. This result implies that the initial trajectory is not resistant but resilient when the disruption impact is strong. One has obtained resilience strategies as complementary solutions to the resistance strategy to cope with the impact of the disruption. The readjusted β, γ, and Tc as functions of the disrupted α value are shown in Figure 23. First, one can see that for a given disrupted trajectory (ie, a given disrupted α value), different preferences can lead to quite different readjustment ways (ie, different values of β, γ, and Tc after readjustment) and thus different nuclear reactor fleet evolutions. Hence, one should choose preferences carefully during the decision-making process. Second, considering that two preferences are, respectively, the maximization and the minimization of γ value, two groups of scattered points (orange and blue points) in Figure 23 b indicate the possible readjustment interval of γ value as a function of the disrupted α value. As an argument, Figure 17 shows different successful readjustment ways for the invalid non-resistant disrupted trajectory with α = 0.70, and all different possible γ values given in Figure 17 lay in the interval indicated by Figure 23B when α = 0.70, that is, . [0.37, 0.87]. Knowing the possible readjustment intervals of characteristic parameters can bring benefits to the decision-making as it can help to avoid the vain analysis out of the ranges of interest.
FIGURE 23
Successfully readjusted β, γ, and Tc as functions of disrupted α corresponding to the Nnon − resistant = 182 invalid non-resistant disrupted trajectories in Section 3.2 using preferences P1 and P2 (each point in the same figure corresponds to a successful readjusted trajectory) [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
One should mention that the results in Figure 23 depend on many factors, such as the database for the construction of Kriging models and the choices of filtering conditions. With a different database or filtering condition, the results can be different.
3.4 Integration of resistance and resilience studies
As sketched in Figure 24, integrating the results in Sections 3.2 and 3.3.2, one can conclude that the initial trajectory (α = 1.0, β = 1.0, γ = 1.0, Tc = 2035) is
resistant to total energy production disruption in the interval α∈ [0.81, 1.00]
resilient to total energy production disruption in the interval α∈ [0.70, 0.81] if given levers β∈ [0.00, 1.00], γ∈ [0.00, 1.00], and Tc∈ [2023, 2060].
FIGURE 24
Resistance and resilience of initial trajectory (α = 1.0, β = 1.0, γ = 1.0, Tc = 2035) vs disruption of α [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
One should mention that the selection of levers can be considered a degree of freedom in the resilience study. According to different compositions of levers, different resilience strategies can be formed. One can propose different compositions of levers, that is, different resilience strategies, for different impact levels of disruption. For example, in this paper, the disrupted α variates between 0.7 and 1.0, and the levers are β, γ, and Tc. If α is disrupted into a smaller value, for example, ., α < 0.6, it is possible that the readjustment with β, γ, and Tc can be no longer sufficient as the impact level is too high. In that case, one may add some other controlled parameters, such as the MOX fuel burnup in the Gen-III+ reactors, as supplementary levers to form another resilience strategy. As a result, one has two different resilience strategies corresponding to different impact levels of disruption. Generally, the more complex the composition of levers is, the higher the impact level of disruption can be manipulated. However, a complex composition of levers usually stands for the high costs from the points of view of economics and engineering, forming a limit for the decision-makers when choosing the resilience strategies.
4 CONCLUSIONS
Nuclear fuel cycle scenario studies are subject to vast uncertainties because of the lack of knowledge or information about the future at the time of study. As a method that comes naturally to overcome such a problem, resistance strategy consists in constructing the trajectories that are capable of standing against any uncertainty by themselves and that still satisfy the constraints without taking any action after the disruption. However, this strategy is not always sufficient in scenario studies.
As a complementary solution, resilience strategy is defined and developed in this study. For a valid scenario trajectory, the resilience is considered a capability to be readjusted to avoid the constraint violation caused by the disruption. The readjustment is carried out by changing the values of levers, which are also called controlled parameters. A scheme has been developed based on Kriging surrogate models and the state-of-the-art SUR algorithm to evaluate the resilience of trajectories.
In the present study, the resilience assessment method is applied to an academic scenario study problem. In the considered scenario model, an initial Gen-II nuclear reactor fleet composed of 58 PWR is gradually transformed into a new fleet purely composed of Gen-III+ reactors. In order to characterize a trajectory with a reduced number of parameters, a fleet driving model is included between the scenario code and the decision-making to determine the evolution of the nuclear fleet according to several rules. Five constraints are considered for defining the validity of trajectories: the full use of reprocessing plant, the feasibility in terms of having enough Pu in the separation stockpile, the limit on the Pu storage capacity in the separation stockpile, the safety limit on the Pu content inside fresh MOX fuels, and the limit on the storage capacity of spent fuels. A valid initial trajectory is given a priori by keeping the total electricity production, the electricity production from MOX fuels, and the reprocessing capacity constant from 2019 to 2080.
As a study plan, the resistance of the initial trajectory vs the disruption on the fleet total electricity production is firstly investigated. This disruption is supposed to be a transcription of information: “At the time of a scenario study, the total electricity production of the nuclear reactor fleet is assumed to remain constant with the level in 2019 during the simulation. Through the scenario study, the valid initial trajectory shown in Section 3.1 is proposed. However, in the future, the study background may be different from that supposed in the scenario study due to the uncertain future. As a result, the political decision-makers (eg, government) may decide to reduce the total electricity production of the nuclear reactor fleet according to the profile in Figure 6 to cope with the disrupted context. This change in electricity production is unexpected and unforeseen in the scenario study in which the valid initial trajectory is proposed. Thus, this change in electricity production constitutes disruptions for the previous scenario study.” The more the energy production is reduced, the higher the impact level of the associated disruption is. As intuitively expected, the results demonstrate that the resistance of the initial trajectory is held only for a certain limited impact level of disruption while it is broken down as the impact level goes higher. If the total energy production is too much reduced, then the production rate of spent UOX fuels becomes too small so that there are no enough spent UOX fuels in the cycle for reprocessing, resulting in the under-capacity operation for the reprocessing plant and the lack of separated Pu to supply the fresh MOX fuel fabrication. Thus, the disrupted trajectories fail to meet the imposed constraints as the impact of disruption is too strong. It is concluded that the resistance strategy is not sufficient in the scenario studies. As a complementary solution, the resilience strategy can be used to take readjustments into account to counterbalance the impact of disruption.
Next, the resilience evaluation scheme is applied to one invalid non-resistant disrupted trajectory derived from the initial one. The disruption of total energy production is kept, and the deployment of MOX fuels and the reprocessing are used as levers for readjustment. It is showed that the chosen invalid non-resistant disrupted trajectory can be successfully readjusted to meet the constraints by adapting the levers. Moreover, there are many different possibilities to readjust, some of which are even quite different from each other. During the decision-making process, it is difficult to take all of these possibilities into account, and one needs to formulate preferences to choose one among them.
The resilience evaluation scheme is afterward applied to all invalid non-resistant disrupted trajectories derived from the initial trajectory: the levers for readjustment are still the deployment of MOX fuels and the reprocessing. Two opposite preferences are considered in this study to show the importance of preferences in the decision-making process: they are the maximization and the minimization of reprocessing capacity after readjustment. These two preferences are used to choose one final valid readjusted trajectory among all possibilities for each of invalid non-resistant disrupted trajectories. First, the results show that all invalid non-resistant disrupted trajectories can be successfully readjusted with both preferences. One can conclude that the valid initial trajectory is either resistant or resilient for all different impact levels of disruption that it receives in this study. Besides, it is found that for a given invalid non-resistant disrupted trajectory, its corresponding final valid readjusted trajectories chosen with two different preferences can be quite diverse (thus, leading to different nuclear reactor fleet evolutions). Moreover, with the two considered preferences, the resilience evaluation scheme can give the possible readjustment interval for reprocessing capacity as a function of the disruption impact level, from which the decision-making can be of benefit.
Overall, the developed resilience assessment method is an efficient tool to deal with the failure of trajectories caused by disruption. The application of this developed method to other academic scenario problems, such as the one in which the mixture of spent UOX and MOX fuels in a reprocessing plant is considered, is an ongoing work.
Endnote
1 The decennial visit is a periodic examination imposed to a reactor for a safety review to authorize the operation of next 10 years.
APPENDIX A: SUR ALGORITHM AND FURTHER DEVELOPMENT
Let us considers a constraint such as I(x) ≤ T where I(∙) is a constraint indicator, x is the characteristic parameters of a trajectory, and T is a given threshold value. With these notations, the iteration steps of the SUR algorithm are given in Figure A1.5 The observation point at each iteration step is selected by minimizing the so-called SUR criterion Jq, which is expressed as:
@(A1)
where Ω represents the study domain. The value of Jq(xq + 1) is the expectation of residual uncertainty about the contour line where I(x) = T when knowing q observations (xi, I(xi))1 ≤ i ≤ q and choosing xq + 1 as a new observation point while without evaluation by scenario code at xq + 1.
FIGURE A1
Iteration steps of SUR algorithm
The SUR criterion shown in Equation (A1) considers only one constraint. However, in scenario studies, the multi-constraint situation is frequently met. To adapt to the scenario studies, we propose a multi-constraint SUR criterion in our study to improve the SUR algorithm. Supposing (Ii(x) ≤ Ti)1 ≤ i ≤ M M constraints, the developed multi-constraint SUR criterion is expressed as follows:
urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er6185:er6185-math-0019
(A2)
where pi,q is the excursion probability corresponding to ith constraint Ii(x) ≤ Ti and constructed with q observations. The interested readers can refer to Reference 4 for more details about the improvement of the SUR algorithm.
