<title>Preliminary assessment of viability of molten‐salt tower technology</title>
<author> Sheela K. Ramasesha</author>
<Affiliation>Energy and Environment Research Programme, National Institute of Advanced Studies Indian Institute of Science Campus Bengaluru 560012 India</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>International Journal of Energy Research</Journal>
<Publishing_house>John Wiley & Sons Inc. </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1002/er.5653</DOI>
<URL>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/er.5653</URL>
Summary
India has incorporated renewable energy sources like solar and wind in its energy mix in order to achieve its ambitious plan to set up 175 GW of renewable energy by 2022 to reduce the emissions of greenhouse gases. Among the solar technologies for power generation, solar photovoltaic (SPV) is considered and large SPV parks are deployed around the country. Some of the drawbacks of deploying large-scale SPV parks are discussed in the manuscript. Because of the intermittency of SPV and wind, there is a backup resource of fossil fuel fired thermal plants that are ramped up or down to meet the electricity demand in the grid, especially the peak demand. The manuscript proposes that India has to consider solar thermal technology that can be ramped up and down, namely, the molten-salt solar tower technology (STT). Based on the direct solar irradiance data there are about 6000 sq. km of land with 7.5 to 8.0 kWh/m2/day and about 12 000 sq. km with 7.0 to 7.5 kWh/m2/day where such STT plants can be set up. Cost analysis demonstrates that the capital cost of STT plant is roughly ₹ 389 million per MW. This is quite competitive compared to the nuclear and coal thermal technologies because these technologies have high operational costs.
1 INTRODUCTION
India, with 2654 million tons of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions in 2018, is the third highest emitter in the world.1 Roughly about 40% to 50% of total CO2 emissions comes from the power sector.2, 3 India, during the 2015 United Nations Climate Change Conference (COP 21 held in Paris), has pledged a 33% to 35% reduction from the 2005 level in CO2 emissions intensity of GDP by 2030. In order to achieve this, about 40% of the power generated will be from non-fossil fuel-based resources. Government of India has ambitious plans of setting up 175 GW of renewable energy capacity by 2022.4 As of February 2020, India has an installed capacity of renewable energy of 81.31 GW, with solar and wind capacities of 31.98 and 37.67 GW, respectively.5 The rest being biomass and small hydroelectric plants.
The solar installations have principally been photovoltaic (PV) panels either on the ground or on rooftops. There are some drawbacks in increasing PV installations. Firstly, there are very few panel manufacturers in India. Even those who manufacture import the silicon wafers and package them. Thus, most of the panels that are used in PV parks are imported leading to heavy dependence on imports for solar PV activities.
Secondly, and most importantly, power generated from PV plants, unless stored in batteries, cannot meet the peak power demand in the grid. Figure 1 shows the typical power demand pattern, also termed as the duck curve, for the whole country, which looks similar to the one in places around the world.6, 7 As can be seen, the morning peak and evening peak demand happens around 7.30 to 11 am and 6.30 to 7.30 pm, respectively. The ramp up is of the order of 13 GW in 2½ h from 4 pm onwards. Power generation from renewable sources (RES) during the day on February 5, 2019 with installed capacity of 75 GW is plotted in Figure 2. This graph is similar to the ones obtained at other locations.8-10 With such a generational pattern through the day, the renewables cannot meet either the morning or the evening peak power demand even if the RES installed capacity is increased to 175 GW. Storing energy in batteries and using during peak hours is an expensive option. Hence, the fossil-fuel fired thermal plants are ramped up and down to meet the peak power demand. Sometimes these plants are kept running at non-optimal levels so that they can be cranked up and thus, contributing to higher CO2 emission. It is known that an efficiency increase by 1% of the coal thermal plants amounts to a reduction in CO2 emissions by 2% to 3%.11 The other possible options to meet the peak power demand are hydroelectric, pumped hydro storage and Gas fired power plants. Hydroelectric plants can be cranked up and down more easily than the thermal plants because the ramp rate of hydro power plants in India is ~50% per minute12, 13 compared to 1.5% to 3% for coal power plants.14 Their ability to generate power depends heavily on the amount of water available in the dams. If the monsoon has been good in a particular year, the hydroelectric plants work very well, but challenges emerge when the monsoons fail. Pumped hydro storage is a possibility, but again, it is monsoon dependent. Gas fired power plants have other challenges because very few gas wells are found around the country and gas must be imported depleting the foreign exchange reserves.
FIGURE 1
Typical all India power demand curve15
FIGURE 2
Renewable generation during the day on February 5, 2019,16 graph recreated from POSOCO 2019 February Monthly operations report
Hence, India seriously needs to consider solar technologies other than PV, for generating electricity that can be used 24 × 7, which are making headway in other countries. One such technology is molten salt solar tower technology (STT) where molten salt acts like a battery to store solar energy and can be integrated viably into large-scale thermal energy storage.
Most of the research around the world, on STT, is focused on identifying and improving the properties of materials used for absorption of solar heat and storage containers for molten salt. The thermal properties of the salt mixture are studied extensively. Though 60:40 mixture of NaNO3:KNO3 is the most popular medium for absorbing solar heat, an attempt is being made to improve the thermal properties of this mixture with addition of carbonates17 and MgO.18 The particle size effect of the salts has also been studied.19 Studies are carried out on carbonate salt mixtures where the plant operating temperatures can be pushed up to 700°C.20 Addition of LiNO3 to the salt mixture increased the corrosion resistance of the alloy SS 32121 and SS310 fared better with addition of KCl/NaNO2.22 On techno-economic front, through simulations it is seen that a reduction in LCOE of 2.7% can be achieved by tuning the functional material for coating on the molten salt receiver.23
Viability of a solar technology is country specific as the magnitude of solar irradiance plays a major role in its application. In this manuscript, the feasibility and advantages of using molten salt solar thermal plant in India are explored. There are many locations in the country which are suitable for setting up STT plants to provide the much needed 24 × 7 power supply. In STT, the heat is stored in molten salt, which generates steam to run the turbine for electricity generation. The technology has the ability to ramp up and down to meet the peak power demand during the mornings and evenings overcoming the intermittency issues associated with the renewable energy resources.
2 THE TECHNOLOGY
Solar power can be converted into electricity using two types of technologies, namely, photovoltaics and thermal. Photovoltaics convert sunlight into electricity directly, whereas solar thermal technology uses the heat from the sun to generate steam to run the steam turbines to generate electricity. Among the solar thermal technologies, parabolic troughs (PTC) and linear Fresnel lenses (LFC) are popular for generating electricity in addition to the molten salt tower technology.24 The solar concentration ratios in PTC and LFC are to a maximum of 40 to 45 compared to up to 1500 in the case of the STT. The corresponding temperatures that can be achieved at the receiver will also be lower in the PTC and LFC.25, 26 In India, a few PTC and LFC technologies are installed for processes in industries where the temperature requirements are below 500°C.27
The molten salt tower technology is simple and straightforward. It is similar to the conventional coal thermal technology except that instead burning fossil fuels to generate steam solar heat is utilized. A schematic diagram of the entire technology is shown in Figure 3. The top of a tower houses a mixture of salts, typically a mixture of sodium nitrate and potassium nitrate with composition 60:40 wt%,28 has a melting point of 238°C. Sunlight is focused onto the top of the tower, in other words onto the salt mixture, using hundreds of mirrors placed on sun trackers that are located all around the tower. The salt mixture reaches a temperature of 560°C that is much beyond its melting point. The viscosity of the molten salt mixture decreases and hence flows easily. The molten salt mixture is stored in hot containers until electricity is needed and is used to generate steam to run the steam turbines. The cooled salt mixture is pumped back up to the tower for reuse and is not wasted. The downstream steam from the turbine is condensed and recirculated.
FIGURE 3
Schematic diagram of the molten salt solar tower technology29 [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
3 INCORPORATING SOLAR THERMAL TECHNOLOGY IN THE ELECTRICITY MIX
In India, power generation is from multiple sources like coal, lignite, gas, diesel, hydro, nuclear and renewable. The first four sources, namely, coal, lignite, gas and diesel can be grouped as fossil fuels. These are the most polluting resources and at the same time they provide the most stable power supply. These resources form the backbone of the country's power sector with more than 78% electricity being generated from them. The electricity generated (E) can be expressed as,
@(1)
where A, B, C, D, F and G are the power generated from fossil fuel thermal, hydroelectric, wind, solar PV, nuclear and other RE plants, respectively. The total electricity generated during the period of April 2018 to March 2019, is 1345.8 Billion units, out of which 1068.3 billion units came from the thermal plants.2, 30 There is a small component of electricity of about 8495.82 million units that is exported to Nepal, Myanmar and Bangladesh, which is not considered here.
Figure 4 shows the all India monthly variations in electricity generation during the year based on meeting the demand. The power production from hydro plants and wind parks, B and C in Equation (1), increases during the months of May to October and is low from Jan to April. Generation from solar parks with photovoltaics (D in Equation (1)) would increase during the summer and low during the cloudy months of monsoon.31 The generation from fossil fuel fired thermal plants, term A in Equation (1), is increased or decreased appropriately to cover the variations and generation gaps from other sources to meet the power demand.
FIGURE 4
Electricity generation (in Billion Units) from various resources during April ‘18 to March ‘19. Generation from fossil fuel fired plants is combined under thermal. Generation from biogas, bagasse and small hydro are combined as other RES2
In addition to the variation in power demand during the day, there are weekly and monthly variations and the generation must be tuned to that demand. Accordingly, some of the thermal plants work continuously to meet the base load and some run only when the power demand is high.15 Figure 5 shows the monthly variation in E. E is high during the months of May, August and October and least in February.
FIGURE 5
All-India monthly variation in electricity generation, in Billion Units, to meet the demand
The proposition is that, can only a fixed number of the thermal plants work at maximum plant load factor (PLF) capacity, so that their efficiency is high, all through the year with no variation and all other thermal plants shut down, so that the environmental pollution is minimized? If yes, how can demand variation in power be met?
Pumped water storage and solar thermal are two technologies that can be attempted to generate the demand variation in power. For pumped water storage technology, water is pumped from a ground reservoir to higher altitudes to store in artificially created lakes and run downhill to generate electricity when needed. The pumping up of water using electricity, is usually carried out during off-peak hours so that electricity can be generated during peak hours. The main drawback with this technology is that it is heavily dependent on the monsoon and the level of water in the ground reservoir. Considering solar thermal tower technology and by adding a new term T in Equation (1), it is possible to see how it can be worked out.
@(2)
If it is assumed, based on 2018 to 2019 power consumption in the country, that the term A, namely, generation from fossil fuel fired thermal plants, is kept constant at 83 BU all through the year (Figure 6) by operating some plants at high PLF. The difference in E with all other variations in terms B, C, D, F and G during high demand months of March, April, May and October is in the range of 11 to 14 BU.
FIGURE 6
The new power mix scenario if solar thermal is incorporated
4 FEASIBILITY
Since there is no solar tower plant in the country, data from Ivanpah solar thermal plant set up in California, USA, is considered in all calculations.32 This solar thermal plant is a 377 MW (net) built on a 14.2 km2 area with about 173 500 heliostats and each heliostat has two mirrors on it. The area requirement is about 9 acres per MW.33 The site receives solar direct normal irradiance (DNI) of 2717 kWh/m2/year34 amounting to an average daily DNI of 7.44 kWh/m2/day. The planned power generation from the plant is ~1 BU annually, but the actual production has been about 0.8 BU during 201835 or 0.07 BU per month on an average. In order to generate the required electricity difference in India during the high demand month of October, which is about 14 BU, STT plants of capacity 75 GW(net) are needed assuming the locations with similar DNI are chosen.
According to the NREL DNI map of India, shown in Figure 7, about 6000 sq. km of land gets a DNI of 7.5 to 8.0 kWh/m2/day, about 12 000 sq. km gets 7.0 to 7.5 kWh/m2/day and about 15 000 sq. km gets 6.5 to 7.0 kWh/m2/day. The area required to set up a 75 GW (net) STT plant is around 2840 sq. km. Not all of them need to be in a single location, but distributed at locations with 7.5 to 8.0 and 7.0 to 7.5 kWh/m2/day DNI. A study by A.T. Kearney and ESTELA suggests that for every increase in DNI of 100 kWh/m2/year (amounting to 0.27 kWh/m2/day), the tariff and Levelized cost of energy (LCOE) decrease by 4.5%.36 From DNI and area required perspective, it is feasible to generate 14 BU of electricity in India from STT plants.
FIGURE 7
NREL/MNRE DNI map of India, legend trimmed for clarity [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
5 COST CALCULATIONS
It is seen above that there are locations in the country with high DNI and there is a requirement of STT plants so that the fossil fuel fired thermal plants can be run efficiently with minimum emissions of polluting gases. Since data on 4000 MW coal-fired thermal (Yadadri) and nuclear (Kudankulam) plants are available in the country, the calculations for STT plant of the same capacity are carried out.
Again, since we do not have any reference to the economics for setting up such STT plants in India, Ivanpah plant cost is considered. Of course, this will be the top end cost as in India, the labor, land and materials cost would be much lower. Ivanpah plant was set up at a capital cost of $5561 per kW. Taking a conversion rate of ₹ 70 per $ and calculating for an STT plant of 4000 MW, the capital cost turns out to be in the range of ₹ 1557 billion amounting to ₹ 0.389 billion per MW. Compare with conventional resource power plants like coal and nuclear. In India, the new more efficient coal thermal plants like the Yadadri in Telangana with a capacity of 4000 MW cost around ₹ 250.99-300 billion and an addition of ₹ 66 billion per year for the imported coal.37, 38 In about 19 years, the cost would surpass the solar thermal plant even with rates from the US STT plant. The fluctuating coal costs, the cost of ₹ 31 billion for the environmental norms of Fluegas Desulfurization (FGD), carbon credit costing and other health costs are not even taken into account here. Coming to the nuclear thermal plants, Government of India has taken up the Kudankulam project with 6 units and a capacity of 1000 MW each.39 The cost of units 1 and 2, started in 2001 at a cost of ₹ 131.71 billion that increased to ₹ 224.62 billion by 2014 and were functional by 2016. Units 3,4 are being built at a cost of ₹ 397.47 billion and units 5,6 will be built for ₹ 500 billion. There is a long gestation period before the nuclear plants become operational from the time of starting the construction and cost escalations are inevitable. For comparison, the STT plant at Ivanpah was built between 2010 and 2013.40 The nuclear fuel availability and the price are highly dependent on international economics and politics.41 Moreover, the spent fuel must be disposed off safely.
Levelized cost of Energy (LCOE) is defined as,
@(3)
Calculations carried out suggest that for solar thermal tower plant with storage LCOE is in the range of $126-156 per MWh compared to $66-152 for Coal and $118-192 for nuclear not taking into account the fuel price fluctuations.42 Internationally cost of electricity generated from STT plants is dropping over the years with 13.5 cents/kWh in 2009 to <5 cents/kWh in 2017.29
6 WATER USAGE
In STT plants the super-heated steam goes through the turbine system and is air condensed to form liquid water for recirculation. Thus, there is hardly any wastage of water in the process. However, to clean the mirrors periodically, there is some requirement of water. BrightSource Energy has calculated the water usage in an STT plant to be in the order of 0.03 gal/kWh as compared to coal which is 0.5 gal/kWh and nuclear which is 0.72 gal/kWh.32
In addition, if the STT plants are set up along the seashore or in deserts that are clean water stressed locations, with slight modification of the design of the steam pipe system, as shown in Figure 8, cleaning up of water can be carried out. The main modification in the design is that instead of recirculating water in the downstream steam heat exchanger, water from other sources that need to be cleaned can be used to cool the steam from the turbine block. The temperature of the steam at the outlet of the turbine is higher than 300°C, which can boil or even evaporate the brackish or saline water, which can be air cooled to get clean water. Thus, in a single system, in addition to generating clean power it is also possible to clean up locally available water. Based on the quality of the clean water that is generated, it can be used for human consumption or at least for agricultural purposes.
FIGURE 8
Schematic diagram of proposed changes in design of the condenser from Figure 3. The modifications are marked as 1 and 2. The brackish water is stored in tank 1 feeding into the heat exchanger and stream of cleaned water flowing out of the heat exchanger at 2 [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
7 MANUFACTURABILITY OF STT COMPONENTS
The main components required for setting up the STT plant are the tower with piping to carry salt mixture up and molten salt mixture down, pumps, mirrored surfaces, heliostats, heat storage tanks, steam turbines and condensers. The coal thermal power generation and transmission are being carried out in the country for a long time. The generation components like the steam turbine and transmission system are already in use. The other components specifically for the STT plants can be manufactured in the country by the local industries, including the heliostats and mirror finished metal surfaces. This capability will drive down the cost of setting up STT plants considered in the above calculations.
8 ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFITS
The fossil fuel fired thermal plants emit many greenhouse gases like CO2, oxides of nitrogen and Sulfur, organic compounds and many more gases that are known to cause global warming and is a cause of concern.43-45 These emissions also have an acute impact on human health.46-48 STT plants have zero emissions during the generation of power. However, during manufacture of components and hardware, there is the emission of greenhouse gases. The heliostats and the mirrors consume a large quantity of steel and aluminum. The construction of the tower involves construction materials. The mining and processing of the salt mixture and thermal storage of molten salt mixture need to be considered. Preparation of the site and transporting the materials to the site also involve emissions of gases. Many of these emissions are location specific as the number of heliostats used depends on the DNI resource and emissions due to transportation would be different. Assessment of life cycle emissions (LCA) of a 125 MW STT plant with 14 hours storage in South Africa indicates a value of 16.3 g CO2 eq. per kWh electricity generated.49 Similar calculations carried out for Portugal and chile indicate lower LCA by 3% and 11%, respectively. For Middle-East and Africa, with improved CTT technology, the predicted emission is 33 g CO2 eq. per kWh electricity generated.50 Comparing these numbers with the predicted life cycle greenhouse gas emissions taking into account the improvements in technologies, in China, for coal (subcritical) plant, without carbon capture and storage, is 933 g CO2 eq. per kWh and with carbon capture and storage it is 263 g CO2 eq. per kWh. For supercritical pulverized coal plant, without carbon capture and storage, is 871 g CO2 eq. per kWh and with carbon capture and storage it is 236 g CO2 eq. per kWh.50 In India, the direct weighted average emission of CO2 from the coal plants is 820 g per kWh of electricity generated.51 It is indeed beneficial to consider the STT plants for the generation of power, wherever possible, in order to battle the climate change.
9 CONCLUSIONS AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS
To meet the increasing energy demand in India, the fossil fuel fired thermal plants are used extensively in addition to deploying SPV and wind parks. The power from the renewable energy parks is intermittent, not being able to meet the peak power demand. Hence, coal thermal plants are ramped up and down to generate the extra power that is required to meet the peak demand making them less efficient and more polluting. To meet the peak power demand and the seasonal variations in power demand, the country should consider the newer solar technologies like the molten-salt tower technology. Based on the DNI intensities, many locations in the country are suitable for commissioning STT plants. The cost calculations and the land/water usage are in favor of the technology in addition to being environmentally friendly. The key takeaways of this study are:
India is an economically growing country and the demand for electricity is growing over the years.
There is a need to provide 24X7 power supply to sustain industrial growth and also to improve the quality of life of the people in the country.
Cranking up coal fired thermal plants when required is an inefficient and an environmentally unfriendly way of meeting peak demand. Instead, some supercritical fossil fuel fired thermal plants can be operated at constant levels efficiently, reducing the pollution levels and the others could be shut completely.
Solar tower technology can be Indianized and most of the components can be manufactured in the country, unlike the silicon-based photovoltaics. With this the cost of setting up STT plants will drop substantially, in addition to giving a big push to “Make in India” program.
Low to zero pollution from STT plants.
With certain modifications in the steam condenser design, in addition to generating electricity, locally available brackish or saline water can be cleaned up either for human consumption or agricultural purposes.
Research and development programs have to start in India before setting up a successful pilot STT plant. Ground based DNI measurements at select locations have to be carried out and analyzed. The actual cost of the various components required to build the plant has to be estimated. Based on these calculations, a road map can be drawn for commissioning an STT plant in India.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author would like to thank the Ministry of Earth Sciences (Grant no. MOES/16/15/2011/RDEAS(NIAS)) for supporting this research.
