<title>Chemical diffusion coefficient calculation of U 3+ in LiCl-KCl molten salt</title>
<author>Wentao Zhou; Jinsuo Zhang</author>
<Affiliation>Nuclear Engineering Program, Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, United States</Affiliation>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2016.04.017</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S014919701630097X</URL>
Highlights
Calculated the self-diffusivity of UCl3 in LiCl-KCl molten salt.
Derived the chemical diffusivity of UCl3 in LiCl-KCl molten salt.
Self-diffusivity decreases with concentration.
Chemical-diffusivity varies little initially then shows an increase by a decrease.
Abstract
Self-diffusion coefficient denotes the intrinsic diffusion of elements without the chemical gradient; generally, it is different from the chemical diffusion coefficient that is used in Fick's law. However, the self-diffusion coefficient can be converted to the chemical diffusion coefficient by considering the concentration-dependent activity coefficient of solute. In this study, the multiple time origins method was applied to calculate the self-diffusion coefficient of U3+ in LiCl-KCl eutectic salt at different temperatures and concentrations. The chemical diffusion coefficient was obtained based on the calculated results and thermodynamic theory. Calculated results show that self-diffusion coefficient decreases with concentration however chemical diffusion coefficient indicates to change little initially but appears to increase followed by decrease later within the concentration range of 0–3 at%.
Keywords:Self-diffusion coefficient;Chemical diffusion coefficient;U3+LiCl–KCl molten salt;Activity coefficient
1. Introduction
Pyroprocessing is an advanced electrochemical method for the treatment of used nuclear fuel. Since 1996, more than four metric tons of spent nuclear fuel from EBR-II has been processed by this method at Argonne National Lab to demonstrate its feasibility (Simpson, 2012). The key step of pyroprocessing is the electrorefining of metal fuel, during which noble metal fission products (FPs) and cladding are retained in the anode basket, alkaline metal and rare earth metal FPs remain in the molten salt, and U3+ deposits at solid cathode. Finally, Pu and other TRUs will deposit in liquid Cd or a new solid cathode (Willit et al., 1992). Compared to PUREX process, pyroprocessing can handle large quantities of “hot” fissile materials due to the electrolyte of molten salt and non-aqueous environment. Also, the equipment is simpler and more compact, thus it may have potential economic benefits and be possible for onsite processing. The most important feature is that pyroprocessing is supposed to be more resistant to proliferation since separated Pu remains mixed with other elements, which gives it an intrinsic barrier for proliferation resistance (Li and Simpson, 2002, McFarlane and Lineberry, 1997). These advantages make pyroprocessing a more attractive choice for treating used nuclear fuel.
Although there is intrinsic resistance for proliferation, safeguards of materials is still one of the main issues of pyroprocessing. There is no accountability tank in pyroprocessing, which is used to account materials in PUREX (Kok, 2009). Also, because of the non-uniform distribution of the metallic spent fuel, the initial amount of material put in anode of the electrorefiner may not be known. Thus, it is hard to determine the concentration or amount of the materials, such as U3+ and Pu3+, in molten salt during pyroprocessing even though the quantity of materials collected at cathode can be measured, which conflicts with the requirement of material accountancy for safeguards (Avenhaus, 1977).
One of the promising methods to solve this problem is the development of kinetic models of electrorefining (Zhang, 2014, Kobayashi and Tokiwai, 1993), through which the material flow could be predicted given the initial conditions for running the pyroprocessing. When applying the kinetic model, diffusion coefficients of the solutes in molten salt are indispensable. They directly affect how fast the elements can transport in the solution which may influence the reaction rate at both electrodes. Generally, the diffusion coefficient is expressed by Arrhenius law in dilution
@(1)
where D0 is the pre-exponential factor, Ea is the activation energy, and T is the absolute temperature in K. Eq. (1) indicates that the diffusion coefficient does not depend on the material concentration in the solution. It should be noted that the equation can only be applied to dilution cases. The diffusion coefficient of species in molten salt could be measured through electrochemical methods, such as cyclic voltammetry (CV), chronoamperometry (CP), and chronoamperometry (CA). These methods and their associated diffusion coefficients of actinides in LiCl-KCl molten salt for dilution cases have been extensively studied (e.g. (Serp et al, 2006, Caligara et al., 1968, Reddy et al., 2004, Masset et al., 2005, Kuznetsov et al, 2005)) and the results are listed in Table 1. Based on the review above, most of the available experimental correlations are obtained for dilution cases where U3+ is less than 0.5 at% (∼3.0 wt%). However, the concentration of U3+ could be up to 10 wt% in a real electrorefiner for processing used nuclear fuel (Bobolea, 2009). Therefore, the concentration-dependent diffusion coefficient is necessary to update the data reference.
Table 1. Diffusion coefficient of U3+ from literature.
Considering the limitation of experiment, such as the limited availability of actinides and the intense radiation, simulation method could be treated as a supplement. In fact, it has been successfully applied to calculate the diffusion coefficient of elements in molten salts (Morgan and Eapen, 2013, Nam et al, 2014). However, they stopped at self-diffusion coefficient calculation, which is the diffusivity without chemical gradient. The diffusivity determined from electrochemical experiment is the chemical diffusion coefficient. Generally, self-diffusion coefficient and chemical diffusion coefficient are different (Chempath et al., 2004). Self-diffusion coefficient cannot compare to the results from experiment or be used in Fick's law to describe the transport of elements with concentration gradient.
In the present study, Einstein method was applied to calculate the self-diffusion coefficient of U3+ in LiCl-KCl eutectic salt firstly and then the chemical diffusion coefficient was calculated based the relationship between the self-diffusion coefficient, chemical diffusion coefficient and the concentration-dependent activity coefficient.
2. Diffusion coefficient
For self-diffusion coefficient, there are two different but equivalent methods to calculate it. One is the Green-Kubo method (Frenkel and Smit, 2001), which is based on the velocities of particles. The other is known as the Einstein method (Frenkel and Smit, 2001), which is based on the coordinates of particles. For the Green-Kubo method, it involves the integral of the velocity autocorrelation function. For three dimensions, the self-diffusivity can be expressed as
@(2)
where N is the number of particles in the system and vi(t) is the velocity of particle i at time t. When the simulation time is long enough, the value of the integral should almost be constant. For the Einstein method, the mean square displacement (MSD) is calculated for individual particles for the self-diffusivity, since they are related by
@(3)
@(4)
where N is the number of particles in the system, nt is the number of time origins, and rj(t) is the coordinate of particle j at time t. After a long time equilibration, the diffusivity can be derived from the slope of MSD. Theoretically, these two methods should give the same results; however, there may be a “long-time” tail to the integral Green-Kubo method that can cause some numerical problems. For this reason, the Einstein method was chosen for the present simulation.
Self-diffusion coefficient is the intrinsic diffusion coefficient of the elements in the solution without chemical gradient. It is different from the chemical diffusion coefficient that is used in Fick's law to study the transport of element with concentration gradient (Chempath et al., 2004), but they can be related by (IUPAC, 1997)
@(5)
whereDic the Dis and  are the chemical diffusivity and self-diffusivity of species i, respectively. γi and xi are the activity coefficient and mole fraction of i, respectively. The concentration-dependent activity coefficient is needed to convert the self-diffusion coefficient to chemical diffusion coefficient. Eq. (5) indicates that the self-diffusion coefficient can represent the chemical diffusion coefficient when the activity coefficient is independent of concentration, which is reasonable for infinite dilute solution.
Considering the expression of Eq. (6), concentration dependent activity coefficient can be derived from excess Gibbs energy, which has been studied at 723 K in previous paper (Zhou and Zhang, 2015).
@(6)
where γi and ni are the activity coefficient and mole number of component i in solution, respectively. Gex is the excess Gibbs energy.
3. Simulation details
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulation method was used to calculate the self-diffusion coefficient of U3+ in LiCl-KCl eutectic salt at temperatures of 723 K and 773 K. It was achieved in the open-source software LAMMPS (Plimpton, 1995; http://lammps.sandia.gov). The interatomic potential used is Tosi-Fumi rigid potential (Fumi and Tosi, 1964, Tosi and Fumi, 1964). Then potential energy between two charged particles is given by
@(7)
where the rij is the distance between the particles i, j. Aij, σij, ρij, Cij, and Dij are parameters. qi and qj are the carried charges of ion i and j, respectively. ε0 is the vacuum permittivity. The parameters are shown in Table 2.
Table 2. Parameters used for the simulation (Salanne et al., 2008).
During the simulation, the pressure and time step were set as 1 bar and 1 fs, respectively. 6000 ions were used for LiCl-KCl eutectic salt (58% LiCl), and 10, 20 … 90 UCl3 were added to the LiCl-KCl molten salt, separately to create solutions with different concentrations (up to around 3 at% of UCl3). For each case, the NVE ensemble was run firstly for 5000 steps to bring the system to the desired temperature. Then NPT ensemble was run with 500,000 steps to reach the pressure of 1 bar. Next, NVT ensemble was run with 500,000 steps to do the final equilibration, after which, the trajectory information of U3+ was output every 1000 steps for totally 200,000 steps to calculate the MSD. 100 time origins were used for every MSD calculation and totally 100 values of MSD (at times of 1 ps, 2 ps, 3 ps … 100 ps) were calculated to fit the self-diffusivity under each concentration.
Since the MSD was fitted into a linear equation with time, such as
@(8)
where A and B are constant and diffusion coefficient can be derived from B according to Eq. (4), the uncertainty of B was calculated following the method described by Talor (Taylor and Cohen, 1997), which gives one sigma error as
@(9)
@(10)
where N is the number of data points, and
@(11)
4. Results and discussion
Fig. 1 shows the self-diffusion coefficient of U3+ in LiCl-KCl molten salt at different temperatures and concentrations. It indicates that the self-diffusion coefficient of U3+ is a function of both temperature and concentration. It increases with temperature but decreases with concentration.
Fig. 1. Self-diffusion coefficient of U3+ in LiCl-KCl with different temperatures and concentrations.
Following the method in the paper of Zhou (Zhou and Zhang, 2015), the molar excess Gibbs energy of LiCl-KClsingle bondUCl3 solution with different concentrations of UCl3 at 773 K can be calculated. The result is shown in Table 3. Fit the molar excess Gibbs energy using Margules model up to seventh order (Shpil'rain et al., 2002), the activity coefficient of UCl3 can be calculated. The relationship between activity coefficient and concentration at 723 K (Zhou and Zhang, 2015) and 773 K is shown as Fig. 2.
Table 3. Molar excess Gibbs energy of UCl3single bondLiCl-KCl solution with different concentrations of UCl3 at 773 K (The units are J/mol).
Fig. 2. Activity coefficient of UCl3 in LiCl-KCl at 723 K and 773 K (Zhou and Zhang, 2015).
Due to the relationship of
(12)
1+dlnγ/dlnx can be calculated through the fitting curves. Table 4 shows the values of 1+dlnγ/dlnx at the simulated concentrations, based on which, chemical diffusion coefficient in Eq. (5) can be derived. Fig. 3 shows the result of chemical diffusion coefficient at different temperatures and concentrations. The result indicates that the chemical diffusion coefficient is larger with higher temperature. Most importantly, it shows that the chemical diffusivity changes little initially but then has an increase and a decrease with the concentration even though the changes are not that significant. Present work will push us to consider the concentration dependence of the diffusion coefficient and also other thermodynamic properties since previously almost all the researches were conducted in dilute solution and assumed diffusion coefficient is concentration-independent. Table 5 shows the comparison of diffusion coefficient with the literature (Caligara et al., 1968, Reddy et al., 2004, Masset et al., 2005, Kuznetsov et al, 2005) at dilute solution and indicates that the result agrees well with existing experimental data.
Table 4. The values of (1+dlnγ/dlnx) at simulated concentration.
Fig. 3. Chemical diffusion coefficient of U3+ in molten LiCl-KCl.
Table 5. The chemical diffusion coefficient comparison at dilute solution (the values of this work are the average of the two lines in Fig. 3 for each temperature).
From the kinetic theory of Einstein relation (Einstein, 1905), the self-diffusion coefficient could be expressed by
(13)
where kB is the Boltzmann's constant, η is the dynamic viscosity, and r is the radius of the spherical particle. Eq. (13) explicitly shows that the diffusion coefficient is related to the temperature, and it may increase with the temperature since generally viscosity will become smaller when increasing the temperature (Janz et al., 1975). However, the concentration dependence is still implicit.
Kim et al. (Kim et al., 2012) studied the viscosity of LiCl-KCl Molten salts with actinides and lanthanides dissolved at 773 K by an object falling down method. The reported data show that viscosity increases with the concentration up to around 13 wt% even though it starts to decrease after that. The authors believe that it was caused by the distortion of the solution structure or the formation of the insoluble UCl3, NdCl3, CeCl3, and LaCl3 in solution (Kim et al., 2012). The turning point concentration is higher than the maximum one of 11 wt% used in the present simulation. Therefore, the viscosity is expected to increase in this work. With the results in mind, the self-diffusion coefficient D in Eq. (13) may be expected to decrease with higher viscosity, which means higher concentration. It supports the present simulation result of self-diffusivity at least qualitatively.
5. Conclusions
The present paper discussed the difference between self- and chemical-diffusivity, and developed the method to calculate them. The results show that the chemical diffusion coefficient of the U ion in the molten salt does have relationship with concentration. It varies little at low concentration below around 5 wt% but then shows an increase followed by a decrease. The Einstein theory of diffusion coefficient clearly indicates that self-diffusivity should be a function of temperature and viscosity. Investigation of the relationship between viscosity and concentration indicates that the viscosity of the molten salt increases in the concentration range considered in the present calculation, which leads to a smaller self-diffusion coefficient when the solute concentration increases. Therefore, the present calculated results of self-diffusivity are consistent with the Einstein equation.
The present work studied the concentration dependence of diffusivity of U3+ in LiCl-KCl comprehensively and may contribute greatly to material concentration measurement in LiCl-KCl molten salt by reversing the electrochemical process generally used to derive the diffusion coefficient given the concentration of UCl3 in LiCl-KCl molten salt. It is one of crucial parts for the safeguards of pyroprocessing of being aware of the material concentration and distribution.
Acknowledgements
This research has been performed using funding received from the DOE Office of Nuclear Energy's Nuclear Energy University Programs (Project NEUP-13-4908, PI: Prof. Jinsuo Zhang, Co-PI: Prof. Supathorn Phongikaroon), and is supported in part by an allocation of computing time from the Ohio Supercomputer Center.
