<title>A novel ionic liquid-impregnated chitosan application for separation and purification of fission 99Mo from alkaline solution</title>
<author>Tarek Monir; Ahmed Shahr El-Din; Yasser El-Nadi; Amal Alir</author>
<Affiliation> Hot Laboratories Center, Atomic Energy Authority , 13759 Cairo , Egypt</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Radiochimica Acta</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Walter de Gruyter GmbH</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1515/ract-2019-3202</DOI>
<URL>http://sci-hub.ren/10.1515/ract-2019-3202</URL>
Abstract:
In this investigation, a novel application of Aliquat 336 (tricaprylmethylammonium chloride)-impregnated chitosan (AICS) for the separation and purification
of 99Mo from some fission products, such as 137Cs, 85Sr and 131I, in alkaline solution is presented. Before impregnation, pristine chitosan experienced no adsorption affinity
for Mo. However, this situation dramatically changed after the impregnation. The structure of AICS was elucidated by TIR, SEM and EDX spectra. The influence of contact time, solution pH, weight of AICS, initial Mo concentration and temperature on the adsorption process was studied.
Kinetic studies revealed that the rate of adsorption was impressively very fast and only 3  min were sufficient to reach equilibrium. The pH influence showed that Mo could be effectively adsorbed over a wide range of pH 3–11.
The equilibrium data fitting to isotherms models followed the order Langmuir > Freundlich > Dubinin-Radushkevich.
Based on the Langmuir model, the maximum adsorption capacity was computed at 60.1  mg/L. Thermodynamic studies indicated that the adsorption process is spontaneous and endothermic in nature. Finally, a pure solution of 99Mo with a purity >99 % was obtained from a real sample. The data obtained confirmed that AICS is a promising candidate for separation and purification of 99Mo from alkaline media.
Keywords: Adsorption;chitosan;ionic liquid; molybdenum-99; separation.
1 Introduction
Since introducing the scintillating camera by Anger six decades ago, scientists have turned to the table of isotopes to look for radioisotopes that could be properly applied for in vivo nuclear medical test [1]. Of the 3000 radionuclides known, the 99Mo decay-product, technetium-99  m
(99mTc), is the predominant radionuclide used for pharmaceutical labelling in clinics of radiotherapy [2]. Due
to its short lifetime (t1/2 = 6.02  h) and relative low energy (140 keV), 99mTc has over 80 % of all nuclear diagnostic protocols conducted in these clinics throughout the world [3]. The generation of 99Mo has two general processes: 235U splitting and 98Mo neutron capture [4]. The former route applied in the Egyptian radioisotopes production plant is usually performed via 235U (n, f) 99Mo where the fission cross section is 586 barns and the fission yield of 99Mo is 6.15 %. After irradiating a 235U-enriched aluminum plate in the 22-MW nuclear reactor, alkaline solution is used in order to disintegrate this plate, producing a solution that contains MoO4 2− together with significant quantities of certain fission products and solid residue [5]. This solution is then chemically processed, to selectively separate
99Mo by applying alumina as adsorbent.
Molybdenum, from the chemical point of view, is a transition metal ion in the periodic table belonging to Group six. It shows many valence states according to its pH solution [6]. At pH < 1, cationic molybdenum species dominate the solution, whereas in the event of 1 < pH < 6,polynuclear anionic species prevail. But, due to the formation of the very highly stable MoO4 2−, monomeric tetrahedral molybdate complex, the mononuclear anionsare only distributed in the solution at pH > 6.There are different available techniques to separate99Mo from different media, like chemical precipitation,anion-exchange, adsorption and solvent extraction [7–12]. Qazi and Ahmad [7] investigated the sorption of 99Moat various pH solutions using hydrous titanium oxide(HTO). It has been recorded that HTO can extract 85 %of 99Mo at pH 3  within 1  h at room temperature. Nevertheless, 95 % of 99Mo was separated when the temperature increased to 100 °C. The capacity of three different
adsorbents, namely; acid alumina, neutral alumina and Dowex 1x8 anionic resin to adsorb 99Mo at pH range 0.1–13.0  was researched by Yamaura and his co-authors [8]. Both alumina and Dowex 1x8 showed high values for Mo adsorption (greater than 99 %) in the pH range from3 to 10. In contrast to alumina, the adsorption of 99Mo byDowex 1x8 had approximately no change in the pH range10–13, whereas, the adsorption% of 99Mo using alumina gnificantly declined to less than 10 %. A process based on the separation of 99Mo from sodium hydroxide solution using precipitation was also provided [9]. In this context, upon dissolving low enriched uranium (LEU)aluminium plate in nitric acid solution, 131I was precipitated as AgI and 99Mo was precipitated by alpha-benzoin oxime, which was then dissolved in NaOH. Thereafter, a purified solution of 99Mo was obtained after applying a series of silver-coated charcoal and activated charcoal columns. Solvent extraction process was also checked for the separation of 99Mo from sodium hydroxide solution using bis(2-ethyl-hexyl) phosphoric acid at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, USA [10]. Integrating both solvent extraction and ion exchange techniques were capable of reclaiming 65 % of 99Mo [11]. A recently developed method based on precipitating aluminum as Al(OH)3  and Iodin as AgI/AgIO3  prior to precipitating 99Mo as Mo-α-benzoin oxime was reported [12]. The precipitated 99Mo was then redissolved in NaOH solution and the acidity of the solution was adjusted to 0.1  M before applying the anion exchanger Amberlyst. Subsequently, the radiochemical yield of fission 99Mo was >80 % when nitric acid solution (6 M) was used for eluting the loaded 99Mo. Mareš et al. [13] studied the uptake of technetium from highly concentrated ammonium molybdate solution by Aliqua 336  supported on an inert polyacrylonitrile matrix. The equilibrium was reached within 30  min and maximum TcO4− capacity was determined as 1.338 mmol/g indicating that the prepared resin could be a promising material for Tc impurity separation from molybdate solutions. Among the aforementioned methods to separate 99Mo from alkaline solution, adsorption seems to be more preferable choice due to its flexibility, simplicity and cost-effectiveness. Owing to having good adsorption performance for some heavy metals and some anionic species, biosorbents have the potential to play a key role in separating 99Mo from other impurities [14–19]. The versatile, nitrogen-rich chitosan (CS), which is a product of the deacetylated chitins, exhibited good adsorption capability [20]. Guibal et al. [21] used raw chitosan to adsorb Mo(VI). They concluded that the efficiency of biosorption had been affected by the H+ and Mo(VI) concentrations.
The adsorption characteristics of chitosan can however be enhanced by applying whether structure chemical modification or chain crosslinking agents. Brion-Robyet al. [22] introduced an economic process for the treatment of Mo(VI)-contaminated water using acetic acid modified chitosan. In which the removal capacity was reached 123 mg/g at pH 7.8. Wang and Chen [20] stressed in their review article that modified chitosan can show significant sorption capacities for some different cationic and anionic species compared to unmodified one. Ranjbari et al. [23] prepared a novel Aliquat 336 impregnated chitosan beads and characterised it by different analytical techniques. They used the prepared material as adsorbent for removal of methyl orange and alizarin azo dyes efficiently where the optimum dosage was 2 g/L in a wide pH range of 7–11. Earlier, the influence of pH on the recovery of molybdate and vanadate with glutaraldehyde cross-linked chitosan was investigated [24]. A pH of 3 was the value at which the bio-sorbent gave high adsorption capacities for V(V) and Mo(VI). In an effort to examine their adsorption abilities with respect to Mo, a group of researchers manip lated virgin and linked chitosan [25].
They reported that aldehyde free groups improved the effectiveness of adsorption.
Herein, a possible applicability of AICS to separate and purify 99Mo from some fission products is given. Based on the obtained results AICS can be applied effectively in the separation of 99Mo from alkaline solution making it more likely to open up new avenues for radionuclide separation scientists to develop new sorbents based on biomaterials for the separation of 99Mo.
2 Experimental
2.1 Materials
Aliquat 336 (Tricaprylmethylammonium chloride)
([(CH2)7CH3]3CH3NCl), sodium molybdate (MoNa2O4 · 2H2O)and chitosan were shipped from Sigma Aldrich. The analytically graded reagents were utilized as received with no purification steps. Aqueous solution preparation was made using deionized water. The radioisotopes 137Cs, 131I, 85Sr and 99Mo were obtained from the Egyptian research reactor.
2.2 Preparation of AICS
AICS was prepared as reported elsewhere [26]. A predetermined amount (10 g) of the as-received flake chitosan (CS) was added to 200 mL-diluted sulfuric acid solution(4 % v/v) and stirred at room temperature for 60  min.
Then, the sulphate-cross-linked chitosan (SCCS) obtained after filtration was washed with deionised water and kept in an oven heated at 100 °C for drying. A portion of the dried SCCS (5 g) was refluxed with 60 mL of 0.05 M ioni liquid (Aliquat 336) in an acetone medium at 57 °C for 1 h.
Finally, the impregnated residue (AICS) was washed with deionised water, dried at 60 °C after being separated from the mixture. The amount of Aliquat 336 impregnated is 0.6  mmol/g. Proposed structural formulas for Chitosan (CS), Aliquat 336 and AICS are given in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Suggested structural diagram representing impregnation of chitosan with Aliquat 336.
Proposed structural formulas for (a) Chitosan (CS), (b) Aliquat 336 and (c) AICS.
2.3 Characterization of AICS
The AICS surface texture was defined by using SEM, JXA840A, JEOL and X-ray (EDX), while the structure of AICSwas analyzed by FT-IR patterns, Nicolet spectrometer, Meslo, USA.
2.4 Instrumentation
For inactive Mo(VI) determination, UV-160A spectrophotometer produced by Shimadzu, Japan was applied. The radiometric analysis of the radioisotopes 137Cs, 131I, 85Sr,and 99Mo before and after adsorption process was performed using multichannel NaI(Tl) scintillation detector (model 3M3/3-X, U.S.).
2.5 Sorption studies
Mo(VI) sorption onto AICS was performed in batch tests.
The operating parameters, for example, pH, time and temperature were examined by mixing 0.01 g of the prepared adsorbent with 5 mL of 100 mg/L Mo(VI). In addition, the Mo(VI) concentration parameter was tested in the 100–500 mg/L range. The AICS weight parameter was carried out in the 0.005–0.025 g range.
2.6 Real radioactive sampling application
A radioactive sample containing 99Mo produced from the Egyptian radioisotopes production plant was spiked with 137Cs, 131I, and 85Sr, and subjected to the adsorption process with AICS.
The adsorption efficiency of Mo(VI), the sorption capacities at time t (qt, mg/g) and at equilibrium (qe, mg/g) retained on AICS were determined utilizing the next equations, respectively [27]:
@(1)
@(2)
@(3)
where Co, Ce and Ct refer to Mo(VI) concentration (mg/L) at initial, equilibrium and time t, V denotes to the solvent volume (L) and m is the AICS mass (g).
3 Results and discussion
3.1 FTIR, SEM and EDX characterizations
The FTIR spectra of Aliquat 336, CS and AICS are shown in Figure 2a. The spectra obtained show that the absorption bands at 2924 cm−1 and 2855 cm−1 are assigned to the –CH3 groups of Aliquat 336 while the signals at 1462 cm−1 and 1378  cm−1 are attributed to the quaternary ammonium groups [28]. The typical chitosan absorption band appearing at 3517 cm−1 is assigned to the N–H stretching overlapped with O–H [29]. The bands of 1557  cm−1 and 1336 cm−1 are due to the extended vibration of both N–H and C–H. Besides, the two characteristic polysaccharide bands, due to the C–O stretching from β(1→4) glycosidic bonds were verified by the presence of the 1150 cm−1 and 1036 cm−1 bands [23, 28]. Figure 2a also illustrates the successful pre-treatment of chitosan with sulfuric acid by the signature band of sulfate appearing at 624 cm−1 [26].
Impregnation of CS with Aliquat 336  was supported by appearance of two small signals of –CH3  group in AICS spectrum as well as broadening and shifting of the O–H stretching vibration band from 3517  cm−1 to 3554  cm−1, which could be attributed to the effective interaction of the tricaprylmethylammonium cation with the hydroxyl group of chitosan in the form of an intermolecular hydrogen bonding interaction [30, 31]. On the other hand, the texture surface structure of AICS was defined by applying SEM micrograph analysis, Figure 2b. The surface morphology of AICS was smooth and had some porosity.
The sulfate group band detected in the FTIR analysis was verified by the EDX spectrum as exhibited in Figure 2c.The absence of the chloride peak in the EDX spectrum for the Aliquat 336 may be resulted from the use of a dilute Aliquat 336 solution during the AICS preparation.
Figure 2: FTIR analysis of chitosan, Aliquat 336 and impregnated chitosan (AICS) in addition to SEM and EDX for AICS. (a) FTIR spectra for CS, Aliquat 336 and AICS; (b) SEM and (c) EDX analysis for AICS.
3.2 Effect of pH
The pH effect on Mo sorption was analysed at 6–12 pH range. Batch experiments were performed by agitating AICS (0.01 g) and 5 mL of Mo solution (100 mg/L) in glass bottles for 30  min. The results drawn in Figure 3a demonstrated that as the pH increased during the investigated pH range, the adsorption percent decreased which is in agreement with other reports [26]. This behavior can be uncovered by using MEDUSA program to get the Mo speciation diagram, Figure 3b. In the pH region being examined, this diagram showed that MoO4
2− species dominate in the solution, ensuring a possible anion-exchange mechanism between these species and both SO4
2− groupsand Cl− in the AICS adsorbent (a proposed mechanism is given in Figure  4). However, at pH > 10 the OH− groups dominated the solution which might compete with MoO4
2−leading to a sharp drop in the molybdenum sorption efficiency to less than 20 %. Therefore, during the upcoming experiments the solution pH was fixed at 9.
Figure 3: Effect of pH on the adsorption of Mo (100 mg/L) on AICS and speciation of Mo at different pH values. Effect of (a) solution pH on the adsorption of Mo; and (b) speciation of Mo.
Figure 4: Proposed separation mechanism of MoO42− by AICS.
Figure 5: Effect of contact time and kinetic models for the adsorption of Mo on AICS. (a) Contact time; and (b) adsorption kinetics.
Table 1: Kinetic parameters for the adsorption of Mo onto AICS.
3.3 Effect of contact time and kinetic models
In order to determine the adsorption capacity and the separation efficiency of AICS for Mo, a batch technique was conducted at different time intervals (1–30 min). AICS (0.01 g) was shaken at ambient temperature with 5 mL of Mo ions (100  mg/L). Results in Figure 5a show that the adsorption percentage of Mo increased rapidly from less than 50 % to around 80 %, up by approximately 30 % after just 3 min. However, the loading capacity of AICS rose from 23.1 to 38.3 mg/g, by about 40 %. These findings show that AICS kinetic rate for the adsorbent was extremely rapid and that the contact time for equilibrium was only 3 min.
The contact time was therefore adhered to 5 min to maintain equilibrium for other experiments. To help understand the kinetic mechanism of Mo using the AICS adsorbent, the kinetic models of the nonlinear forms of the pseudo-first-order [32] (eq. 4) and pseudo-second-order [33] (eq. 5) were applied.
@(4)
@ (5)where q represents adsorption capacity at equilibrium(qe) and at different times (qt); K1 and K2 are the models constants.
The experimental data obtained from the effect of time were modelled in Figure 5b using the aforementioned
models and the parameters were listed in Table 1. From this table, the studied kinetic models cannot assure the reaction mechanism between MoO42− and AICS, as the correlation coefficients (R2) for both pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order models are not good with 0.88 and 0.77, respectively.
3.4 Effect of dose
To measure the adsorption potential within a given concentration, it is vital to test the dose effect of an adsorbent. In this respect, 5  mL of Mo (100  mg/L) was mixed with four different AICS dosages (0.01, 0.015, 0.02, 0.025 g) and shaken at room temperature for 5 min. As shown in Figure6, with the increase in the adsorbent weight, Mo adsorption increased and reached almost complete adsorption at AICS dosage of 0.02 g. In contrast, the adsorption capacity declined by nearly two thirds (from 54.3 to 20.0 mg/g) as the adsorbent weight increased. The reason for this could be that a certain part of the adsorbent became unsaturated when raising the AICS dose. Consequently, 0.01 g was chosen for the next experiments for the efficiency of separation and economic perspectives. 3.5 Effect of metal ion concentration and isotherm models The availability of initial MoO4 2− levels in the aqueous solution can significantly affect the adsorption of molybdenum. In this regard, various initial molybdenum concentrations of 100–500  mg/L, each at three distinct temperatures (30, 40, 50 °C), were examined in detail,while maintaining the other optimum pH and time contacting parameter conditions as constants. In Figure  7, a subsequent rise in the Mo adsorption capability was observed when the molybdenum initial concentration was increased at constant temperature. For example, the capacity of AICS to uptake Mo at 30 °C expanded by over half from 38.0 to 59.5 mg/g when the initial Mo concentration increased from 100 to 500 mg/L. The capacity of adsorption, by contrast, decreased by increasing the temperature for a specific concentration. Also, a decline from 38.0 mg/g to 32.3 mg/g was noticed for the adsorption capacity of Mo (100 mg/L) when the temperature was  increased by 20 °C (from 30 to 50 °C). The results achieved in this section were modelled on the basis of isothermal modelling of Langmuir (specified in eq. 6) [34], Freundlich (represented by eq. 7) [35] and Dubinin-Radushkevich (given by eq. 8) [36] to obtain insights into the surface and the adsorption mechanisms of the system. While Langmuir assumes a homogenous interaction (monolayer adsorption) between the adsorbent and the adsorbate, Freundlich claims a heterogenous one (multilayer adsorption). In other words, the active adsorbing sites in the adsorbent are energy-sensitive and no binding is possible betweenthe adsorbed molecules if the Langmuir efficiently fits the data. If the data were best fitted with the Freundlich model, the inverse should be guaranteed. The D-R model can support the decision on the physical or chemical magneticity of the mechanism during the adsorption process. If the activation free energy is less than 8.0  kJ/mol, the adsorbent-adsorbate electrostatic interaction will dominate the process, however, when the Ea is greater than8.0 kJ/mol, the mechanism will be chemically controlled. The models are represented in the following equations:
1
@ (6)
@ (7)
2
@(8)
@(9)
@ (10)
where in eq. (6–7): qe (mg/g) is the adsorption capacity of AICS; Ce (mg/L) is the concentration at equilibrium;qm (mg/g) is the maximum adsorption capacity of AICS and Kf  is indicated for the Freundlich adsorption intensity and adsorbent capacity; KL  has to do with adsorption energy, and in eqs. (8–10): qe (mol/g) is the equilibrium AICS adsorption capacity; Ce  (mol/L) is the Mo concentration in solution at equilibrium; qm (mol/g) is theAICS maximum adsorption capability; β is the Polanyi potential; Ea(kJ/mol) is an adsorption free energy; δ is a constant (mol2/J2 ) related to the mean free energy of adsorption; R is the universal gas constant (8.314 J/mol K); T is absolute temperature (K). Parameters of those models were obtained from Figure 7 and listed in Table 2.
Based on the correlation coefficient (R2 ), the monolayer adsorption cover monopolized the Mo adsorption in the AICS as the Langmuir R2 (=0.99) was higher than Freundlich (0.89). The calculated maximum monolayer adsorption capacity (qm = 60.1 mg/g) was very near to the value experimentally obtained (qe = 59.5 mg/g). According to the n values illustrated from Table 2 one can emphasize that AICS had a satisfactory adsorption characteristic towards Mo over the studied conditions. From the analysis of the D-R model, the Ea  value calculated (17.4 kJ/mol) exceeds 8.0  kJ/mol, indicating that an anion-exchange mechanism took part in the overall process between MoO4 2− and both SO4 2− and Cl− onto the AICS adsorbent.
This finding reflects other adsorption reports of Mo on other adsorbents [26].
Figure 6: Effect of AICS dose on the adsorption of Mo.
Figure 7: Effect of Mo concentration; and isotherm models for the adsorption on AICS.
Table 2: Isotherms models parameters for the adsorption of Mo onto AICS
Figure 8: The percentage of adsorption of the tested metal regularly declined as the temperature increased, implying a system exothermic adsorption process. Effect of temperature on (a) the Adsorption% and (b) lnK°e  of Mo adsorption by AICS.
Table 3: Thermodynamic parameters for the adsorption of Mo onto AICS.
Figure 9: Application of AICS for the separation and purification of 99Mo from bulk solution containing some radioisotopes.
3.6 Effect of temperature
The effect of temperature on the adsorptive separation of molybdenum (100  mg/L) using the AICS was investigated at four different temperatures in the 30–60 °C range. Figure 8a shows that the percentage of adsorption of the tested metal regularly declined as the temperature increased, implying a system exothermic adsorption process. The van’t Hoff based method was applied (eq. 11–14) to determine thermodynamic parameters, like free energy (ΔG°, kJ/mol), entropy (ΔS°, J/mol K) and enthalpy (ΔH°, kJ/mol). R ln o
@ (11)
@ (12)
@(13)
where o e K (dimensionless) is the thermodynamic equilibrium constant at specific temperature [37, 38]. As the thermodynamic data were best fitted to Langmuir model, the Langmuir constant was applied in the (eq. 14)
@(14)
where , mL K (adsorbate)o and γ are the Langmuir constant (expressed in L/mol), adsorbate standard concentration (1.0  mol/L) and the activity coefficient (dimensionless), respectively. The value of m L K can be obtained from (eq. 15). The value of γ is considered to be unitary at very diluted concentration.
@⋅ (15)
The thermodynamic parameters obtained from the plotting of ln o e K against 1/T (Figure 8b) were recorded in Table 3. From this table, the negative ΔG° values manifested that the Mo adsorption onto AICS was favourable in nature, the negative ΔH° value (–16.4  kJ/mol) verified the exothermic nature of the adsorption and the positive value ΔS° (19.5 J/mol K) confirmed the randomness of the process.
3.7 Selective separation of radioisotope 99Mo
To evaluate the applicability of AICS to selectively adsorb 99Mo from a mixed radionuclides solution, a 5  mL-radioactive sample containing 137Cs, 131I, 85Sr, and 99Mo was adjusted to pH 9 and added to 0.01 g of AICS, followed by shaking for 3 min. Then, after filtration, the solution was subjected to the NaI multichannel analyser device for detecting the radionuclides, and the solid residue wasadded to a 5-mL NaOH solution (0.01 mol/L) for desorbing and purifying 99Mo. Interestingly, the peak of 99Mo detected by this device was effectively decreased by over 99  % compared to its recorded one before adsorption, indicating that 99Mo was almost completely adsorbed, whereas those for 137Cs, 85Sr and 131I showed approximately no change, Figure 9. These impressive results promote more research into the adequate application of adsorbents based on chitosan as alternative sorbents to separate and purify 99Mo from moderately high alkaline solutions. A comparison between the adsorption of molybdenum onto AICS with other different reported materials is given in Table 4. This table demonstrated that AICS is superior in terms of working pH solution and kinetic rate. Based on this comparison AICS is likelihood to be considered as a promising sorbent for the separation and purification of Mo radioisotopes from alkaline solution.
4 Conclusions
Chitosan as an economical material was manipulated as apillar in this paper to separate and purify 99Mo from alkaline solution. The impregnated chitosan showed greater adsorption performance at optimum parameters like solution pH (9), contact time (3 min) and temperature (30 °C).
The reaction mechanism between MoO42− and AICS cannot be guaranteed by the studied kinetic models, since the correlation coefficients (R2 ) for both pseudo-first-order (0.88) and pseudo-second-order models (0.77) are of poor quality.
The adsorption process was homogenous in nature, with an adsorption capacity of 60.1 mg/g for maximum monolayers. The activation energy (17.4 kJ/mol) derived from the D-R equilibrium data modelling indicated that anionexchange mechanism governed the adsorption separation of MoO4 2− onto AICS. Thermodynamically, both ΔH° and ΔG° have shown negative values verifying the exothermal and spontaneous adsorption processes. Finally, a solution of 99Mo with a purity of almost 100 % was successfully reached implying that AICS has a promising potential for the purification of 99Mo from alkaline media.Conflict of interest: None.Funding: We are very grateful for the atomic energy authority of Egypt for funding this work.
Table 4: Comparison of AISC with other reported adsorbents for the adsorption of Mo.
