<title>Electroplating chromium on CVD SiC and SiC f -SiC advanced cladding via PyC compatibility coating</title>
<author>Caen Ang; Craig Kemery; Yutai Katoh</author>
<Affiliation>University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USA;NEO Industries, Knoxville, TN, USA;Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, USA</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Materials</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.jnucmat.2018.03.009</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022311517315787</URL>
Abstract
Electroplating Cr on SiC using a pyrolytic carbon (PyC) bond coat is demonstrated as an innovative concept for coating of advanced fuel cladding. The quantification of coating stress, SEM morphology, XRD phase analysis, and debonding test of the coating on CVD SiC and SiCf-SiC is shown. The residual tensile stress (by ASTM B975) of electroplated Cr is > 1 GPa prior to stress relaxation by microcracking. The stress can remove the PyC/Cr layer from SiC. Surface etching of ∼20 μm and roughening to Ra > 2 μm (by SEM observation) was necessary for successful adhesion. The debonding strength (by ASTM D4541) of the coating on SiC slightly improved from 3.6 ± 1.4 MPa to 5.9 ± 0.8 MPa after surface etching or machining. However, this improvement is limited due to the absence of an interphase, and integrated CVI processing may be required for further advancement.
Keywords:Electroplating;Chromium;Tensile stressSiC;Cladding
1. Introduction
Materials made of SiC are proposed as structural materials in fusion designs and advanced cladding in Light Water Reactors (LWRs) [1]. However, two feasibility issues of SiCf-SiC cladding are microcracking that may compromise hermeticity [2] and aggravated hydrothermal corrosion in LWR coolant [3]. A technology to deposit a metallic environmental barrier and hermetic sealcoat has been proposed. Several metallic compositions (Cr, CrN, CrAlN, Zircaloy) have been tested in LWR coolant [[4], [5], [6]] or autoclave environments (TiN, Ni) in the absence of irradiation [7,8]. However, the aforementioned are typically coatings produced by Physical Vapor Deposition (PVD), which is limited to line-of-sight, smaller batch processing, and high capital costs. Scalable and economical techniques such as electroplating require an electrically conductive substrate.
Currently, the prototype composite cladding is manufactured via a Chemical Vapor Infiltration (CVI) process. Engineers produce SiC as a preform part (e.g. tube), and fibers are uniformly coated with pyrolytic carbon (PyC), followed by infiltration of the SiC matrix by CVI to form a SiC fiber reinforced SiC matrix composite (SiCf-SiC). In the final stage of SiCf-SiC processing, a Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD) sealcoat layer is deposited on top of the fibers. The process typically terminates here. However, instead of ending with CVD SiC, alternating the feedstock gas again could deposit a PyC layer.
A layer of PyC deposited on SiC represents an intriguing possibility for new coating processes. At present, only vapor deposition methods have been successful in deposition of coatings on cladding. While the electrical conductivity of carbon is dependent on anisotropy, PyC offers the potential of electroplating directly onto SiCf-SiC composites. Ohmic conductivity has been observed in carbon, and electroplating of graphite has been demonstrated [9]. If fundamental processing hurdles in CVI/CVD technology can be addressed, there are several advantages to coating by electrodeposition on PyC. Electroplating only requires immersion of the substrate (fuel bundle) in the deposition medium, can deposit on complex shapes (end caps on fuel rods) and interior surfaces (e.g. BWR flow channel boxes), and is attractive in nuclear economics when considering production target of roughly 5 × 104 four-meter long fuel rods per typical LWR.
This work shows that if isotropic PyC can be deposited during manufacturing, electroplating can be conducted. A proof-of-principle could not be demonstrated due to significant capital required for forced-flow thermal-gradient CVI. Instead, a preview of the concept using a fluidized bed (FB) CVD facility was conducted by depositing isotropic PyC on CVD SiC or SiCf-SiC components. We report the results of a simulated SiC/PyC/Cr coating, including morphology and phase analysis. The intrinsic stresses of electroplated Cr and its effects on the mechanical properties pertinent to potential coatings on nuclear fuel cladding are shown. Finally, remaining hurdles and future directions are discussed.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Substrate and coating
The substrate materials were high purity, stoichiometric CVD SiC from Rohm and Haas (now Dow Chemical Company, PA, USA), and “coupon” composites were produced from Tyranno-SA3 fibers (Ube Industries, Ube, Japan) with a matrix of CVI/CVD SiC [(Hyper-Therm HTC, Inc, Huntington Beach, CA, USA (now Rolls-Royce, Ltd.)] for both matrix and sealcoat. These are hereafter named “CVD SiC” and “SiCf-SiC.” Cladding “tube” composites were produced from Hi-Nicalon Type S (HNS) fibers with a CVI/CVD SiC matrix (General Atomics, San Diego, CA, USA). CVD SiC and SiCf-SiC were machined to size 25 × 6 × 1 mm. Surface roughness (to Ra ∼ 2–20 μm) was introduced on the coupons by alkali salt [10] or mechanical abrasion. Isotropic pyrolytic carbon (PyC) was deposited using a fluidized bed reactor with acetylene/propylene as feedstock. Detailed parameters are reported elsewhere [11]. After PyC deposition, samples were washed in 0.1 M sulfuric acid and inserted into a hexavalent chromium (Cr6+) bath. The bath chemistry and boundary parameters are shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Composition of hexavalent chromium baths used for electrochemical deposition.
Table 1 was a laboratory research and development setup isolated from the typical NEO (NEO Industries, Portage, IN, USA) manufacturing process at the Knoxville, TN, USA facility. Other significant differences were the use of a miniature rectifier (Pepetools IPS-25 Plus), and the deposition temperature was controlled by a C-MAG HS4 with a PT1000-60 feedback temperature probe (IKA Inc., Wilmington, NC, USA) with a proprietary glass coating.
2.2. Characterization and testing
Surface roughness and deposition thickness were approximated by SEM imaging. Plating stresses in the NEO K1 and KB coating were determined (by ASTM B975) using 270NI-series strips. Photographs and 3D images were obtained by a Keyence VHX-1000 digital microscope with “depth from defocus” functionality. The specimens were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) with Cu Kα radiation in a Bruker D2 Phaser X-ray diffractometer (30 kV, 30 mA) and analyzed by PANalytical HighScorePlus. Instrument broadening was determined using a NIST 660b LaB6 standard, while specimen displacement and zero error was calibrated by NIST 640d Si. Apparent adhesion strength was tested (by ASTM D4541) using a Positest AT (KTA-Tor Inc, Phoenix, AZ, USA) using 10 mm pull-off stubs. This is a typical test for coating adhesion [13,14] but required adaptation for small irradiation-size coupons (5 mm test diameter). The strength of the selected epoxy was verified by at least 10 pull-off tests, and coatings were assessed by a minimum of 5 tests. Specimens were mounted and polished to 1 μm. SEM imaging was conducted with a JEOL6500F SEM.
3. Results
3.1. Tensile stresses in Cr coatings
Deposition stress was measured by ASTM B975 substrate deflection method. Fig. 1 shows the deposition stresses of two electrolytic chromium coatings (NEO-KB and NEO-K1). The residual stress of coatings exceeded 1 GPa when under 1 μm thickness. The two types of electroplated Cr show different stress-relief behaviors as a function of deposit thickness. As deposition continues, the residual stress in electroplated Cr is < 250 MPa at a thickness of ∼5 μm. The results agree with electrolytic chromium baths from literature [15,16] as well as sputtered Cr from Physical Vapor Deposition (PVD) [17] superimposed in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. Post-deposition stresses of as-deposited NEO electrolytic Cr coatings as a function of deposit thickness when compared to other coatings of PVD Cr [17] and electrolytic Cr [15,16].
3.2. Morphology and phase analysis of SiC/PyC/Cr
The morphology of SiC/PyC/Cr using NEO-K1 for Cr is shown with both optical and SEM images. Table 2 shows the measured thicknesses of the coatings for both substrates. The thickness correlates to the planned 5 μm of PyC and 10 μm of Cr, demonstrating control of deposition rate in both processes.
Table 2. Measured thicknesses of PyC/Cr on two SiC substrates.
Fig. 2(a) is a photo of a machined SiCf-SiC coupon with an electrolytic chromium coating. Fig. 2(b) shows an SEM image of a cross-section of the PyC/Cr on SiCf-SiC. The PyC interlocked with the SiC fiber tows due to surface machining, and the PyC replaced the volume typically occupied by the sealcoat. The inset in Fig. 2(b) highlights a microcrack in the coating, and substrate delamination is observed.
Fig. 2. Optical microscopy image showing (a) the PyC/Cr coating on SiCf-SiC, while the (b) SEM cross-section shows that the coating effectively displaces the CVD SiC sealcoat. The inset shows that microcracks can penetrate to the bond coat. Delaminations are observed in the SiCf-SiC layer. (c) The coating on CVD SiC with an inset indicates the required etching for adhesion. The uniformity of the coating (d) is demonstrated at low magnification with CVD SiC. The difference in coating thickness between upper and lower surfaces is due to distance from electroplating anodes.
Fig. 2(c) shows an example of CVD SiC with a PyC/Cr coating using NEO-K1. The PyC and Cr thickness were designed for 5 and 10 μm, respectively. The surface roughness of the inset shows the depth of the etching used for CVD SiC. ∼2 μm Ra is visible, but a secondary undulation from the etching is found on the surface (due to a pitting mechanism [10,18]) that leads to major peaks and troughs of ∼20 μm.
Fig. 2(d) shows a low magnification image of CVD SiC/PyC/Cr across a 1 mm cross-section of a 25 × 6 × 1 mm coupon. The coating is continuous on both sides. The bottom side of the coupon appeared to have a thicker coating, indicating proximity to the electroplating anode. The top side of the image, which has a thinner coating, was further away from the anode. The lower inset in Fig. 2(d) shows that microcracks are contained within the Cr layer for NEO-K1 series.
Fig. 3 shows the XRD pattern for SiC/PyC/Cr. Chromium (ICSD-426936) diffraction pattern (diamond markers) is present in the coating with a small set of reflections indexing to the substrate CVD SiC 3C (ICSD-24217) polytype (triangles). The reflections with square markers belong to the NIST SRM 640b Si standard.
Fig. 3. XRD pattern for CVD SiC with 5 μm PyC and 10 μm electrolytic Cr (blue) deposit on NEO K1 series. Si (red) and a set of reflections (green) from the CVD SiC substrate can be observed. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
The refined lattice parameter for Cr was a0 = 0.2885(1) nm and no angle-dependent peak-broadening was found from the Rietveld refinement, indicating absence of microstrain. This is consistent with Fig. 1, indicating that residual stress significantly relaxes within the first few microns of deposition.
3.3. Apparent adhesion strength
The apparent adhesion or debonding strength (σad) of the coatings after deposition is shown in Table 3. A set of reference tests were conducted, followed by debonding tests from both CVD SiC and SiCf-SiC coated materials. The epoxy-stub reference test configuration used two pull-off stubs bonded together and then applied a force to remove them. The average strength and standard deviation was 22 ± 6.5 MPa.
Table 3. Apparent debonding strength by ASTM D4541 tests of 10 mm and 5 mm configuration.
Changing the test configuration to 5 mm diameter pull-off stubs was necessary to evaluate irradiation-size coupons. The reference epoxy test showed average strength and standard deviation was 23.3 ± 12.1 MPa. This indicated a size effect and/or less reliable moment of fracture. Edge effects were likely on smaller coupons since a higher density of flaws likely exist near a vertex.
The coatings were then tested using the 5 mm configuration. Table 3 shows the adhesion strength was 3.6 ± 1.4 MPa for PyC/Cr on the SiCf-SiC sealcoat. The strength was 5.8 ± 0.9 and 5.9 ± 0.8 MPa for etched CVD SiC (Fig. 2(c) and (d)) and machined SiCf-SiC surfaces (Fig. 2(a) and (b)). These values are low due to a lack of an interphase or chemical bonding [13]. On etched CVD SiC coupons, failure typically occurred at the CVD SiC-PyC interface. In the machined composites, some debonded coatings showed attached fibers, indicating the failed interface within the composite (SiCf-SiC) or at the SiC-PyC interface (similar to CVD SiC/PyC). Removal of the fibers from the composite is probably due to damage from surface machining and stresses imposed by electroplating, which may have led to internal composite debonding prior to the test. Fig. 2(b) shows an example of either preexisting damage or imposed stresses from deposition of Cr since delaminations are seen in the planar-direction. In summary, etching and machining slightly improved the bonding strength of coating and indicates limitations to CVD PyC as a compatibility coating.
4. Discussion
Chromium and Cr-base alloys show promise as coatings for metallic cladding in LWRs [[4], [5], [6]]. However, a fundamental challenge of Cr by the electrolytic method is the presence of microcracks in the coating. A barrier coating should be continuous, so the presence of microcracks is problematic. Tensile stress is observed in all Cr coatings due to densification, segregation of impurities, and grain growth (intrinsic) [17]. In electrodeposited Cr, an additional problem is the cathodic potential sufficient to reduce water, leading to hydrogen formation. This produces a metastable chromium hydride in the coating, which has a 15% volume difference to bcc-Cr [19]. Decomposition to Cr leads to volume shrinkage, but by definition, the interface is constrained, so tensile stresses appear. Stress relaxation of the coating by brittle fracture (microcracking) rather than plastic deformation is due to a ductile-brittle transition temperature of bcc α-Cr ∼50–80 °C [20,21]. The relief of tensile stress by cracking as deposition thickness increased agreed with other work [15,16], and correlated to observed cracks normal to the substrate. According to Evans' and Hutchinson's theory, as stress increases, cracks combine into channels, and depending on the substrate-coating interface toughness, the coating eventually peels, or the cracks penetrate into the substrate [22,23]. In PVD Cr, compressive ion peening typically counters shrinkage-derived stresses [17,[24], [25], [26]]. In electroplating, control of tensile stress is proportional to the total shrinkage dominated by kinetics of hydride decomposition. A thickness threshold for cracking is found where decomposition is a significant volume of the coating [19]. Since reduction of average current density and, therefore, coating rate can be varied, while hydride decomposition rate is fixed, NEO-K1 stresses appear lower than in the NEO-KB-series. Other techniques to further reduce tensile stress [12] via alternating current density agree with a strategy of allowing time for hydride decomposition before subsequent plating. Furthermore, an alternating reverse current reportedly decomposes chromium hydride between forward (deposition) current pulses, leading to electroplated coatings without cracks [19]. Where microcracks are already present, Fig. 2 SEM images show promising microstructures where subsequent plating (Fig. 2(d) lower inset) seal cracks as an effective single deposition layer. Further details will be published in a more comprehensive work. Finally, future alloy development may shift the ductile-brittle transition temperature of Cr to lower temperatures, which could prevent stress relaxation by microcracking in electrodeposited coatings.
A second challenge with electroplated Cr morphology is engineering uniformity of the coating. Fig. 2(d) showed differences in coating thickness due to the displacement of the anodes from the sample. However, on rough samples, uneven coating can occur even if the sample is immersed equidistant from the anodes. Fig. 4(a) shows a photo of an electroplated section of SiCf-SiC cladding [27,28]. The inset in Fig. 4(a) shows uncoated and coated surfaces. Reduced metallic deposition between the fiber braid is caused by depressions farther away from the adjacent anode than the top fibers. To confirm this, Fig. 4(b) shows the cross-section of an engraved CVD SiC coupon. Laser etched cavities (viewed on the 25 × 6 mm face in the inset) show decreased deposition with increased depth.
Fig. 4. Non-uniform coating caused by surface roughness needed for coating adhesion with (a) electroplated SiCf-SiC cladding showing differences in coating deposition as a function of local topology, dark regions indicate interbraid regions are uncoated. The inset shows the difference between coated and uncoated surfaces. This is confirmed by (b) an engraving cavity in CVD SiC showing Cr thickness decreasing within the cavity. The inset shows a 3D image of an engraved “0” with example cross-section and local electroplating anode.
Challenges in uniform coverage or “throwing power” is consistent with attempts by Gan et al. on electroplating graphite [9] and several strategies on electrodeposition are offered by Yang et al. [29] on designing conforming anodes to fit surface irregularities. At the macroscopic level, uniform coverage of a fuel bundle would have anodes shaped specifically for fuel channels; details will be released in future work. However, at the microscopic level, irregularities (e.g., roughness) are shown to slightly improve coating adhesion at the cost of uniform thickness. Roughness increases interface area and resistance to shear from mechanical interlocking, and it can convert tensile stresses into compressive stresses to constrain mechanisms that lead to peeling observed on unetched coupons. It is likely that PyC on etched SiC is weaker than high purity, graded interfaces found in integrated CVD/CVI processes [30]. Since surface roughening is the basis for successful adhesion of electrodeposited chromium in this work, then further improvements to this concept – particularly uniform coatings without microscopic roughness – are limited without integrated CVD/CVI capability.
5. Concluding remarks
It is possible to electroplate chromium on SiC via a compatibility coating of isotropic PyC by fluidized-bed chemical vapor deposition. The key findings are:
•Isotropic PyC appears to be a suitable compatibility coating for electrolytic plating Cr on SiC.
•This technique has potential for integration into SiCf-SiC composites for advanced LWR cladding if isotropic PyC can be deposited.
•The tensile stresses during α-Cr electrodeposition are >1 GPa by ASTM B975 due to coating shrinkage during deposition. Stresses are sufficient to crack and debond PyC. Mitigation strategies include machining and chemical etching/pitting for surface interlocking.
•The apparent adhesion strength by ASTM D4541 of SiC/PyC is slightly improved by etching (to 5.9 ± 0.8 MPa). Etching and roughening are not desirable for uniform thickness.
•Anode design and development will be crucial for uniform coverage at the macroscopic level.
•An integrated process of PyC deposited after CVD/CVI, rather than the separate processing step shown here, may lead to an improvement in adhesion strength and uniform coverage.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank J. Kiggans (ORNL), B. Jolly (ORNL) and J. Daniels (NEO) for assistance throughout the project. R. Lowden, Sr. (ORNL) provided critical review, and R. Lott (UTK) contributed editorial review of the manuscript. The authors thank General Atomics for prototype cladding sections. Research was sponsored by the Advanced Fuels Campaign (AFC) of the Fuel Cycle Research and Development (FCRD) program, Office of Nuclear Energy, US Department of Energy, under contract DE-AC05-00OR22725 with UT-Battelle, LLC.
