<title>Symmetrical dialkylsulphoxides in ionic liquid as extractants for uranyl ion: extraction efficacy and aggregation behavior</title>
<author>M. S. Murali; Santosh L. Gawali; P. A. Hassan; R. B. Gujar</author>
<Affiliation>Homi Bhabha National Institute, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre; Radiochemistry Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre; Chemistry Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10967-019-06537-2</DOI>
<URL>https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10967-019-06537-2?utm_source=cnki&utm_medium=affiliate&utm_content=meta&utm_campaign=DDCN_1_GL01_metadata</URL>
Abstract
The behavior of three symmetrical sulphoxides, R2SO, where R = Di-(2-ethylhexyl) (DEHSO), R = dihexyl (DHSO) or R = diisoamyl (DIASO) in ionic liquid diluent, 1-methyl-3-octylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate (C8mimPF6) were examined for the extraction of uranyl ion from nitric acid medium. The extraction efficiency is found to be higher for sulphoxides with branched-chain alkyl substituents (DEHSO and DIASO) as compared to the one with linear chain (DHSO). Between branched chain analogues, the one with longer alkyl chain showed better extraction. The stoichiometry of the uranyl species extracted and its redox characteristics were probed by slope analysis, and cyclic voltammetry respectively. The aggregation behavior of the extractant, DEHSO in ionic liquid was examined by small-angle X-ray scattering and is compared with that of DEHSO in dodecane. The extractant remains as aggregates in ionic liquid while in non-polar diluent like dodecane, no aggregates were formed.
Introduction
Dialkylsulphoxides are well known extractants in molecular diluents like dodecane, xylene etc. for actinides from mineral acid solutions. Though their basicities may not be very high and lie between that of trialkyl phosphate e.g. Tri-n-butyl phosphate (TBP) and phosphine oxide, the advantage of having totally incinerable sulphur scores higher as compared to those having phosphorus, though both types are still useful for actinides and other valuable noble metal ions [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12]. For many years now, room temperature ionic liquids (RTILs) have been found widespread application in various fields including separations related to nuclear fuel cycle, especially, at the backend [13,14,15,16,17] for the extraction of actinides, their mutual separation and separation from unwanted fission products and finally for the recovery of the products. The focus on RTILs seems to have shifted more towards understanding their basic chemistry since the unpredictability and diverse extraction-mechanisms in different conditions of extraction make them interesting to be explored by researchers all over the world. Their near negligible vapour pressures, the greenness, at least in some cases, their ability to form in different combinations of cations and anions and ability to dissolve many organic and inorganic materials make them worth as diluents, extractants (e.g. Task-specific) and other media. Though stripping cannot be achieved by simply changing the nitric acid concentrations, the ease of using complexing agents appears feasible and attractive.
Since, the extraction data of actinides by sulphoxides in ionic liquid is very scarce, it is useful to generate data on actinide extraction from aqueous acid solutions. For example, a similar study [9] employing sulphoxide in pyridinium based ionic liquids gave the results contrary to our own shown later in this paper. In this respect it is still intriguing as to what makes an ionic liquid show seemingly different behaviour in identical conditions. The present paper reports the liquid–liquid extraction of uranyl ion from aqueous nitric acid by three symmetrical dialkylsulphoxides, viz. Di-(2-ethylhexyl) (DEHSO), dihexyl (DHSO) and diisoamyl sulphoxides (DIASO) respectively in an ionic liquid, 1-methyl-3-octylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate abbreviated as C8mimPF6. One of the selected sulphoxides, viz. DEHSO is the most studied branched-chain sulphoxide in molecular diluents such as dodecane and the other two are of representative in nature and are taken for comparison. DIASO comes with alkyl chain branching while DHSO contains straight alkyl chains. In the present case, the ionic liquid, C8mimPF6, was chosen because of the popularity of the imidazolium based ionic liquids and C8mimPF6, specifically, because of its existence as liquid at room temperature since other ionic liquids with longer (> C8) chain lengths do not yield liquids or they are extremely viscous gels which pose problems for extraction. The RTILs with lower (< C8) alkyl chains may show more aqueous solubility and loss of cations to aqueous phase during extraction which prevents their reuse for large scale applications. Also, it may be interesting to study C8mimPF6 as it is one of the hydrophobic ionic liquids which are likely to show a mechanism of extraction to be solvation or ion-exchange. It is also noted here that PF6− ion based ionic liquids tend to dissociate at higher concentrations of nitric acids and so the aqueous acid concentration is, arbitrarily, restricted to not more than ~ 3.0 M [18]. This arbitrary concentration up to 3.0 M acidity is employed with the assumption that the dissociation of PF6− based RTILs is relatively less and/or is kinetically slow under the experimental time frames and so can be neglected. The objective was to get the preliminary data of extraction of U(VI) (an actinide and useful in nuclear industry) in ionic liquid and to see whether a correlation of association/aggregation of solvent system is possible to the results of extraction. Similar studies on aggregation of solvents were probed by small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) [19,20,21,22,23]. This kind of association/aggregation of the extractant in presence of ionic liquid was assumed to be present, in our case too, following the literature on aggregation of IL on metal ion extraction [24]. Hence, the present solvent system (with DEHSO as the example) was probed by SAXS to understand the association/aggregation behaviour. In addition, an electrochemical characterization of the uranyl species was explored by cyclic voltammetry to see the complexation and its effect on diffusion coefficients and to explore the recovery of the uranium by electrodeposition.
Experimental
The sulphoxides (~ 98% purity) were purchased from Aldrich chemical and Fairfield Chemicals (USA) and were used as such. The RTIL, C8mimPF6 was obtained as described elsewhere [25]. The water content of the ionic liquid was not explicitly determined but pre-equilibration with respective aqueous nitric acid concentrations under investigation was performed before the actual metal ion extraction so that the ionic liquid was saturated with the aqueous phase. The aqueous phase generally consists of nitric acid of appropriate concentration, containing the tracer 233U (alpha active with T1/2 = 1.6 × 105y, of the order of 10−6 M), while, the immiscible ionic liquid phase consists of appropriate concentrations of sulphoxides in C8mimPF6. The radioactive assay was carried out by taking suitable aliquots of organic and aqueous phases in Aqualight™ liquid scintillator in glass vials and counted for alpha activity in 300SL TDCR automatic liquid scintillation counter (Hidex, Finland). All other chemicals were of AR grade.
General extraction procedure Equal volumes of both organic and aqueous phases (traced with 233U) were taken in click-fit stoppered plastic tubes and were equilibrated in the form of mechanical rotations in a water bath kept at a constant temperature of 25 °C. The equilibrations were carried out for ~ 2 h. This time period was found to be sufficient for attaining equilibrium [26]. The tubes were then centrifuged and suitable aliquots were drawn from both phases for radioassay. The distribution ratios (D) of U(VI) were calculated as the ratio of activities of 233U(VI) present in ionic liquid phase to that in the aqueous phase. The D values obtained were with error limits within 10% and the material balance was > 95%.
Varying concentrations of aqueous nitric acid were traced with 233U and were contacted with 0.2 M solutions of three sulphoxides in C8mimPF6. In a second set, varying concentrations (0.05 or 0.1–0.2 M) of sulphoxides (DEHSO or DIASO) solutions in C8mimPF6 were contacted with fixed (3.0 M) concentration of nitric acid spiked with the tracer. For SAXS, the ionic liquid and dodecane solutions of DEHSO and mixtures of ionic liquid and dodecane in different volume ratios were used. For cyclic voltammetry, 1 mg/mL of natural uranyl nitrate solution was extracted with 0.2 M DHSO or DIASO in C8mimPF6 and the organic extract was used.
Small-angle X-ray scattering Small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) experiments were carried out using Anton Paar SAXSpace instrument which employs line collimated sealed tube X-ray source (Cu-Kα) operated at 40 kV, 50 mA. The samples were placed in a 1 mm diameter quartz capillary liquid cell and thermostated using a Peltier controlled sample holder. The scattering intensities were monitored in transmission geometry using a CCD detector (pixel size 24 µm) to span a q (momentum transfer) range of 0.01–0.65 Å−1. The data were processed using standard protocols.
Cyclic voltammetry Cyclic voltammograms (CV) of the RTIL solutions were recorded using an Autolab-PGSTAT-030 (Metrohm, India) equipped with an IF 030 interface. Three-electrode system, comprising a platinum wire as the pseudo reference electrode, and a platinum wire and a glassy carbon as the counter and working electrodes respectively was used. Usually the scan is made from a positive potential of ~ 1.5 V to a negative of ~ 2.5 V and reversed to the positive at different scan rates at RT. A small glass cylindrical cell of diameter 2.5 cm and ~ 10 mL capacity with a Teflon cap containing inlets to insert the three electrodes was used. 6 mL of solution of the metal extracted ionic liquid phase containing sulphoxides or bare ionic liquid phase for blank were taken in the cell. The cell was flushed with nitrogen gas for 15 min before recording the CV.
Results and discussion
Figure 1 gives the schematic structures of the ligand molecules used in this work. It can be seen that the substituents di-(2-ethylhexyl) and isoamyl are branched where as dihexyl is a straight chain. The solubilities of these ligands in C8mimPF6 are good enough to prepare their solutions of 0.2 M. The general actinide extractants in common molecular (e.g. aliphatic) diluents as well as the mixtures of RTILs with molecular solvents were known to be associated as shown in Refs. [19,20,21,22,23,24]. But, sulphoxides in RTILs were not much explored for association/aggregation phenomena, and so it becomes necessary to examine the possibility of association of the present solvent system i.e. sulphoxides dissolved in C8mimPF6. This has been dealt with later in this article through SAXS. Now, the uranyl ion extraction with varying nitric acid concentrations was profiled and given in Fig. 2. It can be seen that the D values of uranyl ion increased with acidity for all three ligands. The order of extraction (beyond 1 M nitric acid) was DEHSO > DIASO > DHSO. As is noted above, DEHSO and DIASO have branched alkyl chains. Thus, the extraction efficiency is found to be higher for sulphoxides having branched chain substituents as compared to linear chain bearing extractant. Further, between the two branched chain analogues, the one with longer alkyl chain (DEHSO) showed better extraction. This could, probably, be due to longer branching in DEHSO which ensured more interaction sites with the ligand and its metal ion complex which in turn results in more solubility of metal-sulphoxide complex in the diluent. In the case of sulphoxide (DHSO) which has straight chain alkyl groups, the interaction is obviously less and so is the extraction. It can also be seen from Fig. 2 that the acid profile took a curved shape suggesting an increase in D with [HNO3] without showing uniformity/proportionality from 0.1 to 3.0 M. This behaviour was commonly observed for the extraction of neutral species following a solvation mechanism. This non-uniformity/non-proportionality when all other things were assumed to be equal-could be attributed to (1) the non-uniform uptake of nitric acid by the extractant which may influence the association and/or (2) the formation of neutral uranyl species (UO2(NO3)2) in the aqueous phase may not be proportional to the nitric acid concentration. Some interesting observations can be made from Table 1 showing the D values of U(VI) as a function of nitric acid concentration for all extractants. It can be seen that for the doubling of concentration of nitric acid (2nd and 3rd row, from 0.5 to 1.0 M and from 1.0 to 2.0 M), the corresponding doubling of DU(VI) with DHSO or DIASO did not take place except for DEHSO, a lone case from D = 0.81 (at 0.5 M) to almost double, i.e. D = 1.58 (at 1.0 M). This trend might be the consequence of nitric acid facilitated association of these extractants. This formed the basis for our exploring the above possible phenomenon by small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS). DEHSO in the RTIL was chosen for the SAXS study, assuming that highest alkyl branching on the S = O definitely lead to an increased and measurable association of these extractants in RTIL, C8mimPF6.
Fig. 1
figure1
Structures of sulphoxides used
Fig. 2
figure2
Nitric acid concentration dependence of DU; extractant = 0.2 M in C8mimPF6
Table 1 Distribution ratio (D) of U(VI) with nitric acid concentrationa
Further, in all the present cases, there was the display of increase of D with nitric acid concentration which was contrary to that observed in majority of ionic liquids especially with substituents having shorter alkyl chains (C4, C6 etc.), i.e. the cation exchange which resulted in a decrease of D with increase in nitric acid concentration. The observed increase in D with nitric acid concentration in the present case suggested that the mechanism could be of solvation type involving the extraction of neutral uranyl species with nitrate as counter ion. This result with the present RTIL was similar to the conclusions drawn by the authors Murali et al. previously [25]. It may please be noted (no data is presented here) that in our earlier experiments, it was shown that PF6− could act as neither the counter ion nor could it replace the nitrate ion during the metal ion extraction. This was shown by variation of concentration of PF6− by varying the aqueous soluble salt KPF6 in presence of fixed concentration of nitric acid. This exercise did not affect the D values (obtained in the absence of the PF −6) for uranium which showed the non-participating role of PF6− ion in the extracted species. Therefore, the appropriate equation of solvation is given as follows.
UO2+2+2NO−3+nS⇔KUO2(NO3)2⋅nS
(1)
where S represents the extractant sulphoxide (assumed discreet for simplicity) in ionic liquid, n denotes the number of extractant molecules complexing with the metal ion getting extracted and K is the equilibrium constant. This can be written as
K=[UO2(NO3)2⋅nS]IL[UO2+2]aq[NO−3]2aq[S]nIL
where ‘aq’ and ‘IL’ denote the aqueous and ionic liquid phases respectively. It may be noted that the K above is regarded as concentration equilibrium constant in the absence of activities and is assumed to be constant within the range of concentrations used, with no significant changes in the activity coefficients. Further, it can be noted that the distribution ratio of uranyl ion D is defined as
D=[UO2(NO3)2⋅nS]IL[UO2+2]aq
(2)
Incorporating this into the above equation, one can get
K=D[NO−3]2aq[S]nIL
on rearranging and taking logarithms,
logD=logK+2log[NO−3]+nlog[S]
(3)
Therefore at constant nitrate ion concentration the plot log D versus log[S] would result in a straight line whose slope is ‘n’, the number of extractant molecules.
Uranyl species extracted
In order to know the number of extractant molecules associated with uranyl ion, as outlined above, the variation of ligand concentration, [S] was performed. Figure 3 gave a straight line plots for log D versus log[sulphoxide] for DIASO and DEHSO and slope values were found to be non-integral but nearer to 2. Therefore the major species of uranyl ion with the sulphoxide (S) was: UO2(NO3)2·2S. However, in majority of the slope analyses, as in the present case, the slopes were not perfectly integral and the slope values obtained were ~ 2.3 with DIASO and ~ 1.9 with DEHSO. This difference in slope values may be due to the non-ideal behaviour of the extractants, often manifested due to differences in nitric acid uptake and/or aggregation of these extractants [27] in the ionic liquid diluent. The latter phenomenon of aggregation was probed by SAXS as discussed below.
Fig. 3
figure3
Species of U(VI) with sulphoxides, slope analysis
The structural changes in the ionic liquid in the presence of extractant DEHSO was investigated by SAXS. Figure 4 showed the SAXS patterns of ionic liquid (IL), extractant and their separate one to one mixtures in another diluent, dodecane (DD) at different weight fractions of IL and DD. As can be seen from the figure, the IL and the extractant (DEHSO) showed the presence of a correlation peak in the SAXS pattern. The position of the correlation peak in DEHSO is at higher q value than the IL and this corresponds to a smaller correlation length. To understand the effect on the extractant aggregation on IL addition, we compared the SAXS patterns of neat IL and its solution of DEHSO (Fig. 5a). The presence of a correlation peak in the SAXS pattern indicated micro-heterogeneous structure of both ionic liquid and its solution of DEHSO. This micro-heterogeneous structure can be compared to that of a bicontinuous microemulsion, for which the length scale of heterogeneity can be assessed from a model-independent one dimensional electron density correlation function, (γ(r)). In addition, the scattering curves can be represented in real space in terms of the pair distance distribution function p(r) (PDDF), using the generalised indirect Fourier transformation (GIFT) algorithm [28,29,30,31].
Fig. 4
figure4
SAXS patterns of ionic liquid (IL), extractant (DEHSO) and IL-extractant mixtures in dodecane (DD) at different ionic liquid to dodecane ratios
Fig. 5
figure5
a SAXS pattern of ionic liquid with and without DEHSO (red line represents the fit), b the pair correlation function γ(r) of microheterogenous liquid as obtained from SAXS data, c pair distance distribution function (PDDF) of microheterogenous liquid as obtained from GIFT modeling of the experimental data
The correlation function can be calculated using a cosine transformation of the processed intensity curves [28] using the following transformation equation,
γ(r)=∫∞0I(q)q2cos(qx)dq∫∞0I(q)q2dq
(4)
where, ‘r’ represents the distance in real space. The corresponding correlation function, γ(r) pattern of ionic liquid and its solution of the extractant were shown in Fig. 5b. The oscillating nature of the correlation function and PDDF clearly indicated domains of alternating electron density with thickness of the order of a few nanometers. The correlation function in terms of PDDF (Fig. 5c) obtained from the analysis of SAXS data showed hydrophilic and hydrophobic compartments in the neat ionic liquid, as revealed by crossover of the correlation function and PDDF from positive to negative values, at 0.86 nm and 0.91 nm respectively for the neat ionic liquid and extractant-ionic liquid mixture. The correlation function disappeared beyond 3.0 nm indicating the heterogeneous nature extended over a length of 3.0 nm. To estimate the correlation length and the layer spacing in a quantitative manner, we further analysed the data using the Teubner–Strey (T–S) model [31, 32]. According to the T–S model, the scattering intensities (Fig. 5a) were fitted using the equation:
I(q)∝1a2+c1q2+c2q4+Background
(5)
Here, the measured intensities were compared with the simulated curve by varying the three parameters a2, c1, and c2. The best fitted curves were shown in Fig. 5a as solid lines. The periodicity of the micro-heterogeneous domains, i.e. domain size (d), and the correlation length ξ are related to the fitted parameters by the relation:
d=2π⎡⎣⎢12(a2c2)1/2−14c1c2⎤⎦⎥−1/2
(6)
ξ=⎡⎣⎢12(a2c2)1/2+14c1c2⎤⎦⎥−1/2
(7)
Table 2 summarized the different calculated length scales (the periodicity d, and the correlation length, ξ) obtained from the fitted parameters. It was observed that with the addition of DEHSO, the correlation length of IL decreased from 17.5 to 15.5 Å, while the periodicity of the layer spacing increased slightly from 19.4 to 20.1 Å,
Table 2 Parameters from fitting the SAXS data to T–S model and GIFT modeling
Next, the effect of DD was also analysed on the structure of IL. Figure 6a showed the SAXS pattern of IL–DD mixtures at different mass ratios of IL and DD. It can be seen that with the addition of DD to DEHSO, this micro-heterogeneous structure of DEHSO disappears, due to solubilisation of ligand in DD (Fig. 6b). Similarly, when an inert diluent such as DD is added to IL, the data treated by GIFT modelling, showed the correlation length decreased significantly and finally at high DD concentration the peak disappeared (Fig. 6c) indicating destruction of the heterogeneity. The structural parameters of the IL-DEHSO mixtures and that of pure IL and extractant, as obtained from SAXS analysis are summarised in Table 2. The calculations of the PDDF suggest the formation of domains having an alternating electron density. This means that at different IL to DD ratios, bicontinuous microemulsions with a periodicity of about 2.0 nm are formed. From these results, one can conclude that addition of DEHSO to IL in all probability leads to swelling of the micro-heterogeneous structure, at the borderline to bi-continuous microemulsions, while addition of DD disrupted the heterogeneity in IL as well as in DEHSO. These structural differences above could have an indirect bearing on the extraction behaviour of DEHSO present in the diluents, IL or DD but further study is needed to establish this clearly.
Fig. 6
figure6
a SAXS spectra at different ionic liquid and dodecane ratios and given in logarithmic scale, b SAXS pattern of DEHSO with and without dodecane. Solid lines represent the fit by applying the Teubner–Strey model, c pair distance distribution function (PDDF) at various ionic liquid to dodecane ratios indicates domains of alternating electron density obtained from GIFT modeling
Cyclic voltammetry
Electrodeposition is one of the ways to separate and recover a metal ion from a host of others. For this, it is useful if an electrochemical characterization of the metal ion and its complex is carried out by cyclic voltammetry (CV) which gives out the conditions for its recovery by electrodeposition. In the present case, the mapping of cathodic peak potential with current at various scan rates was depicted in Figs. 7 and 8 for the uranyl complex with DHSO and DIASO respectively. The reduction peak signifies the reduction of U(VI) to U(V). The peak positions progressively shifted towards left with increasing scan rate suggested the quasi reversible nature. The diffusion coefficients d* for the extracted complexes of U(VI) with DHSO and DIASO were calculated according to the treatment described elsewhere [33] following the Randles–Sevcik Equation for nearly reversible systems. Accordingly, after subtracting the blank current, the plot of square root of scan rate versus icp resulted in a straight line, passing through the origin in both cases (Fig. 9). Using the equations given below, diffusion coefficients were estimated substituting the known parameters.
icp=0.496nFAC∗(d∗αnαFν/RT)1/2andEcp−Ecp1/2=1.857RT/αnαF
where the symbols represented standard notations. C* is the concentration of the metal ion, A is the area of the electrode, α is the charge transfer coefficient and nα is the number of electrons transferred in the rate determining step etc. The CV represents the reduction of U(VI) to (V), i.e. n = 1, ν is the scan rate, icp is the cathodic peak current and Ecp is the corresponding potential and E½ denotes the potential at half of the peak current etc. The diffusion coefficients, d*, for the two U(VI)-DHSO and U(VI)-DIASO were thus calculated substituting the known values and a few parameters taken from our previous work [33] and were given in Table 3. It can be seen that the diffusion coefficients are less than that (= 4.39 × 10−10) for the less bulky uranyl compound with C8mimBr determined in our work [33]. This indirectly proves the complexation of U(VI) with the ligands. Further, there is a small difference in diffusion coefficients determined for U-DHSO and DIASO which may reflect the small variation in the bulkiness of the uranyl complexes resulting due to the proportionate difference in the bulkiness for DHSO and DIASO. From this study, the higher limit of cathodic potential was obtained for the recovery of extracted uranium from its complex, so that one can attempt to electrodeposit the uranium.
Fig. 7
figure7
Potential versus current of extracted uranyl species with DHSO-at increasing scan rate
Fig. 8
figure8
Potential versus current of extracted uranyl species with DIASO-function of scan rate
Fig. 9
figure9
Square root of scan rate versus cathodic peak current for U-sulphoxide species
Table 3 Diffusion coefficients (d*) calculated for the uranyl-sulphoxide system [33]
Conclusions
In summary, we performed a systematic investigation of actinide extracting sulphoxides with three symmetrical substituents DEHSO, DHSO and DIASO for extracting uranyl ion from nitric acid media employing C8mimPF6, a well known ionic liquid as the diluent. From the measured distribution ratio values it is indicated that the branched chain substitution in the extractant favoured partitioning of the uranyl ion to the diluent phase. The distribution ratio also showed an increase with increase in acidity, consistent with the data observed in other diluents such as dodecane conforming to a solvation mechanism of extraction. Comparing the alkyl chain length dependence of extractant with branched alkyl chains indicated that long chain substitution enhanced the extraction efficiency. This could also arise from the increased hydrophobicity of the extractant which is advantageous in incorporating it in the hydrophobic domains of ionic liquid. The slope analysis showed that two molecules of the extractant are associated with the metal ion, irrespective of the chain length or branching. The association of extractant with ionic liquid is probed by SAXS which showed that in the ionic liquid medium, the extractant DEHSO is capable of undergoing aggregation to form bicontinuous structure. On the contrary, in dodecane, such aggregation is not observed which results in the difference of extraction when these diluents are used. Further, the complexation of uranyl ion with the extractant is supported from the measured diffusion coefficients of the metal–ligand complex using cyclic voltammetry. The diffusion coefficients obtained for uranyl-DHSO, and -DIASO complexes were found to be lower than that is reported for uranyl ions in C8mimBr medium due to their larger bulkiness.
