<title>Study on the leachable behavior of cation exchange resins</title>
<author>Dah-Yu Kao; Liang-Cheng Chen; Tung-Jen Wen; Charles-Fang Chu</author>
<Affiliation>Institute of Nuclear Energy Research, Atomic Energy Council , Taoyuan , Taiwan; Nuclear Generation Department , Taiwan Power Company , Taipei , Taiwan</Affiliation>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2015.1082948</DOI>
<URL>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00223131.2015.1082948</URL>
Abstract
The amount of total organic carbon (TOC) leached from cation exchange resins (CERs) in condensate demineralizers are related to the quality of reactor water in nuclear power plants (NPPs). In the recent years, quality problems of CERs used by ChinShan and KuoSheng NPPs have been identified. Prior to use, TOC and sulfate concentrations must be reduced to meet the criteria; however, this involves an extended purification process and heavy use of water resources. Even in cases where resin can be used, the quality of the water in the reactor remains poor. This study, therefore, investigated the leachates of resins from these NPPs in order to establish a reference for the quality of deep bed CERs. Gel permeation chromatography and ion-pair chromatography were used to identify molecular peaks in the CER leachates in order to elucidate the molecular distributions. We also sought to determine TOC and sulfate concentrations of post-UV treatment using long-term soaking tests, in which the solutions used to soak resins were drained off for analysis on a daily basis. Hydrogen peroxide is employed to accelerate the aging process associated with decomposition in soaking tests to determine the stabilities of the resins.
Keywords: cation exchange resins；hydrogen peroxide；ion exchange；water chemistry
1. Introduction
The principal role of a condensate polishing system is to purify boiler water. Through this system, radiation active products such as impurities and corrosion products can be reduced to suppress the low radiation dose rate. Ion exchange resins have been used in condensate polishing for more than 50 years, and their quality and performance are relevant to boiler water purity. According to previous reports [1,2], organics released from cation exchange resins (CERs) are considered to be the main source of boiler water sulfate. These organics decompose to sulfate under radiation and high temperatures, and the sulfate promotes intergranular stress corrosion cracking.
To maintain the safety of nuclear power plant (NPP) operations, each power plant aims to reduce the corrosion of pipe fittings and maintain optimal water conditions to meet operational specifications. In recent years, however, the CERs used in the ChinShan and KuoSheng NPPs have experienced problems due to high leachable total organic carbon (TOC) concentrations. Contaminated ion exchange resins cause other impurities to be deposited on the surface of the heat exchanger; this reduces heat efficiency and causes leachate oxidation, which produces sulfate and results in corrosion [3]. Online ion chromatography (IC) had been installed at the second unit of the San Onofre NPP to monitor condensate effluent ion concentrations. Although the sodium and chloride concentrations are controlled less than 10 ppt, and sulfate is less than 40 ppt, the sulfate and chloride concentrations in steam are much higher. Investigations have revealed the sources of sulfate and chloride to be organic sulfonate and organic chloride released from the CERs, respectively. These compounds then flow into feedwater, where they are exposed to radiation and high temperatures, and sulfate and chloride are produced by splitting [4]. Therefore, it is necessary to control leachable TOC concentrations.
The polymerization process of strong acid CERs is well studied [5]. The degradation rate is affected by the external environment of the CER; for example, high temperature or added oxidizing agent (e.g., O3, H2O2, etc.) conditions accelerate the degradation of the resin structure [6]. In such conditions, sulfonic acid detaches from the benzene ring to form sulfate, and others form organic acids by oxidation; these products are the CER leachates. The majority of these degradation products are oligomers (MW < 1000) and monomers. Condensate polisher ion exchange resins are styrene/divinylbenzene (SDVB) copolymers. The SDVB copolymer consists of polystyrene chains with divinylbenzene (DVB) cross-linking between styrene chains. Resin properties and organic leachables can be modified by varying the DVB cross-link content [5]. The contents of macromolecular polymers (MW > 1000) are related to the DVB percentages. The main monomer components are 4-phenolsulfonic acid and 4-sulfobenzoic acid [7,8]. In addition, benzene sulfonic acid, 4-methyl benzene sulfonic acid, and 4-ethyl benzene sulfonic acid are also confirmed [9].
The overall mechanism proposed for the decomposition of CERs is shown in Figure 1(a) [8]. In total, five steps are involved in the decomposition. The first step is autoxidation, as shown in Figure 1(b). Autoxidation can be naturally occurring, and the reaction rate is related to the formation of carbon radical. The addition of an oxidizing agent such as H2O2 can accelerate the generation of carbon radicals. In the end, the resulting monomer products are 4-phenolsulfonic acid and 4-sulfobenzoic acid, and some other oligomers and polymers are also produced. Among all products, 4-phenolsulfonic acid accounts for less than 5%, while 4-sulfobenzoic acid, oligomers, and polymers containing 4-sulfobenzoate ester groups comprise a large percentage of the products.
Figure 1. (a) Strong acid CER decomposition reaction mechanism [8]. (b) Strong acid CER autoxidation reaction mechanism [8].
In this report, we characterize three commercial brands of CER using four-step procedures to analyze CER leachates. These methods include gel permeation chromatography (GPC), ion-pair chromatography (IPC), TOC analysis, and IC analysis following UV treatment. GPC and IPC are used to determine the molecular weight distribution of the CER leachates, which can have a major impact on CER fouling and organic sulfonates. The surface capacity of the CER is generally exhausted when organic of high molecular weight passes through mixed-bed demineralizers [4]. TOC analysis can be used to determine the amount of leachates released from the CER. IC analysis following the completion of UV treatment can be used to determine sulfate concentrations in the leachates from CER. Despite similarities in the variation in TOC concentration and sulfate concentration after UV treatment, TOC provides direct knowledge regarding the amount of leachates without the need to perform post-UV treatment. Nonetheless, TOC and IC analysis are both important.
GPC is a type of size exclusion chromatography that separates analytes on the basis of size. This technique is often used for the analysis of polymers. As a separation technique, GPC has many advantages; first, it has a well-defined separation time due to the fact that there is a final elution volume for all unretained analytes. Additionally, GPC can provide narrow bands, although this is more difficult for polymer samples that have broad ranges of molecular weights. Finally, since the analytes do not interact chemically or physically with the column, the incidence of analyte loss is lower [10]. IPC) is a technique used to separate charged substances. It is widely used to selectively analyze acids and bases, particularly coupled with reversed-phase chromatography. IPC is a more general and applicable approach that allows the separation of complex mixtures of polar and ionic molecules [11].
To date, there is not a standardization of analytical methods for resin leachable TOC testing. TOC leaching rate depends on the soaking conditions including temperature, oxidizing agent addition, catalyst addition, and so on. Generally, resin leachable TOC can be measured by either the soaking test or the loop test. The soaking test is characterized by simple analytical methods. As long as the resin is immersed in the water for a sufficient amount of time, the TOC concentration can be determined by removing and analyzing the soaking liquid [12]. The problem with this method is that its detection result is higher than actual NPP TOC concentrations. The loop test involves flowing water through the resin and analyzing TOC concentration. This method is able to simulate the actual operating conditions of NPP condensate demineralizer systems. The addition of oxidizing agents and catalysts can accelerate the resin degradation process, allowing the evaluation of resin stability.
We previously designed a resin leachable TOC concentration detection system employing analysis after a short 16-hour resin soaking time. Although some of the resins can meet the TOC concentration specification of this method, it still has the problem of detecting sulfonic acid concentrations relevant to condensate polishing systems. In this study, long-term testing methods are employed to evaluate resin performance. Sampling and analysis are conducted every day to observe the changes in the soaking water. Each experimental period is about 30 days. In this period, the trend of TOC concentration change can be observed clearly and make a better quality judgment.
Leached organics from resins flow into feedwater systems, where they are decomposed to sulfonic acid and chloride products due to the effects of high temperature and/or radiation. Therefore, UV lamp oxidation is a useful method to oxidize and decompose leachable organics to determine sulfonic acid and chloride concentrations. Despite the fact that UV radiation does not produce precisely the same effects as dose ionizing radiation in nuclear reactors, it does possess similar properties. With the exception of some extra high-energy bonds, nearly all of the chemical bonds can be damaged by UV at a wavelength of 185 nm. In addition, this wavelength of UV can even dissociate water to H and OH radicals. OH radical, which has a strong oxidizing ability, can further oxidize organics into H2O and CO2. Thus, UV irradiation could decompose leachable organics into Cl− and SO42− if chlorine and sulfur are contained in the organics. Therefore, the use of a 185-nm UV lamp to irradiate the resin leachate and conduct anion analysis is helpful to quantify Cl− and SO42− formation when resin leachate flows through the feedwater as well as to assess the impact of the resin on the boiler water.
2. Experimental materials and methods
2.1. Materials
Three kinds of divinylbenzene (DVB; H content, 8%) were used to form gel-type strong acid CERs. All of the DVBs are compositionally the same, however, the manufacturing are different.
4-Phenol sulfonic acid hydrate (85%, MW 174.17 g/mol) was purchased from TCI/America. 4-Sulfobenzoic acid potassium salt (95%, MW 240.27) was purchased from Sigma/Aldrich. Poly(styrene sulfonate) sodium salt (MW 210, 3420, and 10,000 g/mol) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used as a GPC and IPC standard.
2.2. Analytical equipment
Hitachi 7000 HPLC system: injection volume, 50 μL; flow rate, 1.0 mL/min.
IPC: Gemini C18 column (100 × 4.6 mm); column temperature of 25 ℃; mobile phase of 10 mM NH4OH, pH 10.6.
GPC detector: Waters 2489 UV/Vis.; wavelength of 210 nm; pump, waters 1515 Isocratic HPLC pump; column, ULTRAHYDROGEL 250 PKGD; column temperature of 25 ℃; mobile phase, 0.2 M Na2SO4 + 10% acetonitrile; flow rate of 1.0 mL/ min.
TOC analyzer: O.I. 1010-type wet oxidation TOC analyzer.
Ion chromatography instrument: DIONEX DX800; mobile phase of 0.3 mMNaHCO3 and 2.7mN Na2CO3.
UV lamp with 185-nm wavelength.
Online conductivity analyzer: Martek Mark22; range, 0–1000 μs/cm.
Online TOC analyzers: Anatel A-1000 S10 & S20P; range, 0–2000 ppb as carbon.
Resin column: length, 90 cm; 1 BV (bed volume) = 470 mL.
2.3. Methods
2.3.1. IPC test
(1) Soak a resin using water to volume ratio of 1:1 for 24 h. Sample and analyze the leachate. (2) Soak another resin with 1.5% added hydrogen peroxide for 24 h and repeat the test.
2.3.2. GPC test
(1) Soak a resin using water to volume ratio of 1:1 for 24 h. Sample and analyze the leachate. (2) Sample and analyze the leachable solution for 16 and 93 d. (3) Soak another resin with 1.5% added hydrogen peroxide for 1 and 16 d and repeat the test.
2.3.3. CER leachable TOC soaking test
(1) Soak the resin with water and mix with a volume ratio of 1:1. (2) Sample and change the soaking water every day. The total experimental period is 30 d. (3) Analyze the resin leachable TOC and sulfate concentrations. (4) Replace the solvent (pure water) with 1.5% hydrogen peroxide and repeat the test.
2.3.4. UV oxidation test of CER leachate
(1) Connect the UV lamp to the extra pure water production machine. Continuously flush the tube for 5–10 min until the analyzed TOC, Cl−, and SO42− values between the UV lamp inlet and outlet are very close. (2) Dilute the resin leachate until the TOC concentration is in the range of 100–250 ppb. (3) Import the sample with slight shaking to make sure the gas from the UV tube is removed. (4) Turn on the UV lamp and irradiate the sample for 100 min. Shake the tube slightly every 10 min to mix the solution. (5) Turn off the UV lamp and carefully pour out the solution. Analyze the concentrations of TOC and SO42− using the TOC and IC analyzer.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. IPC and GPC analytical results
Three commercially available DVB 8% CERs (A, B, and C) were tested. Resin A is sampled from NPPs. IPC was employed along with a standard sample to separate monomers and polymers. After calibrated using the standard, the following two monomers were separated from the polymers: 4-sulfobenzoic acid (4-SBA), retention time = 1.8 min; and 4-phenol sulfonic acid (4-PSA), retention time = 2.1 min. IPC analysis did not include the precise estimate of molecular weight for each peak because we were seeking only to determine the variations in monomer percentages. 4-phenol sulfonic acid and 4-sulfobenzoic acid are generally the main monomer components [7,8]. The monomer fraction was determined by integrating the curves in Figure 2 from zero to a retention time of 2.1 min. The monomer percentages were determined according to the ratio between monomer area and the total area of the signal. The monomer percentages are listed in Table 1; with the exception of resin A, the monomer percentages for all resins are similar. The monomer percentages determined by IPC are expected to be consistent; resin A seems to have lost a part of its sulfonic acid content to the polymer fraction after one day of soaking.
Figure 2. IPC spectra for resin A soaked in (a) pure water and (b) 1.5% H2O2.
Table 1. IPC data of resins leachate monomer % after different soaking times.
The IPC spectra of resins A and B IPC after soaking in water and 1.5% hydrogen peroxide are shown in Figures 2 and 3, respectively. Hydrogen peroxide retention time in the IPC test is about 2.94 min. Figure 2 shows that the polymer signals almost disappeared after resin A was soaked in hydrogen peroxide. The polymer signals of resin B also decreased after soaking with 1.5% hydrogen peroxide (Figure 3). This indicates that the resin leachable polymers are more susceptible to interference from hydrogen peroxide, resulting in the release of sulfate.
Figure 3. IPC spectra for resin B soaked in (a) pure water and (b) 1.5% H2O2.
The GPC test was calibrated by three poly(styrene sulfonate) sodium salt standards with molecular weights of 210, 3420, and 10,000 g/mol. The GPC spectra of the leachates from resins A, B, and C after soaking in pure water for 1, 16, and 93 days are shown in Figure 4. In Figure 4(a)–(c), corresponding to resins A–C, and the numbers attached with the peaks mean molecular weight which are estimated by the three standards. The Mp (molecular peak) used to separate oligomers and polymers is defined as 2300 g/mol. The polymer percentages of all resins calculated from the GPC spectra are shown in Table 2. The polymer fraction was determined by integration of the curves in Figure 4 from zero to a retention time corresponding to 2300 g/mol. The polymer peak area of resin A decreased more than those of the other resins. When resin A was soaked in water, the leachable polymer at 4948 Mp was the highest in the first day and decomposed rapidly after 16 days. Even after 93 days, its signal area was still lower than the first day. The other signals at 3730, 1197, and 664 Mp all decreased as soaking time increased from 1 to 16 days, but reached the highest levels at day 93. Thus, it seems that the leachable polymer at 4948 Mp decomposed gradually. The GPC spectrum of resin B is similar to that of resin C. The four signals at 4956, 3900, 1196, and 850 Mp in the spectrum of resin B increased in a normal fashion from day 1 to day 93. The polymer percentages were determined according to the ratio between polymer area and the total area of the signal. The polymer peak area percentage of resin A decreased significantly from day 1 to day 16 (Table 2). Their four Mp signals are all decreased, especially 4948 Mp in the 16th day. The differences in polymer peak area percentages among the other resins (B and C) from day 1 to day 16 were not significant; these resins appeared to be more stable than resin A.
Figure 4. GPC spectra of resins A, B, and C after soaking in pure water.
Table 2. GPC data of resin leachable polymer peak % (Mp >2300).
To explain why the resin A polymer peak area at 4948 Mp increased after the first day, the IPC data are shown in Table 1. The monomer peak area of resin A increases more rapidly than any other CER from day 1 to day 93. This might explain why the leachable polymer peak area of resin A increases more slowly than for the other resins. Furthermore, the GPC spectra do not show leachable monomer peaks; fortunately, GPC and IPC spectral results can be analyzed complementarily.
Figure 5 shows the GPC spectra of resins A, B, and C after soaking in 1.5% H2O2. Between 0 and 11.5 minutes, the signal strength of resin A was lower than that of other resins; therefore, only resin A presents a particularly low peak area, while those of the other CERs are similar. Except for resin A, all other spectra present three polymer molecular peaks. Although H2O2 interferes with oligomer signals, oligomer molecular peaks approximately 1200 and 779 Mp are still observed, except in the spectrum of resin A. This phenomenon may be explained by the unstable polymer structure of resin A due to deterioration by H2O2, which decomposes almost all leachable polymers. Unfortunately, the oligomer Mp signal overlaps with the H2O2 peak, and the polymer and oligomer peak area percentages cannot be compared as in the case of soaking in water. Figure 5 shows that the total peak area (either polymers or oligomers) of resin A is far less than those of the other CERs.
Figure 5. GPC spectra of resins A, B, and C soaked in 1.5% H2O2.
3.2. Cation exchange resin soaking leachate analysis results
The soaking leachate TOC analysis results after soaking the CERs in pure water are shown in Figure 6(a). The leachate TOC concentration of resin A, which was previously used in NPPs, is the lowest; however, the characteristics of this resin are unstable, and the TOC concentration increases obviously after about 20 days. Figure 6(b) shows the TOC analysis results of leachates from CERs soaked in 1.5% H2O2. The leachable TOC concentration of resin A is the highest after about 10 days. Hydrogen peroxide oxidizes the resin leachate oxidize; therefore, the TOC concentrations dropped after longer soaking times. The GPC results indicate that the polymers of resin A are almost all degraded after soaking with 1.5% H2O2; thus, this resin should have the highest TOC concentration.
Figure 6. Leachable TOC concentrations for CERs soaked in (a) pure water and (b) 1.5% H2O2.
The changes in CER leachable sulfonic acid concentrations after UV irradiation are shown in Figure 7(a). After soaking in pure water, resin A exhibited the lowest sulfonic acid concentration. After 20 days, the concentration began to rise, similar to the Kuosheng NPP washing experiment. The chloride and sulfate concentrations of CER online analytical specifications at the Kuosheng NPP are less than 10 ppb and 150 ppb, respectively. When the concentrations exceed these values, the resin must be continuously washed to meet the specifications. Kuosheng NPP constantly washed resin A for 22 days until the leachate test met the specifications.
Figure 7. Leachable sulfate concentrations by post-UV treatment for CERs soaked in (a) pure water and (b) 1.5% H2O2.
The results of decomposition experiments with 1.5% H2O2 are shown in Figure 7(b). The concentration of sulfonic acid in the leachate of resin A is the highest at almost all experimental times. This result can be explained by the IPC data, which indicated that almost all polymers in the resin A leachate are paired with sulfate, leading to the release of a large amount of sulfonate into solution. The other resins do not exhibit the same effect. In summary, the quality of poor resin may not be fully apparent from short-term tests of leachable TOC and sulfonic acid concentration. To determine resin quality in the short term, the adding of H2O2 to accelerate the deterioration process can be used as an auxiliary method.
4. Conclusion
The analysis of the GPC and IPC data indicated that the leachate of resin A was significantly different than the other resin leachates. Particularly when H2O2 was added, the experimental results for resin A were very different from those of the other resins. The usefulness of chromatographic methods in determining the characteristics of different resin leachates analysis was demonstrated in this case.
Although the TOC and post-UV treatment sulfate concentrations of resin A were the lowest during the water-soaking test, it still consumes a considerable amount of water and requires many cleaning times when it is used in actual NPP condensers. After soaking in 1.5% H2O2, the TOC and sulfate concentrations treated by post-UV of resin A generally increased, suggesting that the quality of resin A is unstable and suspected.
Based on the chromatographic and long-term leachate analytical results, resin A seems to be significantly different from the other resins. Unfortunately, almost all tests normally used to evaluate resin leachates are short-term tests, and these tests are all easily passed. Incorporating the addition of H2O2 into the testing protocol could improve the leachable test specifications, compared to only H2O soaking test. This method can effectively shorten the experimental time by deteriorating the resin, allowing the accurate determination of resin quality.
