<title>Fabrication of microspherical Hexanitrostilbene (HNS) with droplet microfluidic technology</title>
<author>Han Ruishan; Chen Jianhua; Zhang Fang; Wang Yanlan; Zhang Lei; Lu Feipeng; Wang Haifu; Chu Enyi</author>
<Affiliation>State Key Laboratory of Explosion Science and Technology, School of Mechatronical Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China; Science and Technology on Applied Physical Chemistry Laboratory, Shaanxi Applied Physics-Chemistry Research Institute, Xi'an 710061, Shaanxi, China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Powder Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier BV</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/J.POWTEC.2020.10.056</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0032591020310068?via%3Dihub</URL>
Highlights
•
Droplet microfluidics was firstly used for the spheroidization of HNS.
•
HNS microspheres with arrow size distribution were successfully synthesized.
•
The flowability of HNS microspheres were superior to that of raw HNS.
•
This work provided a novel method for the spheroidization of explosives.
Abstract
Spherical explosives had regular shape and smooth surface, which gave them low sensitivity, excellent flowability, and high bulk density, thereby yield good charging performance. Traditional spherization methods always resulted in irregular shape, low sphericity, and uneven size. In this paper, a novel droplet microfluidic technology was used to fabricate hexanitrostilbene (HNS) microspherical with nitrocellulose (NC) as adhesive. The farication process (e. g., HNS concentration, NC concentration, flow rate) was fully investigated in pursuing for the ideal farication condition. The chemical structures, crystalline structures, and thermal stability of HNS were preserved. Meanwhile, the flowability and bulk density of HNS microspheres were significantly improved (Repose angle: HNS microsphere vs raw HNS, 33.1 vs 39.2°; bulk density: HNS microsphere vs raw HNS, 0.466 vs 0.301 g cm−3), which enhanced the charging and pressing performance of HNS.
Keywords
Microfluidics;Microsphere;Energetic materials;Powder technology
1. Introduction
Hexanitrostilbene (HNS) is an insensitive and heat resistance high energy density materials, it has been widely used in various weapons, space applications, and et al. HNS-IV, one type of HNS, has high purity, large specific surface area, insensitive to mechanical and electrostatic stimulations, and sensitive to short pulses, these characteristics making it the main charge of slapper detonator [[1], [2], [3], [4], [5]]. However, due to ultrafine HNS's high surface energy and low sphericity, it can aggregate eaisily and greatly reduces its flowability and bulk density, thus bring difficulties for the charging process.
Spherical explosives have regular shape and smooth surface, which make spherical explosives have less internal friction, better flowability, and high bulk density, all of these advantages can improve the charging performance. Various methods have been employed for the fabrication of micro-spherical explosives (e. g., spray drying, mechanical ball milling, composite granulation, and emulsification recrystallization) [[6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13]]. However, the above methods always result in irregular shape, low sphericity, and uneven size. Therefore, novel techonology is urgently needed to fabricate micro-spherical explosives.
Droplet microfluidics is a novel micro-control technique, monodisperse droplets are formed in a microchannel by shearing multiphase fluids, thus enabling precise control of reaction parameters in the crystal nucleation and growth processes [[14], [15], [16]]. Meanwhile, the droplets formed in this technique can act as templates to form high sphericity and uniform mocro-particles [[17], [18], [19]]. Droplet microfluidic technology provide a effective method for the high-throughput synthesis of micro-spheres explosives [[20], [21], [22], [23]]. In addition, small amount explosives are operated in the microchannel, which ensures the operational safety.
In this paper, droplet microfluidic technology was used to fabricate HNS microspheres (Fig. 1). Nitrocellulose (NC) was chosen as the adhesive in the NHS microsphere fabrication process for the following resons: (1) NC was an energetic polymer, the additive of NC won't reduce the energetic performance of HNS microspheres; (2) NC could make HNS agglomerate into a microsphere. The dispersed phase (nitrocellulose (NC)/ethyl acetate (EA) solution) was dispersed in the continuous phase (sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) aqueous solution) using a flow-focusing microfluidic chip to form oil-in-water (O/W) droplets, and these droplets were solidified into HNS microspheres by the solvent extraction process. The effects of NC concentration and flow rate on the HNS spheroidization results were studied, the charge performance of the HNS microspheres was characterized.
Fig. 1. Novel technology to increase the flowability of HNS.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Materials
Ethyl acetate (EA) and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) were commercially purchased (A. R.) and used without further purification. Nitrocellulose (NC, viscosity: 1/4 s) was purchased from Sichuan Nitrocell Co. Ltd.. Hexanitrostilbene (HNS, average particle diameter: 200 nm) was produced by North University of China. The flow-focusing microfluidic chips were produced by Suzhou Wenhao Microfluidic Technology Co. Ltd. using glass etching technology.
2.2. Fabrication of HNS microspheres
2.2.1. Preparation of dispersed phase
NC was added and fully dissolved in EA, HNS was added into the above NC/EA solution and stirred for 15 min to ensure complete suspension. Finally, a dispersed phase solution was obtained.
2.2.2. Continuous phase preparation
SDS (2 g) was dissolved in deionized water (100 mL) to prepare a continuous-phase solution (2 wt%).
2.2.3. HNS microspheres fabrication
The flow-focusing microfluidic chip and the fabrication process of HNS microspheres were shown in Fig. 6a. The chip channel had a depth of 100 μm, the width at the intersection point was 250 μm, the width at the exit point was 400 μm. The dispersed phase and the continuous phase solutions were injected into the channels using syringe pumps. These solutions were managed by the flow-focusing microfluidic chip, small droplets of EA suspended with HNS particles were formed, these droplets semi-solidified into HNS microspheres in the microchannel under the extraction of the continuous phase. The semi-solidified microdroplets were collected by a beaker (full of deionized water), slowly stirring process was conducted to ensure the HNS microsphere was fully dispersed in water. The EA in the suspended HNS microdroplets continually diffused into water phase, the addition of SDS in the continuous phase also facilitates the diffusion of EA into water, the HNS droplets were further solidified into HNS microspheres.
2.3. Characterization of HNS microspheres
Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra were recorded from a M2000 FT-IR (MIDAC Co, Costa Mesa, CA) spectrometer (KBr pellet).
The XRD characterization was performed using D8 advance X-ray Diffraction (Bruker, Germany) measurement, at a resolution of 0.02°. The scanning range was 5°-70°, the scanning rate was 10° min−1.
The morphology of the powder was investigated using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, mod. Vega TS5136XM, Tescan, Czech).
HNS microspheres (1 g) was dispersed in pure water using ultrasonic treatment, and the particle size distribution test of HNS microspheres was performed using a Malvern MasterSize 5004 laser particle size analyzer.
The Quanta NOVA 2200e gas adsorption analyzer was used to measure the specific surface area of HNS microspheres.
The angle of repose method was used to measure the flowability of the HNS microspheres and raw HNS. By pouring about 1 g of HNS explosive into a funnel with a height of 5 cm from the plane, it would fall freely and accumulate into a conical structure, and the samples' flowability were evaluated by measuring the cone angle.
The bulk density of HNS was calculated by the ratio of weight and volume described in ASTM 873 standard (Test Method for Bulk Density of Densified particulate Biomass Fuels). The weight and volume values were obtained as follow:samples were poured into a hemispherical cavity with diameter of 5 mm, and excess samples above the hemispherical plane were removed using a ruler, the weight and volume values of samples in hemispherical cavity were measured for further calculation.
Calorimetric tests were carried out by a differential scanning calorimeter DSC204F1 from Netzsch (Germany). An indium standard was used for fusion temperature and enthalpy calibration. Powder samples with a weight of about 0.3 mg were crimped into an aluminum pan. The analyses were conducted in nitrogen (flow rate 50 mL min−1), by heating the sample from 25 to 400 °C with heating rate 5 °C min−1 and 10 °C min−1, respectively.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. The chemical structure characterization of HNS
The HNS microspheres and raw HNS were characterized by FT-IR and XRD, as shown in Fig. 2. FT-IR was employed to confirm the chemical structure of HNS (Fig. 2a), the FT-IR of HNS microsphere was the same as the raw HNS. The peak at 3101 cm−1 was the stretching vibration peak of -C=C-H, the peaks at 1538 and 1348 cm−1 were the absorption peaks of -NO2. Thus, the chemical structure of HNS in HNS microspheres was maintained. In HNS microspheres, the IR characteristic peaks of NC could not be observed, because the amount of NC was preciously little, which had a slight impact on HNS. The XRD peaks of the HNS microspheres were the same as XRD peaks in raw HNS (Fig. 2b), this result further confirmed the crystalline structure of HNS.
Fig. 2. The FT-IR (a) and XRD (b) spectrum of raw HNS and HNS microspheres.
3.2. The investigation of the fabrication of HNS microspheres
3.2.1. Effects of the NC concentrations on HNS microsphere fabrication
The NC concentration used in the fabrication process of HNS microspheres had a significant impact on the sphericity of HNS microspheres. HNS (0.2 g) was dispersed in NC/EA solutions (various NC concentrations: 0.2 wt%, 0.5 wt%, 1 wt%, 2 wt%, and 4 wt%) to form a dispersed phase, various NC concentrations were employed to investigate the effects on the formation of HNS microsphere by NC concentration. The dispersed phase flow rate (Qd) and continuous phase flow rate (Qc, 2 wt% aqueous SDS solution) were 50 and 2000 μL min−1, respectively.
Along with the increase of NC concentration (NC/EA solution), the spheroidization degree of HNS gradually increased (Fig. 3a–e). When the NC concentration was 0.2 wt%, large depression in HNS particle center was observed. When the NC concentration increased to 0.5 wt%, the depression in the microspheres decreased significantly. Upon the concentration of NC was above 0.5 wt% (1 wt%, 2 wt%, and 4 wt%), high-sphericity HNS microspheres were formed. This could be attributed to the collapse of HNS suspension droplets. The viscosity of HNS suspension droplets with low NC concentration wasn't strong enough to resist the disturbance caused by the aqueous solution and support the aggregation of HNS, ultimately, the depression in the center of HNS microspheres formed.
Fig. 3. Morphology of HNS microspheres at different NC concentrations. (a) 0.2 wt%, (b) 0.5 wt%, (c) 1 wt%, (d) 2 wt%, (e) 4 wt%, (f) Surface of the microspheres (NC, 1 wt%), (g) Surface of the microspheres (NC, 4 wt%), (h) Internal image of the microspheres (NC, 1 wt%), (i) Internal image of the microspheres (NC, 4 wt%).
The simulated compaction method was employed to explore the microscopic morphology changes during the charging process. Aggregation of HNS particles and small pores were observed on the surface of the spherical particles (Fig. 3f, g), this channels were formed by the EA diffusion process from the inner droplets to the aqueous solution. When the NC concentration was 1 wt%, the HNS microspheres could be pressed into small pieces (Fig. 3h). These small pieces could be benefited to the increasement of the charge density. Upon the NC concentration increased to 4 wt%, the obtained HNS microspheres were very strong and resist pressure, it won't cracked after pressing (Fig. 3i). Moreover, too much NC was harm to the increasement of HNS microspheres' energetic performance, which were key parameters for explosives. Therefore, the ideal NC concentration was selected as 1 wt% to balance the detonation parameters and the spheroidization performance of HNS microspheres.
3.2.2. Effects of the HNS concentrations on the fabrication of HNS microspheres
The effect of various HNS suspension concentrations on the HNS microspheres' hollowness was also studied. Dispersed phase solutions with various HNS suspension concentrations (10 wt%, 15 wt%, and 20 wt%) were prepared, the NC concentration was fixed at 1 wt%. The dispersed phase and continuous phase flow rates were set to 50 μL min−1 and 2000 μL min−1, respectively. The results were characterized using SEM, as shown in Fig. 4.
Fig. 4. Hollowness of the HNS microspheres at different HNS suspension concentrations. (a) 10 wt%, (b) 15 wt%, (c) 20 wt%.
Upon the HNS suspension concentration increased, the cavities inside HNS microsphere became smaller (Fig. 4a–c). During the HNS microsphere solidification process, coating of these droplets was formed by the NC solidifition process. EA inside the droplet diffused into the water, and drived the inner HNS particles moved to the surface. When these HNS particles reached the envelope, cavity was formed inside the microspheres. Upon the HNS suspension concentration was large, the internal particles would be blocked from moving the small distance to the surface layer, resulted in small cavities inside the particles.
3.2.3. Influence of flow rate on HNS microsphere fabrication
To explore the influence of feed solution flow rates on the formation of HNS microspheres, various flow rates were investagated (HNS, 20 wt%; NC in EA solution 1 wt%; 2 wt% SDS aqueous solution). The dispersed phase flow rate Qd was adjusted to 50 μL min−1, the continuous phase flow rate Qc was set as 1500 μL min−1, 2000 μL min−1, 2500 μL min−1, and 3000 μL min−1.
Along with the increasement of the continuous phase, the obtained HNS microspheres became smaller, the particle size distribution becames narrower (Fig. 5a–d). When the continuous phase flow rate became higher, the dispersed phase fluid became thinner, ultimately resulted in smaller droplets. Meanwhile, the increasement of the continuous phase flow rate increased the distance between the adjacent droplets and prevented the droplets from aggregation.
Fig. 5. Effect of flow rate on HNS microsphere formation. (a) Qc = 1500 μL min-1, (b) Qc = 2000 μL min-1, (c) Qc = 2500 μL min-1, and (d) Qc = 3000 μL min-1.
3.2.4. Fabrication mechanism of HNS microspheres
According to the above results, ideal condition (NC concentration, HNS concentration, and continuous phase flow rate were 1 wt%, 20 wt%, and 2500 μL min−1) was selected for further investigation of the HNS microspheres fabrication mechanism. Microscope was employed for the in-situ investigation of the HNS microspheres fabrication process (Fig. 6).
Fig. 6. Schematic diagram and in-situ Microscope photos of the formation of the HNS microspheres.
The dispersed phase was squeezed by the continuous phase in the narrow cross channel of microfluidic chip, small jet of fluid formed by the pressure from both sides [[24], [25], [26], [27]]. When the dispersed phase jet flowed out of the narrow channel, the pressure on the dispersed phase liquid disappeared, the jet became slightly thicker and fluctuated. Finally, the jet broke into small droplets due to surface tension, forming an oil-in-water (O/W) microemulsion (Fig. 6a and Fig. 6c).
Upon the droplet formed, EA in these droplets slowly diffused into the aqueous solution (Fig. 6b, d), because EA was slightly soluble in water. During the extraction process [28,29], the NC in EA was supersaturated due to its insolubility in water and precipitated on the surface of the droplets to form a composite shell of HNS and NC, where suspended HNS was wrapped inside the droplets. Then, EA in the suspended HNS microdroplets continued to diffuse into water through micropores on the shell, the HNS droplets further solidified into HNS microspheres (Fig. 6b, e).
3.2.5. Further characterization of HNS microspheres' micro-structure
To further investigate the micro-structure characteristics of the HNS microspheres, laser particle size analyzer and gas adsorption analyzer were used to analyze the particle size distribution and specific surface area.
The particle size distribution of HNS microspheres was tested using a laser particle size analyzer (Qc = 2500 μL min−1). The obtained results were collected (D(v, 0.1), 9.46 μm; D(v, 0.5), 23.02 μm; D(v, 0.9), 40.84 μm; D [4, 3], 24.23 μm). The particle size distribution of HNS microspheres ranged from 10 μm to 40 μm, the median particle size was 23 μm (Fig. 7). This results further proved the microsphere structure of HNS microspheres.
Fig. 7. The particle size distribution of the HNS microspheres.
The BET analysis was used to investigate the specific surface area of HNS microspheres (NC concentration: 1 wt%). The BET surface was 28.24 m2 g−1. This results was slightly larger than that provided in literature (5–25 m2 g−1) [5], it indicated that the microscopic surface characteristics of HNS had not been changed after the spheroidization process, the ultra-fine structure of HNS was preserved.
3.3. The flowability, bulk density and thermal performance of HNS microspheres
3.3.1. Flowability of HNS microspheres
Flowability and bulk density are important characteristics of explosives, they can reflect the crystal shape and particle surface state of the explosive, which directly affect the efficiency and quality of the charge [30,31]. In this work, the flowability of HNS microspheres and raw HNS were investigated using the angle of repose measurement [32,33]. HNS (1 g) was poured at a height of 5 cm, the natural pile's angle of repose were measured (Fig. 8). The angle of repose formed by the raw material HNS was 39.2°, and that of HNS microspheres was 33.1°, indicating that the flowability of HNS microspheres was superior to that of raw HNS.
Fig. 8. The angle of repose for raw HNS and the HNS microspheres.
3.3.2. Bulk density of HNS microspheres
Bulk density was determined in accordance with ASTM 873 standard (Test Method for Bulk Density of Densified particulate Biomass Fuels) [34]. HNS microspheres and raw HNS were loaded into a standard hemispherical cavity, and the surface of the charge was smoothed to form a fixed volume. They were weighed precisely to calculate their bulk density, as shown in Table 1. The results shown that the average bulk density of the HNS microspheres was 0.466 g cm−3 and that of raw HNS was 0.301 g cm−3. This results indicated that the bulk density of HNS was improved by the spheroidization process.
Table 1. HNS bulk density test result.
Sample	Weight (mg)	Bulk density (g cm−3)	Average (g cm−3)
Raw-HNS	9.69	0.296	0.301
10.00	0.306
HNS microspheres	15.78	0.482	0.466
14.74	0.450
3.3.3. Thermal performance of HNS microspheres
Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was used to investigate the thermal stability HNS microspheres (heating rates: 5 °C min−1 and 10 °C min−1). As shown in Fig. 9, both the raw HNS and HNS microspheres undergo the melting and decomposition processes. Under different heating rates, the molten peak (Tm) and the decomposition peak (Td) of HNS microspheres were the same as raw HNS. This results proved that the addition of small amount NC had no significant effect on the thermal performance of HNS.
Fig. 9. DSC curves with heating rates of 5 and 10 °C min-1 of raw HNS and HNS microsphere.
4. Conclusions
In this paper, the HNS microspheres were successfully prepared with the droplet microfluidic method. The HNS microspheres' size ranged from 10 to 40 μm, and shown high specific surface area. HNS microspheres' flowability and bulk density were significantly improved compared with that of raw HNS (Repose angle: HNS microsphere vs raw HNS, 33.1 vs 39.2°; bulk density: HNS microsphere vs raw HNS, 0.466 vs 0.301 g cm−3). These results indicated that the droplet microfluidic spheroidizing technology could effectively improved the charging and pressing performances of HNS. The NC and HNS concentration, flow rate, and other conditions, which were key parameters for the spherization process, have been fully investigated (ideal NC concentration and HNS concentration were 1 wt% and 20 wt%, respectively), the particle size and yield of spheroidized product could be managed precisely by controlling the flow rate and ratio of fluid. Moreover, the chemical structure, crystalline structure, and thermal properties of HNS microspheres were the same as that of raw HNS. Droplet microfluidic technology is a promising method for the spherization of explosives. By choosing suitable water-in-oil or oil-in-water emulsion system, this method can also be extended to the other explosives' microspherical fabrication, provide a new way for the synthesis of novel explosives.
Declaration of Competing Interest
None.
Acknowledgements
The project was financially supported by a foundation item from the General Armament Department of PLA.
