<title>Performance analysis of multistep sorption energy storage using compound adsorbents</title>
<author>Zisheng Lu; Ruzhu Wang</author>
<Affiliation>Institute of Refrigeration and Cryogenics, Key Laboratory for Power Machinery and Engineering of MOE Shanghai Jiao Tong University Dongchuan Rd. 800# Shanghai 200240 China</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>International Journal of Energy Research</Journal>
<Publishing_house>John Wiley & Sons Inc. </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1002/er.3796</DOI>
<URL>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/er.3796</URL>
Summary
The multistep sorption-reaction cycle utilizes heat from several processes, such as absorption, dilution, crystallization reaction, and thermochemical reaction. So, it is very attractive to use multistep sorption technology to improve the performance of temperature transmitter, air conditioning, and heat pump. Different working pairs of silica gel/LiCl, activated carbon/LiCl multiwalled carbon nanotubes/LiCl, and multiwalled carbon nanotubes/CaCl2 are tested and compared. The results show that the water uptake of these compound adsorbents varies with different salt mass fraction. The water uptake goes up dramatically at the crystallization and deliquescence point. Compared with the energy storage performance under the same working conditioning, the activated carbon/LiCl has the best performance, and the possible reason is that the activated carbon has the largest specific surface and the smallest average pore diameter.
Nomenclature
A, B
empirical coefficients
C
specific heat (kJ/[kg K])
COP
coefficient of performance
h
latent heat or enthalpy (kJ/kg)
m
mass (kg)
P
pressure (Pa)
Q
heat (kJ)
R
gas constant (kJ/[kg K])
W
storage density (kWh)
T
temperature (°C)
V
volume (m3)
X
water uptake (g/g)
ΔH
change of enthalpy (kJ/kg)
ΔS
change of entropy (kJ/kg)
Greek letters
λ
correction value
σ
measurement accuracy
θ
reduced temperature
ω
root-mean-square percent error
φ
salt mass fraction in the compound adsorbent
ξ
salt mass fraction of the solute
Subscripts
adsor
adsorbent
c
critical
ch
chilled fluid
char
charging
cool
cooling phase
crys
crystallization
dilu
dilution
disk
discharging
evap
evaporation
he
heat source fluid
heating
heating phase
in
inlet
matrix
matrix
max
maximum
min
minimum
ou
outlet
r
reaction
salt
salt
solu
solution
toto
total
water
water
1 INTRODUCTION
Over millions of years, solar energy was stored in fossil fuels, which were formed from the organic remains of prehistoric plants and animals buried under the earth's surface. Human beings primarily still rely on this stored energy. However, the growing consumption of fossil fuels has caused several serious issues such as energy shortage problem, climate change, acid rain, and air pollution.1
In this situation, accelerating the development of renewable energy and energy efficiency technologies is an effective way to solve energy and environmental problems. Solar energy and industrial waste heat are the most commonly available resources at present. In fact, the total solar energy absorbed by Earth's surface, oceans, and land masses in 1 hour is more than that used in the world in 1 year. The low-temperature industrial waste heat accounts for more than 50% of the total heat generated in industry.2 However, one of the greatest barriers to widespread usage of this heat is our ability to store and convert it efficiently due to its characteristics of low energy density and instability.
Recently, more and more attention has been paid to the thermochemical storage due to its long-term heat storage preservation ability, almost no thermal loss, and high heat storage density. One attractive option in thermochemical storage is to store heat in chemical fuels such as hydrogen, methane, and methanol. Because chemical fuels store heat in the bonds of molecules, they inherently have the highest energy density of any storage technology. However, chemical fuels release energy and greenhouse gases through oxidation reactions in open cycle.3 There is one alternative closed cycle of energy storage, based on thermochemical processes, storing heat in the rearrangement of chemical bonds through isomerization. Kolpak and coworkers functionalized single-walled carbon nanotubes in the thermal energy storage,4 but this technology has a low energy density of 56 Wh/kg.
Low-temperature heat has the potential to be stored not only for heating but also for electricity generation. Conventional methods use thermoelectric materials and structures to produce electricity. However, it works well only at high temperatures. Hu et al investigated an electrochemical system for thermal energy harvesting in the architectures as a thermoelectric device, but the efficiency is lower than 0.5% below 100°C because the thermopower is limited by poor ionic conductivity of electrolyte.5, 6 One alternative approach of electrochemical for low-temperature heat energy storage is to explore the thermodynamic cycle as in the thermomechanical engines. Thermogalvanic effect can construct such cycles by the dependence of electrode potential on temperature. In the electrochemical cycle, the system is charged at a high temperature of 60 to 80°C and then discharged at a low temperature with higher voltage to convert low temperature heat to electricity. Lee and coworkers design an innovative system by using a copper hexacyanoferrate cathode and a Cu/Cu2+ anode to covert heat into electricity. This cycle is a promising way to utilize low temperature heat with a conversion efficiency of 5.7% when cycled between 10 and 60°C because the electrode material has high charging density, low polarization, and low specific heat.7
There are several thermal energy storage technologies. The first one is sensible energy storage technology, in which heat is stored isolated from its surroundings. There are 2 main working materials, liquid media (such as hot water storage and oil) and solid media (such as metals and rock). The merit of sensible energy storage is its low cost. However, its energy density is low, so large storage volumes and containers are needed. Moreover, it has significant heat losses.8-12 The second one is latent heat energy storage technology, in which heat is charged and discharged through the changing the phase of a material at a constant temperature. The most common type of latent heat storage is ice storage for air conditioning. Magnesium sulfate heptahydrate is also a promising material for latent heat storage technology. The merit of this technology is its high energy storage density that is 4 to 5 times of that of sensible heat storage. But it also has the problem of difficulty maintaining, chemical instability, dilution effect, etc.13-17 Recently, sorption and chemical thermal energy storage are studied. The heat can be stored and released by reversible phenomenon, chemical adsorption, or reaction. The biggest merit of this technology is its higher storage density than other thermal storage technologies. In addition, it does not degrade over long-term storage and heat can be stored indefinitely at near ambient temperature.18-22
As discussed before, many researchers have done a remarkable job, but there are several bottlenecks in thermal energy storage. They are low energy storage density, low heat transfer coefficient, and liquid leakage in sorption energy storage. In this paper, the authors have studied several innovations to solve these problems. First, new efficient multistep sorption technology is investigated. The energy storage density can be improved significantly by utilizing 3 sources of energy: the potential energy of concentration difference due to the salt solution, the potential energy of complexation crystallization/deliquescence, and the chemical adsorption/desorption reaction. Second, expanded graphite has been added in the compound adsorbent and the adsorbent is consolidated at an appropriate density to improve heat transfer performance and to solve the problem of liquid leakage. Finally, this paper also demonstrated the study results of the sorption capacity and the corresponding energy storage cooling performance.
2 MULTISTEP SORPTION PROCESSES
LiCl-water and CaCl2-water are usually used as sorption working pairs (as shown in Figures 1 and 2), which present that there are several steps for sorbent sorption of water: (1) complexation chemical adsorption reaction/desorption step: At the points of A and A′ in Figure 1, there is only complexation adsorption reaction/desorption process and the salt hydrate of LiCl.H2O will be changed to LiCl in heating desorption process or the salt of LiCl and water will react to produce the salt hydrate of LiCl.H2O in cooling phase; in Figure 2, complexation adsorption reaction/desorption takes place at the points of C, D, and E; (2) crystallization/deliquescence step: at the crystallization/deliquescence point of G (at low pressure) and E′ (at high pressure) in Figure 2. At high pressure of 5000 Pa, the saturated solution will be heated to form the salt hydrate of CaCl2.2H2O in heating crystallization process or the saturated solution will be produced by the deliquescence reaction between the salt hydrate of CaCl2.2H2O and water vapor in cooling phase at the point of E′; at low pressure of 900 Pa, the saturated solution will be heated to form the salt hydrate of CaCl2.6H2O in heating crystallization process; or in the reverse reaction, the saturated solution will be produced by the deliquescence reaction between the salt hydrate of CaCl2.6H2O and water vapor in cooling phase at the point of G; (3) desorption/absorption step: During heating phase, the weak solution will become strong solution and water is desorbed, while in cooling phase, the strong solution will absorb water to become weak solution.
Figure 1
LiCl-water sorption process [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Figure 2
CaCl2-water sorption process [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
3 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND SIMULATION OF COMPOUND SORBENT SORPTION PERFORMANCE
The authors analyzed these 2 different designs for multistep sorption system. The first one is adsorption-like sorption system, and the other is absorption-like system, shown in Figure 3. The former system is composed of reactor with matrix (such as expanded graphite)/activated carbon (or silica gel, MWCNTs, etc)/LiCl (or CaCl2) and condenser/evaporator. The adsorbate is heated from the reactor and is condensed in the condenser. In the cooling phase, the reactor is cooled and the adsorbate is evaporated in the evaporator. In the absorption-like system, the weak solution is pumped from a tank to spray over the heat exchanger, wherein the solution is heated. The weak solution becomes the saturation solution and solid crystal. The crystal is collected by a sieve. Comparing the 2 designs, we can find that no solution pump is used and it has no issue of the solution pump block in the adsorption-like design; the hydrated salt (such as LiCl. 2H2O) cannot be heated to become pure salt (LiCl) in the absorption-like design. So, the adsorption-like system is more suitable for multisorption cycle.
Figure 3
The adsorption-like system design (A) and absorption-like system design (B) [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Usually, physical adsorbents should be used to improve the performance mass transfer or/and heat transfer because the physical adsorbent materials have abundant micropores and mesopores. Silica gel, activated carbon, and multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) are usually chosen. However, when the specific pore volume of the compound adsorbent is smaller than that of adsorbed water, the solution leaks out of the pores. But if the appropriate matrix is used, this problem can be solved perfectly. Expanded graphite is used as matrix in the compound adsorbent. By our experiments, we find that the mass ratio of expanded graphite and the compound adsorbent is about 1:6. Then, it is compressed to become consolidated adsorbent at suitable density. The merits of this adsorbent are that the expanded graphite has abundant pores for mass transfer; in addition, the space between the expanded graphite can also form abundant macropores, which have capillary force and can store enough solution, and the experiment shows that there is no phenomenon of leakage of solution; the added expanded graphite has high thermal conductivity performance to improve heat transfer performance of the adsorbent from 0.14 to 2.83 W/m K.
The authors study the theory of multistep sorption energy storage for cooling. Moreover, we calculate the adsorbent under different salt concentration. At last, the authors compare the performance of air conditioning of different adsorbents. The algorithm used in calculation is shown in Figure 4. In the calculation model, the following assumptions were made:
Vapor pressure and temperature in adsorbent or chamber are uniform.
Heat transfer between heat isolator and evaporator is neglected.
Multistep desorption/condensation and multistep sorption are an isobaric process.
Pressure difference between adsorbent and heat exchangers is neglected.
The adsorbate can be adsorbed uniformly in the adsorbent and stored in the matrix.
All the components are isolated.
Heat losses are neglected.
Figure 4
Algorithm process in calculation [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
The water uptake performance of salt solution can be calculated from Ref 23, wherein the details π1 to π9 and Ai can be found. The reaction equations can be calculated from the data from Ref 24. The root-mean-square percent errors can be calculated by Equation 21 to 23.
@(1)
@(2)
@(3)
@(4)
@(5)
@(6)
@(7)
@(8)
where Psoul is the solution pressure, Pa; θ is the reduced temperature; ξ is the salt mass fraction of the solute; T is the temperature, K; urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er3796:er3796-math-0009 is the critical temperature of water, K; P is the pressure, Pa; Po is 101,325, Pa; ∆Hr is the change of enthalpy before and after reaction, kJ/kg; R is gas constant, kJ/(kg K); and ∆Sr is the change of entropy before and after reaction, kJ/kg.
The heat balance equations can be calculated by the following:
@(9)
where Qchar is the charging heat, kJ; Tsolu , high , heating is the high solution temperature in heating phase, K; Tsolu , low , heating is the low solution temperature in heating phase, K; msolu is the solution mass, kg; Csolu is the specific heat of solution, kJ/(kg K); mwater , desor is the mass of desorbed water, kg; hevap is the evaporation latent heat, kJ/kg; Xsoul , min  , heating is the minimum sorption capacity in desorption phase, kg/kg; Xsoul , max  , heating is the maximum sorption capacity in desorption phase, kg/kg; hdilu is the enthalpy of dilution of solution, kJ/kg; mcrys is the mass of crystal, kg; hcrys is the specific crystallization heat, kJ/kg; Thydr , high , heating is the high temperature of hydrate in heating phase, K; Thydr , low , heating is the low temperature of hydrate in heating phase, K; mwater , hydr is the water desorbed from hydrate, kg; Chydr is the specific heat of hydrate, kJ/(kg K); hreac is the reaction heat of hydrate, kJ/(kg.H2O); Tsalt , high , heat is the high temperature of salt in heating phase, K; Tsalt , low , heat is the low temperature of salt in heating phase, K; msalt is the mass of salt, kg; and Csalt is the specific heat of salt, kJ/(kg K).
@(10)
@(11）
@(12)
where Qchar is the charging heat, kJ; Qcooling water is the heat of cooling water, kJ; Qcond is the heat of condensation, kJ; Qevap is the heat of evaporation, kJ; Xmax is the maximum sorption capacity, kg/kg; Xmin is the minimum sorption capacity, kg/kg; and madsor is the mass of adsorbent, kg.
The mass balance equations can be calculated by the following:
@(13)
@(14)
@(15)
@(16)
where Xtota is the total sorption capacity, kg/kg; Xsalt is the sorption capacity of salt, hydrate, and salt solution, kg/kg; Xmatrix is the sorption capacity of matrix, kg/kg; φ is the mass fraction; and λ is the sorption capacity simulation value.
The performance parameters equations can be calculated by the following:
@(17)
@(18)
@(19)
where COP is the coefficient of performance; mch is the mass chilled fluid, kg; Cch is the specific heat of chilled fluid, kJ/(kg K); Tch , in is the inlet temperature of chilled fluid, K; Tch , ou is the outlet temperature of chilled fluid, K; mhe is the mass heat source, kg; Che is the specific heat of heat source, kJ/(kg K); The , in is the inlet temperature of heat source, K; The , ou is the outlet temperature of heat source, K; Wm is the energy storage for cooling per mass, kWh/kg; Wv is the energy storage for cooling per volume, kWh/m3; and Vadsor is the volume of adsorbent, m3. The main parameters adopted in the calculation are shown in Table 1.
@(20)
@(21）
@(22)
@(23)
where ωsorp is the root-mean-square percent error of sorption capacity; Yobse , i is the observation value of sorption capacity, g; Ymodel , i is the calculation value of sorption capacity, g; ωCOP is the percent error of COP; urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er3796:er3796-math-0027 is the percent error of energy density per mass; urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er3796:er3796-math-0028 is the percent error of energy density per volume; urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er3796:er3796-math-0029 is the measurement accuracy of adsorbent mass, g; urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er3796:er3796-math-0030 is the measurement accuracy of chilled fluid mass, g; urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er3796:er3796-math-0031 is the measurement accuracy of inlet temperature of chilled fluid, K; urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er3796:er3796-math-0032 is the measurement accuracy of outlet temperature of fluid, K; urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er3796:er3796-math-0033 is the measurement accuracy of heat source fluid mass, g; urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er3796:er3796-math-0034 is the measurement accuracy of inlet temperature of heat source fluid, K; urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er3796:er3796-math-0035 is the measurement accuracy of outlet temperature of heat source fluid, K; and urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er3796:er3796-math-0036 is the measurement accuracy of volume, m3.
Table 1. Main parameters adopted in the calculation
Symbol	Value	Unit
Cvapor	2.08	kJ/(kg.°C)
hevap	2350	kJ/kg
Po	101325	Pa
Csolu , LiCl	2.75	kJ/(kg.°C)
urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er3796:er3796-math-0021	3.25	kJ/(kg.°C)
madsor	1	kg
msalt	0.1-0.5	kg
hcrys , LiCl	260	kJ/kg.LiCl.H2O
urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er3796:er3796-math-0022	270	kJ/kg.CaCl2.6H2O
The sorption capacity can be measured by the thermogravimetric analyzer, which is shown in Figure 5. From the figure, we can find that it is composed of operation panel, balance head, pressure, and temperature sensors, suspension coupling, measuring cell, evaporator/condenser, heating belt, vacuum pump, etc. The balance head is used to measure the mass of the sorbent with an accuracy of ±0.02 g; the pressure and temperature were measured by the sensors; the suspension was composed of electromagnet, permanent magnet, and decoupling and thermal oil jacket; the measuring cell was composed of basket and sample; the measuring cell was connected with the evaporator/condenser, which was used to control the sorption of the pressure; the heating belt was covered on the outside surface of the pipes to prevent the water vapor from condensing on the inside surface; the vacuum pump was used to evacuate the test system.
Figure 5
Multistep sorption performance test setup [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
4.1 Sorption performance under high pressure
Silica gel, activated carbon, and MWCNT are used as matrix in compound sorbent. The parameters of the matrix are shown in Table 2, and the calculation sorption performance of the compound sorbents under high pressure is compared with the cooperators' experimental results 25, 26. The results of the experiment and calculation simulation have a good agreement, and the comparison results are shown in Figures 6-9.
Table 2. Parameters of the matrix
Sample Items	Activated Carbon/LiCl	Silica Gel/LiCl	MWCNT/LiCl	MWCNT/CaCl2
Specific surface area (m2/g, sample)	375	179	140	75
Pore volume (cm3/g, sample)	0.32	0.55	1.4	0.9
Average pore diameter (nm)	0.5	8.2	15	15
Mass fraction of salt (%)	45.5	43.6	44	53
MWCNT indicates multiwalled carbon nanotube.
Figure 6
Silica gel/LiCl-water sorption performance variation with sorbent temperature under 4550 Pa [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Figure 7
Activated carbon/LiCl-water sorption performance variation with sorbent temperature under 4050 Pa [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Figure 8
Multiwalled carbon nanotube (MWCNT)/LiCl-water sorption performance variation with sorbent temperature under 5600 Pa [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Figure 9
Multiwalled carbon nanotube (MWCNT)/CaCl2-water sorption performance variation with sorbent temperature under 5000 Pa [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Figure 10
Silica gel/LiCl-water sorption performance variation with sorbent temperature under 880 Pa [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Figure 11
Activated carbon/LiCl-water sorption performance variation with sorbent temperature under 960 Pa [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Figure 12
Multiwalled carbon nanotube (MWCNT)/LiCl-water sorption performance variation with sorbent temperature under 900 Pa [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Figure 13
Multiwalled carbon nanotube (MWCNT)/CaCl2-water sorption performance variation with sorbent temperature under 900 Pa [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
From Figures 6-9, we can find that this technology can theoretically improve water uptake significantly; in addition, the sorption capacity variations of silica gel/LiCl-water and activated carbon/LiCl-water have no significant features of step sorption, while the and MWCNT/LiCl-water and MWCNT/CaCl2-water have. Comparing Figure 2 and Figure 9, we can see that, at the crystallization/deliquescence point of E′ (about at 70°C), there is a sharp rise of sorption capacity because of the adding of crystallization/deliquescence process in multistep sorption technology. From the figures, we can also find that the sorption capacity rises as the sorbent temperature declines. Moreover, the mass fraction of salt in sorbents has significant influence on sorption capacity. When the mass fraction of LiCl is about 44% in MWCNT/LiCl and the sorbent temperature is about 85°C, the sorption capacity value can reach about 0.31 g/g.
4.2 Sorption performance under low pressure
Experimental and calculation simulation of sorption performance results of the compound sorbents under low pressure have been compared. The result shows that they have a good agreement, and the comparisons are shown in Figures 10-13.
From Figures 10-13, we can find that (i) the sorption capacity variation of silica gel/LiCl-water has no significant features of step sorption; (ii) but the activated carbon/LiCl-water, MWCNT/LiCl-water, and MWCNT/CaCl2-water have significant sharp rise of sorption capacity at the crystallization/deliquescence point; (iii) comparing Figure 1 and Figure 12, we can see that, at the crystallization/deliquescence point of B (about at 40°C), there is a sharp rise of sorption capacity because of the process of crystallization/deliquescence; (iv) the figures also present that the sorption capacity rises as the sorbent temperature declines; and (v) moreover, the mass fraction of salt in sorbents has significant influence on sorption capacity. When the mass fraction of LiCl is about 44% in MWCNT/LiCl and the sorbent temperature is about 35°C, the sorption capacity value can reach about 0.62 g/g.
4.3 Energy storage performance comparison of the different compound sorbents
The energy storage for cooling performance of different compound sorbents has been studied under the same working conditioning. When the mass fraction of salt is 44%; evaporation pressure is 900 Pa, sorbent cooling temperature is 30°C, condensation pressure is 4450 Pa, and sorbent heating temperature is 80°C; the COP, energy storage density per kg, and energy storage density per m3 are shown in Table 3. From the table, we can find that the activated carbon is the best matrix for salt, and the possible reason is that it has largest specific surface and the smallest average pore diameter. The root-mean-square percent errors can be calculated by Equations 21 to 23. The results of the error of adsorbents multistep sorption performance of LiCl/silica gel, LiCl/activated carbon, LiCl/MWCNT, and CaCl2/MWCNT are 3.1, 3.4, 2.8, and 4.2%, respectively. The maximum percentage errors of COP, Wm, and Wv are about 8.7, 5.4, and 6.8%, respectively.
Table 3. Energy storage performance comparison of the different compound sorbents
Item Sorbent	COP	Energy Storage Density Per Mass (kWh/kg)	Energy Storage Density Per Volume (kWh/m3)
Silica gel/LiCl	0.56	0.20	88.1
Activated carbon/LiCl	0.65	0.29	127.8
MWCNT/LiCl	0.62	0.26	111.9
MWCNT/CaCl2	0.45	0.13	56.3
MWCNT indicates multiwalled carbon nanotube.
5 CONCLUSIONS
Different physical adsorbent of silica gel, activated, MWCNT, and salts of LiCl and CaCl2 are used to make compound adsorbents. The authors analyzed the multistep sorption process, calculated the multistep sorption performance, and compared the energy storage performance of the different adsorbs. The conclusions can be drawn as follows: The multistep sorption process includes absorption/desorption step, crystallization/ deliquescence step, and complexation reaction/desorption step. This technology can theoretically improve water uptake significantly; in addition, appropriate matrix has no phenomenon of liquid leakage; when the mass fraction of salt is 44%, evaporation pressure is 900 Pa; sorbent cooling temperature is 30°C; condensation pressure is 4450 Pa; sorbent heating temperature is 80°C, and the COP, energy storage density per kg, and energy storage density per volume of the activated carbon/LiCl-water sorption system are the highest, arriving at 0.65, 0.29 kWh/kg, and 127.8 kWh/m3, respectively.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by the Shanghai research project under the contract of no. 17142201800, Education and teaching reform project of energy and power specialty of Ministry of Education under the contract no. NDJZW2016Y-41, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Laboratory Innovation Research Project under the contract no. 16SG-002, and National Natural Science Foundation of China-Russian Foundation for Basic Research (NSFCRFBR) international cooperation and exchange program under the contract no. 51511130034. The authors thank the cooperators in this international cooperation program of Dr N Yu, LW Wang, Larisa Gordeeva, and Yuri Aristov. This work was also supported by the project of the National Natural Science Foundation of China under contract nos 51206105, 51336004, and 51576121.
