<title>First-Principles Study of Helium Trapping in Carbide Precipitates (Cr23C6) in Ferritic-Martensitic Steels</title>
<author>Cao; Xiao; He</author>
<Affiliation>University of Science and Technology Beijing , School of Materials Science and Engineering , Beijing 100083, China; General Research Institute for Nonferrous Metals , State Key Laboratory of Nonferrous Metals and Processes , Beijing 100088 , China; Xinxiang University , College of Physics and Electronic Engineering , Xinxiang 453003 , China</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Fusion Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI> 10.1080/15361055.2017.1416245</DOI>
<URL>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/15361055.2017.1416245?scroll=top&needAccess=true</URL>
Abstract
Experiments observed preferential He bubble formation in carbide precipitates M23C6 during low-temperature He irradiation in ferritic-martensitic steels. However, the process and mechanism of He trapping in M23C6 present a challenge to measure. Using density functional theory, we have systematically investigated He distribution, migration, and accumulation in Cr23C6. The formation energies of interstitial and substitutional He in Cr23C6 are 3.50 and 3.16 eV, respectively, remarkably lower than those in Fe matrix. The higher solubility of He in Cr23C6 makes it an He-trapping center in martensitic steels. On the other hand, the migration barrier of interstitial He in Cr23C6 is 2.58 eV, about 2.52 eV higher than that in bulk Fe. Furthermore, we only find a very weak attraction potency for substitutional-interstitial He pair, 0.25 eV, and even no binding trend for interstitial-interstitial or substitutional-substitutional He pairs, which suggests that it is more difficult for He atoms to move and less powerful driving force to accumulate in Cr23C6 than those in Fe matrix. Our results indicate that the trapping effect results from a lower charge density zone in Cr23C6, and predict that the small and dense Cr23C6 particles may hinder bubble growth at the initial stage, which can improve the resistance to irradiation void swelling.
Keywords: He bubble;Cr23C6;first principles
I. INTRODUCTION
Due to their excellent thermomechanical properties and resistance to swelling upon neutron irradiation,1 the reduced-activation ferritic-martensitic steels, Fe-Cr–based alloys, serve as candidate materials for the reactor vessels and tritium breeding blankets in fusion reactors.2 However, in the extreme environment of a nuclear reactor, the formation and growth of He bubbles are unavoidable in metals, which are strongly related to materials swelling, blistering, embrittlement, and mechanical failure.3 Therefore, it is a significant and prerequisite issue to suppress accumulation and migration of He atoms in alloys for their application.
Up to now, there has been a substantial research effort in attempting to generate intentionally dense and small trapping centers, disperse the clustering of helium, and slow down the growth and merge of small clusters into bubbles and voids.4–8 In experiments, Ono et al. reported that Cr segregation at He bubble surface could slow down the Brownian motion of small bubbles in Fe-9%Cr steels.4 The investigation on the radiation damage in He+ irradiated nanostructured ferritic alloys demonstrated that the surface of nanoclusters is a preferential nucleation site for He bubbles.5 A very extensive transmission electron microscopy study in oxide-dispersion-strengthened (ODS) steel revealed that He bubbles and voids preferred to form and distribute at the immediate vicinity of oxide particles and suppressed irradiation-induced swelling.6 In addition, fine titanium carbides were demonstrated to play an important role in void swelling resistance for the cold-worked titanium-modified steel when irradiated in EBR-II (Ref. 7). Besides the experimental investigations, density functional theory (DFT) calculations have also been employed to study helium solubility, diffusion, and clustering in metals. Hao and Geng8 have carried out a series of work about the effect of alloy additions on He bubble behavior. For instance, Cr segregation8 can retard motion of He bubbles which is ascribed to the increased charge density and migration energy at the bubble/Fe interface, and Au and Ce have a more significant impeding effect than Cr (Refs. 9 and 10). In ODS steels, numerous calculations have also indicated that the solubility of He in oxides and oxide/Fe interfaces is higher than in body-centered-cubic (bcc)–Fe matrix, He migration is significantly slower, and He-He binding is much weaker than that in bcc-Fe matrix.11 According to these properties, the accumulation and migration of He atoms can be suppressed by nanoclusters, including oxide, carbide precipitates, and some alloying agents.
A recent investigation by Mazumder et al.12 observed preferential He bubble formation within carbide precipitates in a tempered F82H ferritic-martensitic steel during low-temperature He irradiation. Atom probe tomography composition analysis showed that the carbide precipitates were M23C6, in which the Cr concentration was >50% and the other solutes in the materials (Fe, W, and other minority species) partially substituted Cr in Cr23C6 precipitates. Speaking of precipitates in Fe-Cr ferritic-martensitic steels, we recall that the major phases present in the tempered (unaged) condition are M23C6 (mainly Cr23C6) and MX (mainly VN) (Refs. 13 and 14) and the creep rupture properties of materials are influenced by these precipitates.15,16 Among (Fe, Cr, W)23C6, only Cr23C6 is a stable carbide, which has been carried out by experimental and theoretical studies about its crystal and thermodynamic properties.17–19 In order to elucidate the reason and mechanism of helium trapping inside Cr23C6 in the experiments,12 we turn to DFT calculations. Moreover, the influence of Cr23C6 on He bubble formation and growth in reduced-activation ferritic-martensitic steels is still unknown. Normally, we need to investigate He behavior in the Fe-Cr-C ternary system including bulk Cr23C6, bcc Fe, and corresponding interfaces. However, this modeling will pose a big challenge to first-principles calculations because of the large mismatch in the constants at the interfaces. As He et al.20,21 did, here we restrict our study on He distribution and accumulation inside bulk Cr23C6 at the initial stage of He bubble formation and compare them with those in bcc-Fe matrix. We organize the remainder of this paper as follows. In Sec. II, theoretical methods and computational details are described. Section III presents and discusses the solution of single He, interstitial He diffusion, and the binding potency of He-pair in bulk Cr23C6 and Fe matrix. Finally, a short summary is given in Sec. IV.
II. METHODOLOGY
All the total energy and electronic structure calculations were performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation package22–24 (VASP). The electron-iron interaction was described using the projector-augmented wave method25,26 and the electron exchange and correlation were treated within the generalized gradient approximation in the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof form.27 The Cr-3d, Cr-4s, Fe-3d, Fe-4s, C-2s, C-2p, and He-1s electrons were treated as valence electrons. The cut-off energy for the basis set was set to be 480 eV for all the systems. For bcc-Fe metals, we employed a 4 × 4 × 4 supercell consisting of 128 atoms, and a 2 × 2 × 2 k-mesh in Monkhorst-Pack Scheme for the integration over Brillouin zone.28 For face-centered-cubic (fcc)–Cr23C6, the calculated supercell contained 116 atoms and the corresponding Monkhorst-Pack mesh was 6 × 6 × 6. The nudged elastic band (NEB) method was adopted to study the He diffusion behavior.29 Five images were linearly interpolated between starting and terminal points on the migration track. In the calculations, the supercell parameters were fixed and the optimization of the atomic positions were continued until the total energy of this system was converged to less than 10–4 eV.
III. NUMERICAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
III.A. Interstitial He and Substitutional He Solution in Cr23C6
As shown in Fig. 1, Cr23C6 has a fcc structure. There are 92 Cr atoms and 24 carbon atoms in one unit cell, in which four types of Cr atoms—Cr4a, Cr8c, Cr32f, and Cr48h—with different bonding environments are represented by blue, teal, turquoise, and light cyan spheres, respectively, while C24e atoms are highlighted by smaller chocolate spheres. As listed in Table I, the optimized lattice constant is 10.53 Å, and the formation enthalpy is −2.47 eV, consistent with experimental values 30,31 and previous first-principles calculations.19,32,33 These results confirm that the DFT calculations can predict the properties of alloys well.
TABLE I Calculated Lattice Constant and Formation Enthalpy Compared with Experiment Values and Previous Calculation Values of Cr23C6
Fig. 1. The unit cell of Cr23C6: Cr4a (three of them are numbered to distinguish them in the calculations), Cr8c, Cr32f, Cr48h and C atoms are in blue, teal, turquoise, light cyan, and chocolate, respectively. Purple spheres with letters A through J represent various interstitial sites.
With these structural parameters, we set out to study He solution at the interstitial and substitutional sites in Cr23C6. Ten different interstitial sites have been considered in our calculations, which are denoted by purple spheres with the letters A through J in Fig. 1. To clearly display the lattice environment around the interstitial sites, we zoom in on them in Figs. 2a through 2h and give the original bond lengths. In Fig. 2a, we can see that the interstitial sites A and C are located at the center and the face-center of a hexahedron embraced by eight Cr32 atoms, while site B is 1.00 Å off site A. Site A has eight nearest neighbors (NNs) with a distance of 2.17 Å, and the hexahedral volume is 15.84 Å3, even much larger than that of one Fe atom in bcc-Fe lattice. In addition, we examined smaller flat octahedral interstice D in Fig. 2b close to site C, which has one NN carbon atom with a distance of 1.13 Å, and five next nearest neighboring (NNN) Cr atoms with a distance of 1.79 Å. The other interstitial sites E through J in Figs. 2c through 2h are all tetrahedral interstices, among which sites F and I have NN carbon atoms. The polyhedral volumes of different interstices are all listed in Table II except sites B and C.
TABLE II Calculated Formation Energies  and Corresponding Polyhedral Volumes of Interstitial Sites in Cr23C6*
Fig. 2. Zoom in to see ten different interstitial sites, A through J in Fig. 1. Note that only the local structures, bonds, and bond lengths around the defect are displayed. For an explanation of the color spheres representing the different atoms, see Fig. 1.
We define the formation energy of interstitial He as the energy needed to embed it into the interstitial position from the free gas state as
@(1)
where
=
total free energies of the systems with an interstitial He atom
=
total free energies of the systems without an interstitial He atom
=
an He atom in gas.
At a very low electron density zone, the energy cost to embed an He atom into an electron gas is always in proportion to the electron density.34 Moreover, helium has a 1s closed shell electron structure, so it can hardly form chemical bonds with surrounding atoms and always prefers to stay in low electron density space, i.e., large free volume. In the bcc-Fe matrix, our calculations show that the formation energy of substitutional He is 4.38 eV, lower than tetrahedral interstice (4.62 eV) and octahedral interstice (4.82 eV), which are in agreement with the previous calculations.35 Following formula (1), we calculate the interstitial He formation energies and list the results in Table II. For the interstitial site A, it has the lowest solution energy, only 3.50 eV, 1.11 eV smaller than that in tetrahedral interstice in bcc Fe. The He atoms at sites B and C near site A are not stable and slide directly to site A under geometry optimization. Similarly, interstitial sites F and I with the lowest volume, 1.41 and 1.43 Å3, also slide to sites E and J under geometry optimization, respectively. In Table II, we can see that other tetrahedral interstices E, G, H, and J have similar formation energy (4.58 ~ 4.62 eV), about equal to that (4.61 eV) in bcc Fe. Due to its bigger free volume of 15.81 Å3 and lower electron charge density of 0.01 e/a.u.3, the interstitial site A has remarkably lower formation energy compared with other interstitial sites in Cr23C6 and those in Fe matrix. These results show that He indeed prefers to stay in low electron density space. However, there is one exception for interstice D, despite that its octahedral volume is really large (6.23 Å3), the solution energy is still considerably high, 5.36 eV, even higher than tetrahedral interstices with tiny free space in Cr23C6. This is owing to the severe compression induced by the short distance between C24e and Cr4a seen in Fig. 2b. All in all, we confirm that He prefers to stay at interstitial site A with the formation energy of 3.50 eV, which is 1.11 eV smaller than that in tetrahedral interstice in bcc Fe.
Similar as the interstitial He, we replace Cr atom at different Wyckoff positions or C24e atom with one He atom to perform the calculations of substitutional He, and the formation energy of an He atom substituting a Cr or C24e is defined as
@(2)or@(3)
where
=
total free energies of the systems with an He atom substituting a Cr atom
=
total free energies of the systems with an He atom substituting a C atom
,  =
cohesive energies in the reference state, and these states are nonmagnetic bcc Cr and graphitic C, respectively (Ref. 36).
The formation of substitutional He has been associated with its corresponding vacancy, and the formation energy of a monovacancy of Cr and C24e can be written as
@(4)and@(5)
where
E(Cr91C24) and E(Cr92C23) =
total free energies of the supercell removing one chromium and one carbon atom, respectively.
The calculated formation energies of substitutional He and vacancies are listed in Table III. The formation energies of He substituting Cr4a, Cr8c, Cr32f, Cr48h, and C24e are 3.16, 5.11, 4.07, 4.80, and 5.22 eV, respectively. Among them, the formation energies of He substituting Cr4a and Cr32f are both lower than those in Fe matrix, 4.38 eV, which indicates that He prefers to substitute Cr4a and Cr32f in Cr23C6 rather than Fe site in matrix. It is known that formation of substitutional He is strongly dependent on vacancy concentration, and the formation energy of vacancies is dominant in vacancy concentration whether in thermal equilibrium or under irradiation conditions. It is interesting that the formation energy of Cr4a vacancy is extremely low, only 0.71 eV, while Fe vacancy formation energies are 2.12 eV in bcc iron35 and 1.32 eV in cementite.20 Owing to the easier formation of the monovacancies Cr4a and Cr32f, the formation energies of He at the corresponding substitutional sites are lower than those in bcc-Fe matrix, and thus the vacancies may trap more He atoms.
TABLE III Calculated Formation Energies of Substitutional He and Vacancies in Cr23C6
From the numerical results above, we know that the formation energies of interstitial and substitutional He in Cr23C6 are both smaller than those in bcc Fe. As we know, the concentration of point defects in the thermal equilibrium is determined by the formula
where
c0 =
coordination number
=
formation energy of the defect
=
Boltzmann’s constant.
Thus, the study of the early-stage growth of He clusters can be performed by thermodynamic analysis. Due to different lattice structures in both solids, here we consider their concentration in unit volume. Since there are four interstitial sites A and four substitutional Cr4a per Cr23C6 unit cell with a volume of 1167.58 Å3, c0 = 0.0034 Å−3 for both of them. While there are 12 tetrahedral interstitial sites and two substitutional sites per Fe unit cell with a volume of 22.67 Å3, we can obtain that c0 = 0.54 and 0.09 Å−3 for the interstitial and substitutional He in bcc Fe, respectively. In Fig. 3, we depict the concentrations of the interstitial and substitutional He in Cr23C6 and bcc Fe as a function of temperature. Figure 3 shows that He concentrations increase with the elevated temperature, and they are remarkably higher in Cr23C6 than that in Fe matrix. For instance, at 900 K, the concentrations of the interstitial and substitutional He are 8.54 × 10–23 and 6.85 × 10–21 Å−3 in Cr23C6, and 7.11 × 10–27 and 2.62 × 10–26 Å−3 in bcc Fe. This means that the occupation probabilities of He in Cr23C6 can reach up to ten-thousand times more than those in Fe matrix. Therefore, both these inherent interstitial sites and vacancies in Cr23C6 can act as trap centers for helium.
Fig. 3. The concentrations of interstitial and substitutional He in denary logarithm as a function of temperature in different solids, Cr23C6, and bcc Fe. The situations at 600 and 900 K in both solids are labeled by dashed line.
III.B. He Diffusion and the Binding Potency of He-Pair in Cr23C6
In order to elucidate He behavior in Cr23C6, we should also consider the kinetics of He accumulation inside the Cr23C6 solid, i.e., the diffusion and migration paths of helium. Here, we only consider the migration paths and barriers between the relatively stable interstitial sites using the NEB method. According to the formation energies obtained in Table II, the initial and final positions for the diffusion paths are both interstitial sites A in Cr23C6.
As shown in Fig. 4a, interstitial sites A in the supercell are located in the body and edge centers, therefore He can migrate from A1 to its NNN site A2. In the NEB calculations, relatively stable interstitial sites E, H, and J have been chosen as transition positions, and we find the migration paths through sites H and J have higher energy barriers. In Fig. 4, we only give the detailed migration paths and energy profiles through site E. Interstitial sites A and E in Cr23C6 are depicted in purple spheres, and the designs of He migration path A1→E1→E2→A2 are also marked with blue dashed arrows in Fig. 4a. In fact, the migration path from E2→A2 is the reverse process of A1→E1, therefore we only need consider two NEB calculations, i.e., A1→E1 with a distance of 2.86 Å and E1→E2 with a distance of 1.75 Å. The energy profiles for He migration are described by the blue circles in Fig. 4b. Figure 4b shows that interstitial He atom has to overcome an energy barrier of 2.58 eV from A1→E1 site. The inset in Fig. 4b gives the detailed migration energy profiles for the path E1→E2, and the barrier is very low, 0.12 eV. We can obtain a migration energy barrier of 2.58 eV for He inside Cr23C6. We also calculate the migration barrier of He inside bcc-Fe matrix, 0.06 eV from the tetrahedral site to its NN tetrahedral site, which is consistent with previous theoretical values.35 The migration of He in solids is just like mountain climbing, the barrier is determined by the difference between the highest and lowest points. The calculated formation energies of He in different interstitial sites in Cr23C6 are listed in Table II. Those in sites D through J are in the range of 4.58 to 5.36 eV, remarkably higher than that in site A, 3.50 eV. What’s more, the energies of other sites around site A, such as B and C, are in fact higher than our calculated interstitial sites. For this reason, the migration energy barrier inside Cr23C6 is much higher than that in bcc-Fe matrix, and this lower diffusivity for He atoms in Cr23C6 can impede the movement of trapping He.
Fig. 4. Migration of interstitial He: (a) The relatively stable interstitial sites A and E in Cr23C6. For an explanation of the color spheres representing the different atoms, see Fig. 1. (b) Energy profiles for interstitial helium migration in Cr23C6 are estimated using NEB calculation. The inset depicts the migration energy profiles from E1 to E2.
The self-trapping of He atoms, together with the fast migration of interstitial He atoms in most metals, is proposed to be responsible for the He clusters and bubbles in absence of vacancies or other crystalline defects,35–37 and the formation of an He pair is the initial stage of He bubble growth.38 The stability of an He pair in both Cr23C6 and Fe matrix is also investigated. The binding energy  of an He pair is defined to characterize the reduction of the total free energy of the whole system when the two He atoms are brought near from afar:
@(6)
@(7)
and@(8)
where =	total free energy of the supercell containing interstitial-interstitial He pairs
=
total free energy of the supercell containing substitutional-substitutional He pairs
=
total free energy of the supercell containing substitutional-interstitial He pairs.
From Eqs. (6), (7), and (8), a positive value means attraction between a pair of He atoms, while a negative value indicates a repulsion. Here, the reference state of two remote He are both located in the lowest-energy positions, such as interstitial site A and substitutional site Cr4a.
The calculated binding energies of interstitial-interstitial, substitutional-substitutional, and substitutional-interstitial He pairs are listed in Table IV. The binding energies of interstitial-interstitial He pairs are all found to be negative, i.e., a pair of interstitial He atoms have no attraction. For a pair of substitutional He atoms, the attraction between Cr4a and Cr4a is only 0.03 eV, much weaker than that in bcc Fe (1.04 eV). In substitutional-interstitial cases, only the two He atoms located at Cr4a and interstitial site G have an attraction energy of 0.25 eV. However, this is still much weaker compared to that in bcc-Fe matrix, 1.84 eV. The weak attractions of He-pair in bulk Cr23C6 come from the extremely stable interstitial site A and substitutional site Cr4a, their formation energies are significantly (about 0.91 ~ 2.06 eV) lower than other sites. Moreover, these sites are very dispersed, that is to say, their nearest neighboring distance is very large. As a consequence, the aggregation potency of He2Vm complexes in Cr23C6 at the very initial stage of bubble nucleation will be extremely weak and can be easily destroyed by thermal fluctuations. Thermodynamically, the weaker binding energy of an He pair provides a less driving force to form an He cluster than that in bcc-Fe matrix at the initial stage of He bubble formation. Based on our calculation, Cr23C6 can both welcome interstitial and substitutional He and at the same time plays down its attraction to additional He atoms. Therefore, if Cr23C6 precipitates are in nanometer scale, they may serve well as dispersed trapping centers so as to retard the growth of He bubbles, which could be very beneficial for the mechanical enhancement of the irradiation-resistance of ferritic steels.
TABLE IV Calculated Binding Energies  of Interstitial-Interstitial, Substitutional-Substitutional, and Substitutional-Interstitial He Pairs in Cr23C6*
IV. CONCLUSIONS
Using DFT, we have systematically investigated helium distribution, migration, and accumulation at the initial stage of He bubble formation in Cr23C6. The formation energies of interstitial and substitutional He in Cr23C6 are 3.50 and 3.16 eV, respectively, remarkably smaller than that in bcc-Fe matrix, which is mainly due to its bigger free volume and lower electron charge density in Cr23C6. The higher solubility of He in Cr23C6 makes it an He-trapping center in martensitic steel, which is consistent with the experimental results. On the other hand, the migration energy barrier of interstitial He in Cr23C6 is 2.58 eV, much higher than that in bcc-Fe matrix (0.06 eV). Furthermore, we only find a very weak attraction potency for substitutional-interstitial He pair, 0.25 eV, and even no binding trend for interstitial-interstitial and substitutional-substitutional He pair, which suggests that it is more difficult for He atoms to move and less powerful driving force to form He clusters in Cr23C6 than those in Fe matrix.
Our results reveal that He atoms have a lower formation energy, a bigger migration energy, and much weaker binding potency to a pair in Cr23C6 than bcc-Fe matrix. Based on our calculation, we predict that the presence of Cr23C6 can slow the growth of He clusters at the initial stage thermodynamically in ferritic-martensitic steels. If Cr23C6 precipitates are in nanometer scale, He bubbles are dispersed and their growth will be retarded by these trapping centers. The concentrated stress may be released below the limited strength of the materials. Consequently, He embrittlement or helium-related irradiation swelling could be suppressed. We can hope that fine Cr23C6 particles in Fe-Cr alloys may serve as trapping centers for He under neutron irradiation, which could slow down He bubble growth and enhance the resistance to irradiation void swelling and He embrittlement.
Acknowledgments
Jin-Li Cao is grateful to her advisor Wen–Tong Geng for his guidance in carrying out this research. This work was supported by the National Magnetic Confinement Fusion Program of China (grants 2014GB104003 and 2015GB105001) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grants 51504033 and 11704041).
