<title>Better linkage of smart materials to energy scale</title>
<author>Peter D. Lund</author>
<Affiliation>School of Science Aalto University PO Box 15100 FI‐00076 Aalto Espoo‐Otaniemi Finland</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>International Journal of Energy Research</Journal>
<Publishing_house>John Wiley & Sons Inc. </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1002/er.3772</DOI>
<URL>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/er.3772</URL>
1 Introduction
The raise of humanity's welfare would not have been possible without carbonaceous fuels. In the past, black smoke from thousands of chimneys was associated to progress and better welfare. In the 21st century, a full reversal of this mindset will be necessary, because carbon (CO2) released into atmosphere will jeopardize the existence of future ecosystems. Much of the carbon-rich energy sources still in the ground may become obsolete in the second half of this century, when nearly all energy production needs to be carbon neutral following the Paris Climate Accord 1.
However, carbon may still be relevant in a different way, not through the chemical energy bound in the hydrocarbons, but through its unique material properties, which may be helpful to clean energy technology. Actually, new smart materials may play a central role in the coming energy transition by enabling better and cheaper energy technologies to emerge but also enabling the use of mass-production manufacturing technologies. Functional and nano materials, such as carbon nanotubes, are of particular interest because materials in the nanometer scale open up a range of new properties and phenomena that are of high relevance to energy.
2 Promise of Smart Materials
Late Nobel Laureate Richard E. Smalley, who co-discovered the new form of carbon or fullerenes and worked on carbon nanotubes for energy, envisioned that nanotechnology could hold the promise of cutting the cost of new technologies such as photovoltaics by 10 to 100 times, and similar-scale reduction in the cost of fuel cells and energy storage 2. From a physics or chemistry perspective, such improvements could originate from new ‘nano’ functionalities such as high porosity and large reaction surface area, new intrinsic properties from quantum effects, reduced reaction distance, etc which contribute to better mechanical, electrical, thermal, optical, and catalytic performance.
Carbon nanomaterials form an important field among nanomaterials. Carbon-based nanomaterials, for example, single or multiwall carbon nanotubes, can be used in supercapacitors, batteries, fuel cells, solar cells, among others to enhance charge transfer processes, and catalytic activities that in turn lead to major performance improvements 3. Geim and Novoselov received the Nobel Prize in 2010 for inventing graphene, first 2-D material based on one-atom thick carbon layers, which demonstrate remarkable physical properties (e.g., flexible, light, and conductive) relevant to many energy applications, also with potential for low-cost manufacturing.
Nanomaterials have impressive specific area (~π × density−1 × particle diameter−1) from several hundred, even up to thousand square meters per gram, which implies that not much material is needed to functionalize a surface or volume. These materials could be linked to smart manufacturing technologies such as roll-to-roll deposition, screen printing, etc. lending themselves to mass production.
3 Challenges with New Materials
Smart materials have been demonstrated and implemented in energy applications but in a rather modest way so far. Science literature increasingly reports about ‘breakthroughs’ or ‘world-records’ in energy based on nanomaterials and nanotechnology, but the factual impacts on energy or emissions have remained marginal so far. For example, silicon semiconductor technology, which emerged in the 1950s, is still dominant in photovoltaics production, whereas thin films or organic solar cells leaning to nanomaterials and nanotechnology are marginal.
One reason for the modest impact from new energy materials may lay in the inertia of energy systems and long lead times associated with energy investments. However, material science may also have overlooked the energy relevance question. Bridging nanomaterials from lab to energy scale, and considering the relevant science necessary for this step, is a factor of importance in this context.
Energy is a complex technical system, which constitutes of many layers, which need to be integrated in order to create a functioning application (Figure 1). Materials are the basic building block. The complexity originates from the number of connections within a level and the number of levels needed to develop a functioning technology, all dynamically interacting.
Figure 1
Energy technology chain and its levels.
This complexity may be undermined in science. Building from scratch a new energy device, for example, a solar cell or fuel cell from nano and other materials, is a huge effort requiring perfectly putting together a large number of different materials, components, and technologies, before a technology with relevance is in hand. Obviously it is not the task of science to create a ready-made fully commercial new technology, but the issue may be more about building the necessary linkages to the next stage of players, which bring the results further. Thus, by addressing already early on issues, which may be relevant for technology and business, such as scale, stability, and integration, could help to catch up scientific results and speed up the process toward commercialization.
4 Way(s) Forward
In order to raise the energy relevance of new (nano) materials, I would suggest to consider a few pathways for future research as described in the next.
First, there are some ‘low-hanging’ fruits, which could enable a faster path for applying new materials. In the following cases, material integration to energy could function quite well:
Consumer-size applications (small size niche markets);
Integration to existing technology scaffold (replacement of old with new material);
Low technology complexity (complementarity); and
Manufacturing compatibility (scaling to relevance).
Examples where aforementioned cases have functioned well in large scale include transparent electrodes (carbon nanotubes replacing ITO-layers), selective solar absorbers (titania sputtering of Cu-plates), and nanoceramics.
Second, when dealing with new materials for complete devices, the scale of both material production and device size should be better addressed. For example, research on advanced solar cell or fuel cell materials deal with sample sizes up to a few cm2, which idealizes performance and disconnects from manufacturability although yielding high efficiencies. 2–3 order of magnitude larger samples would surely induce new phenomena and issues, which would deserve the attention of scientists as well but would also build a link toward the energy scale. How could we motivate more researchers to work in this scale? Should we encourage using some minimum size?
My third observation continues with the efficiency of energy devices. The trend in research publications is to give priority to results on record high efficiencies irrespective of how long the device would work. From an energy relevance point of view, it would be equally important to stress the lifetime of a device, because it is the accumulated performance, which affects the device economics 4. Let us take a perovskite solar cell with a 20% initial efficiency as an example. Assuming that the cell degrades 3% a year, equals over a 40-year energy production period to a η = 12% cell but more stable and aging only 0.3% a year. Here again, should we urge researchers to report how the efficiency evolves over time, say at least for 1000–2000 h to start with? This would encourage better understanding of degradation mechanisms and enhance device stability relevant to energy applications.
New energy-relevant material science should naturally also tackle with device inefficiencies, which may require new discoveries and more frontier science. Applying advanced manufacturing principles such as ink-jets could enable tailor-made thin structures reducing charge transfer losses and raise the efficiency of electrochemical devices. Advanced microscopy and characterization such as 3D tomography and nanoscale visualization 5 accompanied with interdisciplinary research (e.g., molecular dynamics simulations and machine learning for material science) could in turn broaden our understanding of the underlying phenomena for inefficiencies, heterogeneities, and aging.
To materialize the huge potential of smart materials for the clean energy transition, we urgently need to pay more attention to energy relevant issues. The way forward is quite clear.
