<title>Uranium recovery and purification from simulated waste streams containing high uranium concentrations with dispersion liquid membranes</title>
<author>Maretha Fourie; Derik Jacobus van der Westhuizen; Henning Manfred Krieg</author>
<Affiliation>Nuclear Waste Research, Applied Chemistry, South African Nuclear Energy Corporation SOC Ltd (Necsa); Chemical Resource Beneficiation, North-West University</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10967-018-5860-y</DOI>
<URL>https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10967-018-5860-y?utm_source=cnki&utm_medium=affiliate&utm_content=meta&utm_campaign=DDCN_1_GL01_metadata</URL>
Abstract
The suitability of dispersion liquid membranes (DLMs) to recover and purify uranium from simulated waste streams containing nitric acid, high uranium concentrations and radionuclide contaminants with tributyl phosphate (TBP) and ammonium carbonate ((NH4)2CO3) as stripping solution was investigated. The radionuclide surrogates were not extracted and complete uranium recovery was obtained from 15 g U L−1 solutions using a 1:4 ratio of 30% TBP in kerosene and 0.75 M (NH4)2CO3 dispersion. In addition, all the uranium in the stripping solution was precipitated. Consequently, DLM proved to be a promising solvent extraction contacting method for uranium recovery and purification.
Introduction
In order to safely and cost effectively manage and dispose of nuclear waste streams created during molybdenum-99 (99Mo) production and purified with ion exchange on a alumina column [1], a reduction in the volume and radiotoxicity of the waste are required [2, 3]. Activation and fission products contribute to the beta and gamma activity, while the actinides contribute alpha activity which greatly increases the radiotoxicity of the waste [1]. Some of the most problematic radionuclides include activation and fission products such as cobalt-60 (60Co), ruthenium-106 (106Ru), antimony-125 (125Sb), caesium-137 (137Cs), strontium-90 (90Sr) and actinides such as uranium [1]. In addition, a high uranium content results in large waste volumes [2, 4]. Nuclear waste streams containing alpha activity lower than a certain level may be treated as non-alpha waste [5]. Such low alpha activity levels can be reached by recovering uranium from the nuclear waste streams and in addition, the recovered uranium can be re-used. Therefore, recovery of uranium using solvent extraction will greatly decrease the volume and radiotoxicity of the nuclear waste streams [6]. However, in order to recover uranium from nuclear waste using solvent extraction, shielding is required and therefore the process has to take place in a hot cell or glove box [7]. Therefore, the size and number of equipment that can be employed are limited [2]. Contacting equipment traditionally used during solvent extraction such as mixer-settlers usually requires a couple of stages for complete uranium recovery and therefore they have a large footprint [8]. Membrane contactors have smaller footprints and may require fewer stages than mixer-settlers due to their large and constant mass transfer surface [9]. In addition, traditional solvent extraction contacting equipment such as mixer-settlers have long residence times, resulting in increased extractant degradation when recovering uranium from solutions with high levels of radioactivity [10]. The interdependence between the aqueous and organic phases may also lead to formation of a third phase when the two phases are mixed and the uranium loading in the organic phase is above the limiting organic concentration (LOC) [11]. However, maintaining the uranium loading in the organic phase below the LOC may lead to high organic phase volumes when recovering uranium from solutions containing high concentrations of uranium in the feed. Subsequently, the fire hazard, cost and the environmental impact is increased. Furthermore, the large footprint of mixer-settlers also requires a high initial capital investment [7]. Although pulsed columns and centrifugal contactors have shorter residence times and a smaller footprint than mixer-settlers, both contactors are difficult to design and scale up, while pulsed columns require more than 10 m headspace [7, 10]. Accordingly, to be suitable for use during uranium recovery and purification third phase formation should be avoided, the volume of the organic phase and the number of stages and equipment required should be minimised [1].
Alternative contacting equipment for uranium recovery and purification include membrane based solvent extraction (MBSX) where solvent extraction is performed in membrane contactors (Fig. 1).
Fig. 1
figure1
Adapted from Gabelman and Hwang [12] with permission from Elsevier
Membrane contactor used during MBSX.
The membrane contactor consists of hollow fibres enclosed in a cylindrical shell analogous to a shell and tube heat exchanger [13]. One phase is pumped through the inside of the hollow fibre on the lumen side while the other phase is pumped through the shell side on the outside of the hollow fibre [14]. The pressure of the non-wetting phase is maintained above that of the wetting phase to immobilise the wetting phase in the hollow fibre pores and mass transfer contact occurs at the pore openings [2, 12, 13, 15]. The non-wetting phase will not enter the hollow fibre’s pores as long as the pressure is kept below the breakthrough pressure [16]. According to the Laplace equation (Eq. 1) [16],
ΔPBreakthrough=2Θγcosθrp,max.
(1)
The factors determining the breakthrough pressure of the hollow fibres are the interfacial tension (γ in N m−1), the contact angle (θ in °) and the largest pore radius (rp,max in m). The geometrical factor (Θ) is equal to one for cylindrical pores [16, 17]. In the case of a hydrophobic microporous polypropylene (PP) membrane contactor, the organic phase will wet the hollow fibre pores.
MBSX has the potential to replace conventional solvent extraction equipment by achieving selective and efficient uranium recovery while decreasing the equipment size, capital cost, energy consumption, waste production and environmental impact [17, 18]. In addition, MBSX has numerous advantages over conventional dispersive contacting equipment including [2, 9, 12, 15, 17, 19,20,21,22]:
No density and interfacial tension interdependencies between the aqueous and organic phases during MBSX due to the non-dispersive mass transfer contact which prevent complications such as third phase formation, unloading and flooding.
Membrane contactors have a specific, constant and large mass transfer contact surface which is independent of flow rates and therefore higher extraction and stripping rates can be obtained.
Varying phase ratios can be used leading for example to reduced organic phase volumes required.
Extraction and stripping can be combined in a single membrane contactor and continuous stripping of the extractant will prevent equilibrium saturation and lead to a decrease in the number of extraction stages required. The smaller footprint required for solvent extraction than for mixer-settlers and pulsed columns make membrane contactors ideal for use when limited space is available as in hot cells and glove boxes.
The modular design of membrane contactors leads to easier scale-up than traditional solvent extraction equipment and allows operation over wide-ranging capacities.
MBSX is easier to operate than traditional solvent extraction equipment and operation can be automated.
MBSX requires lower energy supply and operational costs than conventional solvent extraction equipment.
MBSX can also be integrated with other processes and equipment due to their small footprint, ease of scale-up and potential for automation.
MBSX can be operated in different configurations including non-dispersive solvent extraction (NDSX), hollow fibre supported liquid membranes (HFSLMs) and dispersion liquid membranes (DLMs) [14, 21, 23] which will be discussed briefly.
NDSX, where extraction typically occurs in one membrane contactor and stripping in another membrane contactor, has been successfully used to treat waste water from a chemical reactor [9, 14, 23]. However, extraction is equilibrium limited by the saturation of the extractant in the organic phase leading to low extraction efficiency in the case of high concentrations of metal ions in the feed [14, 23, 24]. Furthermore, because extraction and stripping with NDSX requires two membrane contactors, the number of equipment required, the cost and footprint is increased [13, 14, 23].
Extraction and stripping can be achieved in a single membrane contactor using HFSLM configuration [25]. When using hydrophobic membrane contactors, the organic phase fills the pores of the microporous hollow fibre, while the feed solution is pumped through the lumen side and the stripping solution is circulated on the shell side [13]. HFSLMs are not governed by equilibrium limitations, require less equipment, less space and smaller amounts of extractant than NDSX [25]. However, they are not very stable due to displacement of the organic phase from the pores under pressure [2, 13, 21, 26] which leads to problems when scaling up [26, 27].
The advantages of a membrane contactor, supported liquid membranes and dispersive stripping can be combined when using DLM, also known as pseudo-emulsion based hollow fibre strip dispersion or supported liquid membrane with strip dispersion [2, 23, 28, 29]. During DLM, an organic phase and stripping solution dispersion is created and pumped through the shell side of the membrane contactor, while the aqueous feed is pumped in counter-current mode through the lumen side of the hollow fibres [2]. The organic phase fills the membrane pores in the case of a hydrophobic membrane contactor and forms a stable liquid membrane that is continuously replenished by the organic droplets in the dispersion [2, 20, 27]. Since extraction and stripping occur simultaneously, the extractant does not become saturated which also increases the concentration gradient ensuring a continuous large driving force for extraction [20, 26, 28]. As the organic phase in the membrane pores is continuously replenished by organic droplets in the stripping solution, DLM does not have the stability problems experienced by HFSLM [2, 26, 30]. During DLM, the metal ion complex diffuses from the feed solution on the lumen side through the diffusion boundary layer to the aqueous–organic interface where it reacts with the extractant to form a complex which is soluble in the organic phase. The metal complex then diffuses from the pore opening on the lumen side through the organic filled hollow fibre pore to the pore opening on the shell side due to the presence of a concentration gradient until it reaches the organic-strip interface and reacts with the strip phase. The uncomplexed extractant subsequently diffuses back to the lumen pore opening while the stripped metal ion complex diffuses to the bulk of the stripping solution [20, 21, 31].
Tributyl phosphate (TBP) is a well-established extractant and has been used to extract uranium from various nitric acid (HNO3) solutions including dissolved spent fuel in the plutonium–uranium redox extraction (PUREX) process and raffinate streams of uranium solvent extraction plants [20, 32, 33]. TBP is considered to be a reliable extractant in terms of selectivity, efficiency, cost and availability for uranium extraction from HNO3 solutions [2, 21, 34]. During uranium extraction with TBP from a HNO3 medium with concentrations ranging from 1 to 5 M HNO3, a solvation mechanism is followed (Eq. 2) [14].
UO2+2aq+2NO−3aq+2TBPorg↔UO2(NO3)2⋅2TBPorg.
(2)
The uranium extraction distribution coefficient (Kd, U extraction) gives an indication of the amount of uranium in the organic phase relative to the aqueous phase when extraction equilibrium is reached and can be described using Eq. 3 [13, 16].
Kd,Uextraction=CorgCaqfeed,
(3)
where Corg and Caq feed refer to the concentration of uranium in the organic and feed phases, respectively. The efficiency of uranium extraction can be expressed by the mass percentage uranium extraction (%EU) and can be calculated using Eq. 4,
%EU=100Kd,UextractionKd,Uextraction+VaqVorg,
(4)
where Vaq and Vorg represent the volumes of the aqueous and organic phases, respectively [34]. Using the uranium concentration at a specific time (C t ) and the initial uranium feed concentration (C0), the %EU can also be calculated using Eq. 5 [21].
%EU=100(1−CtC0).
(5)
The radionuclides present in nuclear waste streams may influence the purity of the recovered uranium that is to be re-used and contribute to the alpha, beta and gamma activity which greatly increases the radiotoxicity of the solution and makes handling more difficult and dangerous [1, 4]. Therefore, uranium should be separated from these radionuclides. Separation of uranium from fission products such as 137Cs and 90Sr is achieved using their chemical differences [35]. Previous investigations showed that all the activation and fission products as well as trivalent actinides present in spent nuclear fuel remain in the aqueous solution during extraction with 30% (v/v) TBP in aliphatic hydrocarbons [36, 37]. As a result, 30% TBP was investigated as extractant for uranium from simulated nuclear waste streams in this study.
Traditionally dilute HNO3 is used as stripping solution for uranium from TBP in the PUREX process [14]. However, numerous stripping stages are required to completely recover uranium due to the large Kd of uranium in TBP at dilute HNO3 concentrations [32]. The large number of stripping stages leads to a large footprint. Therefore, a more effective stripping solution that requires less stripping stages was investigated in this study. (NH4)2CO3 solutions are naturally buffered at a pH of 9 due to an ammonia–ammonium buffer in this region. Uranium will be present as a UO2(CO3)4−3 complex in dilute (NH4)2CO3 stripping solutions [38]. UO2(CO3)4−3 is a stable complex that can completely strip uranium from phosphate extractants in a single stage [21, 39,40,41]. Previous investigations by Hurst and Crouse [42] determined that the solubility of UO2(CO3)4−3 in (NH4)2CO3 decreases from 7 to 1.8 g U L−1 when the (NH4)2CO3 concentration increases from 0.75 to 1.95 M. Therefore, the uranium concentration in a 0.75 M (NH4)2CO3 stripping solution should be kept below 7 g L−1. During stripping with (NH4)2CO3, uranium is recovered from the loaded organic phase as ammonium uranyl carbonate ((NH4)4UO2(CO3)3) [42, 43]. Another benefit is that (NH4)2CO3 decomposes into ammonia (NH3), carbon dioxide (CO2) and water (H2O) when heated above 60 °C, which will reduce secondary waste volumes created during uranium recovery [38]. However, during extraction, small amounts of HNO3 are initially co-extracted as TBP·HNO3, TBP·HNO3·H2O or TBP·2HNO3 [6, 25, 44]. Subsequently the HNO3 in the organic phase will react with (NH4)2CO3 in the stripping solution to form CO2 gas and a nitrate salt according to Eq. 6. This may disturb the mass transfer surface when using dispersed phase contactors for stripping [45].
(NH4)2CO3+2HNO3→2NH4NO3+CO2+H2O.
(6)
The formed NH4NO3 also acts as an oxidizing agent when heated in the presence of combustible materials and can explode when heated in a confined space between 260 and 300 °C [46,47,48]. However, it is possible to avoid the danger of explosions occurring by precipitating the uranium from the (NH4)2CO3 stripping solution as uranium trioxide (UO3·2H2O) by heating the stripping solution above 95 °C where (NH4)4[UO2(CO3)3] decomposes (Eq. 7) [48, 49].
(NH4)4[UO2(CO3)3]→Δ4NH3+3CO2+UO3⋅2H2O.
(7)
In addition to no secondary waste being produced during such a precipitation step, the CO2 and NH3 that are released can be reabsorbed in water to from (NH4)2CO3 which ideally can be re-used for stripping [1]. The obtained UO3·2H2O can subsequently be converted to triuranium octoxide (U3O8) or uranium dioxide (UO2) to be used for fuel manufacturing [50].
The uranium stripping equilibrium distribution coefficient (Kd,U stripping) gives an indication of the amount of uranium in the aqueous stripping solution relative to the organic phase when equilibrium is reached and can be described by Eq. 8 [13, 16],
Kd,Ustripping=CaqstripCorg,
(8)
where Caq strip and Corg refer to the concentration of the uranium in the aqueous stripping and loaded organic solutions, respectively. Similar to the extraction efficiency, the stripping efficiency (%SU) can also be determined using Eqs. 4 and 5 [34].
Although the DLM configuration has been used during previous investigations [20, 21], none of these investigations used the HNO3–TBP solvent extraction system with (NH4)2CO3 as stripping solution to recover and purify uranium from waste streams containing high uranium concentrations and the above-mentioned radionuclide contaminants. Therefore, this study presents a novel application of DLM. The aim of this study is focused on determining the suitability of DLM for uranium recovery and purification from high uranium concentration solutions containing radionuclide contaminant surrogates. Therefore, transfer of the radionuclide surrogates (Co, Ru, Sb, Cs and Sr) from a simulated waste solution to the (NH4)2CO3 stripping solution during DLM was investigated. Transfer of uranium between the feed and stripping solutions during DLM was also determined. Subsequently, dispersive batch solvent extraction, NDSX and DLM were compared to establish the most suitable method for uranium recovery and purification with solvent extraction. Uranium precipitation from the stripping solution was also investigated to determine whether uranium can be recovered in a form that can be re-used for fuel manufacturing.
Theory
In order to prevent the dispersed stripping solution droplets from migrating through the hollow fibre pores to the feed on the lumen side, the stripping solution droplet size should be larger than the hollow fibre pores. The Sauter mean diameter (D¯s) of the stripping solution droplets can be calculated using Eq. 9 [21],
D¯sDa=0.058(1+5.4ψ)We−0.6,
(9)
where Da presents the impeller diameter (mm), ψ presents the volume fraction of the dispersed stripping solution, and We is the Weber number for the interface between the two fluids (dimensionless). We can be calculated using Eq. 10 [21],
We=ρn2D3aσ,
(10)
where ρ presents the density (kg m−3) of the continuous organic phase, n is the impeller rotational speed (rev s−1), and σ represents the surface tension (N m−1) of the dispersed stripping solution.
Experimental
Transfer of radionuclide surrogates and uranium during DLM
A hydrophobic 3M™ Liqui-Cel™ 2.5 × 8″ Extra Flow microporous PP hollow fibre membrane contactor was used during this investigation. All the chemicals used were analytical grade and milli-Q water was used. Uranyl nitrate [UO2(NO3)2] stock solutions were prepared by dissolving triuranium octoxide (U3O8, natural obtained from Nufcor International Limited) in 3 M HNO3 (70% sourced from Sigma Aldrich) at 60 °C and stirred at 250 rpm for 60 min. From these stock solutions feed solutions containing various uranium concentrations were prepared while inductively coupled plasma (ICP) standard solutions (from Ultraspec) of Co, Ru, Sb, Cs and Sr (1 g L−1) were used as radionuclide surrogates in the feed solutions. The organic phase was prepared with TBP (97%) and kerosene (sourced from Sigma Aldrich) and pre-equilibrated with HNO3 solutions before use to prevent a decrease in the feed volume due to HNO3 co-extraction. The stripping solution was prepared with ACS reagent (NH4)2CO3 also sourced from Sigma Aldrich. Isopropyl alcohol (C3H8O) from Merck and water was used to clean the membrane contactor.
The uranium concentration in the aqueous feed and stripping solutions were determined on a Perkin-Elmer Lambda 1050 high performance ultraviolet/visible/near-infrared (UV/Vis/NIR) spectrophotometer using the “Wavelength Quant” method while mass balance calculations were used in order to determine the uranium concentration in the organic phase. The carbonate [51] and Bromo-Padap [52] methods were used to form uranyl-peroxo-carbonate and 2-(5-bromo-2-pyridalazo)-5-diethylaminophenol complexes that absorb light at wavelengths of 450 and 578 nm, respectively. The Beer–Lambert law was subsequently used to determine the uranium concentration [53]. The carbonate and Bromo-Padap methods are able to determine uranium concentrations ranging from 1 × 10−2 to 2 × 10−1 and 0 to 2 × 10−3 g L−1, respectively. When the radionuclide surrogates were present in the feed solution, uranium concentrations were analysed on a PANalytical Axios X-ray fluorescence spectrometer with the measurement done as liquid samples under a helium atmosphere. Co, Ru, Sb, Cs and Sr concentrations were determined using ICP optical emission spectrometry on an Agilent 7700× spectrophotometer and analysis assurance was done using direct spikes of rhodium (5 × 10−2 g L−1) as internal standard.
Uranium recovery with DLM was conducted in an experimental setup (Fig. 2) containing a feed reservoir (1), two Cole Parmer gear pumps (2), inlet and outlet pressure gauges from Wika for the lumen and shell sides (3 and 4), two Aalborg PTFE flowmeters (5), a hydrophobic 3M™ Liqui-Cel™ 2.5 × 8″ extra flow microporous PP hollow fibre membrane contactor (6) and an organic stripping solution dispersion reservoir with a Heidolph overhead stirrer (7). Chemically compatible polyolefin tubing and fittings were used and the procedure described by Gupta et al. [36] was used to operate the NDSX experimental setup.
Fig. 2
figure2
The DLM experimental setup
A feed/organic/stripping solution ratio of 2:1:3 was used unless stated otherwise. The organic and stripping solution dispersion was recirculated on the shell side at a flow rate of 800 mL min−1 while the feed was recirculated in counter-current mode on the lumen side of the hollow fibres at a flow rate of 1000 mL min−1. The lumen side pressure was maintained at least 15 kPa higher than the shell side to immobilise the organic phase in the membrane pores and prevent the organic phase from entering the lumen side of the hollow fibres. The organic and stripping solution dispersion was stirred at 2000 rpm with a 30 mm diameter impeller for the duration of the recovery process with the Heidolph overhead stirrer in the shell side reservoir. All the data were generated at least in triplicate and the accepted data were within 5% of the standard error. The stripping solution droplet size was calculated as 86.92 µm (see supplementary information Eq. S-2) [54].
The uranium containing (NH4)2CO3 stripping solution was heated to 95 °C under constant stirring at 250 rpm while adding water to keep the initial volume constant until no more gas (CO2 and NH3) formation was observed [38]. The precipitate that formed was filtered with a Whatman 42 filter paper and dried under infrared light for 24 h.
The uranium concentration in the stripping solution before and after precipitation was determined with UV/Vis/NIR spectroscopy using the carbonate method [51]. The precipitate was characterized with XRD using a Bruker D8 Advance Diffractometer equipped with a copper anode target that gives 8 keV energy X-rays and a LynxEye detector. The system was calibrated with the Standard Reference Material corundum supplied by the manufacturer of the instrument. The diffractometer was operated at 40 kV and 40 mA, and analysis was done in the range of 10°–130° with a step size of 0.04° and a scan speed of 2 s per step. Qualitative phase identification was performed using EVA v13Search and Match software (Bruker AXS, Diffracplus Basic Evaluation Package released in 2007) in conjunction with the ICDD PDF-2 (2007) database. The diffractograms were overlaid with the proposed stick patterns from the ICDD database to determine the presence of NH4NO3, (NH4)4[UO2(CO3)3] and UO3·2H2O in the precipitate.
An SDT Q600 thermogravimetric/differential scanning calorimetry analyser with the off-gas line attached to a Bruker Tensor Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometer was also used to determine the presence of NH4NO3 in the precipitate. The temperature was ramped from ambient to 700 °C at 20 °C min−1 under a constant 100 mL min−1 synthetic air purge.
Results and discussion
Transfer of radionuclide surrogates during DLM
During previous investigations it was determined that optimal uranium recovery was achieved from a 3 M HNO3 feed solution with 30% TBP in kerosene organic phase and 0.5 M (NH4)2CO3 stripping solution [55]. To compensate for a decrease in the stripping solution concentration due to the reaction between co-extracted HNO3 and (NH4)2CO3 (Eq. 6), the (NH4)2CO3 concentration was increased to 0.75 M during DLM investigations. During previous investigations Co, Ru, Sb, Cs and Sr at concentrations of 5 × 10−3 g L−1 were not extracted from a mixture containing uranium (7.5 g L−1) and 1 M acetohydroxamic acid (AHA) [55]. The waste was created during 99Mo production and purified with ion exchange on a alumina column [1]. Therefore the waste did not contain thorium (Th), zirconium (Zr) or Mo. Plutonium (Pu) was present in the waste however, the addition of AHA prevents Pu co-extraction [32, 56] and therefore Pu, Th, Zr and Mo co-extraction were not investigated during this study. Transport of the radionuclide surrogates during DLM was investigated to verify that a stable liquid membrane formed and that Co, Ru, Sb, Cs and Sr will not be transported to the stripping solution. A 3 M HNO3 feed solution (1000 mL) containing 1 × 10−3 g L−1 Co, Ru, Sb, Cs and Sr was contacted with a 30% TBP in kerosene organic phase (500 mL) and 0.75 M (NH4)2CO3 stripping solution (1500 mL) dispersion for 20 min. Results showed that Co, Ru, Sb, Cs and Sr remained in the feed solution and were not extracted with TBP (Fig. 3).
Fig. 3
figure3
Transfer of Co, Ru, Sb, Cs and Sr from 3 M HNO3 feed to 0.75 M (NH4)2CO3 stripping solution during DLM
TBP is a highly selective uranium extractant and therefore Co, Ru, Sb, Cs and Sr present in the 3 M HNO3 feed had an insignificant Kd in 30% TBP as was reported during previous studies [14, 20, 21, 37, 55]. Therefore uranium purification from radionuclide contaminants such as 60Co, 106Ru, 125Sb, 137Cs and 90Sr with 30% TBP in kerosene using DLM will be possible. In addition, uranium recovery will not be affected due to the absence of competitive extraction of 60Co, 106Ru, 125Sb, 137Cs or 90Sr.
Uranium transfer during DLM
Since waste solutions containing high uranium concentrations of up to 15 g L−1 has been encountered during previous investigations [1], the recovery of 15 g L−1 uranium in 3 M HNO3 with DLM was also investigated (Fig. 4). However, it is known that precipitation occurs when there is more than 7 g L−1 uranium in 0.75 M (NH4)2CO3 [42]. Such precipitation would block the hollow fibre pores and decrease the mass transfer surface area. Therefore, to maintain an organic phase to stripping solution ratio of 1:3 and to prevent uranium precipitation, 1000 mL of the feed solution was contacted with a 715 mL organic phase and 2142 mL stripping solution dispersion. Complete uranium extraction was achieved; however, only 77% of the uranium initially present in the feed was recovered by the stripping solution after 35 min (Fig. 4). As expected, uranium recovery from higher uranium concentration feed also required a longer time than from lower 7.5 g L−1 uranium concentration feed solutions [57].
Fig. 4
figure4
Uranium (15 g L−1) transfer from the feed solution to the 0.75 M (NH4)2CO3 stripping solution (1:3 organic phase/stripping solution ratio dispersion) during DLM
The inability to completely recover the uranium from TBP was due to an insufficient amount of (NH4)2CO3 to form the UO2(CO3)4−3 complex and hence insufficient stripping of all the uranium from TBP [58,59,60]. The available amount of (NH4)2CO3 also decreased due to the acid–carbonate reaction (Eq. 6) [61]. It is therefore expected that by increasing (NH)2CO3 available in the stripping solution, enough CO2−3 may be available for complete uranium recovery. The longer time required to reach equilibrium can be accounted for by the fact that the controlling mass transfer resistance was situated in the organic phase in the hollow fibre pores and therefore the additional hollow fibre pore mass transfer resistance also contributed to the overall mass transfer resistance [2]. In addition, due to the limited amount of TBP present, uranium first had to be stripped from the TBP and TBP had to migrate back to the lumen side pore opening for subsequent extractions thereby decreasing the reaction rate [20, 21, 62].
Accordingly, the (NH4)2CO3 stripping solution concentration was increased in an attempt to achieve complete uranium recovery during DLM which resulted in complete extraction from the feed and about 95% uranium recovery from TBP within 40 min (see supplementary information Fig. S-2). Consequently, the stripping solution volume was increased which should result in an increased mass transfer area. The organic to stripping solution ratio was increased to 1:4, again determining the uranium transfer from a 15 g L−1 feed (1000 mL) via a 30% TBP in kerosene organic phase (937.5 mL) to a 0.75 M (NH4)2CO3 stripping solution (3750 mL). Although it took slightly longer, complete uranium recovery was achieved after 45 min (Fig. 5).
Fig. 5
figure5
Uranium (15 g L−1) transfer from the feed solution to the 0.75 M (NH4)2CO3 stripping solution (1:4 organic phase/stripping solution ratio dispersion) during DLM
The increase in the stripping solution volume in the dispersion led to a reduction in the organic diffusion path length as well as an increase in the mass transfer area [20, 21, 23]. The larger stripping solution volume also provided sufficient CO2−3 for complexing leading to the complete recovery of uranium from the TBP. Therefore, an organic phase to stripping solution dispersion of 1:4 is suitable for uranium recovery with DLM from high uranium concentration feed solutions. Uranium recovery from high uranium concentration solutions in a single stage with DLM at a low organic phase to stripping solution ratio in the dispersion will also lead to a reduced amount of organic solvent used and a more environmentally friendly process, requiring less equipment and a smaller footprint which makes it more economical [23].
During previous investigations with dispersive batch contacting and NDSX [55], separate extraction and stripping stages (or two rotators/membrane contactors) were required to recover uranium. However, during DLM, simultaneous extraction and stripping takes place. The extraction and stripping results that were obtained with the three contacting methods were compared in terms of the efficiency attained for extraction and stripping [57]. After 15 min all three contacting methods resulted in about 95% extraction of the uranium initially present in the feed and after 20 min DLM extracted all the uranium in the feed [57]. Complete uranium extraction was achieved with DLM due to simultaneous stripping that prevented TBP from becoming saturated which led to increased extraction efficiency [21]. Uranium was extracted at a slower rate with DLM than with dispersive batch extraction and NDSX. Less TBP was available due to the 2:1 feed to organic phase ratio and TBP first had to be stripped in order to free TBP molecules for extraction [2, 21, 37]. Although this caused an initial decline in the extraction rate, equilibrium was nonetheless achieved after the same time (15 min) as the other two methods. In view of the higher extraction efficiency achieved as well as the previously mentioned benefits DLM offers, it is clear that DLM will be the best contacting method for uranium extraction from HNO3 waste streams containing high uranium concentrations.
Complete uranium stripping was achieved within 10, 30 and 210 min with dispersive batch contacting, DLM and NDSX, respectively [57]. This result can be ascribed to the fact that the Kd,U stripping (Eq. 8) was large for all cases and the stripping reaction was fast and therefore the controlling mass transfer resistance lied in the organic phase [12, 13]. Since the 3M™ Liqui-Cel™ 2.5 × 8″ Extra-Flow membrane contactor used during NDSX and DLM has hydrophobic PP hollow fibres, the pores were wetted by the organic phase. Therefore, the additional hollow fibre pore mass transfer resistance also contributed to the total mass transfer resistance, resulting in more time required to reach equilibrium during NDSX and DLM [13, 14, 63]. During NDSX, uranium also had a long diffusion length from the bulk of the organic phase to the pore opening on the inside of the PP hollow fibre where the stripping reaction took place [14]. In order to increase the stripping rate during NDSX a hydrophilic membrane contactor can be employed where the stripping solution will wet the hollow fibre pores [14]. Subsequently, the rate-limiting step will then not occur inside the pores and the additional hollow fibre pore mass transfer resistance will be negligible [23]. During DLM, a liquid membrane formed inside the hollow fibre pores and therefore uranium had a shorter diffusion path length through the rate limiting organic phase during DLM compared to NDSX [20]. The organic-stripping solution dispersion also ensured a large mass transfer surface during DLM stripping and the stripping efficiency of DLM compared well to dispersive batch contacting [2]. A uranium flux 10–50 times higher than traditional contactors was also achieved with DLM [20]. Considering the efficiency, operational and economic benefits of DLM over dispersive contacting equipment and NDSX [4, 13, 64], DLM proved to be the most suitable contacting method for uranium recovery from HNO3 waste streams containing high uranium concentrations.
To confirm that a stable liquid membrane formed and in view of the possible side reactions arising from the migration of NO−3 from the feed to the stripping solution, NH+4 and NO−3 transfer during DLM was determined (see supplementary information Figs. S-2, S-3). It was clear that NH+4 remained in the stripping solution and was not extracted with TBP. Migration of the stripping solution droplets in the dispersion through the membrane pores to the feed solution also did not occur. As was calculated (see supplementary information Eq. S-2), the stripping solution droplets had a diameter of 86.9 µm, which is too large to enter the hollow fibre pores with an average size of 0.05 µm [54]. In addition, the continual replenishment of the liquid membrane in the hollow fibre pores with the organic droplets in the dispersion will prevent bleeding of TBP from the liquid membrane from influencing uranium recovery. Therefore, the formation of a stable liquid membrane during DLM was confirmed and will enable scale-up in order to process larger volumes [2, 20].
It was also confirmed that TBP co-extracted HNO3, as had been reported previously [2, 6, 44], which subsequently reacted with the (NH4)2CO3 in the stripping solution (see Eq. 6) forming NH4NO3, CO2 and NH3 [61]. As mentioned previously, the formed NH4NO3 has the potential to explode when heated in the presence of combustible materials [47]. Therefore, precipitation of uranium while keeping the NH+4 and NO−3 in the stripping solution was investigated to mitigate the danger of explosions.
Uranium precipitation
The uranium in the stripping solution was precipitated using the method described in the “Experimental” section and the uranium concentration in the stripping solution before and after precipitation was analysed with UV–Vis. According to Table 1 all the uranium present in the stripping solution precipitated.
Table 1 %U precipitation determined by UV–Vis analysis of the stripping solution
To show that NH4NO3 was not present in the uranium precipitate, the uranium containing stripping solution was evaporated and the solid strip along with the uranium precipitate were heated to 350 °C. The FTIR absorption spectra of the volatiles emitted from 0 to 350 °C by the solid strip before precipitation (Fig. 6a) showed absorption peaks at about 1600, 2200 and 2600 cm−1. However, the FTIR absorption spectra of the volatiles emitted from 0 to 350 °C by the uranium precipitate (Fig. 6b) showed no infrared active gases.
Fig. 6
figure6
FTIR absorption spectra of the volatile gases that were emitted during heating of the a solid strip and b uranium precipitate
The absorption peak at 1600 cm−1 in Fig. 6a may indicate the presence of the N–H scissor and O–H bend vibrational modes due to the formation of NH3 and H2O above 225 °C [65]. The absorption peak at about 2200 cm−1 may indicate the presence of the N–O asymmetrical stretch vibrational mode due to the formation of N2O from 225 °C [65]. The absorption peak at about 2600 cm−1 may indicate the presence of the C–O asymmetrical stretch vibrational mode due to the formation of CO2 from 150 °C [65]. (NH4)4[UO2(CO3)3] releases NH3, CO2 and H2O from 165 to 185 °C [66, 67] while NH4NO3 decomposes into N2O and H2O at about 230 °C [48]. Therefore, it can be assumed that (NH4)4[UO2(CO3)3] and NH4NO3 were present in the strip. However, the FTIR absorption spectra of the volatiles emitted from 0 to 350 °C by the uranium precipitate (Fig. 6b) showed no infrared active gases and therefore (NH4)4[UO2(CO3)3] and NH4NO3 were not present. Therefore, it can be concluded that the uranium precipitate contained no NH4NO3 which makes it safe to re-use.
Conclusions
Complete uranium recovery from a 3 M HNO3 and 15 g L−1 uranium feed solution was achieved using DLM for a dispersion of 30% TBP in kerosene organic phase and 0.75 M (NH4)2CO3 stripping solution in a 1:4 ratio within 45 min. The radionuclide surrogates (Co, Ru, Sb, Cs and Sr) in the feed were not co-extracted and a stable liquid membrane formed during DLM. However, using DLM does not circumvent the co-extraction of HNO3 with TBP, resulting in the formation of NH4NO3 in the uranium containing stripping solution. In order to mitigate NH4NO3 explosive potential during further processing of the stripping solution for re-use of the recovered uranium, the uranium in the stripping solution was precipitated by heating above 95 °C to dissociate the UO2(CO3)4−3 complex. Characterisation of the precipitate proved that no NH4NO3 was present in the precipitate, confirming its safety for further processing steps. Radioactive species present in 99Mo production residue will lead to radiolytic degradation of the PP hollow fibres, TBP and HNO3 which in turn will lead to the formation of degradation products that may affect the recovery of uranium [68, 69]. Monte Carlo Neutron-Particle Transport Code calculations determined that the PP hollow fibres are expected to have a lifetime of about 6 years [57]. However, during the present study a non-active simulated 99Mo production residue solution was used and therefore the influence of degradation products on uranium recovery should be investigated during future studies when a hot cell is available.
Data availability statement
The datasets generated during the current study are not publicly available but are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.
