<title>A review of gas transport and adsorption mechanisms in two‐component methane‐carbon dioxide system</title>
<author> Chaohua Guo; Rongji Li; Jiwen Sun; Xin Wang; Hongji Liu</author>
<Affiliation>Key Laboratory of Tectonics and Petroleum Resources (China University of Geosciences) Ministry of Education Wuhan China ; Institute of Oceanographic Instrumentation Shandong Academy of Sciences Qingdao China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>International Journal of Energy Research</Journal>
<Publishing_house>John Wiley & Sons Inc. </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1002/er.5114</DOI>
<URL>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/er.5114</URL>
Summary
Injecting carbon dioxide for shale gas recovery enhancement (CO2-ESGR) is an effective method to improve gas production and also realize the CO2 geosequestration. In the CO2-ESGR system, there are two-component gases (TCG) coexisted. The gas transport and adsorption mechanisms are different from the single-component gas system. However, most of current work is still focused on single-component gas (ie, methane). Many mechanisms have not been considered in the study of CO2-ESGR study. In order to conduct reliable numerical simulation for CO2-ESGR, a clear understanding of the transport and adsorption mechanisms for TCG system is necessary. In this review, we focused on two key issues regarding CO2-ESGR: the fluid transport and competitive adsorption. The fundamental mechanisms and models for pure gas and TCG transport have been comprehensively summarized. The adsorption models for TCG system have been reviewed and analyzed. Models such as extended Langmuir model, ideal adsorption solution model, and lattice density functional model have been compared. Also, the factors affecting the competitive adsorption of TCG in shale have been illustrated. The main factors include organic matter content, shale composition, pore structure, water content, and pressure. At last, the problems existed in current research of transport and adsorption models for TCG have been analyzed. The issues that are necessary to be considered in CO2-ESGR technology have been proposed so that more accurate numerical simulation and more reliable production prediction can be achieved.
1 INTRODUCTION
Shale gas is the unconventional natural gas with reservoir rock system dominated by organic-rich shale. It is a continuously generated biochemical genetic gas, thermogenic gas, or a mixture of the aforementioned two kinds.1 The permeability of shale is critically low because of the existence of massive nanopores.2 Adsorption, free, and dissolved states are three main forms for the natural gas to be stored in shale gas reservoirs (SGRs).3-5 On the other hand, global warming is always one of the hot issues drawing global concern. Geological storage of carbon dioxide is considered to be one of the effective ways to mitigate global warming. Same as coalbed methane reservoirs, the shale has large specific surface area and abundant nanopores. Therefore, it also can store large amounts of carbon dioxide. As the method for improving the recovery of SGRs, injecting CO2 to enhance shale gas recovery (CO2-ESGR) has been proposed by some scholars. The difference in adsorption capacity between CO2 and CH4 enables the permanent displacement of CO2 while replacing the CH4, thereby improving the recovery of the SGRs and alleviating the greenhouse effect. Furthermore, the shale has the characteristics of dense lithology and low permeability, which can effectively prevent the escape of carbon dioxide and can achieve the long-term geological storage of carbon dioxide.
Many scholars have already started the study of CO2-ESGR. Yu et al have simulated the process of CO2-ESGR by using the commercial CMG software.6 The effect of reservoir parameters and injection timing on methane recovery has been analyzed. However, because of rapid development in the study of fluid flow in nanopores, the fluid transport mechanisms during the CO2-ESGR process cannot be fully considered in the CMG software. On the basis of the Devonian shale in East Kentucky, Dahaghi et al have simulated the CO2-ESGR using COMET3 software.7 However, the transport of gas in the matrix is still regarded as viscous flow. Li and Elsworth have found that the recovery of shale gas increases with CO2 injection pressure.8 Schepers et al9 have analyzed the effect of injection mode on the production of Devonian shale by using commercial ECLIPSE software. They concluded that continuous injection of CO2 can improve shale gas recovery and also effectively geo-sequestrate CO2 underground. Sun et al have constructed the mathematical model for CO2-ESGR with considering multiple gas transport mechanisms.10 However, the effect of water content and dynamic competitive adsorption has not been considered. Liu et al have studied related mechanisms for CO2 storage in SGRs by using numerical simulation method.11 The adsorption mechanism has been quantitatively analyzed. Kim et al have simulated the Barnett shale gas production with CO2 huff-n-puff by using CMG-GEM.12 The effect of reservoir conditions on the gas recovery has been analyzed. However, the latest developed gas transport mechanisms in nanoscale have not been considered in their work.
For the study of two-component gases (TCG) diffusion, rare work has been conducted in SGRs. However, some scholars have carried out research on gas diffusion for TCG in coalbed methane (CBM) reservoirs, which can provide some foundations or references for the study in SGRs. Wei et al have performed numerical study for enhanced CBM recovery by using CO2 injection based on the Maxwell-Stefan diffusion theory.13 The effect of gas concentration on diffusion has been analyzed in their study. Fathi et al have constructed the one-dimensional triple porosity-dual permeability model for CH4–CO2 TCG system.14 The improved Maxwell-Stefan model was proposed to characterize TCG transport in micropores (0.8-2 nm) and macropores (>50 nm). It was found that surface diffusion is a considerable factor that leads to competitive adsorption. Sun et al have simulated CBM development with CO2 injection based on Maxwell-Stefan dual-diffusion model, and the results have provided some references for the study of CO2-ESGR.15
On the whole, the numerical study of CO2-ESGR is still insufficient and cannot follow the development of fluid flow study in nanoscale. Commercial numerical simulation software cannot characterize the gas transport mechanisms accurately, and many latest mechanisms have not been effectively considered in current study. And also, the TCG diffusion mechanisms have not been clearly understood. Most studies still follow the Fick diffusion law, which cannot characterize the bidirectional diffusion in TCG system. As the foundation for accurate numerical simulation of CO2-ESGR, the study of TCG transport mechanisms is still required urgently, but corresponding models are not sufficient. In this paper, the related mechanisms of TCG transport in shale and competitive adsorption have been presented. Models of TCG competitive adsorption have been reviewed, and factors affecting the competitive adsorption of TCG in shale have been illustrated. And also, the problems existed in current research, and models have been analyzed.
2 FUNDAMENTAL MECHANISMS FOR TCG TRANSPORT IN SGRS
2.1 Adsorption mechanism
The diagram of gas distribution and pore structure in SGRs from macroscale to pore scale is shown in Figure 1. There are mainly three forms for shale gas to be stored in SGRs: adsorption gas, free gas, and dissolved gas.5 Efficient production of adsorption gas is the key to achieve high recovery in SGRs. Adsorption is the phenomenon that occurs at the two-phase interface of a substance. Specifically, for the shale gas adsorption, the two-phase interface refers to the contact surface between the shale gas and the pore wall. In the two-phase interface, some component molecules are enriched, and others are displaced, which is called adsorption. The adsorption mechanism can be classified into two categories: physical and chemical. Kang et al found that the shale gas adsorption is mainly physical.16 When gas is adsorbed on shale, shale has the ability to absorb, which is called adsorbent. The gas is the material adsorbed on the shale, which is called adsorbate. Brunauer et al17 found that the force between adsorbent and adsorbent is weak van der Waals, which is often called physical adsorption and is reversible. Choi et al found that in the physical adsorption process, van der Waals force is accompanied by electrostatic force, which can accommodate more than one single-molecular layer. The range of adsorption heat for physical adsorption is 8 to 40 kJ/mol.18
Figure 1
The diagram of gas distribution in SGRs from macroscale to pore scale [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
2.2 Gas migration mechanism
The pores of SGRs are composed of various types of nanoscale pores. Because of the pore confinement effect, the gas transport in nanopore is no longer continuous flow, and the conventional Darcy equation is invalid.19 Therefore, the migration mechanisms of carbon dioxide and methane in SGRs mainly include surface diffusion, Knudsen diffusion, molecular diffusion, and viscous flow. Surface diffusion is due to the decomposition of adsorption gas molecules. Knudsen diffusion is caused by the collision of gas molecules with the pore wall. Molecular diffusion occurs between gas molecules of different components. And the viscous flow is fluid transport because of pressure gradient. The flow pattern of gas in the microporous medium mainly depends on the relative magnitude of gas mean free path and physical properties of the porous medium. Javadpour et al2, 4 found that there are multiple migration mechanisms coexisted for gas transport in SGRs. The flow pattern of gas in SGRs from microscopic to macroscopic scales has been proposed. The division of gas flow regimes in SGRs can be characterized by Kundsen number (Kn).20 According to the Kn, the flow regimes in the SGR can be classified into four categories. For different flow regimes, different fluid transport mechanisms and corresponding mathematical characterization models should be applied (Table 1).
Table 1. Classification of gas flow regimes based on Knudsen number (Kn)
Regime	Range of Kn	Model or Method
Viscous or continuous flow	Kn < 0.01	Darcy equation
Slip flow	0.01 < Kn < 0.1	Slip effect correction on Darcy equation
Transition flow	0.1 < Kn < 10	Knuden's correction on Darcy equation
Free molecular flow	Kn > 10	Molecular simulation method
2.3 TCG transport mechanisms and related models
For more reliable simulation of the CO2-ESGR, which includes TCG transport in shale nano pores, not only the mechanisms for the pure gas transport should be considered (such as viscous flow, surface diffusion, and Knudsen diffusion) but also the mechanisms due to interaction between TCG should be taken into account (such as molecular diffusion, bidirectional diffusion, and competitive adsorption). Many studies have been conducted for one-component gas transport in SGRs,21-26 and different approaches have been proposed to simulate gas transport in nanopores,27-41 such as Burnett equation method,27 Lattice-Boltzmann (LB) method,28 and molecular dynamics (MD) method.29-32 Also, many analytical models have been gradually proposed to simplify the calculation and simulation burden.33-41 In this paper, the fundamental transport mechanisms that should be considered in future CO2-ESGR studies are summarized.
2.3.1 Viscous flow
If the pore diameter of shale is much larger compared with the gas mean free path, the gas transport is mainly driven by pressure difference. This migration mode is called viscous flow. Based on the Hagen-Poiseuille equation,42 the gas flux due to viscous flow can be expressed as follows:
@(1)
where Jvs is the gas flux, kg/(m2·s); ρ is the gas density, kg/m3; r is the pore radius, m; μ is the gas viscosity, Pa·s; and p is the gas pressure, Pa.
2.3.2 Knudsen diffusion
If the pore diameter of shale is close to the gas mean free path, the gas migration is mainly driven by collision of gas molecules with the pore wall. This migration mode is called the Knudsen diffusion. The equation for Knudsen diffusion2 with considering real gas effect is as follows:
@(2)
@(3)
where Jk is the gas flux, kg/(m2·s); M is molar mass, kg/mol; Dk is the coefficient of Knudsen diffusion, m2/s; Z is gas compression coefficient, dimensionless; C represents the molar concentration of methane molecules, mol/m3; and R is the universal gas constant, 8.314 J/(mol.K).
2.3.3 Surface diffusion
In SGRs, the volume of adsorption gas usually takes up 20% to 85% of the pore volume, so there is surface diffusion of adsorption gas in the micro-nanopores of SGRs. The Fick law can be used to characterize the mass flow caused by surface diffusion,43, 44 which is shown as follows:
@(4)
where Js is the gas flux, kg/(m2·s); Ds is the coefficient of surface diffusion, m2/s; and Cs is the gas adsorption capacity on the surface, mol/m3.
2.3.4 Molecular diffusion
When there are TCG in the shale pores, the gas molecules of different components have different molecular velocities, and the gas molecules of different components undergo energy transfer because of concentration gradient. This migration mode is called the molecular diffusion.45 The gas flux due to molecular diffusion can be expressed as follows:
@(5)
@(6)
where Ja is the gas flux, kg/(m2·s); DAB is the coefficient of molecular diffusion, m2/s; wA is the mass fraction of component A; σAB is the gas collision potential diameter, m; ΩAB is dimensionless molecular constant; T is temperature, K; and MA and MB are the mole weight of component A and B, kg/mol.
2.3.5 Bidirectional diffusion
For the TCG transport, the bidirectional diffusion is also an important mechanism. However, this mechanism is rarely considered in current numerical simulation of CO2-ESGR. Lee et al specifically deduced the calculation of bidirectional diffusion by determining the forward and reverse solute fluxes.46 urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er5114:er5114-math-0007 and urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er5114:er5114-math-0008 can be calculated by the following mass balance equation.
@(7)
@(8)
where urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er5114:er5114-math-0011 is forward solute fluxes; urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er5114:er5114-math-0012 is reverse solute fluxes; Jw is the water flux; the subscripts D and F represent draw and feed solutions, respectively; C is concentration; t is the measured time; V is volume; and Am is the membrane area.
2.4 Gas transport models in nanopores
For the gas transport in shale nanopores, conventional Darcy equation under continuum flow is no longer applied because of the effect of nanoscale. Besides viscous flow, mechanisms such as surface diffusion, Knudsen diffusion, and slip flow can also have a marked impact on gas flow capability. In recent years, the mechanisms and permeability models for the single-component gas transport have been widely studied. Beskok et al have corrected the gas transport equation with considering rarefied gas effect.33 However, they did not consider the real gas effect. On the basis of the Beskok model, Michel et al have considered real gas effect on gas mean free path.47 Javadpour et al derived the model with considering slip flow and Knudsen diffusion.4 Other mechanisms such as effect of adsorption layer on pore size have not been considered. Guo et al have conducted the lab experiments for gas transport in nanomembranes and proposed corresponding permeability model.48 A good match between analytical solution and the experimental results was obtained. However, their study is only limited for inorganic pores. Wu et al constructed the single-component gas transport model by rederiving the weight coefficient of diffusion and slip flow.49 The surface diffusion and Knudsen diffusion have been considered in their model. Shi et al have derived the permeability model under different Knudsen number by through nonlinear superposition of diffusion and slip flow. Rahmanian et al proposed the gas transport model by determining the weight coefficient of diffusion and advection through experiments.50 Cao et al have proposed the single-component gas permeability model based on capillary model.51 Mechanisms such as gas adsorption, formation water, slip flow, and free molecular flow have been considered in their model. The main permeability models proposed by previous scholars are summarized as follows.
2.4.1 The Javadpour model
Javadpour et al established an apparent permeability model considering Knudsen diffusion and viscous flow.2, 4 The model proposed by Javadpour et al is shown as follows:
@(9)
where ρg, μg, and pg are the gas density (kg/m3), viscosity (Pa·s), and pressure (Pa), respectively; ka represents the apparent permeability, m2; M is the gas molar mass, kg/mol; α is the correction factor; k∞ is the absolute or equivalent liquid permeability, m2; and R is the universal gas constant, 8.314 J/(mol·K).
2.4.2 The Civan model
Another commonly used model is called the Civan model. On the basis of the Knudsen number, Civan applies the Beskok model to tight porous medium with considering transport mechanisms same with the Javadpour model. The model proposed by Civan36 is
@(10)
where ka is the apparent permeability; k∞ is the intrinsic permeability; Kn is the Knudsen number; b is the correction coefficient for gas flow in the microtube model, usually taken as −1; and α is the dimensionless sparse coefficient.
On the basis of the Beskok model, Civan gives the dimensionless sparse coefficient α, which can be calculated as follows:
@(11)
2.4.3 DGM model
The dust gas model (DGM) considers the coupling effect of molecular diffusion, Knudsen diffusion, and viscous flow at the same time.52 The permeability model can be expressed as
@(12)
@(13)
where pg and μg, respectively, represent the pressure and viscosity of the gas; bk is the Klinkenberg coefficient; and urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er5114:er5114-math-0018 is the Knudsen diffusion constant.
2.4.4 The Florence model
When Kn < <1, with considering Knudsen diffusion and viscous flow, Florence42 obtained the apparent permeability expression in dense porous media based on the Beskok-Karniadakis model:
@(14)
where λ is the gas mean free path; r is the shale pore radius. The meaning of other parameters can be found from previous equations.
2.4.5 General slip regime model
In order to cover the whole slip regimes for rarefied gas flow, Zhou et al have also proposed the permeability model combining the Navier-Stokes equation with first-order slip boundary condition.53 Since the proposed model can cover the whole or general slip regimes, the model is called GSR model. The proposed GSR model is shown as follows:
@(15)
where S1 and S2 are geometry dependent tensors; I is the unit tensor; σ is the coefficient for tangential momentum accommodation; urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er5114:er5114-math-0021 is Knudsen number when the pressure approaching zero.
2.4.6 The Guo model
Based on the Klinkenberg model, our group also obtained the model for gas flow in nanopores with considering multiple mechanisms, such as Knudsen diffusion, slip flow, and viscous flow.48 The expression of the apparent permeability model derived from the Guo model48 is:
@(16)
where M is the gas molar weight, kg/mol;Tis the temperature, K; urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er5114:er5114-math-0023is the average pressure, Pa; μg is the gas viscosity, Pa∙s; ϕ is the porosity of the shale, dimensionless;r is the pore radius, m; and R is the universal gas constant, 8.314 J/(mol. K).
Also, on the basis of the previous research, we further introduced the improved permeability model with considering three-phase adsorption, pore radius, and porosity change because of gas desorption and the aforementioned mechanisms.54 The model is shown in Equations (17) to (19). For simplification, the meaning of each parameter can be found from Guo et al.
@(17)
@(18)
@(19)
However, deficiencies are still existed in the study of gas transport in nanopores: (a) Most research is limited to single-component gas transport; (b) the physical meaning of weight coefficient is not clear, or there exists empirical coefficient in the weight coefficient, which cannot be used for macroscale flow simulation; (c) many mechanisms are still not considered, such as real gas effect, water content, adsorption stress, effect of adsorption layer, and difference between organic and inorganic nanopores. For the reliable numerical simulation of TCG transport process during CO2-ESGR, it is urgently required to propose an improved transport model, which can effectively and reasonably combine aforementioned gas transport mechanisms. Therefore, on the basis of our previous research, we tentatively propose the TCG transport model, which is shown in Figure 2. As it can be found from Figure 2, firstly, the newly discovered water layer effect should be considered, especially in the shale inorganic pores, which are water wet. Secondly, when the CO2 is injected into the shale pores, the CO2 will replace the methane by using competitive adsorption. Thus, the dynamic TCG adsorption model should be considered. Thirdly, during the displacing process, some mechanisms (not only for pure gas but also for TCG) should be considered. Generally, these mechanisms include but not limited to surface diffusion, Knudsen diffusion, viscous flow, molecular diffusion, and the bidirectional diffusion.
Figure 2
Two-component gas transport mechanisms that should be considered in the future study of CO2-ESGR. The red balls stand for CO2 molecule,s and the black balls denote the CH4 molecules [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
3 ADSORPTION MODELS FOR TCG SYSTEM
3.1 Selective adsorption mechanism
As stated previously, there are two adsorption types: physical and chemical. Among them, van der Waals force is the adsorption force for physical adsorption, and the adsorption heat is small. Whereas, chemical bonding force is the adsorption force for chemical, and the adsorption heat is large. In the TCG competitive adsorption process, the gas adsorption is an exothermic reaction. The stronger the adsorption force between gas and adsorbent surface, the larger the adsorption heat, and the more easily the gas is adsorbed. Both the adsorbate (gas) and the adsorbent (shale) affect the adsorption capacity. The gas adsorption capacity is different when the different gas molecules are adsorbed on the same carbon surface. The shale properties also affect gas adsorption. Ji et al55 conducted isothermal adsorption studies for methane on three different types of kerogen. It was found that adsorption heat increased gradually from type I to type III kerogen. The reason may be that the kerogen type promoted the development of aromatic group.
The competition of adsorption sites exists in the process of TCG adsorption, which is called competitive adsorption. The adsorption characteristics of different gases due to their different adsorption capacities are also quite different.56, 57 The fundamental cause is the selective adsorption capacity of shale for different gases. The selectivity factor or separation coefficient (S) is commonly used to characterize the selective adsorption capacity in TCG adsorption system.58, 59 The expression of the selectivity factor for the TCG adsorption system60 is
@(20)
where x and y represent the gas mole fractions in the adsorbed and free phase at the adsorption equilibrium. The selectivity factor S represents the preferential adsorption capacity for component i in the TCG system.61 The larger the S, the stronger the preferential adsorption capacity of the component i is.
Zeng et al have studied the adsorption behavior of CH4, CO2, and mixture of CH4–CO2 on the organic nanopores in SGRs by using molecular simulation methods.58 The nanopores are of different geometries and sizes. It was found that CO2 has a higher adsorption capacity compared with CH4 under reservoir pressure, which is shown in Figure 3 (the selectivity of CO2 over CH4). It is apparent that the values of selectivity factor are larger than 1, which denotes that the adsorption capability of CO2 is larger than CH4 in the TCG system (CO2–CH4).
Figure 3
Selectivity of CO2 over CH4 at different temperature and pressure in shale nano pores58 [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
Chareon et al62 carried out research on the adsorption capacity of three gases (dioxide, methane, and nitrogen) in shale and found that the adsorption capacity of carbon dioxide is higher than methane and followed by nitrogen. When CH4 and CO2 are simultaneously present in the shale, the TCG has a competitive adsorption phenomenon. At the same time, the adsorption characteristics exhibited by the TCG are greatly different from the adsorption of single-component gas. Wang et al63 conducted adsorption experiments for pure gas and mixture of CH4 and C2H6 on shale. The experimental results show that in the single-component adsorption, the excess adsorption amount increases with pressure within the experimental pressure range. Nevertheless, for the TCG adsorption, the total excess adsorption amount increases firstly and then decreases at a pressure around 10 MPa. When the adsorption amount reaches the maximum, this phenomenon is particularly obvious if the concentration of C2H6 component is high and the experimental temperature is low. This should be due to the interaction of the two gases in the adsorption phase.
3.2 TCG adsorption model
The competitive adsorption in the TCG system is the fundamental for CO2-ESGR and CO2 geo-sequestration. The research group of Nuttall and Kang concluded that the adsorption capability of CO2 is 5 to 10 times of CH4 by experiments.16, 64 And they believe that the competitive adsorption in CO2-ESGR is similar to CO2-ECBM. For the competitive adsorption, many models have been proposed. Here, we presented the commonly used adsorption models for TCG system.
3.2.1 Extended Langmuir adsorption model
The E-L model is one of the typical models for characterizing gas competitive adsorption for two or more than two components.60, 65 The expression for the E-L model is
@(21)
where i is the gas component; Vi is the actual adsorbed gas amount for each component; nc represents the number of gas components; (VL)i is the monolayer adsorption volume; bi is the Langmuir constant of isothermal adsorption; Pi is the partial pressure of component i in the free phase; P indicates the total gas pressure; and yi is the mole fraction. For the E-L model, studies have shown that changes in concentration and pressure also have a large impact on the gas selectivity factor.66, 67
3.2.2 Ideal adsorption solution model
@(22)
where xi and yi are the mole fraction of component i in the free and adsorbed phase; p is the total pressure; π is the expansion pressure, which can be obtained by Gibbs equation. The IAS model depends on the isotherm adsorption equation of pure gas for calculation. The theoretical prediction results of the IAS also depend on the selection of single-component isotherm adsorption model. According to Clarkson et al,60 it can be found that the prediction accuracy of the same model is quite different if the mixing ratios of the two identical gases are different (Table 2).
Table 2. Relative error between predicted values and experimental results of each model60
Ratio of CH4 to CO2	E-L	IAS/Langmuir	IAS/D-R	IAS/D-A
Vtotal	VCH4	VCO2	Vtotal	VCH4	VCO2	Vtotal	VCH4	VCO2	Vtotal	VCH4	VCO2
9:1	9%	5%	30%	8%	6%	13%	8%	2%	24%	7%	16%	19%
3:1	11%	28%	38%	9%	14%	25%	9%	25%	32%	7%	7%	8%
3.2.3 Lattice density functional model
The lattice density functional model (lattice DFT)69 not only considers the pore structure of the adsorbent but also considers the interaction between the adsorbate and the adsorbent. It is assumed that there are N kinds of gases in the slit holes. The N kinds of gas molecules are similar in diameter, and each molecule can exist in the free phase or be adsorbed in the adsorption process. The lattice adsorption sites, or crystal adsorption sites, are marked as j (j = 1, …, J) according to their distance from the surface of the adsorbent. The molecular i of a certain component satisfies Equation (23) when the adsorption/desorption between the free position and the lattice adsorption site j reaches thermodynamic equilibrium:
@(23)
where urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er5114:er5114-math-0031 and urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er5114:er5114-math-0032 represent the energy and entropy changes in the exchange process, respectively. For N kinds of gases and J lattice adsorption sites, there should be N × J equations. In Equation (23), the entropy change can be written as
@(24)
where k is the Boltzmann constant; urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er5114:er5114-math-0034 is the probability that the molecule i is located on the lattice adsorption site j; θj is the probability that any molecule is located on the lattice adsorption site j; θb is the probability that any molecule is in the free position; and urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er5114:er5114-math-0035 is the probability that the molecule i is in the free position. At the same time, the probability θ can also represent the lattice occupancy ratio, which stands for the ratio of lattice adsorption sites occupied by adsorbate molecules.
3.2.4 Multiregion extended Langmuir model
For the multiregion extended Langmuir (MREL) model, the equation satisfies the condition of thermodynamic consistency in each zone.70 When there are n components in the mixture system, the saturated adsorption amount can be calculated by the Langmuir equation if assuming that the system is pure component. We can sort the saturated adsorption amount in order from small to large, and then the entire adsorbent region can be divided. For n regions, the model expression is as follows:
@(25)
where i represents the component; qi is the total adsorption amount; j represents the designated region; n is the number of regions; qi, j is the adsorption amount of component i in region j; qs represents the saturated adsorption amount calculated by the Langmuir equation as a single component; b represents the Langmuir constant; qs, j is the saturated adsorption amount of component i in region j; qs, j − 1 is the saturated adsorption amount of component i in region j-1; N is the number of components; and Nj is the number of adsorbed gas components in the region j.
3.2.5 Laden ratio correlation model
The Laden ratio correlation model (LRC) model is also called the extended Langmuir-Freundlich equation.71 The LRC model is as follows:
@(26)
where θi is the surface coverage of component i; bi, qi, and urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er5114:er5114-math-0038 are the parameters obtained by fitting the equilibrium data of pure component i to Langmuir-Freundich equation, specifically bi is the Langmuir constant; qi indicates system unevenness parameter; urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er5114:er5114-math-0039 represents the saturated adsorption amount; m is the number of components, that is, for TCG system, m = 2; pi is the partial pressure for the component i in the free phase; and ni is the equilibrium adsorption amount.
3.2.6 Dual-site Langmuir equation
The Dual-site Langmuir equation (DLE) can also be used to describe the isotherm adsorption for binary gases. Ritter et al72 classified the adsorption sites into two categories. The adsorption isotherm equations of the mixed gas can be obtained after the two types of adsorption sites are respectively expanded. However, it is necessary to note that the adsorption site l is strong for component A but not necessarily for component B. Therefore, there are two cases, if site l is a strong adsorption site for both A and B, the adsorption amount of component A and B can be calculated using following equations:
@(27)
@(28)
If site 1 is a strong adsorption site for component A and a weak adsorption site for component B, the expression becomes
@(29)
@(30)
where, qi is the total adsorption amount; urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er5114:er5114-math-0044 is the maximum adsorption amount for adsorption site m; and Km. i is the equilibrium constant for temperature at adsorption site m; P is the gas preasure; yA and yB are the gas-phase mole fractions of component A and B.
3.2.7 Micropore size distribution model
The micropore size distribution (MPSD) model is also called the PSD model.73 In MPSD model, the PSD function plus the Lennard-Jones potential energy function is used to represent the energy distribution. By using this method, the heterogeneity of the activated carbon surface can be characterized. The adsorbent is characterized by the PSD function. The MPSD model is obtained by using the integral of adsorption isotherm and PSD. The expression for the equilibrium adsorption amount of pure component i is
@(31)
where rmin, i is the smallest pore size at which pure component i can adsorb; ni is the equilibrium adsorption amount; f(r) is the MPSD function; r represents the pore radius; ni(T, P, r) represents the local adsorption isotherm, expressed by the Langmuir equation:
@(32)
where urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er5114:er5114-math-0047 is the saturated adsorption capacity for the component i; b(r) is the local adsorption potential constant when the pore diameter is r, which is a function of temperature (T) and pore size (r):
@(33)
where b∞ is the adsorption potential constant when the temperature is infinite; E(r) is the interaction energy between the adsorbed molecule and the pore wall, and its value is the minimum value of the adsorption potential (∅) of the component i in the pore with the pore diameter of r. The calculation of the adsorption potential ∅(r, z) is expressed by the Lennard-Jones potential energy function.
3.2.8 Mixtures including supercritical component model
The mixtures including supercritical component (MISC) model74 was constructed with considering different adsorption mechanisms of supercritical components and subcritical components. This adsorption model can predict gases adsorption containing supercritical components. The MISC model is also known as adsorption equilibrium model containing supercritical components. For the pure component adsorption equilibrium of the MISC model, the PSD in the previous MPSD model is used to characterize the heterogeneity of the adsorbent surface potential field. The PSD conforms to the Gamma distribution. The modified Langmuir equation is applied as the local model describing the adsorption behavior of the class I and II molecules. The adsorption amount of a single component is
@(34)
where ni is the equilibrium adsorption capacity; ni, I and ni, II are the equilibrium adsorption amounts of class I and II molecules; rmin, i is the minimum pore size at which component i can be adsorbed; and urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er5114:er5114-math-0050, urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er5114:er5114-math-0051 represent the amount of saturated adsorption for class I and II molecules in each component, respectively; θi, I and θi, II are the surface coverage of class I and II molecules, described by the modified Langmuir equation:
@(35)
where b0 represents the preexponential factor in the Langmuir constant and ζ represents the interaction parameter between the molecules of the adsorbed phase.
3.3 Analysis of problems in current two component adsorption models
For the extended Langmuir (E-L) equation, if the gas adsorption capacity of each component has a large difference in concentration and pressure change, there will be a significant error in the prediction result of the extended Langmuir equation.
For the IAS model, the theory of IAS relies on the isotherm adsorption model of pure gas. Therefore, the selection of different one-component isotherm adsorption models will make the IAS theoretical prediction results different. And also, if the mixing ratio of the same gas mixture is different, the prediction accuracy of the IAS model is also different.
For lattice density functional theory model, in the gas adsorption process, not only the adsorption occurs on the surface of kerogen, but also some gases are adsorbed into the organic matter. This leads to the expansion of organic matter and change of its porosity and permeability. However, this effect has not been considered in the lattice density functional theory model. Thus, there will be a certain error between the experimental results and the theoretical values.
For the MREL model, since the saturated adsorption amount of each component in a certain region j is same, the Langmuir model in the region satisfies the thermodynamic consistency. However, for the entire adsorption system, the saturation adsorption amount of the mixture is same as the maximum value of the pure component saturated adsorption amount, which is not necessarily reasonable.
For the LRC model, the LRC equation lacks a strict theoretical basis compared with the extended Langmuir equation and can only be used as an empirical correlation. When pressure is low, the pure gas equation of this model does not satisfy the Henry law. However, because the mathematical expression of the model is simple and easy for calculation, the use of the LRC equation is still quite popular in the adsorption study of the gas mixture.
For the DLE, similar with the E-L model, if the gas adsorption capacity of components depends strongly on gas concentration and pressure, there will be a significant error in the prediction result of the DLE.
For the MPSD model, the PSD is an inherent feature of the adsorbent. As long as the adsorbent is constant, the PSD will be fixed and does not change with P and T. Therefore, in theory, the parameters fitted by the pure components should be the same. However, if the isotherm equation is applied independently to each component, different PSD parameters could be derived for each component even the adsorbent is the same. This deviates from the fact that the PSD function is an inherent feature of the adsorbent.
Currently, extensive experimental studies have been carried out on pure component adsorption (such as CH4 or CO2), and also two component adsorption of CH4–CO2 mixture. Many factors affecting gas adsorption have been analyzed. However, the existing adsorption models rarely consider the capillary condensation phenomenon in the nanopores where shale gas is predominately stored.75 Capillary condensation is the phase change because of pore confinement, which significantly affects the gas recovery and adsorption in the nanopore. Under confinement state, the pore critical temperature and hysteresis critical temperature depend on fluid and pore properties.76 How to consider the capillary condensation phenomenon in the TCG system by using a reasonable and efficient method is also a problem, which the researchers have to face. Moreover, in most of the simulation work, the TCG adsorption still used the extended Langmuir model, which cannot reflect the real adsorption process. It is suggested to propose or select more reliable two-component adsorption model for future CO2-ESGR simulation. Also, in the process of CO2-ESGR, pressure change, gas concentration ratio, and water content have significant effect on competitive adsorption. These factors should be quantitatively analyzed and dynamically embedded in the two-component adsorption model so as to realize more accurate simulation and production prediction of CO2-ESGR.
4 FACTORS AFFECTING THE ADSORPTION OF TCG
Factors affecting the shale adsorption have already been extensively studied, and it is commonly recognized that shale adsorption capacity is affected by following factors: pressure, temperature, thermal maturity, total organic content (TOC), kerogen type, water content, and pore structure characteristics. The main factors that have remarkable effect on gas adsorption are summarized as follows.
4.1 Total organic content
In shale, the main site of gas adsorption is organic matter or kerogen. Gas adsorption on kerogen plays a leading role in the total adsorption amount. So, the content of TOC has a great influence on the TCG adsorption.77 According to the study of Chareon et al62 for different gas adsorption on shale and coal, the adsorption volume of CO2, CH4, and N2 on coal is 10 to 30 times more than on shale with the same maturity (Figure 4). Many reasons can lead to this result, such as TOC, inorganic mineral content, and pore structure. According to Busch et al,78 under unit TOC condition, the adsorption capacity of shale is similar to or slightly lower than that of coal. However, Gasparik et al79 found that coal has a higher adsorption capacity for CH4 compared with shale. Prusty et al80 also reached similar conclusions. Because of different affinity of organic matter and clay minerals for various gases,55 the selectivity factor between gases has a large difference. Therefore, the level of TOC will not only affect the adsorption of TCG in shale but also affect the selective adsorption of shale to TCG.
Figure 4
Different gas adsorption on shale and coal. (A) Methane; (B) Nitrogen; (C) Carbon dioxide (After Chareon et al62)
4.2 Pore structure characteristics
According to Cui et al, it is known that pore structure of the adsorbate and the molecular size greatly affects the competitive adsorption of TCG.56 Compared with CH4 and N2, CO2 has a relatively small kinetic diameter and can diffuse from macropores to ultra-micropores (<0.6 nm). However, the kinetic diameters of CH4 and N2 are relatively large and cannot diffuse in the micropores. Yang et al81 showed that the selectivity factor of two-component CO2−CH4 gas in pores with small-pore diameter is larger than that in pores with large-pore diameter. And the smaller the pore diameter, the more obvious the selectivity effect of two-component CO2–CH4 gas is (Figure 5). It can be easily found from Figure 5, under the same pressure and mole fraction of CO2, all the values of selectivity factor when the pore diameter is 14.0 Å is larger the values of 20.6 Å case. However, some studies have shown that the selectivity effect of TCG does not always become significant as the pore size becomes smaller, and there exists an optimal pore size. Bhatia82 found that the selectivity behavior of CH4 and other hydrocarbon gases is the most obvious when the pore diameter is 11.4 Å by studying the binary gas competitive adsorption characteristics on activated carbon for two hydrocarbon systems: CH4–C2H6 and C3H8–C4H10.
Figure 5
Selectivity factor (S) of CO2 over CH4 under different pore diameter. (A) 14.0 Å; (B) 20.6 Å. (After Yang et al81) [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
4.3 Shale composition
As stated previously, the content of organic matter affects the amount of TCG adsorption and the selectivity factor. However, the microcomponents of organic matter also have a greater impact on the TCG adsorption and the selectivity factor.60, 83 Previous isothermal adsorption experiments on coal samples with different microscopic compositions show that CO2 has a strong preferential adsorption on the inert group, while CH4 has a higher preferential adsorption on the vitrinite group. Busch et al78 performed isothermal adsorption experiments for two components CH4 and CO2 mixture on coal. It is found that the inert group can provide a large amount of adsorption sites for CO2, which makes CO2 have stronger competitive adsorption. Unsworth et al84 and Harris et al85 suggested that the vitrinite groups are more developed in micropores, while the inert groups are more developed in intermediate pores. However, the gas adsorption behavior in the vitrinite and inert groups remains to be further studied.86 Weniger et al87 showed that as the increase of vitrinite content, the amount of adsorbed carbon dioxide decreases significantly, while the amount of adsorbed methane remains unchanged (Figure 6). Lu et al studied binary gas adsorption on nanoporous carbon with different functional groups.88 It was found that the difference of molecular functional groups significantly affects the selectivity factor. The order of adsorption capability for different function group is: –NH2>–COOH>–OH>H. Clay minerals also affect the amount of gas adsorption significantly. The adsorption amount of CH4 on different types of clay minerals also varies, from large to small, followed by montmorillonite, smectite mixed minerals, kaolinite, chlorite, and the last is illite.55 Yang et al81 further showed that carbon dioxide has a higher adsorption capability on sodium montmorillonite than methane. Duan et al89 believed that clay minerals have stronger selective adsorption to CO2 than other components in shale. And the increase of clay mineral content will increase the selectivity factor of CO2–CH4 binary gas.
Figure 6
Effect of vitrinite content on the maximum excess adsorption capacity of CO2 and CH487 [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
4.4 Reservoir pressure
Busch et al78 believed that pressure was the main driving force for preferential CO2 adsorption in CO2–CH4 mixture. Hartman et al66 studied the selectivity factor of binary gas (CH4 and C2H6) under different pressure conditions and found that when the ratio of CH4 to C2H6 is 1:1, the selectivity factor of C2H6 under 27.58 MPa is more than 35% higher than that under 6.89 MPa. Shimada et al67 found that the adsorption capacity ratio for carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrogen under 1.2 MPa was 8.5:3.5:1 at 1.2 MPa. And the ratio under 6 MPa is 5.5:2: 1. Wang et al63 showed that for the binary gas adsorption (CH4 and C2H6) on shale, the total adsorption capacity increased with pressure, reached to the maximum value at 10 MPa, and then decreased with pressure (Figure 7).
Figure 7
Sorption isotherms of CH4–C2H6 mixtures on shale at 60°C63 [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
4.5 Maturity
The main adsorption site of TCG in shale is organic matter. When the maturity is continuously increased, the aromatic structure of kerogen is continuously condensed, and the degree of aromatization is continuously enhanced.88 The oxygen-containing functional group is broken, and the affinity for the TCG changes.90-92 Also, as maturity increases, the shale pore structure undergoes constant changes. At low maturity, compaction plays a dominant role. At this stage, organic pores are not developed, and mesopores (2-50 nm) and macropores (>50 nm) in shale are decreasing.93 When the maturity is near the oil window, the original pores are blocked because of the large amount of liquid hydrocarbons generated. At this stage, micropores (<2 nm), mesopores, and macropores are continuously decreasing.92 When maturity is close to the liquid hydrocarbon cracking stage, the blocked pores are released, and the residual asphalt and kerogen also begin to crack. At this stage, the micropores and mesopores in the shale are increasing. The pore volume and specific surface area are continuously increasing.60 Therefore, at this stage, the amount of gas adsorption has a tendency to increase with maturity, which is similar to that observed in coal.78 At the maturity stage (Ro > 3.5%), the organic pores will be destroyed, and the shale pore volume and specific surface area will be reduced.83 Changes in the fraction of organic pores and clay minerals will inevitably change the adsorption and selectivity factor of TCG in shale. Results from Weniger et al87 showed that in the range of Ro < 3.0%, the CO2 adsorption decreases significantly with the increase of maturity, but the decrease of CH4 adsorption is very tiny (Figure 8).
Figure 8
Effect of maturity on the maximum excess adsorption capacity of CO2 and CH487 [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
4.6 Moisture content
Moisture content also affects the selective adsorption of TCG in shale. When the shale contains liquid water, the gas molecules not only move at the gas-liquid interface but also move at the solid-gas interface. The pores are blocked because of the presence of liquid water, which directly affects the amount of gas adsorbed. Different from coal, there are plenty of clay minerals in the shale, and the clay minerals have strong hydrophilic ability.87 Therefore, the presence of liquid water has a notable effect on the selective adsorption of TCG. In addition, the presence of water also reduces the preferential adsorption capacity of CO2, a phenomenon that is particularly pronounced in the inert group.60 Busch et al found that when water is contained in shale, water will occupy the adsorption site of CO2,78 which makes CO2 difficult to adsorb (Figure 9). As shown in Figure 9, the y-axis means the mole fraction of CO2 in free (nonadsorbed) phase. Those dotted lines denote the mole fraction of the source gas. If the mole fraction of CO2 is lower than the dotted line (Figure 9 for the dry shale), it means that CO2 in the free gas phase decreases, that is, more CO2 is adsorbed. Otherwise, if the mole fraction of CO2 is above than the dotted line (Figure 9 for the wet shale), it means that CO2 as the free gas phase increases, that is, less CO2 is adsorbed. It can be concluded that when the shale is wet, CO2 is becoming difficult to adsorb on the shale. At the same time, CO2 has a higher solubility in water compared with gases such as CH4 and N2. When liquid water exists on the surface of the shale, CO2 not only participates in competitive adsorption but also partially dissolves in liquid water, making its competitive adsorption relationship with other gases more complicated.
Figure 9
Adsorption measurements on shale samples with different water content.78 (A) dry shale; (B) moist shale [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
4.7 Gas concentration ratio
For the competitive adsorption of TCG, the gas concentration ratio also has effect on the gas adsorption. Ma et al carried out isothermal adsorption experiments with different CH4–CO2 concentration ratios.94 It can be found from Figure 10, when comparing Figure 10 for the same sample 1, the amount of adsorption decreases as the ratio of CH4 to CO2 increases under the same temperature and pressure. The same conclusion can be obtained by comparing Figure 10 and Figure 10 for the same sample 2. In the CO2-ESGR process, with the injection of carbon dioxide from the injection well and the production of methane and carbon dioxide from the production well, the gas concentration ratio of carbon dioxide against methane is changing. Thus, this dynamic adsorption effect should also be embedded into current numerical simulation models of CO2-ESGR.
Figure 10
The isothermal adsorption curve of mixed gases on shales under different gas concentration ratio.94 (A) Sample 1 with CH4:CO2 = 2:8; (B) Sample 2 with CH4:CO2 = 2:8; (C) Sample 1 with CH4:CO2 = 8:2; (D) Sample 2 with CH4:CO2 = 8:2 [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
According to the review, it can be found that above mentioned factors have already been studied in previous research by using experimental methods. However, how to effectively combine such factors in the dynamic production process of CO2-ESGR still remains to be a problem and has rarely been considered in the simulation of CO2-ESGR. During the CO2-ESGR process, the pressure, gas concentration, pore radius, water content, etc, will change with time. For more accurate numerical simulation of CO2-ESGR, it is necessary to conduct further research on the development of dynamic TCG adsorption model.
5 CONCLUSIONS
In summary, TCG transport in shale nanopores is different from the single-component gas transport. Although many efforts have been made for pure gas transport in shale nanopores, and also some works have been conducted in the study of CO2-ESGR by using commercial software, rare works have been conducted for TCG transport in shale gas nanopores, and many mechanisms cannot be accurately reflected. Therefore, the key issues that should be considered in the study of CO2-ESGR have been reviewed. The main findings from this review are as follows:
In the study of TCG transport, not only the mechanisms for pure gas transport should be considered (including surface diffusion, Knudsen diffusion, and viscous flow), but also the mechanisms due to TCG interaction should also be taken into account (such as bidirectional diffusion and molecular diffusion).
The models for gas apparent permeability in SGRs have been comprehensively reviewed, including the Javadpour model, the Civan model, GSR model, and etc. It can be found that although apparent permeability model for single component gas has been extensively studied, there is rare study in this area for TCG system, and this should be the research direction for the future work.
The competitive adsorption mechanisms and models for TCG have been summarized, including extended Langmuir equation, IAS model, and lattice DFT. Through analysis, it can be found that there still existed many problems in current models for TCG adsorption.
Many factors affect the TCG adsorption for CO2–CH4 system in the CO2-ESGR, including TOC, pore characteristics, shale composition, mineral type, reservoir pressure, maturity, moisture content, and concentration ratio of CO2 to CH4. An improved dynamic TCG adsorption model that can reflect the effect of time-varying parameters is required for more reliable numerical study and production prediction of CO2-ESGR.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors acknowledge supports from National Natural Science Foundation of China: No. 51704265 (research on two-component gas diffusion-convection model in enhancing shale gas recovery with CO2 injection PI: Dr. Chaohua Guo); No. 51504146 (PI: Dr Xin Wang); the Outstanding Talent Development Project of China University of Geosciences (CUG20170614); and the Fundamental Research Founds for National University, China University of Geosciences (Wuhan) (1810491A07). The authors also want to acknowledge the anonymous reviewers of IJER.
