<title>First‐principles based computational study on nucleation and growth mechanisms of U on Mo(110) surface solvated in an eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt</title>
<author>Choah Kwon; Joonhee Kang; Byungchan Han</author>
<Affiliation>Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering Yonsei University Seoul 03722 Republic of Korea ; Department of Energy Systems Engineering DGIST Daegu 42988 Republic of Korea</Affiliation>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>International Journal of Energy Research</Journal>
<Publishing_house>John Wiley & Sons Inc. </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1002/er.3527</DOI>
<URL>https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/er.3527</URL>
Summary
We utilize first principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations and ab-initio molecular dynamic (AIMD) simulations to identify underlying mechanisms elucidating the initial stage of electrocrystallization process of U on Mo(110) surface in a eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt at T = 773 K. Our results clearly unveil surprisingly different principles on the nucleation of U in the media from that under vacuum conditions. U nanoclusters exposed to vacuum completely collapse into flat atomic layers on Mo(110) surface similar to an electrodeposition process. On the other hand, Cl ions in eutectic molten salt thermodynamically drive crystallite formation consisting of UCln (n = 3–6) through agglomeration of U atoms. Those crystallite gradually grows into bigger nuclei by adsorbing on Mo(110) surface. We propose that those behaviors are understandable only with revised conventional theories and that atomic level interactions among U, LiCl–KCl molten salt and Mo(110) surface play a key role to describe the atomic-scale dendrite formation of U in the electrorefining process. Our study can be one of the basic steps to design efficient electrorefining systems by identifying the fundamental cause of the experimentally observed uranium nucleation phenomena. Copyright © 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
1 Introduction
Extremely strong global demand on development of innovative ways to secure energy sustainability and clean environment has been dramatically shifting conventional energy framework relying on fossil into renewable energy sources. It is not surprising that new forms of energy conversion and storage devices utilizing and emitting low carbon such as nuclear power 1, 2, fuel cells 3, 4 and rechargeable batteries 5 are at the center of the trend. It is also largely true that the efficiency of the energy systems critically depends on its component materials 6-8. Thus, electrochemical reactions are widely utilized to design materials because the methods enable to tune the materials properties through combining appropriate electrodes and electrolytes 9.
In nuclear engineering and industry sectors electrochemical methods have been intensively employed in pyroprocessing technology to recycle spent nuclear fuels, which substantially alleviate the concern with safe treatment of high-level radioactive nuclear wastes. Pyroprocessing is based on sequential electrochemical reactions at high temperature (typically above 700 K at ambient pressure) to decouple nuclear fuels from fission fragments in a molten salt. Using a molten salt in electrorefining process, at which actinides can be selectively electrodeposited in solid cathode from ionic states, gives several advantages over an aqueous solution: higher thermal conductivity (it is liquid phase at high temperature, molten salt plays a role as medium at high temperature over 773 K) 10 in electrochemical reaction, lower kinetic barrier in ionic diffusion mobility 11 and better stability against undesired side reactions with radioactive materials 12. Therefore, the volume of high-level nuclear wastes to be, otherwise, disposed into secured sites is dramatically reduced 13, 14. Most of all it conforms to nuclear non-proliferation treaty.
Electrochemical reactions in a molten salt medium are, however, much more complicated than in aqueous solution rendering accurate acquisition and analysis of thermodynamic and kinetic data formidably challenging 15, 16. Therefore, there have been extensive studies using experimental 17-19 and computational 20-23 methods to identify mechanisms how U and other fission fragments behave in the electrorefining system. Regardless of the researches there is a general agreement that the initial stage of nucleation and growth of U deposit in the electrorefining process is critical for determining properties of final product and system efficiency.
Even though focused studies concentrated on identifying fundamental mechanism on how U ions solvated in a molten salt nucleate on metallic cathode it still remains unclear. Theoretical and computational researches have been often carried out with a wide range of empirical interatomic potential energy models 24-26, which involve unknown variables or parameters until numerical fit to experimental measurements or just assumption is made if experimental data are unavailable. Thus, empirical simulations sometimes predicted outcomes are inconsistent with experimental measurements. For example, Radisic and associates 27, 28 experimentally studied nucleation behaviors of Cu nanoclusters on Au electrode in an acidic solution using real-time recording technology. It was proposed that empirical interatomic potential energy models showed substantial discrepancies from what they observed. This may be largely because the accuracy of an empirical interatomic potential energy models critically depends on the input parameters and thus, can be limited in transferability of the results. Furthermore, it can be difficult to analyze the results because the input variables are devoid of the fundamental physicochemical ground 29. This situation requires special caution when an electrorefining system is studied to recycle spent nuclear fuels because of the extreme difficulty in reliable acquisition of thermodynamic and kinetic data from direct experimental measurements.
In this paper, we extensively utilized first principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations and ab-initio molecular dynamic (AIMD) simulations to figure out underlying mechanisms of the initial stage of nucleation and growth behaviors of U on Mo(110) surface in a eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt at T = 773 K. To rigorously investigate the effect of the molten salt electrolyte we compared the results with those calculated under vacuum condition.
2 Computational Methods
To simulate electrocrystallization process of U on Mo electrode we setup model systems as shown in Figure 1. In the electrorefining system we assumed that anode is always in equilibrium state with solid U metal and U ions in the eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt. We utilized a bulk Mo(110) surface (the most close packed plane) as a solid cathode where U ions from the molten salt are electrochemically reduced. The cathode model was composed of three atomic layers consisting of 144 Mo atoms, stacked in the direction of (110) plane in 5 × 3 × 1 supercell and was open to adsorption or desorption of cations and anions in the LiCl–KCl molten salt. Mo atoms in the bottommost layer of the slab were fixed to their bulk positions, while other Mo atoms and adsorbates were fully relaxed during our calculations. We imposed a periodic boundary condition to the model system. We further divided the model into two subsystems depending on environmental conditions, either vacuum or molten salt: (i) we inserted 1.8 nm of vacuum space in the perpendicular direction of the slab to simulate vacuum condition, or (ii) we filled with Li, K and Cl ions as many as the density of LiCl–KCl reaches to the experimental value 30 1.62 gcm−3 at T = 773 K for the eutectic composition (LiCl:KCl = 0.582:0.418 by the atomic fraction 31). VASP 32 was used in our calculations with a cutoff energy 341 eV for expansion of Kohn–Sham waves. Because it is well known that the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) 33 method describing exchange–correlation functional causes a spurious self-interaction error, especially for f-orbital element like U, we corrected it by the Hubbard model 34 of GGA + U scheme with U = 1.15 eV. We identified the U value by comparing the enthalpy of formation of a bulk UCl3 calculated with DFT calculations and the experimental measurement 35 of −8.98 eV. Gamma point mesh of 1 × 1 × 1 was applied to integrate the Brillouin zone. We carried out AIMD 36 simulations at T = 773 K for 4 ps and generated outcomes at every 1 fs. The algorithm of Nosé–Hoover thermostat 37 was used corresponding to an ensemble with fixed particle number, volume and temperature. A uranium nanocluster was modeled with a cuboctahedron consisting of 13 U atoms occupying (100) or (111) facets 38 and size of 5 Å, and adsorption energy in Mo(110) surface was calculated to determine if an instantaneous nucleation mechanism 39 works. Using DFT calculations we estimated energetically the most stable interface between adsorbed the cuboctahedral U and Mo(110) surface by computing their lattice constants. Our results indicated when a (100) facet of the U cuboctahedron and Mo(110) surface has the least lattice mismatch (5.84%) and thus, we utilized the interface configuration of Unano(100)/Mo(110) surface during all our calculations. In summary, our model system consists of a cuboctahedral U nanocluster, Mo(110) surface exposed to either vacuum or the eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt. Because there were total hundreds of atoms we tested our results for two differently sized supercells as shown in Figure 1: a cubic unitcell with 1.70 nm along each side and an orthorhombic unit cell (volume = 1.78 × 1.89 × 2.25 nm3) with 121 Li, 208 Cl, 87 K, and 144 Mo atoms. We found consistent results with both unit cells.
Figure 1
Schematic pictures of our model systems for electrorefining process in bulk molten salt which is (b) and around a cathode which is (d). The (b) schematically describes the situation that uranium nanocluster solvated in the bulk LiCl–KCl eutectic molten salt and (d) does that uranium nanocluster adsorbed on Mo (110) cathode in the LiCl–KCl eutectic molten salt. In our model system under vacuum (a and c in the figure) was the reference state to LiCl–KCl molten salt. U13 indicates a uranium nanocluster and Mo (110) is (110) surface of molybdenum metal.
3 Results and Discussion
Using DFT calculations we calculated formation energy (Ef) of the 15 Å-cuboctahedral U from gas-phase atoms under vacuum and from U ionic state solvated in the eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt as defined by Equation 1,
@(1)
where Ecluster, Eatom and n are mean total energy of a U nanocluster of a cuboctahedron shape, one U atom and number of U atom in the nanocluster (n = 13 in our model), respectively. The formation energy was normalized per one U atom. According to the equation 1 negative formation energy (Ef) means thermodynamically more feasible reaction of the formation of U nanocluster from individual U atoms because the more negative formation energy indicates the model is more stable. The formation energy of the cuboctahedral U in vacuum condition was calculated as −4.92 eV, which amounts to approximately 88.6% of the cohesive energy of an alpha-phase (hexagonal closed packed structure, hcp) bulk U of −5.55 eV 40, meaning U gas atoms energetically prefer to configure the nanocluster. It is well known that the cohesive energy of a nanoparticle decreases as its particle size decreases 41. Under the eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt the formation energy of the U cuboctahedron was calculated as −4.22 eV. U ions in the eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt also prefer to form nanocluster but with a little bit less intensity similar to vacuum condition.
Figure 2 shows structural evolutions showing the formation of a U nanocluster from randomly distributed 13 U in the eutectic molten salt. Our DFT results clearly indicate that U ions favor clustering into various crystallite as UCln (n = 3–6), mediated by chemical bonding with Cl ions in the eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt. It is well agreed with the finding of our previous papers 21-23 that U and Cl ions have strong chemical interactions. The overall topology of the U nanocluster does not change with only marginal modification around the outmost shell by the interaction with Cl ions nearby. The U nanocluster is in solid metallic state chemically interacting with mostly Cl ions in the eutectic molten salt. Our DFT calculations indicated that the formation energy of the U nanocluster is −1.89 eV, which is more negative than addition of the formation energies of all U crystallite in the molten salt. This implies that the crystallite thermodynamically favors agglomeration into a bigger nanocluster.
Figure 2
Structural evolution from U fragments to U nanocluster in eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt calculated by DFT method. Yellow, red, green and purple represent U, Li, Cl and K ions, respectively. The sizes of the ions were exaggerated to clearly show the chemical bonds.
Our results strongly represent that fundamental mechanism of the nucleation of U substantially depend on environmental conditions. In vacuum U gas directly form the nanocluster via an interatomic clustering, while in the eutectic molten salt U ions first configure crystallite through chemical bondings with Cl ions followed by formation of the nanoclusters as agglomerates of crystallite.
We computed adsorption energy (Eads) of U nanocluster on Mo(110) surface in eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt, as defined by Equation 2,
@(2)
@(2-1)
@(2-2)
where urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er3527:er3527-math-0005 is total energy of the model system composed of U nanocluster, the LiCl–KCl molten salt and Mo(110) surface. In here, U nanocluster is solvated in the LiCl–KCl molten salt and adsorb on the Mo(110) surface simultaneously. Esurf, Ecluster and Esalt mean total energies of Mo(110) surface, U nanocluster and the eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt, respectively. urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er3527:er3527-math-0006 and urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er3527:er3527-math-0007 are solvation energies of a U nanocluster and Mo(110) surface into eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt, which were defined as energetic changes when a U nanocluster and Mo(110) surface are displaced from vacuum to the eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt. Equation about the urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er3527:er3527-math-0008 and urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er3527:er3527-math-0009 is expressed as 2-1 and 2-2. urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er3527:er3527-math-0010 means energy of the system which U nanocluster is solvated in LiCl–KCl molten salt. Similarly, urn:x-wiley:0363907X:media:er3527:er3527-math-0011 presents the energy about the system which the Mo(110) surface is in the LiCl–KCl molten salt. When uranium nanocluster adsorbed on Mo(110) surface at vacuum state, there is no need to consider medium effect. The adsorption energy (Eads) at vacuum state is Eads = Etotal − (Esurf + Ecluster). Here, Etotal is energy of the total system that uranium nanocluster is on the Mo(110) cathode, Esurf indicates the energy of Mo(110) surface and Ecluster expresses the energy of a U nanocluster. When a uranium nanocluster adsorbed on Mo(110) surface under LiCl–KCl eutectic molten salt other energies should be considered to calculate the U nanocluster adsorption energy. The energies to be thought are the solvation energies: interaction between molten salt and Mo(110) surface and interaction energy between molten salt and U nanocluster. Adsorption energy of a U nanocluster in Mo surface in LiCl–KCl molten salt can be calculated by equation 2.
The adsorption energy was calculated as −0.86 eV indicating the U nanocluster energetically favors adsorbing on Mo(110) surface as a whole without degradation into other structures. It suggests that U is electrochemically deposited via instantaneous nucleation mechanism in electrorefining process as agreeing with previous experimental report 18.
Surprisingly, under vacuum condition the U nanocluster followed completely different scenario. It was calculated not to be stable at all on Mo(110) surface but collapsed into flat atomic layers (Figure 3). The results clearly imply that the nucleation of U on Mo(110) surface should be very sensitive to environmental conditions. It is because the different media (vacuum or the molten salt) affect interaction energies between U and Mo(110). Under vacuum the interaction is stronger than in the molten salt. Cl ions in the molten salt seem to weaken the mutual interaction between the U nanocluster and Mo(110) surface and keep the U nanocluster on Mo(110) surface from structural degradation into the flat atomic layers. These completely contrasting behaviors explicitly suggest that the kinds of electrolyte can play a key role in the initial period of nucleation and growth process of U in Mo(110) surface.
Figure 3
Structural evolution of a U nanocluster adsorbed on Mo(110) surface under vacuum condition as a function of time of AIMD simulation. Yellow circles represent U and grey do Mo atoms.
To qualitatively visualize and understand structural evolution of U nanocluster structure as a function of time at finite temperature we used AIMD simulations under either vacuum (Figure 3) or in eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt (Figure 4) at T = 773 K (a video file is available in supporting material with this paper). Our results clearly depict that within a few ps U nanocluster on Mo(110) surface is completely collapsed into a flat atomic layer under vacuum, as sequentially illustrated at Figure 3. On the other hand, U nanocluster on Mo(110) surface in the eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt showed much higher stability than under vacuum. Even after twice-longer simulation times than for vacuum the U nanocluster still maintained kept its overall structure. It implies that there are certainly balanced interactions among the U nanocluster, Mo(110) surface and Cl− ions. And Cl− ions seem to pull the U cuboctahedron on Mo(110) surface back into the bulk of molten salt and weaken the adsorption energy. This mechanism can be the key factor endowing the U nanocluster with structural stability against collapsing into atomic layers on Mo(110) surface, which well agrees with outcomes from our DFT calculations.
Figure 4
Structural evolution of U nanocluster adsorbed on Mo(110) surface in eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt captured by AIMD simulations. Yellow, grey and green circles represent U, Mo and Cl atoms, respectively. Li and K atoms were removed on purpose to more clearly show atomic-level interactions between the U nanocluster and Cl ions.
Another interesting thing we discovered was that the interactions tape the U nanocluster on Mo(110) surface into sharp. This proposes a possible mechanism how the U nanocluster grows into an atomic-scale dendrite on the condition that U are supplied enough from the molten salt. This result also supports the instantaneous nucleation mechanism identified by DFT calculations.
Our results from both DFT calculations and AIMD simulations consistently showed the environmental media play a crucial role in the electrocrystallization of U at electrorefining method recycling spent nuclear fuels. We could rationalize the mechanism by two well-known conventional factors: the adsorption energy of an individual U atom on Mo(110) surface and the cohesive energy of a U nanocluster. If the adsorption energy of each U atom is more negative (i.e. stronger affinity to adsorption) than the cohesive energy the electrocrystallization of U will occur as an electroplating process into atomic layers on Mo(110) surface. This type is a sort of the Frank-van der Merse model 42 and is relevant to under vacuum condition in our study. On the contrary, if the cohesive energy of the U nanocluster is more negative than the adsorption energy of a U atom the nucleation and growth will proceed by forming nanoclusters over isolated region. This is similar to the Volmer–Weber model 43.
These conventional models, however, cannot completely describe our results of the structural evolution of the U nanocluster as depicted in Figure 4. Based on our DFT calculations and AIMD simulations we strongly propose that chemical interaction between the U nanocluster and Cl− ion in eutectic molten salt should be essentially considered, even with a higher priority than the two conventional factors, to correctly understand the initial stage of the nucleation and growth mechanism of U with varying electrolyte media. Table 1 shows the adsorption energy of the U nanocluster on Mo(110) surface under vacuum and in the eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt. Indeed, it is clearly seen that interaction between U nanocluster and Cl ions in the molten salt weakened the adsorption energy of a U nanocluster on Mo(110) surface, by which the nanocluster sustains against structural degradation into a flat atomic layers.
Table 1. Adsorption energies of a U atom and a U nanocluster on Mo surface in either vacuum or eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt.
Vacuum	Molten salt
Adsorption energy
(eV/U-atom)
Nanocluster	Atom	Nanocluster	Atom
−2.49	−4.95	−0.86	−4.89
Figure 5 shows an energy diagram summarizing our DFT calculation and AIMD simulation results. It shows thermoelectrochemical processes where U ions solvated in eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt coalesce into a U nanocluster, followed by its adsorption on Mo(110) surface in LiCl–KCl eutectic molten salt. Equation 3 describes the overall reaction for uranium atom to be adsorbed in the form of U nanocluster in molten salt system, and the reaction can be separated into several steps, from equation 3-1 to equation 3-4.
@(3)
@(3-1)
@(3-2)
@(3-3)
@(3-4)
U and U13 means an U atom and a U nanocluster, respectively. Round bracket means the state of U: X(Vacuum) means the X is in vacuum while X(LiCl–KCl) does the X is in eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt, X(LiCl–KCl, Mo) indicate the X is adsorbed on Mo(110) surface in eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt. ΔE is energy change of the reaction 3. ΔEn is energy change for the elementary reactions from (3-1) to (3-4)-(3-1) to (3-4). The equation 3-1 is the reversal reaction of a U solvation into eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt from vacuum, and the energy change ΔE1 equals to 2.13 eV implying the reaction is thermodynamically unfavorable. The second step, reaction 3-2 describes the formation of a U nanocluster from U gas in vacuum. It is exothermic reaction with −5.52 eV. Third reaction step of the equation 3-3 indicates that the solvation of U nanocluster from vacuum into the eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt releases heat of −0.83 eV. The magnitude of ΔE1 is bigger than −ΔE3. −ΔE1 represents the solvation energy of a U atom into eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt while the ΔE3 does for a U nanocluster. This makes sense because the chemical potential of U in the eutectic molten salt increases as U composition increases. Equation 3-4 represents adsorption of the U nanocluster on Mo(110) surface in the LiCl–KCl molten salt. It indicates that the U nanocluster is stable as much as −0.86 eV. Using these sequential steps the energy change (ΔE) for the reaction described at Equation 3 was calculated by summing ΔE1, ΔE2, ΔE3 and ΔE4, which is equal to −5.08 eV. It means that the nucleation of U in LiCl–KCl molten salt favorably occurs and adsorption of U nanocluster on Mo(110) surface in eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt is also a spontaneous reaction. These results support the instantaneous nucleation mechanism of U in eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt.
Figure 5
Diagram showing the energy for various states of U as a function of exposed media referenced to vacuum.
In summary, we utilized first principles DFT calculations and AIMD simulations to elucidate the initial stage of the electrocrystallization process of U on Mo(110) surface solvated in eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt. Our results clearly unveiled that medium affects nucleation and growth mechanisms: the electrodeposition process as atomic layers under vacuum and the formation of nanoclusters in eutectic molten salt. The specific interactions of Cl− ions with U and Mo(110) surface was proposed as a key factor to the different behaviors and to shaping U nuclei into a sharp tip resembling a micro-dendrite structure. The fundamental principles were ascribed to the strong chemical interaction between U nanocluster and Cl ions in the molten salt.
4 Conclusion
Extensive utilization of first principles DFT calculations combined with AIMD simulations enabled us to elucidate mechanism on the initial stage electrocrystallization of U on Mo(110) surface solvated in either vacuum or a eutectic LiCl–KCl molten salt at T = 773 K. Our results clearly unveiled surprisingly different mechanisms govern the nucleation and growth behaviors depending on the kinds of environmental conditions. Under vacuum U favored a uniform atomic layer electrodeposition on Mo(110) surface, while strong chemical interaction between U nanocluster with Cl ions stabilized and taped the U nanocluster into sharp tip like an atomic-scale dendrite. Our results fully based on ab-initio methods accurately captured the structural evolution as a function of time on atomic scale, which is invaluable for understanding fundamental principles on not only the electrorefining process for recycling spent nuclear fuels but also on other electrochemical reactions involving various electrolytes potentially leading to design of efficient electrochemical systems.
Acknowledgements
The Nuclear R&D Program funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning (2011-0031862) supported this research. This work was also supported by the Global Frontier R&D Program (2013M3A6B1078882) in the Center for Hybrid Interface Materials (HIM) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning.
