<title>A framework for the optimization of chemical looping combustion processes</title>
<author>Chinedu O. Okoli; Anca Ostace; Sourabh Nadgouda; Andrew Lee; Andrew Tong; Anthony P. Burgard; Debangsu Bhattacharyya; David C. Miller</author>
<Affiliation>National Energy Technology Laboratory, 626 Cochrans Mill Road, Pittsburgh, PA 15236, United States; Department of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering, West Virginia University, 401 Evansdale Drive, Morgantown, WV 26506, United States; William G. Lowrie Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, 151 West Woodruff Avenue, Koffolt Laboratories, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, United States</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Powder Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier BV</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.powtec.2019.04.035</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0032591019302803?via%3Dihub</URL>
Highlights
•
A framework for mathematical optimization of chemical looping systems is presented
•
The framework is developed to use detailed first-principles chemical looping models
•
Case studies for moving bed and bubbling fluidized bed CLC reactors are presented
•
Optimization results demonstrate the benefits of this framework
Abstract
Chemical looping combustion is a transformative electricity generation process with the potential for high efficiency and a unique approach to carbon capture capable of achieving very low energy penalties. Chemical looping combustion systems based on moving bed and bubbling fluidized bed reactors have been proposed. This paper employs rigorous models utilizing the Institute for the Design of Advanced Energy Systems (IDAES) process systems engineering (PSE) framework, to optimize iron-based, methane-fueled chemical looping combustion processes based on both reactor concepts. The models account for reaction kinetics, mass and heat transfer, and hydrodynamics. Each system was optimized to minimize total annualized costs while combusting 99.9% of the methane feed of 125 mol/s. Within the assumptions of this study, the moving bed-based chemical looping combustion process has significant cost advantages compared to the bubbling fluidized bed-based chemical looping combustion process due to smaller reactor sizes and solids inventory, and lower electricity consumption.
Keywords:Chemical looping combustion;Optimization framework;Mathematical modeling;Moving bed reactor model;Bubbling fluidized bed reactor model;Total annualized cost
1. Introduction
Chemical Looping Combustion (CLC) is an emerging, potentially transformative electricity generation process that enables the combustion of fossil fuels in a way that produces a sequestration-ready, CO2-rich exhaust stream [1]. Current research into CLC has focused on a wide variety of areas including the choice and design of reactors, development and testing of oxygen carriers (OCs), utilizing different types of fuels, as well as operability and process improvement [[2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8]]. Additionally, many process alternatives have been explored that enable production of hydrogen, chemicals, and liquid fuels as well as electricity [[9], [10], [11]].
The performance of a CLC system is dependent on the OC redox reactions and the contacting between the OC and the fuel. Studies investigating the use of moving bed (MB) reactors as fuel reactors for CLC applications have emphasized the advantages of operating in the counter-current MB regime [10,[12], [13], [14], [15]]. Due to the counter-current flow of the gas and solid in the MB reactors, a near-complete conversion of the fuel can be obtained, together with a very high conversion of the OC particles [14,16]. The high OC conversion can lead to a lower solids circulation rate compared to that generally required in fluidized systems [15,17], improving the cost efficiency of the process. Bubbling fluidized bed (BFB) reactors are also very good candidates for CLC applications due to the excellent gas-solid mixing increasing heat and mass transfer between the gas and solid phases [18,19].
Accurate reactor models that capture the detailed kinetic and hydrodynamic behavior associated with MB and BFB operation can greatly facilitate the design of an efficient CLC process. Several MB adsorber models have been proposed for carbon capture [[20], [21], [22]] and MB fuel reactors have been previously modeled as idealized reactors in series [11,14,17]. However, to our knowledge, no studies have reported rigorous first principles mathematical models of MB reactors for CLC applications. Additionally, numerous fluidized bed reactor models for CLC have been published [23,24], but they are either computational fluid dynamics (CFD) models with long solution times or models based on semi-empirical correlations [4]. Furthermore, few studies have addressed the optimization of stand-alone CLC reactors or complete CLC systems, and none have carried out simultaneous system-wide reactor and process optimization using first principles models. Abad et al. [25] developed a model of a coal-fueled fluidized bed reducer which was used [26] to determine the effect of different operational parameters (temperature, solids inventory, OC to fuel ratio, CO reactivity, coal reactivity and coal particle size) on carbon capture fraction and oxygen demand of the reducer via sensitivity analysis. Shao et al. developed a 3-D model of a solid-fueled in-situ gasification CLC system comprised of a high-flux circulating fluidized bed as the fuel reactor (FR) and a counterflow moving bed as the air reactor (AR) and carried out an in-depth sensitivity study of the effects of different modeling parameters on the solid flow behavior. They also proposed a two-stage AR which increased the power capacity of an in-situ gasification CLC system. Han and Bollas [8,27,28] used dynamic optimization methods to design and tune the cycle strategy of a CLC system carried out in high-pressure fixed-bed reactors.
Emerging technologies such as CLC can benefit from a methodology that enables rapid and comprehensive assessments of the multiple process configurations and interconnected reactor systems (fixed-, moving- and fluidized-bed reactors) typical of CLC to determine the best combination of reactors, equipment design, operating conditions, and product options. The U.S. Department of Energy's Institute for the Design of Advanced Energy Systems (IDAES) [29] has developed a process systems engineering framework (PSE) [30] that enables systems-level optimization using rigorous, equation-oriented (EO), first-principles modeling of key process equipment. The ability to optimize processes, not just simulate them, at multiple-scales enables the evaluation of many thousands of design choices simultaneously, in a computationally tractable manner.
In this paper, we present a methodology implemented in the IDAES framework for the rigorous optimization of two steady-state methane-fueled CLC processes using an iron-based OC – one consisting of two interconnected BFB reactors, the other of two interconnected MB reactors. Though the overall flowsheet considered entails several simplifying assumptions, the BFB [31] and MB [32] models are rigorous 1-D, steady-state, first-principles models which capture the micro-, and macro-scale phenomena present in the reactor models. The applicability of the methodology is illustrated with the minimization of the total annualized cost (TAC) of the processes and a comparison of the two CLC processes.
The article is organized as follows: in Section 2 the IDAES PSE framework is introduced; Section 3 presents the CLC case studies and problem formulation; while Section 4 presents the results. Finally, Section 5 discusses future work and summarizes conclusions.
2. Framework for CLC optimization
The CLC systems studied in this work are developed and implemented in the IDAES framework. In order to facilitate the consideration of different processes and conditions, the IDAES framework uses a modular structure which allows interchangeable “property packages” to be connected to reactor models in the IDAES framework model library [30]. These property packages contain models describing the relevant thermo-physical and transport properties for a given system and set of conditions, which allow the reactor models to be general to any process. Thus, users need only focus on developing a set of property calculations suitable for their needs. Reaction kinetics in the property package are handled in a similar fashion to the thermo-physical and transport properties, with the kinetic calculations being implemented as interchangeable modules within the IDAES framework. The reaction kinetics modules provide a list of potential chemical reactions which may occur, along with a set of stoichiometric constants for each component within the system. These are used in the mass balance equations. The kinetics module also contains a set of equations which calculate the volumetric reaction rate as a function of the material state (e.g. concentration and temperature) for each reaction. Since reaction kinetics are inherently dependent on the specific thermo-physical properties (e.g., an equation of state for determining concentration), kinetic modules are built on the associated thermo-physical property models. This ensures consistency between the kinetic calculations and the underlying thermo-physical properties.
The implementation of the CLC processes in IDAES (illustrated in Fig. 1) is similar to other process modeling software. First, a flowsheet is created to describe the process. Property package models are then attached to provide kinetic and thermo-physical properties. Models of the individual unit operations are added to the flowsheet and connected together to form a representation of the process. An appropriate objective function, flowsheet constraints, and optimization variables are then specified for flowsheet optimization, and the model is then solved. The solution procedure includes sub-steps for model discretization and initialization. Furthermore, custom model initialization routines can be integrated into the solve step by leveraging the flexibility of the Pyomo/Python features of the framework [30].
Fig. 1. Workflow for CLC process flowsheet optimization setup in the IDAES framework.
3. Chemical looping combustion case studies
The IDAES framework is demonstrated for the design and optimization of simple flowsheets of two proof-of-concept CLC systems to combust 99.9% of a methane feed (125 mol/s) using an iron-based (Fe2O3/Fe3O4), Al2O3 supported OC [33]. Kinetic parameters for the oxidation and reduction of the iron-based (45 mass %) OCs are obtained from Abad et al. [33]. In case study one, the FR and AR are both MB reactors with counter current contacting of gas and solids (see Fig. 2), while in case study two the FR and AR are both BFB reactors with co-current contacting of gas and solids (see Fig. 3). In both cases methane in the FR is reacted with the OC to produce CO2, H2O and the reduced form of the OC; the reduced OC is then regenerated in the AR with air and recycled back to the FR to complete the loop. Ancillary equipment considered in the process are compressors for the fuel and air feeds and a solids heat exchanger to cool the OC stream leaving the AR before it is recycled back to the FR. A summary of the fuel feed conditions and OC properties are shown in Table 1.
Fig. 2. Process flow diagram of the MB CLC system.
Fig. 3. Process flow diagram of the BFB CLC system.
Table 1. Fuel feed conditions and OC properties of the MB and BFB CLC process.
Fuel Composition	OC particle properties
MB	BFB		MB	BFB
Flowrate (mol/s)	128.3	273	Particle type	Geldart D	Geldart B
Mole %:			Particle diameter (mm)	1.5 [53]	0.28 [67]
CH4	97.5	45.8	Solid density (kg/m3)	3252
CO2	2.5	47.7	Fresh OC composition	45% Fe2O3, 0% Fe3O4, 55% Al2O3
H2O	0	6.5
The reduction and oxidation reactions taking place in the FR and AR are shown in R1 and R2. For simplicity, these are the only reactions modeled in the system; it is assumed methane reforming is slow compared to methane combustion [34].
(R1)
(R2)
3.1. Models for chemical looping combustion
Rigorous, first principles-based EO models are best suited for representing CLC reactors during flowsheet optimization. Unlike CFD models, which are computationally expensive, rigorous EO models built specifically for optimization provide a compromise between computational efficiency and accuracy by solving mass and energy balance equations together with experimentally obtained empirical correlations for the momentum balance equations, hydrodynamics, and mass and heat transfer. This type of modeling approach has found wide use in the literature for modeling CLC reactors [4,35].
In addition to the reactors, models of the kinetic and thermo-physical properties of the gas and solid interactions specific to CLC are required. The reactor models are coupled with the appropriate thermo-physical properties and reaction kinetics through thermodynamic state variables (temperature, pressure, and mole/mass fractions of species). The thermo-physical property models compute properties required for the mass and heat transfer correlations in the reactor models, such as viscosity, diffusivity, thermal conductivity, heat capacity etc., while the reaction kinetics model determines the amount of each species that are reacted/generated as a function of the state variables.
When combined, the thermo-physical property and kinetic calculations describe the behavior of the material being studied at a given state, whilst the reactor models describe the different states that are present within the reactor system and how they interact.
3.1.1. MB reactor model
The model used for the MB reactor in this work consists of a set of differential equations obtained by applying mass, energy and momentum balance equations. Assuming that radial concentration and temperature gradients along with axial dispersion and thermal conduction are negligible, two mass balance equations – one for the gas and one for the solid phase – are considered. Similarly, for adiabatic operation, two energy balance equations are considered, one for each phase. Specifically, the counter-current MB model consists of a gas phase and a solid phase exchanging mass (by reaction) and energy, while moving in opposite directions. The solid phase is assumed to be moving at a constant velocity, while the gas phase velocity through the reactor bed is computed using the Ergun equation [36] or a simplified pressure balance equation [22]. The gas phase velocity is constrained to be less than the minimum fluidization velocity to ensure the reactors is in the moving-bed transport regime. The minimum fluidization velocity is computed by setting the drag force from the Ergun equation equal to the gravitational force on the particle bed [36,37]. Additional correlations between dimensionless groups such as the Nusselt, Reynolds and Prandtl numbers are used to calculate heat transfer coefficients needed. Other assumptions are constant bed porosity, negligible entrainment and attrition of solid particles, and uniform temperature within particles. The model is described in more detail by Ostace et al. [32]. The model equations are included in section S1 of the supplementary material.
3.1.2. BFB reactor models
The BFB model used in this study was previously developed in the IDAES framework [31] based on models reported by Kunii and Levenspiel [37] and Lee and Miller [38]. The model includes mass and energy balances, empirical correlations for bubble formation, growth and velocity, heat and mass transfer correlations, and pressure drop correlations. Other assumptions include steady-state operation, gas and solids mixing in the radial direction only, spherical bubbles, emulsion gas velocity at minimum fluidization, no channeling of gas, negligible entrainment and attrition of solid particles, no solids in the bubble region, and adiabatic operation.
The resulting model consists of differential algebraic equations (DAE) and is a one-dimensional (axially-varying) three-region model (bubble, cloud-wake and emulsion regions), that describes the hydrodynamics and interaction of gas and solids within the BFB, as well as the mass and heat transfer phenomena occurring in the different bed regions. In addition, the model provides axial profiles of the hydrodynamic and state variables in the bed. The model equations are listed in section S2 of the supplementary material.
3.1.3. Thermo-physical and transport properties models
The MB and BFB models make use of a number of thermo-physical and transport properties of the solid and gaseous materials to calculate the hydrodynamic behavior of the reactors. Two thermo-physical property modules are developed: one for the FR and the other for the AR. Each module contains calculations for all the properties required by the reactor models across the expected range of operation.
For the gas phase mixture, density is calculated from the ideal gas law, which is suitable since the reactor systems are operated at high temperature and low pressure, dynamic viscosity is calculated using the Wilke method with Herning and Zipperer approximations [39], thermal conductivity is calculated using the Wassilijewa equation with Maxon and Saxena modifications [39], and diffusivity coefficients are modeled using the method of Fuller for binary diffusion coefficients and Wilke for gas component diffusion in a mixture [39]. Heat capacities of both gases and solid components are temperature dependent and are calculated from the Shomate correlations [40]. The equations used in the thermo-physical properties module are listed in section S3 of the supplementary material.
3.1.4. Reaction kinetics model
Similar to the thermo-physical and transport properties module, two kinetic modules are developed: one for the reactions which occur in the FR and one for those which occur in the AR. Each kinetic module contains calculations for the reaction rates for those reactions that could occur in each reactor across the expected range of operating conditions and material conversion.
The choice of reaction model for the OC depends on several factors, with the key being particle size. The most common kinetic models for chemical looping are the nucleation model and the unreacted shrinking core model (SCM) [41]. The pure nucleation models only consider the reaction mechanism of the gas-solid reactions and do not consider the effect of the grain size of the particle which are especially important for large particles (>10 μm) [42]. The SCM models, on the other hand, capture the effect of the particle size and pore structure of the solid reactant particles. The SCM model postulates that as the reaction proceeds, the reaction front shifts towards the grain center leaving behind a porous metallic/metal oxide product layer through which gaseous reactants and products diffuse [37]. Since the particle size considered in this work is >10 μm (280 μm), the assumption of the unreacted shrinking core type model is considered to be appropriate. The unreacted shrinking core grain model and kinetic parameters of the Fe2O3-based OC used in this work are obtained from Abad et al. [33] for both the reduction and oxidation reactions. Based on calculations which showed that the mass transfer resistances in the particles gas film and product layer were not important for the experimental conditions considered in their work, Abad et al. [33] assumed that the overall solids conversion is controlled by the chemical reaction in the grain and that the mass transfer resistances in the gas film and product layer of the particle are negligible.
The reaction kinetics [33] are shown in Eq. (1) and Eq. (2), where ConvOC (−) represents the fractional conversion of the OC in the FR (reduction) or AR (oxidation), C (mol/m3) is the concentration of the reacting gas (CH4 in the FR, and O2 in the AR), T (K) is the operating temperature, and k is the kinetic rate constant. The values of the other parameters present in the kinetic equations are shown in Table 2 for the AR and FR [33].
@(1)
@(2)
Table 2. Kinetic parameters for the studied CLC system.
FR	AR
Molar density, ρm(mol/m3)	32,811	22,472
Grain radius, rg(m)	2.6 × 10−7	2.6 × 10−7
Stoichiometric factor, br (−)	12	4
Pre-exponential factor, k0 (mol1−nm3n−2s−1)	8.0 × 10−4	3.1 × 10−4
Activation energy, E (kJ/mol)	49	14
Ideal gas constant, R (Jmol−1K−1)	8.314	8.314
Reaction order, n (−)	1.3	1.0
3.2. Model validation
To confirm that the reactor models are valid in the range of operating conditions considered in the optimization, validation with experimental data from a similar system under similar ranges in the operating conditions is desired. Since experimental data with the required level of details are not available in the open literature, the authors investigated the possibility of comparing the results with other mathematical models. Unfortunately, there is a lack of 1-D steady-state mathematical models of BFB- or MB-based Fe2O3/methane processes of any scale in the literature. Comparing with other types of beds or OCs is ruled out since such comparisons would not be meaningful.
While the correlations used in the MB and BFB reactor models have been widely accepted in the literature, these correlations, particularly hydrodynamic correlations for the BFB, have not been validated for large-scale fluidized beds. It is assumed in this work that the correlations can be extrapolated to reactors of larger sizes. In the future we look forward to validating/enhancing these correlations using data from larger scale plants.
3.3. General problem formulation
The objective function in this work is the minimization of total annualized cost (TAC) while achieving 99.9% combustion of the fuel. TAC is a good metric for cost-based optimization, as it effectively captures the trade-off between the capital cost items, such as equipment sizes, and operating cost items such as compressor electricity usage, that play a key role in designing CLC processes.
The total set of optimization decision variables which are varied by the solver to minimize the TAC subject to the process constraints in the case studies are listed in Table 3.
Table 3. Total set of decision variables considered in the case studies.
Decision variables (i ∀ AR, FR)	Lower bound	Upper bound
Design
Reactor bed diameter, Dbi (m)	0.1	25
Reactor bed height, Lbi(m)	0.1	25
Operating
OC flow rate, MOC_inFR (kg/s)	0	10,000
Gas flow rate, Fgas_inAR (mol/s)	0	10,000
Gas inlet pressure, Pgas_ini (kPa)	100	2000
Gas inlet temperature, Tgas_ini (K)	298.15	1000
3.3.1. Total annualized cost
The TAC, as shown in Eq. (3), is a function of the total equipment cost (TEC), the total operating cost (TOC), the overall installation factor f, and an annualization factor, ϕ.
@(3)
The TEC (Eq. (4)) is a function of the equipment cost of the CLC reactors (Costreact), compressors (Costcompr), OC inventory (Costinv) (assumed to be 1300 $/tonne), and solids heat exchanger (CostHX). The overall installation factor, f, used in Eq. (3) accounts for all the additional capital costs related to equipment installation, indirect costs and working capital. A value of f = 4.4, which is typical for solids processing plants, is used in this work [43].
@(4)
A more detailed breakdown of the cost components of the TEC is provided in Appendix A.
The TOC as shown in Eq. (5) is a function of the total electricity required by the compressors in the process:
@(5)
where 8000 is the number of operating hours per year for the plant. A 2016 average US industrial cost of electricity of 6.75 cents/kWh [44] is used in this study.
The annualization factor ϕ, is a function of the fractional interest rate per year, r, and the annualization period, a as shown in Eq. (6). The values of r = 0.1 and a = 10 years are used in this study.
@(6)
All costs used in this study are in 2016 dollars, with conversion of equipment costs from prior years done with the Chemical Engineering Plant Cost Index [45].
3.3.2. Process design heuristics
To find a feasible starting point for the optimization, heuristics were used. The heuristics ensure the superficial velocity (vg) constraints are maintained, the OC circulation rate between the reactors is high enough to transfer a sufficient quantity of oxygen for high fuel conversion (and to maintain the heat balance), and the amount of OC inventory in the reactors is sufficient to have good conversion of the reacting gases [33,46]. The heuristics-based approach includes the following steps:
1.Select gas feed pressures (Pgas_ini) and temperatures (Tgas_ini) to the AR and FR. These values are assumed to be close to atmospheric conditions for the case studies in this work.
2.The reactor areas should be sized such that vg constraints required for the operating regimes of the reactors are maintained, i.e. in the BFB reactors, vg should be between minimum fluidization velocity (vmf) and the terminal velocity (vt) (vmf < vg < vt), while in the MB reactors vg < vmf.
Here, the minimum fluidization velocity is calculated using the general correlation Eq. (7) proposed by Wen and Yu [47], while the terminal velocity is calculated with Eq. (8) [37].
@(7)
where the values for C1 = 27.2 and C2 = 0.0408 suggested by Grace [48] are used.
@(8)
The internal areas of the reactors (and thus the internal diameters, Db) can then be estimated using Eq. (9) and Eq. (10):
@(9)
Where Vgas_ini is computed using the ideal gas law:
@(10)
3.
The OC flowrate into the FR, MOC_inFR (kg/s) (Eq. (11)), is determined based on the stoichiometry of the OC reduction reaction (R1), on the fuel feed flowrate Fgas_inFR and CH4 molar fraction yCH4, on the mass fraction of active metal oxide in the OC (xFe2O3 = 0.45), and on the conversions of CH4 (ConvCH4) and Fe2O3 (ConvFe2O3FR), respectively [33]:
@(11)
The full conversion of fuel, ConvCH4 = 1, is assumed for both MB and BFB CLC systems. For the BFB, the value of ConvFe2O3FR = 0.3 [33] is used, while ConvFe2O3FR = 0.9 is assumed in the MB.
4.
The flowrate of air into the AR (Fgas_inAR) is assumed to be 20% in excess of the amount of stoichiometric amount needed for complete combustion of methane in the fuel feed.
5.
The heights of the reactors should be estimated such that there is sufficient residence time in the beds for complete fuel conversion in the FR, and OC regeneration in the AR [12].
3.3.3. Initialization and implementation of flowsheet models
The MB-based and BFB-based CLC flowsheet models are implemented in Pyomo [49], using the IDAES framework [29,30]. The flowsheet can be solved both as a simulation (square system) and as an optimization problem. Before solving the flowsheet (either for simulation or for optimization), the MB and BFB model equations are automatically discretized with an orthogonal collocation scheme using Pyomo.DAE [50]. The discretization of the MB model is done over 40 finite elements with 3 collocation points, while that of the BFB model is done over 10 finite elements with 3 collocation points per element. The number of finite elements was established by conducting a grid independence study, while the numbers of collocation points use the default for Pyomo.DAE. The authors found that this worked well for all the simulation and optimization studies in this manuscript. For the optimization studies, the resulting MB CLC discretized system consists of 20,789 variables and 20,781 equations, while the BFB CLC system consists of 16,484 variables and 16,476 equations. Ipopt [51] was used for solving both the simulation and optimization problems.
Given the nonlinearity and complexity of the CLC flowsheet models, the flowsheets can be difficult to solve. To address this challenge, each flowsheet is initialized in a sequence of steps as summarized below:
Step 1. The FR is initialized and solved using a hierarchical initialization approach (automated in the IDAES MB [32] and BFB [31] unit models) in which sub-models of the FR are solved in order of complexity i.e. the thermo-physical and kinetic sub-models are solved, the hydrodynamic correlations and equations are solved next, followed by the mass balance equations, then finally the energy balance equations.
Step 2. The solid inlet stream conditions of the AR are set to equal the solid outlet stream conditions of the FR, and the AR is initialized and solved on its own using a hierarchical initialization approach as discussed in step 1.
Step 3. The loop is closed by connecting the solid inlet stream of the FR to the solid outlet stream of the AR, and the CLC loop is solved.
Steps 1–3 are the initialization steps for simulations. For an optimization problem, an additional step is implemented:
Step 4. The objective function and constraints are activated (using Pyomo's activate function), the decision variables are freed (using Pyomo's unfix function), and the flowsheet optimization model is solved using the steady-state simulation results as a starting point.
4. Results
4.1. Heuristic designs
The heuristic approach was applied to generate initial values for the optimization decision variables for both CLC systems. Since the kinetic models used in this study [39] were developed near atmospheric pressure, the inlet pressures are set to 156 kPa to overcome the pressure drop across the bed while keeping pressure close to atmospheric. The inlet temperatures of both fuel and air are assumed to be at 298.15 K. According to Zeng et al. [27], the FR should be operated above 1045 K to avoid carbon depositions on the OC, and below 1473 K to avoid fusion and sintering of the OC particles. Thus, the inlet OC temperature to the FR is set at 1208 K, which is in the feasible operating temperature range for the iron-based OC.
The initial superficial velocities for the FR and AR of the BFB are assumed to be three times vmf. This constraint is in line with Kunii et al. [35], who noted that moderate gas flowrates of less than ten times vmf are typical of BFBs. To ensure the MB operating regime (vg < vmf) is maintained, the superficial velocity, vg into both reactors is assumed to be 0.8vmf, with the average bed porosity (ϵav) of the MB reactors assumed to be 0.4.
The height of the fluidized beds are often heuristically calculated based on the assumption of perfect mixing of solids, plug flow of the gas phase in the reactors, and negligible resistance for the gas phase mass transfer between the bubble and emulsions [39]. The authors observed that the assumption of negligible mass transfer resistance in the gas phase can lead to considerable underestimation of the height of the bed for the BFBs. Therefore, the initial reactor heights (Lbi) for both BFB and MBs are specified to be 5 m to provide sufficient residence time in the beds.
The heuristic values for the design parameters and inlet operating conditions of the MB CLC and BFB CLC processes are listed in Table 4. In addition, superficial velocity constraints are not violated in the heuristics case as the examples of the MB FR and BFB FR show in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5, respectively. Also shown in Fig. 6 is that the bubble diameter of the BFB FR does not violate the slugging bubble size, defined as 0.6 times Db by Kunii and Levenspiel [35].
Table 4. Heuristic design parameters of the MB and BFB CLC processes.
BFB CLC process	MB CLC process
FR	AR	FR	AR
Design decision variables:
Reactor bed diameter, Dbi (m)	6.5	14.9	8	12
Reactor bed height, Lbi(m)	5	5	5	5
Operating decision variables:
OC inlet flowrate, MOC, inFR (kg/s)	1422	–	591	–
Gas inlet flowrate, FgasinAR (mol/s)	–	1429	–	1587
Gas inlet pressure, Pgas_ini (kPa)	156	156	156	156
Gas inlet temperature, Tgas_in (K)	298.15	298.15	298.15	298.15
Fig. 4. Superficial velocity profiles for the MB FR for the heuristic case (vg_heuristic), optimized case (vg_optimized), and minimum fluidization velocity (v_mf).
Fig. 5. Superficial velocity profiles for the BFB FR for the heuristic case (vg_heuristic), optimized case (vg_optimized), and minimum fluidization velocity (v_mf).
Fig. 6. Bubble diameter profiles for the BFB FR for the heuristic case (db_heuristic), optimized case (db_optimized). Also shown are the slugging bubble diameter constraints for the heuristic case (db_heuristic_slugging) and the optimized case (db_optimized_slugging).
4.2. Optimization results
4.2.1. MB CLC process
The heuristic-based results for the MB CLC system is used as the starting point for optimizing the MB process. As can be seen from the comparison of the optimized design in Table 5 to the heuristic design in Table 4, the major changes in the optimal design are the reduction in the size of the FR and AR, a reduction in the inlet pressure and flowrate of air into the AR, as well as a reduction in the OC circulation through the system. It can be observed that the fuel pressure in the FR is higher in the optimized case.
Table 5. Cost breakdown of the optimal designs for the MB CLC and BFB CLC processes.
*Variables:	BFB CLC process	MB CLC process
Fuel reactor	Air reactor		Fuel reactor	Air reactor
Gas inlet flow (mol/s)	273	1473		128	1199
Gas inlet pressure (kPa)	234	440		250	102
Gas inlet Temp. (K)	584	308		293	293
OC circ. Rate (kg/s)	1078	1070		549	540
Reactor length (m)	7.3	8.64		4.6	2.39
Reactor diameter (m)	10.6	13.27		4.58	13
Compr work (kW)	1560	8703		390	56
Costs:			Totals			Totals
Reactor cost ($K/MWth)	11.66	16.76	28.42	3.14	10.62	13.76
Inventory cost ($K/MWth)	14.22	27.94	42.16	1.90	13.67	15.58
Compressor cost ($K/MWth)	2.83	6.24	9.07	1.51	0.61	2.12
Solids_HX cost ($K/MWth)	–	–	22.34	–	–	17.07
TEC ($K/MWth)	–	–	101.99	–	–	48.53
TOC ($K/MWth-yr)	8.42	46.99	55.41	2.23	0.32	2.55
TAC ($K/MWth-yr)			128.42			37.29
The optimal design cost results are shown in Table 5. The solids heat exchanger is the largest contributor to TEC, contributing 35%, while the inventory and reactors contribute 32% and 28%, respectively. The larger size of the AR compared to the FR indicates that it contributes more to the reactor and inventory costs than the FR. The TOC only contributes 7% to the TAC, with the electricity consumed by the fuel compressor being the leading contributor to the TOC as a result of the higher operating pressure and work required.
The constraint vg < vmf, that ensures that the operation of the reactors stays in the MB regime, is met not only in the heuristic design case, but also in the optimized design (see Fig. 4 depicting vg as a function of the MB FR bed length).
4.2.2. BFB CLC process
Similar to the MB CLC system, the heuristic design is used as a starting point for optimizing the BFB CLC system, with the results of the system optimization shown in Table 5. A comparison to the heuristically designed case (see Table 4) shows that in the optimized design there is an increase in the diameter of the FR, the inlet gas pressures to the AR and FR, and the inlet gas temperature to the FR. However, there is a significant decrease in the OC inlet flowrate to the FR in the optimal design.
The costs of the optimal design are shown in Table 5. The inventory costs and reactor costs are the largest contributors to the TEC, contributing 41% and 28%, respectively, while the solids heat exchanger contributes 21%. Furthermore, the larger size of the AR compared to the FR also indicates that it contributes more to the reactor and inventory costs than the FR. The TOC contributes about 43% to the TAC. The electricity consumed by the air compressor is the leading contributor to the TOC as a result of the higher operating pressure and flowrate of the air in comparison to the fuel.
4.2.3. Comparison of the MB CLC process to the BFB CLC process
A comparison of the two CLC processes can be seen in Table 5. It is observed that the estimated TEC of the BFB CLC process is about two times higher than the MB CLC process. In addition, the estimated TAC of the BFB CLC process is four times higher than the MB CLC system. These differences can be attributed to several factors. First, the BFB FR has a gas throughput which is twice that of the MB because of the additional gases (CO2 and H2O) required for fluidizing the bed. This leads to the BFB FR having a larger volume, thus a higher reactor cost and inventory cost. In addition, although the AR of the BFB and MB systems have similar air throughput, the higher inlet pressure of the BFB (440 kPa) compared to the nearly atmospheric pressure of the MB (102 kPa) indicates that a much higher amount of electricity is required for the BFB AR compressor leading to a higher total operating cost for the BFB CLC system. (TOC in this analysis is computed based on the cost of electricity alone).
Several caveats exist with respect to the optimization results. First, the reactor models have not been validated against pilot-scale data; however, this is the thrust of the authors' current research efforts. Second, the kinetic models were developed for OC particle sizes (Geldart B) that are typical of BFB systems, not for the larger OC particles (Geldart D) which are used in MB systems. Therefore, additional mass transfer resistances that are likely to occur in larger particles are not captured by the kinetic model used in the MB. Furthermore, the kinetic models describe only the partial reduction of the OC which is suitable for modeling the reaction in BFB reactors, but do not necessarily capture the benefits of the counter-current MB reactor in which the complete conversion of the OC is typically achieved [39]. Lastly, as the overall CLC processes considered are relatively simple and other balance of plant equipment typical of a complete CLC process (such as cyclones, heat recovery steam generators, additional heat exchangers, pneumatic conveyors for the MB systems, etc.) are not included, the plants cannot be compared on a much even basis using optimization formulations such as the minimization of the cost of electricity, or the minimization of TAC while achieving a fixed thermal output. These alternative optimization formulations might potentially lead to different cost and design outcomes.
Overall, considering these caveats, the preliminary comparison of the optimized systems indicates that there are potentially more cost benefits to the MB CLC process compared with the BFB CLC process for this particular fuel and OC combination. These results serve as a motivation for more detailed future investigation of the MB CLC process for this particular fuel and OC.
4.3. Sensitivity analysis
The impact of the variation in the price of OC on the design variables and costs of the chemical looping processes are considered in two scenarios. In the first, the OC price is reduced to 500 $/tonne from the original price of 1300 $/tonne, while it is increased to 2000 $/tonne in the second scenario.
4.3.1. MB CLC system
The percentage changes in the optimal reactor design parameters and operating conditions for both cases relative to the original optimal design are presented in Table 6.
Table 6. MB CLC process, percentage variation in the optimal reactor design parameters and operating conditions from the original case with respect to changes to price of OC.
Case 1a (CUinv = 500 $/tonne)	Case 1b (CUinv = 2,000 $/tonne)
FR	AR	FR	AR
Decision variables	Change (%)	Change (%)	Change (%)	Change (%)
Design
Reactor bed diameter, Dbi (m)	+ 14.85	+ 1.74	− 8.35	−0.06
Reactor bed height, Lbi(m)	+ 16.31	− 2.25	− 10.35	− 0.64
Operating
OC inlet flowrate, MOC_inFR (kg/s)	+ 1.67	–	− 0.58	–
Gas inlet flowrate, Fgas_inAR (mol/s)	–	+ 3.55	–	− 0.19
Gas inlet pressure, Pgas_ini (kPa)	− 51.18	− 0.03	+ 19.48	− 0.01
In case 1a, both the FR and AR diameters and heights increase compared to the original optimal results. These increases lead to a 12% increase in the cost of the reactors. Despite having larger reactors, the solids inventory cost, which is a function of the reactor volume, decreased by 51%, due to the less expensive OC. The fuel inlet pressure decreased by 51.18%, leading to a 42% and 13% decrease in the TOC and compressor cost, respectively. Thus, as shown in Fig. 7, a less expensive OC results in a reduction of all components of the TAC, except the reactor cost. Overall, the TAC is 19% lower compared to the original optimal design.
Fig. 7. Percentage change in the MB CLC process costs for optimization cases 1a (CUinv = 500 $/tonne) and 1b (CUinv = 2,000 $/tonne) relative to the original optimization design (CUinv = 1,300 $/tonne).
Increasing the OC price has an inverse effect on the costs of the system. The solids inventory cost increases, as expected, as does the compressor cost and TOC, due to a 19.48% increase in the fuel inlet pressure. The higher inlet pressure helps the fuel conversion, leading to 8.35% and 10.35% decrease in the diameter and height of the FR, respectively. The size of the AR and the OC flow rate remain relatively unchanged. The Fe2O3 and O2 conversions also remain practically unchanged. With the more expensive OC, the TAC of the MB CLC system becomes 16% higher in comparison to the original optimal design.
4.3.2. BFB CLC system
As can be seen in Fig. 8 total costs (TEC, TOC and TAC) increase with an increase in the OC price as expected. It can be observed in Table 7 that the reactor length and diameter increase when the OC price decreases. Due to the larger reactors, their cost increases by 18%, but due to the less expensive OC, a 46% reduction in the inventory cost is achieved. Larger reactors help to reduce the operating pressure of the reactors without compromising conversion, leading to a 10% decrease in the compressor cost and 17% decrease in TOC in Case 2a.
Fig. 8. Percentage change in the BFB CLC process costs for optimization cases 2a (CUinv = 500 $/tonne) and 2b (CUinv = 2,000 $/tonne) relative to the original optimization design (CUinv = 1,300 $/tonne).
Table 7. BFB CLC process, percentage variation in optimization decision variables from the original case with respect to changes to price of OC.
Case 2a (CUinv = 500 $/tonne)	Case 2b (CUinv = 2000 $/tonne)
FR	AR	FR	AR
Decision variables	Change (%)	Change (%)	Change (%)	Change (%)
Design
Reactor bed diameter, Dbi (m)	+ 4.53	+ 15.00	- 5.57	- 2.34
Reactor bed height, Lbi(m)	+ 4.53	+ 14.91	- 5.66	- 2.41
Operating
OC inlet flowrate, MOC, inFR (kg/s)	+ 47.12	–	+ 22.26	–
Gas inlet flowrate, FgasinAR (mol/s)	–	- 4.68	–	- 2.17
Gas inlet pressure, Pgas_ini (kPa)	- 23.08	- 11.14	+ 4.27	+ 13.64
Gas inlet temperature, Tgas_in (K)	- 4.45	–	+ 7.00	–
On the contrary, when the OC price is increased to 2000 $/tonne, the reactor costs decrease by 6% due to a smaller volume while inventory cost increases by 39%. To satisfy the fuel conversion constraint of 97%, operating pressures of the reactors increase, leading to 5% increase in the compressor cost, and a 9% increase in the TOC in Case 2b compared to the original optimal design.
5. Conclusions
This work presents the development and application of the IDAES PSE framework [29,30] for the optimization of chemical looping combustion (CLC) processes. The benefits of the framework have been demonstrated by comparing optimized processes of two simple CLC process flowsheets (one consisting of two interconnected moving bed (MB) reactors, the other of two bubbling fluidized bed (BFB) reactors) utilizing rigorous reactor models.
The examples demonstrated are proof of concept cases with no similar systems existing in the literature. A heuristic methodology was applied to estimate good initial design values for the optimization of the CLC processes.
Using the heuristic obtained designs as a starting point, the IDAES framework enabled the optimization of these large systems (> 16,000 variables and equations for both processes) in a computationally efficient manner with solution times of 197–235 s. Thus, the models and optimization methodology implemented in the IDAES framework can be leveraged to rapidly screen multiple different scenarios of similar CLC systems which utilize different fuels and OCs.
Overall, with the caveats on the simple flowsheets and optimization formulation considered, the results indicate that the MB CLC process is a more promising approach for CLC of methane with the specific OC considered, with a TAC 71% less than that of the equivalent BFB CLC process. These results suggest that additional R&D efforts to further develop MB CLC systems are justified. Future work should include model validation as well as consideration of other fuels and OC's to determine whether the results are generalizable to a wider range of CLC systems.
Furthermore, other future work will focus on optimizing a complete CLC system for power production, including a complete steam system. In addition, a more detailed techno-economic analysis is planned to more rigorously evaluate process economics.
