<title>Investigation of concentration-dependence of thermodynamic properties of lanthanum, yttrium, scandium and terbium in eutectic LiCl-KCl molten salt</title>
<author> Yafei Wang; Wentao Zhou; Jinsuo Zhang</author>
<Affiliation>Nuclear Engineering Program, Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA</Affiliation>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Materials</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI> 10.1016/j.jnucmat.2016.05.043</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022311516302483</URL>
Highlights
Investigation of activity coefficient, apparent potential and diffusion coefficient at different concentrations.
MD simulation was studied for the calculation of thermodynamic properties of rare earth elements in molten salt.
The present study is a pioneering work focusing on the concentration dependence of thermodynamic properties.
Abstract
Thermodynamic properties of rare earth metals in LiCl-KCl molten salt electrolyte are crucial to the development of electrochemical separation for the treatment of used nuclear fuels. In the present study, activity coefficient, apparent potential, and diffusion coefficient of lanthanum, yttrium, scandium, and terbium in the molten salt (58 at% LiCl and 42 at% KCl) were calculated by the method of molecular dynamics simulation up to a concentration around 3 at% at temperatures of 723 K and 773 K. It was found that the activity coefficient and the apparent potential increase with the species concentration while diffusion coefficient shows a trend of increase followed by decrease. The calculated results were validated by available measurement data of dilution cases. This research extends the range of data to a wide component and would provide further insight to the pyroprocessing design and safeguards.
Keywords:Electrochemical separation；Activity coefficient；Apparent potential；Diffusion coefficient；Molten salt；Molecular dynamics simulation
1. Introduction
Reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel (SNF) is an important step in nuclear fuel cycle with the purpose of minimizing the environmental impact and recycling useful elements [1]. Advanced method exploration to process SNF has been adopted as one of the main features for GEN IV nuclear reactors [2]. Although only solvent extraction processes are commercialized currently [3], [4], pyroprocessing is being considered as a prominent way to recover long-lived elements by several countries, i.e. U.S.A, Japan, and Korea [1], [5], [6]. The core technology of pyroprocessing is the electrorefiner where actinides are separated with lanthanide fission products [7]. SNF is loaded into basket immersed in melts as the anode. When it is charged, the alkali metals, alkaline earth metals, rare earth elements, and actinides will anodically dissolve into the molten salt. U selectively deposit on solid cathode while Pu together with minor actinides and residual U deposit on the liquid cadmium cathode or a new solid cathode after being accumulated [8]. The system is more compact compared with traditional PUREX process and expected to have the potential of economic advantage [9], [10]. Also, due to the high resistance of inorganic melts to radiolytic degradation, pyroprocessing has the capability to handle “hot” SNF, which can reprocess SNF timely and save long time of storage [4], [11]. It was designed firstly for metallic fuel treatment but can also processing oxide fuel with an additional step of fuel reduction [5].
Thermodynamic and electrochemical properties of elements in molten salt determine how they can transport and separate in the electrorefining cell [7], [11], [12]. For instance, diffusion coefficient affects species’ transport in bulk electrolyte and electrolyte-electrode surface [13], [14] and activity coefficient provides information about the distribution coefficient and separation factor [15], [16]. These properties are critical to pyroprocessing system design and safeguards as well as the prediction of system performance. Correspondingly, massive effort has been thrust to explore these data experimentally using electrochemical techniques, such as cyclic voltammetry (CV), chronopotentiometry (CP) and electromotive force (EMF) methods [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], [22], [23], [24], [25], [26], [27], [28]. Nevertheless, most of these researches only studied thermodynamic properties in infinite dilutions or were based on the assumption of the infinite dilution even though some studies have been done at different temperatures. It should be noticed that the concentration of an element in the salt could be pretty high in a practical separation process [29] for which the infinite dilution assumption cannot be applied. Therefore, significant deviation may be generated when these data are involved in model development. Considering the gap between previous researches and practical application, further fundamental understandings are still needed, such as thermodynamic and transport data of actinides and rare earth metals in the high-concentrated molten salt to improve the design of an electrochemical separation facility and provide information for safeguarding the facility [30].
Due to the harsh environment of experiments, such as high temperature, corrosion of molten salt, and radioactivity of elements, simulation method with Born-Mayer-Huggins [31] potential was applied in the study which has been successfully used to predict the structure, dynamic properties, and phase diagram of molten salt [32], [33], [34], [35]. The activity coefficients, apparent potentials and diffusion coefficients of lanthanum, yttrium, scandium and terbium in LiCl-KCl molten salt were calculated up to a high concentration of around 3 at% based on our previous simulation model [6] and their concentration dependence was investigated. Apparent potential was derived from the activity coefficient which was calculated by excess Gibbs free energy obtained by molecular dynamic (MD) simulations. After that, diffusivity could be obtained based on the relationship between activity coefficient and self-diffusivity which was also obtained by MD simulation. Based on the present simulations, the relationships between activity coefficient and material concentration were reported. The results indicate that the activity coefficient and apparent potential increase with mole fraction of the targeted ions while diffusion coefficient gives a trend of increase followed by decrease. Moreover, the comparison of diffusion coefficients at the temperatures of 723 K and 773 K of the same element as well as the comparison of activity coefficients of different elements at the same temperature were also discussed. This study offers us a compressive understanding of the thermodynamic properties of elements in LiCl-KCl molten salt corresponding to the practical range of component in pyroprocessing. It will benefit the optimization of the pyroprocessing system and help it to apply to industry scale from laboratory one.
2. Methodology and simulation details
The details of the simulation methodology were described by Zhou and Zhang [6]. Thermodynamically, the system of LiCl-KCl-RECl3 (RE = La, Y, Sc, Tb) can be treated as a homogeneous binary solution because the composition of LiCl-KCl does not change for all the calculations. Therefore, the total Gibbs free energy can be expressed by
@(1)
where μ1 and μ2 are the chemical potentials of the pure component 1 and 2, R is the gas constant, T is the temperature in kelvin,  n1and n2 are the mole numbers of these two components, x1 and x2 are the mole fractions of component γ1 and γ2 respectively,  and  are the activity coefficients of component 1 and 2 respectively.
For the ideal solution, the activity coefficient of every component is unit, so the total Gibbs free energy is simplified into
@(2)
Thus, the excess Gibbs free energy is
@(3)
With respect to the mole number, the partial derivative should be
@(4)
Hence, the activity coefficient  can be calculated by excess Gibbs free energy.
During the calculation process of Gideal and Greal, free energy of RECl3 in eutectic molten salt and pure RECl3 crystal can be calculated through thermodynamic integration [36] in our simulation. It should be noticed that no first-order phase transitions should be encountered along the integration path. In our study, we used the method of coupling parameters to decrease the interatomic potential of liquid to null potential which indicates final status of ideal gas through Gauss potential. The simulation was carried out in NVT ensemble, so the density keeps constant all the time. The final status is still kind of “liquid” but with an interatomic potential of zero. This method has been applied successfully to predict the phase diagram of KCl [37]. Also, we have checked the consistence of forward and backward integrations to make sure its reversibility. Fig. 1, Fig. 2 show an example of the results for LiCl-KCl molten salt at 773 K, which indicates results from backward and forward integration almost coincide. Therefore, we believe that the integration path we used for liquid is fine with avoiding first order transition. Crystal RECl3 was transferred to Einstein crystal to obtain its Gibbs energy. Because of similarity of start and final statuses, there should not be first order transition as well.
Fig. 1. Transformation from potential of LiCl-KCl to Gauss potential at 773 K.
Fig. 2. Transformation of Gauss potential to null potential at 773 K.
For the calculation of self-diffusion coefficient, it is related to the mean squared displacement (MSD) by Ref. [38], [39].
@(5)
where Ds is the self-diffusion coefficient, t is time. MSD is determined by Ref. [39].
@(6)
where p(t) is the position at the time of t and p0 is the initial position, N is the atom number,nt  is the time origins number, t0j is the initial timestep at time j. However, what we need is the chemical diffusion coefficient, also called diffusivity, it can be expressed by Ref. [40].
@(7)
where Dc is the chemical diffusion coefficient,γ  is activity coefficient and x is mole fraction.
As for the simulation details, molecular dynamics simulation and thermodynamic integration [36] were used in this research. For the free energy calculation, solution was transferred to ideal gas through Gauss potential while crystal was transferred to Einstein crystal [6]. All of our simulations were run with molecular dynamics software LAMMPS [41], [42]. The potential we used is the Born-Mayer-Huggins potential which has been widely employed in recent studies [37], [43], [44], [45] for thermodynamic modelling and has successfully predicted structure, phase diagram, diffusion coefficient, and other properties of halides and also RECl3 system. Parameters used are listed in Table 1.
Table 1. The Born-Mayer-Huggins potential parameters used in the simulation [1].
For the calculation of the Gibbs free energy of molten LiCl-KCl at the temperatures of 773 K and 723 K, 400 Cl−, 232 Li+ and 168 K+ was performed firstly. Then, in order to realize calculating Gibbs free energy of RECl3 in the molten LiCl-KCl with different concentrations, 1–6 RECl3 were added to 116 Li+, 84 K+ and 200 Cl- system separately. With regard to the calculation of Gibbs free energy of eutectic LiCl-KCl and LiCl-KCl-RECl3, initial configurations with the temperatures of 773 K, 723 K and pressure of 1 bar were set respectively. The simulations were firstly equilibrated in an NVE ensemble for 10,000 steps, an NVT ensemble for 100,000 steps and then an NPT ensemble for 200,000 steps. During the equilibrium process, the temperature was adjusted from 800 K to 773 K and 723 K respectively for the sake of making simulation results more smooth and correct. Average volume of the system was obtained by averaging the volume dumped by the 200,000 steps in the NPT ensemble and then used to calculate the free energy in the NVT ensemble at the temperatures of 773 K and 723 K respectively. 10-point Gauss-Legendre quadrature was chosen as λ (coupling parameter of potential transformation) in the process of calculating the free energy by thermodynamic integration method and 2000,000 steps were set in NVT ensemble for every λ. The Gauss potential parameters α and ξ used in the simulations were chosen as 21.453 eV and 0.72 Å separately [46]. The time step of all of all simulations was 1 fs.
In order to calculate the Gibbs free energy of RECl3, the lattice should be defined firstly. The initial configuration is made under the case of no atoms losing during the simulation process. The unit cells and initial configuration of RECl3 is given in Table 2 [47]. During the process of system equilibrium, the temperature of 800 K and pressure of 1 bar were set as the initial state, then the system ran 10,000 steps in the NVE ensemble, 100,000 steps in the NVT ensemble to adjust the temperature from 800 K to 773 K and 723 K respectively and 500,000 steps in NPT ensemble to obtain the average volume which was used to calculate free energy after that. Thermodynamic integration of adiabatic switching [48] are used in the calculation of free energy, we ran 50,000 steps to equilibrate the system at  λ=0 and 100,000 steps to vary  from 0 to 1.
Table 2. Unit cells and initial configuration of RECl3.
For the calculation of the diffusion coefficient, we used LAMMPS to track the trajectory of RE3+ at different time and then used it to get the result of MSD. 1160 Li+, 840 K+ and 2000 Cl- were used in the initial configuration and then 10, 15, 20, 25 30, 35, 40, 45, 50, 55 and 60 RECl3 were added to the systems respectively to perform the calculations of diffusion coefficients at different concentrations. The simulations were initially ran in NVE ensemble for 50,000 steps and then 500,000 steps in NPT ensemble and 500,000 steps in NVT ensemble eventually. The positions were dumped every 1000 steps in NVT ensemble for 200,000 steps totally and the time step was 1 fs.
3. Results
The Gibbs free energy for the real solution can be obtained directly from the simulation while that for the ideal solution can be got from equation (2), where Gibbs free energy of supercooled RECl3 ( in Equation (2)) and pure LiCl-KCl molten salt ( in Equation (2)) should be calculated firstly through the simulation. Since at temperatures of 723 K/773 K and one atmosphere pressure, the physical status of LaCl3, YCl3, ScCl3 and TbCl3 are all crystal, we need to transfer the Gibbs free energy of crystal RECl3 to the supercooled RECl3, which can be realized by
@(8)
where Gcrystal,RE is the Gibbs free energy for crystal RECl3, ΔGfusion,RE is the Gibbs free energy of fusion for RECl3 and it can be expressed by
@(9)
where ΔGsc,REcl3 and ΔGsc,REcl3 are Gibbs free energy of formation for the supercooled and crystal status of species RECl3 respectively, which are shown in Table 3.
Table 3. Gibbs free energy of formation for supercooled and crystal RECl3.
3.1. Lanthanum
Based on our modelling, the total Gibbs free energy for the ideal solution and real solution, excess Gibbs free energy and molar excess Gibbs free energy of the system of LiCl-KCl-n LaCl3 (the component of LiCl-KCl-n LaCl3 stands for n LaCl3 were added to 116 Li+, 84 K+ and 200 Cl- system) are obtained respectively, these values are presented in Table 4.
Table 4. The results of total Gibbs free energy for ideal solution and real solution, excess Gibbs free energy and molar excess Gibbs free energy of LiCl-KCl-LaCl3 mixture.
In Table 4, xLa is the mole fraction of LaCl3 in the solution and Gexcess is the molar excess Gibbs free energy. Then the data of mole fraction xLa and molar excess Gibbs free energy Gexcess were used to fit a curve by Margules model [54] which has been verified by many experimental data [55]. Since the value of Gexcess is 0 when xLa=0, so this data point was also used to fit the curve to make the result be more accurate, the fitting result is shown in Fig. 3. It can be seen the fitting result is quite well and then the activity coefficient can be calculated by
@(10)
where xRE is the mole fraction of specie RE. The calculated results can be seen in Fig. 4.
Fig. 3. The fitting curve of molar excess Gibbs free energy to mole fraction of LaCl3 in the solution.
Fig. 4. Activity coefficient of LaCl3 in eutectic molten salt at the temperatures of 723 K and 773 K.
Fig. 4 presents our calculated results of activity coefficients of La3+ at different concentrations for the temperatures of 723 K and 773 K. It should be noted that the values of Gibbs free energy of fusion are a little different in different literature [49], [50], [52] and it has an influence on the calculated activity coefficients. So the imprecision on the values of Gibbs free energy of fusion will result in a small error in our results. Also, the comparisons of activity coefficients in other literature [11], [58] are based on the same order of magnitude. It should be thought the comparisons are acceptable if the calculated activity coefficients of RECl3 in molten salt and literature values are in the same order of magnitude. It can be seen the comparison in Table 5 with other literature at low concentration shows our work agrees quite well with that from others.
Table 5. Comparison between calculated activity coefficients of LaCl3 and literature values.
Once the activity coefficients have been obtained, apparent standard potential can be calculated by
@(11)
where E is the apparent standard reduction potential of RE3+/RE in eutectic molten salt. F is Faraday constant. Fig. 5 presents the calculated results of apparent standard potential at the temperatures of 723 K and 773 K. The comparison in Table 6 indicates that our calculated apparent standard potential agree well with other literature values.
Fig. 5. Apparent standard potential of LaCl3 at the temperatures of 723 K and 773 K.
Table 6. Comparison between the calculated apparent standard potential of LaCl3 and literature values.
The self-diffusion coefficients and chemical diffusion coefficients at the temperatures of 723 K and 773 K with different mole fractions were also calculated in the present study through the method of MD simulation. The relationship between diffusion coefficient and mole fraction is shown in Fig. 6. The comparison between calculated chemical diffusion coefficients and literature values which can be seen in Table 7 indicates our calculated results agree well with previous studies.
Fig. 6. Self-diffusion coefficient and chemical diffusion coefficient of LaCl3 at the temperatures of 723 K and 773 K.
Table 7. Comparison between the calculated chemical diffusion coefficient of LaCl3 and literature values.
3.2. Yttrium
For yttrium, the total Gibbs free energy for the ideal solution and real solution, excess Gibbs free energy and molar excess Gibbs free energy are given in Table 8.
Table 8. The results of total Gibbs free energy for ideal solution and real solution, excess Gibbs free energy and molar excess Gibbs free energy of LiCl-KCl-YCl3 mixture.
The data of mole fraction and molar excess Gibbs free energy were used to fit a curve which can be seen in Fig. 7 and the activity coefficients were also calculated by Equation (10), the plot of activity coefficients with mole fractions is shown in Fig. 8. The results of our calculated activity coefficients of YCl3 are compared with other literature, it can be seen from Table 9 our work agrees quite well with others.
Fig. 7. The fitting curve of molar excess Gibbs free energy to mole fraction of YCl3 in the solution.
Fig. 8. Activity coefficient of YCl3 in eutectic molten salt at the temperatures of 723 K and 773 K.
Table 9. Comparison between calculated activity coefficients of YCl3 and literature values.
Apparent standard potential of YCl3 can be obtained through equation (11) after the value of activity coefficient has been calculated. What Fig. 9 shows is the relationship between apparent standard potential and YCl3 mole fraction. The calculated apparent standard potential was compared with other literature in Table 10 and it can be seen our calculated result is quite reasonable.
Fig. 9. Apparent standard potential of YCl3 at the temperatures of 723 K and 773 K.
Table 10. Comparison between the calculated apparent standard potential of YCl3 and literature values.
Just as what Fig. 10 shows, self-diffusion coefficients and chemical diffusion coefficients were also calculated with different mole fractions of YCl3 at the temperatures of 723 K and 773 K. The comparison in Table 11 shows our calculated chemical diffusion coefficients agree well with other literature values.
Fig. 10. Self-diffusion coefficient and chemical diffusion coefficient of YCl3 at the temperatures of 723 K and 773 K.
Table 11. Comparison between calculated chemical diffusion coefficients of YCl3 and literature values.
3.3. Scandium
For ScCl3, the Gibbs free energy for the ideal solution and real solution, excess Gibbs free energy and molar excess Gibbs free energy of the systems of LiCl-KCl-n ScCl3 are presented in Table 12.
Table 12. The results of total Gibbs free energy for ideal solution and real solution, excess Gibbs free energy and molar excess Gibbs free energy of LiCl-KCl-ScCl3 mixture.
The curve fitted by these data of mole fraction of ScCl3 and molar excess Gibbs free energy is shown in Fig. 11 and it can be seen the fitting result is quite good. Fig. 12 shows the values of activity coefficients of ScCl3 at different concentrations for the temperatures of 723 K and 773 K. The calculated activity coefficients of ScCl3 were compared with other literature in Table 13 and present a good agreement.
Fig. 11. The fitting curve of molar excess Gibbs free energy to mole fraction of ScCl3 in the solution.
Fig. 12. Activity coefficient of ScCl3 in eutectic molten salt at the temperatures of 723 K and 773 K.
Table 13. Comparison between the calculated activity coefficients of ScCl3 and literature values.
Fig. 13 presents that apparent standard potential of ScCl3 increases with the mole fraction at the temperatures of 723 K and 773 K and Table 14 shows that our calculated results of ScCl3 are quite reasonable when comparing with other literature values.
Fig. 13. Apparent standard potential of ScCl3 at the temperatures of 723 K and 773 K.
Table 14. Comparison between the calculated apparent standard potential of ScCl3 and literature values.
The calculated chemical diffusion coefficients and self-diffusion coefficients of ScCl3 were also obtained and shown in Fig. 14. The comparisons in Table 15 show our calculated results are consistent with other literature values.
Fig. 14. Self-diffusion coefficient and chemical diffusion coefficient of ScCl3 at the temperatures of 723 K and 773 K.
Table 15. Comparison between the calculated chemical diffusion coefficients and literature values.
3.4. Terbium
For TbCl3, the total Gibbs free energy for the ideal solution and real solution, excess Gibbs free energy and molar excess Gibbs free energy are shown in Table 16.
Table 16. The results of total Gibbs free energy for ideal solution and real solution, excess Gibbs free energy and molar excess Gibbs free energy of LiCl-KCl-TbCl3 mixture.
The fitting curves of the excess Gibbs free energy as a function of the mole fraction are given in Fig. 15. It shows the fitting result is pretty well. What Fig. 16 shows are the values of activity coefficients of TbCl3 at different mole fractions for the temperatures of 723 K and 773 K (see Table 17).
Fig. 15. The fitting curve of molar excess Gibbs free energy to mole fraction of TbCl3 in the solution.
Fig. 16. Activity coefficient of TbCl3 in eutectic molten salt at the temperature of 723 K and 773 K.
Table 17. Comparison between the calculated activity coefficients of TbCl3 and literature values.
As Fig. 17 shows, the apparent standard potential of TbCl3 at different concentrations were calculated and shown. The comparisons with the literature values are presented in Table 18 and it can be seen our calculated apparent standard potential is quite good.
Fig. 17. Apparent standard potential of TbCl3 at the temperatures of 723 K and 773 K.
Table 18. Comparison between the calculated apparent standard potential of TbCl3 and literature values.
The chemical diffusion coefficients and self-diffusion coefficients of TbCl3 at several different mole fractions were calculated and shown in Fig. 18. The comparison results are shown in Table 19, it can be seen that our calculated chemical diffusion coefficients agree quite well with other literature values.
Fig. 18. Self-diffusion coefficient and chemical diffusion coefficient of TbCl3 at the temperatures of 723 K and 773 K.
Table 19. Comparison between the calculated chemical diffusion coefficients of TbCl3 and literature values.
Refer all the results above, a bunch of new features of these thermodynamic data are established, particularly in terms of the concentration. Fig. 4, Fig. 8, Fig. 12, Fig. 16 show that the activity coefficients of RE3+ increase with the mole fraction. The value could increase by 3–40 times from dilution to 3at%. The increase rate in low concentration is slow while it is relatively larger at high concentration. This phenomenon may be due to the structure transition with the concentration. Excess Gibbs energy or the activity coefficient in an A-B binary system is because of the differences of interaction between A-A, A-B, and B-B pairs [65], [66]. Thus they are sensitive to the atoms’ surrounding neighbors. At the pretty dilute solution, solute’s neighbor change little with new solute added however the effect could be significant when the concentration is higher but not too high. It also should be noticed the values of activity coefficients of Y3+, Sc3+ at the temperature of 773 K are larger than that at the temperature of 723 K, however, the values of activity coefficients of La3+ at the temperature of 723 K are larger, which is consistent with the fitting equation reported in the temperature range of 650 K–870 K [11]. The most interesting thing is the activity coefficient of Tb3+ at 773 K is larger than that at 723 K for low mole fraction while the activity coefficient at 723 K is larger when the mole fraction is higher than around 0.0235. Some structure changes may happen here and more investigation and studies are needed to fully understand it. As the concentration of RECl3 is relative high at the beginning and then decrease because of the deposition of RE on the solid electrode in the real pyroprocessing, the investigation of activity coefficients at different concentrations will contribute greatly in the future industry development for pyroprocessing.
Apparent standard potential of La3+, Y3+, Sc3+ and Tb3+ with mole fraction are shown in Fig. 5, Fig. 9, Fig. 13, Fig. 17, it can be seen that the apparent standard potential of RE3+ increase with the mole fraction and the apparent standard potential at the temperature 773 K is a little larger than that at the temperature of 723 K even for the Tb3+. But the difference among the apparent standard potential at different concentrations is really small while it is pretty large for activity coefficient.
From what Fig. 6, Fig. 10, Fig. 14, Fig. 18 presents, there is no solid dependence but only some fluctuations found about self-diffusion coefficients with respect to concentration. While it should be noticed that the Chemical diffusion coefficients show dependence on the mole fractions and it seems like that with the increase of mole fraction of RECl3, chemical diffusion coefficients of RECl3 increase initially and then decrease even though in a limited range. Moreover, our calculated results show that the chemical diffusion coefficients and self-diffusion coefficients of RECl3 at 773 K are larger than that at the temperature of 723 K.
4. Discussion
As mentioned above, researchers mainly focus on the investigation of thermodynamic properties at dilution. Generally, correlations are only reported in terms of temperature [11], which are the values applied in model development as well [13], [14]. This paper provides a pretty comprehensive insight to the concentration dependence of basic thermodynamic data for the RE in melt, which was rarely reported before. These findings will complicate the calculation in application but may result in more accurate results. For example, without considering the over potential, potential of a solid electrode when RE3+ deposits on it can be expressed by Nernst equation
@(12)
When the mole fraction of RE3+ decreases with deposition, the potential should also decrease following a linear relationship with In xRE3+ according to previous study. However, now it is known that potential will have a larger decreasing rate due to the change of activity coefficient. The distribution factor derived from the potential will also be affected by the property. Additionally, the diffusion equation is no longer a linear one because of the concentration dependence of diffusion coefficient, which can be stood for by the distance at non-homogeneous solution. These modifications will predict the performance and output of pyroprocessing more accurately and guide the design of pyroprocessing device.
5. Summary and conclusion
In the present paper, thermodynamic and transport properties of Lanthanum, Yttrium, Scandium, and Terbium were investigated by the method of molecular dynamics simulation. The calculation of activity coefficients, apparent standard potentials and diffusion coefficients at different concentrations and temperatures can help us identify the effects of concentration and temperature on thermodynamic properties. The comparison between our calculated results and literature values indicates our modelling has a relative high accuracy. This study contributes significantly to the investigation of thermodynamic properties since all of these properties are calculated at different concentrations while most of other available studies are focused on the dilution.
It was found that the activity coefficient and apparent standard potential strongly depend on the element concentration and the relationships between them are positive correlations. However, it seems that the chemical diffusion coefficients are slightly depend on the concentrations although it increases for lower concentrations and then decreases slightly when the concentration of RECl3 in eutectic molten salt is high enough. The interesting result is that there is no big change in the self-diffusion coefficient with the increase of concentration and it almost keeps stable.
Temperature also plays an important role in the thermodynamic properties of Lanthanum, Yttrium, Scandium and Terbium in eutectic molten salt. This result is same to the previous experimental measurements for diluted molten salt. However, the effects of temperature on the activity coefficient can be different for different elements and the same element at different concentrations. This study indicates that activity coefficients of Y3+ and Sc3+ at the temperature of 773 K are larger than that at the temperature of 723 K while La3+ appears in the opposite way. It should be noticed that activity coefficient of Tb3+ at 773 K is larger than that at 723 K for a low mole fractions while the activity coefficient at 723 K is larger when the mole fraction is higher than around 0.0235. The apparent standard potential at 773 K is less negative than that at temperature of 773 K for La3+, Y3+, Sc3+ and Tb3+. Our calculated results also indicate diffusion coefficient at 773 K is larger than that at 723 K although there are some points which do not satisfy. The activity coefficients of these four different elements are also compared which can be seen in Fig. 19, Fig. 20, it shows activity coefficient of LaCl3 is the largest while that of ScCl3 is the smallest.
Fig. 19. Activity coefficients of LaCl3, TbCl3, YCl3 and ScCl3 in eutectic molten salt at the temperature of 773 K.
Fig. 20. Activity coefficients of LaCl3, TbCl3, YCl3, ScCl3 in eutectic molten salt at the temperature of 723 K.
The present study is a pioneering work focusing on the concentration dependence of thermodynamic properties. It fills the gap between the existing data for only dilution and practical demand for high concentration solution. These findings will push us to reconsider the equations and correlations established before and help to optimize the electrorefining device.
Acknowledgements
This research has been performed using funding received from the DOE Office of Nuclear Energy’s Nuclear Energy University Programs (Project 13–4908 and Project 14-6489), and is supported in part by an allocation of computing time from the Ohio Supercomputer Center.
