<title>Deformation behavior of recrystallized and stress-relieved Zircaloy-4 fuel cladding under biaxial stress conditions</title>
<author> Takeshi Mihara; Yutaka Udagawa; Masaki Amaya</author>
<Affiliation>Japan Atomic Energy Agency , Ibaraki , Japan</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2017.1383213</DOI>
<URL>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/00223131.2017.1383213</URL>
ABSTRACT
Pellet–cladding mechanical interaction (PCMI) under reactivity-initiated accident conditions may lead to the failure of high-burnup fuel rods. Biaxial stress states generated by PCMI in Zircaloy cladding may make the cladding more susceptible to failure. In this study, we investigated the deformation behavior of Zircaloy cladding under biaxial stress conditions based on the concept of contours of equal plastic work. The major axis angles of the initial work contours of recrystallized (RX) and stress-relieved (SR) specimens were investigated and it was found that the shapes of the initial work contours of these kinds of specimens were almost symmetric across the direction where the ratio of axial stress to circumferential stress is 1. The shapes of subsequent work contours tended to change for the RX specimen while being the same as the initial for the SR specimen, as deformation proceeded. It was suggested that the textures and slip systems in the RX and SR specimens affect their initial work contours while the slip system in the RX specimens and the residual strain in the SR specimens influence the subsequent work contours.
KEYWORDS: RIA;LWR-type reactor;PCMI;fuel cladding;Zircaloy;biaxial stress;deformation;biaxial tensile testing;work contour;anisotropy
1. Introduction
A reactivity-initiated accident (RIA) is a nuclear reactor accident that involves a rapid increase in reactor power, leading possibly to failure of the nuclear fuel rods and release of radioactive materials. There are many experimental studies on fuel behavior in a light water reactor (LWR) during RIA [1–5]. These studies have revealed that high burnup fuel rods may fail owing to the loading caused by pellet–cladding mechanical interaction (PCMI) under RIA conditions. Since the gap between pellet and cladding tends to be closed under normal operation and the bonding between the pellet and the cladding becomes significant at high burnup, the expansion of pellets in high burnup fuel rod under a RIA may result in the generation of axial stress as well as circumferential stress in the cladding tube: a biaxial stress state may be induced in the high burnup fuel cladding. However, there have been few reports about the influence of biaxial stress on the deformation and failure of cladding tube.
Various mechanical tests have been conducted to address fuel cladding failure behavior [6]. Burst testing is a pressure-controlled loading test in which the biaxial stress state is induced with a stress ratio of 0.5 (the stress ratio is defined as a ratio of axial stress to circumferential stress, in this paper). Ring tensile testing and expansion-due-to-compression (EDC) testing usually induce a stress state with a stress ratio of 0. While a stress ratio which would be generated in the cladding tube under a RIA condition has been estimated to be 0.7–0.8 on average at the mid-wall of the cladding by using computer simulation [7], it seems difficult to reproduce this state of stress ratio by using the above-mentioned conventional mechanical testing methods. Recently, a testing machine that allows for control of the stress ratio has been developed [8] and modified for applying to cladding tube [9] so that the states of stress ratio under RIA conditions can be simulated.
Biaxial tensile testing facilitates the evaluation of mechanical properties under various biaxial stress conditions, especially for materials with anisotropic crystal structure and orientation. The cladding tube used in LWRs is made of Zirconium-based alloy, e.g. Zircaloy, which has the hexagonal close-packed (HCP) crystal structure, and the tube often has preferred distribution of crystallographic orientations. Since mechanical testing studies of Zircaloy sheets have revealed that the fracture strains of the sheets decrease with increasing a degree of biaxial stress condition, e.g. stress biaxiality [10,11], it is probable that the state of biaxial stress significantly influences the fracture limit of Zircaloy cladding tube.
A number of experimental studies have focused on investigating the anisotropy of the yield locus of Zirconium alloys under biaxial stress states. In terms of Zircaloy cladding tube, its anisotropy of the yield locus has been investigated [10,12,13]. When points of the yield locus of material are derived, mechanical properties of the material under biaxial stress states becomes able to be determined as the properties equivalent to those under the uniaxial and biaxial stress states. In the case of anisotropic material, while its mechanical properties should be evaluated considering the anisotropy in the material, isotropic strains were used for determining the equivalent property and changes in material state during deformation under biaxial stress condition were not sufficiently expressed [10]. To evaluate deformation behaviors such as yielding and subsequent work-hardening characteristics accurately, the concept of equal plastic work contours was proposed [14,15].
In this study, the anisotropy in the deformation behaviors of recrystallized (RX) and stress-relieved (SR) Zircaloy cladding tubes is investigated under biaxial stress conditions by applying the above-mentioned concept of work contour, and the effect of the crystal orientation and residual strain in these cladding tubes on the anisotropy of deformation behavior is discussed.
2. Experimental procedure
Biaxial testing of cladding tube was performed under nine types of stress ratio conditions by using a biaxial tensile testing machine [8]. True stress–true strain curves were obtained to derive the aforementioned work contours.
2.1. Materials
The specimens used in this study were obtained from non-irradiated Zircaloy-4 cladding tubes which were produced using a commercial fabrication process for a PWR fuel cladding tube, and two kinds of final heat treatments were conducted to prepare tubes with RX and SR conditions. The outer and inner diameters of the specimen were 9.5 and 8.2 mm, respectively, and the length was 170 mm. Figure 1 shows the pole figures representing the textures of the RX and SR specimens. The basal pole peaks of the HCP structure for the RX and SR specimens were observed at ±15° and ±30° off from the surface normal along the circumferential direction, respectively. In the case of SR cladding tubes, the [101¯0] direction was parallel to the axial direction, and in case of the RX cladding, the [112¯0] direction was parallel to the axial direction.
Figure 1. Pole figures representing the textures of (a) RX and (b) SR specimens.
2.2. Mechanical test procedure
Figure 2 shows a schematic of the biaxial tensile testing machine used in this study. This testing machine is a modified type of the servo-controlled hydraulic tube bulge testing machine developed by Kuwabara et al. [8], and can apply axial tension and internal pressure to the specimen by an oil hydraulic cylinder and a booster, in addition to simultaneous axial loading. The axial tension and internal pressure are measured by a load cell and a pressure gauge, respectively. Strain gauges are attached onto the outer surface of specimen in both the axial and circumferential directions with an adhesive material. In this study, the range of measured strain was limited below approximately 0.2 owing to sensor specifications. Because the axial and circumferential stresses were calculated in real time according to the strains measured continuously during the test, true stress ratio in the specimen was kept as a desired value throughout the test, even when the specimen underwent large deformation. In this study, the influence of a bulge formed during the test was not taken into account because the bulge observed was negligible. Nine biaxial conditions were selected as stress ratios, α, of 0, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1, 1.33, 2, 4 and ∞. The test was performed at room temperature and repeated at least twice at each stress ratio condition.
Figure 2. Schematic of biaxial tensile testing machine used in this study.
2.3. Determination of work contour
Since it is considered that a concept of the contour of plastic work is useful for determining the yield locus of material, this concept is adopted in this study.
The process of the determination of work contour comprises the following three steps: (1) to obtain axial and circumferential true stress–true strain curves under uniaxial and biaxial stress states while maintaining a constant stress ratio, (2) to determine a stress condition equivalent to uniaxial and biaxial stress conditions, and (3) to obtain axial and circumferential stresses under the equivalent condition from the curves obtained from the test results under various stress ratio states. In this study, the equivalent condition was set to the plastic work which is an objective indicator of material response under biaxial stress condition.
According to the procedures shown in [14], work contours were determined as follows. The stress–strain curve obtained from a uniaxial tensile test along the axial direction of a tube is selected as the reference data of plastic work. A uniaxial true stress along the axial direction  σ0 and a plastic work per unit volume W0, which are associated with a particular value of offset true plastic strain along the axial direction, ϵp0, are determined. Biaxial true stress components (σx,σy) are determined so that the sum of their plastic work per unit volume is the same as W0. A uniaxial true stress in the circumferential direction σ90 is determined so that the its plastic work per unit volume is the same as W0. The stress points (σ0, 0), (0, σ90), and (σx, σy) which are plotted in a stress space form the plastic work contour with regard to ϵp0.
The same analysis procedures as those of Hill et al. [14] are adopted in this study. In the case of tube specimen, when the axial, circumferential and radial directions in the tube are labeled as 1, 2 and 3, respectively, the axial and circumferential components of stress (σ1 and σ2) are kept in a certain ratio during the test, and the radial component of stress (σ3) is considered to be negligible. Stress paths are expressed as follows by using polar coordinates (τ, θ):
σ1=τcosθ,σ2=τsinθ,(1)
where θ is the angle between a path of proportional loading and the σ1 direction. The expenditure of work is a primary constituent of our analysis of the experimental data. A differential work per unit volume of the material is given as follows:
dw=σ1dε1+σ2dε2,(2)
where ϵ1 and ϵ2 are the axial and circumferential components of true strain, respectively. We calculated scalar strains γ and τ by using the stress–strain data obtained from the axial and circumferential tensile tests. The value of γ is defined as follows:
γ=ε1cosθ+ε2sinθ.(3)
Equation (2) can be rewritten as follows by using Equations (1) and (3):
dw=τdγ.(4)
Equation (4) shows that γ is the work-conjugate to τ along a proportional path. It is noted that
τγ=σ1ε1+σ2ε2(5)
is derived from Equations (1) and (3). To apply this theoretical framework to the experimental data, we quantified the stress and strain by using the scalars τ and γ introduced in Equations (1) and (3) and used in the empirical analysis.
According to Hill et al. [14], it can be shown in any test that the dependence of τ on γ is empirically reproduced very closely by
τ/ξ=(1+γ/η)m,(5)
where ξ, η and m are parameters and functions of only θ. Equation (5) can be rewritten as
τ=κ(γ+η)m,（6)
where κ  = ξ/ηm . The relations between γ and τ were fitted using Equation (6) as follows. The sets of τ and γ were calculated by using the values of (σ1, σ2) and (ϵ1, ϵ2) recorded continuously during each test at a fixed θ, and then, all data were assembled in log(τ) versus log(γ + η) plots for a spaced set of η. The optimum trio of κ, η and m was determined from the fitting result in the linear range of the relationship between log(τ) and log(γ + η) by the least squares method: it is considered that artificial factors can substantially be removed from parameter determination by using this method. The values of κ, η and m enable w to be calculated as a function of τ by integrating Equation (6) regarding γ, and the plastic work w can be written as
w=(1+γ/η)(1+m)×ω,(7)
where
ω=ξη/(1+m).(8)
The stress points (σ0, 0), (0, σ90) and (σx, σy) were plotted in a stress space to ensure that the plastic work in biaxial test was the same as that in an uniaxial test along the axial direction for a particular value of ϵp0 and the set of the points was a component of the work contours.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. True stress–true strain relationships
Figure 3 shows the axial and circumferential true stress–true strain curves of the RX specimens for different stress ratios α. Here, the origins of the curves for α = 4, 2, 1.33, 0.75, 0.5, 0.25 and 0 are shifted 0.02, 0.04, 0.06, 0.08, 0.1, 0.12 and 0.14, respectively, from that for α = ∞ toward the horizontal axis in order to make it easy to distinguish these results.
Figure 3. True stress–true strain curves of RX specimen along axial and circumferential directions.
As seen in the figure, the axial and circumferential flow stresses vary depending on the stress ratio, and the yield stress, namely, the bending point of the curve, at α = 0 is higher than that at α = ∞. This is consistent with the results obtained in the previous study [12]: the texture of the specimen used in this study was similar to that of the specimen used in [12], regarding the tilt angle of the peak density of (0002) poles from radial direction. The axial or circumferential strain remains nearly zero at α = 0.75 or 1.33 with increasing stress, and the axial and circumferential yield stresses peak at α = 1.33, 1 and 1, 0.75, respectively. The deformation behaviors at α = 1 and 0.75 are also similar to that obtained in the previous study [12]. The deformation behavior seems to be symmetrical against the direction of α = 1 to some extent. The relationship between the axial and circumferential stresses to strain for each stress ratio was qualitatively the same as that in the previous study [12]. However, the yield stresses are lower than the values reported in the previous study, especially the yield stresses at α = 1 of this study and that of the previous study were approximately 500 and 680 MPa, respectively. This difference may be due to the difference in residual strains in the specimens used in the two studies which came from specimen fabrication processes.
Figure 4 shows the axial and circumferential true stress–true strain curves of the SR specimens for different stress ratios. As shown in this figure, the axial and circumferential flow stresses vary depending on the stress ratios, and the axial and the circumferential strains are nearly zero at α = 0.75 and 1.33, which is the same as the results obtained using the RX specimens. The axial and the circumferential yield stresses peak at α = 1.33 and 0.75. As shown in Figures 2 and 3, the yield stresses of the RX specimens are lower than those of the SR specimens as it is well known that the RX material is easier to deform than the SR.
Figure 4. True stress–true strain curves of SR specimen along axial and circumferential directions.
3.2. Work contour
Using the results shown in Figures 3 and 4, parameters κ, η and m in Equation (6) were determined. Figure 5 shows the parameters κ, η, and m in Equation (6) as functions of stress ratio for the RX and SR specimens. These figures show that all parameters vary with the stress ratio α. The values of κ of the RX specimens are nearly the same as those of the SR specimens. By contrast, the values of hardening factor m of the RX specimens are ∼2.6 times larger than those of the SR specimens for all stress ratios, which means that work-hardening behaviors of the RX and SR specimens are different.
Figure 5. Parameters κ, η, and m in Equation (6) as functions of stress ratio α for RX and SR specimens.
Figures 6(a) and 7(a) plot the stress points used for defining the work contours on the proportional path for ϵp0 = 0, 0.002, 0.005, 0.01, 0.02, 0.05, and 0.1 for the RX and SR specimens, respectively. In the case of the RX specimens, the shape of the work contour at ϵp0 = 0.002 is similar to the yield locus obtained at an effective strain of 0.002 in [12], and the shapes of the subsequent work contours were drastically smaller than those obtained in the previous study [12]. This may be due to the difference in the sort of stress used in the experiment and/or evaluation, i.e. true stress or nominal stress: stress and strain were calculated without any feedback in the form of strains measured during the test in the previous study [12] and that is why the variation might become greater with increasing the amount of deformation.
Figure 6. (a) Plastic work contours of RX specimen. (b) Plastic work contours of RX specimen normalized by σc0 which correspond to ϵp0.
Figure 7. (a) Plastic work contours of SR specimen. (b) Plastic work contours of SR specimen normalized by σc0 which correspond to ϵp0.
The values estimated by the Von Mises function that passes through the stress point of ϵp0 = 0 obtained in the uniaxial tensile test are shown as the dotted lines in Figures 6(a) and 7(a) for comparison. If the material was ideally isotropic, the experimental results for ϵp0 = 0.002 should show the trend similar to the dotted curve. The difference between the experimental results and the dotted curve corresponds to the anisotropy in the mechanical property of specimen. Compared with the dotted curve, the work contours tend to elongate in the direction of the stress ratio direction for α = 1 to 0.75 in the case of the RX specimen and for α =1.33 to 1 in the case of the SR specimen. This indicates that the elongation directions of work contours for the RX specimen are the similar to those of the yield loci of Zircaloy [10,12,13] and those of work contours for Titanium [16], and the RX and SR specimens have different anisotropic properties regarding the yield locus and work hardening.
Figures 6(b) and 7(b) show the contours of plastic work normalized by σc0 for the RX and SR specimens, respectively. Here, σc0 is the circumferential stress in the uniaxial test along the circumferential axis which corresponds to ϵp0. In Figure 6(b), it can be seen that the change in the shapes of work contours and the increase in axial flow stress are greater than those in circumferential stress in case of the RX specimen, as deformation proceeds. By contrast, as seen in Figure 7(b), shapes of work contours seem to be the same as the initial irrespective of the amount of deformation in the case of the SR specimen.
In order to investigate quantitatively the effect of final heat treatment of specimen at fabrication on the work contours, the yield function for anisotropic material proposed by Hill [17] was used for fitting the stress points shown in Figure 5. When the cylindrical coordinates are applied and the radial stress generated in the thin wall of cladding tube is neglected, the following formula is obtained:
F(σθ−σz)2+Gσ2z+Hσ2θ=f,
(9)
where F, G and H are the anisotropic constants; and f, a constant. Substituting the nine datasets in the work contour obtained under the biaxial stress conditions, we determined the anisotropic constants by fitting the datasets to Equation (9) by using the least squares method. The plastic strain ratios Ra (= F/G) and Rc (= F/H) were derived using the obtained constants.
Table 1 summarizes the plastic strain ratios of the RX and SR specimens. The plastic strain ratios Ra and Rc represent the resistivities against deformation of cladding tube in the axial and circumferential directions, respectively. As seen in Table 1(a), in the case of the RX specimens, Ra is larger than Rc. This suggests that the RX specimen have better deformation resistivity in the axial direction than that in the circumferential direction, and this result is consistent with the results reported in [10,12]. As deformation proceeds, the difference between Ra and Rc tends to become smaller for the RX specimens, which indicates that the anisotropy in the mechanical properties of the RX specimens diminishes. Contrary to the RX specimen, the value of Ra is smaller than that of Rc in the SR specimen, and this implies that the deformation resistivity of the SR specimen is lower in the axial direction than in the circumferential direction. In the case of the SR specimens, since the values of Ra and Rc hardly change as deformation proceeds, it is considered that the anisotropy in mechanical properties of the SR specimens is not affected by deformation.
Table 1. Plastic strain ratios Ra and Rc of (a) RX and (b) SR specimens (ϵp0: plastic strain in uniaxial test toward axial direction).
The results of the RX specimens of which texture was similar to that of the specimens used in this study were reported in [10], and the results are also shown in Table 1(a). A comparison between the results obtained in this study and those in [10] shows that Ra and Rc are different at ϵp0 = 0.002 and 0.02 while similar at ϵp0 = 0.01. In order to derive the yield locus, quantities under biaxial stress states equivalent to those under the uniaxial stress state need to be determined. However, the isotropic plastic strains obtained from the Von Mises criterion were used in [10] for determining the equivalent condition. This means that material anisotropy was not taken into account when determining the yield locus. Accordingly, it is probable that the values of Ra and Rc at ϵp0 = 0.002 in [10] contains the errors which are derived from the selection of isotropic plastic strains as the equivalent condition. Since the evaluation of the subsequent yield locus is also dependent on how the equivalent condition is determined, the difference between the data obtained in this study and those reported in [10] may become more significant as deformation proceeds. It should be noted that the differences in the specimen fabrication processes employed in this study and the previous study may also affect the shapes of the resulting yield loci.
In Table 1(a), the data reported in [12] are also shown. The difference between our data and those in [12] is quite large. However, little information about the derivation of the anisotropic constants was provided in [12], and the reason of this large discrepancy is not clear at present.
3.3. Equivalent stress–true strain relationships
Independent of the stress ratio, the anisotropic yield function shown as Equation (9) holds for any given values of equivalent stress which are defined by
σ¯=22RθRz+Rθ+Rz−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−√×{Rθ(1+Rz)α2−2RθRzα+Rz(1+Rθ)}−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−√⋅σθ,
(10)
where Rθ = dϵθ/dϵr = F/H  and Rz = dϵz/dϵr = F/G . Since the values of Rθ and Rz of the RX specimens varied with the amount of deformation, these ratios were calculated at ϵp0 = 0.002, 0.005, 0.01 and 0.02, and then they were interpolated.
The equivalent strain of the specimen is defined as
ε¯=2RθRz+Rθ+Rz2RθRz(1+Rθ+Rz)−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−√×[Rz(1+Rθ)ε2z+2RθRzεθεz+Rθ(1+Rz)ε2θ]−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−√.
(11)
Equivalent offset true strains were defined as the equivalent true strains calculated from the axial and circumferential strains for each η determined in 2.3, and they ranged between 0.02 and 0.03. The equivalent plastic strain was calculated as the value that removed the equivalent offset strain from the equivalent true strain.
Figure 8(a,b) shows the relationships between equivalent stress and equivalent plastic strain in the range of α from 0 to ∞ for the RX and SR specimens, respectively. It should be noted that the curves calculated using a yield function agree with each other if the yield function is appropriate. Since good agreement can be seen between the lines in these figures, the yield function (here, Hill's yield function and the Hill's anisotropic parameters obtained in this study were used) seems to be appropriate.
Figure 8. Equivalent stress–equivalent plastic strain relationships for (a) RX and (b) SR specimens.
The relationships between equivalent stress and equivalent plastic strain can be expressed as σ¯=850(0.01+ε¯)0.15 and σ¯=950(0.025+ε¯)0.07 for the RX and SR specimens, respectively.
3.4. Influence of final heat treatment at fabrication of cladding tube on the trend of work contour
Regarding the work contours, two kinds of difference were seen between the RX and SR specimens. One is the difference in the initial work contour elongated more in the axial direction than in the circumferential, and the other is the difference in shape change in the subsequent work contours. Concerning the former, the characteristics in the shape of the initial work contours was investigated. Table 2 compares the major axis angles of the ellipses of the work contours shown in Figures 6(a) and 7(a). The major axis angles of the initial work contours of the RX and SR specimens rotate by −4.74° and 4.76° against the direction of α = 1, respectively. This indicates that shapes of the initial work contours of the RX and SR specimens are symmetric across the line of α = 1. In terms of the latter, while the shapes of subsequent work contours changed for the RX specimens as deformation proceeded, the shapes hardly changed from the initial for the SR specimen.
Table 2. Elliptical major axis angle of work contours of RX and SR specimens along stress ratio direction α = 1 for ϵp0 = 0, 0.002, 0.01, and 0.02.
The difference in the initial work contour is that the initial work contours of RX and SR show symmetry across the stress axis of α = 1. It seems reasonable to assume that these differences are caused by material properties such as texture, structure, and deformation system. The cladding material has the HCP structure and the texture of cladding shows the [0001] direction of the HCP structure is tilted along the radial toward the circumferential direction of a tube, and especially, the [101¯0] direction is parallel to the axial direction for the SR specimens used in this study, as described in Section 2.1. This means that the HCP structure rotates about basal pole by 90° for the SR material compared to that for the RX material. Moreover, it is known that the critical resolved shear stresses of slip systems are lower than twinning, which means that the occurrence of twinning is more difficult than that of slip [18]. Accordingly, the symmetry observed in the initial work contours seems to be caused by symmetry of the slip direction.
The other difference is that as deformation proceeded, the shapes of subsequent work contours elongated more in the axial direction than in the circumferential for the RX specimens, but they were the same as the initial ones for the SR specimens. For the RX specimens, this result means the axial flow stress increased to a greater extent than the circumferential stress. The [112¯0] direction is parallel to the axial direction for the RX specimens used in this study, as described in Section 2.1, and all slip systems are activated along the ⟨112¯0⟩ direction [17], which means that the RX specimens is easier to deform in the axial direction than in the circumferential direction. Eventually, it is reasonable to suppose that this relationship contributes to the shape change of the subsequent work contours. The lack of shape change of the subsequent work contours of the SR specimens can possibly be ascribed to strain differences with the RX specimens. The magnitude of strain is larger in the SR specimens than that in the RX specimens, and this means that plastic deformation is hard to activate in the SR specimens. The previous study reported that in the case of the Zircaloy annealed at 755 K, the 0.5% offset yield stress toward the axial direction is similar to that toward the circumferential direction, and in the case of the Zircaloy annealed at 949 K, the 0.5% offset yield stress toward the axial direction is lower than that toward the circumferential direction [19]. This is consistent with the results obtained in Figures 6 and 7, which indicate that residual strain remaining after annealing at low annealing temperature 755 K could become less anisotropy of deformation of Zircaloy. Hence, the influence of deformation systems is thought to be reduced.
4. Conclusion
The deformation behavior of SR and RX Zircaloy-4 cladding tubes was investigated under biaxial stress states at room temperature using biaxial tensile testing machine with feedback from axial and circumferential strains measured continuously during the test. Using the work contours obtained from true stress–true strain curves, the deformation behavior, namely shape changes in the work contours, of these kinds of cladding tubes was analyzed by applying Hill's anisotropic yield function, and Hill's anisotropic parameters were determined for both SR and RX specimens. Deformation behavior of the SR specimen, which had hardly been reported previously, was obtained under biaxial conditions, and the effect of the final heat treatment of these specimens on the anisotropy of deformation behavior was investigated by comparing the shape changes in the work contours of the RX specimens with those of SR specimens.
The findings obtained in this study are summarized as follows:
The work contour of the RX specimen at the equivalent strain of 0.002 was consistent with the yield locus obtained at an effective strain of 0.002 in a previous study.
As deformation of specimens proceeded, while the change in the shape of the subsequent work contours from the initial one was seen in the RX specimen, such change was hardly seen in the SR specimen.
The major axis angles of the initial work contours of the RX and SR specimens found that the shapes of the initial work contours of these kinds of specimens were almost symmetric across the direction where the ratio of axial stress to circumferential stress is 1.
The comparison of the work contours of the RX and the SR specimens suggests that the initial work contour is associated with the texture and slip systems, and the subsequent work contours are associated with the slip system in the case of RX material and residual strain in the case of SR material.
Our study could provide the useful data of cladding tubes before rapid temperature increase during RIA conditions. In the case where it is needed to consider the cladding deformation behavior under high temperature conditions after rapid temperature increase, another model should be made with taking account of the effect of temperature on mechanical properties of cladding because the equations in this paper have been formulated based on the data obtained at room temperature.
In the case where the fuel failure behavior during a RIA is analyzed by using a computer code, the anisotropic mechanical properties of fuel cladding are indispensable. The data obtained in this study as the anisotropic parameters of the Hill's yield criterion are considered to be useful to perform fuel behavior analyses by computer codes and improve the accuracy of such kind of fuel behavior analysis.
Acknowledgments
A part of this study was conducted as the program sponsored and organized by Nuclear Regulation Authority, Japan (NRA). The authors would like to acknowledge the contributions of Mr S. Kikuchi and Mr Y. Fujisaku in performing the tests necessary for this study.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
