<title>A Complementary Study of the Chemical Behavior of Cesium Iodide in the Presence of Boron in the Condensed Phase (650°C and 400°C) Under Primary Circuit Conditions: Differential Thermal Analysis and Thermogravimetric Studies</title>
<author>Gouëllo; Hokkinen; Kärkelä; Auvinen</author>
<Affiliation>VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd ., P.O. Box 1000, FI-02044 VTT, Finland</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00295450.2018.1430463</DOI>
<URL>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00295450.2018.1430463?scroll=top&needAccess=true</URL>
Abstract
This work is a contribution to the work performed in a paper on the understanding of the chemical reactions between cesium iodide and boron oxide in condensed phase, under conditions close to the ones prevailing in the primary circuit of a nuclear power plant in case of a severe accident. The thermal degradation of samples made from cesium iodide or cesium iodide and boron oxide mixtures has been investigated using the techniques of thermogravimetric analysis and differential thermal analysis at temperatures from 20°C to 1000°C. The boron-to-cesium molar ratio in the investigated mixture was fixed at about the value of 5 (B/Cs = 5). Apart from the dehydration of boric acid, evidence is presented for the formation of a vitreous compound at 360°C to 420°C, depending on the atmosphere composition.
Carrier gas composition also seemed to influence the behavior of the precursor mixture. While under air and argon, the recorded thermograms are similar. In the presence of argon/water vapor, a specific behavior and difference on reactivity is noticed, due to the adsorption of water from the carrier gas at the beginning of the process. It was also pointed out that the addition of water or oxygen delayed the glass formation process.
Keywords: Boron;cesium iodide;thermogravimetric analysis, differential thermal analysis
I. INTRODUCTION
In the case of a severe accident in a light water reactor, understanding basic chemical and transport behavior of fission products and structural materials, especially of iodine, is an essential tool for the development of severe accident codes. For this purpose, a study of chemical behavior of cesium iodide (CsI) in the presence of boron in a condensed phase has been initiated at VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd. in order to gather data on the reactivity between these two compounds at 400°C and 650°C (Ref. 1). Experiments were performed in the EXSI-PC facility by vaporizing CsI and boron oxide (B2O3) mixed in an alumina (Al2O3) crucible under three carrier gas compositions. Results showed the reaction occurred between compounds by the observation of gaseous iodine and vitreous glass formation inside the crucible. However, the configuration of the EXSI-PC facility did not allow for determining the mechanism of the reaction and the temperature at which the reaction starts and glass is formed.
As a complementary study, thermal analyses of CsI powder and a CsI and B2O3 powders mixture [boron-to-cesium (B/Cs) = 5] were performed using a Mettler Toledo TGA/SDTA851e thermogravimetric analyzer and a differential thermal analyzer/differential scanning calorimeter. Thermogravimetry is a technique that measures the change in weight of a sample when it is heated, cooled, or maintained at constant temperature. Its main use is to characterize materials with regard to their composition. The physical changes in the sample that do not involve a change in mass but do involve a change in energy, such as a phase change, are captured in the differential thermogravimetry (DTG) curves. The first derivative of the TGA curve is the DTG curve.
Differential thermal analysis (DTA) and thermogravimetric (TG) studies of CsI and boric acid have been investigated by Bowsher and Nichols.2 The samples were heated from ambient temperature to 962°C, with a heating rate of 50°C/min. In addition to showing peaks identified with the melting and volatilization of CsI superimposed on the melting and dehydration of boric acid, the DTA/TG thermograms for an equimolar mixture of CsI and boric acid showed a small weight loss from 483°C to 632°C. This weight loss was interpreted as the advent of a reaction between the two components of the mixture. From this study, the authors concluded that the reaction was diffusion controlled.2
The objective of this work was to examine the thermal behavior of CsI powder and the CsI and B2O3 powders mixture in different carrier gas compositions and with the nonequimolar ratio [boron-to-cesium (B/Cs) = 5] by DTAs and thermogravimetric analyses (TGAs).
II. MATERIAL AND METHODS
II.A. Materials
The precursors simulating the fission products CsI and B2O3 were in the form of powder (CsI 99.9 wt% provided by SigmaAldrich® and B2O3 99 wt%, 40 mesh provided by AcrosOrganics®).
II.B. TGA/DTA Apparatus
Thermal analyses were performed using a Mettler TGA/SDTA851e thermogravimetric analyzer and a differential thermal analyzer/differential scanning calorimeter. The balance resolves to 1 µg.
II.C. ICP-MS Apparatus
The scrubber solutions were analyzed by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). The analyses were performed with a Thermo Fisher Scientific HR-ICP-MS Element2 apparatus.
II.D. Experimental
The temperature program applied in the tests was as follows:
isothermal phase at 25°C for 5 min
dynamic phase 25°C → 650°C, heating rate 2°C/min
isothermal phase at 650°C for 5 min
dynamic phase 650°C → 1000°C, heating rate 2°C/min.
The heating rate of 2°C/min was chosen according to the study of the revaporization of fission products from the primary circuit deposit samples of Phébus-FP experiments.3 A series of experiments in the EXSI-PC facility were performed at 650°C; therefore, an isothermal phase was chosen at this temperature. It also corresponds to a temperature at which CsI is in liquid phase (melting point is 621°C). The tests were performed in three different gas atmospheres with a similar flow rate:
air, 0.05 l/min
argon, 0.05 l/min
argon, 0.05 l/min, bubbled through water at room temperature.
The gas flow rate through the thermobalance cannot be higher than 0.2 l/min due to the limitations of the TGA. Therefore, it was decided to apply a flow rate corresponding to the same crucible area–to–flow rate ratio as in the experiments with the EXSI-PC facility,1 that is, 0.05 l/min. The evaporation crucibles were made of Al2O3 (purity 99.7%), as were the ones used in the EXSI-PC facility. The CsI/B2O3 mixture was prepared in such a way that the molar ratio of B/Cs was 5. For the three tests on the behavior of the CsI/B2O3 mixture, two sampling lines were added to the outlet of the thermogravimetric analyzer/differential thermal analyzer apparatus. One line was used for the sampling when the temperature was lower than 650°C, and the second one was used when the temperature reached 650°C, after the second phase. Because of the very low mass of material expected to be sampled, only a liquid trap and not filters was used. The main objective was to gather information concerning the elements released before the temperature reaches 650°C and after 650°C. The exhaust gases bubbled through alkaline trapping solution, which was then analyzed by ICP-MS. The experiments are presented in Table I. The thermobalance was appropriately standardized by running a thermograms on an empty crucible so as to correct for the air buoyance effect.
TABLE I List of the Tests Performed with TGAs and DTAs
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
III.A. Tests with CsI
The TG curves presented the same general trend in the tests with the CsI precursor. However, a mass loss was measured during the first isothermal phase of the TGA-1 test. This obviously resulted from the evaporation of free moisture in the sample. In addition, a mass gain was noticed for the TGA-2 test performed with water vapor during the first isothermal phase.
In the first dynamic phase of the TGA-1 test in argon atmosphere, three successive temperature regions with a related change in the sample mass were detected. The mass changes of the sample are presented in Table II.
TABLE II Mass Changes of the CsI Powder in the Thermal Analysis*
In the first temperature region, the sample mass was slightly increased. Because it was rather improbable that this was due to adsorption of nitrogen from the air or of argon, it was suspected to be an artifact. At about 529°C (512°C and 529°C, respectively, for argon/water vapor and air gas flows), the mass of the sample started to decrease due to evaporation of the compound. The rate of the mass loss accelerated at about 630°C (632°C and 628°C, respectively, for argon/water vapor and air gas flows). According to the DTA curve, this was in connection with the melting of the sample compound. The melting point of the compound was measured to be 629.2°C (621°C in the literature4; 629.2°C and 629.5 °C, respectively, for argon/water vapor and air gas flows).
During the isothermal phase at 650°C, the mass change was more noticeable under air atmosphere and was about twice the value obtained under Ar/H2O atmosphere. Although in the experiments performed in the EXSI-PC facility1 the carrier gas was composed with a mixture of argon and air (86.7 and 13.3 vol %) and not pure air as in the present test, the higher release of gaseous iodine was measured. This is then in agreement with the observations of the EXSI-PC experiments.
During the second dynamic phase, the mass of the sample continued to decrease. The TG and differential thermal curves of the test during the second dynamic phase are shown in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. TG and DTG curves of TGA-1; vaporization of CsI under argon atmosphere during the second dynamic phase.
In contrast to what was observed under dry argon and air gas flows, a mass gain was observed during the test with the addition of water vapor to argon flow, most probably resulting from the adsorption of water from the gas flow.
III.B. Tests with CsI/B2O3 Mixture
In the case of the CsI/B2O3 precursor mixture, the TG curves of tests carried out under argon and air atmospheres presented a similar general trend. However, the curves of the test performed under argon/water vapor atmosphere presented different behavior.
For the tests TGA-4 and TGA-6, the mass loss of the sample observed during the first isothermal phase most probably resulted from the evaporation of free moisture contained in the sample. During the first dynamic phase of tests TGA-4 and TGA-6, four successive temperature regions with a related change in the sample mass were detected. The mass changes of the sample are presented in Table III.
TABLE III Mass Changes of the CsI/B2O3 Mixture in the Thermal Analysis*
During the two first temperature regions of tests TGA-4 and TGA-6, endothermic reactions were observed. Afterward, further decrease of mass was registered. At 472°C, the mass of the sample began to decrease more rapidly, due to the evaporation of an unidentified compound. In addition, according to the differential thermal curves the behavior of the sample mixture was increasingly endothermic starting at about 366°C for TGA-4 and 417°C for TGA-6. Obviously, this was connected to the glass formation taking place in the sample. During the second dynamic phase, the mass of the sample continued to decrease.
In the test TGA-5, a mass gain was observed during the first isothermal phase of the temperature program, resulting from the adsorption of water from the carrier gas (Fig. 2). From 25°C to 650°C, four successive temperature regions with a related change in the sample mass were detected. In the first two temperature regions, endothermic reactions could be assigned to the evaporation of the water contained in the boron compound. At a higher temperature, a more complex decomposition was observed, which was composed of three separate subreactions, which are discussed in Sec. III.C. The reason for the complex behavior appeared to be the effect of water contained in the carrier gas. At about 470°C, the mass of the sample started to decrease more rapidly. In addition, according to the differential thermal curve the behavior of the sample mixture was increasingly endothermic starting at about 423°C, which was attributed to the glass formation taking place in the sample.
Fig. 2. TG and DTG curves of test TGA-5; vaporization of the CsI and B2O3 mixture under the argon/water vapor atmosphere during the first dynamic phase.
During the isothermal phase at 650°C, as observed while vaporizing CsI, the mass change was more noticeable under air atmosphere. However, the percentage of mass change was smaller than the one recorded while vaporizing the CsI/B2O3 mixture. The main mass changes during vaporization of the CsI/B2O3 mixture did not happen during the isothermal phase but from about 470°C to 650°C, after the glass formation.
During the second dynamic phase, the mass of the sample continued to decrease.
III.C. TGAs, DTAs, and Results from the ICP-MS Analysis
From the tests performed with CsI powder, it can be highlighted that the DTAs showed no energy content except for the melting of CsI around 630°C for the three conditions. Minor evaporation was observed before melting. During the heating-up phase, from 25°C to 650°C about 3% mass loss was recorded, independent of the gas composition and mainly due to evaporation close to when melting of the compound started at 630°C. From 650°C to 830°C, a large loss of mass was observed (more than 90%). About 2% remained in the crucible despite heating up to 1000°C, which raises a question on the purity of the CsI powder (99.9%, metal basis according to the manufacturer), its storage, and possibly the accuracy of the scale. The main difference when changing the gas composition was the higher mass gain observed at room temperature when water vapor was added to the carrier gas. Otherwise, the general behavior and differences in mass losses were comparable.
In the tests performed with CsI/B2O3 mixture, the DTAs showed several endothermic peaks. Phenomena causing changes in heating power or the heating temperature, in an endothermic way, can be physical (desorption, a change in crystal structure, melting, vaporization) or chemical (reduction, breakdown reactions). The probable explanation for the first endothermic peaks (<100°C) is that the B2O3 powder had contained crystal water and that the peaks occurred due to evaporation of this water. This is accentuated by the fact that the phenomenon was independent of the gas composition. Then, a particular behavior was noticed in the presence of water vapor. At temperatures higher than 134°C, a more complex decomposition was observed, which consisted of three separate subreactions. In the study of dehydration kinetics of boric acid powder from TG data, Sevim et al.5 identified two major endothermic peaks at 159°C and 181°C. The first one was attributed to the first dehydration of boric acid, and the second peak value was associated to the second dehydration and subsequent boiling of the sample. Parallel to this study, the following explanation on the observed peaks can be premised. At about 134°C, the formation of boron compound was suspected, resulting from the reaction of B2O3 and water (boric acid compound). Then, as observed in Sevim et al.’s work,5 the peaks at 156°C and 173°C can be associated with peaks at 159°C and 181°C. The following endothermic peak, accompanied with an important mass loss, revealed the glass formation. In this range of temperatures, the boric acid/oxide is molten and the CsI is solid (melting point of 621°C based on the literature4).
The gas composition had an influence on the process because of the difference in starting temperature (366°C for Ar, 423°C for Ar/H2O, and 417°C for air). The addition of water or oxygen appeared to delay the process. Although the total mass loss during the first dynamic phase was more important in Ar/H2O than in Ar (−21.86 wt% and −20.2 wt%, respectively), it was even lower in air (−18.8 wt%). Thus, the reaction under Ar/H2O gas flow was the most effective in releasing materials. The vapor pressure of the precursors depends on the gas composition; addition of steam may then increase the vapor pressure. This was supported by the ICP-MS results (Tables IV and V). It is worthy of notice that the signature of CsI melting, noticed during tests TGA-1 to TGA-3, was not observed around 630°C, the glass formation being the main phenomenon now. The glass continued to evaporate at increasing temperature. The total mass losses after the CsI/B2O3 tests (<25 wt%) were always lower than for the tests with CsI (>97.5 wt%), due to the formation of boron-containing glass in the crucible, which had a lower vapor pressure than CsI.
TABLE IV Evolution of the Iodine, Cesium, and Boron Release Rates During the First Dynamic Phase of Tests TGA-1, TGA-2, and TGA-3*
TABLE V Evolution of the Iodine, Cesium, and Boron Release Rates After the Second Dynamic Phase of Tests TGA-4, TGA-5, and TGA-6*
Complementary to the TG and differential thermal curves, the results of the ICP-MS analyses are presented in Tables IV and V.
The results are given as release rates in mole/minute because the sampling times were different (317.5 min for T < 650°C and 192.5 min for T > 650°C). The mass of elements released once the temperature had reached 650°C was higher than for the lower temperatures (10 to 100 times higher), which means that what was released during the heating-up phase in the EXSI-PC experiments was negligible. The measured boron molar flow rate released from the crucible was higher than the masses of iodine and cesium individually only when water was present in the carrier gas, most probably due to the formation of highly volatile boric acid, stimulated by water. This is in accordance with what was observed in the EXSI-PC experiments. However, it is difficult to explain why the molar ratios of cesium/iodine (Cs/I) were rather close to 1 in sampling bottles, above 650°C, whereas the mass of iodine on the filter and in the sampling bottles was always higher than the mass of cesium in the EXSI-PC experiments. One explanation could be that iodine was released from the crucible as a cesium-linked compound. Another possibility is that gaseous iodine, which is more reactive than CsI and was released in low mass, had reacted with some metal surface inside the device before reaching the bubbling solution. It is also probable that there was more revaporization of iodine from the surface deposits in EXSI-PC.
IV. CONCLUSIONS AND CONTRIBUTION TO THE ORIGINAL STUDY
This complementary study to the experiments performed with the EXSI-PC facility has contributed to the understanding of phenomena occurring inside the furnace, especially at the vaporization area (crucible). The tests by DTA and TGA provided the measurement of changes in physical and chemical properties of the precursors as a function of increasing temperature.
First, the DTA/TG thermogram showed the process of glass formation only starting from 415°C. Nevertheless, the EXSI-PC experiments1 performed at 400°C have shown the release of gaseous iodine from the crucible. Although it cannot be excluded that the temperature inside the EXSI-PC furnace was not homogeneous, and that an overheating of 15°C at the location of the crucible is possible, the release of gaseous iodine at this temperature is most probably due to the thermal decomposition of CsI and not because of a reaction between CsI and B2O3.
Next, the DTA/TG thermograms showed the release of water from heating the commercial B2O3 powder, even in pure argon. This corroborates the hypothesis stated in the conclusion of the original paper1 concerning the absorption of water by the hygroscopic B2O3 powder during the storage period before the experiment. As a consequence, the presence of a boric acid proportion at the beginning of the EXSI-PC experiment was highly probable and could have affected the reaction involved with CsI.
The obtained results also attested that the evaporation of precursor materials below 650°C is much lower than the evaporation of compounds above 650°C (less than 4% of the initial mass below 650°C). Consequently, the amount of released elements from the crucible during the heating-up phase of the EXSI-PC experiments is negligible.
This complementary study has confirmed the previous observations obtained with the EXSI-PC facility. The reaction between CsI and B2O3 started before 650°C, resulting in a formation of glass and a release of gaseous compound(s).
Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the Finnish Research Programme on Nuclear Power Plant Safety, SAFIR2018. The authors acknowledge the assistance of Pertti Koskinen (VTT Ltd.) in obtaining differential thermal and TG data.
