<title>Review of the microheterogeneous thoria‐urania fuel for micro‐sized high temperature reactors</title>
<author>V. Tkachenko; A. V. Ovcharov; M. B. Rozenkevich</author>
<Affiliation>Mendeleyev University of Chemical Technology of Russia , IMSEN-IFH, Miusskaya sq., 9, 125047 Moscow , Russia</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Fusion Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.13182/FST16-130</DOI>
<URL>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.13182/FST16-130</URL>
Abstract
Vapor phase catalytic exchange is an important part of many hydrogen isotope separation processes. Some industrial hydrogen isotope separation processes are performed in a wide deuterium concentration range. The performance of catalysts in hydrogen-water vapor exchange reaction in the upper deuterium concentration limit is poorly investigated. The paper presents results of an investigation of catalytic activity of three catalyst types at the upper and lower limits of the deuterium concentration range. All catalyst experimental rate constants in protium-deuterium exchange demonstrated a tendency to increase with the growth of deuterium concentration. Experimental rate constants of catalysts in protium-tritium and deuterium-tritium exchange were found to remain constant. In this work the authors propose a method to be used for catalyst performance evaluation to obtain catalyst performance data for liquid phase catalytic exchange process models.
Keywords:Hydrogen isotopes;catalytic isotope exchange;low and high deuterium concentration
I. Introduction
Isotope exchange between liquid water and hydrogen or liquid phase catalytic exchange (LPCE) is the core process for several currently used and developed hydrogen isotope separation methods, e.g., combined industrially reformed hydrogen and catalytic exchange (CIRCE), combined electrolysis and catalytic exchange (CECE), and bithermal heavy water (BHW) processes. The LPCE process includes two stages: phase isotope exchange between liquid water and water vapor, and catalytic isotope exchange [called vapor phase catalytic exchange (VPCE)] between water vapor and hydrogen. The latter process has significantly larger separation factors for both deuterium and tritium exchange and, hence, represents higher interest for additional investigations than phase isotope exchange.
Applications of LPCE-based separation methods comprise heavy water conditioning by removing protium accumulated in it, light water detritiation, and tritium removal (detritiation) of deuterium containing water with concentrations of deuterium varying from the natural level to 100 at. % of D. However, these methods are never used to concentrate tritium to high concentrations due to the water self-radiolysis process and relative instability of hydrophobic catalysts in highly concentrated tritiated water. Consequently, tritium concentration in all practical cases remains relatively low, below 1000 Ci/kg, which corresponds to 0.03 at. % of T in H2O. Catalytic exchange rates of hydrogen isotopes are considered to depend on the deuterium concentration, so knowledge of VPCE kinetics (including tritium exchange) over a wide range of deuterium concentrations is important for designing new hydrogen separation plants.
Several different mathematical models/computer codes for the simulation of the LPCE process have been developed.1–5 All of them involve more or less identical constants for isotopic exchange reactions, or separation factors, in the gas phase based on the work of Urey6 or later work of Bron et al.7 Separation factors for the phase isotopic exchange are normally based on the equilibrium pressure of different isotopic species of water.8 Phase isotopic exchange is considered a mass transfer process; consequently, the differences in its rate for different isotopologues of water can be traced to the differences in their diffusion coefficients raised to the power from 0.67 to 0.5 depending on the limiting phase, gas and liquid, respectively. Consequently, there is little difference in the rate of phase isotopic exchange for water isotopologues. Thus, the principal source of any differences between the existing LPCE models lies in their description of the VPCE process that is a gas phase catalytic reaction of isotopic exchange with very high separation factors that demonstrate strong dependence on deuterium concentration and temperature. Basically, the difference in the description of the VPCE process is the main reason for the discrepancies in simulation results among all existing models/codes.
Most of the isotope exchange reactions between two substances can be characterized using a simple formal kinetics of isotopic concentrations change. If the exchanging isotope concentration is close to 100 at. %, the isotope concentration changes follow a simple first-order kinetics law regardless of the reaction intrinsic mechanism and reaction order by the substances (e.g., water vapor and hydrogen).9 If the concentrations of isotopes are comparable, then the apparent isotopic kinetics of the reaction is defined by the intrinsic reaction mechanism considering all potential diffusion limitations, and usually, it does not follow the simple first-order kinetics law of isotopic exchange. This means that the simple exponential kinetics law is guaranteed to be observed only for low deuterium and tritium concentrations in H2O-H2 exchange and low protium and tritium concentrations in D2O-D2 exchange. Consequently, experimental evaluation of the gas phase reaction rate at the two concentration limits of deuterium at certain temperature and total pressure conditions will lead to first-order isotopic concentration kinetics, and such experimental results can be processed using the simple first-order law of isotopic exchange reaction. Thus, characterization of VPCE/LPCE catalyst performance at lower and upper deuterium concentration limits is not complicated experimentally, and processing of the obtained experimental data is simple and does not depend on the type of catalyst and does not make use of any LPCE model/code for the processing of results.
The results of such experimental characterization are values of observed experimental rate constant kex (in inverse seconds). All codes for the simulation of the LPCE process should predict the simple first-order law isotopic concentration kinetics at the limits of the deuterium concentration range; consequently, at the limits there is always a direct way to obtain kinetic parameters used internally by any LPCE model from the observed experimental rate constants. Naturally, the catalyst performance in the case of comparable deuterium and protium concentrations will depend on the detailed intrinsic kinetics, which is usually not known, and may vary for different catalysts. Different models of the LPCE process will also lead to different deviations from the first-order isotopic kinetics at comparable H and D concentrations. Therefore, in order to compare simulation results obtained with different models/codes and/or demonstrate the applicability of a model/code for an actual hydrophobic catalyst, one should compare how each model extrapolates H-D and T exchange rates from low deuterium concentrations to high deuterium concentrations. Then, differences in the intermediate region of comparable H and D concentrations can be compared.
For model/code comparison, the first stage in this approach is to set VPCE rate parameters at a given temperature and total pressure in two models to values resulting in identical observed experimental rate constants kex obtained from isotopic concentration profiles in a VPCE reactor calculated with the models/codes at low D concentration limit. Then, both models/codes calculate isotopic composition profiles in high D concentration limit at the same temperature and pressure, and observed experimental rate constants are compared. The scale of the observed differences will provide a qualitative measure of the actual differences between the LPCE column models at a given temperature and total pressure because as described above, the differences in VPCE stage kinetic models are the principal source of all discrepancies between all LPCE/CECE process models.
When used to check the applicability of a model/code for a particular type of catalyst, observed experimental rate constants kex should be measured experimentally for both T and D exchange in a single-pass VPCE reactor at both limits of D concentration at given temperature and pressure. Then, the ability of the model/code to predict the experimentally observed differences between high and low D concentration rate constants should be estimated using a model of a VPCE reactor and at the same time comparing the model prediction with the experimental results at the limits of the deuterium concentration range.
There are plenty of papers published investigating VPCE catalyst performance, but most of them describe experiments carried out in a low deuterium concentration range with or without trace amounts of tritium. A previously presented paper10 provides results of a single experiment made at both concentration limits of deuterium and only for deuterium-protium exchange.
This work describes experiments carried out to evaluate the performance of the three most common types of LPCE catalysts in both low and high deuterium concentration ranges for H-D, H-T, and D-T isotope couples.
II. Experimental
II.A. Materials
Three types of catalysts were selected for investigation as the most frequently used hydrophobic VPCE catalysts.11 The first type was platinum deposited on hydrophobic styrene-divinylbenzene copolymer support (Pt/SDBC). The second was platinum over active charcoal made hydrophobic by addition of polytetrafluoroethylene (Pt/C-PTFE). The last type was platinum deposited on alumina (Pt/Al2O3) made hydrophobic with silicone.
All gases used for the experiments were high purity (>99.99% chemical purity). Deuterium gas contained 99.9 at. % of deuterium. Tritium was present in substances only in trace amounts.
II.B. Experimental Setup and Procedure
Figure 1 is a schematic of the experimental setup.
Fig. 1. Schematic of experimental setup (1: gas flow controller; 2: hydrogen pre-saturator; 3: hydrogen saturator; 4: co-current reactor; 5: condenser; 6, 7: silica gel dryers; 8: hydrogen burner).
Before and after the experiment, all vessels and pipelines were purged for 15 min with a flow of nitrogen of 40 ℓ/h in order to remove oxygen or hydrogen to avoid oxidation of hydrogen on the catalyst. The investigated catalyst was loaded onto the stainless steel–jacketed reactor with an inner diameter of 21 mm. Below and above the catalyst, a 10-cm-high layer of spiral-prismatic packing (SPP, Levin's Packing, or HELIPAK) was placed to distribute gas flow and to prevent the catalyst from floating. Hydrogen or deuterium flow from the gas cylinder was controlled by an Alicat gas flow controller. Dry gas passed two consequently mounted saturators filled with SPP. The first saturator made of glass was operated under temperature higher than the required saturation temperature. Through a short uninsulated pipeline, gas passed to the bottom of the second stainless steel saturator. The second saturator operated under slightly lower temperature than the temperature in the catalytic reactor. The temperature had been adjusted so that the relative humidity of the gas in the reactor was ∼90%. The second saturator was directly connected to the reactor to avoid condensation in the pipelines. Humid gas passed to the reactor, where catalytic isotope exchange took place. The gas mixture from the reactor passed to the condenser to separate water from hydrogen. The remaining water vapor was removed from the gas stream by two consequentially connected silica gel dryers. The gas dew point after the dryers was measured by IVTM-7 (gas temperature and microhumidity meter) and always remained lower than 200 K (−73°C). Dry gas passed to the quartz flame burner, where it was oxidized by dry air or pure oxygen. Samples of condensate from the condenser and from the burner were measured for deuterium and tritium content.
Samples for measurement were collected only after a 45-min delay from the start of the experiment to allow all holdups in the experimental setup to accumulate and the isotope concentration to stabilize.
In almost all the experiments (except the Pt/SDBC experiment with high deuterium concentration), hydrogen and deuterium were burned with dry air since a pure hydrogen-oxygen flame caused contamination of samples by tiny particles of quartz from the nozzle. Preliminary experiments showed that there was no significant dilution of samples by atmospheric air.
Concentrations of isotopes in the initial substances were obtained from the blank experiments without catalyst. All conditions were the same as in the actual experiment, and the concentrations in the final samples were measured and considered as initial data for the following experiments.
Temperatures were measured at the second saturator outlet and at the reactor outlet using L-type thermocouples placed in chambers in the core of the gas stream. The reactor was operated at a temperature of 334 K in all experiments.
Blank experiments showed that the deuterium content in samples of water produced by condensation or hydrogen combusting in air can be measured using densitometry without previous sample purification. However, samples produced by combusting hydrogen in pure oxygen contained a significant quantity of impurities restricting densitometry analysis without sample purification. Experiments with heavy water distillation showed that the samples were significantly diluted by atmospheric air while distilling, introducing huge errors in the concentration measuring process. Therefore, combustion in all further experiments was carried out using dry air instead of pure oxygen.
The deuterium content in the water samples was analyzed using an Anton Paar DMA 5000 M densitometer. The deuterium content in the quartz-contaminated samples was measured with atomic emission spectroscopy using a DFS-8-3 diffraction spectrophotometer (1800 lines per mm of diffraction lattice). The tritium content in the samples was measured with a PerkinElmer Tri-Carb 2810 TR liquid scintillation analyzer using Ultima Gold scintillation liquid and single-use polyethylene vials. The count time for each sample was 5 min.
The main difference between the experiments performed was the amount of deuterium in the hydrogen feed, which allowed determination of the rate constant values at the deuterium concentration limits. The gas input and G:Z ratio also slightly varied in all experiments. The amount of catalyst used remained the same in the experiments with one catalyst type. Other parameters including temperature in the reactor remained constant. The scope of the experiments is presented in Table I.
TABLE I Experimental Conditions
II.C. Calculation of Catalyst Performance
The measured concentration data included the initial deuterium and tritium contents in hydrogen and water vapor and those after the catalyst layer. The balance equation for the exchange reaction is
@(1)
where
λ
= G:Z = molar flow ratio
z, y
= heavy isotope (D or T) concentrations (atomic fraction) in vapor and gas, respectively
0
= index that corresponds to initial concentration
∞
= index that corresponds to equilibrium (i.e., on catalyst with infinite activity or after infinite-length layer of catalyst) concentration.
As mentioned above, isotope concentration changes can be described using the quasi-first-order kinetics law, while the atomic fraction of one of the exchanging isotopes is close to unity. The observed experimental rate constant kex can be calculated as
@(2)
where
τ
= residence time, calculated to superficial reactor cross section
F
=  = exchange factor that characterizes proximity of achieved change of concentrations to maximum achievable change in isotope concentrations
τ
= index that corresponds to concentration after catalyst layer.
The exchange factor calculated from the experimental data slightly differs for water vapor and hydrogen because of unavoidable inaccuracies in the experimental techniques. Therefore, the kex values were calculated for both substances, and the mean value was considered in further calculations. Below, index z will be used to show that value was calculated using isotope concentrations measured in vapor and y to show that in hydrogen.
Equilibrium in the isotope exchange system can be described by separation factor α:
(3)
Separation factors were calculated for the ideal gas phase using partition ratios from the work of Bron et al.7 Combining and simplifying Eqs. (1) and (3), one obtains the following square equation:
@(4)
where and One root of Eq. (4) is physically meaningless, and the other gives the value of the equilibrium concentration of heavy isotopes in vapor. Since tritium was present in substances only in very low concentrations, the simplified equation for separation factor α = z∞/y∞ can be applied to tritium equilibrium concentration calculation. Substitution of that equation into the material balance Eq. (1) gives
@(5)
Equations (2) and (5) described above are valid for any catalyst at the limits of the D concentration range due to the first-order rate expression of isotopic exchange kinetics.
Any relation between experimental rate constants kex measured at the limits of the D concentration range can be obtained only on the basis of some kinetic model. The most popular model for the isotopic exchange kinetics between simple molecules containing equivalent exchangeable atoms (H2, H2O, NH3, H2S, etc.) has been the following expression for the second-order reversible reaction published by Bunton et al.12 and independently by Varshavski and Vaisberg13:
@(6)
This kinetic equation was later applied by Trokhimez to heterogeneously catalyzed isotopic exchange processes. In experiments with catalytic exchange between C2H4 and C3H6 with ∼100% D2 on Pt/Al2O3 catalyst, he demonstrated that it holds in such conditions.14
Experiments done by Kemball demonstrated that isotopic exchange between NH3 and D2 on metal films is proceeding via atom-by-atom substitutions and observed kinetics can be described with Eq. (6) (Ref. 15).
Integration of the equation for low heavy isotope concentration (H-D, H-T, and D-T exchange) gives the following result:
@(7)
where
CW
= concentration of water vapor calculated to full catalyst bed volume (mol/m3)
CH
= concentration of hydrogen calculated to full catalyst bed volume (mol/m3).
In the case of high heavy isotope concentration (D-H exchange), integration gives
@(8)
Equations (7) and (8) are valid for all catalysts, but this does not mean that , and overall, Eq. (6) holds over the whole concentration range of deuterium.
Combining equations with the kex equation, one could obtain equations for exchange rate calculation from the observed experimental rate constant. The equation for the low heavy isotope concentration range, including trace T exchange at both high and low D concentration limits, is
@(9)
where Q is for D or T.
For the very high heavy isotope concentration case, i.e., for protium trace exchange in the deuterium environment, the equation is
@(10)
If Eq. (6) holds over the whole range of D concentration, we can expect  to be approximately equal to .
III. Experimental Results and Discussion
Experiments showing the repeatability of results obtained using the presented method were carried out with Pt/SDBC catalyst in the low deuterium concentration range. The experimental results are presented in Table II. As some material balance discrepancy was present in the experimental data, two values of the experimental rate constant for each experiment were calculated. These values were based on the exchange factor for hydrogen and for water vapor, respectively. Initially, three independent experiments with different hydrogen flow rates have been performed. The experimental results are repeated within 15% accuracy. Hence, the following experiments were carried out in a single repetition.
TABLE II Experimental Rate Constant kex Values for Pt/SDBC Catalyst at Low Deuterium Concentration Limit*
The experimental results for protium-deuterium exchange are presented in Table III, and the experimental results for protium-tritium and deuterium-tritium exchange are presented in Table IV. The , , and  values were calculated from kex according to Eq. (9) and  according to Eq. (10).
TABLE III Experimental Rate Constant kexD and Exchange Rate  for Protium-Deuterium Exchange
TABLE IV Experimental Rate Constant kexT and Exchange Rate  for Protium-Tritium and Deuterium-Tritium Exchange
Data presented in Table IV show that initial exchange rate  at the high deuterium concentration limit is approximately two times lower than the  values at the lower limit, while the experimental rate constant values remain constant. At the same time, the difference between the  and  values and the kex values for different deuterium concentrations depends on the catalyst type (Table III).
As stated, for example, in the work of Lynggaard et al., the microkinetic mechanism of reaction cannot be obtained directly from macrokinetic data only.16 However, on the basis of the analysis presented in previous work, some assumptions could be made.10 The observed H-D isotopic exchange behavior of Pt/SDBC and Pt/Al2O3 seems to be close to the homogeneous bimolecular exchange reaction. This could be explained by one of two mechanisms:
Reaction takes place mainly on the surface of the catalyst or in the pores nearest to the surface, and there is no external diffusional limitation that can disguise the second-order kinetics of Eq. (6).
There is a low reaction rate in pores. This case means that reaction in the pores of the catalyst is so slow that there is almost no concentration drop across the catalyst bead, and again, second-order kinetics of Eq. (6) is observed experimentally.
The Pt/C-PTFE catalyst demonstrates a different behavior in protium-deuterium exchange. This concentration dependence of the exchange rate could be explained by a fast reaction in pores that causes a sharp drop of the reactant concentration across the bead of catalyst.
As tritium was always a trace component in the investigated cases, the tritium exchange can be described using simple first-order kinetics in all cases. The obtained values of  are 1.8 to 2.4 times lower in the high D concentration limit. On the other hand, experimental rate constants kex are relatively close at both D concentration limits; consequently, the approach to equilibrium in a layer of a catalyst in a LPCE column will be approximately the same for T trace exchange in protium and deuterium environments.
IV. Conclusion
The protium-deuterium, protium-tritium, and deuterium-tritium exchange reactions between hydrogen and water vapor were investigated at the temperature of 334 K and under atmospheric pressure with different catalyst types. The catalysts used were platinum deposited on hydrophobic or hydrophobisated carriers: SDBC, C-PTFE, and Al2O3.
The deuterium exchange reaction rate for the Pt/Al2O3 and Pt/SDBC catalysts slightly decreases (by 20%) when going to a high D concentration from a low D concentration while Pt/C-PTFE demonstrates a 1.64 times lower exchange rate in the upper deuterium concentration limit.
It was found that different catalysts demonstrate different apparent protium-deuterium exchange rate constant dependence on deuterium concentration that can be attributed to different limiting stages of the reaction on the catalysts. The reasons of such difference between catalysts cannot be deduced from the existing data and are a matter for further investigation.
The ratio between experimental rate constants kex for protium-deuterium exchange on Pt/SDBC catalyst in the high and low deuterium concentration limits obtained in this work is 1.73, which is in reasonable agreement with the value of 1.65 obtained earlier.8
Tritium experimental exchange rate constants kex seem to remain constant or slightly decrease for all the investigated catalysts; however, the exchange reaction rate tends to fall twofold or more when going from a low to a high D concentration environment.
The experimental method described allows evaluating the performance of any VPCE catalyst. The method is not based on any LPCE or VPCE model and only involves simple quasi-first-order equations. We assume that data obtained by the method described could be used as input for LPCE process models and propose this method for the evaluation of performance of batches of VPCE catalysts before loading them into the LPCE separation column.
NOMENCLATURE
CW
= concentration of water vapor in the reactor (mol/m3)
CH
= concentration of hydrogen gas in the reactor (mol/m3)
F
= exchange factor
G
= hydrogen gas flow rate (mol/s)
kDy
= experimental rate constant, calculated based on deuterium concentration in hydrogen gas (s−1)
kDz
= experimental rate constant, calculated based on deuterium concentration in water vapor (s−1)
kex
= experimental rate constant (s−1)
kexD
= experimental rate constant for protium-deuterium exchange (s−1)
kexT
= experimental rate constant for protium-tritium or deuterium-tritium exchange (s−1)
kTy
= experimental rate constant, calculated based on tritium concentration in hydrogen, gas (s−1)
kTz
= experimental rate constant, calculated based on tritium concentration in water vapor (s−1)
nA
= concentration of one of reacting species (mol/m3)
= initial exchange rate in forward direction (mol/m3 · s)
= initial exchange rate in forward direction for protium-deuterium exchange at high deuterium concentration (mol/m3 · s)
= initial exchange rate in forward direction for deuterium-tritium exchange (mol/m3 · s)
= initial exchange rate in forward direction for protium-deuterium exchange at low deuterium concentration (mol/m3 · s)
= initial exchange rate in forward direction for protium-tritium exchange (mol/m3 · s)
VCat
= volume of catalyst in reactor
y
= concentration of heavy isotope in hydrogen gas
y0
= concentration of heavy isotope in hydrogen gas at the inlet of the reactor
y∞
= equilibrium concentration of heavy isotope in hydrogen gas
Z
= water vapor flow rate (mol/s)
z
= concentration of heavy isotope in water vapor
z0
= concentration of heavy isotope in water vapor at the inlet of the reactor
z∞
= equilibrium concentration of heavy isotope in water vapor
Greek
α
= separation factor
λ
= molar flow ratio
τ
= residence time (s)
