<title>Improvement of an Experimental Routine for Electrochemical Composition Measurements of SmCl3 in LiCl-KCl Eutectic Salt Systems</title>
<author>Andrews Hunter; Phongikaroon Supathorn</author>
<Affiliation>Virginia Commonwealth University, Department of Mechanical and Nuclear Engineering, Richmond, Virginia 23284</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00295450.2019.1670009</DOI>
<URL>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00295450.2019.1670009?scroll=top&needAccess=true</URL>
Abstract
Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was used to study SmCl3 at concentrations of 0.42 to 8.99 wt% in molten eutectic LiCl-KCl (44.2:55.8 wt%) at 773 K. For each sample, CV was repeated at different electrode surface areas to measure the peak current density. By analyzing the measured peak current density and concentration relationship with the Randles-Sevcik equation, the Sm(III) diffusivity for each sample was calculated. These diffusion coefficients ranged from 0.934 × 10−5 to 1.572 × 10−5 cm2‧s−1, showing no noticeable trend with a change in concentration. The samples were then divided into two groups of five. The first group was used to develop a calibration model for concentration prediction, while the second group was used to test and validate the model. The first model was based on the relationship between current density and concentration. This model had a very low limit of detection of 0.14 wt% and very low error as evaluated by the root-mean-square error of calibration of 0.108 wt%. The second model was a multivariate approach utilizing the current density values and laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) intensities as regressors; however, the introduction of LIBS data showed an increase in the model’s prediction error when compared to the first model. The electrode withdrawal method proved to be a preferable option due to a substantial increase in precision.
Keywords: Cyclic voltammetry；electrode withdrawal method；SmCl3；pyroprocessing；concentration estimation
I. INTRODUCTION
Pyroprocessing utilizes an electrorefining procedure to recover U on a solid cathode and co-recover U and Pu in a liquid Cd cathode. Currently, the electrorefiner salt is monitored through the use of inductively coupled plasma mass spectroscopy (ICP-MS); however, this introduces a lag time between sampling and analysis. In our previous work, the combined use of laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS) and electrochemical techniques were tested to determine a viable method for replacing the current process monitoring.1 LIBS involves focusing a pulsed high energy laser onto a sample, creating a plasma plume from the sample’s ablated surface.2 As this plasma cools down, an elemental spectrum is generated from the elements returning to their ground state. This spectrum can be collected via fiber optics and analyzed to determine the composition of the sample. SmCl3–LiCl-KCl salt samples were used to generate calibration models for the LIBS system. Results from that study indicated that these models had low limits of detection (LODs) ranging from 0.510 to 0.593 wt% SmCl3 and high coefficients of determination ranging from 0.972 to 0.975 (Ref. 1). These LIBS calibration models proved to estimate the concentration of SmCl3 in the salt samples well compared to ICP-MS analysis.
The second method of salt composition analysis exploited the relationship between salt concentration, cathodic peak current, and scan rate as described by the Randles-Sevcik equation. This involved using a calibration set of samples to determine the diffusivities of Sm(III) and Sm(II) to be used with the equations when testing later samples. This method resulted in concentration values that aligned well with ICP-MS results; however, the method was dependent on the measurement of the working electrode surface area. That is, each surface area was manually measured using calipers, introducing human error into the calculation. Furthermore, manual measurement of the working electrode would not be possible for implementation on the electrorefining system.
The above concern becomes the motivation for this study to further investigate the use of an electrode withdrawal system, as recommended in our previous work.1 The technique has been used by several researchers, notably by the work of Tylka et al.,3,4 Rappleye et al.,5 and Castrillejo et al.,6 to either determine the electrode’s depth or as a detection method. The main advantage of this technique is the use of a translator that can provide an accurate measurement in place of a hand-measured surface area. This method involves performing a cyclic voltammogram and changing the working electrode immersion depth by a known amount before performing another cyclic voltammogram. This process is repeated while maintaining all other factors (e.g., scan rate) constant. The resulting cathodic peak currents can be plotted against the relative immersion area to determine the salt’s current density, represented by the slope. The samples in this study were previously used for LIBS calibration, but no electrochemical testing was done. This study utilized these SmCl3 samples to be able to compare the withdrawal method to the LIBS results from the previous study and to further investigate the feasibility of a combined model.1 Furthermore, the similarity between the soluble/soluble nature of the Sm(III)-Sm(II) reaction and the U(IV)-U(III) reaction make it of interest as a surrogate salt for future applications.
II. EXPERIMENTAL
All experiments were performed in a high-purity argon glove box with oxygen and water levels maintained less than 5 parts per million. All electrochemical experiments were heated in a modified ThermoScientific muffle furnace and conducted with a Bio-Logic VSP-300 potentiostat.
All experimental preparation was done in the procedure standard for molten salt systems.1,7 Before samples were mixed, the alumina crucibles were ultrasonically cleaned with 2 vol % HNO3 acid for 1 h. The crucibles were then removed and rinsed with ultrapure water before being dried at 773 K for a minimum of 24 h to eliminate any impurities. The eutectic salt was prepared by mixing LiCl (99.95%, Alfa Aesar) and KCl (99.95%, Alf Aesar) and adding to a crucible to form 20 g of the LiCl-KCl eutectic salt (58.2:41.8 mol %, 44.2:55.8 wt%). The crucible containing the salt was then lowered into a secondary alumina crucible and placed in the furnace to be dried at 523 K for a minimum of 5 h to remove any residual moisture in the salt. Then, the furnace temperature was elevated to 773 K for a minimum of 5 h to fully melt the salt. The salt was then allowed to freeze before adding a specific amount of SmCl3 (99.95%, Alfa Aesar) to form each experimental sample. Then, these samples underwent the same drying and melting procedures as previously discussed.
For the electrochemical testing, a thermocouple enclosed in an alumina sheath was oriented so that its tip was submerged in the salt to monitor the sample temperature. A 1 mol % Ag/AgCl reference electrode was used. The reference was prepared by contacting a 1-mm Ag wire to 1 mol % AgCl in LiCl-KCl eutectic salt located in a 7-mm Pyrex tube. This custom Pyrex tube was designed so that the thickness at the tip is thin enough to permit ionic conduction. A 3-mm-diameter glassy carbon rod was used as the counter electrode while a 2-mm-diameter tungsten rod was used as the working electrode. This setup is similar to the electrode holder from our previous study; however, in this study the tungsten working electrode was secured to a vertical translator located above the furnace, as shown in Fig. 1, to allow precise changes in the electrode depth.1
Fig. 1. Vertical translator for working electrode immersion depth adjustments.
Prior to electrochemical testing, the working electrode was lowered until it contacted the bottom of the crucible and then raised approximately 2.54 mm. This was the starting position for the working electrode withdrawal experiments. Next, four cyclic voltammograms were performed at a scan rate of 150 mV−1. The working electrode was then raised a recorded amount via the translator, and the cyclic voltammetry (CV) procedure was repeated. The electrode depth continued to be changed until a minimum of seven depths was recorded, corresponding to a total travel length of 1.524 cm.
After the electrochemical testing, a salt ingot was formed by drawing molten salt into a 4-mm-diameter Pyrex tube by applying a vacuum via a syringe. The Pyrex tube was then removed from the furnace allowing the salt in the tube to quickly freeze into a cylindrical ingot. While these ingots were mainly used for LIBS testing, a small portion of these salt ingots was taken to be used for ICP-MS verification. These ICP-MS samples were diluted in 45 mL of 2 vol % HNO3 for 24 h to form a stock solution. Then, small amounts of the stock solution, ranging from 6 to 10 µL depending on the prepared concentration, were added to 10 mL of 2 vol % HNO3 to form the samples to be analyzed by the Agilent 7900 ICP-MS. The sample names for reference in this technical note, along with the ICP-MS measured concentrations, are summarized in Table I.
TABLE I Experimental Sample Information with ICP-MS Measured Concentrations
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
III.A. Cyclic Voltammetry and Diffusion Values
Cyclic voltammetry was performed on each sample at 150 mV‧s−1 at the operating temperature of the electrorefiner (773 K). For each sample, four CV cycles were completed at seven electrode surface areas. Prior to running CV, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy at high frequency was used to measure the solution resistance. The potentiostat then compensated for the potential drop due to this resistance. The cyclic voltammograms for S3 and S9 are shown in Figs. 2a and 2b, respectively. It can be seen that both the cathodic and anodic peak magnitudes increase as the electrode surface area increases. The peak magnitudes also increase with concentration as seen when comparing Figs. 2a and 2b. It can be noted that the peak potentials do not shift when the surface area is changed signifying that the reaction is reversible. Lastly, the peak potentials between Figs. 2a and 2b vary by approximately 100 mV, which is due to a new batch of reference salt being used indicating a slight change in the mol % of AgCl. However, given that this analysis revolves around the peak current rather than the potential, this slight shift did not cause any issues for the study.
Fig. 2. Cyclic voltammograms of (a) S3 and (b) S9 at 773 K, a scan rate of 150 mV‧s−1, and varied electrode surface areas.
To quantitatively validate this study’s CV data, the diffusivities of Sm(III) were compared to our previous work1 and to the literature data available.6,8,9 The Sm(III) diffusion coefficient D (cm2‧s−1) was found by relating the cathodic peak currents ipc (A) and the working electrode surface area A (cm2) through the Randles-Sevcik equation:
ipcA=0.4463nFCnFνDRT−−−−√,(1)
where
n =number of transfer electrons
F =Faraday constant (C‧mol−1)
ν =scan rate (V‧s−1)
C =molar concentration of SmCl3 in the salt (mol‧cm−3)
R =universal gas constant (J‧mol−1‧K−1)
T =temperature (K) (Ref. 10).
The linear relationship between cathodic peak current and working electrode surface area is shown in Fig. 3, where the change in slope corresponds to the change in SmCl3 in the samples, representing the relationship between current density and concentration.
Fig. 3. Current density concentration dependence as illustrated by the change in the slopes between peak current and electrode surface area.
The calculated diffusion coefficients are shown in Table II. The diffusion coefficients agree well with the literature values reported by Castrillejo et al., as well as Cordoba and Caravaca for the same testing temperatures.6,8,9 These values compare well with the values measured in our previous work but tend to be larger in general with a 0.399% difference.1 The discrepancies between the values in this study and the previous work could be due to the removal of human error associated with the hand measurement of the surface area. The diffusion values show no noticeable trend with concentration, giving the average value of 1.202 × 10−5 ± 0.031 × 10−5 cm2‧s−1. This shows that the electrode withdrawal method may be preferable for diffusion determination in the future.
TABLE II Calculated and Literature Sm(III) Diffusion Coefficients at 773 K
III.B. Randles-Sevcik Equation Analysis
With the consistency of the diffusion values over the large concentration range, a leave-one-out analysis of the Randles-Sevcik constant [Eq. (1)] was completed. This was done by splitting the ten samples into two groups. Group 1 consisted of one sample used for the diffusion coefficient calculation, and then group 2 consisted of the other nine samples being used for ordinary linear regression to determine the linear relation between current density and molar concentration. Using the diffusion value calculated from group 1, the Randles-Sevcik constant was calculated. This was repeated ten times, with a different single sample being used for group 1 each iteration. Figure 4 shows the percent residual plot of this analysis.
Fig. 4. Percent residual plot for Randles-Sevcik constant analysis.
The total mean value calculated for the constant was 0.4505 ± 0.0103 corresponding to a 0.94% difference from the constant used in Eq (1). As seen in Fig. 4, each iteration has an associated error term; this is mostly due to the propagation of the ICP-MS concentration error. A paired t-test was performed on the results shown in Fig. 4 to test if the results are reliable. At a 99.9% confidence interval, the test failed to reject the null hypothesis that the true difference was zero, confirming that the results were statistically equivalent to the true constant of 0.4463.
The same technique used to investigate the Randles-Sevcik constant was performed to solve for n, the number of electrons transferred during the redox reaction. The calculated average for n was 1.005 ± 0.023 electrons [based on using the true constant of Eq. (1)], corresponding to a 0.5% difference from the theoretical one electron transferred.
III.C. Electrode Withdrawal Calibration Model
For convenience in discussion between electrochemical, LIBS, and ICP-MS results, sample concentration will be referred to in “wt%” SmCl3. To investigate the electrode withdrawal method’s ability to be used for composition measurement, these samples were divided into two groups: one group to generate a calibration model and a second group to be used for validation of this model. The S1, S3, S5, S7, and S10 samples were used as the calibration group. The calibration model (ipA=14.74 ×wt%) was computed by using linear regression to determine the relationship between the peak current density and the ICP-MS determined concentration in weight percent. The calibration lines, with 95% confidence interval and 95% prediction interval bands, are shown in Fig. 5.
Fig. 5. Electrode withdrawal calibration model for concentration estimation.
The calibration model was evaluated with several measurements. The first measurement was the LOD. It was calculated for the calibration model using
LOD=3σm,(2)
where σ is the standard deviation of the measured current densities and m is the slope of the regression line. LOD represents the lowest sample concentration that can be calculated with 33% confidence. The calculated LOD for the model was 0.014 wt%. This low LOD is ideal as it is less than the amount of SmCl3 expected in the electrorefiner according to Phongikaroon and Simpson.11 Moreover, the root-mean-square error (RMSE), used as a measurement of the goodness of the fit of the calibration line, was also calculated by using the following expression:
RMSE=∑(yi−yˆi)2n−1−−−−−−−√,(3)
where
yi =current density of the data point
yˆi =predicted current density for that data point
n =number of data points.
The RMSE value is in units of the y-axis, and a value of zero indicates a perfect fit. The RMSE was found to be 1.781 mA‧cm−2 indictating a strong fit when compared to the y-axis scale ranging from 0 to 135 mA‧cm−2.
In addition to RMSE, the root-mean-square error of calibration (RMSEC)—to estimate the error of the calibration models—was applied by using
RMSEC=∑(xi,model−xi,ICP−MS)2n−−−−−−−−−−−−−−√,(4)
where xi,ICP-MS is the concentration calculated by the ICP-MS and xi,model is the concentration predicted by the calibration model. The RMSEC calculated for this calibration model was 0.108 wt%, a very low value indicating minimal error was introduced to the model from the data points.
One method for evaluating a model’s ability to predict the concentrations of unknown samples is leave-one-out cross-validation (LOOCV) analysis. The LOOCV analysis methodically leaves one data point absent from the regression calculation and then uses the model to predict the concentration of the data point left out. This is repeated n number of times, meaning the predicted concentration corresponding to each data point is estimated by a model generated without that data point. Using these predictive values, a root-mean-square error of cross-validation (RMSECV) can be calculated using Eq. (4), with a slight modification, where xi,model is now the estimate of the concentration when that data point is absent from the regression model. The RMSECV was calculated to be 0.1835 wt%. While this RMSECV is larger than the calculated RMSEC, there is inherently an increase in error involved in prediction for a small pool of data sets (divided by n versus n – 1). More sample data points are necessary in order to decrease the RMSECV. The calibration model and the evaluation measures are shown in Table III.
TABLE III Evaluation of Electrode Withdrawal Calibration Model
III.D. Electrode Withdrawal Concentration Estimation
With the calibration model now made, the S2, S4, S6, S8, and S9 samples were used to test the model. The current density values and the model described in Table III were used to predict the concentrations of these samples. The results are shown in Table IV along with the prepared and ICP-MS measured concentrations. The results match well with the ICP-MS concentrations with an average error in prediction of 6.31%. The estimation for S9 shows the largest error in prediction at 10.40%; this could be minimized by including more data points in the calibration scheme. The error propagated through the concentration estimation was consistently minimal at an average of 0.24% of the estimated value, whereas the average error of the diffusion method utilized in our previous study was 7.91% (Ref. 1). This reduction in error can be attributed to the repeatability of the electrode withdrawal experiments. To evaluate the model’s prediction ability, a cross-validation t-test was performed to verify there was a statistically significant correlation between the predicted values and the ICP-MS measured concentrations. The t-test was calculated using
tn−2=rn−21−r2−−−−√,(5)
TABLE IV Concentration Estimation Results Versus ICP-MS Results with Cross-Validation Test
where n is the number of data points and r is the Pearson correlation coefficient, which is defined as
r=n∑xi,ICP−MSxi,model−∑xi,ICP−MS∑xi,model[n∑x2i,ICP−MS−(∑xi,ICP−MS)2]⋅[n∑x2i,model−(∑xi,model)2]√.(6)
The two-tailed t-test was used with the null hypothesis that the true correlation between the model predicted values and the ICP-MS measured values was zero and the alternative hypothesis being that the true correlation is greater than zero. At a 99.9% confidence interval, the model is validated as the test rejected the null hypothesis.
The three LIBS models (484.8-, 490.5-, and 546.7-nm peak intensities) from our previous work were regenerated to be compared with the withdrawal method.1 The five samples used to validate the withdrawal model were analyzed via LIBS to predict their concentrations. The results are also shown in Table IV. The error between the ICP-MS values and LIBS values was averaged at 16.00%, showing an increase in error when compared to the electrode withdrawal model results. The error propagated through the LIBS models was significantly greater at an average of 11.11% of the estimated value. It is suspected that this error may originate with the variability of the laser energy shot-to-shot, which could be minimized with more precise equipment.
Last, a multivariate combined model was constructed with the electrode withdrawal and LIBS sample data. A model selection procedure was applied to choose a model with a strong fit as characterized by the adjusted R2. During the model selection procedure, the 490.5- and 546.7-nm peak intensity data were removed from the model. This occurred because the number of regressor variables became too large for the sample population used. The calculated model and the related model evaluation measures are shown in Table V, and the concentration predictions from the model are shown in Table IV. The error in prediction between the ICP-MS concentrations and the predicted values for the combined model was slightly greater than that of the electrode withdrawal model at 6.70%. The percent error associated with each prediction was found to be higher than between the electrode withdrawal and LIBS model at 2.30%. When a t-test was performed to validate the combined model, the test was successful in finding significant correlation, but the level of significance was reduced by adding the LIBS data to the electrode withdrawal data. The trade-off here is that the overall robustness of the system is increased by using a combined model with an electrochemical measurement and a laser measurement together. For example, in more complex salt systems, the reaction peaks may overlap making electrochemical analysis difficult; however, the LIBS spectral resolution may compensate for this. By using two physically different detection methods in parallel, the two methods can validate one another as well as compensate for the weaknesses of one method for a particular sample.
TABLE V Evaluation of Combined Calibration Model
IV. CONCLUSION
Ten SmCl3–LiCl-KCl samples were tested with cyclic voltammograms at varying working electrode surface areas to investigate the relationship between current density and surface area. These ten samples were then split into two sets of five samples. The first group was used to generate calibration models, and the second group was used to test and validate these models. The predicted concentrations from these models are shown versus the ICP-MS measured concentrations in Fig. 6. The first calibration model exploited the relationship between peak current density and wetted surface area of the working electrode. The electrode withdrawal had a very low calibration error as described by an RMSEC of 0.108 wt%. This model not only was able to validate at a 99.9% confidence interval but had a very low percent error associated with each prediction at an average of 0.24%.
Fig. 6. Comparison of ICP-MS measured and model predicted concentration values.
When compared with the diffusion method investigated in our previous study, the electrode withdrawal method had a slightly higher average percent difference between the predicted and actual values.1 However, the S9 data point had a 10.40% difference that inflated the average for the working electrode method. If this point is neglected, the average percent difference becomes 5.28%, which is much lower than the diffusion method. The most noticeable difference between the results of the two methods is the reduction in error from an average of 7.91% of the estimated value with the diffusion method to an average of 0.24% of the estimated value for the electrode withdrawal method. This increase in precision can be attributed to the improved method of measuring the surface area of the working electrode.
The electrode withdrawal method also proved to generate a stronger model than the previously proposed LIBS models with a much lower LOD at 0.014 wt% versus an average of 0.597 wt%. Additionally, the error in prediction and the relative error for each individual prediction are significantly lower for the electrode withdrawal method. The combined model was made using both the electrode withdrawal and LIBS data; here, utilizing two fundamentally different detection methods added a level of sophistication to the combined model, especially for future cases with a more complex salt system. By increasing the sample population used for the model generation, the evaluation would be expected to improve significantly. Moreover, an increase in sample population may also compensate for the error originating in the laser energy fluctuation. Overall, the electrode withdrawal method proved to be an improvement on the previously used diffusion method and should be used as a replacement or as an additional technique for the detection system.
Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported under an Integrated University Program Graduate Fellowship. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not reflect the views of the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Nuclear Energy.
