<title>Comparison of ReO4− and TcO4− in solvent extraction systems</title>
<author> Cecilia Eiroa-Lledo; Lindsey Lecrivain; T. Gannon Parker; Donald E. Wall; Nathalie A. Wall</author>
<Affiliation>Department of Chemistry , Washington State University , Pullman , WA 99164 , USA ; Nuclear Science Center , Washington State University , Pullman , WA 99164 , USA</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Radiochimica Acta</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Walter de Gruyter GmbH</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1515/ract-2019-0006</DOI>
<URL>http://sci-hub.ren/10.1515/ract-2019-0006</URL>
Abstract:
The suitability of perrhenate (Re(VII)) to act as an analog for pertechnetate (Tc(VII)) was tested using solvent extraction and the carrier/tracer systems 99Tc(VII)/99mTc(VII) and 185/187Re/186/188Re(VII). Perrhenate is often used as a non-radioactive analogue of pertechnetate, but scarce data is available for the comparison of these metals for liquid-liquid extraction applications.
Results show that neither Tc(VII) nor Re(VII) extraction is influenced by pH in the 2–8 range. The anion extractant also separates electrolyte anions, with increasing extraction following the order Cl− < NO3−  ClO4−, resulting in a decreased Tc(VII) and Re(VII) extraction in presence of salt. In particular, the extraction of Re and Tc is suppressed in presence of NaCl at concentrations higher than 1 mM. While Tc extraction is larger than that of Re in absence of electrolyte, they are statistically identical in presence of enough electrolyte. Furthermore, tetraphenylphosphonium chloride (Ph4
PCl) is a stronger extractant than iodonitrotetrazolium chloride (INT).
Keywords: Solvent extraction; technetium;rhenium.
1 Introduction
Technetium-99 is a fission product of both 235U and 239Pu,with a cumulative fission yield of ~6 % and a half-life of 2.11 × 105  years. A thorough understanding of Tc chemistry is important for long-term waste storage applications
and remediation efforts. However, experimental work using Tc, which features exclusively unstable isotopes, requires specific safety and licensing for the handling of radioactive materials. In these contexts, Re(VII) is often considered an acceptable surrogate for Tc(VII) where the use of the stable isotope would simplify experimental work [1–4].
The chemistries of Re(VII) and Tc(VII) are expected to show similarities as they are both VIIB transition metals with similar electronic configurations, stereochemistry, thermodynamic properties, and ionic radii (Table  1)
[5–10]. Re-188 and Re-186  have been used for medical applications, as analogs of Tc [11]. Re was also used as a Tc analog to test glass formulations used for the possible vitrification of nuclear fuel [12, 13].
Despite the ubiquitous substitution of Re(VII) (in the form of ReO4−) for Tc(VII) (in the form of TcO4−), only a scarce number of studies compare the relative chemical behavior of the two elements, and even fewer exist
in which the elements were compared under identical experimental conditions. Kopunec et al. used the extractants tetraphenylarsonium and tetraphenylphosphonium
to understand TcO4
− extraction under various conditions(i. e. background electrolyte, pH, comparison of organic phase), but did not make a direct comparison between the extraction behavior of TcO4
− and ReO4
− [14, 15]. The most in-depth comparison of the solvent extraction behavior to date was carried out by Rohal et al. who characterized the extraction of TcO4
− and ReO4
− by Aliquat-336
nitrate into an organic phase of 1,3-diisopropylbenzene (among other solvents) from different aqueous phases [16]. Rohal’s data showed that distribution coefficient of TcO4− between the organic and aqueous phases waslarger than that of ReO4− by a factor of 2–3 depending on experimental conditions, except for high acid concentrations for which Re showed a greater extraction. However,
Rohal’s work was based on two different techniques: Tc was analyzed using radiometric methods and Re was analyzed using inductively coupled plasma – optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES). Additionally, Rohal’swork did not include simultaneous Tc/Re extractions, which would allow for direct comparison under identical conditions.
The present work aims to assess the validity of using Re(VII) as a chemical analog for Tc(VII) in solvent extraction, through dual isotope experiments, as well as individual isotope tests, over a comprehensive pH range. The
influence of the background electrolyte and the nature of the extractant was also investigated.
Table 1: Chemical and physical properties of Tc(VII) and Re(VII).
2 Experimental
Aqueous solutions were prepared with reagent grade chemicals using 18.2 MΩ deionized distilled water. Solutions were prepared with appropriate concentrations
of NaCl, NaNO3 , or NaClO4  (Fisher) to maintain specific ionic strengths. A Fisher Scientific Accument AB15 Basic pH meter equipped with a Mettler-Toledo LE422 combination pH electrode was used to measure aqueous solution pH; the pH electrode was calibrated with pH 4, 7, and
10  standard buffer solutions (BDH). Acids (HCl, HNO3,HClO4
) (EMD, Fisher) and NaOH (J.T. Baker) were used to adjust pH. Organic solutions were prepared by diluting a stock solution of anion extractant, tetraphenylphosphonium chloride (Ph4 PCl) (Aldrich) or iodonitrotetrazolium chloride (INT) (Sigma Aldrich), in chloroform (BDH). These two extractants were chosen due to their previous applications for Tc(VII) separation in the literature [17–21].
Chloroform was chosen as the organic solvent because of its ability to readily dissolve both extractants, and its low affinity to extract water. Figure 1 illustrates the structure of the extractants.
99mTc (t1/2 = 6.0  h) was isolated in the form of NaTcO4 by elution of a 99Mo:99mTc generator with a 1.0 % (w/w) NaCl solution [22]. The 99Mo (t1/2 = 66  h) generator [98Mo(n, β−) 99Tc] was produced at the Washington State University (WSU) Nuclear Science Center (NSC), which hosts a 1.0 MW TRIGA reactor. The generator was prepared by irradiating 6.4 mL of a 0.2 mol · L−1 solution of (NH4)6Mo7O24 (Baker & Adamson) for 1 h with a thermal neutron flux of 1.0 × 1013 n · cm−2s−1. After a cooling time of 24 h, the irradiated solution was loaded onto a 25 mL acidic alumina
column with a 1 cm inner diameter. The alumina retains the 99Mo, while 99Tc can be eluted with a salt solution.
Generators were discarded after 10 days of use. Stock solutions of 99mTc were analyzed by gamma spectrometry prior to use to ensure radiochemical purity of the isotope.
A 99Tc stock solution was prepared from a 0.29  MNH4TcO4 solution (Oak Ridge National Laboratory). The metal was purified through reduction of Tc(VII) in the stock to solid Tc(IV) using sodium dithionite (Na2S2O4) [2].
A volume of 0.5 mL of the Tc(IV) suspension was washed with deionized water. The slurry was centrifuged for 5 min, after which the supernatant was discarded. This washing process was repeated 5 times. The remaining precipitate was added to 5  mL of deionized water in an 8  mL glass ial, 20 drops of 30 % hydrogen peroxide (Fisher) were gradually added to the solution. After several days, upon complete dissolution of the precipitate, 1 mL of the solution was filtered through a Teflon syringe filter (0.22 μm
pore size). An extraction with iodonitrotetrazolium chloride (INT) was carried out to confirm the oxidation state
of Tc in the stock solution [20]. Results showed the Tc was >98 % Tc(VII). The solution was diluted to produce a 0.21 mM Tc stock (~800 cpm · μL−1).
186Re (t1/2 = 3.7  days) and 188Re (t1/2 = 17  h) were also prepared at the WSU NSC, by neutron activation of 0.8  mL of a 0.147  mmol · L−1 solution of stable NH4 ReO4
(Inorganic Ventures) for 1.5  h (thermal neutron flux of 1.0 × 1013 n · cm−2s−1). The 186,188Re spike solutions were prepared the same day as the experiment was conducted to maximize the activity of 188Re.
Dual Tc/Re isotope samples contained 2 mL of aqueous phase (1 M NaCl/HCl) and 2 mL of organic phase containing 0.025–1 mmol · L−1 Ph4
PCl in chloroform. The aqueous phases of the samples were spiked with 100 μL of the 99mTc stock solution, 20 μL of the 99Tc stock solution, and 20 μL of the 186,188Re stock solution; the samples contained an equal Tc and Re concentration of 2.1 × 10−3 mol · L−1.
Samples were sealed and shaken for 15 min using a vortex mixer. The samples were then allowed to sit undisturbed for 30 min to reach phase separations (no centrifugation was necessary); 1 mL aliquots of each phase were added to separate vials and counted on a lead shielded HPGe detector for 60 live seconds, to account for dead time. Data was acquired using the Genie 2000 Gamma Acquisition & Analysis software version 3.2.1 (Canberra). Activity measurements for 99mTc, 186Re, and 188Re were established by
analysis of the gamma lines at 140.5, 137.2, and 155.0 keV,respectively. The time elapsed between each phase sample
counting was only a few minutes, resulting in a negligible decay between samples. All experiments were performed in triplicate.
Single isotope (Tc or Re) experiments were conducted using the dual isotope experiment protocol described above, with the sample spiked with either 99Tc or 186Re (produced by allowing 188Re sufficient time to effectively decay away). The protocol for these extractions was identical to those above, with the following exceptions: (1)
samples were spiked with 10 μL of the respective isotope stock solutions; (2) activities were measured using liquid scintillation counting (LSC, Beckman LS 6500), rather than gamma spectroscopy; (3) only aqueous phases (0.5 mL) were counted, as the chloroform would quench scintillation – organic phase activities were calculated from aqueous phase data and the total activity. Single isotope experiments were carried out to test the influence of various parameters: pH, aqueous background electrolytes (NaCl, NaNO3, NaClO4  solutions), the nature and concentration of the extractant (Ph4 PCl, INT). All experiments were performed in triplicate. The distribution of the extractant Ph4 PCl between chloroform and aqueous phases was also quantified for various aqueous electrolytes, as Ph4 PCl is soluble in both organic and aqueous media. Biphasic mixtures with 2 mL of 1 mM Ph4PCl in chloroform and 2 mL of aqueous solutions (de-ionized water, NaCl, NaNO3
, or NaClO4) wereprepared. The samples were vigorously shaken (vortex)for 15  min. After phase separation, 1  mL aliquots of theaqueous phase were diluted in 5 % nitric acid, for phosphorous concentrations determination using an Inductively Coupled Plasma – Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS,
ThermoFinnigan Neptune MC-ICPMS); the phosphorousconcentration prior to extraction was also quantified withICP-MS.
Figure 1: Structures of tetraphenylphosphonium chloride (Ph4PCl)and iodonitrotetrazolium chloride (INT).
3 Theory
3.1 Metal extraction
Extraction coefficients, Kex, were calculated for eachmetal system. The formation of the extractable ion pair byPh4
PCl can be described by the following equilibrium:
MO4(aq) 4 (org) 4 4(org) (aq) Ph PCl Ph PMO Cl − − + +  (1)
where M is either Tc or Re. The extraction coefficient, Kex,is thus defined as:
@ (2)
where D is the distribution ratio of the metal speciesextracted into the organic phase from the aqueous phase.
Equation 2 can be rearranged to give equation 3:
4 (org) ex (aq) logD log[Ph PCl] +logK log[Cl ] − = − (3)
Plotting log D as a function of log [Ph4PCl](org) will yield a y-intercept that is proportional to Kex and a slope equal to the number of extractant moieties per metal extracted.
The values for [Ph4PCl](org) are calculated as the difference between the initial Ph4 PCl concentration and that in aqueous solution at the end of the experiment. For this work, a slope of 1 is expected. Separation factors between Tc(VII) and Re(VII) were also calculated by equation 4:
@(4)
The chemical behavior of the two metals is considered to be identical if the SF value is independent of the experimental parameters; the two metals can be then considered
analogous one to another under the given experimental conditions.
3.2 Extractant partition
The extractant Ph4 PCl is soluble in both organic and aqueous media, thus the extractant distribution ratio (Dex) between the two phases was quantified. Equation 5 represents the definition of the distribution ratio of the extractant.
@(5)
where [Ph4PCl](i) is the initial Ph4PCl concentration in the organic phase and [Ph4PCl](a) is the concentration of theextractant in the aqueous phase after the extraction.The extractant can form a complex with the background electrolyte anion and partition between the two
phases (Equation 6).4 (org) (aq) 4 (org) (aq) Ph PCl X Ph PX Cl − − + +  (6)where X− represents the anion from the backgroundelectrolyte.
4 Results and discussion
4.1 ReO4
− and TcO4
− extraction by Ph4PCl as afunction of pHThe values of Kex (Eq. (2)) for the extraction of ReO4− andTcO4− with Ph4PCl were determined using the dual isotope extraction method at pH 0, 2, 4, 6, and 8, in solution of constant 1  M ionic strength (NaCl/HCl). Although the values for Tc(VII) Kex are systematically slightly higher than for Re(VII), for pH equal and above 2 (Figure 2),the values are statistically equal within 3σ of triplicates.
The SF value (Eq. (4)) is constant at 1.1 at pH equal and above 2. In the particular case of pH 0, Tc extraction is lower than Re, (although statistically identical, within 3σ) with an SF value of 0.8. This result is consistent with data reported by Rohal et al. and can be attributed to 1) the different metal anions pKa values (Table 1), 0.03 for HTcO4
and −0.28 for HReO4 , combined with a slight difference of charge density on each metal ion, and/or 2) a competitive Tc/Re extraction.
The single isotope Kex and SF results (Figure 3), also derived from experiments conducted with an aqueous solution ionic strength of 1  M (NaCl/HCl), demonstrate that pH has no influence on Tc or Re extraction from an aqueous solution of 1 M ionic strength. Data are statistically equal to those determined with the dual isotope
extractions, except for the data at pH 0. The single isotope results yield a constant SF value of 1.1 from pH 0 to 8.
Unlike the dual isotope experiments, there is no change of SF value at pH 0; a competitive extraction between Tc and Re is clearly taking place in the dual isotope experiments.
The distribution coefficients for the extraction of Tc and Re by Ph4 PCl at various pH and the Kex data are presented in the Supplementary Information section (Figure  S1,Table S1).
Table 2 outlines the distribution ratios of the extractant
Ph4PCl between chloroform and various aqueous solution (de-ionized water, NaCl, NaNO3
, and NaClO4 ). The results indicate that Ph4 PCl is soluble in both organic and aqueous phases. The partition of Ph4PCl into the organic phase increases with an increased electrolyte concentration and Dex follows the trend Cl− > NO3− > > ClO4−, both due
to anion extraction by Ph4 PCl into chloroform.
Figure 2: Kex dependence on pH for the dual isotope extraction of  Tc(VII) (■) and Re(VII) (•) by Ph4PCl.
Aqueous solutions contain 1 M NaCl/HCl. Right axis depicts the separation factor across the series, shown as the solid line on the graph. Error bars represent 99 % confidence interval (n = 3).
Figure 3: Kex dependence on pH for the single isotope extraction of Tc(VII) (■) and Re(VII) (•) by Ph4 PCl.
Aqueous solutions contain 1 M NaCl/HCl. Right axis depicts the separation factor across the series, shown as the solid line on the graph. Error bars represent 99 % confidence interval (n = 3).
Table 2: Distribution ratio, Dex, of the extractant Ph4 PCl betweenthe organic and aqueous phases as a function of ionic strength, in absence of metal.
4.2 ReO4
− and TcO4
− extraction by Ph4 PCl Single isotope experiments were performed to quantify the influence of Ph4 PCl concentration on Tc(VII) and Re(VII) extractions from different aqueous media: 1 M of NaCl, NaNO3 , or NaClO4 , at pH 6. Extractions from pure 18 MΩ water were also quantified. Figure 4 shows that both Tc(VII) and Re(VII) extractions follow the order: 18 MΩ water >NaCl > NaNO3 > > NaClO4 . Data pertaining to NaClO4  are not presented on Figure 4, because the distribution coefficients are too small for accurate quantification. The decrease of metal extraction with the
electrolyte follows the same order as Ph4 PCl extractionwith those solutions (Table 2); the electrolyte anions are competing with the metals for extraction due totheir anionic charge density and the very large electrolyte concentration compared to that of Tc and Re. The
lack of Tc or Re extraction in presence of ClO4− is due to
(1) the similar coordination of TcO4−, ReO4−, and ClO4−;
(2) the similar size of the three anions (252, 260, and 226 pm, respectively), with ClO4− having a slightly larger charge density than the metals, and (3) saturation of theextractant by the 1 M ClO4
, leaving no extraction capacity for Tc and Re.The slope for the log D plot as a function of log[Ph4PCl](Figure 4) is equal to 1, for both Tc and Re extraction from1  M NaCl or NaNO3, as expected from Equation (3). The slopes associated with the data presented with Figure 4 are presented in the Supplementary Information section (Table S2). Also, Tc and Re distribution coefficients are statistically identical in those aqueous solution conditions. The electrolyte anions Cl− and NO3
are extracted by Ph4 PCl (Table 2), leaving little extraction capacity for Tc and Re. However, in the case of extraction from deionized water, these plots show a slope of 0.7 for Tc and 0.3 for Re, and Tc extraction is significantly and statistically larger than Re extraction. In the deionized water samples, only 1 mM Cl− is present in the system, from the dissociation of Ph4 PCl. The water system does not lead to the expected slope of 1 (Equation (3)); this is probably due to the range of Ph4 PCl concentration investigated, for which Tc and Re extraction have almost reach saturation. A lower range of Ph4 PCl concentration would lead to slopes of 1. The higher Tc charge density allows the metal to experience a larger extraction than Re.
The competition for extraction between metal and electrolyte was also tested. Re extraction by Ph4 PCl from  a NaCl aqueous solution was quantified as a function of NaCl concentration and as a function of extractant concentration. Figure 5 shows a decreased extraction with
increasing NaCl concentration, implying an increasing Cl− extraction, leaving a lower extraction capacity for Re.
Table 3 presents the slope values for the linear regression of the log D vs. log[Ph4 PCl] plots shown with Figure 5. The linear regression slopes reach a constant value of 1 for sample containing a NaCl concentration equal and above 0.025 M, but the slopes are statistically smaller than 1 for 0 and 0.01 M NaCl. The deviation from a slope of 1 is due
to the large Ph4 PCl concentration, as explained above. Table  2 has shown a steady increased Ph4 PCl extraction from aqueous solution with increasing Cl− concentration from 0.001 to 1  M Cl−, with no difference of Ph4
PCl extraction between system with 0 or 0.001 M NaCl. Data presented so far in this work shows statistically identical extraction of Tc and Re from aqueous solution containing an electrolyte. It can then be asserted that NaCl interferes with Re and Tc extraction when present at concentrations between 0.001 and 0.025 M. The Tc competitive extraction was tested for NO3 − and ClO4 −. In these single isotope experiments, the extraction of Tc was quantified as a function of the electrolyte nature and concentration. The concentration of Ph4 PCl was increased to 5 mM to be able to observe metal extraction in presence of ClO4−; the extraction with this larger Ph PClconcentration and in presence of Cl− was also quantified,for accurate comparison. Figure 6 shows a decrease ofTc extractions with an increasing electrolyte concentration, as expected. Tc distribution coefficient is identical
for the three electrolyte systems at 10−3 M; it is also identical for the 5  mM NaCl and NaNO3
systems, but 5  mMClO4− is already sufficient concentrated to partially suppress Tc extraction. For ionic strength above 5 mM, data
show a decreased Tc extraction with the order of anion:Cl− > NO3− > > ClO4−, due to the electrolyte anion extractionby Ph4PCl explained above. The slope of the linear regressions shown with Figure 6, above 5  mM are −0.1, −0.6,
and −0.8, for the electrolyte systems Cl−, NO3−, and ClO4−,respectively.
4.3 Extractant dependence
The extraction of Tc(VII) and Re(VII) was also quantified using a different extractant: INT. The anionic extractants INT and Ph4 PCl are thought to have similar extraction mechanisms but differ in their initial solubility. Ph4 PCl is soluble in both chloroform and aqueous media, in absence of complexing anion. On the other hand, INT is only soluble in aqueous phase in absence of a complexing anion. The INT-MO4  complex migrates to the chloroform phase. It was observed that INT precipitates in aqueous media with a salt concentration above 1  mM, therefore all comparison experiments were conducted in 18.2 MΩ deionized distilled water, at pH 6. Figure 7 demonstrates an overall larger metal extraction with Ph4 PCl than with INT. Tc exhibits a higher extraction than Re with both extractants; however the difference between the distribution coefficients is more pronounced with Ph4
PCl than with INT. The slopes of the linear regressions presented on Figure 7 are all ca. 0.8 – the slope for the Re/INT system is more difficult to quantify as only 4 data points were acquired. In the particular case of Tc/Ph4 PCl, the linear regression of the first three points at the lowest Ph4 PCl concentrations, is 1.0, as expected, (Equation (3)) but deviated to a lower number at higher extractant concentrations. While a slope of 1 could not be observed for the
Tc/Ph4 PCl/water system in the range of Ph4 PCl concentration 2.5 · 10−4–10−3 M (Figure 4, Table S2), due to saturation, Equation (3) is verified in the lower 10−5–5 · 10−4 M range of Ph4 PCl concentration. Figure 4: Plot of the log of the distribution ratio on Tc(VII) (solid symbol) and Re(VII) (open symbol) as a function of the log of thePh4PCl concentration (0.025–1 mmol · L−1) in different backgroundelectrolyte solutions.Pure water (■, □) with a slope of 0.69 ± 0.21, 1 M NaCl (•) with aslope of 0.95 ± 0.17, and 1 M NaNO3 (▲) with a slope of 1.05 ± 0.38.Error bars represent a 99 % confidence interval (n = 3). Aqueoussolutions pH = 6.
Figure 5: Distribution of Re(VII) as a function of Ph4PClconcentration with various NaCl concentrations.Aqueous solutions pH = 6. Error bars represent a 99 % confidenceinterval (n = 3).
Table 3: Slope of the plots shown in Figure 5.
Figure 6: Distribution ratio of TcO4− with Ph4PCl (5 mM inchloroform) as a function of the electrolyte concentrations NaCl (•),NaNO3 (▲), NaClO4 (■).Aqueous solutions pH = 6. Error bars represent a 99 % confidenceinterval (n = 3).
Figure 7: Extraction of TcO4− and ReO4− with INT and Ph4PCl, inabsence of electrolyte.Tc-Ph4P (•), Tc-INT (■), Re-Ph4P (○), Re-INT (□). Errors bars representa 99 % confidence interval (n = 3). Aqueous solutions pH = 6; initialorganic phase is 1 mM Ph4PCl or INT in chloroform.
5 Conclusions
Dual and single isotope experiments were performed to confirm the suitability of ReO4 − as a surrogate for TcO4 − in solvent extraction systems. The isotopes behave analogously under most experimental conditions, supporting
the idea that Re(VII) is a suitable substitute for Tc(VII) in solvent extraction studies. It was found Kex for Tc(VII) was slightly greater than that for Re(VII), but the trend in the extraction of both elements was virtually identical,
which is consistent with the work previously reported by Rohal et al. [16]. The same inversion of Kex values of Tc(VII) and Re(VII) was seen at pH 0 in the dual isotope experiments as in the work of Rohal et al. This could possibly
be explained by the difference in pKa values between the two compounds. The present study also showed the difference in extraction efficiency under a variety of conditions;
ionic strength, background electrolyte, and extractant.
Experiments within this study show that the differences might explained by the experimental conditions, such as the free ligand available due to changing background electrolytes, and not the behavior of the metals. These studies highlight the need for careful consideration of experimental conditions when using solvent extraction with Tc(VII) and Re(VII).
Acknowledgements:
This work was funded by the U.S.National Nuclear Security Administration, Funder Id:http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100006168 under the SSAA Grant DE-NA0002916.
