<title>Tritium Content and Chemical Form in Nuclear Graphite from Molten Fluoride Salt Irradiations</title>
<author>Dolan; Zheng; Carpenter; Huang; Hu</author>
<Affiliation>Massachusetts Institute of Technology Nuclear Reactor Laboratory , 138 Albany Street, NW12-311, Cambridge , Massachusetts 02139; Kairos Power LLC , 707 W. Tower Avenue, Alameda , California 94501</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Fusion Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/15361055.2020.1712993</DOI>
<URL>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/citedby/10.1080/15361055.2020.1712993#tabModule</URL>
Abstract
Advanced reactor applications that use a molten fluoride salt coolant and graphite moderator are under consideration as next-generation energy technologies. For molten salts with lithium or beryllium, such as flibe (2LiF-BeF2), the production of tritium from neutron irradiation is a significant technical challenge. Understanding the expected quantities and mechanisms for tritium retention in graphite is important for designing tritium management strategies in these advanced reactors. In this work, the tritium content of IG-110U graphite from a 2013 in-core flibe irradiation experiment was measured by leaching in water and thermal desorption. Five total samples were tested, with an average measured tritium content per salt-contacting surface area of 3.83 ± 0.25 Ci/m2. The tritium measured from the thermal desorption experiments was primarily in a water-insoluble form. Compared to the overall tritium generation during the irradiation, the total amount of retention in graphite predicted by the desorption measurements is significant.
Keywords: Fluoride-salt-cooled high-temperature reactor；tritium；thermal desorption；nuclear graphite；molten salt
I. INTRODUCTION
Lithium- and beryllium-bearing molten fluoride salts are under investigation as candidate coolant options for liquid- and solid-fueled advanced fission reactor designs,1,2 as well as a combined coolant and tritium breeding medium in a high-field fusion device.3 In both applications, mitigating environmental release of tritium generated from neutron irradiation of the molten salt is an important aspect of a commercial power plant’s safety case. Developing a strategy to prevent tritium release in the proposed designs first requires a thorough understanding of the expected tritium transport mechanisms and resulting tritium distributions in molten fluoride salt and other key materials. For the fission applications with a thermal neutron spectrum, nuclear graphite is a commonly proposed neutron moderator because of its extensive experience base and chemical compatibility with molten fluorides. Therefore, it is important to examine the interaction between tritium and graphite in the molten salt environment to successfully predict tritium transport behavior in future reactor designs.
Tritium can be produced directly through neutron reactions with 6Li and 7Li or indirectly through the (n,α) reaction with 9Be, which produces 6Li. The direct tritium production reaction with 6Li is a primary concern because of the large cross section at thermal neutron energies. In proposed designs such as the fluoride-salt-cooled high-temperature reactor, the coolant salt consists of a 2:1 ratio of LiF and BeF2 (referred to as flibe) with the 7Li isotopically enriched to 99.995% in order to limit tritium generation and improve neutronic performance.4 After production from irradiation, tritium exists in molten flibe as an oxidized form T+ ion or TF, or as a dissolved T2/HT molecule.5 If a chemical equilibrium of tritium species in the salt is assumed, then the ratio of TF to T2 can be determined based on the redox potential of the salt.6 The chemical speciation has a significant influence on the resulting transport paths tritium can take through the reactor. For example, both TF and T2 can evolve into the reactor off-gas, but only T2 is typically observed to permeate through metals.7 Chemical speciation between oxidized and reduced forms could also influence how tritium in the salt interacts with graphite.
The retention of hydrogen isotopes in graphite has been studied extensively through experiments where samples were charged with gas at high temperatures.8,9 By examining the desorption of retained hydrogen as a function of temperature, trapping sites within graphite with characteristic energies and mechanisms have been identified.10 The trapping energies of several electron volts were measured in grades of nuclear graphite,11 and thus the majority of hydrogen desorption did not occur until the graphite samples were brought to elevated temperatures. However, it is currently unknown whether tritium retention from flibe salt will occupy the same trapping sites in graphite as tritium from the gaseous charging studies.
Significant levels of tritium retention have been observed in graphite with flibe where tritium was produced by neutron irradiation. For the liquid-fueled Molten Salt Reactor Experiment (MSRE) operated at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL), it was estimated that 15% of the total tritium produced was captured by the core graphite.12 About half of the retained tritium was detected in the outer 1.59 mm of the roughly 50.8-mm-thick graphite stringer blocks.13 As with the MSRE data, measurements from graphites irradiated in flibe at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Reactor (MITR) have indicated that tritium was preferentially retained near the graphite surface in contact with the salt.14 The observed concentration gradients indicate that graphite is difficult to fully saturate with tritium at typical reactor operating conditions, and thus using a bulk solubility approach based on isotherms measured in previous gas adsorption experiments will not produce accurate predictions for tritium retention in future reactor designs. Furthermore, gas adsorption studies only account for retention of one type of tritium chemical species expected in flibe salt; the retention behavior of TF on graphite is much less well understood. In this work, tritium desorption measurements are presented from the first in-core flibe salt irradiation at the MITR. The chemical form of measured tritium is discussed, and the expected total retention is compared to the calculated tritium generation.
II. EXPERIMENTAL
Three fluoride salt irradiation experiments have been carried out thus far in the MITR in-core inert gas irradiation facility at 700ºC, denoted chronologically as FS-1, FS-2, and FS-3. Details of the irradiation facilities have been described elsewhere,15 however relevant details regarding tritium production are summarized here. Each experiment used 7Li-enriched flibe supplied by ORNL, which was originally prepared for use in the secondary loop of the MSRE. The amount of flibe required for each irradiation varied based on the geometry of the test capsules and the dimensions of sample materials. Crucibles machined from IG-110U graphite were used to contain the flibe salt and samples, which were then enclosed in a nickel primary encapsulation and a titanium secondary boundary. A detailed MCNP model of each experiment in the MITR core was used to calculate the expected total tritium production. The FS-1 experiment had a target irradiation time of 1000 h and a total exposure of 229.1 MWd from the MITR.
After the irradiations, a thermal desorption facility was used to examine the tritium inventory of the graphite samples. In this study, roughly 4.5-mm-thick axial sections were cut with a low-speed saw from the FS-1 crucible IG-110 graphite. The top surface of the first section was 43 mm above the bottom of the crucible and subsequent sections were cut moving toward the bottom face. Molten flibe and other samples were extracted from the graphite crucibles before the tritium analysis took place. The FS-1 crucible before irradiation and an example axial section are shown in Fig. 1. The samples were sectioned in a fume hood capable of handling activated materials. Deionized water was used as a lubricant for the cutting saw and was collected in a tray surrounding the saw blade. A total of 200 mL was used in the cutting process. Samples were also soaked for approximately 2 min in a beaker with 100 mL of water after the cutting was complete in order to remove loose graphite particles and any residual flibe salt.
Fig. 1. (a) FS-1 IG-110U graphite crucible sections and nickel test capsule before irradiation. (b) Samples of IG-110U graphite were prepared for tritium testing after irradiation by taking axial sections of a one-third crucible segment.
After sectioning and drying, the samples were desorbed using a MTI OTF-1200X-S series high-temperature tube furnace. A quartz tube was used as the gas boundary, and two O-ring flanges outside of the heated zone created a seal for the flowing gas inside. A mixture of Ar-0.5%H2 was used as the sweep gas mixture at a total flow rate of 350 mL/min set by Omega FMA5412A mass flow controllers. Adding hydrogen in the sweep gas is required to prevent tritium interactions with tubing surfaces in the transit to the measurement systems. Sweep gas from the furnace is first analyzed for tritium with a Tyne 7045 compensated ion chamber system. The gas is then sent to a water bubbler system which traps the tritium for liquid scintillation counting (LSC). The first three bubbler vials capture water-soluble forms of tritium, such as T2O, HTO, or TF. Insoluble forms like HT and T2 pass through the initial vials, but are oxidized in a heated furnace with a palladium catalyst and oxygen supply to create HTO or T2O. The reacted tritium can then be captured in the final three vials.
III. RESULTS
III.A. Tritium Measured in Cleaning Water
An effort was made to monitor the transfer of any tritium from the graphite samples to water used in the sample preparation phase. LSC of each water source showed 5.6 uCi of tritium in the cutting water tray and 1.2 uCi in the soaking beaker. One of the crucible sample sections (sample 1) was soaked for an additional hour in a fresh 100-mL beaker to examine if additional leaching could occur. Periodic 0.1-mL samples were taken for LSC analysis during the hour, as shown in Fig. 2. The extra hour resulted in only 0.4 uCi of tritium from the graphite section based on the data point at 60 min. Some scatter in the plot can be explained by insufficient mixing in the beaker before LSC samples were taken. Water in the soaking beaker was only lightly stirred in order to prevent damage to the submerged graphite sample.
Fig. 2. Tritium removed from the first graphite crucible section by 100 mL of deionized water as a function of soaking time based on 0.1-mL samples at the given times. Tritium concentration was assessed in a 10-min-count LSC measurement, resulting in a relative uncertainty between 1% and 3% based on counting statistics.
If the tritium in the cutting tray and soaking beaker is divided evenly among the five samples prepared, and every sample is assumed to have 0.4 uCi of residual tritium that can be removed by extended soaking, then 1.8 uCi of easily removable, water-soluble tritium was present on each graphite crucible section. Possible sources are tritium contained in frozen salt residue on the graphite surface, TF retained in the graphite, or retained tritium that was converted to HTO during storage of the graphite. Tritium at high-energy trapping sites in the graphite is not expected to easily dissolve into water during soaking.
III.B. Thermal Desorption of Graphite Samples
Thermal desorption spectroscopy was used to examine the temperature dependence of tritium release as well as the total tritium content retained in the graphite crucible sections. The first three crucible sections were heated in a linear temperature ramp at different ramp rates in order to measure the activation energy associated with the tritium desorption process. Varying the temperature ramp rate from 0.1 down to 0.0083 K/s was shown to produce measurements of desorption activation energy for deuterium in graphite.11 However, due to limitations of the tube furnace system, only a narrow range of ramp rates was possible and a peak shift in the release versus temperature plot was not reliably observed for the FS-1 samples. A plot of tritium release versus time and temperature profiles for the first three samples is shown in Fig. 3 to provide an example of the measurement procedure. All tritium release measurements are normalized by the sample mass to account for differences in thickness from the sectioning process.
Fig. 3. (a) Tritium release as a function of time as measured by an ion chamber for samples 1, 2, and 3, and (b) temperature measured by a thermocouple near the sample stage in the furnace.
The fourth and fifth sections were both desorbed at 5ºC/min. As shown in Fig. 4, the desorption rate as a function of temperature peaked at a temperature of 830ºC and 826ºC for samples 4 and 5, respectively. There is also a discontinuity present in the ion chamber reading around 550ºC as the system switches from low to high range. Tritium desorption in the main peak structure could be from retention at crystallite edge surface sites, referred to as Trap 2 sites in other studies.16 However, peak release rates from the Trap 2 sites were typically measured around 1000ºC in deuterium gas adsorption measurements in literature.17
Fig. 4. Tritium release rate verses temperature for IG-110U samples number 4 and 5. Both desorption runs were linear temperature ramps at 5ºC/min.
The lower peak release temperature from the graphite crucible sections in this study can be explained by two different causes. Based on previous experience with MITR samples and the MSRE graphite, the crucible samples are not likely to be fully saturated with tritium. Desorption of an insufficiently saturated material takes less time compared to a fully saturated one for a given temperature profile, which causes a peak shift to lower temperatures. A decrease in peak desorption temperature was clearly observed for ISO-880U graphite samples charged with D2 gas for 1000 s, relative to a 30 000-s period expected for full saturation.11 However, it is difficult to determine whether or not insufficient saturation of the graphite crucible sections had occurred from the desorption measurements alone.
Another contributing factor to the temperature peak shift is the gas environment which contained 0.5%H2 in argon slightly above atmospheric pressure, whereas other graphite desorption measurements were typically taken in a vacuum. The presence of hydrogen gas has been shown to accelerate the diffusion of retained tritium in graphite,18 and thus if the desorption of tritium from the FS-1 graphite was controlled by a diffusion process, then excess hydrogen would lead to an earlier release peak. Beyond this release peak structure, another peak from the higher-energy Trap 1 site is expected.16 This high energy peak was either inaccessible due to the tube furnace maximum temperature, or the total Trap 1 inventory was not large enough to produce a noticeable signal in this study.
III.C. Total Tritium and Chemical Form
The total amount of tritium was measured by integrating the ion chamber measurements from each sample run. A quantity of interest was the tritium content per graphite surface area in contact with molten flibe during the irradiation. The crucible section faces were assumed to be parallel, and the salt contact area was calculated by taking the average of several digital micrometer measurements of the sample thickness. As previously discussed, the chemical form of tritium was monitored by measuring the quantity of tritium trapped in water bubbler vials before and after a catalyzer furnace. In this case, the soluble forms of tritium captured before the catalyzer are TF, T2O, and HTO, and the insoluble forms are either T2 or HT. The total tritium, tritium per area, and percentage of soluble tritium from each sample is shown in Table I. Thermal desorption results show that about 1000 times more tritium was released in the desorption process compared to soaking in water alone. Furthermore, most of the tritium from the desorption was captured from the insoluble forms, indicating that the majority of tritium was not retained on the graphite as a soluble form. Isotopic exchange with H2 in the sweep gas is not expected to significantly affect the tritium chemical distribution based on previous experiments at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Ref. 14).
TABLE I Total Tritium and Tritium per Salt-Facing Area for Each of the Five IG-110U Samples Along with the Percentage of Soluble Tritium as Measured by Thermal Desorption
The tritium retention per area is a useful quantity to estimate the overall tritium transport behavior in the FS-1 experiment. Based on an MCNP calculation, the FS-1 experiment was expected to produce a total tritium activity of 602.5 mCi. If the results in Table I are adjusted to account for tritium decay during the 5.5 years between the FS-1 in-core run in 2013 and the desorption measurements, then retention on the graphite at the time of the experiment would have been 5.22E−3 mCi/mm2. For a total surface area of 28 203 mm2, the retention for the full crucible can be extrapolated as 147.2 mCi, or 24% of the total tritium generated during FS-1. This retention value shows some consistency with other graphite desorption measurements from the MITR flibe experiments.14
IV. DISCUSSION
Tritium retention measurements produced in this study are unique in that tritium was generated directly from molten flibe salt under neutron irradiation, and thus tritium uptake in graphite occurred from a tritium source with chemical conditions representative of a molten salt reactor application. Important factors like characteristic temperatures and neutron damage in graphite were also present in the MITR irradiations. The influence of salt chemistry was assessed by observing the chemical form of tritium retained on graphite, mainly through monitoring whether or not the tritium was soluble in water. Cutting the IG-110U crucible samples with a water-lubricated saw as well as further soaking with deionized water indicated that 1.8 uCi of easily removable, soluble tritium was present on each graphite section. From the thermal desorptions, an average of 0.025 mCi additional soluble tritium was measured. Compared to a total average tritium content of 1.083 mCi per sample, the soluble tritium from desorptions and water soaking was small. These preliminary results suggest that tritium is retained on graphite primarily from T2 in flibe and that retention from TF was less significant. However, it is difficult to make a thorough conclusion about retention rates of the different tritium forms without a direct measurement of the concentration of each species in flibe during the experiment.
The tritium desorption measurements also show that the IG-110U crucible graphite was a significant sink for tritium generated during the FS-1 experiment. However, a total retention of only 24% in the crucible suggests that a large fraction of tritium was also released from the capsule. Considering the geometry of the FS-1 crucible, which has six 143-mm-deep compartments 10.3 mm in diameter, the surface area of salt in contact with the graphite greatly exceeds the free surface of salt at the crucible top. Therefore, tritium that diffuses through the salt to the salt-graphite interface is not always captured by the graphite, otherwise a higher tritium retention level would have been measured. This research points to two explanations that can be used to explain the observed retention levels in graphite. First, if the tritium in the FS-1 salt was primarily in the form of TF, and TF is not able to be retained by graphite, then the tritium would simply evolve from the salt and be carried away by the capsule’s sweep gas. Another possibility is that a mix of TF and T2 was present, but tritium trapping sites near the salt-graphite surface were occupied throughout the course of the irradiation. In this case, the rate-limiting step for tritium retention would be the diffusion of tritium into the graphite bulk, which would then free up the occupied trapping sites near the surface. Because of these unknowns, further characterization of tritium retention in the molten salt and nuclear graphite environment is required in order to successfully predict the tritium distribution in future reactor applications.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Nuclear Energy through contract DE-NE0008285 and Kairos Power LLC.
