<title>In Situ Determination of Parameters of Hydrogen Isotopes Interaction with Materials Using Dynamic Sorption Method</title>
<author>Kulsartov; Zaurbekova; Kenzhina; Gabdullin; Ponkratov; Askerbekov; Kadyrzhanov</author>
<Affiliation>Kazakh-British Technical University , 59 Tole bi str., 050000 , Almaty , Kazakhstan; Branch of IAE NNC RK , 10 Krasnoarmeiskaya str., 071100 , Kurchatov , Kazakhstan; L. N. Gumilyov Eurasian National University , 010008 , Astana , Kazakhstan</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Fusion Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/15361055.2020.1712006</DOI>
<URL>https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/citedby/10.1080/15361055.2020.1712006#tabModule</URL>
Abstract
This paper describes the procedures for calculating parameters of hydrogen isotopes interaction with materials according to the results of experiments conducted by dynamic sorption methods under conditions of complex exposure. Using the proposed approach, we analyzed the data of reactor tests of a lithium capillary porous system based on a stainless steel matrix conducted under conditions of sample purging with deuterium (at a pressure of deuterium in the chamber ~10–2 to 10–4 Pa). The sample was irradiated at various temperatures (T = 180° to 550°) under conditions of oil-free pumping and with continuous mass spectrometric recording of the gas composition in the chamber.
Keywords: Sorption；hydrogen isotopes；capillary porous system；Arrhenius dependence；irradiation
I. INTRODUCTION
One of the relevant materials science problems of energy and industry is to determine the properties of materials in relation to their interaction with hydrogen isotopes. To obtain these experimental data, taking into account the operating conditions, it is often necessary to create special experimental stands where all necessary impact conditions are simulated. Examples of where difficult operating conditions arise are industrial chemical plants (for example, in petrochemical plants1,2), some nuclear systems,3–5 thermonuclear plants,6–10 etc. Within the task described above, there is the problem of adapting classical methods for studying the materials in use under conditions of various factors of influence.
One of the known methods for studying the interaction of hydrogen isotopes with materials are the methods of sorption and desorption.11–13 These methods have a number of variations, for example, the method of sorption under conditions of compensated (or uncompensated) pressure, the thermal desorption spectroscopy method, the desorption method at a constant temperature, etc.
In the present work, a developed generalized computational model is given for estimating the absorption of hydrogen isotopes in the investigated sample when conducting experiments on the dynamic sorption of hydrogen isotopes under conditions of complex exposure (reactor radiation, temperature, gaseous medium).
This paper presents the results of reactor experiment analysis on the dynamic sorption of deuterium by a lithium capillary porous system (CPS). Particularly, the temperature dependences of changes in the composition of the gas in the chamber during the supply of deuterium into the chamber were analyzed. On the basis of the dependences of changes in gas composition in the chamber with the sample during the experiment, the temperature dependences of the deuterium absorption constant of the investigated sample were obtained. The conclusion about the influence of reactor irradiation on processes of generation and release of tritium was made from the investigated sample.
The lithium CPS is a promising plasma-converted material for fusion reactors.14,15 Today there are many studies on the interaction of hydrogen isotopes with the lithium CPS (and lithium), which have allowed for determining in general terms the main mechanisms of interaction of hydrogen isotopes with these materials under normal conditions.16–19 Here, a separate urgent task is to study its properties under the conditions of neutron and gamma irradiation.
Since the lithium CPS is a promising plasma-converted material for fusion reactors, the study of its properties under the conditions of neutron and gamma irradiation is an important task for materials research in the field of controlled fusion.
II. METHOD OF DYNAMIC SORPTION
The method of dynamic sorption is based on the determination of parameters of gas absorption by the investigated sample (sorbent) under conditions of its continuous supply to the chamber with the sample in the presence of continuous pumping of the chamber. Therefore, the structural unit for carrying out such experiments consists of four blocks: (1) the system for feeding the gas mixture into the chamber with the sample, (2) sample chamber, (3) gas partial pressure recording system, and (4) camera pumping system (Fig. 1).
Fig. 1. Scheme of the experiment on dynamic sorption.
Typically, such experiments are carried out according to the following scheme: The dependence of the decrease in gas pressure in the system is determined when the sample sorption properties change (for example, when its temperature changes). Moreover, both the kinetics of a change in gas pressure with a change in the sorption properties of the sample and the quasi-equilibrium pressure levels established in the system under different experimental conditions can be analyzed.
The initial data for calculating the absorption parameters are the following: the geometry of the setup and the sample, the values of the gas supply rate to the system, and the pumping rate of the setup. The following simple formula can be used to estimate the gas absorption rate constant by a sample:
K=dμdt×1S×P,
(1)
where
dμdt =
gas absorption rate at a selected set of experimental parameters (mol/s)
P =
gas pressure in the chamber with the sample (Pa)
S =
surface area of the sample (m2).
It is important to note here that the distribution of pressure on the installation during the conduct of real experiments depends on the setup geometry G1, the parameters of the gas supply to the setup φ, the pumping parameters of the setup F; the temperature of setup units, etc. Therefore, it is necessary to determine the function f connecting the pressure in the chamber with the sample P with the pressure measured in the recording unit Pmes:
P=f(GI,φ,F)⋅Pmes.
(2)
Since the temperature dependences of the gas absorption rate by materials are most often studied, it is necessary to have data on the temperature distribution over the investigated sample [T(x,y,z)]. And often in calculations when estimating absorption, we can use the Arrhenius law for the absorption rate constant:
K(T)=K0.eEaRT,
(3)
where
K0 =
pre-exponent of the Arrhenius dependence [mol/(s·Pa·m2)]
Ea =
activation energy (kJ/mol)
R =
universal gas constant [kJ/(kmol·K)]
T =
is the temperature (K).
It should be noted here that when conducting experiments under conditions of complex exposure (for example, when irradiating samples), the geometry of the setup has considerable dimensions (associated with the presence of long gas paths), and the temperature of the investigated sample has a noticeable gradient caused by irreparable unevenness due to different energy releases in the sample. Ultimately, the task of determining the parameters of the absorption rate constant is reduced to determining the calculation procedure relative to the experimentally obtained data on the decrease in gas pressure in the recording unit of the setup.
Let us consider the formal calculation procedure for the problem of determining the temperature dependence of the absorption rate constant in experiments on dynamic sorption performed with a change in the sample temperature. For each average sample temperature Ti studied, a series of gas pressure values was obtained in the recording unit of the Pmesi unit. Here Ti is the averaged temperature, as it reflects the experimental data measured by thermocouples in a particular place of the sample. Then the calculation procedure is as follows:
Initially, on the basis of experimental data, the estimated gas flow dμdt(Ti) is calculated by the sample at different Ti.
Next, the pressure in the chamber Pi is determined from the known Pmesi values. This estimate can usually be made based on the vacuum calculations of the setup.
Then a thermal calculation is carried out to determine the temperature distribution in the sample under the selected experimental conditions. The calculation is carried out on the basis of actually measured temperatures in the sample and/or setup areas.
After that, the surface of the investigated sample is divided into a number of regions Sj (j = 1, 2. . . N) with temperature Ti,j.
Then, based on the fit of the equality dμdt(Ti)=Pi⋅K0⋅∑jSj⋅e−EaR⋅Ti,j, the parameters of the Arrhenius dependence are determined: the pre-exponential K0 and the activation energy Ea.
Section III gives an example of such a calculation for estimating the rate constant for the absorption of deuterium in the lithium CPS under conditions of reactor irradiation.
III. CALCULATION OF THE RATE CONSTANT FOR THE ABSORPTION OF DEUTERIUM IN THE LITHIUM CPS UNDER CONDITIONS OF REACTOR IRRADIATION
In the experiment described below, a sample of the lithium CPS was studied. Studies were conducted at the IVG1.M reactor (Kurchatov, Kazakhstan). It is worth noting here that experiments on the study of various materials of fission and fusion reactors have been carried out in Kazakhstan for a long time20–27 and that a significant number of them are devoted to determining the parameters of hydrogen isotopes interaction with these materials under irradiation conditions.28–30
The description of the experimental part of the studies cited here [installation and drawing of the chamber with a sample (Fig. 2), parameters of reactor irradiation] are described in detail by the authors in Ref. 31. The experiment itself was fully consistent with the block diagram shown in Fig. 2. Deuterium was fed into the ampoule with the investigated sample from one side, and the ampoule was pumped out from the other side. During the experiment, the composition of the gas in the chamber was recorded.
Fig. 2. Experimental test bench LIANA and drawing of chamber with sample.31
The characteristic diagram of the experiment is shown in Fig. 3. As can be seen from the diagram, quasi-equilibrium values of deuterium flows were registered for various temperatures of the sample. These values decreased with increase of temperature, which indicates an increase in the rate of deuterium absorption by the lithium CPS.
Fig. 3. Characteristic diagram of the experiment on deuterium sorption.
The overall goal of the described reactor experiment was to study the process of tritium generation and release from a sample of the lithium CPS under the conditions of the presence of deuterium above the sample surface.
As was shown in Ref. 31, tritium in this mode is mainly released as a deuterium-tritium (DT) molecule (the maximum level of increase in pressure of DT molecules in the chamber is ~1.4E−7 Torr). As for deuterium, a significant amount of it is simply absorbed by the sample. Comparing the absorbed deuterium fluxes and the fluxes of released DT molecules, it can be stated that the amount of deuterium absorbed is more than 100 times higher than the fluxes of DT molecules. To study the absorption of deuterium in the lithium CPS, the main processes determining its absorption are the processes of adsorption (and subsequent dissociation) of D2 molecules from the chamber and their further dissolution into the volume of the lithium CPS.
Further, in accordance with the above procedure for calculating the absorption constant, vacuum calculations were performed for the experiment presented. The computational model was based on the averaged values of the actual sizes of the nodes of the experimental setup and the ampoule device, the pumping parameters of pumps built into the stand, and others.
The characteristic dependences of the changes in deuterium pressure in the vacuum system for various absorption parameters of the lithium CPS are shown in Fig. 4. It can be seen that the obtained dependences correspond to the physical picture of the experiment:
The greatest pressure is near the area of deuterium supply into the device.
There is an almost linear drop in pressure through the pipelines, and the rate of pressure drop is higher in a pipeline of smaller diameter.
There are characteristic irregularities in the area of the deuterium flow supply and the area of transition between pipelines and the AD experimental cell.
Fig. 4. Calculated dependences of the quasi-equilibrium distribution of pressure along the vacuum system for various parameters of the constant F (fraction of the flow absorbed by the sample’s surface).
If we denote by constant F the portion of the flow absorbed by the sample’s surface, then the variation range of constant F (from 0 to 0.002) completely covers the range of deuterium flow changes observed in the sorption experiments.
The next stage of the analysis was the simulation of experimentally obtained values of quasi-equilibrium deuterium pressures for different sample temperatures and the determination of the constants F and average levels of deuterium pressure in the cell. According to the procedure, the results of calculations of the temperature distribution over the volume of the experimental cell in the prereactor and reactor experiments were analyzed. In the calculations, we used experimental data on the cell temperature obtained in the experiment, according to which the parameters of the computational model were fitted. Examples of temperature distribution over a cell with a sample are shown in Fig. 5.
Fig. 5. Quasi-equilibrium temperature field distribution over the experimental cell with the sample during the prereactor and reactor experiments.
As can be seen from the calculations, there is a significant temperature gradient along the height of the investigated sample for almost all the temperatures studied, which should be taken into account when calculating the absorption constant. Further, calculation of the deuterium absorption constant by a sample of the lithium CPS, which takes into account the temperature distribution over the sample, was carried out.
The adjustment was carried out by variation of activation energy in the range from 10 to 100 kJ/mole and pre-exponential factor K0 in the range from 0.01 to 1 mole/(m2·s·Pa) with step 0.01 mole/(m2·s·Pa) and in the range from 1 to 100 mole/(m2·s·Pa) with step 1 mole/(m2·s·Pa). For each set of activation energy and pre-exponential factor, we calculated the sum of deviations of calculated values of absorbed flow and the values of experimentally measured absorbed flow:
Sum=∑∣∣∣dμdt(T)−P⋅K0⋅∑iSi⋅e−Ea/R⋅Ti∣∣∣.
Summation was carried out for all the temperature distributions for each stage, first for prereactor and then for reactor experiments.
The parameters of the Arrhenius dependence of the absorption rate constant, for which the minimum deviation was obtained, are shown in Fig. 6. It can be seen from Fig. 6 that the deuterium absorption rate constant of the lithium CPS increases under the influence of reactor irradiation.
Fig. 6. Temperature dependence of the rate of deuterium absorption constant by the lithium CPS for various experimental modes.
IV. CONCLUSION
This paper, therefore, shows that the proposed procedure for estimating the parameters of interaction of hydrogen isotopes with materials using the dynamic sorption method under complex exposure conditions allows us to determine the absorption rate constants for the existing uneven temperature distribution over the sample surface and for the presence of long vacuum paths of the experimental setup.
On the basis of the experimental data obtained in reactor experiments with the lithium CPS using the proposed method, the parameters of the Arrhenius dependence of the deuterium absorption rate constant for the lithium CPS under conditions of reactor irradiation without were calculated. The resulting difference in the deuterium absorption rate constants of the lithium CPS for different stages of experiments can be caused by various factors, for example, an increase in the dissolution rate of D atoms and DLi molecules from the lithium CPS surface into the bulk of the lithium CPS sample in reactor experiments or cleaning nonmetallic impurities as a result of reactor irradiation from the surface of the lithium CPS sample.
The calculated parameters will be applied further in modeling the results of experiments on the release of tritium from the lithium CPS: The parameters of the Arrhenius dependence of the formation (and decay) of LiT complexes in the lithium CPS and the dependence of the separation of tritium-containing molecules from the investigated sample will be obtained.
The proposed procedure for calculating the absorption constants of hydrogen isotopes will also be used in the analysis of experiments performed by dynamic sorption in the study of hydrogen corrosion processes in the equipment of petrochemical plants.
Acknowledgments
The work was performed within the program BR05236800 of the Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic of Kazakhstan.
