<title>Hierarchically porous nitrogen, oxygen-rich carbons derived from filter paper for high-performance lithium ion battery anodes</title>
<author>Junke Ou; Liang Zou; Feng Jin; Shugen Wu; Jiayi Wang</author>
<Affiliation>Institute for Advanced Study, Chengdu University, Shiling Town, Chengdu 610106, China; School of Medicine, Chengdu University, Shiling Town, Chengdu 610106, China; Key laboratory of coarse Cereal Processing, Ministry of Agriculture, Chengdu University, Shiling Town, Chengdu 610106, China; Zhanglan Honors College, Chengdu University, Shiling Town, Chengdu 610106, China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Powder Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier BV</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.powtec.2020.05.060</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0032591020304290?via%3Dihub</URL>
Highlights
•
Carbon coated silicon nanoparticles are synthesized in one-step by induction thermal plasma.
•
New ethylene injection method is powerful to reduce the formation of byproducts.
•
Core-shell structure can be clearly identified.
•
Carbon composition and property are tunable by adjusting ethylene gas flow rate.
Abstract
Synthesis of silicon nanoparticles with carbon coating by induction thermal plasma was investigated experimentally. Crystalline silicon was injected into plasma as raw material, and nanoparticles were produced through quenching process. Ethylene was chosen as carbon source for coating and injected into plasma downstream as a counter-flow with different gas flow rates to understand the effect on products. Synthesized silicon nanoparticles were successfully coated with carbon materials, and had an average diameter around 70 nm which was independent from ethylene flow rate. Obtained carbon coating was amorphous and consisted of sp2 carbons and sp3 carbons. Molar ratio of sp2 carbons to sp3 carbons, as well as the hydrogen content, decreased with higher ethylene gas flow rate. Increased concertation of hydrogen radicals was believed as the reason for those phenomenon due to etching effect on carbon coating. The above results are significant for the better performance of lithium ion batteries.
Keywords
Induction thermal plasma；Lithium ion battery；Silicon nanoparticle；Amorphous hydrogenated carbon coating；C/Si molar ratio
1. Introduction
Lithium ion batteries (LIBs) have been widely used and become the domain power source in small electronic devices for their advantages in energy density and cyclic life in the last 20 years. However, with the development of electric vehicles and devices, higher requirements have been proposed on the performance of LIBs, especially on their power capability and energy density [1]. As one of the most important component of LIBs, it is indispensable to improve the performances of anode materials [2]. Carbon is the most popular and widely used anode material for the commercial batteries due to its stable cycling characteristic, but the relative small charge storage capacity (372 mAh/g) severely limits the development of LIBs [3]. Therefore, researches on the higher capacity anode materials have attracted great interests, and many investigators devote their efforts to this challenge.
Silicon is found to be a promising anode material because of its extremely high charge storage capacity of 4200 mAh/g, which is approximately 10 times higher than graphite as anode [4]. Additionally, the formation of lithium dendrites on the silicon electrode surface can be limited due to the relative low discharge platform [5]. However, crystalline silicon undergoes a 400% volume expansion during lithiation and delithiation processes, and leads to poor cycle performance associated with the cracking and pulverization of electrode.
Several approaches have been proposed to overcome those problems. One of them is to form nanostructures, such as nanocrystals, nanowires, nanotubes and nanoparticles [[6], [7], [8], [9]]. Researchers found the particle-size-dependent fracture behavior of silicon nanoparticles during the first lithiation; that is, there exists a critical particle size of ~150 nm below which cracking does not occur [10]. Another alternative approach is forming core-shell structure with some ductile materials which act as a volumetric expansion buffer to improve the stability of anode [11]. Many kinds of materials were chosen as candidates for the coating synthesis, such as metal (Ag, Fe, Co and Cu) [11], SiOx [12,13], carbon [5,[14], [15], [16]] and so on. Especially for the carbon coating, which is believed as a useful way to prevent electrode pulverization, and provides continuous electronic and ionic conduction pathways during cycling. Therefore, the silicon nanoparticles with carbon coating could be a good choice for the LIBs anode.
Several synthesis methods for silicon nanoparticle with core-shell structure were proposed, while synthesis in one-step through traditional methods still seems difficult. In previous work, silicon nanoparticles with carbon coating were usually synthesized through wet chemical synthesis or chemical vapor deposition (CVD). The synthesized particles could avoid exposing the particles to an oxidizing environment and exhibited good electrochemical performance for batteries. However, those synthetic approaches always required complicated processes and lead to lower cost-effective. Moreover, some environmental-unfriendly and hazardous wastes were also synthesized as byproducts and therefore until now limit the large scale commercial viability. Thus the main challenge for the practical implementation of silicon anode is to develop cost-effective and environmental-friendly techniques to prepare silicon nanoparticles.
Thermal plasma has attracted extensive attention in recent years, and it is expected to be utilized for a number of industrial applications, such as plasma spraying, deposition of thin films, treatment of harmful materials and recovery of useful materials from wastes, and synthesis of high-quality and high-performance nanoparticles [17,18]. Among them, induction thermal plasma is characterized by high temperature, high chemical reactivity, rapid quenching rate and especially long residence times of 10–100 ms compared with other forms of thermal plasma [19]. Additionally, induction thermal plasma torch is an inherently contamination-free thermal plasma source, because it is produced without any internal electrodes. Moreover, induction thermal plasma method is environmental-friend and without dangers wastes producing during the particle synthesis. Therefore, induction thermal plasma provides an attractive alternative to conventional methods to synthesize silicon nanoparticles with higher purity and throughput.
The purpose of this paper is to prepare silicon nanoparticles with carbon coating by induction thermal plasma and understand the formation mechanism. To the best of our knowledge, and despite the copious silicon anode studies with plasma, most of the previous experimental methods require additional chemical vapor deposition process to coat carbon shell, or carbon source was injected into plasma with silicon raw materials together and a large amount of SiC was produced as unfavorable byproduct. In this study, a novel but simple way was applied to introduce carbon source in a relative low temperature zone, then silicon‑carbon composites can be prepared in one-step and the synthesis of SiC can be suppressed at the same time.
2. Experimental setup
2.1. Experimental configuration and procedure
Experiments for the fabrication of silicon nanoparticles were carried out with apparatus shown in Fig. 1(a), and the geometry of the torch and chamber is presented in Fig. 1(b). The set-up mainly consists of powder feeder to inject raw materials, plasma torch, reaction chamber, and particle collection filter. The plasma torch mainly comprises a water-cooled quartz tube and a water-cooled induction coil (3 turns), coupling its electromagnetic energy to the plasma at a frequency of 4 MHz. The plasma was generated at atmospheric pressure with fixed power of 17.5 kW. Some other operating conditions were summarized in Table 1.
Fig. 1. (Color online) Schematic of the experimental setup for production of silicon nanoparticle by induction thermal plasmas. The red and green arrows represent the injection of Ar and C2H4, respectively. (b) Illustration of the geometry of the torch and chamber with dimensions in mm. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Table 1. Experimental conditions for the induction thermal plasma system.
Parameter	Condition
Input power [kW]	17.5
RF frequency [MHz]	4
Pressure [kPa]	101.3
Sheath gas rate [L/min]	60 (Ar)
Inner gas rate [L/min]	5 (Ar)
Carrier gas rate [L/min]	3 (Ar)
Quenching gas rate [L/min]	20 (Ar)
Feed rate [mg/min]	800
C2H4 gas flow rate [L/min]	0.16–0.96
C/Si ratio (molar)	0.5, 2, 2.5, 3
Silicon powders with an average diameter around 5 μm (purity 99%, Kojundo Chemical Lab. Co. Ltd.) were fed into torch through the powder feeder by Ar carrier gas. The powder feed rate was fixed at 800 mg/min. Raw materials were evaporated completely because of the high enthalpy of induction thermal plasma after injection. Silicon vapor then were transported with plasma flow to reaction chamber, and nucleated and condensed in the tail region of the plasma due to steep temperature gradient. A counter flow Ar gas was injected into chamber at 20 L/min to enhance the quenching rate for the formation of nanoparticles. The distance between torch bottom and quenching gas exit was fixed as 150 mm as shown in the Fig. 1(b). Existed Csingle bondC double bonds in ethylene molecules are effective to increase the amount of sp2 species in prepared carbon coating, and the battery performance will also be improved with higher electrical conductive. Therefore, ethylene was chosen as carbon source in this research and the flow rate was determined to vary from 0.16 L/min to 0.96 L/min, corresponding to the C/Si molar ratio ranged from 0.5 to 3, respectively. The distance between torch bottom and carbon source injection position was fixed as 485 mm. Ethylene was injected in the axial direction as shown with the green arrow in Fig. 1 (a) to make sure C2H4 molecules were in the low temperature region to avoid the formation of unfavorable SiC. Synthesized nanoparticles were oxidized slowly under Ar atmosphere with 2 vol% of O2 before collected at the filter.
2.2. Analysis methods
The crystal structure and phase identification of the synthesized nanoparticles were determined through powders X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku Multiflex), operating with a Cu Kα source (λ = 0.1541 nm). The diffraction data was collected using the continuous scan mode at a speed of 2°/min in the region of 10–90° with a step of 0.04°. The accelerating voltage and applied current were 40 kV and 50 mA, respectively. The morphology of the particles was observed through transmission electron microscope (TEM, JEOL JEM-2100HCKM) and size distributions were measured by counting approximately 200 different particles. Electron diffraction patterns of nanoparticles were also analyzed by TEM. Element mapping of nanoparticles was conducted by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS JEOL JEM-ARM 200F). The composition and characteristic of carbon coating were mainly investigated through Raman spectra with a microscopic laser Raman spectrometer (LabRAM ARAMIS). The wavelength of excitation laser equipped to Raman spectrometer was determined at 532 nm. Electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS JEOL JEM-ARM 200F) was also conducted to comparatively understand the properties of carbon coating with the results of Raman.
3. Results
This section will present the results for the characterization of obtained nanoparticles, which will be divided into two parts, including characterization of the silicon nanoparticles and carbon coating.
3.1. Characterization of the silicon nanoparticles
3.1.1. Morphology and particle size by TEM
TEM images of the prepared silicon nanoparticles with different C2H4 gas flow rates are shown in Fig. 2. Two kinds of nanoparticles can be identified among the products with different morphologies as marked in TEM images. Obtained nanoparticles are fundamentally a mixture of crystalline silicon and SiC as will be discussed later with XRD results. Therefore, the hexagonal shape particles marked with red hexagon typically are related with SiC formation, while the spherical shape marked with brown circles is typically observed in cubic-structured crystalline silicon [13]. Silicon carbide can be observed exactly with C/Si ratio of 2.0 as shown in Fig. 2(b), and more hexagonal SiC particles are produced as unfavorable byproducts with higher hydrocarbon gas flow rate. Quantitative analysis for SiC formation will be carried out with XRD results in next section.
Fig. 2. (Color online) Morphology of as-synthesized silicon nanoparticle with different C/Si molar ratios. The brown circle represents silicon nanoparticles, while the red hexagon represents unfavorable SiC existence. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Most of the prepared silicon nanoparticles seems to be agglomerated and several tens of nanometers in size, and size distributions with various C/Si ratios are presented in Fig. 3. The number mean diameters of nanoparticles are estimated and shown as inserts in size distribution figures. Here, SiC nanoparticles are ignored during the size estimation because it is inactive material for anode of LIBs. The size distributions are similar with four cases irrespective of the C/Si ratio as well as the average diameter, that suggests the powder feed rate is the predominant factor for the particle size.
Fig. 3. (Color online) Size distribution of prepared silicon nanoparticle with different C/Si molar ratios by induction thermal plasma. Inserts indicate the average diameters of products estimated by countering more than 200 different particles.
3.1.2. XRD spectrum
The XRD spectra of the fabricated nanoparticles were demonstrated in Fig. 4 with changed C/Si ratios. Synthesized crystalline cubic-structured silicon is clearly identified with diffraction peaks shown in the XRD patterns. Diffraction peaks associated with β-SiC phase are also observed, and the relative intensity with respect to that of silicon seems became higher with more C2H4 gas injection. Molar percentage of SiC and Si can be estimated by the quantitative analysis method of XRD spectrum according to the adiabatic method [20,21]. Crystalline silicon and β-SiC can be identified through the XRD results, and Si was selected as reference sample. Then the relative integral intensities of two phases can be applied to quantitatively evaluate the mass fraction of SiC through the following equation,
@(1)
where, MSiC is the mass fraction of SiC, ISi and ISiC represent the relative integral intensities of Si and SiC, K denotes the ratio of RIR (reference intensity ratio) values which can be obtained from the PDF cards (powder diffraction file). The RIR values of Si and SiC are 4.55 and 3.53, then KSiSiC can be determined as RIRSiC/RIRSi while KSiSi is 1. Therefore, the mass fraction of SiC can be estimated and the molar ratio can be determined subsequently based on the molar mass, and obtained result is displayed in Fig. 5. Molar ratio of SiC increases from 2.7% to 17% when the initial C/Si ranges from 0.5 to 3, and this conclusion is consistent with the observation from TEM figures. Since the increased C/Si ratio will lead to more decomposition of C2H4 molecules, and more free C atoms will be released and react with melted silicon to fabricate SiC. Moreover, molar ratio of SiC in this research is lower than 17%, which is few amount compared with other presented research results with the similar C/Si ratio [15]. Therefore, this new setup, which can inject hydrocarbon molecules to the relative low temperature zones, is powerful to reduce the formation of unfavorable SiC, and the performance of anode prepared with these powders will be much improved in prediction.
Fig. 4. (Color online) XRD spectrums of synthesized nanoparticles with different C/Si molar ratios.
Fig. 5. (Color online) Molar percentages of SiC in different cases estimated from XRD results.
3.1.3. EDS and electronic diffraction results
The microstructure of synthesized powders is further investigated through STEM-EDS analysis, and the results are shown in Fig. 6. Firstly, green and red colors represent the existence of silicon and carbon respectively in the elemental mapping figures, which confirms the presence of silicon and carbon. Core-shell structure can be identified clearly as presented in Figs. 6(d)–(p), while the core part is silicon which is surrounded with carbon coating. The thickness of shell is estimated to be roughly 2–8 nm and increases slightly with C/Si molar ratios.
Fig. 6. (Color online) STEM-EDS results of nanoparticles with different C/Si molar ratios, while silicon element is shown as green color and carbon is red. Figures (a)–(b) display the analysis results with C/Si = 0.5, (e)–(f) show results of nanoparticles at C/Si = 2.0, the EDS results with C/Si is 2.5 and 3.0 are shown in figures (i)–(l) and (m)–(p), respectively. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Moreover, electronic diffraction analysis was conducted, and the nanoparticles synthesized at C/Si = 2.5 were taken as an example. Diffraction patterns are shown in Fig. 7. The focuses of the electron beam in the coating and core parts were presented as green and red cycles shown in Fig. 7(a). For the silicon core, clear and regular diffraction spots can be observed from Fig. 7(b), which suggests the silicon particles are crystalline. According to the diffraction patterns of carbon coating shown in Fig. 7(c), only diffused rings are obtained and indicates the shell is synthesized as amorphous phase. This is consistent with the XRD results discussed in last section, that no detectable peaks associated with carbon can be observed. Therefore, silicon nanoparticles with amorphous carbon coating were successfully synthesized, and the properties of carbon coating will be discussed in next section.
Fig. 7. (Color online) (a) TEM figure of nanoparticles synthesized with C/Si = 2.5. The red cycle and green cycle are the focuses of electron beam in core and shell. The corresponding diffraction patterns are shown in figure (b) and (c), respectively. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
3.2. Characterization for the carbon coating
3.2.1. Composition of carbon coating
Raman spectroscopy is a vital and nondestructive tool to characterize crystalline, nanocrystalline, amorphous carbon and other organic groups [22]. Moreover, defects and bond disorders in the materials can also be identified from the signals of Raman. The characterization of carbon coating was investigated with Raman spectrum in this research, which was recorded at a range of 1000–3100 cm−1 and analyzed by curve fitting by 100% Gaussian distribution peak shape. Raman spectra diagrams of synthesized particles are shown in Fig. 8 with two regions, which are in 1200–1700 cm−1 and 2800–3100 cm−1 respectively. Several peaks associated with CHx species can be identified, which means prepared coating is amorphous hydrogenated carbon instead of pure carbon material.
Fig. 8. (Color online) Raman spectra with different C/Si molar ratios, in ranges of (a) 1200–1700 cm−1 and, (b) 2800–3100 cm−1.
There are two most prominent peaks located in the 1200–1700 cm−1 region with visible excitation, which are called as D and G peaks. D peak lies at around 1330 cm−1 and is assigned to K-point phonons of A1g symmetry, while G peak is centered about 1590 cm−1 and associated with the zone center phonons of E2g symmetry. G peak is detectable due to the in-plane bond-stretching motion of pairs of carbon sp2 atoms existing in both chains and sixfold rings. D peak appears due to the breathing modes of carbon sp2 atoms existing only in rings, and is forbidden in perfect graphite while can be observed with some disorders exist. Disorders of carbonaceous materials in this research mainly attribute to the appearance of sp3 atoms, therefore the relative intensity ratio of D and G peaks (ID/IG) can be used to investigate the ratio of sp2 and sp3 bonds [22,23], while material properties will be closer to graphite with higher ratio of sp2.
The calculated results of ID/IG with standard errors at different C/Si ratios are shown in Fig. 9. Taking into account of EELS results, which will be discussed latter, the ratio of sp2 bonds decreases with the increase of ID/IG. Therefore, the prepared nanoparticles are characterized with lower sp2 ratio at higher initial C/Si ratio. Fig. 10 shows the values of G peak position, which reduces from 1590 cm−1 to 1573 cm−1 when C/Si ratio increases from 0.5 to 3. Incorporation of more sp3 groups with lower vibration frequency into coating reduces the phonon vibration frequency [22], and causes G peak shifts to low wavenumbers. Therefore, Raman results indicate the sp3 carbon content increases with higher C/Si ratio. This conclusion demonstrates the results of ID/IG again, and the reason will be discussed in section 4.2 of this paper.
Fig. 9. (Color online) Estimated results of relative intensity ratio of D and G peaks at different C/Si ratios. Error bars represent the standard errors of average.
Fig. 10. (Color online) Estimated results of G peak position at different C/Si ratios. Error bars show the standard errors of the mean.
The hardness of the coating is a significant parameter for the practical applications of silicon nanoparticles. Higher hardness can prevent pulverization and keep the structural integrity. In this research, the full width half maximum (FWHM) at G peak was measured to predict the hardness property. FHWM(G) is proportional to the degree of structural disorder for amorphous carbon coating, and greater FHWM(G) indicates larger density and higher hardness [23]. The values of FHWM(G) with standard errors at different C/Si ratios are shown in Fig. 11, and indicates the hardness, as well as the structural disorder, are lower with a higher hydrocarbon gas flow rate.
Fig. 11. (Color online) FWHM at G peak position estimated by Raman spectrum with different C/Si ratios. The error bars denote the standard errors of the average value.
EELS spectrum is one of the most momentous analysis methods for carbon to characterize its band gap, inter-band transition, density of state, and quantify the sp2 fraction versus sp3 in amorphous carbon materials [24]. The carbon K-edges spectrum recorded from nanoparticles with different C/Si ratios were shown in Fig. 12. The peak locates at about 286 eV is associated with the transitions from the core 1 s state to the π⁎ state, and demonstrates the presence of sp2 bonding. Another broaden peak, which spreads in the range of 290 eV to 300 eV, is induced by the transitions from the core 1 s state to the σ⁎ state and can be interpreted in terms of sp3 bonding. The sp2 ratio therefore is proportional to the intensity ratio of Iπ/I(π+σ) [25], and estimated results are shown in Fig. 13. The value of Iπ/I(π+σ) decreases with higher C/Si ratio, and suggests sp2 ratio becomes lower when more C2H4 molecules are injected into reaction chamber. This further proves the conclusion of relationship between sp2 ratio and C/Si ratio. The relationship between ID/IG and the sp2 ratio, which was applied in the discussion before, will be proved now. The intensity ratio ID/IG decreases with the increases of Iπ/I(π+σ) as presented in Fig. 14. Therefore, ID/IG is in reverse proportion to the sp2 ratio as we mentioned.
Fig. 12. (Color online) Normalized carbon K-edges spectrum recorded from nanoparticles with different C/Si ratios.
Fig. 13. (Color online) Estimated intensity ratio of π* and σ* in different C/Si molar ratios. The error bars represent the standard errors of the corresponding mean value.
Fig. 14. (Color online) Relationship between ID/IG and Iπ/I(π+σ) which already be applied in discussion before.
3.2.2. Hydrogen content in carbon coating
Hydrogen content of coating has a significant effect on the performance of nanoparticles, that can influence microstructure of coating and the mechanical characters, such as density, hardness and so on. Raman spectrum is a powerful tool for the hydrogen investigation because the photoluminescence (PL) background of Raman signals will increase for higher H content [22,26]. The hydrogen saturation of nonradiative recombination centers was believed as the main reason for this phenomenon [27]. Researchers found that the PL background slope m is in exponential dependence with the bonded hydrogen content [28]. Therefore, the ratio of PL slope m and the intensity of the G peak, m/IG, can be used to calculate the hydrogen content as the following equation.
@(2)
where m indicates the PL background slope from the Raman spectrum as shown in Fig. 15(a). Estimated results of hydrogen content from Raman spectrum with different C/Si molar ratios are displayed in Fig. 15(b). More bonded hydrogen atoms can be identified when the C/Si ratio is 0.5, while the hydrogen content decreases slightly from 45.8% to 42.7% as the C/Si increases. This phenomenon can be explained by the effect of H radicals, and more detail discussions will be conducted with the formation mechanism of carbon coating in next section.
Fig. 15. (Color online) (a) Schematic diagram of the estimation method for H content by Raman spectra. (b) Estimated hydrogen content with Raman results at different C/Si molar ratios. The error bars represent the standard errors of the corresponding average.
4. Discussion
4.1. Formation mechanism of silicon nanoparticles
Homogeneous nucleation temperatures of silicon considered in the present study were estimated based on nucleation theory considering non-dimensional surface tension [29]. The homogeneous nucleation rate J can be expressed as:
@(3)
where S is the saturation ratio and ns is the equilibrium saturation monomer concentration at temperature T. β is the collision frequency function. The non-dimensional surface tension θ and saturation ratio S are given by the following equations, respectively:
@(4)
@(5)
where σ is the surface tension and s1 is the monomer surface area. Ps is the saturation pressure, and P represents the partial pressure of the vapor elements. The surface tension and the saturation ratio have strong influences on determining the nucleation rate. A stable nucleation can be confirmed conveniently through experiments when the nucleation rate becomes higher than 1 cm−3 s−1 [30]. The corresponding saturation ratio can be defined as critical saturation ratio at nucleation temperature. Therefore, calculated nucleation temperature at the condition of this experiment is 2504 K. Then the growth zones for the Si particles were determined, where the temperature is lower than the nucleation temperature around 2504 K and higher than the melting temperature at about 1680 K.
Formation mechanism of silicon nanoparticles coated with amorphous hydrogenated carbon is shown in Fig. 16. Firstly, silicon raw material is injected into the plasma torch, and is immediately evaporated because of the high temperature which is higher than 104 K. After that, the silicon vapors are transported through the center zone of the plasma and reach the tail region where the temperature is about 2504 K. The saturation vapor pressure will decrease rapidly due to the decreased temperature, and falls below the partial pressure of silicon. At this time the vapor meets the condition of supersaturation and homogenous nucleation happens. Then silicon vapor condenses on the produced nuclei and nanoparticles will be synthesized through coagulation and solidification processes with temperature lower than 1680 K.
Fig. 16. (Color online) Formation mechanism of silicon nanoparticles by induction thermal plasma.
In the case of ethylene injection, carbon coating is synthesized as well as some unfavorable SiC particles. SiC can be formed spontaneously when temperature is lower than 3400 K due to the negative Gibbs free energy, which was estimated with the thermodynamic calculation software FACT-WIN (No data are shown in the manuscript). If C2H4 is injected into the high temperature zones with temperature higher than 1680 K, a large amount of decomposed C atoms will react with the melted Si particles. Then SiC will be synthesized predominately and the formation of carbon coating will be suppressed. In contrast, formation of silicon carbide will be negligible when most of the hydrocarbon molecules are injected in the zones where silicon particles are already solidified, and the silicon core will be coated with carbon materials successfully. The molar ratio of SiC in this research is much lower than the previous published results as presented, and suggests the formation of SiC can be limited by injecting the C2H4 gas in low temperature zones.
4.2. Formation mechanism of carbon coating
The ethylene molecules injected into the zones where temperature is higher than 1680 K are not considered in this part, because prepared silicon materials are still melted in those zones and will react with carbon to form unfavorable SiC instead of carbon coating. The formation mechanism of carbon coating is shown in Fig. 17, which involves four stages: decomposition, adsorption, bonding and etching. Synthesized carbon coating consists of = CH2 groups as depicted in Fig. 8, which should be attributed to the incomplete decomposition of C2H4. Ethylene molecules start to decompose with temperature is higher than 780 K [31,32], and C2H3 and H are released as following equation,
@(6)
Fig. 17. (Color online) Schematic of the formation mechanism of carbon coating. The red and blue balls represent H and C atoms, respectively, while the green line means the chemical bonds. Orange background indicates the Ar atmosphere. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
With further decomposition reactions, C2H2 and C2H radicals will also be formed due to the relative stronger Csingle bondC double bond (728 kJ/mol) compared with Csingle bondH bond (468 kJ/mol). Ethylene molecules will decompose completely if the temperature continually increases, and C atoms will be released in decomposition stage as shown in Fig. 17(a). Here, large amount of H radicals or thermal H atoms are produced at the same time. However, formation of –CH3 and –CH2, which already be identified by Raman spectrum shown in Fig. 8, seems impossible through the direct dehydrogenation reactions like eq. (6). Moreover, the ratio of hydrocarbon molecules in reaction chamber is less than 1% during experiments, which means the reactions between CxHy and H are ignorable in Ar atmosphere. Therefore, the released radicals should be adsorbed around silicon nanoparticles to form a hydrocarbon rich zones in Fig. 17(b), while argon rich zones are in outer layers because Ar is non-reactive species for silicon nanoparticles. Some radicals will react with each other to form some other species in hydrocarbon rich zones, such as CH3 and CH2, as following equations,
@(7)
@(8)
@(9)
Most radicals include CxHy and H will bond to the surface of silicon nanoparticles in the third stage shown in Fig. 17(c), and decomposed thermally to form a carbon coating consisting of sp2 hybridized carbons and sp3 hybridized carbons and other carbon-based groups. As presented in the previous research papers, the formation rate of graphite (sp2) is higher than that of diamond (sp3) under the atmospheric pressure [33]. Abundant H radicals are produced and surrounded silicon nanoparticles as discussed before. The high-density H radicals are effective to etch the weaker chemical bonds [34]. For the carbon bonds, sp2 hybridized bonds are more easily be destroyed or removed by H radicals than the sp3 hybrid orbital does [35], and the activation energy barrier for the etching of graphite and diamond was estimated as 0.2 eV (~2000 K) and 0.55 eV (~6000 K) according to the previous researches [36,37]. It is due to the weaker π bonds compared with the σ bonds, even though the bond energy of sp2 is higher than sp3. Then the sp2 rings or chains will be destroyed or transfer to sp3 hybrid orbitals for the final products in etching stage as showed in Fig. 17(d). As the C/Si ratio increases from 0.5 to 3, more H radicals were formed with increased C2H4 gas flow rate. However, the number of silicon nanoparticles were almost constant because of the fixed silicon feed rate. Then more H radicals are prepared for every silicon particle to share, and the etching effect will be enhanced. Therefore, more sp2 hybridized bonds will be destroyed and the ratio of sp2 will be lower with C/Si ratio increases, which is consistent with the conclusion as demonstrated in section 3.2.
Furthermore, H radicals can abstract the bonded hydrogen from the carbon coating [38]. The adsorbed H atoms will react with H radicals to synthesize hydrogen gas and released through the pump system. This is one reason for the hydrogen content in coating decreases with higher C/Si as discussed before. Moreover, the composition of carbon coating can be modified through the bonded hydrogen displacing with H radicals [39]. The displaced hydrogen atoms might recombine with each other and become H2 molecules. Those hydrogen atoms and H2 molecules can be trapped in the defects or voids of amorphous hydrogenated carbon coating, or just release to the environment. The latter process also leads the lower H content in a higher hydrocarbon gas flow rate.
5. Conclusion
Silicon nanoparticles with core-shell structure were successfully fabricated in one-step by induction thermal plasma. The formation mechanism of silicon nanoparticles was explained by estimated nucleation temperature and experimental results. Main remarks are drawn as follows:
Crystalline silicon as raw materials were injected into the plasma at 800 mg/min and evaporated immediately, then nanoparticles were produced due to the extremely high quenching rate. The synthesized silicon nanoparticles are in the range of 67 nm to 78 nm for average diameter, while carbon coating has a thickness ranges 2–8 nm. The size distributions of nanoparticles are similar with each other despite of carbon source flow rates, that suggests the diameter of nanoparticles is predominantly determined by silicon raw material feed rate, while the effect of carbon source can be ignored. The formation of SiC is identified with XRD and TEM results, and the molar ratio of SiC increases from 2.7% to 17% with C/Si molar ratio increases. Those values are much lower than previous research works and means the new experimental method is effective to suppress the formation of SiC which is not active material for LIBs.
EDS and Raman spectrum results indicate the obtained coating is amorphous hydrogenated carbon consisting of sp2 hybridized carbons and sp3 hybridized carbons and other carbon-based groups. The effect of C/Si molar ratio on the carbon coating is investigated by Raman as well as STEM-EELS, and the most important factor to effect the carbon shell properties is H radicals. Since the content of H radical increases with more C2H4 molecules injection, etching effect for sp2 bonds is enhanced. Then more sp2 hybrid orbitals will be destroyed and the ratio of sp2 will be lower. For the same reason, hydrogen content in the carbon coating becomes lower with more ethylene molecules injection.
In the present work, induction thermal plasmas provide a powerful tool to prepare the silicon nanoparticles with carbon coating for the anode material of LIBs. Moreover, the microstructure and the composition of coating are tunable through adjusting the experimental parameters, which is significant for the practical application of silicon anode.
Acknowledgments
Zhang Xiaoyu was sponsored by the China Scholarship Council.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
