<title>Tailored MWCNTs/SnO 2 decorated cellulose nanofiber adsorbent for the removal of Cu (II) from waste water</title>
<author>Eman A. Mwafy; Ayman M. Mostafa</author>
<Affiliation>Physical Chemistry Department, Inorganic Chemical Industries and Mineral Resources Division, National Research Centre, 33 El Bohouth St. (former El Tahrir St.), P.O. 12622, Dokki, Giza, Egypt; Laser Technology Unit, Center of Excellent for Advanced Science, National Research Centre, 33 El Bohouth St. (former El Tahrir St.), P.O. 12622, Dokki, Giza, Egypt; Spectroscopy Department, Physics Division, National Research Centre, 33 El Bohouth St. (former El Tahrir St.), P.O. 12622, Dokki, Giza, Egypt; Center for Imaging and Microscopy (CIM), Zewail City of Science and Technology, October Gardens, 6th of October, Giza, 12578, Egypt</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier Ltd.</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radphyschem.2020.109172</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0969806X20308938?via%3Dihub</URL>
Highlights
•Electrospinning was used to produce continuous nonwoven fibers from CA.
•CA was functionalized with MWCNTs/SnO2 hybrid composite by PLAL technique.
•The resulted nanocomposites were characterized by XRD, SEM, TEM, FT-IR, and EDX.
•The effect of CNF/MWCNTs/SnO2 nanocomposite on Cu (II) removal was studied.
Abstract
Functionalized cellulose nanofiber (CNF) was enhanced with multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) and tin oxide (SnO2) forming hybrid CNF/MWCNTs/SnO2 nanocomposite structure in the form of nonwoven fiber membrane by the aid of both electrospinning and laser ablation techniques to be used for the removal of Cu (II) ions from waste water. The confirmation and investigation of the nanocomposite membrane was carried by infrared red spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction, transmission and scanning electron microscope, and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy. They showed the vibrating absorption peaks of the SnO2 and the graphite structure, the presence of the elemental analysis consisting of the composite structure, and the diffraction peaks of SnO2 and graphite crystalline structure. Finally, the adsorption possibility of the modified electrospun nonwoven membrane toward Cu2+ ions was investigated with the effect of pH, contact time and concentration of both adsorbent and metal ion to reach the optimum condition for Cu (II) removal.
Keywords
MWCNTs；Laser ablation；Cellulose；Water treatment
1. Introduction
Clean freshwater is a vital requirement for living life. However, the majority of this resource found as wastewater resulting from industry, agriculture and human households, a great effort to tackle this inescapable global challenge for water treatment has been exerted (Mostafa and Mwafy, 2020a, Mostafa and Mwafy, 2020b; Eisa et al., 2019; Alghool et al., 2019; Menazea et al., 2020a, 2020b, 2020c; Mostafa et al., 2020; Mwafy et al., 2019; Mostafa and Menazea, 2020). The contamination of water by toxic heavy metals (cadmium, mercury, copper, nickel, zinc, and chromium) has a considerable great attention as perilous for human health and the whole environment as they naturally occurred in the rock composition and ore minerals. They might be brought to the environment through different industrial sectors (Shi et al., 2020; Jumina et al., 2020; Menazea and Awwad, 2020). Furthermore, when these heavy metal ions combined with the organic compound of dyes, the toxicity of water contamination increased, leading to essential do a lot of efforts to find solutions from water purification technologies which are environmentally friendly and cost-effective for removing these contaminants (El-Saied et al., 2020; Mostafa et al., 2019a; Zakria et al., 2020; Mostafa and Menazea, 2020b; Menazea and Mostafa, 2020; Abdelrahman and Khattab, 2019; Menazea et al., 2020d; Ahmed et al., 2020a).
Versatile methods including biological treatment, chemical precipitation, reverse osmosis, ion exchange, electrolytic reduction, advanced oxidation, membrane technology, and adsorption have been developed to solve the water treatment problem (Arbabi et al., 2015). Major drawbacks of the mentioned methods include handling and disposal problems, high sludge production, technical constraints, high cost, etc. This required cost-effective and environmentally green techniques for the treatment of wastewaters containing metals and dyes. Among all these offered treatment methods, adsorption is preferred as a candidate to be one of the most economical and effective methods. The fabrication of adsorbent materials with a proper adsorption capacity and relatively minimal costs is the main goal of the environmental remediation plane. The progress in nanotechnology has enormously contributed to both water quality and availability of water resources, meanwhile the use of sophisticated filtration materials that permit for great water area to be reuse (Gao et al., 2019; Raza et al., 2018).
Owing to the considerable specific surface area and adorable adsorption capacity behavior, nanomaterials have been widely used for the removal of pollutants from water whereas incorporation of these nanomaterials is now broadly considered as a key component of advanced membrane materials with a highly efficient permeability separation membranes and low processing cost throughputs. Subsequently, challenges still exist in the fabrication of nanofiber membrane with high permeation property (Mostafa and Mwafy, 2020c; Mwafy et al., 2015; Awad et al., 2015; Abou-Kandil et al., 2015).
In addition to its attractive physical properties, it is an important cellulose ester in industry and comparatively has adequate flexural, high modulus, and tensile strength. Furthermore, CA could be forming a bond to capture undesired heavy metal ions into the surface forming the complexation mechanisms. Besides, it can also be used as reverse osmosis and nanofiltration membranes, but CA is not totally effective in its natural form because its low stability and finite adsorption sites. For that, the functionalization strategy is employed to enhance both the stability and the surface activity and this step could be achieved through adding functional groups such as –COOH, –SO3H and –NH2 into the backbone of cellulose structure or developing the dimension scale of the fiber to tune its pore size and the surface area with changing its functional groups on its surface (Khattab et al., 2019a, 2019b, 2019c; Ahmed et al., 2020b, Ahmed et al., 2020c, Ahmed et al., 2020d; Morsi et al., 2019; Mwafy et al., 2017; Okil et al., 2019; Menazea et al., 2020; Tommalieh et al., 2020). The second strategy that comes back generating fibers with nanoscale diameters where these nanostructured materials fit this criterion well through building blocks providing extra high surface area and capturing functional groups that can interact with heavy metal ions (Menazea and Ahmed, 2020a, 2020b). So, they show impressive water treatment capacity like eliminating heavy metal ions. Among these nanostructured materials, Multi-walled Carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) and SnO2 with a novel study due to limiting publications related to the adsorption of heavy metal ions by metal oxide nanoparticles in addition to the lack of complete adsorbent characterization for the selected composite structure, which could be synthesized by different techniques as pulsed laser ablation (Menazea and Ahmed, 2020c; Ahmed et al., 2020e; Menazea, 2020a) and chemical vapor deposition (Mwafy et al., 2017; Mwafy, 2020; Eman et al., 2016).
Electrospinning is a simple and multilateral method for producing continuous nonwoven fibers with diameters ranging from micrometers to nanometers (Khattab et al., 2016; Abdelmoez et al., 2016). Through the electrospinning process, a large specific surface area with an excellent adsorption capacity fiber membrane could be obtained.
So, this work is aimed to fabricate cellulose acetate (CA) functionalized with MWCNTs/SnO2 hybrid composite in the form of a nonwoven fiber membrane by the technique of electrospinning and laser ablation method. MWCNTs hybrid composite provides both more chains through the adsorptive–COOH groups beside SnO2 on the CA fiber increasing the capture selectivity and effectiveness. Different techniques were used to study the physicochemical properties of the prepared nanocomposite membrane such as Fourier transform infrared red spectroscopy (FT-IR), X-ray diffraction (XRD), transmission and scanning electron microscope (TEM and SEM), and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX). Finally, the adsorption possibility of Cu2+, of the modified electrospun CA nonwoven membrane were investigated to clarify the optimal adsorption condition by studying the effect of pH medium values, contact time and concentration of both adsorbent and metal ion.
2. Material and method
2.1. Materials
Cellulose acetate of Mw = 30,000 g/mol with an acetyl content of 39.8% supplied from Sigma-Aldrich. Acetone and N,N-dimethylacetamide (DMAc) analytically graded and were supplied by Sigma-Aldrich were used as received. Multiwalled Carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) were functionalized by nitric acid (68%). Tin metal granules purchased from Sigma-Aldrich were used for the preparation of SnO2. Copper (II) nitrate trihydrate (CuN2O6·3H2O) purchased from Sigma-Aldrich was used in the adsorption experiments. pH adjustment was carried on using 0.1 N hydrochloric acid (HCl) and 0.1 N sodium hydroxide (NaOH). All the solutions were prepared using deionized water.
2.2. Preparation of nanocomposites nanofiber (CNF/MWCNT/SnO2)
The synthesis of CNF/MWCNT/SnO2 nanocomposite was passed to the number of steps as mentioned in the schematic diagram of Fig. 1, which could be described in details as following:
Fig. 1. Schematic illustration for synthetic CNF/MWCNTS/SnO2 nanocomposite.
2.2.1. Functionalization of MWCNTs
1 gm of MWCNTs was dissolved in 126 ml of 68% concentrated nitric acid and the solution was completed to 200 ml of deionized water (DI) followed by refluxing at 120 °C for 24 h. The resultant was filtrated on Whatman Millipore filter paper and the precipitate was washed several times with ethanol and deionized water until reaching to neutral pH value of 7 and was dried overnight at 100 °C.
2.2.2. Electrospinning of cellulose acetate
A Solution of 15% CA w/v was prepared in a solvent solution of acetone: dimethylacetamide (DMAc) with a percentage of 2:1 and homogenously stirred for about 12 h. A homogeneous CA solution has been obtained and loaded into a 5 ml syringe and positioned horizontally on the syringe pump of the electrospinning device (Model Na-Bond, China). The aluminum foil was grounded on the collector which placed on a distance of 15 cm far from the tip of a stainless-steel needle, which was adjusted with a selected flow rate of 0.3 ml/h and the solution were pumped through a gauge (bore diameter = 0.21 mm) at a high voltage direct current of 20 kV. The electrospun mat was collected on the aluminum foil and initially dried for 12 h at 60 °C to remove the residual solvent. Then the composite membrane was immersed in deionized water for 24 h to improve the fiber roughness and porosity. Finally, the wetted nanofiber was dried at 70 °C for another 24 h then heated in an oven at 150 °C for 1 h to ensure curing and cross-linking, hence the aluminum foil was peeled off carefully.
2.2.3. De-acetylation and functionalization of cellulose acetate nanofibers
Prior to functionalization, CANF was deacetylated to regenerate cellulose nanofibers (CNF). Deacetylation step is a vital step and briefly was performed by soaking 100 mg of the mat in 100 ml of 0.1 M NaOH solution for 6 h then washed by deionized water DI until to reach neutral pH.
2.2.4. Functionalization of cellulose nanofiber
The functionalization step was carried out at room temperature by dipping CNF mat in a solution of 2 M NaOH for 3 min to produce sodium cellulose nanofiber (Na–CNF) and subsequently washed with 0.1 M NaOH solution. Then the resultant Na-CNFs were dipped into a solution of 1 M sodium choro acetate for 6 h. Finally, an anionic functionalized cellulose nanofiber (f-CNFs) was obtained and washed thoroughly with DI and dried.
2.2.5. Preparation of nanocomposites nanofiber (CNF/MWCNT/SnO2)
CNF/MWCNT/SnO2 nanocomposite nanofibers were prepared by the laser ablation assisted method. For the preparation 100 mg of f-CNF was dipped into 100 ml of DI and an appropriate amount of f-MWCNTs and tin (Sn) metal granules via Nd:YAG laser with 80 mJ power per pulse. An acoustic optically Q-switched Nd-YAG laser (λ = 1064 nm) with 7 ns pulse duration, was used and adjusted to operate at a 10 Hz repetition rate (Continuum laser, PL9000, USA). The laser beam was focused on the target surface using a lens of focal length 70 mm based on the previous work (Darwish et al., 2015, 2016; Mostafa et al., 2017a, 2017b; ElFaham et al., 2020a; Mostafa, 2021; Menazea, 2020b). The obtained suspension nanocomposite from CNF, MWCNTs, and SnO2 was filtered by the aid of the pump system and the solid product was dried in an oven overnight at 120 °C.
2.3. Characterization techniques
The crystalline structure investigation of the prepared sample was carried by X-ray diffractometer (XRD) (Schimadzu 7000, Japan) operating with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.154060 nm). Moreover, the composites nanofiber obtained was performed by Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR, JASCO 6100 spectrometer, Japan). Also, The morphology and the chemical composition of the prepared sample was investigated by Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) measurements using TEAM® software attached to scanning electron microscopy on a Quanta FEG 250 electron microscope, while its size and shape were observed by a high-resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) of the type JEOL—JEM-1011, Japan. In addition to the optical properties of prepared sample was measured using a JASCO 570 UV–vis–NIR spectrophotometer, Japan.
2.4. Heavy metal ion separation study
Batch adsorption investigations were carried to modify the removal by the adsorbent of heavy metal ions and acquire the equilibration data, while the stock was performed in a batch reactor where 1000 mg/L of copper stock solution was prepared by dissolving 3.8 g of Cu(NO3)2·3H2O in 1 L distilled water, which was used as a standard tested Cu solutions. Different pH values and solution concentrations were optimized at ambient temperature. Fixed volume (100 ml of concentration 10–100 mg/L) of metal ion solutions was transferred into flask containing 50 mg of the adsorbent nanofiber mat and agitated for a constant contact time for 24 h on a mechanical shaker. The mixture was then centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 10 min. The supernatant was filtered using a 0.45 μm microfilter and analyzed for residual metal ion concentration. When the filtration was completed, the filtrate solution containing non-adsorbed metal ions was taken and the concentration of heavy metal ions was determined by spectrophotometer technique.
To ensure accuracy, reliability, and reproducibility of the data collected, all the experiments were carried out twice and the mean values of the data sets are recorded. The amount of metal ion adsorbed was calculated according to Eq. (1) (Ajmal et al., 2018):
(1)q = (Co − Cf) V/ M
where q is the amount of metal ion adsorbed (mg g−1), Cf and Co are final and initial metal ion concentrations (mg L−1), respectively, V is the volume of metal ions used (L), and M is the mass of the adsorbent (g).
2.5. Desorption and recycling experiments
Desorption and re-adsorption have been conducted in order to validate the recycling capacity of the membrane for further practical application. For desorption process, 1 mM of 30 ml ethylene-diamine tetra acetic acid (EDTA) solution was flown via the membrane. Consequently, distilled water was poured to wash the membrane for an hour. To assess the quantity of Cu2+ disorbed, EDTA solution was examined and Cu2+ concentration was calculated. The re-adsorption process was performed as the same method of initial adsorption. The concentration of Cu2+ in the stock samples was recorded and Cu2+ adsorbing efficiency (q) was expressed by the following formula (Ajmal et al., 2018):
(2)q (μg/mg) = (q0 − q1) V/ m
where [Math Processing Error] and [Math Processing Error] are the concentration of copper ions in the stock solution before and after the adsorption, respectively, while m is the mass of the membrane. The recycling capacity was calculated by the following equation, recycling efficiency (%) = [Math Processing Error].Where [Math Processing Error] is the amount of re-adsorbed copper ions. The amount of Cu2+ in the solution was calculated. Recycling experiments were carried out by treating the wasted nanofiber obtained after filtration with HCl (Ki et al., 2007).
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Physicochemical investigations
The vibrational absorption spectra of cellulose acetate nanofiber (CANF), cellulose nanofiber (CNF), functionalized carbon nanofiber (f-CNF), and CNF/MWCNTs/SnO2 nanocomposite was mentioned in Fig. 2. In the case of CANF, there is a broad and weak vibration absorption peak appeared in the range between 3220 cm−1 and 3650 cm−1 corresponding to the presence of free stretching –OH vibrational motion, while the weak vibrational absorption peak at 2847 cm−1 and 2926 cm−1 was related to the stretching –CH and –CH2 vibrational motion of methyl group –CH3, respectively (Anis et al., 2018; Ahmad-Fouad Basha and Mostafa, 2019). Furthermore, the strong vibrational absorption peak at 1735 cm−1 has appeared as the effect of the presence of stretching –Cdouble bondO vibrational group in the CA structure. Moreover, there is an absorption band for the vibrational motion that appeared at 1326 cm−1 due to the effect of the bending vibrational motions of –OH. Furthermore, there is a vibrational motion that appeared at 1218 cm−1 due to the effect of stretching -C-O-C- of the ester group. Also, the vibrational motion that appeared at 1034 cm−1 was due to the presence of -C-OH. Besides, the vibrational motion appeared at 864 cm−1 was related to the out-of-plane bending of C–H (Mostafa et al., 2019b, 2020b; Hasanin et al., 2018). In the case of CNF, the deacetylation process was appeared by disappearing the absorption peak of –COO- stretching at 1734 cm−1 was disappeared. The main characteristic peaks related to CA structure were disappeared, while the main characteristic peaks of CNF are still present as in the following description; the broadband around 3450 cm−1 was related to free hydroxyl, whereas the peak appeared at 864 cm−1 was related to the out-of-plane bending of C–H, The peaks appeared in the range between 800 cm−1 and 1500 cm−1 were related to the functional groups of –Cdouble bondO and –Cdouble bondC of the epoxy resin structure (ElFaham et al., 2020b; El-Messery et al., 2020). In the case of functionalized CNF, there is the new characteristic peaks have appeared at 1637 cm−1 and 1591 cm−1, that was related to the stretching vibration motion of C–CH2- and –Cdouble bondO functional groups of Na-carboxymethyl group, respectively. Also, the peaks of the bending vibrational motions of OH vibrational motion at 1326 cm−1 and the peak of stretching -C-O-C- group of ester group at 1218 cm−1 were re-appeared again. Finally, in the case of CNF/MWCNTs/SnO2 nanocomposite, there is a characteristic peak have appeared at 609 cm−1, that was related to the stretching vibration motion of Sn–O and Odouble bondSn–O groups (Singh et al., 2012).
Fig. 2. FT-IR spectra of CANF, CNF, functionalized –CNF, and the composite structure of CNF/MWCNTS/SnO2.
X-ray diffractogram spectrum of CNF/MWCNTS/SnO2 nanocomposite was investigated to confirm the structures composition as shown in Fig. 3. In the diffractogram, it was cleared that there are a number of peaks have appeared and were located at 2Ɵ values of 26.9°, 34.5°, 38.4°, 38.9°, and 52.1°, 61.9°, 65.7°, and 66.4° are indexed to (1 1 0), (1 0 1), (2 0 0), (1 1 1), (2 1 1), (2 0 0), (3 1 0), (1 1 2), and (3 0 1), respectively, which was related to the pure tetragonal phase of crystalline SnO2 (JCPDS card no. 41–1445) (Mostafa and Mwafy, 2020d). Also, there are other diffraction characteristic peaks were located at 2Ɵ of 26.6°, 43.1°, 51.7°, and 53.1° indexed to (1 1 1), (0 1 0), (2 2 2) and (1 1 2), respectively, which was related to the MWCNT structure (JCPDS card No. 75–2078) (Mwafy, 2020; Mwafy and Mostafa, 2019; Velmurugan et al., 2020). In this diffractogram, the main characteristic peak of the plane (1 1 1) corresponded to the graphite structure at 26.6° is overlapped with the main characteristic peak of (1 1 0) corresponding to SnO2 at 26.9°, and the characteristic peak of the plane (2 1 1) corresponded to the SnO2 structure at 52.1° is overlapped with the characteristic peaks of (2 2 2) and (1 1 2) corresponding to the graphite structure at 52.1°, and 53.3°, respectively, which indicates that the obtained SnO2 in CNTs and CNF composite process is in less crystalline degree than CNT and CNF.
Fig. 3. XRD diffractogram of the nanocomposite structure of CNF/MWCNTS/SnO2.
The morphological image and chemical composition of the prepared CNF/MWCNTS/SnO2 nanocomposite was investigated by SEM and EDX as shown in Fig. 4. In Fig. 4a, it was clear that the resulting CNF/MWCNTS/SnO2 black mat displays a uniform appearance without any significant aggregation (with a nanofiber diameter around 50–75 nm). This phenomenon was due to two effects: the short-range hydrophobic interactions between the graphite structure of MWCNTs and the specific crystalline faces in the cellulose structure of the hydrophobic (200) plane, and the long-range electrostatic repulsion between the cellulose network provided the stabilization of the CNF/CNT dispersion. Moreover, it could be noted that all specimens showed several homogeneously smooth fibers are randomly oriented on the external structure of the nanofibers with randomly distributed SnO2 nanoparticles. Furthermore, the chemical composition spectrum of the composite nanoparticle-decorated fibers is confirmed that only three elements are existed, i.e. Sn, C, and O were identified based on the uniform distribution and spatial distribution of Sn signals in the EDX spectrum (Khattab et al., 2019d; Mostafa et al., 2019c) as shown in Fig. 4b, which precisely fits with the crystallographic details and the physiochemical surface state of the specimen, as examined using XRD confirming the formation of pure nanofibers decorated MWCNT-SnO2.
Fig. 4. (a) SEM image and (b) its EDX analysis of the prepared nanocomposite structure of CNF/MWCNTS/SnO2.
The shape and the average diameter and particle size of the prepared nanocomposite structure of CNF/MWCNTS/SnO2 was investigated by imaging via TEM as shown in Fig. 5. In this figure, it was cleared that TEM image of the prepared sample illustrates the realization of a composite nanofiber based on CNF/MWCNTS/SnO2, comprising long, random, smooth fibers, decorated with SnO2 nanoparticles on their surfaces leading to amendments in the composite fibers, and the generation of porous structures among the inter-connected nanoparticles. Also, the decorating SnO2 has a tetragonal shape with an average particle size of 43 nm, which is in agreement with the index of the plane of XRD patterns.
Fig. 5. TEM image of the prepared nanocomposite structure of CNF/MWCNTS/SnO2.
3.2. Removal of copper ion investigations
3.2.1. The factor affecting on the adsorption capacity
Pristine nanofibers have a relatively low amount of negative charges on their surface thus adsorbing a low amount of (M+x). The metal ion adsorption capacity of the nanofibers was enhanced during the incorporation or decoration with MWCNTs and SnO2 NP composite since the carboxylate groups introduced on the nanofibers from MWCNTs besides the additional of SnO2, helping in constituted more negative sites for the electrostatic attraction of metal ions. Cu2+ has been chosen as a template heavy metal ion due to its tiny size with a pronounced light blue color which is easily observed by the naked eye or in an aqueous solution and the change in the color of the fiber membrane to blue color after immersing the copper solution is the evidence for success of adsorption. The rate of Cu+2 removal is related to the availability of sites capable to donate electrons or to trap the target metal ions. There are other affected factors as pH, contact time and concentration that affecting the adsorption capacity and have been studied in batch equilibrium (Chen et al., 2011).
3.2.1.1. Effect of pH
The optimization of pH was adjusted by subjecting 50 mg of nanofiber to 100 ml volume of a constant concentration of 100 mg/L of metal ion solutions at pH 2, 4, 6, and 8. It should be noted that both the surface functional groups of adsorbents and the metal chemistry in solution as shown in Fig. 6a are related to the dependence of metal uptake on the pH value. At the initial lower pH value = 2, the removal of Cu+2 was observed to be almost negligible, mainly because of the competition on the surface of nanofibers between high concentrations of hydrogen ions and metal ions at adsorption sites. According to this phenomenon, as the pH is low, the kinetic and energetic prefer the proton caption H+ on the adsorption sites. This behavior offers the possibility of using this low pH effect for metal elution and nanofiber regeneration. In fact, at pH = 2, the metal ions are leached out from the nanofibers into solution. The adsorption of Cu (II) was increased with the increase in pH from 3.0 to 6.0 which may be due to the reduced number of hydrogen ions present in the solution, which allowed more sites for Cu2+ to form complexes and this result is in a similar trend with adsorption behavior of the majority of other reported adsorbents towards this metal. Furthermore, the removal of copper ions was decreased at pH above 8, this is could be related to the formation of insoluble gelatinous metal hydroxides precipitate. Finally, the experiment confirmed that the optimum pH is 5.8 for the greater affinity of these nanofibers toward cupper ion so this value was fixed to monitor the adsorption for all the simulated solutions (see Fig. 7).
Fig. 6. Effect of (a)pH, (b) Adsorbent concentration (c) metal ion concertation, and (d) contact time for removal of Cu (II) by CNF/MWCNTs/SnO2 nanocomposite.
Fig. 7
Download : Download high-res image (2MB)Download : Download full-size image
Fig. 7. The efficiency for removal of Cu (II) by CNF/MWCNTs/SnO2 nanocomposite when reused six times.
3.2.1.2. Effect of nanofiber mat dose
This study has been performed to determine the optimum nanofiber dosage, solutions with an initial metal concentration of 20 mg/L were used at optimum pH 5.8 value as shown in Fig. 6b. During the contact time of half an hour, the amount of nanofiber that added to the solutions was varied ranging between 10 and 100 mg per 100 ml of metal ion solution. It has been seen that the adsorption efficiency increases as the nanofiber amount increases which has been explained by the increase in the exposed surface area where the adsorption takes place. From this figure, the optimum nanofiber dose that can be used in copper removal is 50 mg nanofiber and this value had been selected for all the experiments.
3.2.1.3. Effect of heavy metal dose
In this study, series solutions were prepared by immersing 50 mg of nanofiber in 100 ml of initial concentration 20, 40, 60, 80, 100, 150, and 200 mg of copper solution. It was cleared that the maximum adsorption capacity (qmax) of CNF/MWCNTs/SnO2 nanofiber for Cu removal is observed for an initial concentration of Cu of 60 mg/l as shown in Fig. 6c. Particularly, this figure indicates that the metal uptake results are closely compatible with the Freundlich adsorption isothermal model (Skopp, 2009). It supports the hypothesis that the adsorption sites on the surface of cellulose have been expanded following surface enhancement with MWCNTs and SnO2 (Hussain et al., 2009).
3.2.1.4. Effect of contact time
The optimum adsorption time was specified by measuring the maximum equilibrium adsorption concentration of Cu2+ and this was adjusted by immersing 50 mg of nanofiber mat with time progress from the absorbance of the solution at 600 nm from spectrophotometer device as shown in Fig. 6d. As a result, it was found that for the first 20 min the absorbance was gradually changed, after that it was reaching an equilibrium state. Afterward Cu2+ adsorption running time was fixed to be measured every 30 min the capacity of Cu2+ adsorption of CA/MWCNTs/metal oxide nanofibrous membrane was calculated from the absorbance values and compared.
3.2.2. The mechanism of adsorption capacity
The nanofibrous CNF/MWCNTs/SnO2 mat had a far higher Cu2+ adsorption potential than the pure CNF owing to the considerably greater broad surface area of MWCNTs correlated with the fiber and hence its efficiency as a metal ion adsorbent. This is primarily attributed to the variation in the chemical structure and composition, in particular, the ionizable groups which are known to be positive metal sites for capturing. There are more polar groups in CNF/MWCNTs/SnO2 nanofiber blend than pure CA and CNF, these polar groups effectively function as binding sites with much more hydrophilic polar groups providing polar side residues (assumed to be a mostly carboxylic acid residues of carbon nanotubes) which can create an extra bond with more Cu2+ metal ions. As a result, CA/MWCNTs/SnO2 blend nanofibrous membrane had higher adsorption capacity than CA membrane with similar specific surface area. This is mainly attributed to the higher ion absorbability of the blend nanofiber mat (Markandeya et al., 2017; Dubey et al., 2017; Carolin et al., 2017).
3.2.3. Desorption and re-adsorption behavior
The desorption and re-adsorption process of metal ions is a very crucial for various applications, because membrane processing is economically valuable. Desorption of metal ions once adsorbed to an adsorbent substrate material could be considerable benefit to the industry, especially in the water purification field. Excellent desorption and adsorbability are also preserved in most recycling systems. Negatively charged agents are required for the desorption of metal ions linked to the membrane. When the ionic strength of the desorbing agent is larger than that of the membrane, the metal ions might be separated. EDTA is considered as a very conventional metal ion desorbing agent that can rapidly and intensely bind with the positively charged metal ion so the desorption process had been conducted using a solution of 1 mM EDTA. The quantities of desorption and re-adsorbed Cu2+ were estimated with their efficiencies and recorded after 30 min of the desorption process. Nonetheless, it was verified that the adsorbed Cu2+ solution may be fully desorbed by a diluted EDTA solution. Following to the first recycling process, the re-adsorption process was repeated with copper (II) ions as shown in the figure and the recycling efficiency was noted to be 97% relating to that the fiber might be missed some of the electrically active sites during the desorption process with EDTA. To investigate the change in the adsorption capacity and durability of prepared nanofiber is continuous recycling, the desorption and re-adsorption process has been repeated up to six times. It was concluded that the adsorption efficiency was preserved its initial value throughout the process without big deformation at all, therefore, this composite structure could be considered a suitable material for the elimination or recovery of Cu (II) from water and has an economic advantage for practical use (Benitez et al., 2011; Dutta et al., 2010).
4. Conclusion
As increasing in heavy metal ions adsorption on the nanofibers, a facile and efficient method based on both electrospinning and laser ablation techniques was successfully used to produce CNF/MWCNTs/SnO2 hybrid composite nanofibers for the adsorption of Cu (II) ions from waste water solution. Different techniques were successfully used to confirm the formation of composite structure. It has been concluded that the composite was in the shape of 1D nanofiber structure decorated with graphite structure of MWCNTs and tetragonal SnO2nanoparticles.The optimum condition and factors (pH, nanofiber dose, heavy metal dose, and contact time) for the maximum adsorption of copper ions have been investigated, followed by studying the desorption and re-adsorption behavior confirming that CNF/MWCNTs/SnO2 hybrid composite nanofibers considered as an inexpensive and efficient alternative to conventional sorbents for the removal of heavy copper ions from contaminated water.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgment
This work was supported by National Research Center (NRC) of Egypt (Project No.12010310
