<title>The dendrite growth, morphology control and deposition properties of uranium electrorefining</title>
<author>Liu Kui，tan Tan，Zhou Xuanpu，Zheng Nantao，Ma Yue，Kang Mingliang，Wang Biao，Chai Zhifang，Shi Weiqun</author>
<Affiliation>Sino-French Institute of Nuclear Engineering and Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai 519000, China; School of Physics, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China;  Laboratory of Nuclear Energy Chemistry, Institute of High Energy Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China；Engineering Laboratory of Advanced Energy Materials, Ningbo Institute of Industrial Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315201, China</Affiliation>
<year>2021</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Materials</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI> 10.1016/J.JNUCMAT.2021.153110</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022311521003330?via%3Dihub</URL>
Abstract
In the widely researched and demonstrated molten salt-based electrorefining process, it is extremely important to control the morphology and growth of uranium dendritic in order to guide the design, operation, safeguard and even upgrade of industrial equipment. Herein this work focuses on the influences of various electrochemical techniques and cathode materials on the dendrite growth and deposition performance for uranium electrorefining. The corresponding current efficiency, deposition rate, deposit compactness, dendrite size distribution and growth rate were studied and compared. It was found that the electrode material has limited effects on the current efficiency, whilst the deposition rate of uranium and growth rate of dendrites on inert cathodes (W and Mo) are relatively higher than that on active cathodes such as stainless steel, Ni and graphite. For controlled current techniques, both the uranium deposition rate and dendrite growth rate are linearly related to the current density. For the controlled potential techniques, only the uranium deposition rate has a linear relationship with the overpotential, whilst the dendrite growth rate has a power exponential relationship with the overpotential. Regardless of the electrolysis technique, controlling the growth of uranium dendrites will sacrifice the deposition rate. In addition, the pulse potential technique can exponentially reduce the growth rate of uranium dendrite at the expense of 30–40% deposition rate. by optimization of the shape.
Keywords: Pyroreprocessing；LiCl-KCleutectic；Uranium dendritic morphology；Electrochemical techniques；Cathode materials
1. Introduction
In the widely researched and demonstrated molten salt-based electrorefining process, recovery of actinides in metallic form from spent nuclear fuels (SNF) via electrorefining is the most significant step. For example, for the oxide SNF unloaded from Pressurized Water Reactor (PWR), it was initially electro-deoxidized into metallic form in LiCl melt and then anodically dissolved into chloride molten salt (ex. LiCl-KCl). Meanwhile, most of uranium is selectively recovered on a solid cathode and the remaining uranium and trans-uranium elements in melt are collected into another liquid cadmium cathode [1], [2], [3], [4]. Nevertheless, uranium readily forms metallic dendrites during electrodeposition on a solid cathode, which much affects the throughput of electrorefiner [5] and makes the continuous operation of this pyro-process a big challenge [6], [7], [8]. In addition, unexpected morphologies of uranium dendrites may induce potential risks of short circuit in the electro-refining process, even after applied a mandatory removal of dendrites with a mechanical scraper [9], [10], [11], [12], [13]. Moreover, self-scraping system essentially adds complexity with respect to electrolytic cell design and potentially makes the operation unstable [14,15]. As such, it is quite necessary to find out a reasonable solution for morphology control and growth of uranium dendritic to better facilitate the design, operation, safeguard and upgrade of industrial equipment for the so-called electrorefining process.
At present, much attention was paid to the growth morphology and/or uranium dendrites growth and control on solid electrodes. Factors observed having impact on the appearance of uranium deposition either from experiments or from the theoretical multi-physical phase field simulation [11,12] include molten salt composition [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], temperature [18,22], cathode material [22], [23], [24], [25], electrolysis technique [22,24,26,27] and impurity [23,28] etc. Typically, Marshall et al. developed a potential- and current pulse technique aiming at plate thick, metallurgically sound uranium bodies with specified geometries for special nuclear applications [26]. In the chloride melt with very high UCl3 content up to 20 and 42.4 wt%, they observed a constant and uniform uranium layer on the Ni coupon by using potential-pulse electrolysis (PPE) with an overpotential amplitude at −75 mV or current-pulse electrolysis (CPE) with pulse height being below −100 mA/cm2, of which growth rates are calculated to be 0.103 and 0.375 , respectively. The application of this experience to the electrorefining process for SNF may be debatable, but the results show that the pulse technique method can regulate the growth of uranium deposits. Thus, if the pulse technique can help to inhibit or control directional growth rate and size of dendrites to some extent, it will be quite meaningful to explore its applicability in the practical electrorefining process. For instance, under different electrorefining conditions, it is of great importance to know the growth and evolution of dendrites after a certain amount of electricity is posed, but no existing literature is available in comparison of these parameters obtained by different electrochemical techniques such as galvanostatic electrolysis (GE), potentiostatic electrolysis (PE), PPE and CPE.
Moreover, the cathode material was found to have considerable effects on the uranium or actinides deposition from a fundamental electrochemical mechanism to a practical application point of view [15,24,25]. From a practical application's perspective, stainless steel (STS) is the most commonly used electrode material for U deposition due to easy access and machining, but it has insurmountable characteristics in terms of a sticking during the scraping of deposit [14]. The material of cathode possible to be used for continuous operation is graphite. Thus, Lee et al. examined the superior self-scraping property of graphite cathodes by comparing sticking coefficient calculations. It although shows a self-scraping behavior but its durability and the physical strength of the graphite electrode are generally not as good as metal and could lead to other problems [24]. Most recently, Lee et al. proposed the possibility of using W electrode as an alternative to graphite for effective U recovery [25] and ranked the electrodes in terms of the facility by overall observations of U dendrites as followed: W>Mo>STS. In our previous work, we found that, under the same electrode condition, the amount of charge passing through the W cathode for uranium deposition is much more than that of the STS one [22]. Thus, it is quite meaningful to comprehensively compare the deposition performance of uranium on different cathode materials.
This work aims to have a direct and systematic comparison of the impact of various electrochemical techniques and cathode materials on current efficiency, deposition and dendrite growth of uranium electrorefining. Current efficiency, deposition rate, deposits compactness, size distribution and growth rate of dendrite are analyzed in the purpose of figuring out a possible practical choice.
2. Experimental
2.1. Chemicals, materials and melt preparation
The LiCl-KCl eutectic (51:49 mol%) was directly prepared by anhydrous lithium chloride (>99.0%) and potassium chloride. Potassium chloride (>99.5%) and lithium chloride (>99.0%) were bought from Aladdin (Shanghai); Bismuth chloride (>99.9%) were purchased from Macklin (Shanghai); Silver chloride (99.9%) was purchased from Alfa Aesar (Shanghai); Uranium metal (50 g, >99%) was purchased from Hubei Chushengwei Chemistry Co., Ltd.; Silver wire (0.5 mm,>99.9%), tungsten, molybdenum, graphite, nickel and stainless steel wires and of different diameters (1 mm and 2 mm, >99.9%) were purchased from Beijing Yinlong metal technology co.LTD. The melt preparation process has been introduced in our previous work in detail [18]. Typically, for the preparation of uranium containing salt, BiCl3 and uranium metal were used to prepare UCl3 in the LiCl-KCl eutectic melt. The specific concentration of the cation can be determined by the inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES, Agilent 5110). In this work, all the experiments were carried out in a LiCl-KCl-6.5 wt% UCl3 melts.
2.2. Apparatus and electrodes
The chemical storage, handling of molten salt and electrochemical experiments were all carried out in a glove box (Vigor, HG1500/750TS) under a pure argon atmosphere (99.99% Ar, H2O < 0.5 ppm, O2 < 0.1 ppm). A programmable electric furnace (Jiuchen, GR2–270) with a stainless steel (ϕ64 × 150 mm) and corundum crucible (ϕ50 × 100 mm) inside was placed in the glove box [18]. The furnace maintained at the temperature with an accuracy of ±1 K. An Omega thermometer (HH806AU) was used to measure the actual temperature of the melt system. An electrochemical workstation (Autolab PGSTAT302N) was used to apply and record current and voltage for electrochemical measurements. The scheme of the electrodes and electrochemical cell is shown in Fig. 1 (a–d). The Ag/AgCl reference electrode was widely used in the chloride molten salt, an alundum tube containing a silver wire (ϕ=0.5 mm) was used, which was filled with LiCl-KCl −1 wt% AgCl salt (Fig. 1a). In order to reflect the overpotential of uranium refining more intuitively, all potential values in experiments are shifted to the equilibrium potential of uranium (U/U3+). A uranium lump (50 g) housed by a nickel net was used as the sacrificial anode (or counter electrode, CE) for the stability of the melt system (Fig. 1b). The working electrode is composed of various metallic wire, graphite connector and stainless-steel current collector (Fig. 1c).
Fig. 1. (a) RE, (b) CE, (c) WE and (d) scheme of the cell.
2.3. Electrorefining test and analysis
Four electrochemical techniques (GE, PE, CPE and PPE) and five electrode materials (W, Mo, STS, Ni, Graphite) were utilized in our tests to evaluate the electrorefining performance and dendrite growth of uranium. The deposition rate (DR, mg•min−1•cm−2), current efficiency (ξ), dendrite growth rate (DGR, mm/min) and deposit compactness (DC) are four key parameters in our study. The research design consists of three parts:
(1) Electrochemical techniques: GE and PE (Fig. 2a), CPE and PPE [26] (Fig. 2b), and 4steps [29,30] (Fig. 2c) with different experimental conditions were considered. More details are summarized in Table 1 and Tables s1–s5 (SI, Support information). It should be mentioned that, in some runs, higher overpotentials (η) such as −800 and −1000 mV vs. U/U3+ were applied in order to get more statistically significant data without considering the concept of actual separation in electrorefining.
Fig. 2. (a) The static, (b) normal pulse and (c) 4steps current/potential signals for uranium electrorefining.
Table 1. Experimental conditions of the electrorefining test.
(2) Cathode materials:
In this part, PPE and 4-steps method were applied on different cathode materials: W wire (ϕ=1, 2 mm), Mo wire (ϕ=1, 2 mm), Ni wire (ϕ=1, 2 mm), STS wire (ϕ=1, 2 mm), C rod (ϕ=2 mm) to compare the four consider parameters mentioned above. More details are summarized in Table 1.
(3) Analysis and characterization:
After the electrolysis, the deposit with the cathode wire (mc) was detached from the graphite connector, weighed as md. The deposit was then washed in a small beaker (mb) in the mixture of deionized water and ethyl alcohol to remove the entrained salt, dried using a vacuum oven. The pure uranium dendrites, the cathode wire and the beaker were then weighed in all as ma. Thus, the masses of the entrained salt and pure uranium dendrites for each deposit can be calculated as md+mb-ma and ma-mb-mc, respectively.
The deposition rate (DR, mg/min.cm2) per unit cathodic area and electrolysis time, can be defined as,
@(1)
Where, ξ, the current efficiency is defined as,
@(2)
Where, Q denotes the passed-charge for each run, C; S is electrode area, cm2; t is the electrolysis time for each run, s or min; n is the transferred electrons for U3+ reduction, 3; F is the Faraday constant, 96,485.3, C/mol; MU is the relative atomic mass of uranium metallic, 238; j represents the current density, mA/cm2.
The deposition compactness (DC), relating to the actual uranium metal extraction of each deposit [17] or the actual uranium output of each run over the entrained salt, which is an important parameter for practical batch process since deposited uranium dendrite was found normally containing about 30–40 wt% salts [31], can be defined as:
@(3)
Quantitatively, DC means the mass proportion of pure metallic uranium dendrites in the withdraw deposits. If the deposits shape is approximately cylindrical, the DC can be inferred to be in a certain extent, which further relating to the proportion of dendrites in a limited space. The limit value of 1 relates to get a uniform chunk structure of uranium metal with no salt adhere. Obviously, it is difficult or impossible to achieve in practical.
For the characterization of uranium dendrites, an upright metallurgical microscope (AOSVI, M303) is used to measure the size and summarize the length distribution of the uranium dendrites for each run. We define the maximum length of uranium dendrites as, lmax., the scale of priority to cause short circuit. The average length of statistical dendrites (The number of dendrites varies from more than 10 to 60–70 depending on the electrolysis conditions) denoted as lavg., relates to the loading amount of uranium dendrite on a cathode for a batch process in some extent. Thus, the j and  dependence of maximum and average dendrite growth rates (DGRs, mm/min) can defined as,
@(4)
In addition, SEM-DES (Quanta 400 FEG) was also applied to characterize and compare the morphologies of dendritic uranium.
3. Results and discussion
Cyclic voltammetry was firstly applied before electrorefining test in order measure the in-situ equilibrium potential of U3+/U in the cell and determine the applied overpotential. Fig. 3 presents the cyclic voltammograms recording on five solid cathode materials (STS, W, Ni, Mo, Graphite). The large redox reactions at ~0 V vs. U3+/U relates to the electrochemical reduction of U3+ to uranium metal at different cathodes [25,32]. In addition, in the cyclic voltammograms of Graphite, Ni and STS, redox current responses can be observed at more anodic potential than that of U3+/U, suggesting the formation and dissolution of uranium alloys [25,33,34]. The formation of alloy on the cathode could affect the scraping properties for U dendrites [25], dendrites morphology [22], and deposit rate [22] in some content.
Fig. 3. Comparison of the cyclic voltammograms collected on different cathode materials, STS, Mo, Ni, W, Graphite, ϕ=2 mm, S = 0.974 cm2, scan rate: 100 mV s−1.
3.1. Time transients for different electrochemical techniques and cathode materials of uranium electrorefining
Fig. 4. Typical time transients of the electrochemical method and cathode material for uranium refining test, (a) GE, runs 1–4, WE: W, S = 0.479 cm2; (b) CPE, runs 17–21, WE: W; (c) PE, runs 11–16, WE: W, S = 0.479 cm2; (d) PPE, runs 22–27, WE: W, S = 0.479 cm2; (e) PPE at −500 mV, runs 35–43, WE: W, Mo, Ni, STS, Graphite, S = 1.056, 1.232, 1.087, 1.112, 0.880 cm2, respectively; (f) 4steps, runs 44–52, WE: W, Mo, Ni, STS, Graphite, all S = 0.974 cm2.
Fig. 4c shows typical Cottrell-type behaviors [35] for PE tests with an identical 5 min of deposition, the currents increase with time due to the continuous deposition of uranium to extend active deposition area in real time. For the PPE method, the effects of various parameters (overpotential, pulse ratio, period and reversal potential) of the pulse method were explored. The total duration of each run of deposition is 10 min, which ensured that the effective duration of electrorefining is compatible with the PE. In the representative transients for the PPE (Fig. 4d), except for the release part, similar trends (Cottrell-type behavior) but of larger current intensities for deposition part can be observed comparing to that of PE method in Fig. 4c. This phenomenon was also observed in the transients for different pulse ratios, periods and reversal potentials (SI, Fig. s1), which further indicates the pulse signal can release the mass transfer limits of U3+ in the release part and promote the U deposition in the plating part.
For the different materials, two methods, PPE at −500 mV and 4steps were adopted for electrorefining test as shown in Fig. 4e and f. Except for a distinct positive current response relating to the dissolution potential in the 4steps method, there is no obvious difference in transient since both methods are pulse potential techniques. For PPE at −500 mV, the intensity of current can be sorted as Mo >W >Ni >graphite >STS, while Mo >W >Ni >STS >graphite for 4steps method. We can figure out that on the inert Mo and W cathodes, higher Qs related to U deposition. This phenomenon is consistent with previous work [22], suggesting that the formation of alloy on active cathode may affect the uranium deposition rate (will be discussed in Section 3.2).
3.2. Deposition rate and current efficiency
Fig. 5 shows the effect of (a) n for PE with identical Q of 130C and (b) Q (or normalized Q/t relating to an average j) for PE with an identical n at −250 mV on DR. For better comparison, Fig. 6 presents the effect of j (a, c) for GE and CPE with identical Q of 130C, and n(b, d) for PE and PPE with identical active deposition time of 5 mins on DR (a, b) and ξ (c, d) (More details about the data are summarized in Tables s1–s4 (SI).
Fig. 5. Effect of the (a) n with identical Q of 130C (runs 5–8) and (b) Q (black square) or normalized Q/t (red cycle, an average value of j) with an identical n at −250 mV (runs 7, 9–10) for PE on DR, Cathode material: W (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.).
Fig. 6. Effect of the j (a, c) and n (b, d) on DR (a, b) and ξ (c, d) for GE (runs 1–4) and CPE (runs 17–21) with identical Q of 130C; PE (runs 11–16) and PPE (runs 22–27) with identical active deposition time of 5 mins; Cathode material: W.
For an identical passed charge of 130C, PE (Fig. 5a), GE and CPE (Fig. 6a) methods suggest linear relationships established for DR on both n and j. Moreover, for an identical electrolysis time of 300 s, linear relationships between DR and η can also be fitted for PE and PPE methods (Fig. 6b). However, for PE tests at an identical η of −250 mV with different passed charge Q (130, 230, 423C or different time t) (Fig. 5b), DR and Q suggest a very good power function relationship(similar phenomenon was observed in literature [36]), which can also be transformed into a linear one when normalized Q to Q/t, an average value relation to j for the PE test.
From the Eq. (1), we can see the DR is a linear function of j and ξ. Thus, it very easy to figure out the linear relationships for DR values in Fig. 6a, since the ξs almost maintain at about 0.8 in Fig. 6c for GE and CPE. This can also explain the linear relationship between DR and Q/t in Fig. 5b to some extent. The deviation of ξ to a smaller value at −800 mA/cm2 of GE (Fig. 6c) can be attributed to the deposition of Li mentioned above in Fig. 4a. This current efficiency drop at higher current density has been verified in literature [27,36]. For those PE and PPE methods, the Cottrell-type behaviors in Fig. 4(c–f) suggest that the current intensities tend to a stable level as electrolysis time going. Therefore, the reasons for these linear relationships can also be well explained based on the Eq. (1). Regardless of electrochemical techniques, these relationships are very important for a practical operation.
On the other hand, for the comparison of controlled-current and controlled-potential technology, the latter have some advantages;
i, The DRs (Figs. 5 and 6b) of controlled-potential techniques are multiple times higher than that of controlled-current ones (Fig. 6a) primarily due to the technology advantage of the former which current density is not only limited by physical equipment, but also depends on the properties of the cell, such as composition, concentration, and electrode area, etc.
ii, If we only considered the deposition part (red square in Fig. 6b), PPE presents about 15–20% higher of DR than that of PE, while no different appears in controlled-current techniques (Fig. 6a). This comparison seems less rigorous since the magnitude of js for controlled-current and controlled-potential techniques varies a lot as shown in Fig. 4. However, the instantaneous js for the deposition part in Fig. 4d of PPE are indeed much higher than that of PE (Fig. 4c), while the potential transients for GE (Fig. 4a) and PCE (Fig. 4b) always maintain at the same range. When we comprehensively consider process outcomes and economy more than processing time to some extent as it is of greater interest for a practical case, theoretically, the 15–20% higher of DR for PPE will save more power consumption than PE with same outcomes for a given electrolysis. However, distinctly, PPE sacrifices half of the running time, increasing costs of efficiency. Comprehensive consideration is always required in an actual process.
iii, From the fitting result for these tests, CPE loses ~50% of the DR comparing to GE, while PPE loses 33–44% of the DR comparing to PE. From this point, controlled-potential technique is also more prominent than controlled-current ones.
Since PPE have some advantages as mentioned above, the influence factors of pulse parameter such as reverse potential, pulse period and pulse ratio (on/off ratio) on DR were also explored. The detail experimental parameters are summarized in Table 1 (runs 24, 28–33). The corresponding results are demonstrated in Table s4 and Fig. 7(a–c), suggesting that lower reverse potential and higher pulse period and ratio can promote the increase of both DR and ξ. It is easy to figure out, since more unstable deposits will be dissolved back into the molten salt as the reversal potential rising, more mature uranium nucleus and dendrites can be deposited for a potential pulse with a higher period and ratio. In addition, for the pulse ratio (Fig. 7c), the DR linearly decreases with the decrease of pulse ratio (the proportion of deposition part in a pulse, x = 1, 0.8, 0.5, 0.2; DR = 44.1* x), while the DR at the deposition part of the ratio almost maintains at a same level. This phenomenon implies that the dissolution rate of uranium in the off part might be stable and linear.
Fig. 7. Effect of the reversal potential (a, runs 24,28,29), pulse period (b, runs 24,30,31) and pulse ratio (c, runs 24,32,33) on DR and ξ; cathodic materials (W, Mo, STS, Ni, graphite) for (e, runs 35–43) PPE and (f, runs 44–52) 4steps methods on DR.
Moreover, the effect of electrode materials on DR and ξ was also investigated by PPE and 4steps method. The four-step potential pulse has been adopted for the electrowinning of uranium [30] and thorium [29] in molten salt. More details about the parameters and results are summarized in Table s5 and Fig. 7(e,f), suggesting that the inert materials (W, Mo) are superior to the active ones in improving the DR value, while no distinct correlation was found between materials and ξ (Table s5). On the different cathodic substrate, the different vertical interaction energies and crystallographic misfit between initial nucleus / adatoms and substrate are the most important parameters determining the subsequent phase formation and growth mechanism [37]. In our previous work, we found the cathode material highly affects the initial nucleation morphology of uranium [33], such as nucleation density, adatoms agglomeration, etc. Thus, different cathode materials may cause different rates of active cathode area growth. The higher the active area will promote a higher deposition rate.
Fig. 7(e,f) also suggest that the DRs obtained by 4steps are smaller than that of PPE owing to the higher overpotential of −500 mV as shown in Table s5. However, we can simply normalize the overpotential of one pulse of the 4steps to PE method as ~−210 mV for 10 s. We can make a relatively reasonable comparison on run 34 in Table s4 and run 13 (PE at −250 mV) in Table s2. Two close DR values are obtained, suggesting that multiple pulse conditions, such as pre-concentration can be introduced to increase the DR for pulse method and reverse potential to control the dendrites growth at the same time.
It should be mentioned that ξ and DR are also affected by some other factors. First, some dendrites will unexpectedly fall off from the cathode to the bottom of the crucible. We did not collect these dendrites that may fall off from the cathode, because it is difficult to evaluate the actual mass of the entire deposits, md (in Section 2.3), which is a very important value for the following calculation of DC. Secondly, uranium dendrites sample loss during cleaning and salt removal. These errors will reduce the ξ and DR, especially under the condition of lower passed charge Q. For example, in runs1–4 and 12–34, the ξs of some runs are below 80%, while values above 90% relate to runs 5–11 and 35–52. Nevertheless, same level of ξs were also obtained in literature regardless of different melt composition, temperature [21,27,36].
3.3. Deposit compactness
Fig. 8 plots the representative DCs on different j,η , pulse ratio and cathode material. Other results and more details are summarized in Tables s1–s5 (SI). These data suggest that:
@
Fig. 8. Effect of current density (a), overpotential (b), pulse ratio(c), cathodic materials (d) on deposit compactness for GE (a, run 1–4), CPE (a, run 17–21), PE (b, run 11–16), PPE (b, run 22–27), PPE and (c, run 24,32–33 and 4 steps, run 34), PPE(d, run 35–43) and 4 steps (d, run 44–52) methods; WE(a-c): W.
i, Pulse-controlled methods can improve the DC compared with that of static techniques, indicating that the former may dissolve some complex and unstable dendrites, thus reducing the dimension of dendrites, since molten salt are more likely to stay in complex multidimensional structures or rough surfaces after deposits withdraw. The influence of reverse potential and pulse period, pulse ratio on the DCs is difficult to judge due to the limited data (Table s4, SI). However, all DCs range from 0.3 to 0.5 in a relative higher-level, since these conditions promote dendrite dissolution.
ii, From Fig. 8(a,b), the DCs decrease with the rising of j for both GE and PCE and  for PE, while no significant difference for the PPE. A similar parameter defined as metal/salt ratio also suggested a similar decrease trend for uranium electrorefining at 872 K [27]. The DCs of GE and CPE are much higher than that of potential-controlled ones primarily due to the lower j resulting in lower growth distribution, dimensionality and structure of uranium dendrites. iii, From Fig. 8(c,d), 4steps method shows higher DCs than PPE, indicating that multiple pulse condition, such as pre-concentration, may improve the DC since no significant difference on DCs in Fig. 8b for PPE on different . iv, From Fig. 8d, the cathode materials have limited effect on DCs, indicating that they have limited effect on the entire structure and distribution of uranium dendrites formation.
In most cases, only 30–50% of the uranium dendrites in the deposits (DC), which is consistent with the results in NaCl-KCl melt [17], while some literature reported about only 30–40% of salt is in the deposits [31]. Except for the different electrolysis technique, the other possible reason for these discrepancies are the different molten salt system, concentration, temperature, salt removal process and electrolysis time etc. Especially for the electrolysis time, uranium dendrites can only grow on the narrow cathode surface in the initial state with relatively high distribution density which provides enough space conducive for molten salt retention or insertion. However, with the time going, the dendrite grows divergent around the cylindrical electrode with lower distribution density at the peripheral against salt insertion.
3.4. Morphology of deposits and dendrites
In Fig. 9a, the macroscopic features of uranium deposits obtained from runs 1–4 (GE) and runs 17–21 (CPE) are compared. A few, sparse large dendrites with very little salt retention scatter can be observed on the shiny electrode for lower j, resulting in higher DC values in Fig. 8a. With the j rising, full coverage and high distribution density of the uranium dendrites grown on the cathode, which gives more space for salt retention, leading to the decreasing of DCs. A similar phenomenon was also observed on the deposits of CPE. However, all deposits present full coverage of relatively compact and uniform uranium deposits with shorter dendrites.
Fig. 9. Typical photographs for the uranium deposits of different refining test, (a) GE, runs 1–4; (b) CPE, runs 17–21; (c) PE, runs 11–16; (d) PPE, runs 22–27, Cathode material: W.
For the PE and PPE, similar geometric variation on applied condition of η can be observed as that of current controlled techniques. Compact and uniform deposits and short dendrites were also obtained by the pulse method, PPE as shown in Fig. 9b. In addition, Fig. 10 demonstrates the representative photographs of uranium deposits on different pulse conditions. With the increasing of reverse potential and decreasing of pulse periods and ratio, the geometry size of uranium deposits decreases, and the surface of deposits becomes more uniform.
Fig. 10. Typical photographs for the uranium deposits of different refining test, (a) PE (run13) and PPE with different reversal potential, runs 24, 28, 29; (b) PE (run 13) and PPE with different pulse period, runs 24, 30, 31; (c) PE (run 13) and PPE with different pulse ratio, runs 24, 32, 33, Cathode material: W.
Figs. 11 and 12 shows the comparison of typical optical microscope and SEM images for the uranium dendrites of different representative tests. For PE (Figs. 11a–d and 12a–c), the length and dimension of dendrites increase with the rising η, but no significant change in size is observed for PPE (Figs. 11e–h and 12d,e) except for the case at −1000 mV (Fig. 12f). However, PPE provides more fragmented and incomplete dendrites, even for the case (run 32) of only 2 s of release time (Fig. 11i). In addition, more piecemeal and smaller sizes of dendrites were found for those runs with reverse potentials (Fig. 11j–l). These phenomena prove the dissolution of those unstable dendrites back to melt in the release part of the pulse technique.
Fig. 11. Typical microscope images for the uranium dendrites of different refining test, (a–d) PE, runs 11–14; (e–h) PPE, runs 22–25; (i) PPE with different pulse ratio, run 32; (j,k) PPE with different reverse potential, run 28–29; (l) 4 steps, run 34, Cathode material: W.
Fig. 12. Typical SEM images for the uranium dendrites of different refining test, (a–c) PE, runs 11, 13,16; (d–f) PPE, runs 22,24,27, Cathode material: W.
In addition, we can also find some reasons to explain why the DCs (Section 3.3) of uranium deposits in pulse method are higher than that in static runs from the dendritic micromorphology. Fig. 12 shows some secondary dendrites densely arranged on the trunk dendrites for the PE. However, they are eliminated or reduced to a great extent in the PPE cases. Once these trunk dendrites with densely arranged secondary dendrites diverge and distribute on the cathode in a concentric direction, they obviously provide dense 3D space conducive to salt insertion.
3.5. Distribution and growth rate of uranium dendrites
The statistical number of dendrites varies with different cases, for example, the cases under low j and η present very small number, sometimes only a few to more than a dozen. However, the cases of high j and η show hundreds or thousands of them. Thus, after salt removal, samples were stirred and mixed enough, and about 60 to 90 dendrites among them were counted for the latter. The typical size distributions of uranium dendrites for (a) PE (runs 11–16) and (b) PPE (runs 22–27) are demonstrated in Fig. 13. Each set of histograms corresponds to a different amount of uranium dendrites, these histograms clearly presents the distributions of uranium dendrite sizes obtained at different η. The size corresponding to the fitted Gaussian peak can be considered as the average size of the dendrites. PPE presents more uniform and concentrated dendritic distribution on sizes which are much smaller than that of the PE method regardless the maximum or average values. The degree of non-concentration or dispersion of size distribution in PE method increases significantly with the increase of η, directly reflects the degree of specific or explosive growth of uranium dendrites due to the tip point effect. These phenomena suggest that PPE can highly eliminate or alleviate the explosive growth of dendrites to a great extent.
Fig. 13. Size distribution of uranium dendrites, (a) PE, runs 11–16, (b) PPE, runs 22–27, Cathode material: W.
Fig. 14 typically plots the j and η dependence of average and maximum DGRs for representative tests. More details about the data of all tests are summarized in Tables s1–s5, SI. If a zero-growth rate is considered at zero point of j and η, some linear and power function relationships relating to j and η with DGR for both current-controlled and potential-controlled methods can be fitted, respectively. According to the Eq. (4), the DGRs determined by different electrochemical techniques on the tungsten cathode (D = 1 mm) in LiCl-KCl-6.5 wt% UCl3 can be expressed as follow:
Fig. 14. The current density and overpotential dependence of average and maximum growth rates on uranium dendrite, (a) GE, runs 1–4, CPE, runs 17–21; (b) PE, runs 11–16, PPE, runs 22–27, (c) PE runs 5–8 and (d) PE, runs 9–11, Cathode material: W,.
For GE with identical charge of 130C (runs 1–4),
@(5)
@(6)
For CPE with identical charge of 130C,
@(7)
@(8)
For PE with identical charge of 130C,
@(9)
For PE with identical electrolysis time of 5 min,
@(10)
@(11)
For PPE with identical electrolysis time of 10 min,
@(12)
@(13)
The fitting results of GE (except for the data of −800 mA/cm2) and CPE Fig. 14a) suggest almost no difference on average value, while four time of difference on maximum ones for DGRs. However, for the potential controlled-methods (Fig. 14b,c), both the maximum and average DGRs of PPE are lower than the results of PE. The difference of the maximum DGRs is also very large, which increases power exponentially with the rising of η. Moreover, in Eqs. (5)–((8), the correlation coefficients (R2) of the maximum DGRs for both GE and CPE, are higher than 0.99, while much lower values were fixed to the average ones. However, in Eqs. (9)–(13), the higher R2 above 0.99 seems belong to the PPE rather than the PE method. The fitting noise in Fig. 14b can more intuitively demonstrates this difference. In addition, if a reverse potential is applied, increasing the pulse period and decreasing the on:off ratio will decrease the DGRs accordingly due to the dissolution of unstable uranium dendrites as expected (Fig. s2(a–c), SI), which is coherent with the results in literature for a given η [26]. Fig. 14d seems suggest a maximum value for DGR on Q/t based on the limited data collected by PE −250 mV to consider the factor relating to an average j, suggesting that the DGR of uranium deposited by PE may reach a maximal value with time going.
Nevertheless, these phenomena clearly suggest that,
i
Compared with the PE, the GE is more stable and controllable for the growth of uranium dendrites. For PE, it is also possible that the continuous growth of dendrites affects the continuous change of real-time j and increases the instability of DGR.
ii
The pulse technique can highly and effectively control the DGR of uranium dendrites, whether it is the current or the potential techniques.
4. Conclusion
The influences of electrochemical techniques and cathode materials on the current efficiency, deposition rate, deposits compactness, distribution of dendrite size and growth rate are investigated and compared for uranium electrorefining. The electrode material has limited effect on the current efficiency but certain effect on the deposition rate of uranium. The deposition rates on inert cathodes (W and Mo) are relatively larger than those on active cathodes such as STS, Ni and graphite. For controlled-current techniques, both the deposition rate and dendrite growth rate have a linear relationship with current density. For the controlled potential techniques, only the deposition rate has a linear relationship with the overpotential, while the dendrite growth rate has a power exponential relationship with the overpotential. In addition, the potential pulse technique can promote the deposits compactness, exponentially reduce the growth rate of uranium dendrite at the expense of 30–40% deposition rate. Moreover, although the electrolysis time is doubled, under the same overpotential or electrical energy supply, the deposition rate is about 20% higher than that of the potentiostatic technique. For the pulse parameters, lower reverse potential and higher pulse period and ratio can promote the increase of deposition rate, current efficiency and dendrite growth rate. Regardless of the electrolysis technique, controlling the growth of uranium dendrites will sacrifice the deposition rate.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Kui Liu: Conceptualization, Investigation, Methodology, Visualization, Validation, Funding acquisition, Data curtion, Software, Formal analysis, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing, Project administration. Tan tan: Investigation, Data curtion, Software, Formal analysis. Xuanpu Zhou: Investigation, Data curtion, Formal analysis. Nantao Zheng: Data curtion. Yue Ma: Writing – review & editing. Mingliang Kang: Resources, Validation. Biao Wang: Resources, Validation, Supervision. Zhifang Chai: Conceptualization, Supervision. Weiqun Shi: Conceptualization, Supervision, Validation, Visualization, Funding acquisition, Writing – review & editing.
Declaration of Competing Interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This work was financially supported by the National Postdoctoral Program for Innovative Talents (No. BX20180387) and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation Grant (No. 2019M653182), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51904360), the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (No. 21925603) 1and the Undergraduate Innovation and Entrepreneurship Project (45000–31911202).
Appendix. Supplementary materials