<title>Fouling and cleaning protocols for forward osmosis membrane used for radioactive wastewater treatment</title>
<author> Liu Xiaojing; Wu Jinling; Hou Li-an; Wang Jianlong</author>
<Affiliation>Collaborative Innovation Center for Advanced Nuclear Energy Technology, INET, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, PR China;Beijing Key Laboratory of Radioactive Waste Treatment, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, PR China;Xi'an High Technology Institute, Xi'an, 710025, PR China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Engineering and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>Gao Shengman，HEU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2019.08.007</DOI>
<URL>https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1738573319302347?via%3Dihub</URL>
Abstract
The membrane fouling is an important problem for FO applied to the radioactive wastewater treatment. The FO fouling characteristics for simulated radioactive wastewater treatment was investigated. On-line cleaning by deionized (DI) water and external cleaning by ultrasound and HCl were applied for the fouled membrane. The effectiveness and foulant removing amount by each-step cleaning were evaluated. The membrane fouling was divided into three stages. Co(II), Sr(II), Cs(I), Na(I) were all found deposited on both active and support layers of the membrane surface, resulting in membrane surface became rougher and more hydrophobic, which increased membrane resistance. On-line cleaning by DI water recovered the water flux to 69%. HCl removed more foulants than ultrasound.
Keywords:forward osmosis;Membrane fouling;Membrane cleaning;Radioactive wastewater
1. Introduction
The radioactive wastewater, which contains various radionuclides (such as 60Co, 137Cs, 90Sr, etc), is harmful to environment and human health. Various technologies have been applied for the treatment of radioactive wastewater, such as precipitation, adsorption, membrane separation and the like [1], [2], [3], [4], [5]. Forward osmosis (FO) has the advantage of high rejection, high water flux and low membrane fouling, which is a potential effective process for the treatment of the radioactive wastewater [5]. In our previous study, FO was found effective to separate Co(II) from the aqueous solution. Cellulose triacetate with embedded polyester screen support (CTA-ES) membrane featured the highest water fluxes among the three selected commercial FO membranes. The optimal operation conditions were NaCl concentration of 1.0 M in draw solution (DS), the cross-flow velocities of 11 and 5 cm s−1 at the feed solution (FS) and DS sides respectively. However, Co(II) was found on the fouled membrane surface and became the membrane foulants [6], which affects the nuclide retentions. Therefore, membrane fouling is an important problem for FO applied to the radioactive wastewater treatment.
Although FO membrane fouling for the radioactive wastewater treatment is less studied so far, membrane fouling of FO applied for other wastewater treatments was much investigated. Like other membrane technologies, membrane fouling during FO process is inevitable, which involves colloidal fouling, organic fouling, inorganic scaling and biofouling [7]. In the last decade, organic fouling during FO process has been extensively investigated [8], [9], [10], [11], which has many similarities with colloidal fouling and can be explained by similar fouling mechanisms [7]. Organic fouling and colloidal fouling are caused by macromolecules and colloidal particles from the influent. The foulants aggregation and/or attachment on the membrane through van der Waals and electrical double layer force [7]. Inorganic scaling is a problem especially for wastewater reclamation and brackish water desalination [7], [12], [13], [14]. Scaling is caused by the sparingly soluble salts, such as CaSO4, BaSO4, and CaCO3. These salts precipitate near or on the membrane surface when the local concentration is higher than their solubility [15]. Biofouling is complicated and mainly attributed to bacterial adhesion onto the membrane surface to form biofilm [16].
No matter what kind of fouling, it affects the performance of FO. Membrane fouling could reduce the permeate water flux [17]. The foulants deposited on the membrane surface or within the support layer (SL), which made the overall membrane resistance for water transport increased and the extent of concentration polarization changed [7]. The fouling-enhanced concentration polarization and internal concentration polarization self-compensation effect also declined the water flux. Membrane fouling not only affects the water flux, but influences the membrane rejection property [18]. Fouling either enhanced or reduced the contaminants rejection because of the different rejection mechanisms [7]. The increased rejection of contaminants (arsenite [19], trace organic compounds [20], [21], micropollutants [18], etc.) was attributed to the membrane fouling enhancing the size sieving, electrostatic repulsion and hydrophobic interaction between contaminants and membrane. However, the decreased rejection of trace contaminants (boron, hydrophilic neutral contaminants) was caused by the fouling-enhanced concentration polarization, which increased contaminants concentration near the membrane surface and eventually enhanced the contaminants diffusion through the membrane [7], [18], [19].
Membrane fouling in FO process is influenced by operational conditions, influent characteristics, DS composition, membrane properties and membrane orientation [7]. The operational conditions include cross flow velocity [11], [22], [23] and temperature [13], [24], etc. Influent characteristics contain influent composition [9], [25] and concentration [26], [27], physicochemical properties (e.g. pH [28], ionic strength, etc.) [9]. In addition, the composition and concentration of DS can influence the membrane fouling by affecting the initial water flux [29]. Membrane properties consist of membrane materials, membrane surface properties (surface functional group, hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity, roughness, charge density, etc.), and structural properties [8]. Membrane orientation has an impact on internal concentration polarization, which affects the initial water flux [25], [30], [31] and then influences the extent of the membrane fouling.
Considering fouling is inevitable, membrane cleaning is required including physical cleaning, chemical cleaning and biological cleaning [7]. Physical cleaning can remove the deposited foulants on the membrane surface by enhancing shear force [8], [26], [32]. The water flux was even recovered close to 100% by simple surface flushing [8]. When FO was used to treat complex wastewater, chemical cleaning is also required because of the irreversible fouling caused by the complicated foulants from the wastewater [11], [33]. The typical cleaning chemicals include alkali (NaOH), acids (citric acid, nitric acid, etc.), chelating agents (EDTA) [11], oxidants (NaClO [16], H2O2, peroxyacetic acid, etc.), surfactants (detergents) and so on [15]. The recovery efficiency of water flux was affected by different cleaning chemicals [33]. The chemical agents of alkali, oxidants and surfactants are generally used to remove the organic fouling. Acids and chelating agents have advantages in removing the inorganic scaling. For biological cleaning, bioactive agents are applied to remove the foulants [7], [34], [35]. In fact, every cleaning method has its limitations. Generally, it is necessary to establish a combined cleaning protocol to overcome their limitations and mitigate the membrane fouling.
When the FO process is specially applied for the radioactive wastewater treatment, membrane fouling characteristics would be significantly different from that for the general wastewater treatment. Firstly, in some radioactive wastewater, inorganic substances are the major parts instead of organics. Fouling here was mostly attributed to the inorganic substances. However, the effect of inorganic fouling on the FO performance was not investigated as fully as that of organic fouling. Secondly, inorganic fouling, especially the fouling caused by radionuclides would make the membrane module radioactive. The used membrane when disposed might become new solid radioactive wastes. Thirdly, which nuclides are prone to attach on the membrane and become the foulants is unclear. The proper cleaning protocols have to be proposed on the basis of this question. As a result, the characteristics of fouling during FO process applied for the radioactive wastewater should be investigated in details for answering all the above questions. An effective cleaning method should be proposed to reduce fouling and facilitate the disposal of radioactive wastes.
Aiming at these questions, in this study, fouling and cleaning for the CTA-ES membrane used in FO process for radioactive wastewater treatment were studied. The fouling characteristics were investigated during 30 d FO operation. The combined cleaning protocols involved on-line cleaning by deionized (DI) water streams and external cleaning by ultrasound and HCl were proposed. The effectiveness of the various cleaning steps were compared and discussed. In addition, the residual foulants on the membrane surface after each cleaning step were analyzed.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Chemicals, feed and draw solutions
All the chemicals, including CoCl2, SrCl2, CsCl, NaCl and HCl, used in this experiment were of analytical reagent grade. FS was simulated radioactive wastewater and prepared by dosing the following chemicals successively to DI water: 20 mg L−1 CoCl2, 20 mg L−1 SrCl2 and 20 mg L−1 CsCl. DS was prepared by dissolving NaCl salt in DI water.
2.2. FO membrane and characterization
A commercial flat-sheet CTA-ES membrane was purchased from Hydration Technologies Innovations (HTI). According to the manufacturer, the membrane has asymmetric structure with embedded polyester screen support, containing a thin active layer (AL) and a thick mechanical support layer (SL) [36], [37], [38]. The operating pH of membrane was 3–8. The membranes were soaked in DI water for 18 h before use to remove the glycerin on the surface of membrane. The characteristic parameters of CTA-ES membrane are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1. Changes of the membranes properties.
Fig. 1. The schematic diagram of the FO system.
The fouling experiment was carried out with the FO system operated under the optimal conditions (DS of 1.0 M NaCl, FS and DS flow velocities of 11 cm s−1) for 30 d (FO I) [5]. FS contains 20 mg L−1 CoCl2, 20 mg L−1 SrCl2 and 20 mg L−1 CsCl. There was no other foulants to be added in FS. The fouled membrane (Membrane I) was taken to analyze the fouling characterization.
The cleaning experiment was conducted with the FO system after 14 d operation (FO II). The fouled membrane (Membrane II) was on-line cleaned with DI water recycling by both FS and DS sides of the membrane at the flow velocity of 11 cm s−1. For external cleaning, ultrasonic and HCl cleaning were successively employed as follows: 1) The Membrane II was soaked in DI water (60 mL) for 2 h with ultrasonic cleaning at 600 W power (KQ5200DB, Kunshan, China). 2) The Membrane II was soaked in HCl solution (55 mL, pH ∼3) for 2 h.
2.4. Indicators of FO performance
The water flux, the nuclide retentions, and the reverse Na(I) flux were the indicators of FO performance. Effects of fouling and cleaning on FO performance were investigated in terms of water flux, nuclide retentions and the reverse Na(I) flux.
2.4.1. Water flux
Water flux can be calculated by equation (1) [5], [36], [37]:
@(1)
where A (m2) is the effective area of membrane, Δt (h) is the measuring time interval, ρ (g cm−3) is the density of water. Δm (g) is the measured permeated water weight interval from the FS to the DS.
2.4.2. Nuclide retentions
The retention of each nuclide ion is determined by equation (2) [5], [36]:
@(2)
where Vf,DS (mL) and Vp (mL) are the final volume of DS and permeated water, respectively. Cf,DS(mg L−1)is the final concentration of nuclides ions in DS, Ci,FS (mg L−1) is the initial nuclide ions concentration of FS.
2.4.3. Reverse Na(I) flux
The reverse Na(I) flux can be defined as(3):
@(3)
where Vi,FS, Vf, FS (mL) are the initial and final volumes of FS, respectively; CiNa,FS, CfNa,FS (mg L−1) are the initial and final Na(I) concentration in FS, respectively.
2.5. Analytical methods
The concentrations of Co(II), Sr(II) and Cs(I), Na(I) in FS and DS were determined by atomic absorption spectrometry (ZA3000, HIT, Japan).
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Fouling characteristics
3.1.1. Decline of water flux
The water flux of Membrane I was investigated during the 30 d operation, which is shown in Fig. 2. The decrease of the water flux could be divided into three stages: Stage 1: a gradual decrease, Stage 2: a sharp decline and Stage 3: a slight decrease. A gradual decrease (from 13.3 to 12.7 L m−2 h−1) in water flux was found in the first 5 d. The gradual decline could be attributed to the decrease in osmotic driving force with time because of dilution of the DS and concentration of the FS [12]. Then, a sharp decline (from 12.7 to 3.9 L m−2 h−1) in water flux followed during the following 11 d, which suggested that membrane fouling occurred and fast developed. After about 16 d of operation, the water flux declined slowly from 3.9 to 2.4 L m−2 h−1 for 14 d. The slow decline of flux indicated a slow developed fouling process. With the development of fouling, the foulants increased the membrane resistance (Please see 3.1.4 in details), which hindered the water molecules through membrane from the FS to DS. In addition, more and more nuclide ions were rejected by membrane as the operation time, which eventually enhanced the osmotic pressure near the membrane surface at FS side. The enhanced osmotic pressure at FS side reduced the effective osmotic pressure of membrane on both sides. Thereby a slight decline in water flux occurred [39].
Fig. 2. Effect of membrane fouling on water flux. The experimental conditions were as follows: the FS was 20 mg L−1 nuclides solution, the DS was 1 M NaCl solution, the flow velocity was 11 cm s−1 on FS and DS sides, and the temperature was 25 ± 2°Cfor both sides.
3.1.2. Decline of nuclide retentions
The effect of membrane fouling on nuclide retentions was investigated. Fig. 3 shows the nuclide retentions with time. Although severe fouling occurred, the retention of Co(II), Sr(II), Cs(I) maintained higher than 65% during the whole operation time. During the process, the retention of Co(II) and Sr(II) were always higher than Cs(I), because Co(II) and Sr(II) possessed larger hydration radius than Cs(I) and had more difficulties to pass the membrane [40]. The Co(II) retention and Sr(II) retention were 97.7–99.6% and 91.1–97.2%, respectively. Only a slight decrease of Co(II) and Sr(II) retention were observed during the whole operation.
Fig. 3. Effect of membrane fouling on nuclide retentions. The experimental conditions were as follows: the FS was 20 mg L−1 nuclides solution, the DS was 1 M NaCl solution, the flow velocity was 11 cm s−1 on FS and DS sides, and the temperature was 25 ± 2 °Cfor both sides.
Unlike Co(II) and Sr(II), the retention of Cs(I) changed a lot with fouling occurred. The retention of Cs(I) was initially 92.2%, but declined to 65.8% after 30 d. Fouling-enhance concentration polarization could be an important reason. More and more Na(I) attached on the membrane surface of AL with time (3.1.4 in details), which increased the reverse transfer of Na(I) from DS to FS (3.1.3 in details). The CTA-ES membrane was of negative charge, which worked as a cation exchange membrane. Therefore, more and more nuclide cations transferred from FS to DS to keep the electric balance [40], [41]. Among the three cations, Cs(I) with the smallest hydrated ionic radius and lowest charge was easier to be exchanged by Na(I).
3.1.3. Increase of reverse Na(I) flux
The reverse Na(I) flux, shown in Fig. 4, increased slightly from 1.67 to 2.56 g m−2 h−1 during the entire operation time, indicating that the reverse permeation of Na(I) enhanced. It was related to the continuously-increased amount of Na(I) accumulated on the membrane surface due to the fouling-enhanced concentration polarization, which was proved in section 3.1.4. The increased Na(I) concentration on the membrane surface increased reverse flux of Na(I) with the smaller hydrated radii (see Fig. 5).
Fig. 4. Effect of membrane fouling on reverse Na(I) flux. The experimental conditions were as follows: the FS was 20 mg L−1 nuclides solution, the DS was 1 M NaCl solution, the flow velocity was 11 cm s−1 on FS and DS sides, and the temperature was 25 ± 2 °C for both sides.
3.1.4. Characterization of fouled membrane
From the SEM images, it can be seen that some crystals attached on membrane surface, especially the surface of AL (Fig. 5a∼d). The composition of foulants was analyzed by EDS (Fig. 6). Si, Na, Cl were found deposited on the membrane. Si element was from natural water. Na(I) and Cl(I) were the major foulants, which was consistent with the ion concentration in cleaning solutions (refer to section 3.3). The accumulation of NaCl on the membrane was the reason for the increase of reverse Na(I) flux and the decline of Cs(I) retention. The CTA-ES membrane was of negative charge, which worked as a cation exchange membrane [40], [41]. A great quantity of Na(I) increased the reverse transfer of Na(I) from DS to FS. For the electric balance, more nuclide cations transferred from FS to DS, which caused the decline of the nuclide retentions. Cs(I) retention reduced faster than Co(II) and Sr(II) retentions because Cs(I) featured the smallest hydrated ionic radius and lowest charge, which made the Cs(I) easier to be exchanged by Na(I) to keep the electric balance.
Fig. 5. SEM images of the AL (a) and the SL (b) of the original membrane; the AL (c) and the SL (d) of the fouled membrane.
Fig. 6. SEM image and EDS spectrogram of the AL of fouled membrane.
Within the selected area observed in SEM images, none of the nuclides ions including Co(II), Sr(II) and Cs(I) were found on the either surface of the fouled membrane. It suggested that the concentration of three nuclides were much lower than NaCl concentration on the membrane surface.
The AL of fouled membrane became rougher with Rmax value increased from 41.8 to 1587 nm (Fig. 7, Table 1). The deposition of foulants on the membrane surface increased the membrane roughness. The contact angle of AL increased from 65.6 to 84.0° and that of SL increased from 72.9 to 102.9°, which indicated that the fouled membrane became more hydrophobic (Table 1), so that the membrane resistance increased and then the water flux reduced.
Fig. 7. AFM image of the AL of fouled membrane.
3.1.5. Foulant amounts
The foulants accumulated on the membrane were evaluated by the total amounts of the ions removed from the following cleaning steps. The total amount of Co(II), Sr(II), Cs(I), Na(I) were 53.2, 52.2, 45.5, 27100 mg m−2, respectively (Table 2). It is observed that Na(I) is the major foulant for the membrane fouling. Cs(I) amount is lower than Co(II) and Sr(II) since Cs(I) with smaller hydrated ionic radius and lower change is easier to go through the membrane into the DS.
Table 2. Cleaning efficiency of various cleaning protocols.
3.2. On-line cleaning by DI water
The fouled Membrane II was subjected to on-line cleaning by DI water after 14 d operation when the water flux rapidly reduced at the end of Stage 2 (Fig. 2).
3.2.1. Recovery of water flux
The efficiency of on-line cleaning on the recovery of water flux was shown in Fig. 8. The water flux decreased from 10.0 to 4.9 L m−2 h−1. After on-line cleaning by DI water, the water flux recovered from 4.9 to 6.9 L m−2 h−1. The water flux was recovered to 69%. Therefore, the on-line cleaning by only DI water was not enough to obtain a good flux recovery.
Fig. 8. Water flux before and after cleaning. The experimental conditions were as follows: the FS was 20 mg L−1 nuclides solution, the DS was 1 M NaCl solution, the flow velocity was 11 cm s−1 on FS and DS sides, and the temperature was 25 ± 2 °Cfor both sides.
3.2.2. Change of nuclide retentions and reverse Na(I) flux
The changes of nuclide retentions after on-line cleaning by DI water were shown in Fig. 9. The Co(II) and Cs(I) retentions were decreased by 0.11% and 1.91% respectively. Sr(II) retention increased from 95.7% to 96.8%. The changes were small and could be almost neglected.
Fig. 9. Co(II) retention (a), Sr(II) retention (b) and Cs(I) retention (c) before and after cleaning. The experimental conditions were as follows: the FS was 20 mg L−1 nuclides solution, the DS was 1 M NaCl solution, the flow velocity was 11 cm s−1 on FS and DS sides, and the temperature was 25 ± 2 °Cfor both sides.
The reverse Na(I) flux after on-line cleaning was investigated (Fig. 10). The reverse Na(I) flux was slightly increased from 1.57 to 1.65 g m−2 h−1.
Fig. 10. Reverse Na(I) flux before and after cleaning. The experimental conditions were as follows: the FS was 20 mg L−1 nuclides solution, the DS was 1 M NaCl solution, the flow velocity was 11 cm s−1 on FS and DS sides, and the temperature was 25 ± 2 °Cfor both sides.
3.2.3. Characterization of on-line cleaned membrane
After on-line cleaning, a great quantity of crystals were effectively removed from both AL and SL, which resulted in the roughness of the membrane significantly recovered from 1587 to 45.8 nm (Fig. 11, Table 1). But there were still some remnants attached to the membrane surface (Fig. 12a and b). This result indicated that on-line cleaning by DI water is not sufficient to remove all the fouling layers deposited on the FO membrane. Other cleaning methods are needed to further remove the irreversible fouling and restore the water flux.
Fig. 11. AFM image of the AL of cleaned membrane.
Fig. 12. SEM images of the AL (a) and the SL (b) of the cleaned membrane.
3.2.4. Foulants removed by on-line cleaning
Great amount of the foulants were removed by on-line cleaning, especially the Na(I). The foulant amounts removed from AL per membrane area were 51.5 mg m−2 of Co(II), 47.5 mg m−2 of Sr(II), 42.6 mg m−2 of Cs(I) and 1990 mg m−2 of Na(I). The amounts of Co(II), Sr(II), Cs(I), Na(I) removed from SL per membrane area were 1.17, 2.35, 2.37, 24500 mg m−2, respectively (Table 2). The nuclides from AL were much more than those from SL because the FS faced the AL. A great quantity of NaCl was also removed from AL, which indicated that the reverse transferred NaCl also accumulated on AL and became the foulants. The nuclides did attach on both sides of membrane although they were not found by SEM-EDS.
3.3. External cleaning
After on-line cleaning, Membrane II was cleaned by another two-step external cleaning methods. The two-step external cleaning is HCl cleaning followed by ultrasound. The cation concentrations in the cleaned solution from each step were examined to investigate the cleaning effectiveness and evaluate the foulants amount on fouled membrane surface.
The amounts of Co(II), Sr(II) and Cs(I) removed by ultrasound were 0.15, 1.16, 0.07 mg m−2, respectively (Table 2). The amounts removed by HCl were 0.43, 1.22, 0.46 mg m−2 (Table 2), respectively. HCl removed more foulants than ultrasound. Among the three nuclides, Sr(II) amount removed from the membrane by the external cleaning was the highest, which suggested that Sr(II) played a more important role in fouling among the three nuclides. Sr(II) and Ca(II) are the same main group elements in the chemical periodic table and have similar chemical properties. The presence of Ca(II) generally enhanced the membrane fouling by directly depositing and improving the intermolecular adhesion between foulants [9], [27]. Therefore, it is reasonable that Sr(II) has a similar fouling effect with Ca(II), which was more prone to foul the membrane than Co(II) and Cs(I).
Although a great quantity of foulants had been removed, the recoveries of nuclide retentions and water flux were insignificant. Therefore, more effective cleaning protocols are required to be proposed in FO process used for radioactive wastewater in the future.
4. Conclusions
This study investigated the fouling and cleaning protocols for CTA-ES FO membrane used for radioactive wastewater treatment. Membrane fouling during FO process for radioactive wastewater was divided into three stages according to the decrease rate of water flux: Stage 1 with slow declined flux, Stage 2 with rapid declined flux and Stage 3 with slightly declined flux. Co(II), Sr(II), Cs(I), Na(I) were all found deposited on both AL and SL of the membrane surface, resulting in membrane surface became rougher and more hydrophobic, which increased membrane resistance. Sr(II) was more prone to foul the membrane than Co(II) and Cs(I). On-line cleaning by DI water recovered the water flux to 69%. HCl removed more foulants than ultrasound.
Further study is needed to explore the fouling mechanisms and propose more effective cleaning protocols for FO process applied of radioactive wastewater treatment.
Acknowledgments
The research was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program (2016YFC1402507) and the Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team in University (IRT-13026).
