<title>Radioisotopes present in building materials of workplaces</title>
<Affiliation>a.Federal University of Technology Paraná – UTFPR, Av. Sete de Setembro, 3165, Curitiba PR 80230-90, Brazil
b.Center of Nuclear Technology Development (CDTN/CNEN), Av. Presidente Antônio Carlos, 6627 (31270-901), Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil
c.Pelé Pequeno Príncipe Research Institute, Av. Silva Jardim, 1632, Curitiba PR 80250-060, Brazil
d.National Science Center ‘Kharkov Institute of Physics and Technology’, Akademicheskaya 1, Kharkiv 61108, Ukraine</Affiliation>
<author>F. Del Claro, S.A. Paschuk, J.N. Corrêa, V. Denyak, J. Kappke, A.F.N. Perna,M.R. Martins, T.O. Santos, Z. Rocha, H.R. Schelin</author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier Ltd</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radphyschem.2017.02.037</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2017.02.037 </URL>
ABSTRACT
The isotope 222Rn is responsible for approximately half of the eﬀective annual dose received by the world population. The decay products of 222Rn interacting with the cells of biological tissue of lungs have very high probability to induce cancer. The present survey was focused in the evaluation of activity concentration of 222Rn and other radioisotopes related to the building materials at workplaces at Curitiba – Paraná State. For this purpose, the instant radon detector AlphaGUARD (Saphymo GmbH) was used to measure the average concentrations of 222Rn in building materials, which were also submitted to gamma spectrometry analysis for qualitative and quantitative evaluation of the radionuclides present in samples of sand, mortar, blue crushed stone (Gneissic rock), red crushed stone (Granite), concrete and red bricks. The main radionuclides evaluated by gamma spectrometry in building material samples were 238U/226Ra, 232Th and 40K. These measurements were performed at the Laboratory of Applied Nuclear Physics of the Federal University of Technology – Paraná in collaboration with the Center of Nuclear Technology Development (CDTN – CNEN). The results of the survey present the concentration values of 222Rn related to construction materials in a range from 427 ± 40.52 Bq/m³ to 2053 ± 90.06 Bq/m³. The results of gamma spectroscopy analysis show that speciﬁc activity values for the mentioned isotopes are similar to the results indicated by the literature. Nevertheless, the present survey is showing the need of further studies and indicates that building materials can contribute signiﬁcantly to indoor concentration of 222Rn.
Keywords: Building materials Radionuclides Radon
Gamma spectroscopy Hazard indexes
1.Introduction
Radon (222Rn) is a radioactive gas that can be found naturally in inhabited environments and dwellings. Its concentration and activity in air present the variation according to region and mineral composition of the soil. This radioactive gas is produced by alpha decay of radium (226Ra), which belongs to the radioactive series of uranium (238U).
222Rn is about seven to eight times heavier than air and therefore it
tends to accumulate at an altitude close to the ground level that corresponds to the air breathed by humans. The study of 222Rn is important because it is a radioactive gas that emitting alpha particles (α) produce 8 radioactive successive decay products (one half under- goes alpha decay and another half is beta radioactive), which can interact with the cells of biological tissue of lungs. This radiation has very high probability to induce the lung cancer (Hopke et al., 2000).
According to the research conducted by the United Nations Scientiﬁc Committee on the Eﬀects of Atomic Radiation (UNSCEAR,
2006) radon and its decay products are responsible for approximately half of the eﬀective dose received by the population from natural radiation sources.
Typical building materials may contain signiﬁcant levels of radium as well as other natural radioactive isotopes of uranium and thorium. Considering the high porosity of construction materials this may cause rather exhalation rate of 222Rn and its accumulation in air of dwellings. Thus, the building materials can represent an important source of indoor radon activity (IAEA, 2003).
Materials such as cement, concrete, sand, clay bricks, granite, marble, limestone and gypsum represent a source of exposure because they contain radionuclides like potassium (40K), uranium (238U), thorium (232Th) and its decay products (Fathivand et al., 2006; Turhan et al., 2008; Mehdizadeh et al., 2011).
According to the European Commission (1999), when an individual inhabits an environment built from concrete blocks that contain an average concentrations of radium activity, thorium and potassium
equal 40 Bq/kg, 30 Bq/kg and 400 Bq/kg, respectively, this will cause an increase of his eﬀective annual dose of about 0.25 mSv/year.
International Agencies such as the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States (USEPA, 2016) and the International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP, 1993, 2010, 2014) have elaborated guides of protection measures and radon prevention as well as recommendations for reduction of radon levels in air of residential areas and workplaces.
The ICRP states that the value of 300 Bq/m3 meets the basic standards of safety standards recommended by agencies such as the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), World Health Organization (WHO), The European Atomic Agency Community (EURATOM), among others.
The Commission also states that the radon reference limits should be applied in mixed-use buildings that are used both by individuals and by the public workers (ICRP, 2014).
Radon surveys concluded in diﬀerent regions of Brazil present results that conﬁrm rather high concentrations of 222Rn in air of dwellings (Corrêa, 2006; Veiga et al., 2003; Geraldo et al., 2005; Neman, 2000; Santos, 2010), which in some cases reaches the values from 200 to 600 Bq/m3. During the last years, an increase of experi- mental studies concerning 222Rn concentration in air of Brazilian homes and dwellings was observed. Unfortunately, it is not suﬃcient yet for the evaluation of the overall population exposure to this sort of radiation.
The aim of the present research was to study the correlation between the radon activity in air of workplaces and concentration of other radionuclides present in collected samples of building materials from those locations.
2.Materials and methods
The present survey was focused in the evaluation of activities concentration of 222Rn and other radioisotopes related to the building materials at workplaces at Curitiba – Paraná State (Brazil), which is a big industrial city located in Southern Brazil. The urban area of the city is situated at the First Paraná Plateau located between the Serra do Mar Mountain and Devonian Cliﬀ which makes part of the hydrographic basin of Alto Iguaçu River. The substrate soil of Paraná, contains rocks, which are mostly classiﬁed as metamorphic. At this region a great variety of igneous intrusive rocks could be found, including granites and granitoids (MINEROPAR, 2001; Pereira et al., 2013; Salamuni et al., 2003). This fact leads to the conclusion that building materials from this region could contribute considerably to the concentration of radon in air of dwellings and workplaces of this region since granites usually contain signiﬁcant amount of the precursor (parent) radio- isotopes as uranium and thorium.
The samples of sand, mortar, blue crushed stone (Gneissic rock, mesh size of approximately 30 mm), red crushed stone (Granite, mesh size of approximately 38 mm), crushed concrete and red bricks (characteristic size of 80 mm) were randomly chosen and separated from diﬀerent construction places of Curitiba metropolitan area, mainly from recently build new academic sciences, research and laboratory buildings of the Federal University of Technology – Paraná (UTFPR). All samples were submitted to analysis concerning the exhalation of 222Rn as well as the evaluation of radionuclides such as 226Ra, 232Th and 40K, which are the main elements associated with human exposure to radiation from building materials.
From collected building materials samples of 1 kg were separated and stored in sealed in glass vessels (Fig. 1) for 40 days while 222Rn reaches the secular equilibrium. Accumulated radon activity in air of sealed bottles was measured using the instant radon detector AlphaGUARD (Saphymo GmbH).
For the purpose of background evaluation, an empty glass vessel
Fig. 1. Brick sample stored in a glass vessel to measure the 222Rn concentration.
was separated and used as reference in each measurement being stored at the same conditions as the glass vessels with material samples. Filters, hose and connectors were added in the air circuit measurement as shown in Fig. 2. All components and connections were tested for possible points of entry of external air as well as leakage of accumulated gas that could alternate the results obtained with the AlphaGUARD.
Every measurement consists of three major steps: (1) AlphaGUARD ventilation using the open circuit, (2) background measurements, and
(3) measurements of 222Rn liberated by building material sample and accumulated within the internal volume of the sealed bottles. All steps were performed using the air pump (AlphaPUMP), supplied together with the AlphaGUARD, which operated with air ﬂow rate of 0.5 L/min. The AlphaGUARD was set to operate in mode of “1 min/ﬂow” suggested by the User Manual.
The ventilation of the AlphaGUARD was done using open-air circuit when the air pump remained turned on for 40 min approximately, so that the detected alpha activity reaches the lowest level before the background evaluation step (Fig. 3).
Background measurements were performed during 1 h using a closed air circuit that prevents the entry of external air into measure- ment system. In this second step the air circulation circuit contains the precision rotameter, two dust ﬁlters and safety glass vessel that is included in Aquakit of AlphaGUARD system. All those elements were used in the measurements in order to ensure that possible dust particles from the samples will not penetrate inside the ionization chamber of AlphaGUARD.
At the third step, the glass vessels with building materials samples were connected to the AlphaGUARD and submitted to evaluation during two hours. This step was executed using the air pump operated with airﬂow rate of 0.5 L/min. The AlphaGUARD detector was set to operate in mode of “1 min/ﬂow” following the recommendations of the User Manual. Every step of materials evaluation was concluded by background control measurement to ensure that there was no con- tamination of the AlphaGUARD by any particles or dust from the samples.
The volume of each sample of building materials, because of its irregular form, was found using the Archimedes’ principle by measur- ing their weight with a precision-scale in air and when they were immersed in water.
Other samples of the same building materials were sent to the Laboratory of Natural Radioactivity of the Center of Nuclear Technology Development (CDTN) for qualitative and quantitative assessment of natural radionuclides using gamma spectrometry. This analysis was performed using a gamma spectroscopy system (CANBERRA) with hyper pure germanium semiconductor detector (HPGe) solid state with high eﬃciency (15%) and resolution, located
Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of the closed circuit for the measurement of background samples and building materials.
inside the Lead Shield Chamber installed and operated inside a shielded room designed for tritium analysis and measurements. Thus, the external radiation does not interfere with the equipment detection limits.
For this analysis the samples of each studied building materials were ground in a ball mill device (Los Angeles Abrasion Test, mesh size of 0.074 mm), homogenized and stored in Marinelli Beakers and remained at rest for approximately 40 days to achieve the secular equilibrium between 226Ra and its decay products.
The use of Marinelli beaker is essential because they ensure that the
sample remains as close as possible to the HPGe detector thereby improving the detection eﬃciency.
Table 1 shows the gamma transitions of 214Pb, 214Bi, 212Pb, 212Bi, 228Ac, and 40K, which were used in the gamma spectrometry analysis for determining the activity of 226Ra, 232Th, and 40K in the studied building material samples.
The method of gamma spectrometry allowed the identiﬁcation of radionuclides originated from the decay series of 238U and 232Th. Among the main natural radionuclides found in the building materials samples, there were considered the 226Ra, 232Th and 40K isotopes, which had their higher activity (Bq/kg) (Table 2).
Table 1
Gamma transitions used in gamma spectrometry analysis.
Those data were used for the calculation of the concentration index of activity (I), radium equivalent (Raeq) and emanation coeﬃcient (f) given by Eqs. (1)–(3) that are shown below:
@1
@2
@3
Fig. 3. Schematic drawing of AlphaGUARD ventilation in open circuit.
Table 2
Activity in [Bq/kg] of radionuclides evaluated by the technique of gamma spectrometry.
Table 3
Results of 222Rn measurements for six studied building materials.
In the equations above, the activity concentration index (I) was calculated following the recommendations of the European Commission (1999), where the terms CRa, CTh and CK represent the concentrations of activity of 226Ra, 232Th and 40K in Bq/kg, respec- tively. The maximum value of Raeq was considered equal to 370 Bq/kg (indoor reference limit) established by international norms and the recommendations of other publications (OECD, 1979; Beretka and Mathew, 1985; Malanca et al., 1993; Venturini and Nisti, 1997; Al- Sulaiti et al., 2008; Trevisi et al., 2012)
The radon emanation coeﬃcient (f), showed in Eq. (3), was used to evaluate the fraction of radon gas produced by radium decay in each sample of the studied building materials and liberated into the air of external environment. This coeﬃcient was calculated using the results of measured radon equilibrium activity (CRn), the free volume of used glass vessels (V), radium activity (CRa) in studied building materials samples (Bq/kg) provided by the analysis of gamma spectroscopy, the sample mass (M) and following the approach described in (Morawska, 1989; Kovler et al., 2005; Corrêa, 2006; Bikit et al., 2011; Hassan et al., 2011; Hassan, 2014).
3.Results and discussion
The activity concentrations of 222Rn exhale from building materials was obtained by subtracting the background values measured by the AlphaGUARD. The errors associated were obtained by calculating the quadratic sum of the errors associated with the background measure- ments and experimental 222Rn activity detected by AlphaGUARD.
Table 3 presents the obtained results for radon concentration activities in the air for the studied samples of sand, mortar, blue crushed stone, red crushed stone, crushed concrete and red bricks.
Thus, the concentration levels of 222Rn associated to evaluated building materials were obtained in a range from 427 ± 40.52 Bq/m³ to 2053 ± 90.06 Bq/m³, which are well above the range of activity of 10 Bq/m3 to 20 Bq/m3, which is established by the European Commission (1999). Such elevated levels of radon exhalation by the studied building materials showed the possibility that they can contribute potentially to the elevated indoor 222Rn activity above the
it is possible to conclude that these materials may contribute to the annual eﬀective dose of about 0.3 mSv following the documents of the European Commission (1999). In the case of other evaluated samples of mortar, blue crushed stone and concrete clocks, the activity concentration indexes presented the values close to 1.0 that may be associated with the eﬀective annual dose contribution of less than 1 mSv/year.
4.Conclusions
The present research presents the results of survey of radioactivity of building materials common in the Paraná State of Brazil. The obtained values of Hazard Indexes show that the activity concentra- tions were within the normal limits, since no value exceeded the activity limits recommended by the European Commission, ICRP, USEPA and UNSCEAR. Nevertheless, observing the rather small quantity of similar studies of Brazilian building materials and the present grow of building materials industry, and considering the absence of national norms and regulation, the importance of further studies of radioactive safety of building materials to ensure the reduction of human exposure can be highlighted.
Acknowledgments
The authors are very thankful to CNEN, CAPES, CNPq and Fundação Araucaria of Paraná State for ﬁnancial support of current research work as well as to colleagues from the Center of Nuclear Technology Development (CDTN/CNEN) for the positive discussions and assistance in the measurements.