<title>The nuclear fuel cycle code ANICCA: Veriﬁcation and a case study for the phase out of Belgian nuclear power with minor actinide transmutation</title>
<Affiliation>a.Korea Atomic Energy Institute, ICT Department, Republic of Korea
b.FairApp, Republic of Korea
c.Department of Graduate School of Information Security, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea</Affiliation>
<author>I.Merino Rodríguez , A. Herna´ndez-Solís , N. Messaoudi , G. Van den Eynde</author>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Energy and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2020.04.004</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2020.04.004</URL>
a b s t r a c t
The Nuclear Fuel Cycle Code “ANICCA” has been developed by SCK●CEN to answer particular questions about the Belgian nuclear ﬂeet. However, the wide range of capabilities of the code make it also useful for international or regional studies that include advanced technologies and strategies of cycle.
This paper shows the main features of the code and the facilities that can be simulated. Additionally, a comparison between several codes and ANICCA has also been made to verify the performance of the code by means of a simulation proposed in the last NEA (OECD) Benchmark Study. Finally, a case study of the Belgian nuclear fuel cycle phase out has been carried out to show the possible impact of the trans- mutation of the minor actinides on the nuclear waste by the use of an Accelerator Driven System also known as ADS.
Results show that ANICCA accomplishes its main purpose of simulating the scenarios giving similar outcomes to other codes. Regarding the case study, results show a reduction of more than 60% of minor actinides in the Belgian nuclear cycle when using an ADS, reducing signiﬁcantly the radiotoxicity and decay heat of the high-level waste and facilitating its management.
Keywords:
Nuclear fuel cycle simulator     Belgian nuclear power   ADS    Transmutation of minor actinides     ANICCA veriﬁcation
1.Introduction
Key aspects of nuclear fuel cycles can nowadays be analyzed by the use of computer simulation tools, which have emerged as versatile and powerful tools in many institutions around the world. In fact, many of them are currently under development with the intention to help policy makers addressing suitable solutions con- cerning the different fuel cycle components, which range from the front-end ones (i.e. mining, conversion, enrichment and manufacturing) all the way to the back-end players, which are the ones that would make nuclear energy sustainable (i.e. interim storages, reprocessing and ﬁnal repositories). In this respect, the Belgian Nuclear Research Centre (SCK CEN) has developed over the past few years the ANICCA simulation platform (or “Advanced
Nuclear Inventory Cycle Code”) [1e3].
ANICCA is a Nuclear Fuel Cycle Simulation Code (NFCSC) that has been continuously under development since 2012. Its main objective since its initial conception was to fulﬁl the necessity of answering the questions that have been arisen about the Belgian nuclear fuel cycle, as well as advanced strategies for this country and/or scenarios at a regional level. This code has been designed to be a ﬂexible and reliable tool for scenario studies, ranging its different modelling stages from uranium mining to the ﬁnal disposal (FD) of the spent fuel (SF) or high-level waste (HLW) from reprocessing. All in all, the code shares the same common interests to similar tools developed around the world when it comes to addressing the solution of the different fuel cycle issues. To mention some examples of such codes, see Table 1.
Nevertheless, the wide range of input parameters, physics methods and approximations that are used by the codes, led to the organisation of different benchmarks due to the fact that applying different codes to the same scenario may lead to dissimilar results, even when a ﬁxed set of hypotheses are given describing a certain nuclear fuel cycle scenario [6]. In this respect, the use of code-to- code benchmark exercises as a strategy to verify and assess the capabilities of predicting fuel cycle observables of interest, might turn out to be a good ﬁrst indicator on the degree of conﬁdence developers could put into their respective codes [3,13,14]. In this
Table 1
Examples of NFCSC.
paper, a veriﬁcation benchmark study is performed before attempting to show results related to the scenario of the Belgian fuel cycle. The objective is to show that ANICCA, compared to other major fuel cycle codes, properly predicts and quantiﬁes parameters of interest related to both the front and back end by means of light water reactor (LWR) scenarios burning UOX and MOX fuels, such as the Belgian nuclear power has used.
Currently, the phase out of the nuclear ﬂeet is considered as the most likely scenario in Belgium [15] and, although many studies have been carried out to analyse this scenario, the long-term operation of at least three nuclear power plants is a fact that modiﬁes the previous studies [2]. The Belgian waste management organisation, ONDRAF/NIRAS, considers direct disposal of the more than 5000 tHM of spent fuel expected at the end of the reactors' operation as a potential long-term management solution. However, an advanced option is also being studied at the Belgian nuclear research centre SCK CEN, which corresponds to the transmutation of minor actinides (MA) by means of an accelerator driven system (ADS) [16]. This speciﬁc scenario, which involves the use of the EFIT (European Facility for Industrial Transmutation) ADS and seven Belgian PWR's, is of great particular interest for SCK CEN due to the fact that Belgium has committed itself to the construction of MYRRHA (Multi-purpose hYbrid Research Reactor for High-tech Applications), the ﬁrst ADS prototype that will be employed to demonstrate the transmutation proof-of-concept [17]. The aim of this particular fuel cycle strategy is to reduce the ultimate volume and the radiotoxicity of the HLW. The main purpose of this work is to show a comprehensive study about the Belgian nuclear fuel cycle providing information and estimates of required nuclear materials as well as the ones generated during the cycle, such as uranium needs, fuel mass, separated material, HLW, etc. Additionally, some other parameters are also included to show the capabilities of ANICCA for this speciﬁc transmutation scenario.
2.Description of ANICCA
The code is being designed to carry out all the processes and to not directly depend on other codes, so that radioactive decay of the nuclear material and the burnup process of the nuclear fuel can be quickly and accurately executed within the code. For the irradiation process, each fuel is simulated by means of an associated prebuilt library ewhich will be describe further. This library has so far been obtained by the post-processing of an exhaustive calculation car- ried out by the in-house burnup code known as ALEPH2 [18]. The created library has then enough information to allow ANICCA to perform the burnup process in one step. Also, all the facilities involved in the cycle can be generically modeled, but they differ from each other in their processes.
2.1.ANICCA runtime
When the code is run, there are three main phases to distinguish as depicted in Fig. 1. The ﬁrst step is the initialization of the scenario
which loads all the information needed from the inputs to the required modules for the simulation; it also creates the nuclear material and connects all components. In this stage, the nuclide data is loaded from an Evaluated Nuclear Data File (ENDF), usually JEFF [19], which contains all the physical information of the nu- clides. It has to be mentioned that ANICCA can track the whole number of isotopes deﬁned in the ENDF ﬁle, however a reduction of its length is also possible to accelerate the simulation or for development purposes. The second stage is the computation phase that runs the scenario over the time steps deﬁned by the user. It starts by updating the behaviour of the components (i.e. deter- mining which functions the facilities are doing) then transports the material to the connected facilities that will then operate. The material not considered after a process (such as releases to the environment after reprocessing) is then discarded before updating the viewer (update depending on the time step). Finally, the last phase is the creation of all the requested output data when the scenario is ﬁnished. The output ﬁles are also deﬁned by the user, they can be Excel sheets or plain text.
2.2.Components or facilities
Most of the facilities of a nuclear fuel cycle can be modeled by ANICCA [3], examples are:
External or Initial legacy: To add nuclear material coming from a different fuel cycle or stocks. Materials such as spent fuel (SF), depleted uranium (DepU) coming from enrichment processes, plutonium (Pu), MA or reprocessed uranium (RepU), can be added to the cycle by means of this facility.
Mining: To create the raw material needed for the cycle. This cover from the natural uranium (NatU) to the metal alloy for fuel fabrication, if required.
Fuel Fabrication: This facility groups the different processes and stages to produce nuclear fuel from the raw material to the ﬁnal assembly. Different fuel types can be produced, such as: UOX and MOX for LWR or Fast Reactors (FR) and inert matrix for ADS fuels. Equivalence models have been implemented to maintain reactivity levels of the fuel, which are described in section 2.3.
which loads all the information needed from the inputs to the required modules for the simulation; it also creates the nuclear material and connects all components. In this stage, the nuclide data is loaded from an Evaluated Nuclear Data File (ENDF), usually JEFF [19], which contains all the physical information of the nu- clides. It has to be mentioned that ANICCA can track the whole number of isotopes deﬁned in the ENDF ﬁle, however a reduction of its length is also possible to accelerate the simulation or for development purposes. The second stage is the computation phase that runs the scenario over the time steps deﬁned by the user. It starts by updating the behaviour of the components (i.e. deter- mining which functions the facilities are doing) then transports the material to the connected facilities that will then operate. The material not considered after a process (such as releases to the environment after reprocessing) is then discarded before updating the viewer (update depending on the time step). Finally, the last phase is the creation of all the requested output data when the scenario is ﬁnished. The output ﬁles are also deﬁned by the user, they can be Excel sheets or plain text.
2.2.Components or facilities
Most of the facilities of a nuclear fuel cycle can be modeled by ANICCA [3], examples are:
External or Initial legacy: To add nuclear material coming from a different fuel cycle or stocks. Materials such as spent fuel (SF), depleted uranium (DepU) coming from enrichment processes, plutonium (Pu), MA or reprocessed uranium (RepU), can be added to the cycle by means of this facility.
Mining: To create the raw material needed for the cycle. This cover from the natural uranium (NatU) to the metal alloy for fuel fabrication, if required.
Fuel Fabrication: This facility groups the different processes and stages to produce nuclear fuel from the raw material to the ﬁnal assembly. Different fuel types can be produced, such as: UOX and MOX for LWR or Fast Reactors (FR) and inert matrix for ADS fuels. Equivalence models have been implemented to maintain reactivity levels of the fuel, which are described in section 2.3.
Fig. 1.  ANICCA runtime.
Reactor: The reactor (or reactor ﬂeet) produces the electricity required by the cycle according to the reactor capacity and the burnup of the nuclear fuel. After the burnup process, which is based on CRAM16 method [20], the spent fuel can be stored in the reactor pool, as a cooling time, for the time deﬁned by the user. ANICCA allows the deployment of an unlimited number of reactors or ﬂeets and types.
Reprocessing: In charge of separating the elements or materials from the spent fuel when a recycling strategy is foreseen. The process includes different types of reprocessing, according to the residence time of the spent fuel, such as LOFI (Last-Out, First-In), FOFI (First-Out, First-In) and a homogeneous strategy (where the spent fuel materials are added to a generic pool of materials). On the other hand, this facility, as well as a real reprocessing plant, can also remove from the HLW those ele- ments that are not considered in this category, such as described in Ref. [21]. For instance, 100% noble gases and 99% iodine and chlorine are discarded from the cycle when applying PUREX; or, additionally, noble metals if PYRO (See Ref. [22] for more in- formation about these processes). Those elements, depending on their nature, can be released to the environment or stored as intermediate level waste (ILW); however, their accountability is optional.
Repositories: These facilities can store different materials, temporarily or permanently. Different processes can be carried out here, such as the radioactive decay and the extraction or addition of new material. Additionally, different batches of the materials can be gathered to speed up the simulation.
Depending on the strategy, these facilities can be connected as the user choices. Facilities and connections created can be modeled in any time as required. An example of such connections can be seen in Fig. 2, which represents a mono recycling of There is no restriction on the number plutonium strategy. Note that facilities allow back and forth connections (i.e. tails storage) and the delivery
of materials to different receivers simultaneously (e. g. power reactors).
2.3.Fuel models
Different fuels can be modeled in ANICCA, particularly UOX, MOX for LWR or FR, or an inert matrix for ADS. They can be created using ﬁxed fractions of materials or equivalence methods. For instance, it is possible to use a ﬁxed fraction when the isotopic composition to blend is partially known, such as the case of mono reprocessing of Pu. However, when multi-processing strategies are implemented, maintaining the reactivity of the fuel is required. There are three equivalence models implemented in ANICCA to obtain a reference reactivity level for certain type of fuels. Such reactivity level, given initially by the irradiation libraries, is re- calculated when the fuel is loaded in the reactor and considered during the fabrication process. The available equivalence methods are as follows:
U-236 Compensation: When using reprocessed uranium for UOX fuel, the neutron absorbing effect of the isotope U-236 (and from U-234 to a lesser extent) requires additional enrichment to assure the desired reactivity of the fuel. Therefore, a penalty factor is used to describe the magnitude of the effect, (averaged value taken from Ref. [23]). However, in further improvements, it will be also calculated according to the initial enrichment and burnup of the fuel or set with another ﬁxed magnitude (such as a value of 15% extra enrichment, taken from Ref. [24]).
Pu-239 Equivalent: This concept was ﬁrstly introduced by Baker and Ross [25] and further developed by Ott and Borg [26]. This method is based on the fact that, for any given reactor, if the geometry and the isotopic composition of the structural mate- rial, coolant and moderator are ﬁxed, the criticality level of the reactor will only depend on the isotopic content of the fuel. ANICCA calculates this parameter internally by using the cross
Fig. 2.  Example of connections between facilities.
sections and the n (average number of emitted neutron per ﬁssion event) value of the isotopes in the materials that will be mixed, in order to match a reference Pu equivalent factor taken from the reactor/fuel library. Using this method, several fuels can be produced, including those advanced for MA transmutation.
MOXEU: This method is an ad hoc approach for fuel multi-  reprocessing for a speciﬁc reactor that burns MOX with Enriched Uranium and up to 50GWd/tHM which is taken from the new NEA benchmark on Transuranic (currently under study) led by the Expert Group in Advanced Nuclear Fuel Cycle Sce- narios [27]. The method uses the ﬁssile Pu content in an equivalence formula, limiting the Pu content and the U-235 enrichment. The raw material to combine can be Pu and U (Natural or Reprocessed).
2.4.Reactor libraries
To perform the burnup process in ANICCA, a speciﬁc library for each fuel/reactor need to be used. This library is built by means of the SCK-CEN code ALEPH2 [18], which can be combined with any version of MCNP(X) family code [28]. This code can be used for time dependent behaviour simulations of various systems, ranging from a single pin model to a full-scale reactor model efor example, the core burnup, activation of the structural materials or irradiation of samples, dosimetry, among others. Regarding the irradiation pro- cess performed by ALEPH2, several fuels, zones and time steps can be simulated depending on the complexity of the reactor core and on the user choice. The general output ﬁle in ALEPH2 sums-up all the information about the irradiated fuel by type and the evolution of the isotopes generated per simulated time-step. Along with this
ﬁle, at every time step cross-sections and ﬁssion yields ﬁles are also generated. All this leads to the management of vast quantities of output ﬁles to create the averaged library for ANICCA. This process is carried out by a library builder script included in the code, which takes the required ﬁles to weight them in ﬂux, burnup and volume for each type of fuel in the reactor to create a single library.
This built library contains the information needed for ANICCA to perform the burnup process in a single step (or more steps, if required) by means of a built-in routine based on CRAM16 [20]. The information of the library includes an averaged ﬂux, the effective full-power days of irradiation (EFPD), as well as averaged isotopic cross-sections and ﬁssion yields. This library is also required to create the nuclear fuels, since a calculated parameter from the reference fuel simulated in ALEPH2 is also included to fabricate MOX or advanced fuels from the different material stocks, main- taining the reactivity conditions as the initial loading.
3.Veriﬁcation
A veriﬁcation procedure is always needed when complex methods and processes are carried out to simulate a scenario, such as the NFCSC cases. As previously mentioned, several benchmarks have focused to verify nuclear fuel cycle codes, simulating reference scenarios from very basic functionalities to complex ones. The aim of this section is to validate the main functionalities of ANICCA by comparing it to other existing codes. This comparison will be car- ried out using the last worldwide exhaustive benchmark for NFCSC carried out by the Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA/OECD) in 2012 [7]. This benchmark has three different scenarios, which depends on the fuel cycle strategy. The ﬁrst scenario is an open cycle; the sec- ond one a mono-recycling of Pu in a PWR and the last one, a mono- recycling of Pu in PWRs plus a deployment of Generation IV fast reactors.
3.1.
Scenario description
The chosen scenario for the comparison will correspond to the “mono-recycling of Pu in PWR”. This was based on two main rea- sons: the high number of codes that participated in this exercise and the fact that such a scenario is very similar to the Belgian fuel cycle. The length of this scenario and the installed capacity per reactor type, are shown in Fig. 3. Meanwhile, the fuel cycle scheme (where the involved facilities and their inter-connections take place) is depicted in Fig. 4.
In the study, two different reactors were simulated: PWR UOX and PWR MOX. However, they are in fact the same technology. Thus, the scenario assumes the same electrical output, load factor, fuel burnup and cycle length for both of them. Five codes were used for the analysis of this scenario: COSI6 [4], FAMILY-21 [7], DESAE2.2 [29], TR_EVOL (formerly known as EVOLCODE) [10] and VISION [11]. The main goal is to obtain similar results with ANICCA as those obtained by the aforementioned codes.
3.2.Results
Fig. 5 to Fig. 9show the main results of the front-end of the cycle. The results for the back-end are shown in Figs. 10e15. Since the differences between COSI6, FAMILY21, DESAE2.2, TR_EVOL and VISION were already explained in the previous benchmark [7], the focus will be to analyse behaviour of ANICCA compared to those codes on the whole.
3.2.1.Front-end
According to the speciﬁcation, the electricity production of the cycle is constant and approximately 430 TWhe. To produce this energy, about 878 tHM of fuel is required. At the beginning of the cycle, this amount is 100% UOX and decreases to be constant up to 790 tHM after the third year. This amount is the same value ob- tained by most of the codes, as shown in Fig. 5. Here, relative dif- ferences between codes in the equilibrium stage are less than 1%, when considering average outputs for COSI and DESAE. On the other hand, the use of MOX fuel increases up to 87.8 tHM during the ﬁrst three years. This value also agrees with most of the other codes, as shown in Fig. 6. At this point, the main differences come from the interpretation of the scenario. In fact, ANICCA includes the fuel for the transition between PWR UOX and PWR MOX during the ﬁrst three years (not directly linked to the fabrication time), while the others perform this a-priori or, in some cases, do not even include this stage. Once again, when averaging COSI and DESAE outputs, differences between codes are less than 1%.
Two more comparisons regarding the UOX fabrication can be seen in Fig. 7 and Fig. 8, respectively. The ﬁrst one shows the annual
Fig. 3. Installed capacity along the cycle (Taken from NEA).
Fig. 4.  Scenario Flow chart.
Fig. 6.  MOX  Fabrication needs.
requirements of NatU consumption for the PWR UOX ﬂeet and the second one, the separated working units (SWU) needed along the time. In both cases, ANICCA agrees with the results of the other participants. For these cases, differences caused by the transition step are only observed during the ﬁrst year, since fuel is fabricated 2 years before it can be used in the reactor. At the equilibrium stage, differences of less than 2% were found between the codes for Natural Uranium and SWU needs, excluding DESAE which showed a difference of 6% for both cases (Note that for this code, the sig- niﬁcant increase of UOX fuel to set up new cores, shown in Fig. 5, is not reﬂected in these results).
To ﬁnish the comparison for the front-end of the cycle, Fig. 9 shows the amount of Pu charged in the MOX fuel. Using the reference ﬁxed value for the Pu content of the benchmark e set as
Fig. 7.  Natural  Uranium needs.
Fig. 8. Separative working units (SWU).
9.26%e ANICCA blends 8.15 tHM of Pu with 79.85 tHM of DepU. Despite the wide range of the results, the code is also in concor- dance with those obtained by most of the codes, especially with TR_EVOL, which assumed the same ﬁxed Pu value given by the reference. COSI, on the other hand, used an equivalence model to calculate the Pu content. For COSI, the average 9.4 tHM has been plotted to avoid the oscillation caused when reactors are simulated as a single ﬁctitious reactor, as showed in reference [7]. Finally, FAMILY, VISION and DESAE applied different interpretations of the Pu fraction and core loading assumptions, which explain these differences [7].
3.2.2.Back-end
Quantifying the differences between codes during the back-end is one of the most important stages of the veriﬁcation. From here
Fig. 10.  Fission products.
on, both masses and isotopic compositions of the nuclear materials can be measured to conﬁrm the accuracy of the methods and models built-in the code.
Since the scenario is a mono-recycling of Pu, the reprocessing process gives several outputs (i.e. streams of separated elements) that can be compared divided into two main groups of results. From one side, ﬁssion products (FP) and reprocessed U and, from the other side, the reprocessing losses. The ﬁrst group is presented in Figs. 10 and 11 for FP and U, respectively, and from Fig. 12 to Fig. 15 for the second group. It has to be taken into account that in the benchmark, the separated amount of Pu was not considered directly. Note that neither DESAE 2.1 nor FAMILY 21 were able to present all results from this stage at the time of the benchmark ﬁnalization.
For FP (see Fig. 10), which are going to be stored in the FD along with the reprocessing losses; the expected  amount  is  roughly  6300 t. It comes from the ~6% of FP in the 790 tHM/year of refu- elling reprocessed along the cycle, plus 10.000 tHM of spent fuel coming from an initial legacy (this is according the benchmark). Brieﬂy, ANICCA result is close enough to the expected value and at the same level of the other codes. On the other hand, uranium is the main contributor to the separated elements with a total amount over the 90 ktHM. Results shown in Fig. 11 demonstrate that ANICCA is in the range of the other participants.
The second group to compare corresponds to the TRU reproc- essing losses (Np, Pu, Am, Cm). Since the reference scenario con- siders only Pu and U separation with an efﬁciency set as high as 99.9%, all the leftovers are accumulated as waste in the ﬁnal disposal along with the FP. The aim is to compare the evolution of the TRU elements in a ﬁnal repository.
As previously mentioned, TRU losses are the most important results in this veriﬁcation, since they depend on the mass
Fig. 11.  Reprocessed uranium.
Fig. 12.  Plutonium losses.
conservation among facilities, the decay process and the fuel irra- diation (o depletion) model, since each code has applied its own neutron spectra and cross-sections data. Therefore, if ANICCA ﬁts between most of the codes, then it can be said that both the mass conservation and isotopic composition can be well veriﬁed. Again, DESAE and VISION are not considered in this analysis because the former was not able to simulate reprocessing losses and the latter was not able to apply decay processes during a repository stage [7]. Results for Pu losses (Fig. 12), Np (Fig. 13), Am (Fig. 14) and Cm (Fig. 15) show a relatively good agreement among codes. In particular, ANICCA is in between all of them, following the same
trends along time.
Going further, for Pu losses, accumulated differences between codes can be close to 2 t (25%) at End of the Scenario (EOS). This difference seems to be negligible considering a total SF reprocessed in the order of the 100 ktHM. However, this reveals the hight un- certainty between fuel models (see Fig. 9) or depletion calculations that can affect such a strategic material, since differences in fuel amounts UOX and MOX (Figs. 5 and 6) were found lower than 1% between codes. The same happens for the MA, however, these amounts are signiﬁcantly higher than Pu (even more than 30 t for Np) since they are totally considered as waste and stored in the FD. Although the reference study benchmark remarks that differents between codes are in fact due to different assumptions, models and methods, these results demonstrate that new studies need to be performed by codes, especially to compare built-in methods and functionalities, in order to assure concordance and reliability in the outputs.
3.2.3.Conclusions of the veriﬁcation
According to the main outcomes presented in this chapter, ANICCA results agree with most of the participants in the bench- mark. This fact can be considered as a satisfactory exercise to
Fig. 13.  Neptunium  losses.
Fig. 14.  Americium  losses.
Fig. 15.  Curium losses.
successfully verify the code outputs. This means that all the methods implemented in the code that were used in the simulation respond correctly. However, the large amounts of MA mass losses along the comparison and the signiﬁcant bias among codes to this respect, are big enough issues to re-consider new procedures or benchmarks, in order to gain more conﬁdence in future results.
4.The Belgian nuclear fuel cycle
In this study, two scenarios for the phase out of the Belgian nuclear ﬂeet have been assessed in terms of nuclear material re- sources. All the commercial reactors were simulated and the analysis considers an Accelerator Driven System option (ADS) in one of the scenarios. This ADS [16] has been predicted to be oper- ational from year 2050, 25 years after the shutdown of the last reactor. The purpose of the study is to estimate the nuclear mate- rials generated for the phase out of the ﬂeet with or without using
an ADS. In particular, parameters such as nuclear fuel mass needed and irradiated, reprocessed materials and HLW are calculated to show the beneﬁts that a TRU transmutation strategy can produce. Although a preliminary approach of this study was already pre- sented [2], the addition of new data regarding the scenario (and the several improvements that have been implemented in the code) make this new study interesting for the Belgian policymakers and researchers.
4.1.Nuclear power plants and electricity production
The nuclear ﬂeet simulated consists of 7 PWR commercial re- actors, which have been operating since 1975 and it is expected to be decommissioned by 2025, considering the phase-out program. Table 2 summarizes the nuclear reactors and their main operational features. The table also includes a dedicated MA burner facility (ADS) taken as a solution for the back-end of the cycle. This ADS, known as ADS-EFIT, was conceptually developed in the 6th Euro- pean Commission Framework Programme IP-EUROTRANS [15].
According to the Power Reactor Information System (PRIS) [30] of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the Belgian nuclear ﬂeet has produced about 1540 TWhe since its start-up until 2018. Considering the lifespan, the net power by design and the load factor of the reactors taken from PRIS, an accumulated elec- tricity of about 1810 TWhe will be produced at the EOS. Fig. 16 shows the annual production of electricity along the timeesolid linee and the installed capacity edashed line. It has to be mentioned that all of the ﬂuctuations represented in the ﬁgure (real-life data) are taken into account in the simulation.
4.2.Nuclear fuels
The Belgian nuclear ﬂeet has used different type of fuels (UOX and MOX), with different cycle length (12 and 18 months) and as- sembly types (14   14, 15  15 and 17  17). For Doel 3 and Tihange 2, a fraction of MOX fuel were loaded during a limited period of 10 years (from 1996 to 2005) [15]. To simplify the study, these fuels have been grouped into two representative types: UOX, one to reach an average burnup of 40 GWd/tHM and another for 50 GWd/ tHM (named UOX_30 and UOX_45, respectively) and MOX (for a burnup of 40 GWd/tHM). Table 3 summarizes the reactors and their associated fuels. Additionally, the ADS fuel will be made with a mixture of Pu and MA with an U-free inert matrix fuel (IMF) [16].
4.3.Description of the scenarios
The two scenarios proposed for this simulation are described as follows:
Phase-out scenario (P-O): This is the reference scenario, where no new nuclear power plants are expected to be built and all reactors will operate for a lifespan deﬁned in Table 2. The total
Table 2
Reactors characteristics.
Fig. 16. Power production of the PWR ﬂeet.
Fig. 17. Electricity production for the ADS.
electricity generated will be around 1810 TWhe, based on the PRIS information, as above mentioned. The scenario also con- siders 670 tHM of spent fuel which was reprocessed to supply 67 tHM of MOX to the cycle [31].
ADS scenario (EFIT): This is considered an advanced scenario, since it includes an ADS facility to burn the MA generated along the P-O scenario. This scenario will be an extension of the P-O, so that the same simulation conditions are applied until the commissioning of the ADS, 25 years after the shutdown of the last PWR. The main purpose of this cycle is to reduce signiﬁ- cantly the HLW mass (or, consequently, the volume of waste) at the FD. For this reason, both Pu and MA are removed from the spent fuel and considered as resources or assets to be used in a new potential nuclear ﬂeet. The electricity generated in this scenario will be around 1868 TWhe. Note that the small contribution of the ADS increases the electricity generated in the P-O scenario by only 3%. The ADS is intended to work for 9 cycles of 6 years each with a gap of 4 years between them to set up the new core, since the entire core is replaced every cycle. This means, the ADS will be around 86 years operative before
Table 3
Fuel speciﬁcations.
decommissioning, but only 54 running (or burning MA and providing electricity), such as Fig. 17 shows.
These scenarios consider a fabrication time of two years for every fuel. Additionally, 5 years of cooling time after irradiation for all reactors and ADS, such as [7]. Regarding reprocessing, the pro- cess lasts one year and losses are set at 0.1% for U, Pu and MA, such as applied in Ref. [21].
4.4.Main results
This section is intended to show the main results obtained by the simulations. In order to clarify them, results are divided into three subsections. Firstly, the front-end, regarding fuel fabrication needs. Secondly, the ADS-EFIT in-core performance, which gives the transmutation behaviour of this facility in every cycle. Lastly, the back-end, where it is shown the waste generation of the two strategies and their impacts on the ﬁnal repository for parameters such as HLW mass, decay heat and radiotoxicity.
4.4.1.Front-end
As shownin Fig.18, around 5431 tHM of fuel are needed to produce the electricity of the P-O scenario (UOX_45 UOX_30 MOX). To produce that fuel, around 41.5 ktU of NatU will be removed from the mine and about 36 ktU will be stored and managed as DepU (see Table 4). Additionally, after the reprocessing process of the 670 tHM of UOX SF (the total of UOX_30 irradiated), around 67 tHM of MOX are fabricated (containing about 6 tHM of Pu in total), which is the same amount speciﬁed in Ref. [15]. The MOX mass represents around 17% of the loadings for Tihange 2 and Doel 3, the two reactors that used MOX fuel between 1995 and 2005 [15].
With regard to the ADS scenario, the ADS-EFIT fuel required for the 9 cycles will be about 48 tHM. According to the speciﬁcations [16], this fuel is made blending ﬁxed fractions of Pu (45%) and MA (55%). It has to be mentioned that this facility do not need to keep a reactivity level on its own, but by means of an accelerator, therefore the need of an equivalence model for its fuel is not required. Both Pu and MA materials, which are already separated at the moment of the fuel fabrication, present small quantities of decay products. These products, mainly coming from the Am and Cm elements, can be included directly into the fuel. Nevertheless, the simulation showed that those quantities were negligible (values are smaller than 0.3% of the weight) and, therefore, they were not taken into account.
4.4.2.ADS-EFIT in-core performance
Although the proportions of Pu and MA are constant for ADS- EFIT fuel fabrication, the transmutation of MA experiences slight changes along the cycle, as in Fig. 19 (blue points). These changes
Fig. 18. Fuel mass by type.
Table 4
Separated material inventory at EOS (year 2025 for P-O and 2142, after the last core is reprocessed for ADS strategy).
are due to small variations in the isotopic vectors of the separated material stocks, caused by the multi-recycling of the different fuels with different burnups. It can be seen that EFIT may maintain an average amount about 48 kg/TWhth of MA burning all over its cycle, this means, around 15% of the initial MA mass is burned (Or more than 0.8 tHM). The value above mentioned is important to conﬁrm that the facility is burning MA properly. In fact, a minimum mass of 42 kg/TWhth is required to provide a zero net balance of Pu [16]. Since the transmutation is higher than that value, there is a small Pu production along the entire cycle of the ADS (orange triangles vs the secondary axis).
As speciﬁed previously in the scenario deﬁnition, EFIT is fore- seen to work for 9 cycles of 6 years each discontinuously (54 years full operational) with 4 years gap between cycles. Results show that the Pu and MA masses are enough to cover the requirements in all of those cycles. However, to decrease the MA stock to the minimum, more stages are needed, such as the next section shows.
4.4.3.Back-end
The next results show the main advantages of implementing a MA transmutation strategy by using the ADS in the Belgian nuclear fuel cycle. In fact, such as Fig. 20 shows, where the evolution Pu and MA mass in all facilities (excluding FD) are depicted, the use of an ADS may signiﬁcantly reduce the MA mass by about 62%, from 12.5 to 4.8 tHM, by the year 2142 (EOS), where the reprocessing of the last ADS core is performed. This process will be carried out few years after the EFIT last operation. Additionally, by EOS, the Pu stock would have around 0.9 t of MA due to the Pu-241 decay into Am-
241. Excluding that mass from the ﬁnal 4.8 tHM, the ﬁnal stock of separated MA would be around 3.9 t. As mentioned before, the strategy chosen considers that ADS-EFIT core is fully loaded every 10 years (which explains the staggered line in the ﬁgure during its operation time). On the other hand, when the last reactor is shut- down in year 2025 in the P-O strategy, the inventory of Pu reaches the highest amount generated, ~54.7 tHM. Additionally, the MA mass will be around 8.55 tHM, which excludes 0.37 tHM stored as HLW from the reprocessing carried out for MOX fabrication (the stock of these materials and others can be seen in Table 5).
Going further, the evolution of the MA elements (Np, Am and Cm) in all facilities can be seen in Fig. 21, where both scenarios are compared (solid lines for P-O and dashed lines for ADS). The ADS strategy signiﬁcantly reduces the mass of Np and Am. On the contrary, the Cm increases its mass with every ADS cycle. Although the isotopes of this element decay rather quickly, the amount at the EOS is signiﬁcantly higher than in the P-O strategy.
The stocks of nuclear materials (which can be used in other purposes, such as new fuel cycles), right after the shutdown of the last commercial reactor, is shown in Table 4. For the P-O scenario (year 2025), neither Pu nor MA is available from the 670 t of UOX SF reprocessed. In fact, Pu has been already used for MOX fabrication and MA have been vitriﬁed as HLW. However, there will be around 636 t of RepU along with 36 ktHM of DepU. On the other hand, in the ADS strategy about 51 t of Pu (included ~0.9 tHM of Am) and 4 t of MA can be expected after the last reprocessing (year 2142).
On the other hand, Table 5 shows the estimated quantity of each material that will be sent to the FD. Only spent fuel and HLW from reprocessing are considered in this study. For the P-O strategy, 4615 t of UOX SF need to be managed as HLW along with 67 t of MOX SF and 9.9 t of HLW coming from reprocessing. The total amount of Pu an MA in the P-O scenario at EOS would be around
54.7 and 8.92 of MA. For comparison, by year 2142, those amounts would be 49.9 t and 12.85 t for Pu and MA, respectively, which are shown in parenthesis in the table. For the ADS strategy, where all the spent fuel is reprocessed, the main contributor to the FD is the 169  t of HLW  from reprocessing. This mass would have around   76 kg of Pu and 400 kg of MA, of which 372 kg originates from the early reprocessing, where there was no MA recovering. It has to be mentioned that, in this case, noble gases and metals, as well as most of the iodine and chlorine were removed from the HLW. Therefore, that mass (which can represent between 10% and 15% of the FP), is not taken into account for the FD. This method has been applied according to Ref. [21] and described in Section 2.2.
ANICCA code can calculate the radiotoxicity of the nuclear ma- terial in any phase of the cycle. However, this parameter is of greater importance in the FD phase, due to the long-live products stored in there. For its further computation, the highest biological Dose Conversion Factors (DCF) based on reference [32] for each nuclide were selected, as well as a dilution factor for ingestion of 100% was considered. Therefore, a conservative computation of the dose equivalent was taken as a reference.
It is known that the HLW from a once-through fuel cycle needs a number of hundreds of thousand years to reach the same radio- toxicity level as the NatU [21] and one of the purposes of imple- menting advanced strategies is to reduce drastically the generation of waste, and consequently, the radiotoxicity. In this study, results
Fig. 19.  MA and Pu burning per cycle in the ADS-EFIT.
Fig. 20. Evolution of Pu and MA in all facilities excluding FD.
Table 5
Nuclear Material considered for storage in FD (year 2025 for P-O and 2142, after the last core reprocessed for ADS strategy).
for the FD, depicted in Fig. 22, shows that the radiotoxicity of the HLW coming from the P-O scenario (blue line with markers), would need around 200 thousands years to reach the level of NatU (dashed orange line). The reduction of Pu (6 tHM) due to the MOX usage in the cycle was not enough to reduce the radiotoxicity level compared to a fully open cycle. In fact, if Belgium would have fol- lowed a pure open cycle, the curve would overlap the current blue one. On the contrary, the removal of the 99.9% of MA and Pu of the FD by using an ADS strategy, leads to a drastic decrease of the radiotoxicity in the medium and long term, such as the green line shows. On the other hand, when removing Pu and MA from the FD the decay of FP allows the HLW to reach the same radiotoxicity level that the NatU in around 300 years, which is one of the aims of the transmutation strategy [21]. However, the 420 containers of HLW coming from the ﬁrst reprocess [31] to make the 67 t of MOX in- creases the radiotoxicity level, requiring more than 1500 years to reach the radiotoxicity of the NatU.
Finally, the code is also able to calculate the decay heat in any facility, such as the fabrication plant or a SF or HLW disposal (interim or permanent). For a ﬁnal disposal, this capability may be applied to estimate the number of assemblies or vitriﬁed HLW per waste package to be stored according to some industrial speciﬁ- cations (i.e. to avoid reaching a maximum thermal limit) [21]. To see the implications of a MA burning (ADS strategy) in the long term on the decay heat produced by the HLW or spent fuel, Fig. 23 shows the evolution of the thermal power in the ﬁnal disposal for both P-O and ADS scenarios (The HLW coming from the reprocessing to make the 67 tHM of MOX have been also included in the results). For the P-O scenario, the MA explain the most of the heat produced (blue line with markers). In contrast, applying an ADS strategy
Fig. 21.  Evolution of  the MA
signiﬁcantly reduces the parameter in the long term (green line), mainly explained by the decay of the FP. Although, during the ﬁrst decades in the ﬁnal disposal, both scenarios give similar results.
5. Conclusions
ANICCA has been designed and developed by SCK-CEN to simulate different nuclear fuel cycles, especially those related to the Belgian cycle. Its modular design has been aligned to lie within the state-of-the art scope of fuel cycle modelling around other in- stitutions, and to perform studies that consider in one hand, the impact of the long-term operation of the ﬂeet and, on the other hand, the options for the phase out (or the strategies for the waste management). In fact, the ﬁrst part of this paper has been devoted to verify ANICCA in a benchmark exercise versus other codes.
The mono-recycling of Pu in PWR proposed by the NEA/OECD in 2012, was the chosen scenario for this purpose. Although at the time of such organized benchmark ANICCA was not present (nor ready), the results of other participants are considered a reference to test the capabilities of fuel cycle codes for computing front- and back-end observables. The correspondent front-end part of the described scenario showed that ANICCA is in very good agreement and consistent with other codes, making the code reliable
Fig. 22. Evolution of radiotoxicity after commercial reactors shutdown.
Fig. 23. Evolution of the thermal heat after commercial reactors shutdown.
regarding the estimation of the nuclear material in the cycle.
Additionally, in this paper two phase out scenarios have been simulated to compare strategies for the Belgian nuclear power. The ﬁrst scenario is aimed at giving a reference for a number of pa- rameters in the current cycle, such as nuclear material required and irradiated, HLW generated and their impact on the ﬁnal disposal. The second one is aimed at showing the main advantages of using an ADS (EFIT design) as a solution for the back-end.
Results show that when ADS-EFIT is deployed, the stock of MA is signiﬁcantly decreased by around 60% by the year of the last reprocessing of the ADS spent fuel. On the other hand, the stock of Pu remains the same. When both Pu and MA are removed from the FD, an important reduction of the HLW mass to be stored in the ﬁnal repository can be expected.
Finally, the advantages of implementing a MA transmutation strategy for the back-end are a low nuclear material stored in the ﬁnal disposal and a low-level of radiotoxicity and decay heat in the HLW. Particularly, the use of this advanced scenario in Belgium will lead to the HLW reaching the same radiotoxicity level as the natural uranium in about 1500 years, instead of the 200 thousand years, with a contribution dominated by the past choice to reprocess the ﬁrst 670 t of SF.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.