<title>Adjoint acceleration of Monte Carlo simulations using SCALE: A radiation shielding evaluation of the neutron generator room at Missouri S&T</title>
<Affiliation>Missouri University of Science and Technology, Nuclear Engineering, Rolla, MO, United States
</Affiliation>
<author>Manish K. Sharma, Ayodeji B. Alajo, Xin Liu n</author>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research A</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nima.2015.04.035</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2015.04.035</URL>
a b s t r a c t
A deuterium‐deuterium accelerator-type neutron generator was installed in the Nuclear Engineering Department at Missouri University of Science and Technology (Missouri S&T). This generator is shielded by different hydrogenated and non-hydrogenated materials to reduce the dose rates in the vicinity of the facility. In the work presented in this paper, both SCALE6 and MCNP5 radiation transport codes were used to conduct two independent simulations. The new shielding analysis tool of SCALE6—MAVRIC, with the automatic variance reduction technique of SCALE6, was utilized to estimate and compare the dose rates from the unbiased MCNP simulation. The ultimate goal of this study was to compare the computational effectiveness offered by employing the MAVRIC sequence in the modeling of the neutron generator facility at Missouri S&T.
Keywords:
Neutron generator shielding D-D neutron generator Monte Carlo
Variance Dose
1.Introduction
Monte Carlo simulations are considered the most accurate method for solving dose rates in a radiation ﬁeld. However, the computation time required for many practical problems involving deep-penetration is prohibitive. Over the past several decades, various techniques have been developed to reduce the variance in dose rates and accelerate the Monte Carlo simulations [1–10]. Among these developments, the hybrid Monte Carlo/Deterministic methods are the favored techniques for radiation shielding pro- blems [8–10]. The Oak Ridge National Laboratory recently devel- oped a new shielding analysis tool in the SCALE6 code system [11]. This new tool, known as MAVRIC (Monaco with Automated Variance Reduction using Importance Calculations), employs a hybrid deterministic‐stochastic method to automatically generate variance reduction parameters for Monte Carlo simulations. MAV- RIC is based on the Consistent Adjoint Driven Importance Sam- pling (CADIS) and Forward CADIS (FW-CADIS) methodologies, which use the concept of an importance map and biased source distribution to accelerate Monte Carlo simulations (a more detailed description can be found in [8–11]). In the past, it has been shown that this hybrid technique serves as an appropriate method for the shielding analysis of nuclear reactors [12–15]. In this work, this new shielding analysis tool (MAVRIC), with the automatic variance reduction technique of SCALE6 radiation transport code, was utilized to estimate the dose rates in and around the neutron generator facility at Missouri University of Science and Technology (Missouri S&T).
A deuterium–deuterium (D-D) accelerator-type neutron gen- erator (model: DD-109, manufactured by Adelphi Technology) was recently installed in the Nuclear Engineering Department at Missouri S&T. The operation of this generator will produce fast neutrons of approximate energy 2.5 MeV through D-D fusion reactions   (2Hþ2H-3Heþn).   The   detailed   working   mechanism and the applications of neutron generators that produce fast neutrons through deuterium-deuterium and deuterium-tritium fusion reactions have been discussed extensively in the literature [16–20]. The operation of the generator at Missouri S&T will increase radiation exposure around the facility. Therefore, to  reduce the dose rates in and around the facility, due to the neutrons and secondary photons, the generator has been shielded with different materials. Shielding of neutrons is a challenging problem because of the fact that dose contributions from both the neutrons and the photons should be considered. Therefore, the generator was shielded with different materials (e.g., high-density polyethylene, lead, and 5 wt% borated polyethylene). Moreover, some walls of the generator room were also lead-lined to further reduce the dose rates around the facility.
A Monte Carlo N-Particle (MCNP) radiation transport code [21,22] was recently used to develop a model of the neutron generator and its facility. An MCNP simulation was then performed
to estimate the generator's annual hours of operation in order to keep the dose rates within the prescribed limits. This problem is a typical example of a deep-penetration shielding problem where the attenuation of the beam is considerably higher. Thus, it was difﬁcult to obtain good statistics (i.e., low relative uncertainty) in the regions of interest without sacriﬁcing computation time. Therefore, in the work presented in this paper, attempts were made to speed up the simulations by utilizing the automated variance reduction technique of the MAVRIC tool. The ultimate goal was to compare the dose rates and statistical uncertainties from a SCALE simulation with those from a Monte Carlo simulation and thereby evaluate the relative computation efﬁciency of the SCALE simulation. The concept of Figure-of-Merit was utilized to determine the relative computation efﬁciency and speedup of the SCALE simulation.
2.Facility layout and analytical calculations
The physical placement of the DD-109 accelerator-type neutron generator at Missouri S&T is illustrated in Fig. 1. The generator, which is installed in room 217A on the second ﬂoor of the Fulton Hall building, will be operated from an adjacent room (No. 217), as shown in Fig. 1. For spatial clarity, a zoomed image of room 217A is also shown. As already discussed in the previous section, this type of generator utilizes D-D fusion reactions to produce fast neutrons with an approximate energy of 2.5 MeV. The V-shaped copper target (where the Dþ ions strike) is approximately 1.02 cm thick and has a titanium coating that is approximately 0.102 mm thick. The initial bombardment of Dþ ions results in the formation of titanium hydride on the target's surface. The subsequent bom- bardment of Dþ ions at the target initiates the D-D fusion reactions that produce fast neutrons. For a sufﬁcient reduction of dose rates (due to generated neutrons and secondary photons) in and around the facility, it is imperative that sufﬁcient shielding be provided around the generator and the facility. Various materials (e.g., high-density polyethylene, borated polyethylene, and lead) have been used to achieve this objective. The V-shaped target and the current shielding of the generator are depicted in Fig. 2(b). The generator was ﬁrst surrounded by high-density polyethylene (HDPE) to efﬁciently thermalize the fast neutrons. Hydrogenated materials (such as HDPE) are always a preferred option for this purpose. The (n,γ) capture reactions in the HDPE also results in dose rate contribution from photons. Due to its high atomic number, lead is the preferred choice for attenuating photons. Therefore, the HDPE has been surrounded by a 0.64 cm (0.25 in.) thick lead box to reduce the dose rate contribution from photons (see Fig. 3).
This  entire  conﬁguration  has  been  surrounded  by  5.08 cm   (2 in.) thick 5 wt% borated polyethylene (BPE) to absorb the thermalized neutrons. The shielding's shape was chosen to effec- tively cover the generator by utilizing rectangular pieces of polyethylene. This design also offers the advantage of obtaining     a more “open” space where the samples can be placed and irradiated (see Fig. 3(b)).
It is worth noting that the walls, roof, and ﬂoor of the generator room also provide shielding to the neutrons and secondary photons. The composition and the thickness of each wall are listed in Table 1.
Some of the walls of the generator room have also been lead- lined to reduce the dose contribution from the photons. The eastern and southern walls each have a lining  of  0.32 cm  thick lead to reduce the dose rates in the adjoining rooms (rooms 217   and 218 in Fig. 1). Since the generator  is  elevated approximately  36 cm from the ﬂoor, the concrete ﬂoor has also been lined with
0.64 cm thick lead to reduce the exposure (due to secondary photons) to the persons working on the building's ﬁrst ﬂoor. The effectiveness of lead-lining in reducing the neutron and photon dose rates is discussed in [21]. The room's roof in the developed SCALE model was assumed to be made of a 2.54 cm (1 in.) thick wood covering only. In reality, the roof is made of a composite material located above the wood. This assumption was made so that the simulated dose rates were an overestimation of the actual values. Moreover, the MCNP simulation that was recently per- formed [21] was also based on the same assumption. Therefore, maintaining the same assumptions for both models was crucial for a justiﬁed comparison between these dose  rates  (obtained  from the MCNP simulation) and those obtained from the SCALE simulation.
2.1.Analytical calculations
An analytical estimate of the neutron dose rate was made at the reference point. The objective was to see how close this estimate was to the neutron dose rate from the SCALE simulation. The NCRP Report No. 144 recommends that the “removal cross-section” method be used to estimate the dose rate from neutrons of energy less than 30 MeV [23] that are shielded by hydrogenous materials. This approach, however, requires information about the buildup factor—which accounts for dose contributions from scattered neutrons. Therefore, an alternative approach (given in [17]) was used to theoretically estimate the dose rate. The neutron dose rate at a reference position 1 m away from the neutron source toward the east (position A in Fig. 4) is given by
@1
Fig. 1. The second ﬂoor of the Fulton Hall building where the neutron generator is located.
Fig. 2. (a) DD-109 neutron generator head and HDPE blocks used for shielding of generator. (b) Cutaway of a neutron generator and the surrounding HDPE blocks. The V-shaped target, where the neutrons are produced, is also shown. (Image courtesy of Adelphi Technology, Inc.)
Fig. 3. (a) DD-109 generator shielding. (b) Different materials used in the shielding. (The top BPE cover is removed for a better perspective.) The place where samples will be irradiated is also shown.
Table 1
Composition and dimensions of different walls of the generator room.
Fig. 4. Cutaway diagram of the generator's shielding (central plane, xy view). The neutron source (indicated by a red star) is assumed to be a point source at the origin. Also shown is the reference position (A) where the analytical calculation was performed. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
where DEt and DE0 are the dose equivalent values at a particular position with and without a shield of thickness t, λ is  the relaxation length, and C is a constant that incorporates the scattering factor for the correction. The neutrons, when traveling to reference position A, will encounter approximately 14.3 cm of HDPE and approximately 5.08 cm of BPE. Since lead is practically ineffective in attenuating the neutrons [21,24], the  attenuation  from the 0.64 cm lead encountered in this direction was ignored. Furthermore, the HDPE, BPE, and parafﬁn had very similar den- sities and neutron removal cross-sections [25,26]. Therefore, the relaxation length of parafﬁn provided in [17] was used in the calculation using Eq. (1).
The unshielded dose rate (DE0) at a distance of R cm away from a neutron source of strength S neutrons per second is given by
@2
where q is the dose-equivalent rate per unit neutron ﬂuence rate (in Sv h—1 per neutron cm—2 s—1, provided in [26]). For a neutron source emitting 2.5 MeV neutrons with a rate of 2 ~ 109 neutrons/s, the unshielded and shielded neutron dose rates (at reference position A) were calculated to be 22.25 mSv/h and 0.99 mSv/h, respectively. Thus, the generator's shielding reduced the neutron dose rate by an approximate factor of 22 (in the east direction). This observation highlights the importance of incorporating hydrogenated shielding materials for effective reduction of neutron dose rates. The analytical estimate at the reference position (with shielding) was also found to be reasonably close to the dose rate value obtained for that position from the SCALE simulation: 1.06 mSv/h, with a relative uncertainty of approximately 0.8%. Details of the developed SCALE model and the simulation performed are given in the following section.
3.SCALE modeling and methodology
The details of composition and dimensions of the generator head, shielding, and the facility were used to develop a SCALE model. To simplify the analysis, a point neutron source of energy
2.5 MeV and strength of 2 ~ 109 neutrons/s was assumed to be at the origin. This assumption was a conservative estimate because the attenuation from the V-shaped titanium-coated copper target was neither considered nor incorporated in the model. The neutron source (i.e., the target) was surrounded by an aluminum shroud approximately 0.15 cm (0.06 in.) thick and 12.7 cm (5 in.) in diameter. This shroud was further surrounded by a stainless steel outer wall that was approximately 0.28 cm (0.11 in.) thick with a 20.32 cm (8 in.) diameter. Adelphi Technology provided the generator head's dimensions and compositions. The generator head was assumed to be cylindrical in shape, which is a reasonable assumption with regard to its original shape (see Fig. 2). The compendium of material composition data [27] was used to obtain details on the composition of different materials, information that is necessary for SCALE modeling. The composition and density information of the different materials used to model the generator head, its shielding, and the facility are listed in Table 2. Details of the generator head, the target, and the cooling mechanism are discussed in [21]. A ﬁnal SCALE model of the generator head, shielding, and facility was then developed. The 3D views of this model, obtained using the KENO3D visualization tool [29], are illustrated in Fig. 5.
After the geometric SCALE model was developed, it was important to establish the tally and the automatic variance reduction parameters. Since the total dose  rate  is  contributed by both the neutrons and the (secondary) photons, respective neutron and photon mesh tallies to cover the entire facility (approximately 500 cm ~ 600 cm ~ 350 cm in dimension) were created. The FW-CADIS methodology was then adopted to optimize the Monte Carlo simulations so that various tallies have more uniform relative uncertainties. The FW-CADIS approach ﬁrst performed a quick discrete ordinates calculation, using the SN method, to estimate the expected tally results. The SN method is a deterministic methodology for numerically
solving the Boltzmann transport equation and its related adjoint equation [30]. Then, an adjoint SN calculation was performed to construct the adjoint source. Thereafter, the  adjoint source, corresponding to each tally, was weighted inversely by those forward tally estimates obtained in the  ﬁrst SN calculation. Finally, the weighted adjoint ﬂux was used to create the importance map.
The mesh tallies for neutron and photon dose rates were constructed uniformly along three central planes passing through the neutron source: xy, yz, and xz. A total of 111,996 (51 ~ 61 ~ 36) bins were created, with each bin of size 10 cm ~ 10 cm ~ 10 cm. To perform a deterministic SN calculation, a grid geometry overlaying the physical geometry was created. This grid mesh size was made relatively large to improve the computational efﬁciency. Therefore, a grid mesh of 41 53 30 cells was created. Since the grid mesh size was not uniform, additional grid cells were constructed in the peripherals of the facility. The SN calculations used the default S8 quadrature and P3 Legendre order. These calculations used 27 neutron energy groups and 19 photon energy groups. In the ﬁnal dose rate calculations, however, 200 neutron energy groups and 47 photon energy groups were used. In both cases, the energy groups
Fig. 5. 3D views of the generator facility and its shielding. (The facility's roof is not shown.)
Table 2
Composition of various materials used in the SCALE model of a neutron generator, its shielding, and the facility [27,28].
were taken from the ENDF/B-VII library. The simulated neutron and photon dose rate contour plots at three central planes,  obtained from the SCALE simulation, are illustrated and discussed in the following section.
As already discussed, the recently developed MCNP model [21] was computationally expensive when obtaining reasonable uncer- tainties for the dose rates. The computation time of MCNP simulation for a particle history of 1 ~ 109 on different computer systems is given in Table 3.
The computational expensiveness of this Monte Carlo simula- tion was, therefore, prohibitive. Thus, in this study an attempt was made to accelerate the Monte Carlo simulation by generating the variance reduction parameter using the MAVRIC sequence. To gain an insight into the computational effectiveness of the variance reduction technique, results from the SCALE simulation and an analogy (unbiased) MCNP simulation were compared. The concept of Figure-of-Merit (FOM) was utilized to achieve this objective. It was deﬁned as
FOM	1	3
RE2 ~ T
where RE is the relative uncertainty in the dose rate and T is the total computation time taken for the simulation [31]. As indicated
Table 3
Computation time on different computer systems for a previously performed MCNP simulation [21].
by its deﬁnition above, the value of FOM includes consideration of both the resultant relative error of the sample mean and the computer time necessary to achieve this relative error. A compar- ison of FOM values for two different and independent simulations (Monte Carlo and SCALE) is made in next section.
4.Results and discussion
The model discussed in the previous section was used to perform a SCALE simulation for a computation time of 800 min. The neutron dose rate contour plots (in Sv/h) for three central planes, obtained from the SCALE simulation, are shown in Fig. 6. The statistical uncertainty corresponding to the dose rate at each position is depicted in Fig. 7. Similarly, the photon dose rate contour plots (in Sv/h) and their respective statistical uncertainties are shown in Figs. 8 and 9, respectively. For a better understanding of the distribution of dose rates in and around the facility,  the outer boundaries of the generator shielding and the  facility  are also shown.
The vital role played by the generator's shielding and the facility's walls in reducing the dose rates is shown in Figs. 6 and
8. As expected, the neutron and photon dose rate decreased as the distance from the source increased. This ﬁnding is supported by the fact that the neutron and photon dose rate decreased approxi- mately by the order of 108 and 105. The dose rates were relatively higher just outside the east wall, as observed in previously obtained results [21]. The effectiveness of a lead-lined concrete ﬂoor can also be seen in Fig. 6(b) and (c). These dose contours also considerably matches to those obtained from a previous MCNP simulation.
Fig. 6. Neutron dose rate contour plots along the three central planes passing through the neutron source at origin. Outer boundaries of the generator's shielding and the facility's walls are also shown for comparison.
Fig. 7. Contour plots showing the relative uncertainty in the neutron dose rate along the three central planes passing through the neutron source at origin.
Fig. 8. Photon dose rate contour plots along the three central planes passing through the neutron source at origin.
Fig. 9. Contour plots showing the relative uncertainty in the photon dose rate along the three central planes passing through the neutron source at origin.
Table 4
The neutron dose rate contribution near the facility (where maximum total dose rates were earlier reported [21]). Dose rates from the SCALE and unbiased MCNP simulations were compared for T  ¼ 800 min.
The estimated dose rates had reasonably good statistics (i.e., low uncertainty) in  regions  located  inside  the  facility  (see Figs. 7 and 9). Inside the shielding, the statistical uncertainties in the neutron and photon dose rates were less than 4.1% and 1%, respectively. These respective uncertainties were less than 6.8% and 4.6% inside the generator facility. The regions, that were primarily near the facility's walls, had relatively higher uncertain- ties. This observation was based on the fact that fewer particles were registered in those regions.
The primary focus of this work was to compare the computa- tional effectiveness of employing a variance reduction technique in the modeling of a generator facility. Thus, the computational efﬁciencies of two independent SCALE6 and MCNP5 simulations were compared to one another. For this purpose, we compared the Figure-of-Merit of dose rates at six positions near the facility (where the maximum total dose rates had been earlier reported [21]). The two simulations were performed on the same compu- ter system, for the same computation time, to create a reliable
comparison. The SCALE simulation was performed using the developed model and the automatic variance  reduction  techni- que of the MAVRIC sequence, as already discussed in the previous section. The MCNP model developed previously was used for the Monte Carlo simulation [21].
Both of these simulations were performed for time duration of 800 min on a computer system with an Intel Xenon 3.33 GHz processor and a 48 GB RAM. The objective was to compare the neutron and photon dose rates at six positions near the facility where the total dose rates were maximum. These dose rates are given in Tables 4 and 5, respectively. The FOM values are also reported for each of the dose rates. The importance of utilizing the variance reduction technique to obtain dose rates with less uncertainty for the same computer time can be seen in Table 4.   The speedup represents the ratio of FOM values from the SCALE and MCNP simulations. The average computational speedup of 11.3 demonstrates the momentous role played by variance reduction technique in improving the computational efﬁciency.
Table 5
Photon dose rate contribution near the facility (where maximum total dose rates were earlier reported [21]). Dose rates from the SCALE and unbiased MCNP simulations were compared for T ¼  800 min.
Fig. 10. Histograms showing relative uncertainty in dose rates contributed from (a) neutrons and (b) photons.
Improvement in the photon dose rate uncertainties from the SCALE simulation was not very signiﬁcant, as evidenced in Table 5. It was even worse in most of the locations (see Table 5). This ﬁnding is justiﬁed because the goal of the FW-CADIS method is to converge neutron and photon dose tallies to similar relative  uncertainties. The adjoint source (i.e., importance) corresponding to the neutron and photon dose tallies needs to be weighted inversely by the neutron and photon ﬂuence value in the FW- CADIS approach. This leads to much reduced relative uncertainty for the neutron dose tally and slightly increased relative uncer- tainty for the photon dose tally. Additionally, the dose rate contribution from neutrons was approximately 85% of the total dose rate in the east direction. Therefore, the speedup in the neutron dose rate simulation was more important.
Better insight into the uncertainty distribution can be observed  in the  relative  uncertainty  histograms  illustrated   in  Fig.  10.   Figure   10
(a) and (b) shows the fraction of voxels that has relative uncertainty  that is less than a particular amount. Relative low and uniform uncertainties, throughout the entire mesh tally of neutron or photon dose rates, indicate that the FW-CADIS technique is better than the analog Monte Carlo simulation. The distribution of uncertainties is given for the two independent MCNP and SCALE simulations per- formed for a duration of 800 min. A histogram of uncertainties  from the MCNP simulation performed previously [21] for a particle history of 1     109 (T      6.4 days) is also shown for comparison. It can be seen  in Fig. 10(a) that the relative uncertainty in the neutron dose rates considerably improved when the computation time  increased  from 800 min to 6.4 days, using the analog MCNP simulation. More importantly, the SCALE simulation for a computer time of 800 min proved to be the most efﬁcient approach among these three  cases.  Here, approximately 99.7% of the voxels had a relative uncertainty that was less than 10%. For photon dose rates, the SCALE provided considerably good statistical uncertainties, considering the  fact  that  the contribution of photon dose rates to the total dose rates was not very signiﬁcant in almost all of the six directions (see Tables 4 and 5).
5.
Conclusion
A new shielding analysis tool of SCALE6—MAVRIC—with the automatic variance reduction technique of SCALE6, was used to model and simulate the current shielding of the neutron generator installed in the Nuclear Engineering Department of Missouri S&T. The automated variance reduction capability of the MAVRIC yielded an average computational speedup of 11.3 for neutron dose rates with respect to an unbiased MCNP simulation. The neutron and photon dose rates (and their respective uncertainties) at various positions near the facility are discussed and compared.
Acknowledgments
The work presented in this paper is supported by U.S. NRC under the Award Number NRC-HQ-12-G-38-0039.
