<title>Neutronics analysis of megawatt-class gas-cooled space nuclear reactor design</title>
<author>Tao Meng, Fulong Zhao, Kun Cheng, Chen Zeng & Sichao Tan</author>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Affiliation>Fundamental Science on Nuclear Safety and Simulation Technology Laboratory, College of Nuclear Science and Technology, Harbin Engineering University, Harbin, China</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2019.1644244</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2019.1644244</URL>
ABSTRACT
Neutronics analysis was conducted for a proposed megawatt-class gas cooled space nuclear reactor design. The reactor design has a high operating temperature of up to 1500 K. Annular UO2 fuel rods were used to reduce the central temperature of the fuel. The thermal power is
2.3 MWt and is converted into electric power by a direct Brayton cycle. The control rods were arranged in diﬀerent conﬁgurations and were analyzed in order to evaluate the inﬂuence on the reactor design in diﬀerent scenarios. The calculation results reveal that the control rods arrangements have inﬂuences on the begin-of-life (BOL) excess reactivity and the shutdown reactivity. The distribution of control rods  aﬀects the neutron economy and leakage in  the  fuel region, consequently aﬀecting the reactivity. It is also known that the  reactivity  in ﬂooding scenarios are not sensitive to diﬀerent control rod arrangements. Meanwhile, according to calculation results, the proposed reactor design has enough shutdown reactivity margin which will allow for ﬂexible control strategy. Further analysis is still needed for more detailed and accurate parameters of the reactor design.
KEYWORDS
Neutronics analysis; gas- cooled space reactor; control rod arrangement
1.Introduction
Space application of nuclear energy has been a long history. In 1965, the United States launched the ﬁrst space nuclear ﬁssion reactor called SNAP-10 [1] and  it has become the only space nuclear ﬁssion reactor launched by the United States so far. However, after 43 days operation, the reactor was shut down due to system failure. There are also many other space reac- tor designs, including MPRE [1], 710 reactor [2], SPR
[3], SP-100 [4], AFSPSS [5], kilopower [6], etc. The former Soviet Union launched many nuclear ﬁssion reactors as well, including Romashka, BUK, and TOPAZ [1,7]. Most of these nuclear power sources are used for the space radar satellites.
In the latest decade, many innovative  space  nuclear reactor concepts focusing on  safety  issues  are proposed [8–10], including heat pipe cooled reac- tor, gas cooled reactor, etc. Gas-cooled space reactor has many advantages over the other types [11]. It can eliminate erosion problems, hence enabling a longer operation lifetime. Its design is also ﬂexible and easy to scale without many modiﬁcations. At last, it has limited system total mass, complexity and high con- version eﬃciency.
In 2005, the United States initiated its gas-cooled space nuclear system project called the Prometheus project or the JIMO project [11,12]. It aimed at developing a 200kWe Jupiter icy moon probe that
has a lifetime of more than 10 years. The reactor is designed to be He-Xe mixture cooled considering the good extensity performance and improvement of the reactor eﬃciency. This project conducted compre- hensive research on the material,  feasibility  and many other concerns in the engineering aspect. Although the project was terminated at last, it  was still a good support for the technology hereditability and a very good reference for future reactor design.
Russia proposed the megawatt-class nuclear power and propulsion system (NPPS) project in 2009 [13]. The project was also a He-Xe mixture cooled reactor concept. This reactor design has a rated thermal power of 3.5MWt. The outlet temperature of the reactor was raised up to 1500K while the JIMO design only used 1150K. By increasing the operating temperature, two beneﬁts will be achieved. One is that large amount of heat rejection through radiation will be easier, enabling larger reactor thermal power with less concerns about the large radiator area. The other is that higher system eﬃciency can be achieved due to larger temperature diﬀerence. If more advanced radiator like droplet radiator [1,14] is adopted, the radiator area and mass will be a smaller problem.
Until today, most of the electric power demands for space activities are still in the range of kilowatts scale. Even if for the international space station (ISS),
which is the largest manmade space system to  date,  its electric power is only about 100kWe, with solar battery arrays larger than a thousand square meters. But long lifetime megawatts power may be required if large power becomes essential such as the Russian megawatt-class space reactor project, which is aimed at exploring and exploiting the outer space. Besides,  in NASA’s report [15], it is suggested that electric power level will increase to some megawatts if planet surface outposts are going to be built in the future.
For space missions, the mass restraint of the pay- load is also an important aspect. The payload is normally restricted not only because of the launch cost, but also because of the rocket payload capacity. Thus the Brayton cycle, which has high conversion eﬃciency, is chose for the space reactor system  design.
In the paper, a megawatt reactor pre-conceptual design  is proposed. The reactor design can be used for interplanetary transportation, space trash shut- tling or planet outpost power supply and is not spe- ciﬁed at the moment. In order to improve the reactor performance, a group of control rods are used to ﬂatten the power proﬁle. Since  information  about  the inﬂuence of control rod arrangement on the reactivity and the radial ﬂux peaking factor for mega- watts space nuclear reactor is still limited, their inﬂu- ence under diﬀerent situations are evaluated, which are the main objectives of the paper.
2.Reactor system design
2.1.Overall parameters of the reactor design
The reactor is a He-Xe mixture (He-7.17wt.%, Xe- 92.83wt.%) cooled fast reactor. The traditional UO2 fuel is utilized as the fuel material in order to reduce technology risk and economic cost. The mixture mole weight of the coolant is 40g/mol [16]. The rated  power is 2.3MWt with a speculated heat to electricity conversion eﬃciency of 30.7%, resulting in an electric power of about 0.7MWe. The eﬃciency is calculated by using the heat balance analysis which assumes isentropic thermodynamic process in the compressor and turbine. The preliminary design parameters are summarized in Table 1 and system mass estimates are listed in Table 2.
Table 1. Initial design  parameters.
Table 2. Summary of system mass.
Table 3. Comparison of reactor  designs.
The reactor design is based on both  the Prometheus and Russian NPPS projects. The compar- ison between these projects is shown in Table 3. In order to reduce the system mass, the operating tem- perature of the proposed reactor design is increased  to 1500K as the Russian design. By increasing the operating temperature, the conversion eﬃciency can be increased. Thus generating same amount of power, a smaller system mass can be realized. The reduction of the reactor power is also aimed at decreasing the total mass. The composition (40g/mole) of the He-Xe coolant also adopts the Russian design as suggested [16]. This composition is a suitable compromise between the heat transfer characteristic and system compatibility. Since the operating temperature is much higher than that of the Prometheus project, structure materials should be replaced by molybde- num alloys. For the control rod, reﬂector, and shield, materials like B4C, BeO, and W are recommended in some publications [1,12] and thus used in the calcu- lations. Tungsten is used for axial reﬂector as both reﬂector and shield materials. Meanwhile, the core and fuel structures are designed similar to the Prometheus project due to more public information and will be further considered in future thermal ana- lysis studies.
2.2.System layout and reactor core structure
The thermal power is converted to electric power by the Brayton cycle. The system heat balance is preli- minarily designed as follows in Figure 1. There are six loops in total and the number of the loops is chosen from the perspective of redundancy and system sym- metry. The Greek letter π represents the turbine
Figure 1. Direct gas cooled Brayton circulation system layout. π represents turbine expansion ratio and the compressor compression ratio respectively.
expansion ratio and the compressor compression ratio respectively. On the right side, the radiator  is      a combination of medium temperature radiator and high temperature radiator since the outlet tempera- ture of the pre-cooler is lower than the lower limit of the high temperature radiator (roughly 400K). The temperature in each node is decided by optimization method [17,18] to maximize the total eﬃciency and considering heat rejection.
Illustrations of the reactor physical model  details are presented in Figure 2. In the ﬁgure, diﬀerent colors represent diﬀerent structures. Besides those denoted in the ﬁgure, there is a thin annular gas region between the fuel pellets and the fuel pin cladding (not shown due to small size). All the materials used for physical calculation are summarized in Table 4. The shape and material of each structure are as exact as shown in Figure 2 and Table 4.
In order to give a preliminary radial reﬂector thick- ness for the reactor setup, the BOL excess reactivity is
calculated for ﬁve diﬀerent radial reﬂector thicknesses, shown in Figure 3. It is shown that when the reﬂector thickness rises from 8 cm to 9.5 cm, the reﬂector thickness has a  rise of  about  18%,  which  represents a mass increase of about 22%. The BOL excess reac- tivity rises for about $2, which has a rise of about 21%. It is obvious that when the reﬂector thickness becomes thicker than 8 cm, the rising rate of BOL excess reactivity will be lower than that of  the  reﬂector  mass, which means that increasing reﬂector thickness becomes less eﬀective with a larger weight penalty. Therefore, 8 cm is preliminary adopted as the radial reﬂector thickness for the reactor setup.
Figure 2(a) adopts a control rod arrangement of the SP-100 design [4]. Another alternative arrangement is that of the Prometheus project design, which only has a large control rod in the center of the reactor core. There are also other alternatives for controlling the reactor reactivity, such as control drums or sliding reﬂector. For larger power reactor design like the one
Figure 2. Illustration of reactor core structure. (a) and (b) are cross section view and longitudinal section view of the reactor neutronic calculation model. (c) is the detailed core view.
Table 4. Summary of the material for neutronic calculation model.
Figure 3. BOL excess reactivity for diﬀerent reﬂector thickness.
in this paper, using control rods to control reactivity seems more beneﬁcial over the other options due to the potential ability of core power ﬂattening [19]. On the other hand, by adopting more smaller radius con- trol rods than that of the SP-100 design may further ﬂatten the core power distribution and enhance con- trol strategy ﬂexibility. Thus more control rod conﬁg- uration with a smaller radius is adopted in the present study. Another thing need to mention is that control rods have diﬀerent functions. The shutdown reactivity margin will be adjusted in further researches concern- ing control strategy.
2.3.Neutronic calculation method
For the physics analysis, the SuperMC Monte Carlo transport code is used. The nuclear data library used  is ENDF/B-VII. The SuperMC code is developed by the FDS team (the Team for Frontier Development of Science, founded in 1986 in China) and has been validated with many other Monte Carlo transport code [20,21]. The begin-of-life (BOL) reactivity, shut- down reactivity and neutron ﬂux distribution calcula- tions are conducted at room temperature. The eﬀects of the material temperature have been analyzed in publication  [22]  using  the  MCNP  code  [23]  and    a multiplication factor diﬀerence of about 0.005 is calculated, which is considered to be not vital at this design stage. Besides, the eﬀects of material tempera- ture can also be compensated by larger reactivity margin [24]. The nuclear data library used in the publication [22] is ENDF/B-VII and its reactor design is a highly enriched prismatic fast reactor cooled by the He-Xe mixture. The reactor design  in this  paper is also a highly enriched fast reactor and is cooled by the He-Xe mixture. But it is a reactor using circular fuel rods as the pressurized water reactor (PWR) instead of prismatic fuel assembly. The  thermal power and the lifetime of the reactor design of the publication are in a similar range of 5 MW and more than 10 years compared to the design in this paper.
Because the neutron ﬂux distribution is more straight-forward to analyze than the power density distribution, it is used in the paper. A formula that represents their relationship is as follows [25]:
@1
Where f and φ denote macroscopic ﬁssion cross section and neutron spectrum relating to energy and position, and wf is a constant of about 200 MeV, which means eﬀective energy released per ﬁssion event. For simpliﬁcation, the  power  is  the  product of the energy released per ﬁssion, the ﬁssion prob-
ability, and the neutron number.
For moderated uniform reactor, where the neutron ﬂux is the highest in the thermal spectrum around 0.025eV and much higher than other neutrons, if the eﬀects of burnup are not signiﬁcant, the power gen- eration is proportional to thermal neutron ﬂux [19]. For the gas-cooled fast reactor in the paper, as calcu- lated, most of the neutron ﬂux is in the energy range between 0.1 MeV and 10 MeV, where the macro- scopic ﬁssion cross section for 235U and  238U  is  almost a constant value near 1b or  zero.  Similarly, the contributions of the fast neutrons for the right- hand term in equation (1) drastically exceed other neutrons. Thus the macroscopic ﬁssion cross section term can be moved out of the integral operation. Therefore, the power density distribution can be con- sidered positively related to the neutron ﬂux distribu-
tion ( φðE; rÞdE or φðrÞ) in the main fuel region.
The criticality calculations utilized 20,000 parti- cles per cycle and 100 skipped cycles  with  1000  active cycles in total. The largest error of the keﬀ calculation is estimated as 0.00016. The delayed neutron fraction is  also  calculated  for  each  case  and is divided by reactivity to change the reactivity unit into dollar ($) [26].
The calculations in the paper are mainly about the reactivity of reactor in the BOL and ﬂooding states with diﬀerent control rod arrangements, which have also been calculated in papers [24,27]. The focus of  this paper is on the eﬀects that the control rod arrangements have on the reactor neutronics
performance. This actually belongs to the reactor design process and will be helpful for deciding the control rod arrangement. Without a designed or spe- ciﬁed control rod arrangement, conducting further researches about reactor performance in real opera- tion state is not practical. The reactivity and neutron ﬂux distribution results in the BOL states can provide information for how to control the power distribu- tion or the neutron ﬂux distribution in the operation states. After this design process, more dynamic and complex conditions with diﬀerent inserted control rods or burnup steps that resemble the real reactor operation can be conducted on the basis of this paper.
3.Results and discussion
3.1.BOL excess reactivity and shutdown reactivity
Some of the control rod arrangements of the  reactor have been illustrated below in Figure 4. The red annular circles represent the reﬂector. The red zone with small circles inside the reﬂector represents nuclear fuel pins. The yellow circles represent control rods. In the ﬁgure, Annotation ‘A’ means that this is the design basic arrangement A. ‘A’ followed by an ‘I’ and then followed by a number means these are the arrangements that originate from changing the inner circle of 6 control rods. The changing of a circle of 6 control rods means increasing or decreasing the diagonal length of the inner hexagon, surrounded by the control rods, or rotating it along the central fuel pin. ‘A’ followed by an ‘O’ and then followed by a number means that these are the arrangements that originate from changing the outer circle of 6 control rods. Annotations  that  followed  by an ‘R’ mean these are the revised arrangements of the arrangement denoted by the string just before the letter ‘R’. For example, ‘AI2R’means that this is a revision of arrangement ‘AI2ʹ and ‘AI2ʹ means this is the second
arrangement of prototype design A that originate from changing the inner 6 control rods. From ‘A’ to ‘AI1ʹ, the outer 6 control rods remain unchanged. Only the inner  6 control rods are rotated clock-wisely for 30 degrees. From ‘A’ to ‘AO1ʹ, the inner 6 control rods remain unchanged. Instead, the outer 6 control rods are rotated clock-wisely for 30 degrees. Note that all the calculation conditions are using the same reactor model that is mentioned above.
Figure 5 presents the results of the BOL excess reactivity and shutdown reactivity. The shutdown reactivity is calculated with all control rods fully inserted. In the ﬁgure, annotations represent the eﬀective multiplication factor. According to the results, arrangements AI3 and AO3 have  the  high- est  BOL  excess  reactivity,  which  is  +$10.650  and +
$10.733 respectively. Arrangements  AI1,  A  and  AO1 have the lowest BOL excess  reactivity,  which are +$9.678, +$9.863 and +$9.601 respectively. Arrangements AI2 and AO3R have the highest shutdown  reactivity  margin,  which  is  -$26.148 and
-$25.816 respectively. Arrangements AI3 and AO2 have the lowest shutdown  reactivity  margin,  which is -$22.656 and -$22.690 respectively. In the results, the BOL excess reactivity and the shutdown reac- tivity curve have the similar  tendency  except  for  AI1 and AO3. Arrangement AI1 has lower BOL excess   reactivity    than    AI2.    It,    however,    has   a higher shutdown  reactivity  than  AI2.  Arrangement AO3 has a higher BOL excess reactiv- ity than AO2 but has a lower shutdown  reactivity than AO2. In arrangement AI1, the control rods are gathered in the center zone of the  reactor  core,  which reduces the fuel  loading  and  thereafter reduces the neutron economy near the core center.   At the periphery of the reactor, the fuel loading is relatively high and  the neutron leakage is increased  to some extent. Thus AI1 has lower BOL excess reactivity.  Meanwhile,  since  the  reactor  center   has Figure 4. Illustration of control rod arrangements.
Figure 5. BOL excess reactivity and shutdown reactivity of diﬀerent control rod arrangements.
more control rods and thus fewer fuel loading than other arrangements. The average worth of the con- trol rods is reduced, resulting in low shutdown reactivity margin. In arrangement AO3, all the con- trol rods are uniformly distributed in the whole reactor core and can generate  a  relatively  larger  high neutron ﬂux region. Thus, the BOL excess reactivity is higher compared  to  the  others.  Large  as the high neutron ﬂux region is, the worth of the  control rods is also raised compared to AO2.
It is presented that the control rod arrangement will aﬀect the BOL and shutdown reactivity. The thought is that if we can ﬁnd a control rod arrangement that has higher BOL reactivity and lower shutdown reactivity, then the fuel loading can be saved and the reactor safety can be enhanced. But based on the above results, the diﬀerence of reactivity between diﬀerent control rod arrangements is not prominent. Thus, the eﬀects of the control rod arrangement on the reactivity are not considered with the ﬁrst priority.
It has also been mentioned that the control rod arrangement and movement will aﬀect the neutron ﬂux distribution or the power distribution [19], which is important for the reactor performance. For space reactor, it is not practical to arrange too many control rods and use many other methods to ﬂatten the power proﬁle as the land-based commercial reactor. Only the control rod arrangement and movement can be adopted for the neutron ﬂux distribution control. Thus, for the reactor design in the paper, if we can  ﬁnd some arrangements that have little BOL ﬂux peak- ing factor or power peaking factor, then in real opera- tion states, the function of the control rods to adjust the power distribution can be impaired. Therefore, the ﬂexibility of the control rods movement will be enhanced and will be helpful for the reactor control and thermal-hydraulic performance.
If the BOL results show that the central neutron ﬂux is very high, then in real operation states, we should
insert more control rods in the center region to sup- press it. And if we originally arrange more control rods in the center, the central neutron ﬂux will also be suppressed due to lower local fuel loading. Then in real operation states, the central control rods will be somehow liberated to some extent so that they can be used more ﬂexibly. If the BOL results show that the central neutron ﬂux is ﬂat enough, then in operation states, we shouldn’t specially insert central control rods to suppress the central ﬂux. On the contrary, we should be careful when we insert control rods to adjust the reactivity so that the central ﬂux will not be suppressed, and use the control rods in other positions instead to control the reactor. The central control rods are better
be used as shutdown rods. Based on these results, further research coupled with burnup steps can be conducted to acquire more precise results. In order to evaluate the eﬀects of the control rod arrangement on the neutron ﬂux distribution, radial ﬂux peaking fac- tors are calculated and shown in Table 5. The ﬂux peaking factor is deﬁned as the ratio of the maximum value of the neutron ﬂux to the average value of the neutron ﬂux in the fuel region and the related data are extracted from the neutron ﬂux distribution results in the radial plane at the core center.
From Figure 4, it is known that AI2, AI2R, AO3, and AO3R have a relatively uniform distribution of control rods. Among these four arrangements, the con- trol rods in AO3 are more spread out to the periphery. Thus the fuel loading of AO3 at the periphery is rela- tively lower, resulting in lower neutron leakage and higher BOL excess reactivity compared to the rest three. For AI1, AR, AO1, and AO2, the  distribution  of control rods is not uniform compared to the above four arrangements. The six control rods in the center are shrunken in a small region so that the fuel loading is relatively higher in the outer region. Thus the BOL excess reactivity of these four arrangements is lower due to high neutron leakage. Meanwhile, due to denser distribution in the central region, the ﬂux peak is suppressed so that the radial ﬂux peaking factor will  be lowered compared to those that have a uniform distribution of control rods (see Table 5).
AO3 is one of the special cases that are discussed here. The outer six control rods of AO3 is near the core fuel region fringe where the neutron ﬂux is normally low. Control rods in this  area  will  have  low worth during insertion conditions. This control
Table 5. Summary of radial ﬂux peaking factors.
rod reactivity worth reduction will reduce the shut- down reactivity margin. AI3 also has its outer six control rods arranged near the fringe. Although its inner six control rods are dense compared to AO3, its radial ﬂux peaking factor is still high, which is 1.30.
Arrangement A is the basis and its control rod distribution is uniform with the exception that the control rods are linearly arranged radially, which means that the control rods are  distributed  in  the  six hexagon diagonal directions. The azimuthal dis- tribution is not uniform compared to others. From the perspective of neutron ﬂux distribution, this arrangement will result in suppression in the six hexagon diagonal directions, generating several ﬂux proﬁle valleys, as shown in Figure 6. Note that all the cross-section plots show the dose plane at z = 30.08 cm until otherwise denoted, and all the longitudinal sec- tion plots show the dose plane at y = 0.08 cm, which correspond to the core center.
In addition, there are some arrangements that are similar and are discussed here. One is the arrange- ment A and AO1. The only diﬀerence is that the six outer hexagonally arranged control rods are rotated 30 degrees. From Figure 4, it is known that A has higher BOL excess reactivity and lower shutdown reactivity margin. It means that rotating  the  six outer hexagonally arranged control rods can change the reactivity but their eﬀects are little. Arrangement AO2 and AR is the other pair that has similar pattern. Figure 7 shows the BOL neutron ﬂux distribution. It is shown that the rotation of outer control rods has little inﬂuence on the BOL neutron ﬂux distribution, which means that the radial ﬂux peaking factor also has little diﬀerence, which can be seen in Table 5.
Based on the above analysis, with the same reactor structure, changing the control rod arrangement will change the BOL excess reactivity, shutdown margin, and the ﬂatness of the ﬂux distribution. These
characteristics will be the preliminary  evaluation  of the reactor and meaningful for further analysis coupled with fuel burnup and control rod movement. When the BOL excess reactivity is increased, less fuel will be needed to get the designed operation lifetime. Thus the reactor mass can be reduced. When the shutdown margin is increased, the reactor safety will be enhanced. As for the ﬂatness of the power distribution, it decides the reactor power output and the fuel depletion, and is also related with the reactor safety from the thermal- hydraulic perspective [19]. Since the reactor mass is only a portion of the total system mass, which is 21% for the Prometheus project [28], just increase the BOL excess reactivity will not help save a great amount of mass. Furthermore, mass is not the only factor that matters. Focusing only on the mass saving might cause some other factors to deteriorate such as the reactor safety. Thus, these characteristics should be combined to decide the choice of the control rod arrangement.
Because the reactor safety is more important, the
shutdown margin and the ﬂatness of power distribu- tion are considered with higher priority than the BOL excess reactivity. Conﬁgurations AO2, AO3, AR, AI3, and AI2R are disadvantaged in terms of reactor con- trol because their outer six control rods are too near  to the periphery. AO3 is disadvantaged in terms of   the power ﬂattening since the ﬂux peaking factor is the highest. Besides, AI3 and AO2 have low shut- down margins and thus not suggested as well. Consequently, arrangements A, AI1, AI2, AO1, and AO3R are suggested for further analysis.
3.2.Reactivity in ﬂooding scenarios
One special safety issue diﬀers from that of the land- based nuclear power plant is the ﬂooding situation. For space nuclear reactor systems, the primary issue is the
Figure 6. Contour plots of BOL neutron ﬂux distribution of arrangement A. X, Y and Z represents radial coordinates and longitudinal coordinate respectively. The neutron ﬂux ﬁgures are all normalized by dividing the maximum of all the reactor    neutron results.
Figure 7. Contour plots of BOL neutron ﬂux distribution of arrangement AO2 and AR. X, Y, and Z represent radial coordinates  and longitudinal coordinate respectively.
ability to launch them safely into the space orbit. Once there exist rocket launch activities, there is a launch failure risk. If the launch fails, the nuclear reactor may fall into the ocean and be ﬂooded by the water. If this scenario happens, more neutrons will be moderated and more ﬁssion reactions will happen between thermal neutron and uranium 235. Thus super-criticality may be induced. For reactors that use neutron generator as the initial neutron source, launch failure may not result in super-criticality since the ﬁssionable material is not activated or radiated. But once the reactor is started and reentry the atmosphere from orbit, the ﬂooding situa- tion becomes serious and need to be took into consid- eration. For the sake of safety, sub-criticality should always be maintained in all possible scenarios.
Being an important part of space nuclear reactor safety, in this paper, the reactivity in ﬂooding scenarios for diﬀerent control rod arrangements is calculated and shown in Figure 8. All the ﬂooding and shutdown scenarios calculated in this section are with all control rods inserted or withdrawn simultaneously. Scenarios with partially control rods inserted or withdrawn will be
analyzed in future researches. It is seen that adding water in the reactor core has little eﬀect on the reactivity tendency for diﬀerent control rod arrangements. It just Figure 8. Shutdown reactivity and reactivity in the ﬂooding scenarios (with all control rods fully inserted).
increases the reactivity by about 15 percent, which means that the ﬂooding scenarios have similar inﬂuence on diﬀerent control rod arrangements. The results also show that the safety margin is large enough in the
ﬂooding  scenario  for  all  arrangements  even though
one control rod is unable to be inserted into the reactor core. Note that for the ﬁnal reactor designs, the reactiv- ity may change due to the fact that the void fraction of
Figure 9. Contour plots of neutron ﬂux distribution of arrangement A in diﬀerent scenarios. (a) is ﬂooding scenario without control rods inserted, (b) is shutdown scenario with control rods inserted and (c) is ﬂooding scenario with all control rods inserted.
the reactor core changes since some structure is omitted in the neutron calculations. The void fraction means the volume fraction of gas coolant area in the core.
In ﬂooding scenarios, severe neutron moderation occurs at where water is ﬂooded and then a large number of ﬁssion reactions with thermal neutrons will happen. In order to study the eﬀect of ﬂooding water on the reactor, the neutron distribution in ﬂooding scenarios is calcu- lated and presented in Figure 9. From Figure 9(a), it is known that, in ﬂooding scenario, the neutron  ﬂux region with red color is shrunken to the range of roughly −10 cm<x, y < 10 cm compared to Figure 6, where the red zone is within the range of roughly
−15 cm<x, y < 15 cm. In the shutdown scenario, the control rods will drastically absorb neutrons and reduce the neutron ﬂux especially in the control rod positions, shown as Figure 9(b). When the reactor is ﬂooded, the ﬂooding will not alter the neutron ﬂux distribution pat- tern but reduce the magnitude of the neutron ﬂux (Figure 9(c)). Therefore, the control rod arrangement is  a very key factor that aﬀects the neutron ﬂux distribution in both the shutdown and the ﬂooding scenarios. From this perspective, the control rods in the central regions are suggested to be used or partially used as safety rods to maintain sub-criticality.
From the above analysis, AI3, AO3 have the highest BOL excess reactivity and AI2, AO3R have the highest shutdown reactivity margin. From the perspective of system mass, higher BOL excess reactivity with similar fuel loading will result in more compact reactor and thus smaller system mass. But deciding which control rod arrangement to use cannot depend on the reactiv- ity alone. Instead, characteristics like core neutron ﬂux distribution uniformity are also important.
4.Conclusion
A fast neutron energy spectrum, megawatt-class inert gas-cooled space nuclear reactor design based on  both the Prometheus and Russian megawatt-class space reactor is proposed in the paper. For the
purpose of ﬂattening neutron ﬂux distribution, the control rods are adopted to control the reactivity and many control rod arrangements have been proposed, aiming at providing helpful information for the deci- sion of the reactor core structure. The reactivity of   the BOL, shutdown and water ﬂooding scenario have been calculated and the eﬀects of the control rod arrangement on the reactivity as well as the neutron ﬂux distribution have been analyzed.
The calculation results show that control rod arrangements have inﬂuence on the reactor reactivity and the ﬂux peaking factor. Arrangements AI1,  A, and AO2 have the lowest BOL excess reactivity, and AI3 and AO3 have the highest BOL excess reactivity among all the proposed arrangements. Besides, the reactor that has a uniform control rod arrangement has larger radial peaking factor.
The ﬂooding scenarios have little impact on the control rod arrangements and only increase the shut- down reactivity by approximately 15 percent com- pared to each of themselves. Based on the  calculations, arrangements A, AI1, AI2, AO1, and AO3R are suggested for further analysis.  It  still  needs further analysis to complete the reactor design and evaluate the reactor performance more precisely considering control strategy and thermal-hydraulics.
Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank the support of Fundamental Science on Nuclear Safety and Simulation Technology Laboratory, Harbin  Engineering  University,  China  and the academic guidance of late Donald Victor Williams.