<title>Displacement damage induce degradation of COTS array CCDs irradiated by neutron beams from a nuclear reactor</title>
<Affiliation>State Key Laboratory of Intense Pulsed Irradiation Simulation and Effect, Northwest Institute of Nuclear Technology, P.O.Box 69-10, Xi'an, China</Affiliation>
<author>Zujun Wang, Wei Chen, Zhigang Xiao, Minbo Liu, Shaoyan Huang, Baoping He, Tongding Luo</author>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research A</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>110.1016/j.nima.2014.10.030</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2014.10.030</URL>
a b s t r a c t
The experiments of displacement damage effects on COTS array charge coupled devices (CCDs) induced by neutron irradiation from a nuclear reactor are presented. The charge transfer inefﬁciency (CTI), saturation output signal voltage (VS), dynamic range (DR), dark signal, and camera imaging quality versus neutron ﬂuence are investigated. The degradation mechanisms of the CCDs irradiated by reactor neutron beams are also analyzed. The CTI increase due to neutron displacement damage appears to be proportional to displacement damage dose. The experiments show that VS degradation induced by neutron irradiation is much less than that induced by gamma irradiation. The dark images from the CCDs irradiated by neutrons are given to investigate dark signal degradation. The degradation forms and mechanisms of the camera imaging quality are very different between the reactor neutron displacement damage and the gamma total ionization dose damage. The three samples were exposed by 1 MeV neutron-equivalent ﬂuences of 1 ~ 1011, 5 ~ 1011, and 1 ~ 1012 n/cm2, respectively. A sample was exposed by 1 MeV neutron-equivalent ﬂuences up to 2 ~ 1013 n/cm2, and the CCD is a functional failure after irradiation.
Keywords:
Charge-coupled devices (CCD) Charge transfer inefﬁciency(CTI) Displacement damage effect Dark signal
Dark signal spike Neutron irradiation
1.Introduction
Charge coupled devices (CCDs) have extensive applications in particle detection, space mission, medical imaging, and nuclear industry because of their small size, low power consumption, low cost, and high reliability. However, the CCDs used in these particular applications are susceptible to radiation damage. The radiation- induced damages can be separated into two phenomena: ionization damage effects and displacement damage effects [1]. Displacement damage caused by energetic particles such as neutrons or protons induces stable bulk traps with energy levels within the band-gap which can lead to the degradations on the CCDs.
Many studies have been dedicated to the proton displacement damage effects on CCDs [2–6]. The degradations of charge transfer inefﬁciency (CTI) and dark current induced by 10 and 60 MeV proton irradiation have also been studied [3]. The mean degradation of the dark current and the dark signal non-uniformity induced by proton irradiation from 17 MeV to 100 MeV have been analyzed [5]. The  random  telegraph  signal  behavior  induced  by  1.5,  10,  and 46 MeV protons irradiations have been presented previously in [6].
However, fewer studies have focused on the neutron displace- ment damage effects on CCDs, especially in the case of reactor neutrons. It is important to note that neutron irradiation brings only displacement damage because neutral particles induce negligible ionization and they are useful tools to study only displacement damage in CCDs, in contrary to proton irradiations which are also associated with total dose effect. Proton irradiations bring ioniza- tion damage in CCDs and disturb displacement damage studies [7]. Neutron irradiation can cause permanent damage in CCDs. The effects of neutrons on a CCD of the SLD vertex detector have been investigated, and the traps induced by neutron irradiation have also been studied elsewhere [8]. The ﬂat-band voltage shifts, the dark signal, the dark signal spike, and the CTI have been studied on a two phase CCD used as vertex detector subjected to irradiation with ﬂuences reaching 8.9 ~ 109 n/cm2 [9]. The interactions of high energy neutrons with CCDs and single particle displacement
damage in the CCDs have been presented in [10,11].
The research reported herein examines the displacement damage effects on COTS array CCDs induced by neutron irradiation from a nuclear reactor. The CTI, saturation output signal voltage, dynamic range, dark signal, and camera imaging quality versus neutron ﬂuence are shown to investigate the degradation induced by neutron dis- placement damage in CCDs. The degradation mechanisms are also
analyzed. The CTI increase due to neutron displacement damage appears to be proportional to displacement damage dose. The experi- ments show that VS degradation induced by neutron irradiation  is much less than that induced by gamma irradiation. The phenomena  are explained by comparing the neutron and gamma experiment results. The dark images from the CCDs irradiated by neutrons are shown to investigate the degradation of dark signal. The degradation forms and mechanisms of the camera imaging quality which are very different between the reactor neutron displacement damage and the gamma total ionization dose damage are investigated  by  comparing the experimental results of the radiation.
2.Experimental details
The samples tested in these experiments are ICX285AL array CCDs made by SONY. ICX285AL is a diagonal 11-mm interline CCD solid-state image sensor with a square pixel array. The frame readout image has a row of 1434 ~ 1050 elements. The image sensing elements are with a pixel size of 6.45 6.45 μm2. Progressive scan mode allows all pixel signals within the same exposure period to read out simultaneously, making this mode suitable for high-resolution image capturing. High sensitivity, low smear, and excellent anti-blooming are also character- istics of this CCD. The CCDs are operated at a 15 V power supply.
The CCDs were exposed to a neutron beam at Xi'an pulse reactor (XAPR) facility at the Northwest Institute of Nuclear Technology (China). The accuracy of  the  ﬂuence  was  within  75%, and the neutron beam homogeneity was within 710%.
Irradiations were performed at room temperature and the samples were unbiased with all pins ﬂoating. The samples numbered from N01 to N03 bore the same code. The three samples were exposed by 1 MeV neutron-equivalent ﬂuences of 1 ~ 1011, 5 ~ 1011, and 1 ~ 1012 n/cm2, respectively. The ﬂux of neutron beams was about 1.33 ~ 108 n/cm2s, and was measured by a staff at the radiation facility. The ratio of n/γ is 4.19 ~ 1011 cm2/rad(Si). A sample was exposed by 1 MeV neutron-equivalent ﬂuences up to 2 ~ 1013 n/cm2, and the CCD is functional failure after neutron irradiation. The irradiation test conditions and samples are given in Table 1.
The samples were kept in quarantine to allow neutron activa- tion effects to die down. The quarantine period spanned from one week after neutron irradiation. The measurements that are shown in this article were performed approximately one week after irradiation. All the samples are measured by a CCD radiation test system after each irradiation step. Fig. 1 shows the image of a CCD radiation parameter test system [12]. The parameters of the CCDs are measured before and after the irradiation.
3.Results and discussion
3.1.Degradation on charge transfer inefﬁciency
The CTI (1-CTE) is one of the most important performance parameters for a CCD, which is the fractional loss of charge after its
Fig. 1. The image of a CCD radiation parameter test system [12].
Fig. 2. The CTI of COTS array CCDs versus neutron radiation ﬂuence.
transfer across one pixel. An initial charge Q0 after being trans- ported across pixels is reduced to Qn Q0(1-CTI)n. For CCD devices containing many pixels, CTI values around 10—5 are not negligible [13]. During the transfer of charge packets in the CCD, some signal charge will be lost in the traps produced by radiation damage. The CTI of a CCD is extremely sensitive to radiation damage caused by neutron irradiation.
The CTI can be measured using different methods: extended pixel edge response (EPER) technique, ﬁrst pixel edge response (FPR) technique, spot illumination measurement, and X-ray source (55Fe) technique [2,3,14–15]. EPER is a useful and simple method, and often used to measure the CTI of a CCD [16]. In this technique, the CCD is illuminated uniformly and read out in such a way as to obtain an image that extends over one or both edges opposite the output ampliﬁer. The signal measured in the extended regions gives an indication of the amount of charge which has been deferred from the pixels in the imaging area of the CCD through
the clocking process [1]. The CTI measurement method used in this article is EPER. The signal output of the CCD camera leaves several overscan pixels at the edge of the output ampliﬁer which are used to measure the charge deferral.
Fig. 2 shows the CTI of COTS array CCDs  versus neutron radiation
ﬂuence. From Fig. 2, one can see that the CTI increases with increasing
radiation ﬂuence. The CTI increase is due to the loss of signal charges from their charge packets which is caused by the bulk  traps induced by neutron irradiation. The bulk traps in the channel region of CCDs capture signal charges during readout. Though re-emitted later, parts  of the signal charges do not rejoin their packets.
The bulk traps induced by neutron irradiation are the dominated mechanism of the CTI increase. Neutron beams can collide with silicon atoms, displacing them from their positions in the lattice and creating vacancies within the bulk silicon of the CCDs [1]. The vacancies that do not recombine, are unstable and will migrate to more favorable positions in the lattice, often forming the stable bulk traps by trapping near impurity atoms such as phosphorus or oxygen. These stable bulk traps create energy levels between the conduction and valence bands, hence, the signal charges may be captured by these new defect levels. Conventional n-channel CCDs have a phosphorus-doped buried channel and suffer from the generation of phosphorus-vacancy complex (P-V center or E-center) electron traps that degrade CTI [17]. The bulk traps of the divacancy (V-V center) and oxygen-vacancy complex (O-V center or A-center)
1000
800
600
400
200
0
0	2	4	6	8	10
Neutron radiation fluence ( 1×1011n/cm2)
induced by neutron irradiation are also reported in [8–9,13,18–19]. The most important of the resulting bulk traps in the CCD's appears to be the E-center, which introduces a trapping state with activation energy of about 0.4 eV below the conduction band [8].
Fig. 3 shows the CTI increase (ΔCTI) of COTS array CCDs versus neutron displacement damage dose. From Fig. 3, one can see that ΔCTI due to neutron displacement damage increases dramatically and appears to be approximately proportional to displacement damage dose. The ΔCTI increase contribution is due to displace- ment damage dose (Dd). Non-ionizing energy loss (NIEL) is that part of the energy introduced through both elastic (coulombic and nuclear) and nuclear inelastic interactions that produce the initial vacancy interstitial pairs and phonons [20]. The Dd is given by the particle ﬂuence, Ф(E), times NIEL(E), where the latter quantity is the rate at which non-ionzing energy is lost to the production of atomic displacements in a given material [30]. The Dd induced by the reactor neutron irradiation can be expressed as
@1
where Ф(E) is the reactor neutron ﬂuence, E is the given particle energy.
The Dd induced by monoenergetic particles are determined by the radiation ﬂuences and the NIEL values. The ΔCTI increase induced by neutron displacement damage dose can be expressed
Fig. 3. The CTI increase (ΔCTI) of COTS array CCDs versus neutron displacement damage dose.
Fig. 4. Mean dark signal increase (ΔKD) versus neutron displacement damage dose.
Fig. 5. Dynamic range (DR) of COTS array CCDs versus neutron radiation ﬂuence.
@2
where C is damage factor constant, Vm is the sensitive  volume which is the total depleted region within the pixel, Se is the charge to voltage conversion factor.
This illustrates that the experimental results agree with the concept of NIEL scaling introduced by Srour which is used to simulate the displacement damage effects of a radiation environ- ment of interest by using conveniently available particles such as reactor neutrons, monoenergetic protons or electrons, and Comp- ton electrons produced by 60Co gamma photons [20,21].
3.2.Degradation on saturation output signal voltage
The saturation output signal voltage (VS) is deﬁned as the maximum saturation output voltage when a CCD is illuminated. One can measure the output signal voltage versus the exposure until it reaches maximum exposure. The scatter dots are plotted with the output signal voltages as y-axis and the exposure as abscissa, and then lines are drawn in the linear region and in the saturation region according to the method of least squares. The
y-axis of the corresponding point at  which the two lines intersect  is the saturation output signal voltage.
Fig. 4 shows the VS of COTS array CCDs versus neutron radiation ﬂuence. From Fig. 4, one can see that the VS has a slight decrease after neutron irradiation. The percent of degradations are no more than 6%, even though the neutron radiation ﬂuence reaches 1 1012 n/cm2. However, the gamma ionization radiation produced by 60Co induces
Fig. 6. Output signal voltage distribution  of  the  photo  pixels  from dark image in COTS array CCDs irradiated by neutrons:.
Fig. 7. The probability distribution of  the pixel values  of  the  CCDs  irradiated  by neutron radiation ﬂuence of 1 ~ 1011 n/cm2.
a dramatic decrease of the VS, contrary to neutron  irradiation  that  does not induce any obvious degradation. The percent of degradations induced by the gamma ionization radiation are about 71.5% on biased CCD and 47.7% on unbiased  CCD when the  total  doses accumulate  20 krad(Si) [12].
The array CCD includes the photo sensing region, the shift register region, and the output ampliﬁer region. The output ampli- ﬁers of the CCDs which are mainly made of MOSFETs are very sensitive to total dose damage. The gain of the output ampliﬁer will be severely degraded by total dose damage, which induces VS degradation. However, the MOSFETs are not sensitive to neutron displacement irradiation. Neutron irradiation brings only displace- ment damage because neutral particles induce negligible ionization. Thus, VS degradation induced by neutron irradiation from a nuclear reactor is not remarkable.
3.3.Degradation on dynamic range
The dynamic range (DR) is deﬁned as the ratio between the saturation output signal voltage and the read noise. The DR can be expressed as
@3
where VS is the saturation output signal voltage, VN is the noise.
Fig. 5 shows the DR of COTS array CCDs versus neutron radiation ﬂuence. The DR shows a remarkable decrease after neutron irradiation. DR degradation is due to the VN  increase  while the VS decrease is induced by neutron irradiation. DR degradation induced by neutron irradiation affects the imaging quality of the CCD camera.
3.4.Degradation on dark signal
The dark signal is one of the most radiation sensitive para- meters of the CCDs induced by radiation damage. Displacement damage caused by neutron or proton irradiations can induce a remarkable increase of the mean dark signal, dark signal non- uniformity (DSNU), and the generation of dark signal spikes in CCDs. The degradations of the mean dark signal, DSNU, and dark signal spikes induced by reactor neutron irradiation have been investigated in our previous study [22]. The test methods and degradation mechanisms of the mean dark signal, DSNU, and dark signal spikes in the CCDs were also studied in [22].
In this article, we presented the dark images from the CCDs irradiated by neutron beams. Fig. 6 shows the output signal voltage (Vo) distribution of the photo pixels from the dark image in COTS array CCDs irradiated by neutrons: (a) Neutron ﬂuence: 1 1011 n/cm2, (b) Neutron ﬂuence: 5 1011 n/cm2, and (c) Neutron ﬂuence:
1 1012 n/cm2. From Fig. 6, one can see that the Vo increases with increasing neutron radiation ﬂuence. This is due to the dark signal increase induced by neutron irradiations. DSNUs are also increase because neutron irradiations induce the dark signal increase, and their pixel-to-pixel non-uniformity increase.
Dark signal spike which has the highest dark signal value is caused by depositing large amounts of displacement energy within a pixel of an optoelectronic image sensor such as CCD and CMOS image sensor.
Neutron displacement damage can  induce  a remarkable  increase of the number and amplitude of dark signal spikes which are shown in Fig. 6. Fig. 7 shows the probability distribution of the pixel values of the CCDs irradiated by neutron radiation ﬂuence of 1 ~ 1011 n/cm2. From Fig. 7, we can see the probability distribution of the dark signal induced by neutron radiation.
3.5.Degradation on cameral imaging quality
Camera imaging quality is degraded by neutron displacement irradiation. Fig. 8 shows the images of the resolution test card delivered by COTS array CCDs irradiated by neutrons: (a) Before radiation, (b) Neutron ﬂuence: 1 ~ 1011 n/cm2, (c) Neutron ﬂuence:
Fig. 8. The images of the resolution test card delivered by COTS array CCDs irradiated by neutrons: (a) Before radiation; (b) Neutron ﬂuence: 1 ~ 1011 n/cm2; (c) Neutron
ﬂuence: 5 ~ 1011 n/cm2; (d) Neutron ﬂuence: 1 ~ 1012 n/cm2.
5  1011 n/cm2, and (d) Neutron ﬂuence: 1  1012 n/cm2. From Fig. 8, one can see that the camera imaging quality of the resolution test card decreases with increasing radiation ﬂuence. This is due to the dark signal increase and the large number and amplitude of dark signal spikes induced by neutron irradiations.
The degradations of the camera imaging quality induced by neutron irradiations are very different from that induced by total ionization dose irradiations shown in [18]. Camera imaging is very illegible after total ionization dose radiation because VS is degraded severely by the gamma ionization radiation and the luminance contrast of the CCD camera imaging is also degraded with the dynamic range decrease after total ionization dose radiation.
However, neutron irradiation induces slight VS degradation. Neutron displacement damage can  induce  a  remarkable  increase of the number and amplitude of dark signal spikes, which are shown as many white spots in the images. These white spots are not shown in the images irradiated by gamma ionization radiation. This is a typical difference between displacement damage and ionization damage. These white spots in the images increase with increasing radiation ﬂuence. The resolution of the image of the resolution test card delivered by COTS array CCD is degraded severely when the neutron radiation ﬂuence reaches 1 ~ 1012 n/cm2. The degradation forms and mechanisms of the camera imaging quality are very different between the reactor neutron displacement damage and the gamma total ionization dose damage.
4.Conclusions
In this article, the displacement damage effects on COTS array CCDs induced by neutron irradiations from a nuclear reactor have been investigated. The samples were exposed by 1 MeV neutron- equivalent ﬂuences of 1 ~ 1011, 5 ~ 1011, and 1 ~ 1012 n/cm2, respec- tively. Though a sample was exposed by 1MeV neutron-equivalent ﬂuence up to 2 ~ 1013 n/cm2, the CCD is functional failure after neutron irradiation. The experimental results show that the neutron displacement damage induces an increase of the CTI and dark signal, and a decrease of the VS, DR, and camera imaging quality.
The CTI increase due to neutron displacement damage appears to be proportional to displacement damage dose. The CTI increase is due to the loss of signal charges from their charge packets which is caused by the bulk traps induced by neutron irradiation. The experimental results agree with the NIEL scaling introduced by Srour which is used to simulate the displacement damage effects  of a radiation environment of interest.
The experiments show that VS degradation induced by neutron irradiation is much less than that induced by gamma irradiation. The percent of degradations are no more than 6%, even though the neutron radiation ﬂuence reaches 1 1012 n/cm2. However, the percentages of degradations induced by gamma ionization radia- tion are about 71.5% on biased CCD and 47.7% on unbiased CCD when the total doses accumulated 20 krad(Si) in our previous experiments. The phenomena can be explained by comparing the degradation of the output ampliﬁer in the CCDs induced by the neutron and gamma irradiation, respectively.
The DR shows a remarkable decrease after neutron irradiation, which is due to the VN increase while the VS decrease is induced by neutron irradiation.
The dark images delivered by COTS array CCDs after reactor neutron irradiations show the increase of dark signal, DSNU, and the number and amplitude of dark signal spikes.
The degradation forms and mechanisms of the camera imaging quality are very different between the reactor neutron displace- ment damage and the gamma total ionization dose damage. The experimental results present a typical difference between displa- cement damage and ionization damage.
More radiation experiments will be carried out in the future to further investigate the degradations induced by neutron beams with a wide range of ﬂuence. The synergistic effects on the CCDs irradiated by neutron beams and gamma rays will also be investi- gated in future experiments.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos.11305126, 11235008) and the Foundation of State Key Laboratory of China (Grant No. SKLIPR1211). The authors would like to thank the staff at the XAPR neutron beam facility     in the conduct of this research for their invaluable assistance and support, especially Wenshou Zhang, Qiang Zhang, Jiaxiang Wei, and Guangning Zhu for their help in measurements.
