<title>INNOVATIVE CONCEPT FOR AN ULTRA-SMALL NUCLEAR THERMAL ROCKET UTILIZING A NEW MODERATED REACTOR</title>
<Affiliation>a.Department of Nuclear and Quantum Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, 291 Daehak-ro,Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea;b.Handong Global University, 558 Handong-ro, Buk-gu, Pohang, Gyeongbuk 37554, Republic of Korea</Affiliation>
<author>SEUNG HYUN NAM, PAOLO VENNERI, YONGHEE KIM, JEONG IK LEE ,SOON HEUNG CHANG , and YONG HOON JEONG  </author>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Energy and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2015.06.003</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2015.06.003</URL>
a b s t r a c t
Although the harsh space environment imposes many severe challenges to space pioneers, space exploration is a realistic and profitable goal for long-term humanity survival. One of the viable and promising options to overcome the harsh environment of space is nuclear propulsion. Particularly, the Nuclear Thermal Rocket (NTR) is a leading candidate for near- term human missions to Mars and beyond due to its relatively high thrust and efficiency. Traditional NTR designs use typically high power reactors with fast or epithermal neutron spectrums to simplify core design and to maximize thrust. In parallel there are a series of new NTR designs with lower thrust and higher efficiency, designed to enhance mission versatility and safety through the use of redundant engines (when used in a clustered engine arrangement) for future commercialization. This paper proposes a new NTR design of the second design philosophy, Korea Advanced NUclear Thermal Engine Rocket (KANUTER), for future space applications. The KANUTER consists of an Extremely High Temperature Gas cooled Reactor (EHTGR) utilizing hydrogen propellant, a propulsion sys- tem, and an optional electricity generation system to provide propulsion as well as elec- tricity generation. The innovatively small engine has the characteristics of high efficiency, being compact and lightweight, and bimodal capability. The notable characteristics result from the moderated EHTGR design, uniquely utilizing the integrated fuel element with an ultra heat-resistant carbide fuel, an efficient metal hydride moderator, protectively cooling channels and an individual pressure tube in an all-in-one package. The EHTGR can be bimodally operated in a propulsion mode of 100 MWth and an electricity generation mode of 100 kWth, equipped with a dynamic energy conversion system. To investigate the design features of the new reactor and to estimate referential engine performance, a preliminary design study in terms of neutronics and thermohydraulics was carried out. The result indicates that the innovative design has great potential for high propellant efficiency and thrust-to-weight of engine ratio, compared with the existing NTR designs. However, the build-up of fission products in fuel has a significant impact on the bimodal operation of the moderated reactor such as xenon-induced dead time. This issue can be overcome by building in excess reactivity and control margin for the reactor design.
Keywords:
Nuclear propulsion Nuclear thermal rocket Space exploration
Space nuclear application Space reactor
1.Introduction
Space exploration and human colonization of the outer planets can be justified on the basis of it being a long-term insurance policy for ensuring the continuation of human civilization and other forms of terrestrial life. In addition, such endeavors have the potential to rapidly accelerate the advancement of science and technology, although the costs involved are likely to be high. Long-distance space missions, however, impose many challenges due to the extremely harsh space environment that necessitates life support, space radi- ation protection from solar flares and cosmic rays, externally independent energy sources and propellants, and numerous safety concerns. Therefore, space pioneers demand efficient and trustworthy space power and propulsion systems to reduce the mission duration, risks, and costs. At present, there are two major types of space propulsion classified ac- cording to their energy sources: chemical energy and nuclear energy. Until now, chemical rockets (CRs) have dominated most space programs based in Earth's orbit. However, manned missions to Mars and beyond, that make use of conventional CRs, will seriously suffer due to the enormous propellant requirement and correspondingly high launch costs resulting from the associated low propellant efficiency. This, in turn, could result in a longer trip time. Meanwhile, nuclear rockets have at least twice the propellant efficiency of chemical pro- pulsion, allowing a reduction in propellant requirement and launch costs. Nuclear rocket engines can also be configured to operate bimodally, by converting the surplus nuclear energy to auxiliary electric power, required for the operation of a spacecraft. Moreover, the concept and technology of the nu- clear rocket are very simple, already proven, and safe [1,2]. Considering these factors, nuclear propulsion is the most attractive option for long-distance space exploration or exploitation.
Space development is not the duty of just a few nations that are advanced in space technology. The Republic of Korea (ROK), which successfully launched the two-stage NARO rocket carrying a satellite, is also one of the volunteers in the international efforts at space exploration and the expansion of human civilization beyond the Earth. The ROK government has also recently shown extensive support for the Korean space program through its long-term space development plan, praising the success of NARO as evidence of a positive outlook. This is particularly important given that the ROK promises great potential in terms of developing space nuclear systems, as it already develops advanced nuclear technology as a major nuclear energy country, even exporting it to other countries. In fact, the ROK has already begun the research and devel- opment of space nuclear systems. The Korea advanced nu- clear thermal engine rocket (KANUTER) is an innovative, ultra- small nuclear thermal rocket (NTR) engine currently being
designed at Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Tech- nology (KAIST) for future generations [3]. KANUTER has the following characteristics for meeting the leading NTR design requirements: high efficiency, compact and lightweight sys- tem, and optional bimodal capability (capable of both pro- pulsion and electricity generation). This paper briefly introduces the general principle of nuclear thermal propul- sion (NTP), and proposes the innovative concept of KANUTER by describing the system and its neutronic and thermohy- draulic design features.
2.Why nuclear propulsion in space?
Nuclear-based systems can provide electricity, heat, and pro- pulsion for space missions that are well beyond the capabil- ities of solar power, fuel cells, and conventional chemical systems. There are three main classifications of nuclear en- ergy for space applications: radioisotope decay, nuclear fission, and nuclear fusion. Among these nuclear energy sources, nuclear fission energy is the most feasible option in terms of both sufficient energy density and technical maturity for high thrust propulsion missions. In particular, nuclear fission energy can power three types of space propulsion: nuclear pulse propulsion (NPP), nuclear electric propulsion (NEP), and NTP. NPP involves the detonation of small nuclear explosive devices behind a spacecraft to generate immense thrust. For shorter trips with high acceleration, an NPP system will be preferred, despite having lower propellant efficiency. This concept, however, is currently unrealizable due to the enormous radiation exposure and the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty. NEP uses a bank of electric thrusters powered by a fission reactor. Although NEP has a very high propellant effi- ciency, it is problematic because of its low thrust-to-weight ratio, and the low acceleration. Perhaps future missions to the outer planets (such as Jupiter and beyond) will require an NEP system. NTP directly utilizes the thermal energy of a fission reactor to heat a low molecular weight propellant producing thrust through a thermodynamic nozzle. NTP rep- resents the most promising and near-term method for human solar system missions, because it ensures not only high thrust, but also high propellant efficiency [4e6]. This section briefly introduces the general principle, advantages and applications of the NTP system for the purpose of informing the public.
2.1.General principle of NTR
NTRs use nuclear fission reactors similar to those safely employed in nuclear power plants and propulsion ships. They utilize thermal energy released from the fission reactor to heat a single low molecular weight propellant, i.e., hydrogen (H2). This is the basic difference from a CR which utilizes the chemical reaction energy from a bipropellant such as H2 fuel and an oxidizer. The nuclear reactor of an NTR, which could be  named  as  an  extremely  high  temperature  gas  cooled reactor  (EHTGR),  is  heated  to  the  maximum  temperature without fuel melting by fission energy, and is cooled by the H2 propellant. The propellant absorbs enthalpy from the EHTGR and is expanded out through a converging-diverging nozzle at very high temperature and exhaust velocity (ve) as depicted in Fig. 1. The main components of an NTR engine are a propel-	SP
lant feeding system (PFS) housing a turbo-pump assembly (TPA), an EHTGR, and a thermodynamic nozzle. The liquid H2 is stored in insulated propellant tanks and is drawn through a pump of the TPA. The pump then sends the pressurized H2 flow to coolant channels in the secondary reactor components (the nozzle, moderator, reflector, etc.) to extract heat for the propellant feeding power. After cooling the secondary com- ponents, the accessorily heated H2 flows up to the TPA to drive its turbine. The H2 then flows into the primary fuel zone in the reactor core and is exhausted through the thermodynamic nozzle at 2,500 K to over 3,000 K to generate rocket thrust [7].
2.2.Advantages of NTR
Nuclear propulsion is indispensable in the exploration and exploitation of deep space due to its enormous energy density. NTRs also have notable advantages over conventional CRs. First, the propellant efficiency of NTRs is more than double, owing to the combination of enormous energy density and the use of the lowest possible molecular weight propellant (H2). A propellant efficiency parameter of rocket engines is specific impulse (Isp), which represents the ratio of the thrust over the rate of propellant consumption as shown in Eq. (1). Isp is also related to the temperature of the reactor core and the molecular weight of the propellant. Eq. (2) explains why the Isp of an NTR is able to be at least twice that of the best CR using denser bipropellant with the same exhaust temperature:
@1
@2
where F ¼ thrust, m_  ¼ mass flow rate (MFR), g0 ¼ Earth's gravity
acceleration, ve ¼ exhaust velocity, Tcore ¼ temperature of core, and MW ¼ mean molecular weight of propellant.
If the maximum exhaust temperature of an NTR is around 3,000 K, which is limited by the nuclear fuel's melting tem- perature and the heat transfer capability in the core, an Isp as high as 1,000 seconds can be achieved as compared to only about 450~500 seconds in the case of the best CR. Because of the higher propellant efficiency, NTRs are able to accomplish longer space missions at much lower propellant requirements which then result in cheaper launch costs. For example, an NTR yielding 906 second Isp requires only a propellant mass of 244 tons (t) for the 2033 human Mars orbital mission [8,9], instead of 688 t of propellant required for a CR yielding 500 second Isp.
The second advantage is that an NTR engine system can be configured for bimodal functions; both propulsion and electric power generation. The bimodal NTR engine is able to produce electric power accessorily with a dynamic power system that utilizes the existing reactor's heat. The electric power of a spacecraft is essential for life support, ship controls, com- munications, other instruments, and even auxiliary electric
Fig. 1 e Typical operating principle of a nuclear thermal rocket. EHTGR, extremely high temperature gas cooled reactor; NERVA, nuclear engine for rocket vehicle application.
thrust increasing DV. Bimodal NTRs are able to eliminate the need for additional electric power sources such as a radio- isotope thermoelectric generator or a solar electric system, the electric generation capacities of which are very low compared to their heavy weights. In contrast, conventional CRs need additional heavy electric power systems.
Third, NTR technology has already been developed and successfully tested for >50 years. It is simple in its overall concept and could be compatible with contemporary space vehicles [1]. Substantial research and development of NTR technology was carried out as part of the ROVER and the Nu- clear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application (NERVA) projects in the USA from 1955 to 1973. These major projects, in which 20 different reactors were built and tested, are considered brilliant technical successes demonstrating the practical feasibility of NTR engines. In particular, the smallest engine tested in the projects, “Pewee”, was considered sufficient for a human Mars mission when used in a multiple engine arrangement [9,10]. After these major projects, the research on NTRs has continued until today. NERVA-derived engine concepts, which are built on the state-of-the-art technology of the ROVER and NERVA projects, vary the engine designs to increase rocket performance. The representative NERVA- derived engine is the small nuclear rocket engine and its enhanced version suitable for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's (NASA's) Mars Design Reference Ar- chitecture 5.0 (DRA 5.0) [11,12]. In addition, there has been extensive research on innovative NTR engines pursuing more efficient, compact, and lightweight designs for the next gen- eration such as the particle bed reactor engine [13], MIniature reacTor Engine-E [14], square lattice honeycomb engine [15], and Thermal Engine Rocket Adventurer [16]. Therefore, the feasibility of long-distance space missions using NTRs is not a technical issue, but rather requires a political decision based on public acceptance. Table 1 summarizes the performance characteristics of the representative NTR engines.
Fourth, NTR technology is safer and more reliable than conventional CRs in terms of both the risks of radiation exposure and system failure probability. Essentially, no radi- ation is released from an NTR at the time of launching in the Earth's atmosphere because it is not used when lifting off from the Earth. The launch from the Earth's surface to low Earth
orbit (LEO: 185 km) is done by conventional CRs carrying the NTR system, so that the NTR starts up from LEO and continues to run to the deep space destination. The merits of an NTR in terms of mission safety and reliability are due to its much shorter transit time in a long-distance space mission. The reduction in time of an NTR results in the crew and spacecraft system being exposed to lower levels of space radiation, which are much larger than the NTR's own radiation. In addition, the shorter mission time also reduces the engine system failure probability, due to propellant leakage and material degradation by hot H2 [2].
2.3.Applications of NTR
The merited applications of an NTR include solar system exploration, transportation, and power support for the Inter- national Space Station (ISS), and near Earth object (NEO) missions. The first one includes human exploration missions to Mars and beyond, because an NTR is more reliable and flexible for long-distance space missions at lower costs than CRs. On the basis of launch cost, two NTR missions could be conducted with the same price of one CR mission. Second, a bimodal NTR is able to provide not only propulsion for transportation, but also electric power to the ISS. By using a bimodal NTR, the ISS can be placed into a lunar cycle orbit and be electrically powered for lunar exploitation [17]. In addition, an NTR is suited to conduct the missions for threat investi- gation or interception of NEOs, whether they are asteroids or comets. An NTR enables flight velocities over two times those achievable of CRs with the same amount of propellant, allowing interaction with a potential NEO threat in a shorter time or at a longer range [18].
3.Concept design of KANUTER
The design of KANUTER includes a few innovative and po- tential concepts to enhance the performance compared to the existing NTR designs for the purpose of future generation utilization. This section summarizes the design description and features of KANUTER in terms of neutronics and thermohydraulics.
Table 1 e Performance characteristics of representative nuclear thermal rocket engines.
3.1.Design requirements and governing design parameters
The design requirements of KANUTER are mainly derived to improve engine performance over the existing NTR engines and to ensure multi-application potential for the future gen- eration as briefly presented in Table 2. In particular, the goal for the engine performance is mainly set to accomplish improved propellant efficiency (Isp), a compact and light- weight system, and a sufficient lifespan, by taking into ac- count the state-of-the-art NTR engine performance, the advanced nuclear material technology, as well as the 2033 human Mars orbital mission requirements: a mission period of 600 days and a DV budget of 8.42 km/s [9].
The Isp should be no less than 900 seconds, compared with the 865 seconds of the state-of-the-art technology. To achieve the high Isp, the maximum temperature of the reactor core should be > 3,000 K and correspondingly the reactor requires an advanced heat-resistant nuclear fuel and efficient cooling capability. Second, the system should be compact, light- weight, and resultantly have a high thrust-to-weight of engine (T/Weng) ratio by thermalizing neutron energy spectrum and selecting lightweight materials of the reactor. Third, the life- span should be sufficient to carry out a long-term manned mission to Mars. Fourth, the system should be optionally configured as a bimodal engine to generate essential electric power by being equipped with a dynamic power conversion system that utilizes the reactor's surplus energy. In addition, mission versatility is also a consideration for multi- application competence, so that various  scale  missions,  from robotic science missions requiring low-thrust to manned missions requiring high-thrust, can be performed. Thereupon, the system needs to be a small and modular system with relatively low thrust, but a high T/Weng ratio that can meet the required thrust levels by a clustered engine arrangement. For example, a lightweight robotic science mission could require only two to five engines, while a massive human mission could demand over 10 engines. The clustered engines are also able to improve redundancy and survivability, as well as high- thrust, even if the weight of a spacecraft is increased.
Table 2 e Design requirements and governing parameters of Korea advanced nuclear thermal engine rocket (KANUTER).
3.2.System description
KANUTER, as a bimodal NTR engine utilizing H2 propellant, mainly consists of a 100 MWth EHTGR, a propulsion system and an electricity generation system (EGS) as depicted in Fig. 2. The following subsections specifically describe the design characteristics and considerations of the fuel element, the EHTGR, and the bimodal engine system.
3.2.1.Heat-resistant fuel and integrated fuel element
The integrated fuel element uniquely houses a heat-resistant fuel assembly, a fuel support shroud, an annular moderator cooling channel, a moderator block, and an individual pressure tube as an all-in-one compact design, as shown in Fig. 3. The nuclear fuel should avoid melting, deformation, cracking, and corrosion, caused by high temperatures (of >3,000 K), high pressure H2, and radiation in the EHTGR. Table 3 lists the advanced nuclear fuel options designed to overcome the harsh conditions for the next generation of NTR reactors. Those fuel options mainly include the series of carbide fuels [19] and the tungsten-uranium dioxide ceramic-metallic (W-UO2 CERMET) fuel [20]. In particular, the (U, Zr, Nb)C solid solution fuel is a promising option for KANUTER to increase safety margins and the resultant rocket performance, due to its high melting point, high thermal conductivity, improved H2 corrosion resistance, and good retention of fission material [21]. This ternary carbide fuel is predicted to tolerate the hot H2 condition for up to 2 hours with only small mass losses. In the actual hot H2 tests carried out in the Innovative Nuclear Space Power and Pro- pulsion Institute (INSPI), the ternary carbide fuel withstood 4.5 hours at > 2,500 K with <1% uranium (U) loss [19]. In the case of the ternary carbide fueled reactor tests performed by Russia/ the former U.S.S.R, the H2 exhaust temperatures were rated at 3,100 K for >1 hour and 2,000 K for 2,000 hours [22]. The other fuel options such as (U, Zr, Ta)C or W-UO2 CERMET are also potential options, depending on technical maturity or engine performance requirements.
However, these carbide fuels are very problematic to pro- cess and shape for complex core geometries with microsize cooling channels, due to their high melting points, low duc-
tilities,  and  diffusion  bonding  difficulties.  Accordingly, the
square lattice fuel design proposed by the INSPI of the Uni- versity of Florida [19] was selected for the fuel assembly of KANUTER. In the square lattice fuel assembly design, the ternary      carbide      fuel      is      first      manufactured   into
0.50 mm~1.50 mm grooved wafers, and then the fuel wafers are interlocked with each other to form the square lattice geometry. Particularly, the square lattice fuel assembly cre- ates numerous square flow channels (SFCs) among the wafers as described in Fig. 3. The SFCs maintain a 30% void fraction of the fuel assembly to ensure a critical fuel mass, and to sub- stitute for circular cooling channels of the existing hexagonal
fuel design of NERVA [23]. The H2 propellant passes through
these SFCs to cool down the fuel and to be heated to a high temperature. The U enrichment of the fuel is assumed to be 93 wt% 235U/U for a small-size and high-performance design. Various fuel compositions of the tricarbides could be used to adjust required U densities from 0.7 g/cm3 to 1.6 g/cm3 depending     on     the     neutronic     and     thermohydraulic
Fig. 2 e Schematic view of Korea advanced nuclear thermal engine rocket.
requirements of the EHTGR [24]. The square lattice fuel design satisfies the required fissile mass as well as easy fabricability for the delicate cooling channels. It is able to not only remove the very finical diamond drilling of the tubular coolant chan- nel, but also reduce thermal stress on the fuel assembly by leaving marginal spaces at each end of the fuel wafer.
The fuel assembly is supported and surrounded by three layer tubes depending on their structural and thermal con- siderations: first, a carbon fiber-reinforced carbon (C/C) shroud protectively coated with zirconium carbide (ZrC); second, a metal hydride moderator block protected by a thin ZrC-coated C/C jacket; and third, a C/C pressure tube as depicted in Fig. 3. The first ZrC-coated C/C shroud is highly heat and corrosion resistant in order to directly support the fuel assembly and to insulate the very high temperature H2. The second moderator block is made of a metal hydride such as 7lithium hydride (7LiH) or zirconium hydride (ZrH1.8). The third C/C pressure tube has a superior strength to endure the harsh stress in the individual fuel element. In particular, there is an annular moderator cooling channel between the first C/C shroud and the C/C jacket of the hydride moderator to insulate the high thermal energy conducted from the fuel assembly, to cool the moderator, and to transfer the thermal energy to the PFS and EGS. This integrated fuel element is axially connected with the cylindrical caps at the top and bottom of it. The top
cap consists of a C/C pressure shell and beryllium (Be) filler. The bottom tip is sealed with a C/C support block integrated with the shroud and pressure tube of the fuel element. These top and bottom caps also act as the axial reflector. The inte- grated fuel element design has the characteristics of resis- tance to high temperature, pressure, and corrosion, as well as fabricating simplicity.
3.2.2.Moderated EHTGR
The fission reactor type of KANUTER is an EHTGR, the maximum core temperature of which exceeds 3,000 K, using H2 coolant (also as a propellant). The H2 is the best option of the NTRs' propellant candidates because of its low molecular weight, good thermal properties, and thus high propellant efficiency. As shown in Fig. 4, the heterogeneous core of the EHTGR consists of 37 integrated fuel elements arranged in a hexagonal prism pattern. The Be spacers, which include the structure cooling channels, occupy the plenums among the fuel elements as a core structure support, moderator, and a good thermal conductor. Again, the core is surrounded by the reflector composed of Be e Be e C/C layers to reduce neutron leakage. Particularly, the outer Be e C/C layers also serve as a pressure vessel (PV). Thus, the combination of the Be e C/C PV and the individual C/C pressure tubes of the fuel elements substitute a heavy PV which is typically mounted on other
Fig. 3 e Configuration of the integrated fuel element. SFC, square flow channel.
NTR reactors [14]. In order to control the reactor's reactivity and in turn the power, cylindrical rotating control drums, each of which partially comprises a boron carbide (B4C) neutron absorber, are symmetrically placed in the radial reflector. The reactor's reactivity goes in a supercritical state with the B4C
Table 3 e Thermal properties of nuclear thermal rocket fuel options.
parts of the control drums rotated out and in a subcritical state with the B4C parts rotated in. These reflector and control drums also have suitable cooling channels to lessen the ra- diation- induced heating.
To maintain a critical state with even a small amount of fuel, and thereby a lightweight and small size reactor, the heterogeneous core of the EHTGR creates a thermalized neutron energy spectrum. The mass of (U, Zr, Nb)C fuels in the core are estimated at 40~50 kg with 4~9 kg of 235U depending on moderator types at a fuel element pitch to diameter (P/D) ratio of 2.0. When the core loads 7LiH moderator, the required fuel mass with a U density of 0.71 g/cm3 is only 41 kg, which
contains about 4 kg of 235U. In the case of the ZrH1.8
moderator
core, the amount of 235U should be increased to over twice that of the 7LiH moderator core due to the lower moderating per- formance. Thus, the required fuel mass is estimated to be about 50 kg with a higher U density of 1.47 g/cm3 [24]. The other components are composed of the metal hydride moderator and the structural materials such as C/C and Be. The core components are arranged depending on their func-
tional considerations such as heat resistance, neutron moderation, and strength. The mass of the 7LiH moderator is
Fig. 4 e Configuration of the extremely high temperature gas cooled reactor. TPA, turbo-pump assembly.
estimated to be only 13 kg. In the case of ZrH1.8 moderator use, the mass is largely increased to 93 kg. The mass of the reflector (including the PV) and control drums is estimated at 97 kg. The primary structural material, C/C, is a potential option to minimize reactor mass and radiation-induced heating due to low densities (~ 2.0 g/cm3), high strength at high temperature, high thermal conductivity, low thermal expansion, and a su- perior neutronic cross section to other candidate materials [13,25]. All the surfaces of the C/C components in contact with H2 should be protectively coated with ZrC to prevent corro- sion. Table 4 presents thermophysical and neutronics prop- erties of the moderator and reflector candidates for the EHTGR [25e29]. Thereupon, the reference mass of the EHTGR with the 7LiH moderator is estimated to be just 180 kg. When the moderator is changed to ZrH1.8, the EHTGR mass is estimated to be 268 kg at the same size. Although the reactor mass uti- lizing the 7LiH moderator is lower than that seen with ZrH1.8
Table 4 e Moderator and reflector candidates of the extremely high temperature gas cooled reactor.
due to the higher moderating ratio and lower density, the lightweight moderator could require more complex and effi- cient cooling methods such as a direct inflow cooling in its block or particle bed because of the poor thermal properties. This EHTGR is operated in two modes of propulsion and electricity generation by adjusting the control drums for the bimodal capability. In the propulsion mode, the reactor power is 100 MWth for both propulsion and electricity generation. The required total operation time in the full power mode for the NASA Mars mission is about 2 hours and the longest single burn time is around 50 minutes. In the case of the electricity generation mode, the reactor is operated at only 100 kWth power for the EGS utilizing a dynamic power conversion cycle. The required operation time in the idle power mode is about
600 days for the 2033 human Mars mission [8].
In summary, the moderated EHTGR has a few character- istics of the small and lightweight system, high fuel power density, and protective cooling. The size and weight are greatly reduced by the low U requirement due to the ther- malized neutron spectrum, the low density materials, and  the elimination of a typical heavy PV. The EHTGR adopts low power to enhance the mission versatility requiring various thrust levels by the multiple engine arrangement. Although the EHTGR's power is low, the power density is higher than that of the NERVA derived NTR reactors having 2~5 MWth/L,
which indicates a higher T/Weng ratio. In addition, one of the
challenging issues of the EHTGR is to mitigate the severe heating in the core and thus to transfer the thermal energy to the power conversion systems for both propulsion and elec- tricity generation. In this regard, the EHTGR evenly distrib- utes the protective and regenerative cooling channels such as the numerous SFCs in fuel, the annular moderator cooling channels, and the structure cooling channels in the core. Table 5 summarizes the reference design parameters of the EHTGR.
Table 5 e Reference design parameters of the extremely high temperature gas cooled reactor.
3.2.3.Bimodal                    engine                     system The NTR engine could be configured for the bimodal functions of both propulsion and electricity generation utilizing one fission reactor to reduce the mass of a spacecraft. It consists of the EHTGR, the propulsion system, and the EGS as shown in Fig. 2. This bimodal engine is operated in the two modes of propulsion with 100 MWth full power and electricity genera- tion with 100 kWth idle power. The two operation modes are switched and controlled by the control drums for the power and the control valves for the propellant flow. The mass of the engine, excluding the EGS, is estimated to be 390 kg including 50% contingency to cover design uncertainties and shadow shield mass.
3.2.3.1.Propulsion system. The propulsion system is mainly made up of a PFS comprising a TPA and a propellant man- agement unit, a regenerative nozzle assembly, a thrust vector control, and an instrumentation package. This system only operates in the propulsion mode not only to produce thrust, but also to concomitantly generate electricity. Although all of the components of the propulsion system are not specifically designed to date, it is possible to manufacture them on a small scale with better quality using the already proven technolo- gies that have been developed since the NERVA and the Space Nuclear Thermal Propulsion (SNTP) [30] projects. The key element of the propulsion system is the TPA, which mainly consists of a rotodynamic pump and a driving gas turbine to feed the propellant to the EHTGR and in turn to the nozzle
propellant is passed through a nozzle cooling jacket. The primary material options of the nozzle assembly are aluminum with C/C liner, Inconel with NARloy liner or a re- fractory carbide-coated C/C. The aluminum and Inconel noz- zles are the baseline in terms of proven technologies. However, the coated C/C nozzle, which was proposed at the SNTP [30], is also an innovative and feasible design, although the concept is somewhat unproven in such a large scale nozzle. The merits of the coated C/C nozzle are low weight, superior high-temperature strength largely reducing the cooling requirement (potential for radiation-cooling) [31] and easy integration with the C/C PV of the EHTGR. Another innovative nozzle designing option is a clustered nozzle as- sembly concept, in which 37 individual small C/C nozzles in- tegrated with the fuel elements replace a common heavy single nozzle [14]. In this option, blending of the individual exhaust gas from these small nozzles slightly reduces the total thrust compared with a heavy single nozzle, whereas the shortened nozzle length could lighten a weight of the nozzle assembly (about two times) and thus the engine mass. The mass estimation of the each component is based on rough scaling from the SNTP program [30] in accordance with the reactor power or the thrust differences. The mass of the pro- pulsion system is predicted to be 120 kg including 50% con- tingency of the mass estimation. The detailed engine mass budgets are included in Table 6.
Both rocket engine cycle options of a hot-bleed cycle and an expander cycle were considered for the propulsion system. The hot-bleed cycle simply utilizes a small fraction of high temperature H2 withdrawn from the thrust chamber and mixed with unheated H2 to operate the TPA; after that, the H2 is exhausted through additional auxiliary nozzles. This hot- bleed cycle is relatively simple, while its rocket performance is degraded by the temperature loss of the bleed gases to drive the turbine. In the expander cycle, the intermediate
assembly. The TPA utilizing the H2 working fluid converts a
small portion of thermal energy of the EHTGR into dynamic energy to make the flow continue for the self-sustaining sys- tem. Uniquely, the TPA of the KANUTER PFS is equipped with an auxiliary alternator to generate electricity in the propulsion mode or in the emergency of the EGS malfunctions. The nozzle assembly expands and accelerates the H2 heated in the EHTGR, so that the exhaust gas exits the nozzle at hypersonic velocities to produce thrust. To protect the nozzle assembly from the high temperature H2, a regenerative cooling config- uration is applied, which means a portion of the unheated
Table 6 e Reference design parameters of Korea advanced nuclear thermal engine rocket.
temperature H2 heated in the secondary reactor components expands in the TPA to drive its pump. Then, the H2 re-enters the fuel zone in the core where it is heated to high tempera- tures, and exhausted through the nozzle assembly. Although this expander cycle is more complex because both reactor and PFS are tightly coupled, it is 2~3% more efficient than the hot- bleed cycle [7,30]. As part of a preliminary study, the expander cycle was selected for KANUTER since the regenerative cool- ing channels in the core and the nozzle assembly could ensure plentiful heat transfer to the PFS, while the pressure loss is also sufficiently low.
3.2.3.2.Electricity generation system. The EGS, which oper- ates only in the electric power mode with 100 kWth reactor power, converts the thermal energy of the EHTGR into the electric power required for spacecraft operation. This system eliminates the need for additional larger and heavier electric power sources like RTGs or solar electric systems. The dy- namic power conversion options for the EGS include Stirling, Brayton, and Rankine cycles to ensure both high efficiency and small radiator size [32]. The Stirling cycle could offer great potential at relatively low power under a few tens of kWe, but its immature technology may result in high risks for long-term space applications [33]. Both Brayton and Rankine cycles are able to yield high power and efficiency on the basis of proven technology [34]. In the particular case of KANUTER, however, the relatively low temperature of the working fluid at the moderated EHTGR's outlet (the turbine inlet) restricts the power conversion efficiency of these power cycles, because the maximum temperature at the turbine inlet is limited by the moderator's melting point (962 K of 7LiH and 1,073 K of ZrH1.8). In addition, the heatsink radiator also re- stricts the power conversion efficiency, since the radiator temperature related with the back work of a compressor or pump should be as high as possible to minimize its size and mass in space. Typical working fluids for the dynamic power cycles in space are inert gases, e.g., helium (He), argon (Ar), xenon (Xe), or mixtures for the Brayton cycle, and liquid metal or organic compounds, e.g., toluene, Dowtherm A or RC-1 for the Rankine cycle [34]. Table 7 presents the perfor- mance comparison between the Brayton and Rankine cycles for reference for the conditions particular to KANUTER. The results were calculated using thermodynamic equations
under simplifying assumptions such as standard cycles, steady states, adiabatic processes, an absence of pressure losses, the same turbo machinery efficiencies and radiator emissivity (0.9), turbine inlet temperatures considering the moderator's melting point, similar radiator sizes, etc. The working fluid options are assumed to be He or Ar for the Brayton cycle, and steam/water or toluene as an organic compound. The results indicate that the thermal efficiency of the He Brayton cycles (hth ¼ 3.5%) is about five times lower than about 18.6% of the Rankine cycles in similar conditions of the radiator areas (around 50 m2) and the turbine inlet temperatures of <750 K. The cycles' efficiency difference is because the compressor of the Brayton cycles requires a huge back work compared with the pump of the Rankine cycles. Even if the turbine inlet temperatures of the Brayton cycles are increased to 850 K (utilizing ZrH1.8), the thermal efficiency is up to 8.3% with a 56 m2 radiator area, which is still lower than that of the Rankine cycles. In order to achieve both a reasonable thermal efficiency and a small radiator size in the Brayton cycle, the temperature of the turbine inlet should be at least 1,000 K, which is impossible in the EHTGR due to the moderator temperature limit. In addition, although the use of reheating or regeneration units in the Brayton cycles could raise the thermal efficiency, the increased mass and complexity of the system might offset the efficiency benefit. Therefore, the Rankine cycle options are more promising from the viewpoint of a power cycle's efficiency in the limited conditions. However, the Rankine cycles must overcome the handling and separation issues of two-phase flow for their condenser, which are problematic in zero gravity. Addition- ally, the system should prevent working fluid from freezing upon the EHTGR shutdown, and the water/steam option could be corrosive to the EGS components. Although inno- vative concepts such as direct-condensing radiators [35,36] or liquid droplet radiators [37], even operating in zero gravity, were proposed, their reliable and long-life operation has not been fully established. In addition, the bimodal design in- volves much complexity in the engine system, and also re- quires very precise power control. To put these particular conditions in perspective, more in depth studies on the bimodal system are needed to determine whether the EGS is profitable or not in terms of the limitations of the moderated EHTGR.
Table 7 e Performance comparison between the referential Brayton and Rankine cycles for Korea advanced nuclear thermal engine rocket.
Fig. 5 e Reference component-level operating conditions of the propulsion mode. EGS, electricity generation system; EHTGR, extremely high temperature gas cooled reactor.
3.2.3.3.Reference operating conditions. Figs. 5 and 6 show the reference component-level operating conditions in the steady-state of both propulsion and electric power modes for KANUTER. The operating conditions are, respectively, assumed to use the expander cycle and the standard Rankine cycle for referential purposes only. The results were calcu- lated by the one dimensional (1-D) propellant thermodynamic models using the gas properties from the NIST REFPROP 9.0 (under 900 K) [38] and the NASA chemical equilibrium (>900 K) [39], and under simplifying assumptions such as steady-state, adiabatic, turbo machinery efficiencies, ideal nozzle, standard cycle, etc. In particular, the 1D thermodynamic model of the propulsion system computationally simulates the propellant flow through the major engine components including the EHTGR, PFS, and nozzle assembly, and ensuing power con- version performance for thrust, propellant feeding, and elec- tricity generation [40].
The propulsion mode uses 100 MWth power in the expander cycle both to create a thrust, and electric powers of 14~16 kWe. In this mode, the EGS does not operate because the H2 temperature after the cooling of the secondary reactor components and the nozzle assembly is too low, < 320 K, and the resultant radiator size would be too large. Instead, the auxiliary alternator is mounted on the TPA shaft to generate
electricity in the propulsion mode. As described in Fig. 5, the H2 flows through the open expander cycle in order of (A)~(H) components both to cool the EHTGR and the nozzle assembly, and to convert the thermal energy to the powers of thrust, propellant feeding, and electricity. The cold H2 stream pum- ped through the TPA of the PFS first splits up into both of the structure cooling channels in the core spacers, and the regenerative cooling channels of the nozzle cooling jacket and the ensuing reflector. Most of the coolant flows into the core and the rest is used to cool the nozzle assembly and the reflector. The portion of the core bypass stream is mainly determined by the types of nozzle design. In this study, uti- lizing the heat-resistant C/C nozzle, the portion of the core bypass stream is assumed to be 10%. Again, the main stream after passing through the structure cooling channels is fed into the annular moderator cooling channels at the bottom of the fuel elements. In the fuel elements, the H2 flows up through the moderator cooling channels to protect the moderator from the fuel's thermal attack and then gathers into the outlet plenum of the upper reactor vessel head. Another core bypass stream also comes into the outlet plenum of the reactor vessel and is mixed with the main stream after cooling the nozzle and reflector. Then, the heated H2 flows out to the TPA uniquely equipped with an auxiliary Fig. 6 e Reference component-level operating conditions of the electric power mode. EGS, electricity generation system; EHTGR, extremely high temperature gas cooled reactor, PFS, propellant feeding system.
alternator for both propellant feeding and electricity genera- tion. After the power conversion in the PFS, the H2 streams down into the square lattice fuel assemblies in the core again to be heated to 3,000 K, before it expands out through the nozzle assembly to produce a thrust. Most of the reactor power is used to produce the thrust through the nozzle as- sembly, and only 18 kWth power is converted to 16.2 kWe of electric power. The referential state points and rocket per- formance at the propulsion mode are included in Fig. 5.
In the case of the electric power mode, the reactor is operated at just 100 kWth idle power, and the Rankine cycle is assumed to be the EGS to generate around 15 kWe electric power. The EGS consists of two closed loops where the first is for the EHTGR's heat transfer and the second is for the elec- tricity generation as depicted in Fig. 6. The first loop mainly uses the existing EHTGR, utilizing H2 or He working fluids, a low pressure compressor, and a heat exchanger as an evap- orator to transfer the heat from the EHTGR to the second power conversion loop. In the first loop, the working fluid is forced from the low pressure compressor and flows into the existing cooling channels in the core components excluding the fuel assembly. However, the working fluid does not flow out to the PFS for propulsion, but runs to the heat exchanger for heat transfer to the second power conversion loop, and flows back to circulate the closed loop. Most of the fuel heat is transferred to the annular moderator cooling channels by heat conduction through the fuel support shrouds in the fuel
elements. In the moderator cooling channel, the temperature of the coolant increases to the maximum 850 K, which is strictly limited under the melting temperatures of the mod- erators such as 962 K for 7LiH and 1,073 K for ZrH1.8. The second power conversion loop mainly consists of an evapo- rator, a turbine with a main alternator, a condensing radiator, and a pump. As presented in Fig. 6, the working fluids in the two closed loops are circulated in order of the first loop's components (A)~(C) and the second loop's components (D)~(G) for electricity generation. When the working fluid of the sec- ond loop is assumed to be water/steam for only referential purpose, its thermal efficiency is rated at 18.2% due to the low back work (0.21 kWth) of the pump, and thus the electric power output is estimated to be 16.4 kWe with  a  radiator area  of  50 m2. In the consideration of the compressor work (1.5 kWe) of the first loop, the net power output of the EGS is estimated at 14.9 kWe, so that the radiator area is 3.4 m2/kWe, as shown in Fig. 6. In the case of the organic working fluid of toluene, the thermal efficiency and radiator size are similar to the results of the water/steam power cycle.
The transient period operation between the propulsion and electric power generation modes is also a critical issue in demonstrating the feasibility of a bimodal system in terms of decay heat removal and finical power control. The current design assumes that the system uses both the existing turbo- pump of the expander cycle and the EGS to remove the re- actor's decay heat after the downward power changes. When the decay heat is higher than the capacity of the EGS in early stages after a downward power change, extra propellant would be pulsed through the reactor for cooling and low effi- cient propulsion. For the post burn engine cooldown, the entire amount of propellant for a mission includes 3% margin of usable propellant [12]. To ensure sufficient propellant flow during the post burn engine cooldown, an auxiliary electric motor connected with the turbo-pump or an extra passive decay cooling system utilizing thermoelectric cells might also be required. After the decay heat generation drops to under the EGS capacity, the EGS is only able to remove the residual decay heat. Additionally, the system needs special power sensors and control logic for the huge power change control. As presented in these referential operating conditions, KANUTER has the characteristics of high efficiency, low weight, and bimodal capability as an innovative NTR engine. The reference design parameters are summarized in Table 6.
3.2.3.4.Reference mission performance. The major benefits of KANUTER are to significantly reduce the propellant mass and initial mass in LEO (IMLEO) of a spacecraft. The relatively low thrust and power of KANUTER can be compensated by increasing the number of the modular engines (in a clustered arrangement) since the weight of the engine is ultralight. The clustered engine arrangement is also able to enhance redun- dancy, survivability, and mission versatility as well as the thrust and resultant DV. For example, Table 8 shows the mission performance comparison among various rocket engines based on the NASA 2033 Mars orbital mission re- quirements: 600 days of the mission period and 8.42 km/s of the mission DV [9]. The results were calculated using simple rocket equations and under several assumptions such as 71 t of crewed payloads, the maximum burn time within 2 hours for propulsion, three restarts, one jettison of two propellant tanks   after   the   first   burn,   and   tankage   mass  fractions
considering tanks and support structures. The total propellant loading includes a 6% margin of usable propellant to consider performance reserve, H2 leakage, post burn engine cooldown, and tank trapped residuals. The CR considers only a 3% pro- pellant margin to exclude the cooldown margin of 3%. The tankage mass fractions are assumed to be 0.25 for the NTRs and 0.13 for the best CR in order to consider the extra mass associated with the reactor and the shielding system. The number of engines was determined by the total thrust level required to achieve the same DV of 8.42 km/s within the maximum burn time. As the final outcome, the required propellant mass was estimated by the burn time and propel- lant flow rate to compare the rocket performance. KANUTER used a total of 15 engines: five for bimodal and 10 for propul- sion, only to produce 293 kN of thrust and 50 kWe of electric power while being operated at 70% of the rated power. The mass of the total engines, propellant, and IMLEO are esti- mated at 5.9 t, 209 t, and 357 t, respectively. This result shows the mass savings of KANUTER compared with those of the best CR and the NERVA-derived engines. In this study, the most influential variable for determining the required pro- pellant mass and IMLEO is the Isp, but the impact of engine mass increasing is relatively low compared with the tremen- dous mass of propellant and propellant tanks. Thereupon, KANUTER can reduce the propellant mass by about 24% compared with that of the small nuclear rocket engine, despite its larger number of engines. Additionally, the best CR demands at least three times as much propellant mass compared with that of KANUTER.
3.3.Design features of reactor
3.3.1.Neutronic design features
The EHTGR of KANUTER has a complicated and heteroge- neous core design which utilizes a thermal neutron spectrum
Table 8 e Reference mission performance comparison among various rocket engines.
to reduce the reactor's size and mass, to arrange the protective cooling channels, and to ensure the system integrity. The EHTGR is assumed to yield 100 MWth power with an average fuel power density of 14.7 MWth/L. The core mainly consists of 37 integrated fuel elements comprising the square lattice fuel of (U, Zr, Nb)C and a metal hydride moderator. In this study, the moderator material is assumed to be 7LiH due to its good neutronic performance. The core is surrounded by the reflector layers of Be e C/C. The six control drums partially containing a B4C neutron absorber are symmetrically ar- ranged in the radial reflector. For this reactor design to be feasible, the EHTGR's criticality must first be achieved in the appropriate dimensions and mass. In addition, the EHTGR must have a sufficient lifetime (burnup) at the desired power level with minimal fuel. The power distribution of the EHTGR is also a significant issue, because large power peaking could cause local fuel failure, such as melting or deformation by local heat concentration and thermal stress. As a preliminary design study, the Monte Carlo codes MCNPX 2.7 [41] and Ser- pent 2 [42] were used in conjunction with the ENDF-VII.0 neutronics library to simulate the reactor physics and to resultantly estimate the criticality, burnup, and power distri- bution of the EHTGR [43]. In the following, the neutronic design features of the EHTGR are described.
First, the EHTGR has a fully thermalized neutron spectrum compared with fast or epithermal reactors of the typical NTRs. Fig. 7 shows the neutron energy spectrum of the fuel, which has a high concentration of neutrons in the thermal energy regions. In the thermal neutron spectrum, the EHTGR ach- ieves an effective neutron multiplication factor (Keff) of 1.0351 (standard deviation: 0.00013) despite the ultra-small size and mass: 50 cm of diameter (at a P/D ratio of 2.0), and 180 kg reactor mass containing only 4.1 kg of 235U. The total reactivity swing of the rotating control drums is about $ 7.3 (with a delayed neutron fraction of 0.0075), ranging from a Keff of 0.9805 (standard deviation of 0.000025) up to 1.0351. The thermal spectrum and lightweight characteristics are largely
attributed to the 7LiH moderator. The 7LiH moderator not only has a high neutron scattering cross-section in the thermal energy range due to its high hydrogen content (12.68 wt% H in 7LiH), but also a relatively high melting temperature (961.7 K), a low dissociation pressure (~2.66 kPa at the melting point), and a low density (0.77 g/cm3) [28,44]. Another promising candidate of the metal hydride moderators is ZrH1.8, which has a higher melting temperature of 1,073 K and better ther- mal conductivity of 17~18 W/(m$K). When the 7LiH moderator is replaced with ZrH1.8 under the same P/D ratio, the required 235U mass is increased to >9 kg. To achieve more fissile mass, the U fraction of the (U, Zr, Nb)C fuel should be about two times higher than that of the 7LiH moderator core at the same fuel volume. A Keff of the ZrH1.8 moderator core is rated at 1.0208 (standard deviation: 0.00014) with a higher U density of
1.47 g/cm3 in the fuel. This result indicates that 7LiH is a better moderator than ZrH1.8 in terms of neutronic performance. To use 7LiH as a moderator, however, very high isotopic enrich- ment of 7Li is required because even a small inclusion of 6Li causes a large reactivity penalty [45]. In addition, the 7LiH moderator could require a more complex and efficient cooling method due to the poor thermal properties. The critical mass and size of the EHTGR could be further reduced by the opti- mization of the P/D ratio, which relatively adjusts the amounts between fuel and moderator. Expansion of a P/D ratio increases the amount of moderator, so the neutron spectrum is more moderated. If the core is under moderated, a higher P/D ratio increases Keff and vice versa. The thickness of a reflector is also able to affect the critical mass and size, since the mass ratio of the reflector to reactor is relatively large.
Second, it is crucial that the EHTGR is able to operate for the required operation time. To achieve the 2033 human  Mars orbital mission [9], the bimodal EHTGR should operate both for 2 hours in the full power mode (100 MWth) for pro- pulsion and for > 600 days in the idle power mode (100 kWth) for electricity generation. Fig. 8 shows a burnup cycle of repeated 2 hour full power burns for propulsion followed by a
Fig. 7 e Neutron energy spectrum of the fuel.
Fig. 8 e Burn-up cycle of repeated 2 hours full power burns for propulsion.
decay period of 15 days at near zero power. As can be seen, the lifetime of the EHTGR in the propulsion mode is esti- mated at > 80 hours, enabling 40 full power burn cycles if the fission product poisons are allowed to decay. In a real bimodal engine cycle for the Mars mission requiring multiple sharp changes in power between the two modes, however, the build-up of fission products, such as 135Xe, has a signifi- cant impact on the operation of the moderated EHTGR. Fig. 9 depicts a whole burnup cycle for the bimodal mission, which is assumed to require a total of 2 hours of full power burn time for propulsion, and eight power changes to bimodally operate during the entire mission period. After the first power change from the longest full power burn (50 minutes) of the first trans-Mars injection to the idle power burn, the
Keff dramatically falls to the minimum 0.9532 in just 15 hours. This is because the downward power change by a factor of 1,000 induces a significant increase of the 135Xe poisoning effect on the reactivity. The 135Xe-induced dead time is esti- mated to be about 40 hours. The other downward power changes also provoke abrupt Keff drops and the ensuing 135Xe dead times. These results indicate that the lifetime of the EHTGR from the point of view of fuel consumption is quite enough for the Mars mission, but the 135Xe dead time prob- lem has to be surmounted to enable the continually bimodal capability. This can be done by building in sufficient excess reactivity and control margin, and tailoring the neutron spectrum to reduce the impact of the fission products on the reactivity.
Fig. 9 e Whole burn-up cycle for the bimodal Mars mission.
Fig. 10 e Axial and radial power distributions of the extremely high temperature gas cooled reactor.
Third, the power distribution in the EHTGR is a very sig- nificant issue, from a thermohydraulic point of view, in ensuring the integrity of the nuclear fuel, the maximum temperature of which would be far over 3,000 K locally. Fig. 10 depicts the axial and radial power distributions of the EHTGR which are not optimized to flatten the power peaking. The values of power peaking factors of the core are approximately
1.30 in the axial and 1.48 in the radial direction. The high power peaking is due to the large neutron leakage of the small core size and the thin reflector. Ideally, the power distribution of the core should be as flat as possible to mitigate excessive heat concentration at hot spots of the fuel, and thereby create higher H2 exhaust temperature and resultant thrust. To lessen the power peaking, it is possible to adjust the U density vari- ations of the fuel assemblies according to the core's temper- ature zoning axially and radially. Additionally, different fuel assembly void fractions needed to create the square fuel cooling channels according to the radial temperature zoning, can mitigate both radial power peaking and pressure drop in the core. The thicker reflector can also lessen the power peaking, but would result in the increase of the reactor's size and mass.
3.3.2.Thermohydraulic design features
The rocket performance of an NTR depends on some ther- mohydraulic constraints. The maximization of core temper- ature is the most important factor in creating a higher propellant efficiency (Isp), if it is assumed that the NTR uses the lowest molecular weight H2 propellant. Thus, the key design issues of NTR engines from a thermohydraulics point of view, come down to heat-resistance of a fuel material and its cooling channel design to maximize heat transfer in the core. In the case of KANUTER, the (U, Zr, Nb)C solid solution is adopted as its fuel material, which has a high melting point and thermal conductivity. However, the hardness and high melting temperatures of the ternary carbide fuels could make it difficult to manufacture finical fuel design with microsize cooling channels. Accordingly, KANUTER has a square lattice fuel design, which formulates the numerous SFCs occupying a 30% cross-sectional voided flow area in the fuel assembly [19]. The square lattice fuel design is simple and cost-effective in making delicate microsize cooling channels rather than the existing hexagonal fuel design which has circular cooling channels. In particular, in the square lattice design, the fuel
wafer thickness (FWT) is directly correlated with the size and number of SFCs, and thus affects the mechanical strength of the fuel assembly as well as the thermohydraulic capability, mainly depending on the heat transfer area of fuel, as depic- ted in Fig. 11. As the fuel wafers get thicker, the mechanical strength against both thermal and shear stresses improves, whereas the heat flux and fuel temperature increase because the heat transfer area decreases, and vice versa. Therefore, a thicker fuel wafer is mechanically strong with low pressure drop, while a thinner fuel wafer is thermally robust with less mechanical strength and higher shear stress. The optimum FWT will balance both thermal and mechanical resistances of the fuel assembly [19].
In order to estimate the optimum FWT of the unique square lattice fuel design and thereby the maximum rocket perfor- mance of KANUTER in a steady-state, a preliminary thermo- hydraulic design study was carried out using both a 1D thermodynamic model to predict propellant state points of the entire system [40], and a 3D computational fluid dynamics model, ANSYS CFX [46], to analyze the detailed heat transfer of the complex SFC in the core [47]. In the propellant thermody- namic model, the thrust was estimated by 1D ideal nozzle calculation as having nozzle expansion ratios of 100 and 200. The calculated performance of an ideal nozzle is generally 1~6% higher than that of an actual nozzle. As a preliminary study, two thermal design criteria were taken into account to estimate the best rocket performance. The first design criterion was determined so that the maximum temperature in the fuel's center line must be below its melting point. To preclude fuel melting, the maximum fuel temperature limit of around  3,420 K was selected. This provides a 10% margin of the (U, Zr, Nb)C melting point for overpower uncertainties. Additionally, to ensure at least 2 hours engine operating time against hot H2 corrosion in the core, the H2 exhaust temperature at the fuel exit was limited to around 3,000 K, but it should be < 3,100 K as the second design criterion. This H2 exhaust temperature limit was assumed from the Russian/former U.S.S.R reactor test re- sults [22]. The equivalent SFC, containing two domains of fuel and propellant, was used for a simplified 3D analysis to reduce the computing time. The boundary conditions included the symmetric outer walls (cut surfaces) of the SFC, volumetric fuel energy deposition rates coupled with the axial and radial power distributions in the propulsion mode, 2.107 kg/s of the system MFR, etc. The volumetric fuel energy deposition rates, MFR, and Fig. 11 e Thermohydraulic analysis models for the square lattice fuel assembly. FWT, fuel wafer thickness; SFC, square flow channel.
H2 inlet states were taken from the neutronics and 1D propel- lant thermodynamic studies, respectively. Nonuniform local MFRs in the core were employed according to the radial loca- tions of the fuel elements to mitigate the nonoptimized radial power peaking and ensuing severe local heat concentration. The weighting factors to the averaged MFR per fuel element were assumed based on the radial power profile according to the ring-shaped fuel element zones, as shown in Fig. 12. Both the NIST REFPROP 9.0 at the temperature range down to 900 K
[38] and the NASA chemical equilibrium at the temperature range of >900 K [39] were applied to evaluate the thermody- namic properties of H2. The thermal conductivity of the (U, Zr, Nb)C fuel was assumed to be a constant 50 W/(m$K). The major variables for this study were the FWTs of 0.75 mm, 1.00 mm,
1.25 mm, and 1.50 mm as the four unit SFC samples. Each unit SFC sample represented both the hottest channel in the central fuel element rating the highest radial power peaking factor of
1.48 to estimate the peak fuel temperature and core pressure drop, and the average temperature channel in an average fuel element to estimate the average rocket performance. The equivalent MFRs of the unit SFC samples were applied in pro- portion to the samples' cross-sectional flow areas.
Table 9 summarizes the results of this study as a function of the FWT. The increase of the FWT causes a significant rise in the temperature at the fuel center line, but the averaged fuel exit H2 temperature and the averaged chamber temper- ature are maintained at the same level regardless of the FWT increase, due to the constant MFR. In order to meet both peak fuel temperature limit and fuel exit H2 temperature limit, the relevant FWT should be > 0.75 mm and <1.25 mm as presented in Fig. 13. By contrast, the thicker FWT reduces the pressure drops in the core  and ensuing  entire system as shown in Fig. 14. Additionally, the thicker FWT augments the mechan- ical strength of the fuel assembly, and also reduces the shear
Fig. 12 e Nonuniform local mass flow rates in the extremely high temperature gas cooled reactor. FE, fuel element; MFR, mass flow rate.
Table 9 e Summary of rocket performance according to the fuel assembly geometry of Korea advanced nuclear thermal engine rocket.
stress due to the pressure drop in the core. Therefore, the increase of the FWT lowers the required pump discharge pressure and resultantly enhances the structural integrity of the EHTGR. In this study, the optimum FWT is estimated to be around 1.00 mm to satisfy both thermal limits and lower pressure loss. There are no changes of rocket performance such as thrust, T/Weng ratio and Isp due to the constant chamber states and MFR, despite the large changes of the peak fuel temperature and system pressure as shown in Figs. 15 and  16.  KANUTER  ideally  yields the rocket performance of
20.6 kN thrust, 5.4 T/Weng ratio and 999.5 Isp at the optimum FWT of 1.00 mm in the core, and a nozzle expansion ratio of
200. The more conservative performance considering 5.5% loss from the ideal values is estimated to be 19,514 N thrust,
5.1 T/Weng ratio, and 944.5 s Isp.
The preliminary studies on neutronics and thermohy- draulics do not consider the material property changes due to the high temperature and radiation states, which could affect the neutronic, thermohydraulic, and thermomechanical per- formance in the core. Therefore, in future studies, a coupling analysis of neutronics, thermohydraulics, and thermo- mechanics is still required to prove the square lattice core design to be feasible and to estimate the optimum rocket performance.
4.Conclusions
Space exploration or exploitation is a realistic and reasonable goal for the long-term survival of humanity, even though the
Fig. 13 e Temperature states as a function of the fuel wafer thickness in the extremely high temperature gas cooled reactor.
Fig. 14 e Pressure states as a function of the fuel wafer thickness in the extremely high temperature gas cooled reactor.
extremely harsh space environment imposes lots of severe challenges to space pioneers. In the harsh space environment, nuclear energy can offer more outstanding powers of heat, electricity, and propulsion compared to other energy sources. Particularly, NTRs, utilizing a fission reactor to create both thrust and electric power, is the most promising and viable option in achieving long-distance manned missions in space. The attractions of NTRs include excellent thrust and propel- lant efficiency, bimodal capability, proven technology, and safe and reliable performance. Thus, the bimodal NTR can be applied to various missions such as solar system exploration, ISS transportation and power supports, NEOs interception, etc.
KANUTER is one of the innovative and advanced NTR en- gines for future generations. KANUTER mainly consists of the 100 MWth power EHTGR utilizing H2 propellant, the propulsion
system, and the EGS. To achieve the leading design re- quirements, KANUTER adopts the ultra heat-resistant ternary carbide fuel, protective cooling channels, a thermalized neutron spectrum core, a modular fuel element design with an individual pressure tube, and an EGS based on a dynamic power cycle. This bimodal engine is operated in two modes of propulsion with 100 MWth of full power and electricity gener- ation with 100 kWth idle power. The reference design param- eters indicate the characteristics of KANUTER as being a compact and lightweight system (341 kg engine mass), having excellent efficiency (944.5 s Isp), and providing electricity (14~16 kWe). Although the reference rocket performance was ideally estimated, the system design was not optimized. Thus, the actual performance may be slightly better or worse than the reference values. In addition, this compact and modular NTR engine, yielding relatively low power and thrust, can be
Fig. 15 e Thrust estimation as a function of the fuel wafer thickness of the Korea advanced nuclear thermal engine rocket.
Fig. 16 e Isp and T/Weng estimation as a function of the fuel wafer thickness of the Korea advanced nuclear thermal engine rocket. Isp, specific impulse; T/Weng, thrust-to-weight of engine.
utilized for multi-applications requiring various thrust levels by the clustered engine arrangement. For example, KANTUER is able to achieve the NASA 2033 Mars orbital mission by using 15 engines (5 for bimodal) to produce 293 kN thrust and 50 kWe electric power with just a propellant mass of 209 t. This pro- pellant requirement is far lower than 688 t of the best CR engine.
However, there are a few substantial challenges in devel- oping this innovative and futuristic NTR engine. First, the most critical problem is public acceptance, and gaining the support of policy makers. In this regard, clear and transparent information about not only advantages, but also safety, technical deficiencies, and risks of NTRs should be provided to the public to remove the exaggerated fear of nuclear energy. Second, there are a few technical issues to be solved such as verified heat-resistant fuel development, conservative cooling strategy for the fuel and moderator, excess reactivity and control design, and safety. Third, the security issue utilizing high enriched uranium (HEU) for the NTR must be resolved, because it is almost impossible for non-nuclear weapon states, not only to enrich U, but also to import HEU from other countries under the current Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. If a non-nuclear weapon state never uses HEU for the NTR, then the only alternative is to utilize low enriched uranium (LEU) for a new type of NTR. The feasibility of an LEU fueled NTR was first proposed at KAIST [48]. The LEU-NTR concept is based on improving the neutron economy in the core by both neutron spectrum thermalization and nonfission neutron losses reduction. In particular, compared with the LEU-NTR concept, the thermalized EHTGR of KANUTER and its low impact of engine mass increase on rocket performance, strongly suggests the possibility of the KANUTER utilizing LEU fuel. Therefore, in future work, this research will focus on demonstrating the feasibility of a LEU- NTR, using a thermal neutron spectrum, and modifying the current HEU-design to a nuclear nonproliferative design uti- lizing an LEU fuel for KANUTER.
Conflicts of interest
All authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge that this research was supported by the National research Foundation of Korea (NFR) (Grant NRF-2013M2A8A6035681).
