<title>Initial estimates of the economical attractiveness of a nuclear closed Brayton combined cycle operating with ﬁrebrick resistance-heated energy storage</title>
<Affiliation>a .Institut National des Sciences  et Techniques Nucl´eaires - CEA, Saclay, 91400, France
b.Nuclear Science and Engineering Dept., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA</Affiliation>
<author>Florian Chavagnat , Daniel Curtis </author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Energy and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2017.11.011</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2017.11.011</URL>
a b s t r a c t
The Firebrick Resistance-Heated Energy Storage (FIRES) concept developed by the Massachusetts Insti- tute of Technology aims to enhance proﬁtability of the nuclear power industry in the next decades. Studies carried out at Massachusetts Institute of Technology already provide estimates of the potential revenue from FIRES system when it is applied to industrial heat supply, the likely ﬁrst application. Here, we investigate the possibility of operating a power plant (PP) with a ﬂuoride-salt-cooled high-temper- ature reactor and a closed Brayton cycle. This variant offers features such as enhanced nuclear safety as well as ﬂexibility in design of the PP but also radically changes the way of operating the PP. This exploratory study provides estimates of the revenue generated by FIRES in addition to the nominal revenue of the stand-alone ﬂuoride-salt-cooled high-temperature reactor, which are useful for deﬁning an initial design. The electricity price data is based on the day-ahead markets of Germany/Austria and the United States (Iowa). The proposed method derives from the equation of revenue introduced in this study and involves simple computations using MatLab to compute the estimates. Results show variable economic potential depending on the host grid but stress a high proﬁtability in both regions.
Keywords:
Firebrick Resistance-Heated Energy Storage Nuclear Power Plant
Revenue Estimate Storage System
1.Introduction
The electricity market in the Western countries is facing  changes engendered by market deregulation as well as new envi- ronmentally friendly energy policies. Studies show that large penetration of nondispatchable generators, mainly solar and wind generators, in an energy mix induces market volatility and that this is ampliﬁed in a deregulated market [1,2]. The variability in elec- tricity price is expected to threaten the proﬁtability of future nu- clear power plants (PPs), while most current ones are currently operating in base-load to lower the impact of the investment cost on the electricity price.
Led by Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the project of the ﬂuoride-salt-cooled high-temperature reactor (FHR) with Nuclear Air-Brayton Combined Cycle (NACC) and Firebrick Resistance- Heated Energy Storage (FIRES) aims to develop a PP that is able to generate proﬁt from a variable electricity price [1,3,4]. This is achieved by operating a nuclear reactor at constant thermal power
and using additional heat sources to provide a variable electric power output: natural gas burned with the air used as coolant of the power conversion cycle and the FIRES system in which heat can be charged, stored, and discharged. Both heat sources are added in addition to the nuclear heat when the market prices are sufﬁciently high. The additional heat from the heat storage system or the combustion of natural gas increases the highest temperature of the conversion cycle and is converted to electricity using the plant turbines. The system is able to convert the additional heat sources to electricity with an efﬁciency up to 66%, which is above efﬁ- ciencies of most current PPs [1]. Moreover heat at high temperature can be sold directly to industry, offering an additional option to maximize proﬁt. A supplemental revenue source from ancillary services, using the ﬂexible capacity of such PPs, can also be valuable to a lesser extent [5].
Economically this system generates proﬁt from variable elec- tricity prices as well as from the difference in electricity and natural  gas prices. Estimates for such a PP show a high proﬁtability when the PP is implanted in markets in which natural gas price is slightly higher than the average variable electricity price. The case of the Iowa market (US) was studied when the system was applied to industrial heat supply (IHS) [6].
However closing the Brayton cycle can be of some interests; this is detailed in the ﬁrst subsection. Instead of focusing on the revenue of the PP from both natural gas price and the electricity price, here the PP makes a proﬁt only on the variable electricity price. This study aims to provide estimates of PP revenue when FIRES operates with FHR and a closed Brayton combined cycle.
First, we introduce the main points of interest of using the nuclear closed Brayton combined cycle with FIRES and describe how it operates. Second, we discuss a methodology to estimate the revenue expected from  operating  FIRES.  Finally,  results  are given and discussed.
1.1.Main points of interest
The main motivation of using a closed Brayton cycle is a more robust containment against accidents releasing radioactive ele- ments from the nuclear reactor. The closed Brayton cycle acts as an additional containment barrier.
Besides this advantage, the closed Brayton cycle gives more choices for the design of the PP, such as the Brayton cycle working ﬂuid (use of inert gas, noncorrosive ﬂuid, and ﬂuid with high spe- ciﬁc heat), the operating pressures (increase of the compactness), etc. The choice of the working ﬂuid is a key factor to enlarge the range of nuclear reactors able to operate with FIRES. This is espe- cially the case for some sodium fast reactors, e.g. the ASTRID project in France. The closed Brayton cycle involved in nuclear PPs is not
Table 1
Nonexhaustive list of nuclear plant concepts involving a closed Brayton cycle.
new and experience already exists, in particular on helium-oper- ated turbomachinery [7]. Table 1 presents some of the concepts of nuclear plants involving a closed Brayton cycle.
Finally, in countries where natural gas is mostly imported and its access is costly compared to the average wholesale electricity market price, the ability to use natural gas for supplemental power production can be less valuable. This has to be tempered by the high economical sustainability of NACC PPs, even in case of high break-even natural gas prices [13]. Hence the advantages of closing the Brayton cycle could surpass the beneﬁts of keeping the cycle opened. The choice is made to perform estimates of revenue on the European market in Germany/Austria. To ensure comparison with estimates done in the previous study in the case of IHS, additional estimates are provided for the Iowa wholesale market [6].
1.2.Operating modes
The PP is built with a high-temperature nuclear reactor, using a combined cycle in which the Brayton cycle is closed and a FIRES- like heat storage unit is installed. A ﬂow-sheet of the simpliﬁed
Fig. 1. Flow-sheet of the PP conversion cycle.
FIRES, Firebrick Resistance-Heated Energy Storage; FHR, ﬂuoride-salt-cooled high- temperature reactor; PP, power plant.
power conversion cycle is shown in Fig. 1. More complex nuclear closed Brayton combined cycles have been studied by North-West University (South Africa) [14]. Further studies will have to answer the design issues raised by the need to keep the nuclear reactor in nominal operating conditions of temperature and pressure while varying the thermal output power of FIRES.
The PP can operate in three modes:
in base-load mode, the FIRES unit is bypassed and the Brayton cycle coolant goes through the second turbine (from pt.5 to pt.70 in Fig. 1) after being heated by the primary loop (from pt.4 to
pt.5). The maximum coolant temperature is mainly deﬁned by the FHR. Then, only the FHR and its auxiliaries operate to pro- vide electricity through the combined cycle;
in storage mode, starting from the base-load mode, the PP op- erators redirect the electrical power from the generators to electrically heat FIRES. Additional electrical power is also pro- vided from the grid to charge FIRES. At that step, the PP is a net buyer of electricity from the grid;
in peak-load mode, the Brayton cycle coolant goes through the FIRES unit (pt.5 to pt.6 in Fig. 1). The heat from FIRES raises compressed gas temperatures after addition of the nuclear heat from the FHR. The combined cycle integrating FIRES enables a topping cycle with an incremental heat to electricity efﬁciency signiﬁcantly above the base-load PP efﬁciency. It also implies that the steam cycle operates at higher temperature. Then, the PP output power increases and is able to meet the peak demand.
We consider in this study a business based only on the pur- chasing and the selling of electricity. This study does not consider neither the possibility of selling process-heat to industry nor the provision of ancillary services. In practice, a hybrid business for a FIRES-like system which involves selling both valuable heat and electricity is expected.
2.Materials and methods
The method developed in this study is to provide estimates of added revenue by using FIRES within the nuclear PP. We assume that installing the PP does not impact the electricity market. One study currently being conducted at Massachusetts Institute of Technology details the impact on the market of operating a large FIRES capacity [15].
2.1.Equations
revenue generated by FIRES over a cycle Dt. We deﬁne a cycle as a period of time in which the amount of heat discharged from FIRES is equal to the amount of heat charged into FIRES and in which the operator knows the electricity price for each hour in that period.Two aspects limit the value of Dt are as follows:
1.economical constraint: operating long cycles has a value only if we can maintain a certain amount of heat for a long period.
This means a certain allocated part of the FIRES0 storage ca- pacity becomes unavailable for other transactions, and hence requires an over-sized storage unit. Contrary to the open Brayton cycle case, operating in a closed Brayton cycle requires a pressurized FIRES vessel. Although FIRES is compatible with a high pressure Brayton cycle, there are currently no estimates of the incremental cost of a pressurized FIRES unit. However, we expect that this cost will increase with the pressure requirement leading to a limit of the vessel size, i.e. a heat storage capacity that is proportional to the mass of ﬁrebrick in the unit;
2.technical constraint: charging and discharging FIRES are plan- ned when the proﬁtability is known or expected, i.e. when the electricity price is forecast. This depends on the forecasts of the electricity consumption and supply. Current mathematical methods and models provide hourly estimates of the electricity consumption, e.g. the French distribution network operator publishes workable estimates up to 9 days ahead [16]. The supply, modeled by a curve giving the electricity price against the production capacity, is less predictable due to the major impact of the weather (wind speed, cloudiness, etc.) on wind and solar energy production and the possibility of unplanned thermal plant outages. In global production, the difﬁculty of accurately forecasting the electricity supply is expected to in- crease based on the wind and solar production capacities. Market deregulation could also be a factor increasing the difﬁ- culty in forecasting the supply curve as there is no authority to ﬁx minimum thresholds for the electricity price from these nondispatchable sources. According to the US National Renew- able Energy Laboratory, forecasts of wind and solar productions are made up to 6 days ahead to schedule required fossil-fuel production [17].
Considering these two aspects, we assume that Dt can take values from 24h since the PP sells electricity on the day-ahead market up to 168h (a week).
The equation of revenue generated by operating FIRES, denoted RDt [V or $], is written below for a cycle Dt with m heat charges and n discharges. It derives from the business model described in Section 1. The state of charge [MWh] after each event, i.e. a charge or a discharge, is denoted Skf with kf the index of the last event. Each charge is identiﬁed by the index j and each discharge by the index i.
@1
with i s;inij p;ini, the starting time of  the ith discharge and jth  charge, respectively and s;fi and tj	, the ending time associated.The constraints are such as,
and ckf2[1,nþm], t1;1  < t1;1  … < ti;k< ti;k< … < t j0 ;kf [chronology of events (charge or discharge)] with k as the event index, k2[1,kf], i2 [1,n] as the discharge index, and j2[1,m] as the charge index.
The index k is introduced here to take into account the sequence of events.
Three main types of variables impact the revenue RDt:
variables linked to the operating schedule n, m, ti   , ti, tj,
and t p; fin;●_ehs;inis; finp;iniPP characteristics H, Pin, Qout , K, and h ;
●electricity price p .
2.2.Input data and assumptions
Power plant reference characteristics: These characteristics are either computed using thermodynamic equations or taken from the literature. Though a closed Brayton cycle is used, most char- acteristics are close to those of the original project involving the NACC. We assume that the transition times when the operators switch the PP operating modes are sufﬁciently short compared to the time spent in each mode. Moreover we assume that the tem- peratures of the coolants in the combined cycle remain constant during the discharge of FIRES. This last statement is made in case of the ﬁrst approach but needs to be veriﬁed to obtain more accurate
estimates of RDt. Admitting those two assumptions is tantamount to making all the PP characteristics just functions of the PP operating mode. Table 2 gives the values of each PP characteristic.
The storage capacity of FIRES, denoted H, is not set. The storage capacity of FIRES is easily changeable since it is proportional to the mass of ﬁrebricks in the storage unit. H needs to be chosen based on
the nature of the grid in which the PP is built and the incremental investment cost of FIRES, which is expected to increase with the constrain  the  maximum  value of t1	to be smaller than t1working pressure. The revenue is computed for various values of H
from 500MWh to 2500MWh.
2.3.Computations
Every variable involved in the equation of RDt is known except those related to the operating schedule, i.e. when each PP operating
Table 2
Reference power plant characteristics.
mode is used during Dt. This schedule is modeled by the variables t,
n, and m. Finding these variables presents three major issues:
1.there are 2*(n m) 1 unknown variables t, plus, n and m are also unknown for each cycle;
2.these variables need to be optimized to obtain good estimates of the revenue RDt;
3.in practice, other constraints need to be considered before
deﬁning these variables, e.g. the time-lapses required between a
charge and a discharge of FIRES or the maximal duration the PP is able to operate in peak-load.
Note that the term —1 in the ﬁrst issue is due to the deﬁnition of a cycle given previously, i.e. there is an equality between the heat charged into FIRES and the heat discharged from FIRES during a cycle (constraint G4). All those points make deﬁning the operating schedule a complex task, one that is not useful for obtaining ﬁrst estimates of RDt. The method used in this study to circumvent a complex optimization process is to bound the optimized value of RDt from below and above.
Lower bound of RDt: Since we cannot optimize the operating schedule, we constrain it to reduce the complexity of deﬁning an
optimized operating schedule. The cycle duration Dt is ﬁxed at 24 h and only one charge and one discharge of FIRES are planned for each cycle, then n and m are equal to 1. Hence, the number of in-
dependent and unknown variables is reduced to three: t1 , t1 and t1. t1p;inip;fins;inis;fin is determined from these three variables.
Afterward an optimization is made to ﬁnd the three remaining unknown variables. The  target of  the optimization  is  to maximize
RDt. Note that the heat stored in FIRES is included in these variables and is equal to hehPinðt1
1
p;ini
Þ. This leads us to constrain the optimization to take into account the constraint G1. We also constrain  the  maximum  value of t1 to be smaller than t1 (constraint G ) and t1p;finDs;ini
After ﬁnding the value of each variable, RDt is computed using numerical integrations. All constraints (from G1 to G4) are fulﬁlled and the operating schedule is severely constrained. It is expected that a such PP will operate with a more ﬂexible operating schedule to maximize the revenue. Hence the value RDt computed by this method is used as a lower bound of what can be easily expected from the PP and especially from operating FIRES.
Upper bound of RDt: The next step is to obtain an upper bound to frame the realistic additional revenue of FIRES. One way to obtain this limit is to remove some constraints related to RDt. We propose
here to remove the constraints G1 and G2, i.e. that the FIRES unit is
considered full and with an inﬁnite storage capacity. Without these two constraints, obtaining the values of all t, n, and m that optimize
RDt can be done by the following these steps:
1.discretize  the  hourly  electricity  price  pDA(t),  noted  pDA   with
u an integer, and sort from the lower to the higher price to
Table 3
Estimates of the economical potential of FIRES operating with FHR and NCCC.
have pDA increase with u'. Each value of u' is associated to a value u;
2.ﬁnd  u0      and  u0      such  as  .u0    — u0   .  is  minimum  while  keeping KpDA > 1 pDA: This inequality is made to maintain a positive revenue.  The  constraint  G4   gives  the  following  relationship:
u0       zheh Pin  : The equality is not strict because the time variable has been discretized. Finally the problem consists of ﬁnding just
one value, e.g. u0   ;
3.recover all the discrete times of purchase u by inverting the process  done  in  step  one  for  all  u'  in  between  0  and  u0   .  The selling times are given for all u' in between u0 1and Dt;
4.compute RDt and the FIRES state of charge S using numericalintegrations.
The main consequence of this method and the assumptions related to it is that the revenue RDt is necessarily above the revenue expected in practice. The information on the storage capacity is not considered in this method, but analysis of S provides the orders of magnitude of heat storage capacity H required. Since we do not keep the constraints G1 and G2, studying the absolute value of S is meaningless. We study its variations to obtain the required order of magnitude of heat storage.
3.Results
The method described above was implemented with two elec- tricity price data sets. Table 3 sums up the output of the estimation. All computations were done for 364 days by summing all cyclic revenues, i.e. 364 daily cycles or 52 weekly cycles if Dt is equal to 24 h or 168 h, respectively. We introduce m and s to estimate the heat storage capacity required to obtain revenue close to the upper bound estimate. These variables correspond to the average and the standard deviation of the amount of heat discharged from FIRES between two charges. The choice of focusing on the heat dis- charged and not charged is arbitrary, but both values indicate the range of heat storage capacity required. Analyzing the distributions of the amount of heat discharged between two charges shows that
99% of this amount is between 0 and m 1.5s in the case of a weekly cycle;
89% of this amount is between 0 and m 1.5s in the case of a daily cycle.
We need to consider that m and s do not take into account the effect of heat accumulation in FIRES, e.g. when several charges and
discharges are done alternately but with larger charges than discharges.
The maintenance costs of FIRES and all systems associated in the PP are not considered in this study. They are expected to be low compared to the investment cost. The incremental cost of FIRES has been computed in the case of the study related to the FHR with NACC and FIRES. This cost might change if FIRES is designed to meet the requirements of a closed Brayton cycle, e.g, a higher operating pressure or a coolant gas other than atmospheric air. For these reasons, the investment costs given in Table 3 are only estimates and show the ratio between the yearly revenue and the investment cost of the storage unit.
4.Discussion
This exploratory study stresses the potential proﬁtability of the FIRES system. The results might indicate that FIRES is able to beneﬁt from variable electricity prices in both investigated markets. The ratio between the revenue expected from operating FIRES and its capital cost suggests a pay-back from the system after several years. The forecast capability of the suppliers appears as a key factor to increase the operating revenue generated by FIRES. In both case- studies, forecasting the electricity in the week-ahead instead of the day-ahead  could  double  the  additional  revenue,  with  the conse-
quence of multiplying the required heat storage capacity by three. As mentioned in Section 1, closing the Brayton cycle is advan-
tageous if the natural gas price is signiﬁcantly higher than the average electricity prices, such as can be in Western Europe because natural gas is mostly imported. Questions of dependency on sup- pliers might be argued for limiting importations of gas. The German/Austrian case shows interesting ﬁnancial results despite the German renewable energy policy. This factor tends to smooth the electricity prices in the wholesale market by guaranteeing the purchasing price of electricity produced from these energy sources. This energy policy of supporting and developing wind and solar PPs could open  an important market for  this FIRES system in  Europe.
The size of the German/Austrian market also tends to smooth the electricity price since the day-ahead electricity price is made for the entire region. Moreover the integration of the German/Austrian electrical grid within the European grid enables numerous com- mercial exchanges with the surrounding countries such as France, limiting the occurrence of dramatic price peaks or gaps in the wholesale markets.
The Iowa case-study, in which the proﬁtability of selling process-heat has been shown in the case of a PP applied as an IHS, still demonstrates high revenue estimates in this  conﬁguration  with a closed Brayton cycle.
Further investigations would give more accurate estimates of the ﬁnancial potential of setting a PP with NCCC and FIRES, notably in Europe. This means taking into account the commercialization of process-heat and ancillary services together with electricity pro- duction as well as estimating of the investment and maintenance costs related to setting up pressurized FIRES units in NCCCs.
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare that there is no conﬂict of interest.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Professor Forsberg, C. and his research group at the Nuclear Science and Engineering Department of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT-NSE) for their advice and help during this study, and the EDF Foundation for their ﬁnancial support.
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data related to this article can be found at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2017.11.011.
