<title>Is nuclear energy a better alternative for mitigating CO2 emissions in BRICS countries? An empirical analysis</title>
<Affiliation>a.School of Management and Economics, Beijing Institute of Technology, 100081, Beijing, China
b.School of Economics and Trade, Guangdong University of Foreign Studies, Guangzhou, 510006, China
c.Sustainable Energy Technologies (SET) Center, College of Engineering, King Saud University, PO-Box 800, Riyadh, 11421, Saudi Arabia
d.School of Economics and Management, Baoji University of Arts and Sciences, 721013, Baoji, China
e.Soil and Water Testing Laboratory Mandi Bahauddin, 50400, Pakistan</Affiliation>
<author>Syed Tauseef Hassan, Danish , Salah-Ud-Din khan , Muhammad Awais Baloch,
Zahid Hassan Tarar  </author>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Energy and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2020.05.016</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2020.05.016</URL>
a b s t r a c t
Looking at the recent studies, nuclear energy and carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions nexus shows incon- clusive result. To further explain nuclear energy-pollution nexuses this study is an attempt to analyze the impact of nuclear energy on pollution reduction for BRICS countries covering data for the period from 1993 to 2017. This study conducts advanced panel techniques such as Continuously-Updated Fully- Modiﬁed (CUP-FM) and Continuously-Updated Bias-Corrected (CUP-BC) for long run estimation. Our results support the notion that nuclear energy reduce CO2 emissions. Also, renewable energy corrects environmental pollution in BRICS countries. The magnitude of the coefﬁcient of nuclear energy is less as compared to renewable energy, implying that nuclear is less effective in reducing environmental pollution. The ﬁndings offer signiﬁcant policy understandings and suggestions not only for BRICS economies but for developing countries as well in designing suitable nuclear energy-growth-carbon policies.
Keywords:
Nuclear energy       CO2 emission     BRICS    LM-Bootstrap integration     CUP-FM & CUP-BC
1.Introduction
The BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) coun- tries have experienced rapid economic growth, huge foreign ex- change reserves, and attracted substantial foreign direct investment. However, together all these contribute to global carbon emissions [1]. The incidence of carbon dioxide (CO2) emission harms the worldwide atmosphere and brings climate change. Environmental degradation is the most highlighted issue that threatens the world [2]. According to the British Petroleum (BP) statistics [3], during the year 2013 CO2 emission of BRICS countries has reached to 14,110 million tons (Mt), about two times higher as compared to the year 2000. Moreover, since 2009, BRICS countries every year have emitted more than 40% of the world's carbon [3]. Due to growing CO2 emission, demand for clean energy has emerged. Moreover, BRICS countries plan to reduce CO2 emission following United Nations Conference on Climate Change 2015 (COP21) in Paris which was launched to revitalize public and pri- vate actions aimed to reduce global temperature up to 2 ○C. As outlined by the Intergovernmental Penal Climate (IPCC), it is committed to ensure Greenhouse gas emission (GHGs) reduction [4]. Hence, an applicable environmental strategy is required to overcome total CO2 emission without damaging the countries developmental projects to improve energy resources and acquired ideal energy efﬁciency [5].
Rising concerns including environmental degradation, climate change and the need for energy justice have become key human rights issues worldwide [6]. In production process energy is the key inputs and used as capital and labour [7e9]. However, energy consumption leads countries' economic growth, but energy con- sumption plays a vital role in rising pollution trends; people are still anxious about environmental challenges raised due to economic growth as well [10e12]. Energy innovation measures might be helpful in pollution mitigation [2]. However, currently, electricity generation intensely depends on fossil fuels. But more electricity generation from nuclear energy may helpful in climate change mitigation [13]. Nuclear energy is capable to generate electricity  [14] and most importantly to beat ecological issues and also help to improve and maintain environmental sustainability. Nuclear en- ergy is suitable and well-known source for the usage of low carbon outﬂow [15]. However, nuclear energy has not added to relieve CO2 emission due to the adverse environmental impact of radioactive waste and atomic accidents [16]. Nuclear energy causes to harm the environment [15] and more radioactive waste has a serious impact on humans and the environment as well [17,18].
It is observed from the earlier work (reported in Table 1) there has been a restoration of motivation for the investigation of nuclear energy and environmental pollution nexus. However, the environ- mental impact of nuclear energy and its implications have not been sufﬁciently addressed whether nuclear energy reduces environ- mental pollution or not. For instance, nuclear energy promotes environmental sustainability [19,20] and does not contribute to CO2 emissions reduction [17,21]. Meanwhile, it is observed that nuclear energy releases CO2 emission into the atmosphere and leads to environmental pollution [15,22]. Given these motivations to the prospect of nuclear energy and CO2 emission, the current study aims to examine the relationship between nuclear energy, renewable energy, per capita gross domestic product (GDP) and CO2 emission in BRICS association.
Our research is interesting and unique in two important man- ners. First, the current empirical investigation will consider the
impact of nuclear energy on CO2 emissions for BRICS countries. Henceforth; the study's scope extends the global debate on climate change and its impact on BRICS countries. For the last decade, nuclear energy has shown momentum in BRICS countries [23]. Second, no empirical studies have found to apply the Continuously Updated Fully Modiﬁed (CUP-FM) and Continuously Updated Bias Corrected (CUP-BC) techniques on the evidence of nuclear energy and CO2 emissions. The method used for empirical estimation in this study is robust that generated reliable estimates.
2.Material and methods
Before building the model speciﬁcation, we talk about the present hypothetical background of the study, which supports our empirical study to pick the explanatory variables for this research. The rise in economic growth not only expands economic structure but contrib- utes to environmental degradation through an increase in energy demand, structural transformation; develop transportation systems and consumption habits of residents of a country. Subsequently, economic growth is inﬂuencing an individual's income, expectations for everyday comforts and buying power increases. To meet the rising energy demand the renewable energy sources are emerging as clean and environmental energy sources (renewable energy sources). Therefore, the use of renewable energy is measured to improve climate change, decrease environmental pollution and improve
Table 1
Related studies on nuclear energy and CO2 emissions nexus.
human wellbeing and quality of life improve [37]. Similarly, nuclear energy contributes to a clean environment, increase energy supply, control of CO2 emission, and lead to sustainable development [14]. However, the role of nuclear energy in CO2 emission is unclear. In this sense, the decision-making process is more complicated so that's why we examine the inﬂuence of nuclear energy, renewable energy, and per capita GDP on CO2 emission which can be expressed as:
lnðCO2it Þ¼ a0 þ a1 lnðYit Þþ a2 lnðNEit Þþ a3 lnðREit Þþ mit (1)
where CO2 is carbon dioxide emission; Y is the income per capita; NE shows nuclear energy, and RE means renewable energy in time t from 1993 to 2017 for i cross-section. Finally, m it represents an error term.
The study uses panel data for BRICS countries and based on available data empirical estimation techniques are employed. The cross-sectional dependence (CSD) test among the panel countries is very common owning to overﬂow impact, ﬁnancial crisis, and trade agreement [38]. Recently the CSD investigation in panel data analysis becomes popular in energy-environment studies [39,40]. This study also use panel data which may confront the homogeneity, correla- tion and cross-section dependence issues. To solve the above- mentioned problem, this empirical study uses advanced penal methods that are capable to handle the endogeneity issue. Our research begins by investigating cross-sectional dependence (CSD) across sample countries since there may prompt the issue of the dependencies between cross-section elements in panel data [41,42] and CSD test by Ref. [44] is utilized for the purpose to detect the CSD issue. The next step is to check the stationary level of the data weather indicated variables hold unit root or not. Avoiding the sta- tionary level may lead to biased results. For this purpose, our study relies on CIPS panel unit root tests by Pesaran (2007) to resolve the cross-section dependence issue that might exist in panel data. After successfully resolving these issues the next step is to assess the level of the relationship among the investigated variables in the study. At this stage, the LM bootstrap panel cointegration approach created by Ref. [45], is employed. For long-run results, we use continuously updated fully modiﬁed (CUP-FM) and continuously updated (CUP- BC) develop by Ref. [46] which produces robustness estimates. The estimation process is continuously updated till to the convergence happening for robust estimation, this methodology is known as continuously updated fully modiﬁed (CUP-FM). Similarly, asymptotic bias is additionally assessed and revised in this process which is named (CUP-BC) estimation. The equation of the (CUP-FM and CUP- BC) is can be expressed of the below:
@2
where DFεi & are estimated one-sided covariance. The (CUP-FM and CUP-BC) techniques are efﬁcient estimators in the core of exoge- nous variables. Similarly, the (CUP-FM and CUP-BC) estimators are appropriate for the occurrence of mixed order of integration such as I(1)/I(0) and generate robust estimation within sight of endoge- neity [46]. Owning these advantages, accurate size and small data sample, the (CUP-FM) and (CUP-BC) are the most appropriate se- lection for current empirical investigation. Besides, these methods are widely used for long-run estimation [40,47,48].
The selections of countries are a crucial phase in panel data analysis and one should be careful in choosing a panel of countries. Hence, yearly data of nuclear energy, renewable energy, gross do- mestic product (GDP), and CO2 emission are acquired from 1993 to 2017 for BRICS countries. The data of CO2 emission is measured in metric tons per capita. Both renewable energy and nuclear energy are measured in kiloton oil equivalent (ktoe) and converted into per capita by dividing the total population. The data on CO2, renewable energy and nuclear energy is retrieved from BP statistics [49]. The per capita GDP constant 2010 US dollar is collected from World Database Indicator [50].
3.Results
The empirical part begins with the investigation of the CSD of panel data and analyzed results have appeared in Table 2. The re- sults show that the null hypothesis of independence among the panel data is rejected at a 1% signiﬁcance level. In short, CSD is found among the study regressors, and shocks happening in one sample country may spill over to other sample countries. After conﬁrmation of the CSD, the CIPS panel unit root test is used for the stationary check which helps in the selection of the proper esti- mation approach in the existence of CSD. The result of CIPS is noted down in Table 2 which shows that the unit-root of all the variables is not integrated at level, but they become stationary at the ﬁrst- order of integration I(1).
Having found out the order of integration now we determine the cointegrated relationship among indicated variables of the study. The LM bootstrap cointegration results are indicated in Table 3 and the analyzed results show that the rejection of null hypothesis of cointegration among the indicated variables are not rejected. So, we do not rejected the null hypothesis and found co- integration among indicated variables. Thus, there is strong evi- dence for the long-run relationship that exists among the CO2 emission, (nuclear energy) NE, (renewable energy (RE), and income per capita (Y).
The results of CUP-FM and CUP-BC estimators have appeared in Table 4. the evidence indicates that per capita GDP (Y) has a positive and signiﬁcant impact on CO2 emission. Keeping other things constant a 1% increase in per capita GDP will increase CO2 emission by 0.054% and 0.055%.
Concerning the role of nuclear energy, from Table 4 it can be seen that a rise in a 1% increase in nuclear energy consumption  reduces CO2 emissions. It clearly shows that the environmental pollution reduce by nuclear energy consumption in BRICS coun- tries. In other words, nuclear energy works as a clean source of energy in BRICS countries which is indicated by Lau et al. (2020) as
well. Notably, BRICS has been pursuing nuclear energy infrastruc- ture development-related projects for the last three years [15].
Nuclear energy can be served as an alternative for conventional energy sources to certify better environmental quality [14]. How-ever, it relies on the economic classiﬁcation and socioeconomicfactors of the country that help to implement the energy storage for sustainable development [51]. Nuclear energy has prodigious development ensures energy security, stimulate economic growth. Taking into account the encouraging role of nuclear energy in clean environment, the constant increase in pollution in BRICS can be lessened via conversion toward nuclear energy [40].
Also, renewable energy signiﬁcantly contributes to CO2 emission by (0.006% & 0.007%) to increase environmental sustainability and economic development. Our ﬁnding differs from the existing study [30,52,53]. More investment in clean energy technologies is required which might be compatible with the environment. For instance, the cost of incorporating renewable energy is higher than
Table 2
Results of cross-sectional dependence and CIPS panel unit root test.
Table 3
Results from the LM bootstrap panel cointegration test.
non-renewable technologies. Therefore, the BRICS countries should start the stage-wise transformation from fossil fuel (oil, gas, coal) to green energy implying in household use, industrial and commercial sectors. Energy innovation measures are suggested that reduce environmental pollution [6,54e56]. Furthermore, the BRICS coun- tries need to promote nuclear energy-related investment. For a better understanding, BRICS countries should bring reforms to reduce the use the fossil fuel consumption through intensiﬁcation of nuclear energy and renewable resources. Regarding the strategy and policy execution between income level and pollution, imple- menting energy conservation measures are suggested, and ac- cording to the neutrality hypothesis, neither energy supply nor energy conservation affect economic growth [57,58].
4.Conclusion and future prospective
This study investigates the long-run relationship between nu- clear energy, renewable energy, per capita GDP, and CO2 emissions in the context of the BRICS for the period from 1993 to 2017. For this purpose CSD test and CIPS unit root test are applied to check the dependencies across countries and stationary levels respectively. We employ the LM-bootstrap Panel cointegration test for the level of relationship among indicated variables. For long-run estimation results, we use CUP- FM and CUP- BC estimators. Our results show:
(i)The CSD test conﬁrmed there exists dependencies across sample countries. (ii) LM bootstrap co-integration conﬁrmed the level of relationship among variables under consideration . (iii) The CUP- FM and CUP-BC estimation result conﬁrmed nuclear energy con- sumption reduce CO2 emission and renewable energy consumption plays a signiﬁcant role in climate change mitigation.
In the light of the study's ﬁndings hypothetically probable relation is afﬁrmed between the investigated variables. Nuclear energy can contribute to energy production. Execution of carbon pricing instruments in the manufacturing sector across the countries and inside the economic activities would be useful to control pollution. Moreover, it is not only an environmental concern but also a social perspective that has generated a strong interest in nuclear energy consumption. Nuclear energy plays a signiﬁcant role in ensuring energy security and improves envi- ronmental pollution if the scientist and policy analyst of BRICS countries should take serious measures especially. No doubt nu- clear energy-related technology will continue to maintain the sta- tus of country and signiﬁcance for alternative power supply sources not only to contribute economic growth but also contribute to so- cial and sustainable environmental improvement. Due to less expensive and ensuring energy security, the nuclear power supply generation has a positive role in the environment through reducing air pollution and ozone-depleting which come from fossil-based energy production. Innovative technology based on nuclear en- ergy can be an attractive choice for economic, social, and envi- ronmental purposes.
This study attempts to observe fronts or challenges on the BRICS's CO2 emission considering the inﬂuence of nuclear energy on environmental pollution, however, some limitations still exists. Future research ought to analyze the the role of nuclear energy in climate change mitigation in the presence of globalization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgment
The author would like to sincerely appreciate funding from Researchers Supporting Project number (RSP-2020/58), King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
