<title>Automated Work Packages: Capabilities of the Future</title>
<author>Ahmad Al Rashdan, Johanna Oxstrand & Vivek Agarwal</author>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Technology</Journal>
<Affiliation>Idaho National Laboratories, Department of Human Factors, Control, and Statistics, P.O. Box 1625, Idaho Falls, Idaho 83415</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>ANS</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00295450.2017.1406774</DOI>
<URL> https://doi.org/10.1080/00295450.2017.1406774</URL>
Abstract — As part of the ongoing efforts at the U.S. Department of Energy’s Light Water Reactor Sustainability Program, Idaho National Laboratory is conducting several research projects in collaboration with the nuclear industry to improve the reliability, safety, and economics of the nuclear power industry, especially as the nuclear power plants extend their operating licenses to 80 years. One of these projects is the automated work package (AWP) project. An AWP is an electronic intelligent and interactive work package. It uses plant condition, resources status, and user progress to adaptively drive the work process in a manner that increases efficiency while reducing human error. To achieve this mission, the AWP acquires information from various systems of a nuclear power plant and incorporates several advanced instrumen- tation and control technologies along with modern human factors techniques.
With the current rapid technological advancement, it is possible to envision several available or soon- to-be-available capabilities that can play a significant role in improving the work package process. As a pilot project, the AWP project develops a prototype of an expanding set of capabilities and evaluates them in an industrial environment. While some of the proposed capabilities are based on using technological advances in other applications, others are conceptual; thus, they require significant research and develop- ment to be applicable in an AWP. The scope of this paper is to introduce a set of envisioned capabilities, their need for the industry, and the industry difficulties they resolve.
Keywords — Work process automation, electronic work package, industry need survey.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
Work processes in the nuclear power industry consist of a defined set of tasks that are executed in a fixed or flexible order, require specific resources, and meet overall work objectives. The tasks are highly dependent on procedures that guide field-workers through the work stages. These stages are compiled into typically large work packages that include work orders, forms, and reference documents. Work package development and compilation is performed by a procedure writer or planner. Procedures are written in accordance with industry-specific guidelines.1 Oncea work package is compiled, the schedulers allocate plant resources to the work package and schedule its execution. The work
package is then executed by field-workers with the support of other relevant plant organizations. The use of work packages in nuclear power plants has been proven to suc- ceed in terms of maintaining plant safety. However, the recent plan to extend the nuclear power plant’s operating license to 80 years created a research and development need to explore new means to improve the reliability, economics, and safety of these plants. This need is being fulfilled by several projects under the U.S. Department of Energy’s (DOE’s) Light Water Reactor Sustainability Program.
The Light Water Reactor Sustainability Program is a research and development program that is sponsored by the DOE and performed in close collaboration with industry. One of the key means of the program to achieve
its objectives is to develop pilot projects for research and development and industrial evaluation. Automating parts of the work process is one of the projects targeted in this effort.2
The two means to improve the work process as part of this project are by applying the science of human factors (HF) in the design of work packages and by using the advancements of instrumentation, information, and control (II&C) technologies in automating the work package pro- cesses. Implementation of advanced HF and II&C techni- ques in the design of a work process necessitated evolution of the conventional paper-based work packages to advanced electronic versions of work packages. This resulted in the guidelines developed in Ref. 3 and was reaffirmed by the business case study in Ref. 4.
Electronic work packages (eWPs) are work packages that rely, to various extents, on electronic data acquisi- tion, processing, and presentation. The Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) introduced  several  functions of this type of work package.5 Automated work packages (AWPs) are the logical evolution of eWPs. They are envisioned to incorporate the advanced automation tech- nologies and innovations of the future and address the work process deficiencies that are not resolved by eWPs. This paper describes an AWP using the following stages of analysis:
1.performing a deficiencies or gap analysis study on the current work processes
2.determining the gaps that are addressed by eWPs
3.determining the remaining gaps that are not resolved by eWPs
4.identifying new technologies or functions to address the remaining gaps.
Steps 1 and 2 have been investigated in earlier and ongoing efforts5; therefore this paper is focused on steps 3 and 4 to define the future AWP capabilities in Sec. II. The needs and benefits of the AWP capabilities were evaluated by an industry survey, which is presented in Sec. III. The conclu- sion of this effort is presented in Sec. IV.
II.ENVISIONED AUTOMATED WORK PROCESS
The envisioned automated work process is developed taking into consideration the current state of relevant tech- nology advancements in addition to projecting short-term achievable advancements. The approach followed was to fully automate the work process cycle from the work request initiation to archiving. To ensure consistency with other efforts in the area of eWPs, the work package process description used in the EPRI’s eWP (Ref. 5) will be used
for introducing AWPs. The envisioned scenario assumes staff-assigned mobile devices equipped with an AWP plat- form that plays the role of being the worker’s day-to-day mentor. Secs. II.A through II.K goes through the work process stages in chronological order.
II.A.Initiation of Work Request
In addition to the manual and/or remote initiation of work requests, AWP incorporates an automatic initiation of work requests using plant equipment that is smart to know and report the equipment maintenance need. Smart equipment does exist in various industries today, and their benefit for predictive maintenance is being put into use. Equipping nonsmart plant components with smart diag- nostics and prognostics is being explored in ongoing efforts.6,7 Other maintenance prediction methods rely on smart plant state evaluation. This area of research has also been advancing.8 In AWPs, the initiation of work requests would rely on simplified and automatic template data population of work requests. All plant equipment will have its own list of potential work request initiation templates. The list will be accompanied by a probability of occurrence of the various failure modes. The field- worker will need to select the applicable work request from a list and then the rest of the information would be populated. This work process automation results in the following AWP functions:
Function 1: automatic creation of a work request by systems, schedules, and current work packages
Function 2: integration of smart plant equipment that perform self-diagnosis and prognosis into  the work request creation process
Function 3: integration of intelligent plant discre- pancies identification systems into the work request creation process
Function 4: association of work requests with equipment failure modes and their associated probabilities of failure
Function 5: simplified and automatic template data population of work requests.
II.B.Screen Work Request
Once a work request is initialized, its information is instantaneously and automatically passed to operations and relevant plant organizations. Information such as priority and impact would be associated with the work
request and would be evaluated against the current state and risk level of the plant. Operations and other relevant organizations are presented with a summary and detailed description of the feasibility of executing the work request, the needed requirements, and the ideal environ- ment and time to execute the job. This work process automation results in the following AWP function:
Function 6: automatic  evaluation  of  the  impact  of work on the plant and plant risk estimation tools.
II.C.Work Package Creation and Scheduling
In the envisioned AWP, every work request tem- plate will be associated with a work package. The  planner does not need to explicitly specify the list of materials, documents, tools, and other resources of a work package. This results in improved work package compilation quality and speed. A smart scheduling capability will evaluate the  feasibility  of  performing  the work in the  current  and  future  operational  states  by acquiring data from various plant information sys- tems, including the plant enterprise asset management system, and the plant status as was performed in Ref. 9. The optimal time for performing the work package will  be decided based on the status of the plant; the priority of the request; the logistical aspects such as manpower, materials, and tools; and the impact of the work package on the plant risk. Other less trivial factors (such as weather,   time   of    day,    and    the    field-worker’s stress factor) will also be  evaluated  to  determine  the best resources and time for performing the work. The schedule will continuously update based on the changes of the mentioned factors and work being executed. The allocation and release of resources will be driven by the scheduler of the AWP. This work process automation results in the following AWP functions:
Function 7: automatic allocation of work packages to work requests
Function 8: automatic population of work pack- age information and properties from the work package instructions
Function 9: automatic acquisition of plant information
Function 10: real-time plant risk models update based on current work packages status
Function 11: comprehensive smart scheduling cap- ability to determine the optimal sequence of work package steps execution in the plant
Function 12: automatic allocation, reservation, and release of work package resources
Function 13: automatic verification and acquisition of documents.
II.D.Preimplementation Walk Down
The AWP will automatically decide on the need for a preimplementation walk down based on the work pack- age, and schedule the walk down for all involved parties. The walk down will guide the participants through every step of the process and advise them on key aspects to consider. The AWP will also brief the participants on the scheduled execution time. This work process automation results in the following AWP functions:
Function 14: associating the need for a walk down with the work package
Function 15: systematic instructions-based walk- down process incorporated in the work package.
II.E.Supervisor Assigns Work Package to Craft
The AWP will evaluate worker qualifications with respect to work package scope in a manner similar to  Ref. 10. In the context of AWP, every instruction or process of the work package will be associated with certain qualifications. The qualifications will be used to automatically allocate the craft considering factors such as historical behavior of the field-worker in performing certain instructions, stress factor of the field-worker, training record and need, availability, hazards qualifica- tions, impact, and criticality of the task. The automated decision making of the best field-worker for the job is presented to the supervisor to review, edit if needed, and confirm. If training is needed, various forms of just-in- time training are used in the AWP. The training format can be audio, video, and/or augmented or virtual reality.  If human-based training is a must, the AWP will allocate a suitable time slot for the training to occur. If the craft is qualified enough but has not performed a similar task for a while, a random set of task-specific questions will be automatically presented to refresh the craft’s knowledge. This work process automation results in the following AWP functions:
Function 16: automatic manpower allocation based on historical performance, field-worker status, qualifications, training records, availability, hazards qualifications, impact, and criticality of the task
Function 17: training through audio, video, and/or augmented or virtual reality
Function 18: task-specific questions to validate and refresh field-worker readiness.
II.F.Holds and Prejob Brief
Work package holds are automatically set by the AWP. The AWP automatically asks the supervisor  to clear the hold after review. The AWP also decides and presents the key points that need to be mentioned in the prejob brief such as the job execution plan, hazards, cautions, warnings, notes, historical issues, projected execution time and duration, and any specific comments the supervisor adds. The prejob brief could be presented in text, audio, video, augmented, or virtual reality format. Automation of this work process results in the following AWP functions:
Function 19: automatic hold review and removal or notification for removal
Function 20: automatic determination of key points to mention in the prejob brief based on the work package scope
Function 21: prejob brief by means of video, aug- mented, or virtual reality
Function 22: tracking the historical common issues with work package activities
Function 23: using the historical execution time of all work package activities.
II.G.Measurement and Test Equipment, Tools, and Spare Parts
The measurement and test equipment  (M&TE), tools, and spare parts used in  the  plant  will  be  equipped with radio-frequency  identification  (RFID) tags that are linked to the AWP. The AWP auto-  matically allocates the appropriate M&TE, tools,  or  parts for the work package; makes sure they are cali- brated as the work requires; ensures the field-worker does not forget them as the field-worker heads to the work location; and ensures the field-worker does not
forget or misplace them in the plant as the field-worker heads back from the work location. M&TE and tool tracking would also enable better utilization of the available resources. The AWP will ensure that the field-worker has the needed safety  gear  by  equipping the safety equipment with wireless detection capabil-  ities such as RFID. This work  process  automation results in the following AWP functions:
Function 24: smart and RFID-enabled M&TE, tools, and spare parts
Function 25: automatic calibration tracking and assurance of proper M&TE use
Function 26: automated safety compliance and enforcement techniques
Function 27: tracked and optimized M&TE and tools use.
II.H.Walk-Down Clearance, Tag Out, and Operations Permission to Start
Once the field-worker heads toward the work activity location, the AWP will use location detection capabilities to automatically proceed with tag out and clearance requests. An electronic tagging system including electro- nic tag out status indication will be implemented to manage the tag-out and tag-in processes.  A  database  will automatically track all tagged out and tagged in equipment as work packages are executed and completed. Operations are automatically requested for a remote clearance after the AWP verifies plant conditions and allows the job to be performed. The AWP will also enable an electronic handwritten signature and date for critical tasks. This work process automation results in the follow- ing AWP functions:
Function 28: use of AWP devices location tracking in scheduling and progress tracking
Function 29: use of plant equipment location defi- nition in scheduling and progress tracking
Function 30: electronic tagging system displays
Function 31: automatic tag out and tag in
Function 32: automatic notification and clearance requests to supervisors, operations, and other relevant entities
Function 33: remote notification of permission to start.
Perform Work Activity
The AWP will use the device and equipment loca- tion identification to confirm the field-worker is at the right equipment. A set of computer-based procedures will guide the operator through the work.11–14 The procedures will use various levels of detail depending on the field-worker’s qualifications and the  criticality of the performed task. The time to complete each step will be tracked. If a certain step or task takes an abnormal time to complete, the field-worker and super- visor are alerted, because this indicates a possible human error. Voice commands and  instructions  will  be used to help the field-worker utilize both hands if needed. In addition, all relevant plant entities will have full-view access to the field-workers’ progress. This includes video monitoring the task using a safety hel- met-held camera or safety glasses equipped with cam- eras. The work execution will be recorded for quality assurance, peer inspections, training purposes, or supervisor review. Historical work package issues associated with similar  equipment  will  be  presented to field-workers as the workers approach the step of their historical occurrence. Ahead-of-time notification of the need for any support will occur by the AWP  scheduling capability. This will use a  projection  of task completion time based on the current and histor- ical behavior of the work package parts. As the field- worker completes any part of the work package, the worker will have the ability to provide feedback or review any part of the work package including steps, documents, warnings, plant components, trainings, spare parts, tools, and M&TE at any  stage  of  the  work package. This work process automation results  in the following AWP functions:
Function 34: location-based verification of the equipment to perform the work on
Function 35: use of computer-based procedures
Function 36: adaptive level of the detail for instructions based on field-worker qualifications and task
Function 37: automatic tracking of work progress
Function 38: duration-based abnormality detection
Function 39: voice-enabled commands and voice instructions
Function 40: remote access of field-worker progress to all involved entities
Function 41: remote video monitoring capability
Function 42: rapid and automated issue report dur- ing work execution
Function 43: automatic reporting of  historical issues of all parts of the work package including steps and equipment, as well as reporting of historical information on how the issues were handled
Function 44: ahead-of-time notification of needed support
Function 45: real-time update and optimization of the work packages schedule according to current progress
Function 46: simplified and integrated feedback or review capability of steps, documents, warnings, plant components, trainings, spare parts, tools, and M&TE.
II.J.Sign-Off Clearance and Review
Once the work package procedure is complete, a clearance notification is sent to the supervisor for approval or acknowledgment. Instead of having to review the whole work package, the AWP will generate a summary of the key highlights for the supervisor’s evaluation based on task’s progress, issues faced, field- worker review, and the task’s criticality. This work process automation results in the following AWP function:
Function 47: automatic identification of key points to report to supervisor for review.
II.K.Quality Assurance and Archiving
The feedback, review, and performance of  all aspects of the work package will be stored to a quality assurance system that  automatically  detects  patterns  and identifies weaknesses in the work execution pro-  cess for improvement. This will include the log of all actions performed in addition to video recording of the performed tasks. The data provided will be used  to  create areas of strength  of  individual  field-workers.  The log and data of the work package will be electro- nically archived. This work process automation results   in the following AWP functions:
Function 48: automatic pattern detection and weak- ness identification in the work package
Function 49: automatic development of field-workers’
areas of strength
Function 50: automatic archiving.
III.USER NEEDS SURVEY
A web-based survey was conducted by Idaho National Laboratory (INL) to determine which of the proposed functions would align best with the industry
needs. The survey also aimed to acquire feedback from the industry of what works well in the current work package process and where in the process potential exists for efficiency gain improvements. A total of 12 indivi- duals participated in the survey. The participants repre- sented one European and five U.S. commercial nuclear utilities. Among the participants there were maintenance supervisors, planners, procedure coordinators, and infor- mation technology architects. The survey results are sum- marized in Figs. 1, 2, and 3.
Fig. 1.  Comparison of what works well in the work package process and identified areas for improvements.
Fig. 2.  What and how to change the process.
III.A. Results Discussion
From Fig. 1, it was found that initiating work requests is part of the current  work  package  process  that works well. Screening of work requests and con- ducting prejob briefs were also identified as parts of the process that currently work well. Labor intensive tasks such as disassembling the work package, quality assur- ance records, and archiving were identified to have the highest potential for improvement. Figure 2 shows that screening of work requests was identified as the  only part of the process that could be removed. However, the overwhelming majority of the participants indicated that this part of the process should be kept in its  current  form; therefore, this result was deemed to be inconclu- sive. The participants agreed that the planning part of   the process is not suited for automation but that it needs to change.
Creating work packages is  one  part  of  the  process
that the majority of participants indicated as working well in Fig. 1. However, it was also identified as a part of the process that should not be  kept as is in Fig. 2.  The participants were split over whether this should be automated or just changed without automation. The participants identified two process  parts  that  should  be   kept  as   is,   which  are   the   prejob  briefs  and the
walk-down clearances. The steps at the end  of  the work package execution were identified as having  a high potential for automation.
There are two interpretations for participants not selecting “keep as is” for the majority of the process activities. The first is that the work package process has great potential for being improved. The second is that participants are very open to change. Both of these ways indicate the need to continue the AWP effort for the potential benefits to industry.
The last scope of the survey targeted identifying capabilities to increase the efficiency of the work pack- age process from the envisioned scenario of the previous section. As illustrated with an orange bar in Fig. 3, the function that all participants identified as useful for increasing efficiency is automatic tracking of task pro- gress. An overwhelming part of the participants (i.e., 86%) identified several other functions as  having  a  great impact on efficiency gains, including the following functions:
III.A.integration of enterprise asset management sys- tem and/or work management system
III.B.automatic population of work package informa- tion including assigned craft, tools, spare parts, equipment, and documents
Fig. 3.  Functions to help increase efficiency in the work package process.
III.C.automatic integration of plant risk information during planning
III.D.automatic notifications to supervisors, opera- tions, and other relevant entities as required
III.E.voice-assisted instructions (e.g., talk-to-text)
III.F.remote access of task progress to all involved entities
III.G.automatic notification to resources for quality assurance and other validations
III.H.automatic	tool	recall	for	calibration	or disqualification.
Figure 3 demonstrates that though the participants were in disagreement about the extent to automate the process in the earlier survey part of Fig. 2, there was a significant
change of stance toward automation when the participants were introduced with automated solutions, described by the functions of Sec. II.
IV.CONCLUSIONS
The scenario development performed in this study identified 50 advanced functions that could impact the current work process. These functions encourage rely- ing on II&C technologies that have not been utilized. Since the vast majority of these functions can be devel- oped with current or near-future technological advance- ment, the envisioned AWP described in this paper is achievable in the near future. However, there is a need  for an organization to drive this evolution, which is the role of INL through this project. The actual impact in terms of efficiency, cost saving, and human  error remains unknown; however, the survey conducted  as  part of this study clearly demonstrated the desire for industry to apply advanced technologies and move for- ward. To the research team, the  survey  indicated  that the AWP mission of  enhanced  process  automation aligns with industry need. The  future  plan  for  the  AWP project will  develop  and  evaluate  an  initial  set of the functions along with an industrial collaborator.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge the DOE’s Office of Nuclear Energy for funding this effort as part of the Light Water Reactor Sustainability Program.
