<title>MOBILE SYSTEMS FOR FLUORIDE REPROCESSING OF SPENT NUCLEAR FUEL</title>
<Affiliation>National Research Center – Kurchatov Institute, Moscow, Russia</Affiliation>
<author>N. M. Trotsenko, O. G. Lebedev, and D. Yu. Chuvilin</author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>ATOMIC ENERGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Springer</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10512-017-0264-6</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10512-017-0264-6</URL>
Abstract
Experts at the National Research Center – Kurchatov Institute have proposed compact reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel from the naval fleet as well as NPPs close to the Arctic coast, directly at the site of offloading, on the basis of an innovative, experimentally verified, fluoride-distillation technology. They propose developing a mobile system consisting of a seagoing carrier (vessel with small displacement) or terrestrial carrier (railroad platform) on which is mounted a compact process line consisting of fluorination and purification apparatus as well as auxiliary setups. There are no liquid wastes in the fluoride processes; solid wastes are to be removed, as they are formed, from the mobile system into special sites in waste locations of the Arctic coast for long-term dry storage in concrete containers.
In 2012, the experts at the National Research Center – Kurchatov Institute investigated reprocessing spent fuel assem- blies (FA) by means of fluoride-distillation technology directly on site of their removal from the naval and nuclear icebreaking vessels as well as NPPs close to the Arctic coast [1]. For this, it was proposed that a mobile system be developed on the basis of a seagoing carrier (floating technical platforms) with displacement not exceeding 2000 tons or terrestrial carrier (railroad platform) on which a compact process line consisting of fluorination and purification apparatus as well as auxiliary equipment are mounted [2]. The equipment solutions were checked on low-level materials on stands at the Kurchatov Institute and then at enterprises equipped with biological protection using high-level materials. As a result, the following were developed:
1)the M-495 experimental setup at the Siberian Chemical Combine (fluorination of irradiated uranium blocks, rec-
tification purification of UF6, and separation of plutonium) [3];
2)a prototype facility at the Kirovo-Chepetsk Chemical Combine for rectification purification of UF6 by removal of volatile metal fluorides;
3)multipurpose facility FREGAT in hot chambers at the Research Institute of Nuclear Reactors (NIIAR) for working out a uranium-plutonium fuel cycle for fast reactors [4];
4)flame fluorination block for reprocessing high-enrichment, weapons-grade uranium at the Ural Electrochemical Combine; and
5)a commercial method for obtaining binary volatile metal fluorides for centrifuge technology of separation of sta- ble isotopes.
The reprocessing of spent fuel from propulsion reactors directly at the removal site in Arctic waters or removal from distant terrestrial power-generating unit together with reprocessing in a terrestrial mobile system is an innovative step for the following reasons:
1)long shipping routes from the northern part of the country to a centralized enterprise in a densely populated region are no longer needed;
2)the obtained, conditioned, solid wastes are sent into storage/disposal in specially chosen waste sites in a narrow strip of the Arctic coast.Fig. 1. Flame fluorination of uranium-plutonium fuel in the FREGAT setup with capacity 0.2 kg/h and coefficient of purification by removal of fission products 107:
1)fuel; 2) electromagnetic grinder; 3) carrier gas; 4) transport line; 5) combustion chamber; 6) receiver for hard-to-volatilize fluorides; 7) regenerated filtration unit.
Fig. 2. Arrangement of the M-495 experimental setup in canyons at the Siberian Chemical Combine: 1) fluorine receiver; 2) gas blower; 3) irradiated block feeder; 4) sluice setup;
5) liquid nitrogen tank; 6) 6-liter Dewar; 7) sorption column; 8) rectification column with a condenser in the assembly; 9) collapsible protective capsule of the rectification-sorption purification unit; 10, 12) sorption column; 11) filtering apparatus; 13) collapsible protective capsule of the fluorination unit.
The fluoride technology is insensitive to the background radiation; the obtained solid wastes are compacted as much as possible in a form with complete elimination of liquid wastes with the main product being highly pure UF6, which can be immediately directed to isotopic re-enrichment [3, 4]. The fuel is fluorinated at 400–1200°C. The UF6 distillation temperature 62.3°C is distinguished from the volatility of the fluorides of chemical elements which are fission products. This makes it possible to separate UF6 from nonvolatile fluorides of fission products by its sublimation and from volatile products by the
Fig. 3. Primary apparatus of the M-495 facility – Vulcan reactor: 1) moisten-air entry; 2, 3) air and nitrogen entry, respectively; 4) plug.
method of distillation (rectification). Rectification is conducted at 70–110°C and pressure 0.35–0.45 MPa. To separate a small mass of volatile fluorides, it is also possible to use solid sorbents at 100–400°C.
R&D work was performed in four directions.
1.Physicochemical studies of individual systems – experiments confirming the efficacy of fluoride regeneration of spent fuel, the study of phase equilibrium in binary and multi-component systems containing uranium hexafluoride (for rec- tification), the study of selective sorption of volatile fluorides on solid sorbents, and the synthesis and study of the chemical properties of plutonium hydroxide.
2.Study of the key stages of fluoride technology – development of a multipurpose experimental setup FREGAT; it was
put into operation in the hot chambers of NIIAR in 1968; experiments performed on 1–4 kg batches of spent fuel confirmed high coefficients 107 of purification of actinides by removal of fission products and production of nonvolatile fluorides in a compact form; several key stages of fluoride reprocessing were studied: reprocessing of the alloy U–Be, production of PuO2 by pyrohydrolysis of PuF4, and others; a flame apparatus for fluorinating irradiated uranium-plutonium fuel was tested (Fig. 1).
3.Organization of heat and mass transfer in heterogeneous fluorination processes for industrial use – the work was performed in application to fluorination of fuel and separation of the products of fluorination on unirradiated and irradiated uranium; fluorination of unirradiated metallic uranium and uranium oxides with mass of tens of kilograms was studied on special benches with an exhaust ventilation system; the M-420 facility for working with unirradiated materials in a manual control regime was developed at the Siberian Chemical Combine for preparing irradiated metallic uranium for fluoride repro- cessing; in 1964–1967, standard blocks of metallic uranium fabricated with the addition of fission-products simulators were used in the experiments; 100 kg of such blocks was reprocessed; the parameters of the process were as follows: melting tem- perature above 1100°C, reactive surface area 1 dm2, gaseous fluorine concentration 96%, and productivity 8 kg/h. Then, the M-495 facility was developed for reprocessing irradiated uranium blocks with nominal rate up to 10 kg/h; it was placed in two canyons and was remote-controlled (Figs. 2, 3).
The experimental program was conducted in 1969–1971. Batches of irradiated blocks of metallic uranium were re- processed in an aluminum casing without removing the casing beforehand. The degree of purification of UF6 was 108 (puri- fication to the native background). More than 150 kg of irradiated uranium blocks were reprocessed with a holding period of 4 years and 130 kg with a holding period of 11 months. As a result, high purity UF6 was obtained (selective sorption and rectification); plutonium was separated in the form of PuF6 and fixed on NaF sorbent.
TABLE 1. Parameters of Rectification Blocks
The flame fluorination block developed at the Ural Electrochemical Combine for reprocessing highly enriched ura- nium developed productivity of 10 kg/h. The raw material in form of U3O8 powder was fed through a feeder; the product was UF6. Three metric tons of weapons grade uranium was reprocessed from 1984 to 1988.
4.Rectification purification of UF6 on the experimental and prototype scale – the work was conducted in 1960–1970 [5]. At the Siberian Chemical Combine, in reprocessing of spent fuel from commercial reactors by the fluoride method, rectifi- cation was used for fine purification of UF6 by removal of β and γ emitting radionuclides. The packing part of the rectification column was fabricated from monel and consisted of six 44 mm in diameter and 50 cm long courses filled with 2 × 2 × 0.2 mm spirals. The column was operated in a periodic regime. The UF6 purification factor achieved on the apparatus met the condi- tions of isotopic enrichment of uranium. A commercial facility for purifying enriched UF6 by removal of impurities with low molecular mass operated at the PO Electrochemical Plant. The uranium content from the column’s reflux condenser was equal to 10–1–10–3 vol.%. At the Kirovo-Chepetsk Chemical Combine, the setup for rectification of UF6 in the UF6 production shop made it possible to obtain an ultrapure product. The purification was conducted in serially operating bubble-cap tray columns. Each column consisted of seven courses with three trays each. The purity of the UF6 obtained was so high that when it was used at the PO Electrochemical Plant equipped with centrifuge equipment no impurity accumulation was observed in the final-en- richment UF6. The processes were conducted at column temperature 70–110°C and pressure 0.35–0.45 MPa (see Table 1).
In summary, the R&D work on rectification showed on a prototype commercial scale high efficiency both with respect to the productivity of the apparatus and the depth of purification of UF6. In the columns used for rectification purification of UF6, intense mass transfer at moderately high temperature (~120°C) is achieved as a result of the absence of any diluents.
Specifics of fuel reprocessing in a mobile system. A block diagram of the reprocessing of spent FA by the fluoride technology in a mobile system is displayed in Fig. 4. It includes four basic links: electrochemical production of fluorine, flu- orination, separation of the products of rectification, and vitrification of high-level solid wastes in the form of oxides obtained by pyrohydrolysis of fluorides. This technology is suitable for reprocessing any fuel composition.
The compactness of the fluoride processing facility, making it possible to place it on a small ship or railroad platform, is due to to, first and foremost, the organization of high-temperature fluorination processes and the fact that there are no water and organic diluents. There is no need for cumbersome apparatus for dissolving the fuel and thousand-vat underground reser- voirs for storing liquid wastes. Thus, the M-495 facility was fit into only to canyons.
The absence of non-water diluents promotes intense mass transfer during fluorination and rectification. Fuel fluori- nation can be conducted at high temperature in order to intensify mass transfer, which ultimately makes it possible to develop a more compact fluorination apparatus.
Fluorination apparatus. The main technical problem in heterogeneous high-exothermal fluorination reaction of uranium-based nuclear fuel is organizing stable heat and mass transfer in apparatus with critically safe geometry. High pro- ductivity of the fluorination apparatus is achieved by intense heat and mass transfer at temperatures up to 1200°C.
To protect the apparatus, the fluorination zone is separated from the wall. This is achieved by using a cold crucible or by organizing flame burning of fuel particles in a fluorine stream. In the first case, heat is removed through a thin skull layer and in the second case the heat of reaction from the flame is removed to the wall of the apparatus by radiation. At the Kurchatov Institute, both methods were studied experimentally and implemented on commercial platforms (skull – on the Fig. 4. Block diagram of the reprocessing of spent FA in a mobile system.
M-495 setup at the Siberian Chemical Combine, on the FREGAT-2 setup at NIIAR for uranium-plutonium fuel, and at the Ural Electrochemical Combine for reprocessing high-enrichment uranium).
At present, a flame fluorination apparatus with a special design appears to be a promising and high-efficiency variant for reprocessing spent fuel.
Conditioning of solid radioactive wastes. According to the block diagram shown in Fig. 4, sorbents with high-level fission products must be conditioned by means of vitrification for immobilization of radionuclides, i.e., calcination and mixing of the obtained calcination product with fused phosphate or borosilicate glass at temperatures above 800°C. The concentration of the fission products in molten glass with different mix formulas can range from 5 to 30% by weight. It has a limit, which is determined by the possibilities for removing the heat generated in the radioactive decay of the fission products. The melt is poured into alloyed steel cylinders, which are then sealed. The obtained glass blocks are sent to temporary storage (40 years) with passive heat removal in order to reduce the heat release and possibility of access. The proposed storage time for condi- tioned wastes without access is thousands of years.
Even though many waste sites are present on the Arctic coast, it is likely not to be easy to pick a storage site for conditioned high-level solid wastes under the conditions extant in the North.
Commercial setups for vitrified high-level liquid wastes are used at the PO Mayak and MosNPO Radon. In the vit- rification of high-level solid wastes by the fluoride technology, there is no need for certain preparatory operations (evapora- tion, collection of the condensate, and others).
Safety of fluoride technology. It is well-known that UF6 is the only known gaseous compound of uranium and ele- mental fluorine – a chemically extremely corrosive gas – is necessary for its synthesis. Work with fluorine and UF6 eliminates
interaction with atmospheric moisture or organic substances and must be conducted in a hermetically sealed apparatus made of nickel, monel, or black steel. Industry adopted electrolyzers a long time ago for fluorine production.
Gaseous fluorine is toxic. However, the risk of exposure to workers and the environment in the fluoride process chain is low, since fluorine traverses a short path between the electrolyzer, where it is formed, and the fluorination apparatus, where it is used, and therefore at any time the mass of free fluorine is small. The electrochemical process of fluorine production is easily regulated.
Experience in operating the FREGAT and FREGAT-2 setups at NIIAR has shown that manipulators make it possible to work with a fuel mass of several kilograms. Probably, batches of tens of kilograms of fuel will be reprocessed in mobile systems. Prototype of carrier ship. It is expedient to set the productivity of a demonstration fluoride facility for reprocessing
FA at 20 tons/yr. This level as been checked on an experimental apparatus and is found to be adequate for perfecting the han- dling cycle from removal from a nuclear steam-generating facility to placement of conditioned solid wastes in shore-based repositories. An industrial complex operating in the national or international commercial services segment must have a pro- ductivity 100 tons/yr.
A seagoing mobile system can be implemented on a non-self-propelled ship with displacement, probably, not ex- ceeding 2000 tons.
Conclusion. R&D work on fluoride-distillation recycling of nuclear fuel was initiated more than half a century ago, but thus far there has been no commercial demand for this technology. About 20% of spent fuel from NPP is now being re- processed worldwide. This is done using water-extraction technology, which is showing high reliability in application to fuel with burnup reaching 40 GW·days/ton.
A property of fluoride technology – insensitivity to radioactive emission – makes it possible to use this technology for reprocessing spent fuel of fast reactors with burnup ~100 GW·days/ton.
An apparatus (flame fluorination apparatus, apparatus with a cold crucible, and others) making possible intense removal of the heat of high-exothermal formation reaction of fuel exposed simultaneously to high temperature and the chemi- cally corrosive element fluorine has now been developed. This has been done on a scale making it possible to talk about com- mercialization, especially in tandem with a nuclear reactor operating on high-enrichment uranium. The fluoride technology does not produce liquid wastes and, therefore, there are no problems of handling such wastes. On the basis of these factors, it can be assumed that the reprocessing of fleet ground-based power-generating units in mobile systems is a promising niche for application of fluoride technology on a pilot scale.
We are particularly grateful to R. S. Gudimov and S. A. Subbotin for a discussion of the material presented here as well as to the designers V. P. Korobtsev, P. K. Pronin, Yu. P. Shchekal, I. V. Il’gisonis, and B. G. Bobrinskii.
