<title>INNOVATIVE NUCLEAR POWER FACILITIES IN REPORTS AT THE 5th INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL CONFERENCE ON INNOVATIVE DESIGNS AND TECHNOLOGIES FOR NUCLEAR POWER</title>
<Affiliation>1.Frumkin Institute of Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences (IPCE RAS), Moscow, Russia.
2.Bochvar High-Technology Research Institute of Inorganic Materials (VNIINM), Moscow, Russia; e-mail: yavoskresenskaya</Affiliation>
<author>B. A. Gabaraev, A. V. Dzhalavyan, and E. A. Karandina</author>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>ATOMIC ENERGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Springer</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>  10.1007/s10512-019-00537-x</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1007/s10512-019-00537-x</URL>
The 5th international scientic and technical conference on innovative designs and technologies of nuclear pow- er (ISTC NIKIET-2018) was held on October 2–5, 2018 at the Dollezhal Research and Development Institute of Power Engineering (NIKIET). Two-hundred eighty specialists from 15 countries, international research centers, and IAEA partici- pated. Innovative nuclear power facilities presented in the reports are examined in the present review.
Reports of Russian Specialists
Two-component nuclear power. In the report of project Proryv it is noted that in order to overcome stagnation and barriers in the advancement of nuclear power it is necessary to focus on the transition to a two-component structure based on thermal and fast reactors with nuclear fuel cycle closure. The technological and resource bases of nuclear power based on thermal reactors are adequate for the scales of construction of NPP forecasted to 2050, but their potential is limited in solving long-term energy problems. The reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel and recycling of plutonium and undepleted uranium in the fuel cycle of fast reactors makes it possible to reduce the demand for native uranium by as much as 100-fold and the mass of heavy nuclei and long-lived high-level waste tenfold and to remove the problem of the accumulation of spent fuel.
Systems studies show that by the end of the 21st century nuclear power could reach the 120 GW level, taking into ac- count the decommissioning of NPP whose life has been exhausted, with yearly commissioning of four to six power-generating units over ve years to 2050 and as many as 10 power generating units over ve years in the second half of the 21st century.
The possibilities of forming by the end of the 21st century a two-component structure of nuclear power with VVER and fast reactors operating in a single closed nuclear fuel cycle (NFC) as well as a complete transition of nuclear power through the stage of two-component structure to a new technological platform dominated by inherently-safe fast reactors were conrmed.
BREST-OD-300 reactor facility. The status of the development of lead-cooled fast reactors was presented in the reports by NIKIET and enterprises collaborating with it. The developed technical design of the BREST-OD-300 reactor facil- ity is based on experiments performed on small and medium-size stands and working sections as well as calculations per- formed using veried software. Positive results of the irradiation of prototype fuel rods conrmed the technical solutions obtained for the core. The neutronic characteristics, thermohydraulics, strength, and nuclear safety were validated by certied computational codes. Radiation safety calculations have conrmed the need for evacuation and moving the population farther outside the boundaries of the industrial site upon disruption of the normal operation with multiple failures.
The solutions adopted for the BREST-OD-300 reactor facility can be used in commercial high-power facilities with assurance of their competitiveness.
The design of the power-generating unit is now going through the licensing process at the Russian Federal Environ- mental, Technological, and Atomic Protection Agency (Rostekhnadzor).Design concepts for a ground-based small nuclear power plant (SNPP) with the RITM-200 reactor installation. The design was developed at the Afrikantov Experimental Design Bureau of Mechanical Engineering (OKBM Afrikantov) (Nizhnii Novgorod). An unconventional conguration of the main building was chosen to minimize costs. Two reactor instal- lations were installed in it; the main equipment of each of one was enclosed in an individual hermetic protective shell.
The RITM-200 reactor of the universal nuclear icebreaker was picked as the source of energy for SNPP. The steam generating unit is water cooled and moderated reactor with a cassette-type core and forced circulation of the primary coolant. All main component parts of the circulation channel as well as for steam generators are located in its vessel. Each steam gen- erator consists of three cassettes, which are integrated with respect to feed water and steam. A cassette in the assembly is a direct-ow vertical straight-tube heat-exchanger of the surface type. The equipment of the reactor installation is placed inside a hermetic protective shell consisting of a volumetric box-shaped welded structure with at, reinforced, leak-tight walls.
SNPP with the Shelf reactor installation. The equipment for the facility developed at NIKIET is compactly ar- ranged in a reinforced leak-tight vessel. The integral-type reactor ensures the compactness and reliability of the facility owing to the reduction of service lines under primary coolant pressure. The reactor has negative coefcients of reactivity on fuel and coolant temperature.
The SNPP structure includes a turbogenerator plant, the equipment of the system of automatic control, monitoring, and protection of technical means, including the apparatus for regulation, control, and monitoring of the generated electric power, the equipment of auxiliary systems, and other equipment.
The technical and economic assessments showed that it competes with diesel power plants operating in remote regions in decentralized power supply zones. The electric power capacity of the power-generating unit of the Shelf reactor installation is 6.6 MW, the service life is at least 60 years, and autonomy in the event of a blackout is at least 72 h. A core run is 4000 h.
SNPP with the Vityaz reactor installation. The Vityaz block, transportable, power plant being developed at NIKIET is intended for regions with a decentralized power supply. The design allows delivery of an operation-ready SNPP in the form of four transportable modules compactly arranged on high-mobility wheeled platforms. An integral water moderated and cooled reactor with thermal power 6 MW forms the base of the design.
SNPP with the Uniterm reactor installation. The design under development at NIKIET is based on maximizing safety. The serially fabricated and tested (under factory conditions) modular installation delivered to the operation site can operate for a long time (up to 15 years) without core refueling and upon completion of service it is removed and sent to the plant for recharging or recycling and is replaced by a new module with fresh fuel. During autonomous operation its power varies as a function of the load.
Floating power-generating units with RITN-200M. OKBM Afrikantov is developing two variants of optimized oating power-generating units with the new installation RITM-200M, which is an analog of RITM-200 of the new universal nuclear icebreakers under construction.
The rst variant of a oating power-generating unit was a rack-type vessel with a nuclear power installation Akademik Lomonosov arranged on it. The use of RITM-200M instead of KLT-40S makes it possible to considerably reduce the dimen- sions and mass: length – by 28 m, width – by 5 m, water displacement – by 9000 tons.
The main directions of optimization are: switching to no-refueling operation on a base site up to dock repair 10 years, rejection of excess redundancy and backup of systems and equipment, and extension of the normal service life and equipment life to dock overhaul.
The second variant is a self-propelled vessel, powered by a nuclear power installation, possessing a system for motion, unlashing or dynamic positioning, and output and distribution of electricity to consumers. It can be located at adequate distances from shore, which makes it possible to reduce the risk of being hit by tsunamis considerably, transmit electricity along underwa- ter cables, and supply electricity not only to shore structures but also above- and underwater objects at distances up to 50 km.
Signicant advantages of a self-propelled vessel are the absence of expensive hydrotechnical structures, minimiza- tion of onshore construction, and high mobility and export potential.
The power installation is unied for both variants. Its structure includes two RITM-200M reactor installations, two steam-turbine plants, main generators, and auxiliary systems. The electric power reaches 100 MW, service life 60 yr, period between refueling 10 yr, and operating time to factory maintenance 20 yr. The cassette core of RITM-200M contains 241 FA
with a hexahedral prole instead of 199 in RITM-200. They are placed at the nodes of a regular triangular lattice. The main element of the reactor installation is a steam-generating block whose vessel holds the core and steam generators; four hydro- chambers with rst-loop pumps are located at the center of the vessel. The safety systems maintain the reactor installation in a safe state during all types of accidents. Thus, a safe state with the most unfavorable accident with loss-of-coolant and a power blackout is covered for at least three days. Serious accidents are controlled by means of systems that ll a caisson with water in order to prevent melting of the reactor vessel, lower the emergency pressure in the containment, and after-burn the hydrogen present in the containment.
Multi-purpose lead-cooled reactor with high-energy neutron spectrum. The National Research Nuclear University MEPhI presented the concept of reactors with thermal power 15–200 MW with a higher fraction of high-energy neutrons in the core than in fast sodium and molten-salt reactors. The interest in such reactors is due to the possibility of using them as special actinide transmuters as well as research reactors for producing isotopes with new user properties.
Reports of Foreign Specialists
CLEAR reactor with lead or lead-bismuth coolant (China). The Institute of Technology of Nuclear Power Safety of the Chinese Academy of Sciences completed, within the scope of the national project LBR, a large volume of work on design, materials, technology of liquid-metal coolants, and software as well as modeling of the reactor.
Uranium dioxide with enrichment below 20% was chosen as the fuel in pool-type 10 MW CLEAR-10 reactor. For greater compactness a decision was made to install one circulation pump. For the same reason the steam generators and pump were placed in a vessel on the same side of the core. The water-cooled immersed heat-exchanger is connected with the upper water protection tank and provides natural circulation. The residual heat release is diverted to an external air ow by trans- mission through the wall of the vessel. Supercritical carbon dioxide gas circulates in the second loop. Lead-bismuth eutectic with temperature 380°C at the core egress was chosen to remove heat from the core. The fuel rod cladding material is 15-15Ti corrosion resistant steel. The reactor dimensions must be such that it can be placed in a container and transported.
A hybrid system consisting of a nuclear reactor and a controlling accelerator has been under development since 2011. The rst stage is the use of a proton accelerator together with the 10 MW(t) CLEARI research reactor cooled by lead-bismuth coolant. The rst loop of the reactor has a pool conguration with 600 tons of coolant. The core contains fuel in the form of uranium dioxide with enrichment 19.5% and can operate in critical and subcritical regimes. Two pumps circulate the fuel. Four heat-exchangers of this loop are immersed directly into the pool with the coolant. CLEARI does not produce electricity.
CLEAR-A is an improved ADS facility where the subcritical LBR reactor with a traveling-wave controls the external source of neutrons. The main goal of CLEAR-A is to realize the function of a reactor with a traveling wave with fuel burnup below 20%, controlled by an external source of neutrons. The installation consists of an accelerator, target system, and sub- critical LBR.
The described technologies and the development of prototypes provide a foundation for constructing the multifunc- tional experimental stand KYLINII and three integral experimental facilities: the experimental test stand CLEAR-S with lead-bismuth coolant (the main vessel is 2 m in diameter and 6.5 m high, its electric power is 2.5 MW, and the coolant mass
>200 tons); CLEAR-0 is a zero power reactor and CLEARV is a virtual reactor.
BLESS fast reactor with lead-bismuth coolant (China). The thermal power of the reactor is 300 MW and the elec- tric power 100 MW. Uranium dioxide is chosen as the fuel.
The thermohydraulic computing code was prevalidated in experiments on a hexagonal experimental setup with a bundle consisting of 19 electrically heated rods. The calculations showed that the maximum temperature of the coolant at the core egress, fuel-element cladding, and fuel at the center of the fuel rod is equal to 541.6, 545.4, and 1055.9°C, respectively, and the maximum coolant velocity is 1.2 m/sec.
NHR200II reactor with natural circulation and power 200 MW (China). Low-power, modular, water-cooled re- actors with an integral arrangement and natural circulation of the coolant at full power have been under development since the 1980s at Jinhau University to provide centralized heating in cities. The constructed 5 MW compact experimental re- actor NHR-5 was operated for several years. All advantages of the reactors NHR-5 and NHR200I have been preserved in NHR200II; in addition, the pressure and temperature in the rst loop are greatly increased, which makes it possible to expand its use, for example, for co-generation of electricity and heat as well as desalination of seawater.
The complex installation HRTL200II for testing at high pressures and temperatures was constructed to study the thermohydraulics of the reactor. The computed pressure and temperature of the coolant and the thermal power are equal to 11 MPa, 300°C, and 1 MW. This facility has been used to study the particularities of the rst loop, the effect of the parameters of the second loop on the operation of the rst loop, the underheating at the egress at maximum pressure and temperature of the coolant and thermal power 7 MPa, 278°C, and 960 kW. In the full power regime the reactor can operate with natural circulation. The plant is to be built in Hebei province in the northern part of China.
HAPPY 200 reactor (China). This reactor with thermal power 200 MW is being developed for supplying heat, de- salinating seawater, and other uses. The reactor installation consists of three loops and safety systems. The rst loop includes a two-circuit reactor with water under low pressure and with low thermal parameters; the second-loop systems are intermedi- ate heat-exchange loops. The third-loop systems are heating loops, which are connected with the city heat-and-power net- work. The pressure in the second loop is somewhat higher than in the rst loop. This eliminates leakages from the rst loop into the second loop or radioactive contamination. The rst loop operates at pressure 0.6 MPa. The temperature of the coolant at the ingress into and egress out of the core is 80 and 120°C, respectively. The safety of the reactor is ensured by passive systems for feeding and discharging coolant, removing residual heat release, and air cooling of the pool. The passive coolant feeding/discharging system consists of an automatic system for reducing pressure and spraying coolant.
SMLFR fast reactor with lead-bismuth coolant (South Korea). The main design limitation for a small modular fast reactor cooled by lead-bismuth eutectic are the dimensions of the core – height 1 m, diameter 1.45 m. The core equipment must be contained in a small vessel of the reactor, which upon completion of operation can be placed in a container for spent fuel. The thermal power of the reactor is 37.5 MW and the electric power 15 MW;  the reactor is supposed to operate for   30 years without refueling. A hexagonal concept was chosen for the grid of uranium mononitride fuel rods. The fuel-rod clad- ding material is martensite steel HT-9, which has high thermal conductivity and radiation resistance. The coolant temperature is equal to 300°C ingress into and 400°C at the egress from the core; the pressure is equal to 0.1 MPa. Calculations conrm the technical realizability of the operation at full power for 30 years without refueling.
IRIS-160 reactor (Italy) placed in underwater containment. The report of the Milan Technical University examines the concept of the IRIS-160 modular reactor which was obtained by scaling IRIS In the direction of lower power (from 335 to 160 MW). IRIS-160 is a PWR reactor with an integrated arrangement, where the core and rst-loop equipment – steam generator, pressurizer, MCP, and control rod drives – are placed in the pressure vessel. Lowering the power to 160 MW made it possible to decrease the core height and vessel diameter as compared with IRIS.
The standard PWR FA was chosen to complete the outtting of the IRIS-160 core. Just as in IRIS, the core consists of 89 FA with 264 fuel rods in a 17 × 17 square lattice. As a result, the diameter of the core is equal to about 2.75 m. The height of the active part of the fuel rods is equal to approximately half the height of IRIS FA (4.2 m).
The control rods are arranged above the core and are operated with the aid of electromagnetic or hydraulic mecha- nisms. Four axial pumps with a spiral chamber are provided for organizing the ow in the rst loop. The pumps can be placed above the steam-generator modules, in the annular space between the core cage and reactor vessel. An arrangement with two or four steam-generator modules, coaxial with the cage, with spiral tubes was chosen, which made it possible to decrease the diameter of the reactor vessel.
The underwater containment plays the main role in cooling upon loss of the ordinary possibilities of active сooling and actuation of passive safety systems and loss of integrity of the rst loop. Modeling of emergency situations with the aid of CFD codes and the Relap5 systems code showed efcient removal of residual heat-release.
Conclusions. Ways to overcome the crisis in world nuclear power are being actively sought. The potential of modern thermal reactors is almost exhausted in the 21st century. Active development work is being pursued in order to transition to fast reactors and close the nuclear fuel cycle, which will make it possible to decrease 100-fold the demand for native uranium and 10-fold the mass of heavy nuclei in the long-lived high-level waste.
Sodium or lead cooled fast reactors have seen the greatest advancement. The safety and economic competitiveness of sodium-cooled reactors, greatly improved in the BN-1200 design, leave certain questions in dispute. The prospects appear to be best for lead-cooled reactors, but at the moment no reactors of this type are operating in the world.
Interest in SNPP is not abating. Designs of stationary and transportable ground SNPP as well as oating and under- water power-generating units are being developed. China continues to develop 200 MW reactors for centralized heating and it is almost ready to build them.
The assertion made by the authors of the SMLFR (South Korea) reactor design concerning the possibility of it oper- ating for 30 years without refueling arouses interest. Another advantage of the SMLFR is that the core equipment is arranged in a small vessel of the reactor which upon completion of operation can be placed in a spent-fuel container.
The ISTC NIKIET-2018 proceedings executed as an electronic edition are available in open access on the conference website http://istc2018.nikiet.ru.