<title>Design and Analysis of Embedded I&C for a Fully Submerged Magnetically Suspended Impeller Pump</title>
<author>Alexander M. Melin & Roger A. Kisner</author>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Technology</Journal>
<Affiliation>Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Sensors and Embedded Systems Group, 1 Bethel Valley Road, Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37831</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>ANS</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00295450.2018.1439644</DOI>
<URL>  https://doi.org/10.1080/00295450.2018.1439644</URL>
Abstract — Improving nuclear reactor power system designs and fuel-processing technologies for safer and more efficient operation requires the development of new component designs. In particular, many of the advanced reactor designs such as the molten salt reactors and high-temperature gas-cooled reactors have operating environments beyond the capability of most currently available commercial components. To address this  gap, new cross-cutting technologies need to be developed that will enable design, fabrication, and reliable operation of new classes of reactor components. The Advanced Sensor Initiative of the Nuclear Energy Enabling Technologies initiative is investigating advanced sensor and control designs that are capable of operating in these extreme environments. Under this initiative, Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) has been developing embedded instrumentation and control (I&C) for extreme environments. To develop, test, and validate these new sensing and control techniques, ORNL is building a pump test bed that utilizes submerged magnetic bearings to levitate the shaft. The eventual goal is to apply these techniques to a high-temperature (700°C) canned rotor pump that utilizes active magnetic bearings to eliminate the need for mechanical bearings and seals. The technologies will benefit the Next Generation Power Plant, Advanced Reactor Concepts, and Small Modular Reactor programs. In this paper, we will detail the design and analysis of the embedded I&C test bed with submerged magnetic bearings, focusing on the interplay between the different major systems. Then we will analyze the forces on the shaft and their role in the magnetic bearing design. Next, we will develop the radial and thrust bearing geometries needed to meet the operational requirements of the test bed. Finally, we will present some initial system identification results to validate the theoretical models of the test bed dynamics.
Keywords — Embedded instrumentation and control, active magnetic bearings, advanced control.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
Improving nuclear reactor safety, efficiency, and cost is necessary to nuclear power’s continued use as an important electricity generation source. Oftentimes, these improve- ments require that reactor systems operate in extreme environments not seen in current designs. These extreme environments can include high temperatures, high pressures, corrosive materials, and high radiation. In these new extreme operating environments, many current component designs will not provide sufficient safety, performance, and reliability.In fact, many existing component technologies will not function at all in these operational environments. Embedded instrumentation and control (I&C) is one technology that will enable new component designs for extreme environments. However, new cross-cutting technologies need to be devel- oped for I&C for extreme environments to meet design, safety, and performance goals.
The Advanced Sensors Initiative (ASI), a program  of the U.S. Department of Energy’s (DOE’s) Nuclear Energy Enable Technologies (NEET) initiative, is funding research into new cross-cutting technologies to enable new classes of reactor components to overcome the challenges of operating in extreme environments. In particular, the ASI program focuses on new sensor and control techniques, including embedded I&C. Under this program, Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) is researching high-temperature  (700°C) magnetic bearings for use in reactor components such as fluid pumps and turbines. Developing high- temperature magnetic bearings  requires  the  development  of high-temperature electromagnetics, which will enable  new component, sensor, and actuator designs.
The initial phase of the project developed a conceptual high-temperature reactor coolant pump utilizing magnetic bearings. This component was chosen due to the design challenges posed by the extreme  operating  environment  and the potential for improved performance, safety, and reliability from embedded I&C (Refs. 1, 2, and 3). This project phase identified pump configurations, functional materials, sensors, and control techniques that would be suitable for high-temperature operation. After study, a canned rotor pump (i.e., the internal components of the  pump are in direct contact with the pumped fluid and protected by a barrier material) was chosen as the configuration for the conceptual pump. The use of active magnetic bearings in the pump design removes the need for mechanical bearings and seals that are the main cause of maintenance costs and failures.4–7 The design feasibility and manufacturability of the conceptual pump design were studied.8 This early phase of the project also developed detailed models of the coupled electromagnetics and rotordynamics, including the nonlinear hydrodynamic forces in the fluid gap between the rotor and stator due to the canned pump design.9
The next phase of the project was the creation of a
laboratory-scale magnetic bearing test bed. This  test  bed was used to investigate closed-loop system identification techniques, develop stabilizing controllers, validate theore- tical models, and create software toolsets for the design and analysis of magnetic bearing geometries and controls.10
The third project phase currently under way is the development of a unique submerged magnetic bearing test bed where the bearings are in contact with the fluid.11 This low-temperature test bed emulates the dynamics of the high-temperature canned rotor pump. As far as the authors are aware, this will be the first magnetic bearing to operate submerged in fluid. The SKF company has built an undersea gas compression system that uses magnetic bearings, but the bearings are not in contact with the surrounding seawater. The ORNL submerged magnetic bearing test bed will be a fully operational water pump with a shaft that is levitated using two radial and two omnidirectional thrust magnetic bearings. This test bed will be used to develop the foundational technol- ogies needed for high-temperature operation. This
development effort includes modeling, closed-loop sys- tem identification, sensorless magnetic bearing operation, and advanced control design strategy in conjunction with material, mechanical, electromagnetic, and electromecha- nical design.
Magnetic bearings have been in use for decades and are well suited to challenging environments. They have seen widespread use in cryogenic pumps and expanders, turbopumps, steam turbines, hot helium blowers, flywheel energy storage, high-speed transportation, levitating trains, and high-speed machinery.12–14 They are also commonly used in aerospace gyroscopes, momentum wheels, and vacuum turbopumps. Currently, magnetic bearings operate in air or a vacuum, and the external forces on the shaft are not considered because they are small or treated as a bounded external force when designing the magnetic bearing controller. However, in a canned pump  design like the ORNL high-temperature conceptual pump, the shaft will experience nonlinear hydrodynamic forces that can exhibit complex behavior such as speed-dependent Taylor-Couette flow bifurcation.15 Existing models and control design techniques for magnetic bearings are not sufficient for systems with these nonlinear hydrodynamics. The ORNL test bed will emulate the nonlinear hydro- dynamics of the high-temperature conceptual pump designed by ORNL (Ref. 1). The goal of the test bed is to provide a realistic platform for developing, validating, and testing new models and embedded I&C systems that can stabilize the magnetic bearings in the presence of the nonlinear fluid
forces.
Most magnetic bearing research focuses on new geometric configurations and control theory. The most common magnetic bearing control design method is to linearize the system about the operating point and create independent proportional-integral-derivative controllers for each axis.13,14 This decoupled control design  assumes  that the shaft is rigid and well balanced and that gyroscopic and other external shaft forces are minimal. For many operational environments these assumptions are valid. For example, vacuum turbopumps have minimal aerodynamic forces  on the shaft and very precisely balanced shafts because they operate at high rotational speeds. Much of the research into control design for magnetic bearings has focused on relaxing these assumptions. In Refs. 16 and 17, fuzzy-logic–based controllers for magnetic bearings are developed. Other nonlinear controllers developed for magnetic bearings use sliding-mode control.18,19 Robust controllers are typically  used in magnetic bearings to compensate for vibrations due  to shaft imbalances and flexible mode shapes. In Ref. 20, a robust controller is developed based on eigenstructure assign- ment. An H1 robust controller for shaft imbalance
compensation was developed in Ref. 21. An adaptive controller was developed in Ref. 22 to perform shaft auto- centering with an unknown mass imbalance on the rotor.
There has also been interest in the development of sensorless bearings or self-sensing  magnetic  bearings. These bearing designs do not explicitly use shaft position sensors. Self-sensing bearing techniques are the only viable option for magnetic bearing control above 450°C until high- temperature position sensors are available. Self-sensing techniques are still being researched, and the difficulty in practical implementation means that currently there are no commercially available self-sensing magnetic bearings. There are two main techniques for self-sensing bearings.13 The first technique uses the existing pulse-width modulated signal from the power electronics to create a current  ripple in the coil windings. The amplitude of this ripple is propor- tional to the shaft position. The second main technique for self-sensing is the family of Kalman filters. Theoretically,  the shaft position is observable using only the magnetic bearing coil currents because of the coupling between the shaft motion and the bearing electromagnetic dynamics. In practice Kalman techniques suffer from poor performance due to uncertainties, a lack of persistent excitation, and nonlinearities in the system. In Ref. 23, the robustness limitation of self-sensing magnetic bearings is investigated and compared to bearing control using shaft  position sensors. In Ref. 24, a wavelet-based shaft position estimator is developed. A self-sensing three-pole magnetic bearing using the Kalman filter was developed in Ref. 25 and extended to use the Unscented Kalman Filter in Ref. 26.
The remaining sections of the paper provide details
about the ORNL submerged magnetic bearing test bed design. In Sec. II, the design concept for the test bed is discussed. In Sec. III, the worst-case impeller forces that constrain the magnetic bearing geometry are described. In Sec. IV, the geometry and force dynamics of the radial bear- ing design are discussed. In Sec. V, the design of the axial bearing is discussed, including optimizing the geometry and force characteristics of the bearing. In Sec. VI, the impact of the magnetic bearing geometry on the coil dynamics and control stability is discussed, and some experimental results of system identification tests are presented. Section VII concludes the paper, and future work is discussed.
II.DESIGN CONCEPT
To reduce the cost and time needed for design and fabrication of an induction motor–driven pump, a commer- cial canned rotor pump was chosen to be the foundation of the test bed. Canned rotor pumps operate with the rotor and
stator submerged in the pumped fluid and utilize a thin metal “can” around the electromagnetic components to prevent their contact with the fluid. The pump selected was a Teikoku 204TF1 impeller pump. The nominal pump flow rate at 3450 rpm is 511 L/min with a nominal head of 75 m. To create the test bed, the original pump is retrofitted with active magnetic bearings that replace its existing graphite fluid bearings. This retrofit requires extensive modification to the original pump but allows the use of  the  existing  3600 rpm induction motor, impeller, and volute. The pump was disassembled; then each component was measured and modeled in three dimensions because detailed manufacturing drawings of the Teikoku pump were not available. The solid model of the unmodified pump is shown in Fig. 1 without the volute.
After the development of an accurate solid model of
the original pump, the design was modified to add two radial and two omni-directional thrust magnetic bearings at each end of the shaft. To make room for the magnetic bearings, shaft extensions are used on either end of the existing shaft. The shaft extensions mount the radial magnetic bearing laminations and the thrust bearing rotors. The radial magnetic bearing laminations  are  made of M19 electrical steel, and the thrust bearing is made from grade 410 martensitic stainless steel.
Figure 2 shows the final design of the modified Teikoku 204TF1 pump, and Fig. 3 shows a closer view  of the front magnetic bearing.
The radial bearing design is a magnetic reluctance force– based bipolar design that eliminates the need for permanent magnets. Geometry and assembly constraints limit the diameter of the thrust bearing rotor; therefore, to minimize the size of the thrust bearing stator, an offset flux path is used. This configuration allows the magnetic coils to be offset from the rotor stator air gap. The thrust bearing is split into front and rear omni-directional bearings. This configuration, which minimizes nonlinear magnetic field interactions  in the thrust bearing stator, also increases the maximum available magnetic field strength before saturation. Two
Fig. 1. Three-dimensional model of the Teikoku 204TF1 pump created after disassembly and measurement.
Fig. 2. Three-dimensional model of the modified Teikoku 204TF1 pump magnetic bearing test bed.
Fig. 3. Closer view of the combined front thrust and radial magnetic bearings.
touchdown bearings are mounted into the thrust bearings to prevent the rotor from touching the stator when the magnetic bearings are not operating or in the event of a failure.
When designing magnetic bearings, it is important to consider the entire system because of the close coupling between the mechanical, electromagnetic, and control systems. The three critical design parameters  are  the shaft forces due to the impeller, the maximum rotational speed, and the dynamics of the magnetic coil. The maximum impeller forces provide a lower bound for the magnetic flux path geometry. The maximum rotational speed of the shaft provides a lower bound on the band- width of magnetic coil current response. The rotational speed also impacts the impeller forces. Finally, the geometry influences the linearized dynamics of the shaft, which in turn provides another bound on the control system bandwidth.
III.IMPELLER FORCES
The magnetic bearing force is proportional to the cross-sectional area of the magnetic flux path. The active magnetic bearings must have sufficient force capacity to overcome any shaft forces over the full  range of the shaft movement (±0.75 mm). The primary forces on the shaft are due to  gravity,  fluid  forces on the impeller, and position-dependent hydrodynamic forces on the shaft. Typically  magnetic  bearings operate in air or a vacuum, and the position-dependent hydrodynamic forces on the shaft are ignored. In this design, the hydrodynamic forces due to the small fluid-filled gap between  the  rotor  and  stator  cannot be ignored. In Ref. 9,  the  authors  present  a  method for calculating these forces. Since the hydrodynamic forces act to restore the shaft  to  a  centered  position and they reduce to a torque when the shaft is centered during operation, we will consider only the impeller forces in the design of the bearing geometry.
The impeller/volute geometry and the operating condi- tion of the pump define the fluid forces acting on the impeller. The Teikoku 204TF1 impeller has a single volute design, closed impellers, balance holes, and a back ring.
The radial loading of the pump is affected by the volute design and the fraction of operating capacity (how far from the best efficiency point) at which the pump is operating. The radial load is given by
@1
where
Kr = radial thrust factor
H = impeller head at the flow point (m)
D = impeller diameter (m)
B = impeller width at the vane discharge including the shroud (m)
SG = specific gravity of the fluid being pumped.27
Table I summarizes the relevant physical para- meters and radial  forces  on  the  Teikoku  204TF1  pump with the minimum  and  maximum  expected  values in parentheses.
The axial loading of the pump is affected by the pump flow rate and the pressure differential created between the front and rear of the impeller and the impeller design.27 Calculations for axial impeller forces are highly uncertain. Fortunately, Teikoku tests all of their pump designs to determine the actual axial impeller forces. For the 204TF1 pump, their expected maximum axial force  is 600 N, and their tests show that the maximum measured axial force for the 0.208-m-diameter (8.188-in.-diameter) impeller is 510 N (52 kgf).
TABLE I 	IV.RADIAL BEARING
The forces on both radial bearings due to fluid forces on the impeller can be calculated based on the distances from the impeller to the bearings. We denote the impeller as the “front” of the pump, the Z   direction from the center of mass toward the impeller, and the radial bearing that is the closest to the impeller as the front bearing or bearing A. The bearing farthest from the impeller is denoted as the rear bearing or bearing B. The distance from bearing A to the impeller outlet denoted by LA is approximately 0.27 m, and the distance from bearing B to the impeller outlet denotedTeikoku 204TF1 Radial Forces by LB is approximately 0.860 m.
Using simple moment balance equations, the worst-  case reaction forces at the bearings FA and FB can be calculated as
@2
and
@3
Given a maximum radial force of Fr   1082 N, bearing    A needs to create at least 742 N of force and bearing B will need to create at least 339 N. To account for any uncertainties in the forces on the shaft, both radial mag- netic bearings are designed to create a maximum force of 2000 N.
The radial magnetic bearings will use a differential bearing driving mode. This mode utilizes a bias current i0 to linearize the relationship between the bearing force and the control current ui  t   for ui t	i0; i0 . The nonlinear force created by the radial magnetic bearing for a bipolar mode magnetic bearing can be calculated for a rotor position x and control current ui by13,14
@15
where
N = number of turns in the magnetic bearing coil
x0 = nominal air gap between the stator and rotor
A = minimum cross-sectional area of the magnetic flux path.
Assuming that the bearing operates in a region about x  0, we can linearize Eq. (4) about the operating points x  0 and ui 0, yielding the expression of the bearing force given by13,14
@6
where
@7
and
@8
Equations (5), (7), and (8) show that the linearized force characteristics of the bearing are due only to the number of turns in the coil N, the cross-sectional area of the magnetic flux A, the nominal air gap x0, and the linearizing bias current i0. Consequently, these are the primary design parameters for magnetic bearings.
Another important consideration in designing the bearing geometry is magnetic saturation. The magnetic bearing force can also be expressed as
@9
where B is the magnetic field strength and μ0 is the magnetic permeability of vacuum. Using Eq. (9) we can calculate the minimum magnetic flux cross-sectional area
for the bearing stator. The stator is made from M19 electricl  steel,  so  using  the  maximum  desired  radial
force of 2000 N and a maximum magnetic field strength of
1.4T, which is the upper bound on the linear region of the M19 electrical steel B-H curve, the minimum cross- sectional area needed for the radial bearings is 1283 mm2. The total number of turns N in  the  magnetic  bearing coil is related to the maximum magnetic field  strength  of 1.4 T and the maximum steady-state  current  sup- plied by the power electronics. Using a  maximum  current  of  ui  20  A,  the  desired  number  of  turns  in the magnetic bearing coil is calculated to be N  167   using
@10
The bearing coil windings will use 16 American wire gauge (AWG) wire, which has a nominal steady-state current limit of 20 A. Now the radial stator geometry can be set. The stator tooth width, inner and outer radius, and stack length are optimized to balance the magnetic cross-sectional area, coil cross-sectional area, and stator mass.
Based on these design constraints, the final geometry and coil parameters are shown in Table II.
The geometry chosen defines the linearized dynamics of the shaft. For this radial bearing design, ki  136:3 and kx 727044:6. The linearized force position term can be thought of as a destabilizing virtual spring attached to the shaft. This virtual spring can be related to a shaft funda- mental frequency using
@11
where m is the mass of the shaft. For the final design  with a shaft mass of 18.3391 kg, the fundamental shaft frequency is 199 rad/s (31.6 Hz).
TABLE II
Radial Bearing Geometry
Fig. 4. Radial bearing nonlinear force for M19 steel  when the rotor is in the center of the stator.
Figure 4 shows both the theoretical linearized force characteristics of the radial bearing differential drive design, which is validated by calculating the nonlinear magnetic forces using experimentally measured material properties for M19 electrical steel.
The radial bearing geometry was designed at the nominal operating point of the system. However, during startup, the shaft starts resting on the touchdown bearings, which means that there is a significantly larger air gap in the vertical direction that reduces the maximum force available to lift  the shaft to its operating position; therefore, we need to ensure that the bearing will have sufficient force at the limits of the radial motion to overcome the weight of the shaft. Calculations show that during startup, the magnetic bearing needs to produce at least 180 N of force on the shaft in the vertical direction. Figure 5 verifies that the nonlinear force produced by the radial bearing when it is resting on the touchdown bearings is sufficient to overcome gravity.
V.AXIAL BEARING
The design process for the axial bearing is identical to the radial bearing design process except for some additional geometry and material constraints. The radial bearings uti- lize laminated stators and rotors to reduce eddy current loss; however, the magnetic flux path of the axial bearings would require wedge-shaped laminations to create the axial bear- ing annulus shape. Electrical steel is available commercially only in thin sheets, so the axial bearing design is limited to
Fig. 5. Radial bearing nonlinear force for M19 steel
when the rotor is at the limit of its motion.	Fig. 6. Thrust bearing annuli and geometric quantities.
less efficient magnetic materials. Because the axial bearing will be in direct contact with water, 410 grade martensitic stainless steel was chosen. For 410 grade stainless steel,  B 1 T is the upper bound on the magnetic field strength to remain in the linear region of the B-H curve.
The axial bearing will have two concentric annulus surfaces on the stator for the magnetic flux to pass through to the rotor, as shown in Fig. 6. The maximum magnetic flux is limited by the minimum cross-sectional area of the axial bearing. This makes variations in the cross-sectional area along the magnetic flux lines unde- sirable because they only add additional mass to the bearing. To optimize the mass of the axial bearing, the cross-sectional area of the axial bearing annulus should be equal. In addition, we would like to separate the outer diameter of the smaller annulus and the inner diameter of the larger annulus by a gap larger than the thrust bearing air gap to reduce the magnetic forces between them and prevent a short circuit of the magnetic flux. Given the outer radius of the larger annulus ro, the inner radius of the smaller annulus ri, and the gap ga, we can calculate the smaller annulus outer radius r m and the larger annu- lus inner radius r m ¼ r m þ ga, as
@12
For the test bed the maximum force specification is three times the manufacturer’s expected force or 1800 N because of the higher uncertainty in the axial forces.
Using Eq. (9) with a maximum magnetic field of 1 T, the desired cross-sectional area is calculated as 2350 mm2. The inner radius ro is chosen as  43 mm to provide  a  large enough air gap between the axial bearing and shaft so that it is not creating significant radial forces. Using Eq. (12), the other axial bearing geometric parameters are r m ¼ 34:2 mm, r m ¼ 32:2 mm, and ri ¼ 17 mm. The gap ga is chosen to be 2 mm.
For a maximum magnetic field of 1 T and a maximum coil current of 20 A, using Eq. (10), the required number of turns for the axial bearing is 130. Like the radial bear- ing, 16 AWG wire was chosen for the axial bearing wind- ings. With a cross-sectional area of 1.3 mm2 and a packing factor of 0.6, the minimum area for the coil is 518 mm2.
With a bias current of 3.5 A and an air gap of
1.5mm, the thrust bearing dynamics has the linearized coefficients
ki ¼ 465:4
and
k   ¼ 1 085 963 :
Figure 7 shows the nonlinear force when using 410 grade steel and the linearized force for the thrust bearing in bipolar mode. The maximum nonlinear force corresponds to the theoretical maximum force calculated in Eq. (9).
Figure 8 shows the force response of the thrust bearing at the limit of the shaft travel. Figure 8 shows that even at
Fig. 7. Axial magnetic bearing force when centered.
Fig. 8.  Thrust bearing force at the limit of travel.
the limit of travel, the thrust bearing creates enough force to overcome the maximum expected axial force of 600 N.
VI.COIL DYNAMICS
The geometry of the magnetic flux paths based on the force requirements of the test bed and the bias current define the dynamic behavior of the magnetic bearings.
Developing an accurate model of the dynamics is the first step to designing a stabilizing controller. The dynamics of the magnetic bearing can be approximated by a linearized coupled model between the shaft motion and the coil current given by the differential:
@13
@14
where
R = coil resistance
L = nominal coil inductance
i(t) = coil current
v(t) = coil voltage.
This model assumes that the coil inductance is constant given by
@15
There is a nonlinear dependence of the induction on the air gap size, but the variations in the inductance are typically small. This nonlinear relationship is important to character- ize for accurate application of an Extended Kalman  Filter  or Unscented Kalman Filter for state estimation and for some sensorless magnetic bearing control schemes that rely on the inductance variations to estimate the shaft position. Equation (15) also does not take into account manufactur- ing variability, eddy currents, magnetic field fringing, or magnetic field coupling. These unmodeled effects are difficult to accurately quantify theoretically or with numer- ical methods. To more precisely measure the dynamics of  the coils, system identification experiments were performed on the test bed.
To capture the coil response over a wide range of frequencies, a chirp signal from 0.1 to 400 Hz was chosen as the input voltage signal. The frequency response func- tion from the input voltage to the coil current was calcu- lated using
@16
where U s is the Fourier transform of the input voltage and Y s is the Fourier transform of the measured coil current. The magnitude and phase of the frequency response function are shown in Fig.  9.  The bandwidth  of the open-loop coil response is approximately 55 Hz.
The experimental complex frequency response of the coil G s was then used to identify the system transfer function model. Figure 10 validates the identified model
Fig. 9. Magnitude and phase of the radial bearing input-output relationship.
Fig. 10. Comparison of the step input response to the identified model response.
by comparing the step response of the identified model to the step response of the coil current.
While the designed number of turns for the radial bearing is 167, the actual number of turns in the assembled radial coils is 154; therefore, for the radial magnetic bearing coils, the nominal theoretical inductance is 0.0128 H, the mean identified inductance is 0.0107 H, and the variance of the identified inductance is 1.83 10—7 H. The nominal theoretical inductance for the axial bearings is 0.0166 H, while the identified model yields an inductance of 0.1722 H, which is an order of magnitude larger than expected.
The average identified coil resistance is 2.935 Ω, which is slightly higher than the measured resistance at the output of the power electronics of 1.6 Ω.
VII.CONCLUSIONS
In this paper the design of a fully submerged active magnetic bearing test bed was detailed with a focus on design procedures that do not ignore the complex interactions between the mechancial, electromagnetic, and control systems. Some initial experimental results identifying the dynamics of the magnetic bearing coils were also presented. The goal of this test bed is to mimic the dynamics of high- temperature molten salt pumps with canned rotors so that researchers can develop and test embedded I&C and state estimation for magnetic bearings in the presence of nonlinear hydrodynamic forces between the rotor and stator.
This test bed development is a step toward the devel- opment of high-temperature magnetic bearings that can operate in contact with high-temperature fluids such as molten salts, which are the primary coolant in molten salt reactors and large-scale solar power generators.
Currently, the test bed assembly is complete, and initial open-loop state-estimation experiments have been completed. To initially determine whether the linearized steady-state force model parameters are correct, the test bed shaft was manually positioned at different air gap values over the range of motion of the shaft and the coil control current was slowly increased until the bearing force was equal to the gravitational force on the shaft. While this test had high uncertainty, it provided confi- dence in the theoretical force model parameters.
The experimental data for the open-loop dynamic response of the coils showed a  bandwidth  of  55  Hz  for the radial bearing and a bandwidth of 35 Hz for the axial bearing. This is below the 200-Hz bandwidth requirement due to the linearized spring constant or the 60-Hz bandwidth from the 3600-rpm operating speed of the pump. This lower bandwidth will make it difficult to find a stabilizing
ontroller for the magnetic bearings. To increase the band- width of the coils, inner coil control loops with a propor- tional integral controller or a lead controller will be tested. The experimentally obtained inductances for the radial magnetic bearings were within 16% of the nominal value. However, the measured inductance of the axial bearings is an order of magnitude larger than the theoretical value. This is likely due to the large eddy current losses because the axial bearing is not laminated. The experimentally obtained coil resistances are higher than the resistances measured at the output of the power electronics. This is due to the
internal resistances of the power electronics.
The next steps in the research are the development of an initial stabilizing controller so that closed-loop system identi- fication of the full system dynamics can take place. After model identification and validation, controllers will be designed using modern multivariable control design techniques and tested to compare their performance. Finally, a signal modulation and a state-estimation–based technique for estimating the shaft position based on the coupling between coil inductance and shaft position will  be  tested and compared.
Acknowledgments
This work was sponsored by the DOE NEET program on ASI, DE-AC05-00OR22725. This paper has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC, under contract  DE-AC05-00OR22725  with  the DOE. The U.S. government retains and the publisher, by accepting   the   article   for   publication,   acknowledges   that  the
U.S.government retains a nonexclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, worldwide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for U.S. government purposes. DOE will provide public access to these results of federally sponsored research in accordance with the DOE Public Access  Plan (http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan).
