<title>EFFICIENCY ASSESSMENT OF NUCLEAR ENERGY DEVELOPMENT SCENARIOS FOR RUSSIA USING MULTI-CRITERIA ANALYSIS</title>
<Affiliation>1.National Research Center Kurchatov Institute, Moscow, Russia.
2.State Science Center of the Russian Federation – Leipunskii Institute for Physics and Power Engineering (IPPE), Obninsk, Russia; e-mail: afegorov@ippe.ru.
3.Afrikantov Experimental Design Bureau of Mechanical Engineering (OKBM Afrikantov), Nizhnii Novgorod, Russia.. </Affiliation>
<author>P. N. Alekseev, V. Yu. Blandinskii, A. L. Balanin,1 A. V. Grol’,V. A. Nevinitsa, P. S. Teplov,  P. A. Fomichenko,A. V. Gulevich,V. M. Dekusar, A. F. Egorov, V. V. Korobeinikov, A. L. Moseev,E. V. Marova, A. M. Maslov, M. R. Farakshin, S. F. Shepelev,and A. V. Shirokov3</author>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>ATOMIC ENERGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Springer</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10512-020-00641-3</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10512-020-00641-3</URL>
Abstract
The development of any energy system, including nuclear, is a lengthy and multi-stage process. To evaluate the outlook, many significant factors outside the nuclear energy system and the uncertainty of future avenues of macroeconomic development must be taken into account. This task requires a multi-criteria approach to the analysis of the competitiveness of the technology using criteria that combine economic and safety indicators, environmental impacts, realization risks, and development outlook. This article reports the results of a multi-criteria systems analysis of alternative scenarios for the development of nuclear energy in Russia performed using international assessment tools.
In deciding on a strategy for the development of the nuclear energy system, one cannot rely only on economic crite- ria, especially for medium- and long-range development. A large number of factors involved in the formation of energy sys- tems, including a change in the global market and makeup of nuclear and non-nuclear technologies, affect the decision. Environmental consequences, nuclear, radiation, and fire safety, waste management, usage of internal resources such as mineral and labor resources, capacity utilization, mastery of the technology, and public opinion and therefore political stabil- ity can all play a weighty role.
A tool capable of taking into account economic and non-economic factors of electricity production is systems analy- sis. In comparing energy technologies, international programs developed by, among other organizations, IAEA and the Gen-4 International Forum are geared precisely to the use of multi-criteria multi-factor approaches in the analysis of promising nuclear energy systems.
In the present work we performed systems studies of the efficiency of not only different energy technologies but also possible energy development scenarios taking nuclear and non-nuclear components into account.
General description of the results in multi-criteria analysis of energy systems and technologies. A large number of Russian and non-Russian works examining efficiency assessments of power plants, choice of the structure of electric power systems affording stable development of not only energy but also the industry as a whole, and variants of power grids taking different criteria into account are devoted to the justification of decisions using multi-criteria methods in the energy industry [1–4]. Multi-criteria methods in the theory of decision making are based on a limited number of approaches, so that they can be easily classed according to their affiliation. The multi-criteria theory of utility most widely used in the practice of systems
TABLE 1. Alternatives for Energy Development
analysis is nothing more than a mathematical formalization of an ordinary procedure of making decisions in the presence of uncertainty [1].
The obtained indicators are based on design work on BN-1200 performed in 2016–2018, showing their effectiveness not only with respect to the predecessor projects but also competitiveness, in spite of the unique features as compared with the most advanced VVER reactors [5].
Alternative scenarios of nuclear energy development and their analysis. The electric power system in Russia is a complex and multi-component system, so that in predicting development it is important to take possible uncertainties into account. Combining nuclear and conventional non-nuclear electricity generating systems it is possible to construct different alternative scenarios and compare their efficiency. Of course, to construct full-value alternatives it is necessary to take into ac- count their regional constraints and the prospects for their use, resource possibilities, public needs, and other factors, but at the presented stage the efficacy of the alternatives was investigated neglecting the regional features. The construction of complete energy systems will make it possible to take into account the special features of nuclear and non-nuclear sources of energy.
Indeed, in such complete energy systems the efficient management of spent nuclear fuel and radioactive waste, cycle closure, and special features of the safety security become general systems problems [6]. The different variants and scenarios of such systems are compared using a single set of efficiency criteria that includes criteria associated only with nuclear energy and concrete non-nuclear technologies. A comparison in terms of the criterion of export possibilities of technologies will be made for the entire system as a whole. So, according to the criteria of a systems analysis it will be expedient to increase the construction of nuclear power generating units in foreign countries but with a complete package of fuel-related services. If the complete energy system is formed so that it interferes with exports of non-nuclear energy carriers (gas and coal), then the criteria of the systems analysis of complete systems will also show this. Environmental criteria for emissions, risk criteria for workers and the public, and others will have a similar impact.
We shall examine six alternative scenarios for electricity production by NPP, gas and coal burning TPP, and hydro- electric power plants (see Table 1). Renewable sources of energy were not taken into account in the fuel-energy balance.
It is proposed that the efficiency of model scenarios be compared in terms of key criteria covering economics, ecolo- gy, innovation, resources, exports, readiness level, and management of spent nuclear fuel and radioactive wastes. The criteria of systems scenarios are as follows: 1 – specific cost of electricity, 2 – reserve of resources [7], 3 – specific resource, 4 – oc- cupational risk [8], 5 – population risk [8], 6 – environmental impact [8], 7 – technological potential, 8 – export potential,   9 – management of spent nuclear fuel and radioactive wastes, 10 – mastery of the technology.
Alternative scenarios of energy development, including all basic forms of electricity production with equal priorities of the criteria, are shown in Fig. 1. The investigations showed that among all of them the highest potential obtains for variants with a two-component structure of nuclear energy. Among the variants with a two-component structure the scenario 1, which Fig. 1. Alternative scenarios of energy development: 1) nuclear power growing the fastest; 2) same growth rate of nuclear and non-nuclear energy; 3) stationary development of nuclear energy + gas; 4) stationary development of nuclear energy + coal;
5) reduction of the growth rate of nuclear energy + gas; 6) reduction of growth rate of nuclear energy + coal; B) priority for
specific cost of electricity (economics), exports, reduction of spent nuclear fuel amount (in terms of the weight of the criteria);
B) equilibrium variant in terms of the weights of the criteria; B) priority only for specific cost of electricity (economics).
is growing at the highest rate, has the greatest potential. This is associated with the reduction of the consumption of gas, which can be exported, reduction of CO2 emissions, and increase of the fuel resource going to the commissioning of BN-1200. Of the scenarios with stationary growth the variant with the missing capacities replaced by gas-burning sources has the highest potential. The trend is the same and scenarios with decreasing nuclear power capacity. The replacement of decommissioned nuclear capacities by coal-burning sources of energy degrades the environmental indicators, increases worker life risk asso- ciated with coal production, and increases the risk of lost years of life for the population living near TPP.
In summary, with nuclear energy growing the fastest in a two-component system with fast and thermal reactors the fuel resource of energy carriers increases, the impact on the environment, population, and workers improves, the exporting possibilities in nuclear and non-nuclear energy improve, and the consumption of gas and coal decreases.
In the first set of scenarios, it was assumed that all criteria have the same priority (B). In the subsequent set of sce-
narios, it was assumed that 20% goes to the economic indicator, 20% to the indicator for the environmental impact, 10% to technological potential, 30% to export, and 20% to management of spent nuclear fuel and radioactive waste. The potentials
of scenarios are distributed approximately in the same way as in the equilibrium assessment (B). In the third variant of the
studies, it was assumed that 40% goes to the economic indicator, 10% each for resource reserves and risks, 5% to the envi-
ronmental impact, 20% to management of spent nuclear fuel and radioactive wastes (B). The scenarios are distributed approx- imately in the same way, but taking into account the cheaper electricity production based on gas.
Conclusions. Multi-criteria analysis of alternative scenarios, including a consistent set of key criteria characterizing economics, safety, environmental impact, and export and technological potentials of the energy system showed a higher po- tential for variants with a two-component structure of nuclear energy. Among them, the highest potential obtains for scenarios realizing nuclear energy growing faster than non-nuclear energy.
Among the scenarios with stationary development, where nuclear energy reaches a stationary level after 2035, the potential is highest for the variant with the missing capacities replaced by gas-based sources. The same trend also obtains for scenarios with lower nuclear energy capacity after 2035 and its subsequent displacement. The replacement of the displaced nuclear capacities by coal energy sources degrades the environmental indicators, increases the worker life risk associated with coal production, and increases the population risk.
In summary, with the two-component nuclear energy with fast and thermal reactors developing most rapidly the fuel re- source of energy carriers increases, the impact on the environment, population, and workers improves, the export possibilities in nuclear and non-nuclear energy increase, and coal and gas consumption decreases. The results obtained in the present work make it possible to determine the direction for future improvements in fast and thermal reactors as well as fuel fabrication technologies using materials separated during reprocessing, making two-component closed-NFC nuclear energy even more competitive.