<title>COMPARISON OF CLOSED NUCLEAR FUEL CYCLE TECHNOLOGIES</title>
<Affiliation>1.Frumkin Institute of Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences (IPCE RAS), Moscow, Russia.
2.Bochvar High-Technology Research Institute of Inorganic Materials (VNIINM), Moscow, Russia; e-mail: yavoskresenskaya</Affiliation>
<author>A. Yu. Shadrin,V. B. Ivanov,	M. V. Skupov,V. M. Troyanov, and A. A. Zherebtsov</author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>ATOMIC ENERGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Springer</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10512-016-0171-2</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10512-016-0171-2</URL>
Abstract
The aim of this work is to compare different approaches to nuclear fuel cycle closure from the standpoint of plutonium utilization, fuel type, and reprocessing technology. It is shown that the choice of mixed uranium- plutonium nitride fuel for fast reactors will make it possible to effectively close the NFC and at the same time develope safe nuclear power; the combined (pyrochemical + hydro) technology will make it possible to reprocess any type of high-burnup short-decayed irradiated fuel from fast reactors and to obtain the final uranium-plutonium-neptunium product suitable for use in any fuel production technology.
The closure of the nuclear fuel cycle and use of fast reactors in the nuclear power system make possible, aside from the expansion of the resource base via full-fledged use of 238U, the solution of the main problems: prevention of the accumu- lation of irradiated nuclear fuel and minimization of long-lived radioactive wastes by recovery of trans-uranium-plutonium elements. The key questions pertaining to closed NFC technologies are recycling of regenerated uranium, plutonium, and neptunium, recovery of transplutonium elements such as americium and curium, whose management can differ significantly, viz. after extraction americium can be sent to transmutation and curium to technological storage for up to 100 yr. In this time, curium largely decays with plutonium isotopes being formed, which subsequently can be used as fissile material in urani- um-plutonium compositions. The residual amount of long-lived curium can be sent to transmutation similarly to americium. The desired use of plutonium and neptunium can be implemented in a system with thermal and fast reactors. In addition, burning of americium and curium can be implemented only in a system with fast reactors.
Variants of Plutonium and Neptunium Recycling
Our work is motivated by the need to pick an effective technology to implement a closed NFC. Three of the main variants of plutonium and, possibly, neptunium recycling are now being examined:
1)the use of an unseparated mixture of uranium and plutonium, extracted from the irradiated fuel of thermal reactors, for fabrication of fresh fuel with additional 235U introduced; in this variant the use of neptunium is not formulated as a problem [1];
2)the use of plutonium extracted from the irradiated fuel of thermal and fast reactors for fabrication of mixed urani- um-plutonium oxide fuel for sodium-cooled fast reactors burning neptunium and americium simultaneously [2, 3]; and
3)the use of plutonium extracted from the irradiated fuel of fast reactors for fabrication of mixed uranium-plutonium nitride fuel for lead- or sodium-cooled fast reactors burning neptunium and americium simultaneously [2].
A closed NFC imposes the safety, environmental acceptability, and economic efficiency requirements not only on the reactor facility but also on the technology of fuel fabrication, irradiated fuel reprocessing, and radioactive wastes management.
Closed NFC Based on Thermal Reactors with Recycling of Mixed Uranium-Plutonium Oxide Fuel (unseparated mixture of uranium and plutonium, extracted from irradiated nuclear fuel of thermal reactors)
One variant is a closed NFC with fuel obtained from the reprocessing of irradiated fuel of thermal reactors without
separation of uranium and plutonium, which meets the nonproliferation regime requirements of nuclear weapons [1, 4]. The total content of 235U, 239Pu, and 241Pu in the product of reprocessing depends on the initial enrichment, burnup, and decay time of irradiated fuel and does not exceed 1.6–2%. It is proposed that enriched native uranium be used as the second compo- nent of the fuel composition for increasing the content of fissile isotopes to the required level. The total content of 239+141Pu in such fuel is less than 1%.
A cycle with such fuel is attractive because regenerated plutonium is brought into a limited number of recycles and native uranium (~25%) is conserved. Outside such a cycle based on fast reactors it is impossible to recycle regenerated ura- nium and plutonium – their quality degrades with increasing number of recycles because of, specifically, the accumulation of even isotopes of uranium and degradation of the isotopic composition of plutonium – and to efficiently burn Np, Am, Cm, and other radionuclides. The use of such fuel in a cycle combining thermal and fast reactors has not been thoroughly examined.
A drawback of a closed NFC with recycling of mixed uranium-plutonium fuel obtained from an unseparated mixture of uranium and plutonium from the reprocessing of irradiated fuel of fast reactors is that not only must the entire volume of irradiated fuel be reprocessed but enriched uranium must also used, and evidently enrichment of less than 20% must still optimized first and foremost from the standpoint of economic competitiveness. In addition, it is proposed that such fuel be used in all fuel elements and fuel assemblies in the core, which signifies a multi-fold increase of the cost of fabrication com- pared with uranium fuel. According to data from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (USA) in 2011, the cost of fabri- cation of fuel using native uranium was almost 10 times lower than for mixed uranium-plutonium oxide fuel (250 versus 2400
$/kg h.m.). Moreover, after several recycles the extracted uranium with relatively high concentration of even isotopes will accumulate without any prospects for its subsequent use. It should be note that after recycling in a thermal reactor the accu- mulated even isotopes of plutonium can be utilized only in a fast reactor.
Closed NFC Based on Thermal Reactors with Mixed Uranium-Plutonium Oxide Fuel
In this variant, all plutonium is extracted from the irradiated fuel and used to fabricate part of the makeup fuel ele- ments with additional makeup of the reactor with enriched-uranium fuel. Mixed uranium-plutonium oxide fuel, just like re- cycled fuel, can be fabricated without separating uranium and plutonium, solving in this manner the problem of nonprolifer- ation of nuclear materials.
A drawback of this cycle is that irradiated fuel must be used and reprocessed and native uranium must be enriched at the same time. In addition, higher production costs pertain only to makeup fuel; the uranium fuel will be produced at the relatively low price of 250 $/kg h.m. for uranium and 2400 $/kg h.m. for mixed fuel. As in the case of recycled uranium, the regenerated uranium with high content of even isotopes is removed from the fuel cycle without any prospects for its subsequent use.
Closed NFC Based on Fast Reactors with Mixed Oxide and Nitride Fuel
Distinguishing features of such a cycle based on fast reactors are self-fueling with fissile materials and the possibility of expanded breeding of fuel with ratio >1 even without breeding blankets. The latter condition follows from the requirements of nonproliferation of nuclear weapons – absence of blankets in principle eliminates their separative reprocessing with ex- traction of low-background plutonium. After reprocessing, it is possible to extract from the irradiated fuel of fast reactors an amount of fissile materials that is sufficient for the fabrication of fuel for subsequent makeup. In the ideal case a commis- sioned fast reactor one day supplies itself with fuel for the entire period of operation and does not require uranium enrichment services. Only native or waste uranium is used for makeup. Regenerated uranium is not removed from the cycle and does not accumulate.
An additional advantage of fast reactors is the possibility of utilizing neptunium and americium. It is this property of fast reactors that is associated with the high density and intensity of the neutron flux in which long-lived actinides reach an equilibrium between accumulation and transition into other, safe isotopes.
Choice of fuel composition. We shall confine ourselves to an analysis of only fast reactors which are cooled by liquid metal and possess enhanced safety properties owing to the elimination of accidents with loss of core cooling. The si- multaneous requirements of using liquid-metal coolant, absence of breeding blankets, and minimum reactivity excess have
TABLE 1. Characteristics of Dense Compositions with Mixed Uranium-Plutonium Oxide Fuel
shown that mixed oxide fuel, which is well-studied and perfected, cannot satisfy in a high-power reactor the requirement of small reactivity excess ΔK/K ≤ 0.5% in the cold and hot states taking account of fuel burnup. This requirement can be satis- fied only if the fuel density exceeds 13–14 g/cm3. The characteristics presented in Table 1 show the prospects for metallic or mixed nitride dense fuel depending on two basic factors:
1)the choice of liquid-metal coolant – sodium or lead (sodium is compatible with many compositions, lead is com- patible only with nitride);
2)the choice of the thermodynamic parameters of the first-loop coolant in designing the reactor (the maximum fu- el-element cladding temperature can reach 700°C for nitride fuel and ≤630°C for metallic fuel).
A choice of the type of reactor facility on the basis of the type of coolant has not been made [5]. In our country the BN-1200 reactor with sodium coolant and the BREST reactor with lead coolant are now under development. In both reactor facilities, temperatures above 500°C are obtained at the entry into the turbine of steam, i.e., the maximum temperature of fu- el-element cladding exceeds 650°C. The universal fuel for both types of reactors is only mixed uranium-plutonium nitride fuel. Reprocessing of irradiated mixed uranium-plutonium and nitride fuel of fast reactors. The hydrometallurgical technology for reprocessing short-decayed irradiated fuel with high burnup and high fissile materials content is not suffi- ciently effective because of many problems, first and foremost, deposit formation at high content of fission products and the difficulty of managing tritium-containing solutions [6–8]. Dry (water-free) reprocessing technologies are characterized as compact, radiation resistant, and low-waste [9, 10]. A drawback is their low purification factor. An attempt to combine the advantages of both approaches was made during the reprocessing of combined (pyrochemical + hydrometallurgical) technol- ogies for reprocessing irradiated fuel, which was based on the use of water-free head operations, making it possible to purify fissile materials 100–1000-fold by removing fission products, and hydrometallurgical refining operations (Fig. 1) [11]. The
operations of the pyrochemical part of the scheme include the following:
1)removal of fuel-element cladding in zinc;
2)preliminary reduction of the irradiated mixed oxide fuel to metal;
3)reprocessing of nitride, metallic, or metalized irradiated fuel with anodic and cathodic products obtained;
4)local gas purification of pyrochemical operations (Cs, Sb, Te, Se, radioactive inert gases, tritium), elimination of salt and cadmium from different products;
Fig. 1. Flow diagram of combined (pyro+hydro) technology for reprocessing spent fuel from fast reactors.
5)salt purification No. 1 by removal of plutonium with PuO2 being formed after elimination of the salt;
6)salt purification No. 2 by removal of rare-earth elements, Am, Cm, and U with oxide fractions of Am, Cm, U, rare-earth elements obtained after elimination of the salt; and
7)salt crystallization purification No. 3 by removal of alkali and alkaline-earth metals with a bar obtained for vitri-
fication and return of the purified salt to reprocessing.
The operations of the hydrometallurgical process stage of the combined technology include the following:
1)dissolution of the cathodic deposits;
2)dissolution of the plutonium dioxide deposits;
3)dissolution of the oxides of rare earth, transplutonium elements;
4)gas-purification of the dissolution operations;
5)clarification of solutions;
6)extraction-crystallization refining of the unseparated mixture uranium–plutonium–neptunium;
7)extraction of the transplutonium elements fraction from the raffinate of the extraction-crystallization refining of U, Pu, and Np;
8)separation of Am–Cm vapors;
9)evaporation of liquid medium- and high-level wastes;
10)production of uranium, plutonium, neptunium, and americium oxides;
11)production of curium oxides for long-term storage;
12)management of medium-level solutions; and
13)solidification of high-level solutions.
We shall now examine some operations of the pyrochemical process stage of the combined technology in greater detail.
Production of actinide oxides in the combined technology. Ordinarily, mixed actinide oxides from the solutions are obtained by ammonia precipitation of mixtures of ammonium diuranate and plutonium hydroxide or co-precipitation of
Fig. 2. Thermal analysis of hydrated oxides of uranium (1), plutonium (2), and neptunium (3) (a) and x-ray diffraction pattern after heat-treatment of the mixture in air at 800°C [12] (b).
ammonia-uranyl-plutonyl-tricarbonates with subsequent filtration, drying, and calcination of the obtained compounds at
~800°C in a reductive argon-hydrogen atmosphere. The drawbacks are obvious: difficulty of implementation and multi- staged processes. For the combined process, the method of obtaining actinide oxides in nitric-acid solutions with hydrazine hydrate was adopted for the combined process as the main technology for obtaining actinide oxides [12, 13]. Heating of ni- tric-acid solutions of U, Np, and Pu (~90°C) in hydrazine hydrate results in the formation of hydrated dioxides in solution, which at 300°C transform into crystalline dioxides. It was shown that thermolysis of a solution of mixed nitrates of U, Np, and Pu under the same conditions makes it possible to obtain at first in solution hydrated (U, Np, Pu)O2·nH2O, which upon heating in air to ~800°C transforms into a crystalline product comprising a solid solution of uranium, plutonium, and neptu- nium dioxides. This method makes it possible to obtain solid solutions of actinide dioxides with variable composition. It is shown in [13, 14] that the black deposit of mixed compounds of U, No, and Pu obtained by this method is a mixture of hy- drated dioxides. The x-ray diffraction pattern shows this to be an x-ray amorphous compound. Only a single phase of an ac- tinide dioxide (U, Pu, Np)O2 or a homogeneous mixture of three dioxides is identified from the results of the x-ray phase analysis in the sample of the mixture of oxides which are heated to 800°C (Fig. 2).
Extraction and separation of americium and curium. The management of transplutonium elements is not consid- ered in a closed NFC based on reactors with recycling of mixed or uranium-plutonium fuel, but it is provided in a cycle with fast reactors operating on mixed oxide as well as mixed nitride fuel. Large-scale investigations of technologies for extraction and separation of americium and curium are now being conducted for solving the problem of burning americium. Extraction systems based on diglycolamide and other amides as well as diamides are being extensively studied for hydrometallurgical technologies using the oxidation of americium to Am(IV) [20] and others [21]. However, processes based on bis-triazinyl-pyr- idine [22], di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acids [23, 24] and carbamoyl methylene phosphinoxides [25, 26] remain most suitable for commercial use even though they are not fully perfected.
The method of intergroup separation of rare-earth and transplutonium elements, based on the use of the well-known extracting agent CMPO (carbamoyl methylene phosphinoxide) in the new (for this extracting agent) diluent formal-n2 (octo- fluoropentanol), was tested in the course of the development of the combined technology for reprocessing irradiated mixed nitride fuel [26]. A diagram is presented in Fig. 3. Dynamic tests of this scheme, using a model solution and real raffinate of the purex process from reprocessing of irradiated fuel from VVER-1000 (burnup 60 GW·days/ton), showed the intergroup separa- tion of rare-earth and transplutonium elements (Table 2) to be highly efficient. Thus, the new extraction mixture 0.2 mol/liter CMPO in a mixture of 30% TBP–70% formal-n2 efficiently extracts americium and other actinides.
In summary, the proposed combined (pyrochemical + hydrometallurgical) technology is an example of a positive synergetic effect in which a combination of two methods leads to a combination of their positive properties and permits:
Fig. 3. Flow diagram of the extraction of rare-earth and trans-plutonium elements of the extraction mixture 0.2 mol/liter CMPO in the mixture 30% TBP–70% formal-n2 [26]:
1)feed solution; 2) washing solution 1; 3) washing solution 2; 4) spent washing solu- tion 2; 5) re-extracting solution 1; 6) re-extracting solution 2; 7, 9) spent extracting agent;
8) light-lanthanide fraction; 10) actinide and heavy lanthanide fraction; 11) raffinate;
12) extracting agent.
1)reprocessing of irradiated nuclear fuel of fast reactors with high burnup and short decay time, thereby reducing the storage volume;
2)reprocessing of any type of irradiated nuclear fuel of fast reactors; and
3)obtaining uranium-plutonium-neptunium product of any degree of purification for the pellet fuel-fabrication technology.
Conclusion. Analysis shows that variants of a closed NFC based on thermal reactors with mixed recycled or urani- um-plutonium fuel can be an effective step in the transition to a system based on fast reactors with mixed oxide or nitride fuel. These variants are not a full-fledged comprehensive solution for closing the fuel cycle and they do not satisfy the simultaneous requirements of using liquid-metal coolant in fast reactors, absence of breeding blankets, and minimal reactivity excess. These variants do not eliminate the need for enriching uranium for fabricating fuel for thermal reactors, since these reactors cannot breed nuclear fuel.
A comprehensive and full-fledged solution for NFC closure is implementation using fast reactors. In addition, high-density fuel is promising, and from this standpoint mixed uranium-plutonium oxide can be regarded only as one step in the transition to a closed NFC with mixed nitride or metallic fuel.
It is impossible to avoid a variant strategy for the development of nuclear power that stipulates a two-component sys- tem with thermal and fast reactors. It is precisely this simultaneous presence of both components that is expected in the 21st century. The possibility of using mixed oxide fuel for water moderated and cooled thermal reactors, where the source of pluto- nium for fuel will be the plutonium produced in fast reactors among other sources, is discussed in such a system. In order to organize expanded breeding of plutonium, the fast reactors will be equipped with blankets, which will be a departure from the complex of fundamental requirements of them, since it becomes possible in this case to reprocess screen assemblies separately with the production of the extracted plutonium. Of course, in part, the requirement of nonproliferation of fissile materials will be met by organizing the reprocessing of the screen assemblies so that a mixture is extracted in the form of mixed uranium and plutonium oxide. In this case, the guarantee of nonproliferation becomes not the impossibility of extracting plutonium from the screen assemblies because they are physically absent but rather the organizational measures and production control.
TABLE 2. Distribution of the Target Components over the Products of the Technological Scheme for the Separation of Rare-Earth and Transplutonium Elements by the Extraction Mixture 0.2 mol/liter CMPO in the Mixture 30%TBP–70%Formal-n2 from Model Raffinate of the Purex Process of Reprocessing of Irradiated Fuel from VVER-1000 [26], % initial
It can be expected that in order to meet the requirements for minimal reactivity excess in the core of a fast reactor preference will be given to nitride fuel for the fuel assemblies in the core as well as for the screen assemblies. In addition, the product sent after reprocessing of the irradiated nitride fuel of the screen assemblies to fuel fabrication for thermal reactors will comprise a mixed uranium-plutonium oxide fuel. Such a solution can be successfully implemented by using the com- bined (pyro+hydro) reprocessing technology that will permit the following:
1)reprocessing of the irradiated fuel of fast reactors with high burnup and short decay;
2)reduction of the volume of the stored irradiated fuel;
3)reprocessing of any type of irradiated fuel of fast reactors; and
4)obtaining the final uranium-plutonium-neptunium product suitable for fuel refabrication by the pellet technology.