<title>An innovative device to transport electron gun automatically in nuclear power plant</title>
<author>Hao Wan, Wu Zhao, Wei Li, Ling Chen and Xin Guo</author>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Affiliation>a.School of Manufacturing Science and Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China; bScience and Techonology on Reactor System Design Technology Laboratory, Nuclear Power Institute of China, Chengdu, China</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2019.1651228</DOI>
<URL> https://doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2019.1651228</URL>
ABSTRACT
The electron gun, as the equipment to generate and control nuclear reactions, has been  widely used in nuclear power plants of the traveling wave reactor. To avoid the damage of radiation to maintenance personnel and improve the safety and security of nuclear reaction,    it was necessary to realize the automatic transportation of electron gun. However, the work- ing conditions of the automotic devices in a nuclear radiation environment were harsh and complex, which required the high operational reliability. Combining with the features and working environment, an innovative engineering design process based on quality function deployment (QFD) and function-behavior-structure (FBS) model was proposed for designing the transport device in the nuclear industry. With the guidance of this process, ﬁrstly, the problems and technical characteristics of the transport device were analyzed by the QFD method to obtain basic functions. Then, the FBS model was used to assist the designer to express knowledge and expand the search space of the schemes of control, structure, and material. Finally, the overall design scheme of the automatic transport device was obtained    by adjusting these preliminary schemes. The design provided a solution to the possible interference phenomenon in automatic transportation and achieved the maximum reliability and safety.
KEYWORDS
Transport device; electron gun; radiation protection; nuclear security; design
1.Introduction
Safety and security are the primary consideration in nuclear power development and have always been the focus of attention [1,2]. In the traveling wave reactor, the electron gun is an important part of the high- energy electron beam and used to emit neutrons on fuel rods to cause nuclear ﬁssion to generate nuclear energy. However, in the event of an emergency, such as vulnerable parts damaged or power outage, if the electron gun cannot be removed from the hot cham- ber in time, it may lead to nuclear leakage, which will have serious consequences for the surrounding envir- onment and safety of residents. In the early years, maintenance personnel wearing bulky radiation suits transport the electron gun manually, but the nuclear radiation would cause great harm to them. And after the electron gun enters the hot chamber nuclear environment to complete its work, the vulnerable parts of the electron gun may be damaged without warning and need to be replaced [3]. The Nuclear Regulatory Commission’s regulation 10 CFR 20 sti- pulates that maintenance  personnel  cannot  receive  a full-body dose of more than 50mSv per year and once this has been reached they must stop working immediately [4]. This necessitates an automatic  device to transport an electron gun.
At present, there are few reports on the research and application of automatic transport devices for electron gun in the nuclear  environment.  Some works of literature mention that handling heavy radioactive loads such as fuel rods or contaminated waste have been performed with robots [5–8], but when using robots to deal with  nuclear  accidents,  the related devices are limited or easily damaged in high radiation, high temperature, high pressure, nar- row space, slopes and curves [9]. The bridge crane mechanism tends to transfer solid waste in  the nuclear reactor, which can realize unattended opera- tion in an open space [10]. But the transportation route and installation space of the electron gun are not enough spacious. Besides, if the device mechan- ism is complex and placed in a nuclear radiation environment for a long time, the hardware is easily aging, and the diﬃculty of debugging and mainte- nance can lead to a sharp increase in costs [11].
The complex and radiative working conditions have caused great diﬃculties in the design of transport devices for the electron gun. This is the typical diﬃcult problem of engineering design in the nuclear radiation environment, which is confronted with vagueness between engineering problems and technical character- istics, non-formalization between functional require- ments and structural parameters. To improve work eﬃciency and realize the automation, this paper pro- poses an innovative engineering design process for the automatic transport device of the electron gun in the nuclear industry. The process has played an active role in guiding the designer to design the transport device.
2.Task description
The electron gun needs to be transported to the hot chamber by an automatic device to emit neutrons  on fuel rods in a certain nuclear power plant of the traveling wave reactor. Figure 1 shows the working conditions of this  automatic  device.  The  transport  device  runs  in    a narrow space to a designated installation area to realize a series of automated operations. The following tasks should be accomplished by the device:
●Through three sealed doors, the connection of pipelines between the equipment in the hot chamber and electron gun can be completed.
●Even if there are some faults in the device, the electron gun can be safely removed.
●The device has safety and reliability under neu- tron radiation conditions.
3.Innovative engineering design process of transport device based on QFD/FBS
Given the special problems of engineering devices under complex conditions, the method of combining QFD with FBS model can be adopted. First, QFD is used to transform engineering problems to technical characteristics, indicating the design direction, and then FBS is used to guide the concrete innovative design from functions to  structures.  The  problems of what to do and how to do can be solved succes-  sively in this process, which can improve the design eﬃciency and capability of engineering devices.
3.1.QFD method
QFD theory is put forward by experts in the ﬁeld of quality management [12]. It is mainly used to solve the problems that there are diﬀerences between user
requirements and technical characteristics. The core idea of QFD is that from the beginning of feasibility analysis to the production of products are driven by the requirements and problems, which can be trans- formed into information that can be understood by diﬀerent design roles. The house of quality (HoQ) is   a matrix frame with intuitive expression and quanti- tative analysis of technical importance weights [13], which is a good tool for realizing quality function deployment.
3.2.FBS model
Product conceptual design is an iterative process, which is divided by Greo into three stages [14]: functional modeling, behavioral modeling, and struc- tural modeling. The iterative process of each stage is based on the designers’ domain knowledge or auxili- ary knowledge base, and its essence is to decompose tasks gradually. The core of the FBS model is to assist the designer to express the knowledge and formalize the synthesis, analysis and evaluation methods in the design process.
3.3.Innovative design process
The innovative design process for transport device of the electron gun is carried out by integrating of QFD method and FBS model. Compared with conventional products, the design of the transport device needs to consider the restriction of nuclear radiation. Based on the existing design process [15,16], the following improvements should be implemented: (1) the design object should be changed to the engineering device in a complex environ- ment with many constraints, such as working environ- ment, given size, special materials, etc. (2) The constraints cannot be broken through or changed, the design must be carried out under the constraints. (3) The design process requires detailed decomposition of the total function, deﬁnition of the sub-functions and mapping of each sub- function with FBS. (4) The resulting sub-structures are not one-to-one correspondences with design problems, and sometimes requires a combination of multiple sub- structures to solve a problem. The improved process of innovative design can guide designers to deﬁne problems,
Figure 1. The schematic diagram of working conditions.
build HoQ of the transport device, map with FBS model and evaluate schemes. The innovative engineering design process of the transport device is shown in Figure 2.
4.Innovative scheme design of transport device of electron gun
4.1Requirements and problems
In-depth communication with the user and detailed analysis of working conditions of the device, the following engineering problems, and diﬃculties will be encountered in the design process.
(1)The device is exposed to the neutron radiation and little gamma radiation. It is necessary to use anti-neutron and gamma radiation materi- als to make protective shields and parts.
(2)Avoid the use of sensors and microelectronic components to improve radiation resistance.
(3)The device can automatically open, pass and close the three sealed doors.
(4)The guide rail has a non-linear structure, but it cannot be stuck when the device is working, which will aﬀect the normal operation.
(5)If the electrical system fails, the mechanical sys- tem should guarantee the electron gun exit safely.
(6)Accurate positioning of the device to achieve the inspection and replacement of vulnerable
parts and other functions.
(7)The other engineering requirements and pro-(7)blems include simple structure, safety and reliability, easy disassembly and maintenance, and so on.After sorting out, the engineering requirements  and problems of the device include R1: radiation protection, R2: stable speed, R3: non-stuck, R4: auto- mation, R5: positioning, R6: non-microelectronic, R7: emergency exit, R8: power supply, R9: system control, R10: high safety, R11: reliability, R12: maintenance and R13: long life.
According to the paper [13], analytic hierarchy process (AHP) is used to analyze and process the acquired requirements and  problems  information. To measure the relative degree of importance  for  each requirement, a pairwise comparison matrix for the requirements is completed:
Where the larger the value of aij , the more important object i is than object j.
Then, the normalized importance weighting of requirements can be computed, as shown in Table 1. Furthermore, to check for consistency in the pair- wise comparison matrix, the maximum eigenvalue λmax of A is computed to be 14.359, and consistency
index CI are computed as follows.
@
By querying, the value of the random index RI is 1.56,  so  CI=RI  is  0.072.  Since  CI=RI  < 0:10,  the
degree  of  consistency  is  in  compliance.  Therefore,
the importance weighting of requirements can be provided for the QFD transformation.
Figure 2. The innovative engineering design process of transport device based on QFD/FBS.
Table 1. The normalized importance weighting of the requirements.
4.2.Function determination and decomposition
Based on the analysis of engineering requirements and problems, the transformation from engineering pro- blems to technical characteristics is completed accord- ing to the experience and knowledge of designers. The HoQ of the transport device consists of the relationship matrix between the requirements and technical charac- teristics and the importance degree of technical char- acteristics. The importance degree is the resource allocation priority of the design process, as shown in Table 2. The degree of importance and the normalized importance degree for each technical characteristics can be computed [13], and the results are shown on the bottom two rows of Table 2. The table reﬂects the correlation between engineering requirements and technical characteristics. It also deﬁnes the design direc- tion and technical priority for designers. For example, the signal marking must be prioritized over others.
Through a qualitative description, the technical
characteristics are transformed into functional ele- ments. According to the functional division standard of general mechanical products, the total function of the device is divided into four parts: the control system function, mechanical system function, relia- bility, and safety function. The function decomposi- tion diagram of the transport device is obtained, as shown in Figure 3.
4.3.FBS mapping
In the process of structure design, FBS model is used to map the functions to structures based on the designers’ domain knowledge or auxiliary knowledge base, and the speciﬁc mapping process of FBS is  sorted out as shown in Figure 4.
There can be multiple alternative structures to implement a behavior, which is essential to achieve innovative design. And environmental constraints have to be taken into account in choosing the appro- priate structures. The gray boxes in Figure 4 are the part of candidate structures that are not chosen due   to environmental constraints, as detailed in Section
4.4.FBS is an iterative model, for example, S1 can continue to decompose sub-behaviors and sub- structures.
4.4.Structure scheme design
From the FBS mapping, the preliminary structure (S1-S10) of each function is obtained in detail as follows:
S1: There are two ways of signal transmission for automatic control: wireless and cable. But the wireless control system and weak current will be disturbed by the rays in the radiation ﬁeld. To avoid the inﬂuences, the device relies on strong direct current control to provide electric energy and start/stop signal. And the two metal guide rails of S2 are used as the transmis- sion lines. By switching the positive and negative poles of the current, the device can  keep  forward  and backward movement.
S2: In the domain of automated guided vehicle, the ways of path navigation include electromagnetic, laser, and visual path-following system. But these  ways need to be equipped with microelectronic com- ponents, which are not stable in the radiation envir- onment.  This  system  uses  two  guide  rails  to  plan  a moving route and limit switch to locate the posi- tion. When the limit switch at the front end of mov- ing direction of the device touches a sealed door, the device stops and waits for the sealed door to open.
S3: The signal instructions are required for open- ing or closing the sealed doors and starting or stop- ping the transporter. The timer, magnetic or photoelectric sensor of limit switch hardly  survives for a long time in the radiation environment. As shown in Figure 5, the spring pressure switch, designed as a pure mechanical limit switch at the  front end of moving direction, is in a closed state
(a) while approaching a sealed door. When it touches the sealed door, the door forces the spring to com- press and the switch is oﬀ (b). At this time, the circuit of the motor is open, but the device keeps moving for a very small distance because of inertia, while the strong damping keeps the device in a static state. Then, the ammeter in the circuit loop has a change   of some value, and the engineer gets this signal to close the last door and open next door (c).  Finally,  the spring bounces back and the circuit of the motor  is closed to go on.
S4: The kinetic energy from fuel energy conversion is not controllable as that from electric energy con- version. The drive system of the device adopts direct current motor which can work in the strong current system. The power of the motor is supplied by  the  two guide rails. Compared with the alternating cur- rent motor, the forward and reverse of the direct current motor can be controlled by the current direc- tion. The rotating motion of the motor is converted  to the wheels through couplings.
S5: The rotational motion of the motor is trans- ferred into linear motion of the device through the
Table 2. HoQ of the transport device.
Figure 3. The function decomposition diagram of transport device.
gear wheels and rack guide rails. Using mechanical transmission as much as possible can not only increase the damping of the motion system but also ensure the stability of the pressure switch.
S6: The inner and outer travel distances of the guide rails are diﬀerent when turning, and the gears on both sides are easy to cause motion jam. The inner guide rail is designed as a rack structure with the gear wheels. The smooth guide rail and round wheels are used as followers on the outer side, as shown in  Figure 6. To a certain extent, a small amount of sliding distance is allowed on the outer wheels,   which can eﬀectively prevent the device from jam- ming at turning and ensure the smoothness of the whole movement.
S7: When the transport device moves to the installa- tion area, the electron gun needs to connect six groups of pipelines with the equipment in the hot chamber. The six groups of pipelines are symmetrically distribu- ted on both sides of the device. Each group of interfaces is connected by a conical interface, which can ensure the contact area, positioning accuracy and sealing of the interface, as shown in Figure 7. The device is stopped at the position control module by a pressure switch. The left and right interface modules are connected to the pipelines of the electron gun under the control of elec- tromagnet switches (K1 and K2). The function of elec- tromagnet switch K3 is to move the slider to the right to reconnect the current loop of the motor when the device needs to exit.
S8: To solve the situation that the device cannot exit due to the failure of the electrical system (mainly the motor) in the nuclear radiation environment, the mechanical redundancy design of  the  device  must be carried out. That just says, when  there  is  a  fault in the conversion of electric energy, it requires additional energy and motion components to execute the exit action. The battery energy storage system is not reliable enough. And the traction rope  system  can only be used as an alternative because of the
Figure 4. FBS Mapping of the Transport Device.
Figure 5. The device passes through the sealed door.
Figure 6. Guide rails and wheels structure.
operational complexity at the sealed door. However, the clockwork spring can be designed as a spare mechanical energy storage mechanism, as shown in Figure 8. The potential energy of the clockwork  spring should be greater than the work done to over- come the kinetic friction. When the situation hap- pens, the energy of clockwork spring will be triggered by the electromagnet switch K4 and released to the gear wheels through the transmission mechanism.
S9: This structure is used to replace vulnerable parts in the electron gun. It is  a  complex  system.  The detailed structure of maintenance has been described in our previous work [3].
S10: Increasing the distance from the radiation source and reducing the time to be radiated are diﬃcult for the device. Therefore, the damage of radiation can only be reduced by employing the material shield. The stainless steel is used as the main material for the
Figure 7. Fast mechanical interface structure.
Figure 8. Clockwork spring for mechanical energy storage.
transport device and guide rails. And lead boron poly- ethylene composite material containing hydrogen can be used as the protective shield for the other compo- nents. The neutron absorptivity can reach 92.97% while the material thickness is 5mm.
4.5.Overall structural scheme
By integrating the above structures, the overall struc- tural design scheme of the transport device of the electron gun in the nuclear radiation  environment can be obtained, as shown in Figure 9. This scheme fully takes into account the various working situa- tions in the process of the automatic transportation system and has good adaptability to the complex and radiative working conditions.
5.
Discussion
5.1Meanings of the new design method
The conventional design methods in the nuclear industry mainly follow the principles of Pahl and Beitz’s Systematic Design Approach [17], which includes the steps: clarifying task, conceptual design, embodiment design, and detail design.
The design tasks in complex environments are usually ambiguous, and many factors aﬀecting the device must be considered. The new and initial  design task of the device in this paper is to transport the electron gun automatically. This task has a strong openness  and  requires  the  designer  to   synthesize  a large amount of design information.  In  other words, the key to designing the device is the phase     of conceptual design. Compared with the conven- tional method of clarifying task, such as the checklist, the task of this transport device ﬁrst needs to identify the user wishes, engineering requirements and pro- blems, and then transforms them into technical char- acteristics  to  obtain  functional  elements.  QFD  is     a suitable approach to this phase. Moreover, because of the complexity and constraints of environmental impact factors, it is necessary to quantify the techni- cal priority of engineering characteristics to  reduce the technical contradictions in the design process.
The core of the conceptual design of System Design Approach is to decompose functions into sub-functions, then ﬁnd structural solutions for each sub-function, and ﬁnally synthesize all the structural solutions to analyze and evaluate. However, this conceptual design process directly transforms the subjective world (function) into the physical world (structure), which relies heavily on the designer’s practical experiences. Introducing the behavior concept into the mapping process of function and struc- ture as a bridge can help conventional design methods to ﬁnd the principal solution from the root. This process can be supported by the knowledge base. For example, in the design of S3, the behavior acquisition signal is abstracted from the function sealed door control. The designer can query the knowledge base to ﬁnd the ways or structures of generating signals, such as pressure signal, time signal or magnetic ﬁeld signal. Therefore, the functional decompo- sition based on FBS model will be conducive to the innovative design. By the way, in the knowledge-based engineering management of large enterprises, such as Nuclear Power Institute of China, the resource organiza- tion of design knowledge has not only taken the form of the ordinary design case but also constructed as the knowledge base based on FBS model.
After obtaining the overall design scheme, the
designer can combine the quantitative geometry, kine- matics, force, and other parameters to carry out the next step of the embodiment design and detail design.
Figure 9. Overall structural design scheme of the transport device.
Table 3. The RPNs of the existing and new devices’ failure modes.
5.2Meanings of the new device
Compared with the existing device, ﬁrstly, the new device uses two rack rails instead of the smooth rails like the train. It helps to provide parking damping. And the two rails are used as the transmission lines. Secondly, when the motor fails due to the radiation, the new device uses the redundant clockwork spring structure to exit the hot chamber instead of dragged out manually by a rope. Besides, the start-stop signal of the new device comes directly from the circuit information, while the existing device can only be observed through the worker visual ﬁeld.
The failure mode and eﬀects analysis (FMEA) method is used to compare the ﬁve main failure modes of the existing and new devices. Through discussions and eva- luations among experts, technicians and operators, the values of the severity, occurrence and detection in Table 3 are obtained from the average of the values they eval- uated. The risk priority number (RPN) of the failure modes is calculated. It can be seen that the three RPNs  of the new device in the failure modes are smaller than that of the existing, which means that the performances of the existing transportation device are improved.
In summary, without the components such as pro- grammable logic controllers and microcontrollers, the new device can also realize the logical control of the whole process and failure protection. This increases
the reliability and adaptability in the nuclear environ- ment. And it adopts the automation scheme combin- ing strong electricity with the mechanical system, which enhances the anti-interference ability of the system.
6.Conclusion
Creativity can be considered more in the design of  the modern nuclear industry. In this paper, the inno- vative engineering design process integrated with the QFD method and FBS model is used to assist the designing of the transport device.  Compared  with the existing system designed by the conventional design method, the new design result has been improved in creativity, stability, and adaptability. Besides, the new transport device  of  the  electron  gun guarantees the health of maintenance personnel and the safety of the nuclear reactor. At the  same time, the engineering design process based on QFD/ FBS proposed can be further studied to guide and motivate designers in the nuclear industry.
Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the  authors.
Funding
This work was supported by the The National  Key  Research and Development Program of China [2018YFB1700702]; Sichuan Science and Technology Program [2019YFG0397; 2018GZ0287].
