<title>Enhanced Dual Confocal Measurement System</title>
<Affiliation>aGeneral Atomics, P.O. Box 85608, San Diego, California 92186-5608
bSandia National Laboratories, P.O. Box 5800, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87185-1168
</Affiliation>
<author>K. Tomlinson, C. T. Seagle, H. Huang, G. E. Smith, J. L. Taylor & R. R. Paguio</author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>FUSION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/15361055.2017.1387449</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1080/15361055.2017.1387449</URL>
Abstract — A measurement instrument utilizing dual, chromatic, confocal, distance sensors has  been jointly developed by General Atomics and Sandia National Laboratories (SNL) for thickness and flatness measurement of target components used in dynamic materials properties (DMP) experiments on the SNL Z-Machine (Z). Compared to previous methods used in production of these types of targets, the tool saves time and yields a 4× reduction in thickness uncertainty which is one of the largest sources of error in equation of state measurements critical to supporting the National Nuclear Security Administration Stockpile Stewardship program and computer modeling of high energy density experiments. It has numerous differences from earlier instruments operating on the dual confocal sensor principle to accommodate DMP components including larger lateral travel, longer working distance, ability to measure flatness in addition to thickness, built-in thickness calibration standards for quickly checking calibration before and after each measurement, and streamlined operation. Thickness and flatness of 0.2- to 3.3-mm-thick sections of diamond-machined copper and aluminum can be measured to submicron accuracy. Sections up to 6 mm thick can be measured with as-yet undetermined accuracy. Samples must have one surface which is flat to within 300 µm, lateral dimensions of no more than 50 ×50 mm, and height less than 40 mm.
Keywords — Dynamic materials properties, Z-Machine, equation of state.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
Experiments conducted on the Sandia National Laboratories (SNL) Z-Machine (Z) to determine material properties at extreme temperatures and pressures often use targets containing nominally flat components made  of rigid materials.1 Accurate measurement of component thickness and flatness is crucial to reducing uncertainties in the analysis of dynamic compression data. For shock compression experiments, an uncertainty of even 10 µm in a thickness can lead to a calculated shock velocity uncertainty of greater than 10% (Refs. 2 and 3). In shockless compression experiments, to determine equa- tions of state and strength, sample thicknesses are used in combination with velocimetry to determine sound velocities.4 Uncertainties in sound velocities are directly
influenced by the accuracy of sample thickness measure- ments. Often, multiple materials (e.g., tantalum and LiF) are bonded together, making glue bond thickness a poten- tially important parameter. Because glue bond thickness is determined by subtracting individual material thick- nesses from the bonded stack thickness, several thickness uncertainties accumulate in the calculation. Furthermore, glue bonds are typically on the order of 1 µm thick. For these reasons, small individual errors can compound resulting in error uncertainties greater than the actual thickness itself. Flatness is another important measure- ment in the characterization of these targets because it couples to dynamic target tilt and two-dimensional wave effects during dynamic experiments.5
Previously, two methods have been used to measure the thickness of dynamic materials properties (DMP)
target components for Z (referred to as “our specimens” for the remainder of this paper), but both have had serious drawbacks which have limited the assumed accuracy of thickness data to ±3 µm in experimental analyses. For measuring flatness, the previous instrument adds a bur- densome operation to the characterization which is unwelcome in a production environment where it  is  often required to characterize and assemble a dozen components in one day.
This paper describes a new instrument which was jointly developed by General Dynamics (GA)  and  SNL specifically for simultaneously measuring both thickness and flatness of our specimens. The instru- ment overcomes the shortcomings of both previous methods while yielding at least a 4× reduction in thickness uncertainty for specimens of diamond- machined copper and aluminum within the thickness range of 0.2 to 3.3 mm. It uses dual chromatic, con- focal, distance sensors and has numerous features which eliminate the drawbacks of the previous dual confocal designs for the Z target application discussed here.6–8 Accuracy has yet to be determined on speci- mens of materials other than copper and  aluminum, and of thickness between 3.3 mm and the instrument’s maximum capability of 6 mm, but it is hoped perfor- mance will prove to be similar when these tests are completed.
II.PREVIOUS METHODS OF DMP COMPONENT THICKNESS AND FLATNESS MEASUREMENT FOR Z TARGETS
The two tools currently used to characterize thick- ness and flatness of our specimens have significant drawbacks. One of these tools, which measures thick- ness only, is a contact-type, digital height gage (Heidenhain CT6001) where  one  face  of  a  specimen  is hand held against an anvil while a probe lightly  presses against the opposing face. There are two pro- blems with this method. The first is that compressive forces induced by the anvil and probe inevitably cause small but potentially significant deformation—both temporary and permanent—to the specimen surfaces, leading to measurement errors and, possibly, unwanted experimental effects if damage is excessive.  The  sec- ond problem is that the method is significantly depen- dent upon operator technique. Accurate measurements require manually varying the orientation of the sample relative to the anvil and probe to find the minimum measurement and are consequently  overly  subjective and of poor reproducibility.  Based  upon  experience,  the assumed  accuracy  of  thickness  data  collected  using this tool is ±3 µm in experimental analyses.
The second tool is a Nikon Nexiv VMR-3020, numerically controlled, confocal microscope equipped with an x-y positioning stage and autofocus which  is  used to map flatness of the upper specimen surface. Unfortunately, it is of very little use for measuring thick- ness of our specimens since the best it can do in that regard is measure specimen height relative to a reference plane; the resulting “thickness” measurements therefore being affected by flatness of the lower specimen surface. Because flatness of our specimens is known from inter- ferometric measurements  to  be  commonly  >2  µm  (Fig. 1), this problem often results in thickness values  that are significantly too large.
III.THE ADVANTAGES OF DUAL CONFOCAL THICKNESS MEASUREMENT
The dual confocal measurement principle, as dis- cussed in this paper, overcomes the thickness mea- surement problems described in Sec.  II.  It  employs two confocal distance sensors which are mounted inline, with the measurement specimen  in  between, and the sensors simultaneously “looking” at opposing surfaces of the specimen. By subtracting each sensor’s distance measurement from a  calibration  parameter, the specimen thickness is determined. The calibration parameter is just the sum of the two distance measure- ments and the known thickness of  a  standard when it  is placed between the sensors. Because the sensors are noncontact and the specimen is mounted on a fixture which orients the measured surfaces perpendicular to the measurement axis, the deformation/damage and subjectivity problems associated with our previous contact measurement method are avoided. Since thick- ness is measured directly (rather than height above a reference surface) flatness errors of the specimen have no effect on thickness measurements.  The  sensors  have numerous other features making them easy to integrate into instrument designs and nearly ideal for this application: large selection of working distances, compact size, <1-µm accuracy capability, perpendicu- lar line of sight enabling measurement close to walls, low sensitivity to surface reflectivity, and small mea- suring spot diameter.
IV.INSTRUMENT DESIGN CRITERIA
The initial constraints which drove the instrument design are described in Secs. IV.A through IV.E.
Fig. 1. Interferometric measurement of a DMP target panel used on Z. The lower-right image is a cross section taken between the triangular markers on the image at lower left. Note the almost 3-µm-flatness error.
IV.A.Lateral Travel
Although the largest lateral dimensions of our specimens are approximately 50 ×  50  mm  (x/y), which establishes the lower limit of the instrument’s x/y-axes travel, it was decided to enlarge the travel envelope to 126 × 91 mm to fit an array of thickness calibration standards which could be automatically accessed during the calibration/verification software routines (see Sec. IV.D). The larger travel also allows for future increases in specimen size.
IV.B.Flatness Measurement
Another critical system design constraint is the cap- ability to routinely and accurately measure flatness in addition to thickness, significantly improving upon dual confocal systems which are typically designed to accu- rately measure thickness only. While systems which can measure form or flatness have been built, we are not aware of any dual confocal systems with the ability to    do so and certify accuracy to <1 µm with a high level of confidence in a production environment.7 To accomplish this, our approach involves mapping stage travel flatness errors using a flatness standard and then automatically correcting them with software. Measuring flatness with our system, therefore, demands high flatness repeatability of x-y axis motion since repeatability determines the validity of the stage’s flatness map. Because a design
requirement of the system is to measure flatness with an accuracy of at least 2 µm of diamond-machined copper and aluminum specimens with lateral dimensions of up to 50 × 50 mm, x-y stage flatness repeatability of 0.2 µm (i.e., one-tenth of the required accuracy) is desired within an area of that size, within the ±0.1°C expected operating temperature range of the instrument during the measure- ment cycle.
Instead of using a semipermanent map of stage flat- ness, the method used in our instrument is to generate a new one immediately prior to taking a flatness measure- ment on a specimen. Doing so reduces the likelihood of significant differences between mapping temperature and specimen measurement temperature, thereby increasing the reliability of the map and hopefully eliminating the need for stringent temperature control in the lab. It also enables mapping precisely the unique x-y locations to be subsequently measured in the specimen, greatly speeding the mapping operation and eliminating map interpolation errors.
Generation of the flatness map of the required area   is accomplished by using the most accurate sensor (the lower in our case) to measure distances to a 3-in. diameter, 1/20λ optical flat which is mounted to the stage. The distance data recorded for all points com- prises the flatness map which can be applied to the subsequent measurement data from the specimen. Verification of the map’s accuracy can be accomplished by remeasuring the optical flat after specimen
measurement, this time applying the flatness map to the lower sensor data and verifying <1-µm flatness com- pared to a least-squares fit through the resulting point cloud. This mapping/measurement/verification process requires the ability to quickly install and remove both   the optical flat and the specimen to be measured, not  only to make immediate mapping practical given the  time restrictions imposed by the production environ- ment, but also to  minimize  temperature  variation  in  the instrument during the process. A  requirement  for  the holding fixtures for the optical flat and specimen, therefore, is that they permit quick changeover.
IV.C.Sensors
Confocal distance sensors are available in a variety of working distances, and their accuracy improves as working distance becomes shorter, so good design prac- tice is to use the shortest working distance possible. All our specimens have at least one side which is nominally flat with no projecting features, allowing one sensor (the lower sensor in our instrument) to have a very short working distance. As nominal working distances become shorter, however, so does the allowable deviation of the target  surface  from   the   nominal   working   distance. A second design criteria for the holding fixtures for the optical flat and specimen, therefore, is that they must reliably locate the lower specimen surface within the lower sensor’s relatively narrow range of working distances.
The upper sensor, on the other hand, must accommo-
date a large working distance and working distance varia- bility. Although the range of thickness requiring measurement is 0.2 to 6.0 mm, overall specimen thickness can be up to 24.5 mm due to extraneous features which project from the upper side of the specimen. Maximum working distance for the upper sensor, therefore, must be at least equal to the maximum overall specimen thickness minus the minimum measurement thickness, or 24.3 mm. As an additional upper sensor constraint, so that normal operation of the instrument will not require adjustment of the sensor position (thereby greatly simplifying and speed- ing use of the system in production), allowable working distance variation must be at least equal to the specimen thickness range of 5.8 mm.
Sensor linearity is an important criterion in sensor selection because linearity defines the maximum error of the sensor after calibration. Our requirement for the instrument is <1-µm-thickness measurement  accuracy  on diamond-machined copper and aluminum samples,  but it is not believed <1-µm sensor linearity is required
to achieve that requirement. Our approach, as described in Sec. IV.D, is to calibrate out the sensor linearity.
IV.D.Built-In Thickness Standard Array
As discussed in Sec. IV.A, it was decided to incor- porate multiple thickness calibration standards semiper- manently located within the working envelope of the instrument’s x-y stage. The array of standards encom- passes the instrument’s full thickness  measurement  range at very fine thickness  intervals  so  that  it  not  only increases productivity by saving the time  that  would otherwise be required to install, measure, and remove the required calibration standard before each measurement—and repeat after each measurement as verification—it also  improves  measurement  accuracy  in two ways. By reducing the time required for the calibration/measurement/verification  process,  as   well as operator handling of standards,  temperature  effects are minimized. More importantly, by enabling calibra- tion using a standard which  is very near the thickness    of the specimen, thickness measurement uncertainty is reduced far below the uncertainty which would be pre- dicted based upon advertised sensor linearity. This is what is meant by the term “calibrating out” the sensor linearity. Because the instrument is intended to measure the thickness of 0.2- to 6.0-mm-thick specimens, a  design constraint for the thickness  standards  is  that  their lateral size be small enough to enable fitting the entire array into the space available within the working envelope of the instrument.
IV.E.Thermal Effects
Any change to the sensor spacing without a compen- sating change to the thickness calibration parameter will cause thickness measurement errors, and any change to sensor positions during flatness calibration or flatness measurement will result in flatness measurement errors. For these reasons, it is very important to mitigate dimen- sional changes within the instrument resulting from ther- mal effects. The flatness and thickness measuring processes have been designed to this end both by mini- mizing operator handling and time between the mapping/ calibration, measurement, and verification steps, as described above. As also described, these process features place constraints upon the hardware design. The instru- ment’s x-y travel has been enlarged to accommodate a built-in array of thickness standards, and the holding fixtures for the optical flat and specimen have been designed to allow rapid placement and removal.
Other hardware design features considered desirable for controlling thermal effects include use of materials with higher specific heat c, higher mass m, and lower thermal conductivity k because these property directions favor temperature stability. Enclosing the entire instru- ment within a box further reduces sensitivity to ambient air temperature changes.
To minimize dimensional changes due to instrument temperature variations which occur despite the measures mentioned above to control them, the use of materials with low coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) in cri- tical locations is important. It is believed that the com- bined effect of these instrument design features to mitigate thermal effects will eliminate the need to closely control ambient temperature and air flow of the lab.
V.INSTRUMENT DESIGN OVERVIEW
V.A.x-y Stage
A specially built version of the Steinmeyer KDT380, precision x-y stage is used to position the object to be measured laterally between the fixed sensors (Fig. 2). By hand fitting the slide components, flatness repeatability of less than 0.05 µm within ±25 mm of center (x- and y-axes) has been achieved in an environment controlled within 0.1°C. The stage has an x-axis travel of ±65 mm and y-axis travel of +30 mm/−65 mm; x- and y-axes position- ing repeatability are ±1 µm; x- and y-axes positioning accuracy are ±10 µm; maximum speed is 25 mm/s for both axes. The stage more than satisfies the travel and flatness repeatability requirements outlined in Secs. IV.A and IV.B.
V.B.Distance Sensors
Two Precitec CHRocodile SE chromatic, confocal, dis- tance sensors and optical probes are used. The lower optical probe has a working distance range of 4.35 to 4.65 mm, distance resolution of 0.010 µm, spot diameter of 5 µm, and linearity of ±0.1 µm. The upper optical probe has a working distance  range  of 32.3 to 40.3 mm, distance  resolution of
0.260  µm,  spot  diameter  of  30  µm,  and  linearity  of
±2.6 µm. The sensors satisfy the working distance require- ments described in Sec. IV.C.
Note that the Precitec CHRocodile SE is a white light, chromatic sensor enabling an order of magnitude improve- ment in linearity over a tuning fork–type of sensor, such as the Keyence, with an equivalent range. For example, the Keyence   LT-9011   sensor   has   an  advertised   linearity of
±0.5%  of  its  working  distance   variation   of   0.6   mm (i. e., ±0.3 mm), or 3 µm. The equivalent Precitec sensor has an advertised linearity of 0.033% of its working distance variation of 0.6 mm, or 0.2 µm. So, for our lower sensor, the more accurate option is the chromatic-type sensor. For our upper sensor, however, the only option is the chromatic-type sensor  because  a  minimum  working  distance  variation of
5.8 mm is required to avoid adjusting the sensor position during normal operation (as discussed in Sec. IV.C), and such tuning fork sensors are not available.
V.C.Instrument Base
A massive granite structure was chosen due primarily to the thermal and mechanical stability it provides. Dimensional changes in upper sensor mounting column would directly affect sensor positions, as discussed in Sec. IV.E, and must, therefore, be mitigated. The specific
Fig. 2. Enhanced dual confocal measurement system with enclosure removed and fixture elements shown to right for clarity.
heat of granite is approximately 1.6× that of steel and Invar and 0.9× that of aluminum, hence its ranking as second among the candidate materials for favorability of this property. Granite’s density is about equal to that of aluminum and about 0.4× that of steel and Invar, giving steel and Invar a mass advantage if geometry is the same. However, the thermal conductivity of granite is only 0.02× that of aluminum, 0.1× that of steel, and 0.2× that of Invar, giving granite approximately a 3× advantage over the nearest competitor (Invar) in the final analysis  of overall temperature stability. Although the CTE of Invar is only one-quarter that of granite, making Invar    an attractive alternative, its cost is approximately 2× that of granite and its density is 2.5×, which would increase the instrument weight by approximately 200 kg, while offering little, if any, actual advantage since we believe the measures discussed earlier to ensure temperature sta- bility of the instrument will be effective.
V.D.Sensor Mounts
Dimensional changes in the sensor mounts would also directly affect sensor positions and therefore should be constructed of a material with good temperature sta- bility and low CTE such as granite and Invar as discussed in Sec. V.C. For the sensor mounts, however, Invar is much preferred over granite because of its high machin- ability, which is required for these pieces since they possess many machined features to permit adjustment of sensor alignment.
V.E.Holding Fixtures
Invar was also chosen for the holding fixtures for the optical flat and specimen. Although dimensional changes to these pieces would not affect thickness measurement, they would affect both flatness calibration and flatness measurement, making good temperature stability and low CTE also advantageous for these items. The holding fixtures are positioned and oriented  in the x-y plane by   a pin and diamond pin arrangement, and are positioned in the z direction by resting on three pads. Location toler- ances of ±50 µm are sufficient for the optical flat and specimen, so kinematic mounting is not required. Location stability during calibration and measurement is critical, however, so a custom, quarter-turn tensioner is employed to lightly spring-load the fixtures against the locating pads. The measuring specimens rest on narrow shelves which are machined into parallel Invar “fingers,” one of which slides on a precision dovetail to permit adjustment for specimen width. Round or odd-shaped
specimens are accommodated by first mounting them in rectangular adapter blocks. Generally, free-state measure- ments are preferred, so a few small tacks of hot glue are used to prevent specimens from shifting during measure- ment rather than clamping. Two fixtures are available to enable mounting the next specimen on a workbench while performing measurements on another, increasing productivity and minimizing opportunity for instrument temperature changes.
V.F.Software and Operation
All instrument motion as well as data acquisition and analysis are controlled through a custom Windows appli- cation (Fig. 3). The following are the operational steps for specimen measurement:
1.Specify the measurement locations. To facilitate this, the user interface presents built-in strategies for simplified definition of uniformly distributed locations within user-defined circular and rectangular areas since these are very common specimen shapes. Alternatively, specific x-y coordinates may be input or read from a file to accommodate special tasks and geometries.
2.Install and measure the optical flat (optional). The operator is prompted to install  the  optical  flat  which is semipermanently mounted in its own fixture. If only thickness is to be measured this step is omitted by first checking a thickness-only box in the user interface. Upon operator command, the optical flat is measured at the x-y coordinates just defined, automatically creating the flatness compensation map (see Sec. IV.B).
3.Install and measure the specimen (with auto- matic thickness calibration and verification). The opera- tor is prompted to remove the optical flat  (if  present)  and replace it with the specimen which has been pre- viously installed into its holding fixture off-line. The operator is also prompted to input the nominal specimen thickness. Upon operator command, the instrument automatically positions the calibration standard of near- est thickness between the sensors and performs the thickness calibration, then measures  the  specimen  at  the defined locations, and then, finally, automatically measures the standard of next-nearest thickness to pro- vide verification. An option is also presented to remea- sure the specimen so repeatability of thickness data can be assessed.
4.Confirm flatness calibration (optional). The soft- ware prompts for remeasurement of the optical flat as a
Fig. 3. Custom Windows application user interface.
means of confirming accuracy of the flatness compensa- tion map if desired.
5.Output and store data. Upon completion of mea- surements, flatness and thickness results are automati- cally output in numerical and graphical form within the software’s user interface. Numerical data are stored in ASCII format suitable for export into Excel or other third-party data analysis/display applications.
V.G.Thickness Calibration Standards
Critical to the accuracy of the instrument are the thickness calibration standards as discussed in Sec. IV.D. The lower surface of the standards is flat while the upper surface has a 1-mm-diameter flat center pocket surrounded by six concentric steps, each 50 µm tall and 500 µm wide, forming seven different thickness zones and a thickness range of 350 µm per standard (Fig. 4). The upper and lower   surfaces   are   produced   by   diamond   turning to
~10 nm Ra to simulate the surface roughness of our speci- mens as well as to give high thickness uniformity. Each standard has an alignment notch which, together with the standard’s center, establishes a radial axis along which the steps are calibrated as described in Sec. VI. These calibra- tion axes of the standards are precisely oriented in the instrument which enables preprogramming the calibrated locations of all the standards in the thickness calibration array. When thickness calibration and verification of the instrument are performed during normal operation, enter- ing the nominal thickness value for the specimen to be measured  is sufficient for the instrument  to automatically
Fig. 4. Top and bottom of thickness calibration standard showing seven thickness steps.
locate the standards nearest the specimen thickness. The upper and lower standard surfaces are machined parallel within 1 µm so that large errors in the orientation of the standards within the holder would be required for the thickness at the location measured during the calibration or verification cycle to vary significantly from the stan- dard’s calibrated value. The standard array currently con- sists of nine aluminum and nine copper standards,  covering the thickness range of 0.2 to 3.3 mm for each material, since this is the thickness range of our specimens of aluminum and copper. The standard holder, however, can accommodate up to 26 standards (Fig. 5). Aluminum and copper were chosen for the thickness standard materi- als because nearly all the DMP targets on Z utilize one or both materials in critical locations, in addition to other
Fig. 5. Thickness calibration standards (26) and holder.
materials that may be used to suit the experiment, and using the same material for the standards as is used for the specimens ensures the instrument can, at a minimum, provide accurate measurements on our most common specimens.
VI.THICKNESS STANDARD CALIBRATION
A Zygo NewView 7300 white light interferometer and a special technique were used to calibrate the thick- ness standards. The center hole of a 1-in. square × 2-mm-thick, Grade 00  gage block  was bored to a  slip  fit for the outer diameter of the standards, permitting a standard to be glued inside with its flat face nominally coincident with one face of the gage block (Fig. 6).  Using a 1× objective with 0.5× zoom lens, a single interferometric scan was taken which included one side of the glued assembly with the 9-mm diameter standard centered within the scan, thereby giving a height map of
Fig. 6. Copper thickness standard glued into 2-mm gage block with alignment notch visible.
the entire 14.1 × 10.6-mm scan area with x-y resolution  of 44 µm. The z coordinates of the resulting data were then shifted and rotated to transform the z origin to four areas on the gage block surface symmetrically surrounding the thickness standard, the resulting data set thus contain- ing the z coordinate of each pixel in the scan relative to a best-fit z origin plane passing through the four–gage block areas. The assembly was then flipped over and the other side was similarly scanned and transformed, but this time the data were also mirrored about the flipping axis to yield a data set which, when added to the first, gives the thick- ness of the standard minus the thickness of the gage block at each pixel location (Fig. 7). The final step to get the standard thickness at each pixel location is simply to add the gage block thickness to each data point. The Zygo MetroPro software has all the data manipulation function- ality just described built in, so no processing outside of MetroPro is required.
The expanded uncertainty of the thickness deter-
mined using the interferometric method just described is determined as follows:
1.standard uncertainty σ of Zygo extended scan used for stepped  side  of  thickness  standard (30 measurement sample size): ±0.080 µm
2.standard uncertainty σ of Zygo standard scan used for flat side of thickness standard (30 mea- surement sample size): ±0.001 µm
3.standard uncertainty σ of 2.542590-mm gage block used for calibration of Zygo extended scanning: ±0.030 µm
Fig. 6. Copper thickness standard glued into 2-mm gage block with alignment notch visible.
the entire 14.1 × 10.6-mm scan area with x-y resolution  of 44 µm. The z coordinates of the resulting data were then shifted and rotated to transform the z origin to four areas on the gage block surface symmetrically surrounding the thickness standard, the resulting data set thus contain- ing the z coordinate of each pixel in the scan relative to a best-fit z origin plane passing through the four–gage block areas. The assembly was then flipped over and the other side was similarly scanned and transformed, but this time the data were also mirrored about the flipping axis to yield a data set which, when added to the first, gives the thick- ness of the standard minus the thickness of the gage block at each pixel location (Fig. 7). The final step to get the standard thickness at each pixel location is simply to add the gage block thickness to each data point. The Zygo MetroPro software has all the data manipulation function- ality just described built in, so no processing outside of MetroPro is required.
The expanded uncertainty of the thickness deter-
mined using the interferometric method just described is determined as follows:
1.standard uncertainty σ of Zygo extended scan used for stepped  side  of  thickness  standard (30 measurement sample size): ±0.080 µm
2.standard uncertainty σ of Zygo standard scan used for flat side of thickness standard (30 mea- surement sample size): ±0.001 µm
3.standard uncertainty σ of 2.542590-mm gage block used for calibration of Zygo extended scanning: ±0.030 µm
Fig. 7. Sum of upper and lower Zygo scans of assembly shown in Fig. 6.
4.standard uncertainty σ of 2-mm gage block in Fig. 6 used for measurement comparison:
±0.030 µm
5.standard uncertainty σ of best fit planes to upper and lower gage block surfaces: ±0.200 µm (estimated).
Combined standard uncertainty σ = [(0.08)2 + (0.001)2 + (0.03)2 + (0.03)2 + (0.20)2]1/2 = ±0.22 µm.
Combined expanded uncertainty (2σ = 95% confi- dence) = ±0.44 um.
As a test of the method’s accuracy, a gage block was substituted for the thickness standard in the center of the gage block in Fig. 6. The calibrated thickness was certified by the manufacturer (Starrett) as 2.000150 mm ± 0.000090 mm σ. Using the interferometer method described above, the measured  thickness   was   2.000280   mm,   well   within the ±0.44-µm expanded uncertainty calculated  above  for  the method, giving confidence that the method is valid.
VII.RESULTS
The instrument was completed very shortly before the writing of this paper so extensive testing and evaluation has not yet been performed, but preliminary indications are posi- tive. We have measured approximately two dozen of our specimens and have found remeasurement of the optical flat after specimen measurements (Sec. V.F, step 4) has consis- tently yielded flatness values of less than 0.1 µm, indicating validity of the flatness compensation map applied to the specimen measurements and the absence of thermal effects which significantly degrade measurement accuracy. Further, measuring the standard of next-nearest thickness after speci- men measurements (Sec. V.F, step 3) has consistently pro- duced results which agree to better than 1 µm of the standard’s calibrated thickness, as would be expected given the small uncertainties in the thickness standard calibrations. Remeasurement of the specimens has yielded thickness var- iations consistently below 0.1 µm, also providing confidence.
VIII.FUTURE WORK
We plan to conduct testing to determine whether thickness standards of both copper and aluminum are really required. If we find calibration of the instrument using a thickness standard of copper produces accurate measurements on a thickness standard  of  aluminum,  and vice versa, we would know there is no need for thickness standards of both materials. We also plan to make thickness standards from Cupronickel and
compare them to those of copper and aluminum. Cupronickel is diamond turnable and extremely corro- sion resistant, so it makes a  nearly  ideal  material  for our application. If Cupronickel turns out to measure the same as copper and aluminum in our instrument, it will be substituted for them, thereby extending  the  useful  life of the standards indefinitely and allowing all the thickness standards required to cover the  instrument’s full thickness measurement capacity of 0.2 to 6 mm to   be contained within just one holder. At  present,  we  have not quantified the contribution from sensor linear- ity to the accuracy of the  instrument,  instead  assume that it is negligible due to the very fine thickness  intervals of the thickness  standards.  However,  it  may be possible to estimate the sensor linearity contribution  in the future by measuring gage blocks or other certi-  fied standards of thickness between our thickness stan- dard intervals. Finally, certification of system accuracy on specimens other than copper and aluminum  should  be undertaken to extend instrument usefulness to other DMP target components. Polished steel should be included among these materials since  it  would  allow  the use of gage blocks for accuracy confirmation.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) under contract DE-NA0001808. The authors would like to thank Mackenzie Massey of the Zygo division of Ametek Ultra Precision Technologies for his instruction regarding data manipulation within the MetroPro software. We would also like to thank the folks at Steinmeyer Mechatronik GmbH, Germany, and Integrated Machining Company of Albuquerque, New Mexico, for their assistance and patience during the develop- ment process. We would particularly like to thank Terry Chriss and Dave Trickey at Custom Lab Software Systems of Centerbrook, Connecticut, the prime contractor for both hard- ware and software, who contributed heavily to all design aspects and whose dedication and experience were invaluable. SNL is a multimission laboratory managed and operated by National Technology and Engineering Solutions of Sandia LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Honeywell International Inc. for DOE’s National Nuclear Security Administration under contract DE-NA0003525.
