<title>NUCLEAR FUEL CYCLE COST ESTIMATION AND SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS OF UNIT COSTS ON THE BASIS OF AN EQUILIBRIUM MODEL</title>
<Affiliation>a.Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, 1045 Daedeokdaero, Yuseung-gu, Daejeon 305-353, Republic of Korea
b.University of Science and Technology, 217 Gajungro, Yuseong, Daejeon, 305-350, Republic of Korea</Affiliation>
<author>S.K. KIM , W.I. KO, S.R. YOUN, and R.X. GAO  </author>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Energy and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2014.12.018</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2014.12.018</URL>
a b s t r a c t
This paper examines the difference in the value of the nuclear fuel cycle cost calculated by the deterministic and probabilistic methods on the basis of an equilibrium model. Calcu- lating using the deterministic method, the direct disposal cost and Pyro-SFR (sodium- cooled fast reactor) nuclear fuel cycle cost, including the reactor cost, were found to be
66.41 mills/kWh and 77.82 mills/kWh, respectively (1 mill ¼ one thousand of a dollar, i.e., 10—3 $). This is because the cost of SFR is considerably expensive. Calculating again using the probabilistic method, however, the direct disposal cost and Pyro-SFR nuclear fuel cycle cost, excluding the reactor cost, were found be 7.47 mills/kWh and 6.40 mills/kWh, respectively, on the basis of the most likely value. This is because the nuclear fuel cycle cost is significantly affected by the standard deviation and the mean of the unit cost that includes uncertainty. Thus, it is judged that not only the deterministic method, but also the probabilistic method, would also be necessary to evaluate the nuclear fuel cycle cost. By analyzing the sensitivity of the unit cost in each phase of the nuclear fuel cycle, it was found that the uranium unit price is the most influential factor in determining nuclear fuel cycle costs.
Keywords:
Deterministic method     Direct disposal      Equilibrium model     Nuclear fuel cycle cost      Probabilistic method Pyroprocess    Pyro-SFR fuel cycle   Uncertainty Unit cost
1.Introduction
Because not many reprocess facilities or enrichment facilities exist in nations with advanced nuclear power generation technology, the data related to the nuclear fuel cycle cost are
mostly estimated costs instead of real costs [1]. Further, it is very difficult to obtain the relevant costs. Thus, the nuclear fuel cycle cost as an estimated cost is inevitably subject to uncertainty. A probabilistic method is generally used to evaluate such uncertainty. Namely, an input variable with a high uncertainty is assumed to have a probability distribution, and the result of the calculation is assessed through this distribution. If the decision makers involved in the policies  of nuclear fuel cycles know the result of the nuclear  fuel cycle cost calculated by the probability distribution, they can make better decisions by referring to the standard deviation value including uncertainty. However, most nuclear fuel cycle costs have used a deterministic method thus  far.  In this case, a deterministic method means calculating the nuclear fuel cycle cost using an input variable as a representative value instead of a probability distribution [2].
In addition, such uncertainty cannot be considered in the deterministic cost estimation [3], because the result calculated by the deterministic method produces the nuclear fuel cycle cost as a value instead of a probability distribution. Therefore, not only a deterministic method, but also a probabilistic method that uses a probability distribution, is necessary in the engineering cost estimation method based on a conceptual design [4].
The back-end nuclear fuel cycle cost that includes the cost to manage spent fuel (SF) is also subject to high uncertainty. For example, the cost caused by subsequent action for serious and unexpected accidents like the Fukushima Nuclear Power Plant in Japan increased the uncertainty of the nuclear fuel cycle cost. If the premium for a nuclear power plant accident and indemnity money paid to the community to acquire the site of the high-level waste (HLW) repository is included in the nuclear fuel cycle cost, the current nuclear fuel cycle cost will increase considerably [5]. After all, the economic efficiency of nuclear power will decrease if such a social cost is included in the cost to dispose of SF. Social cost means the cost to hold public hearings so as to acquire the site of the repository or indemnity money paid to regional residents or the community.
Furthermore, the data related to the nuclear fuel cycle may vary considerably, because the measuring environment is different in each country [6]. Cost may also vary, depending on the effect of scale in the difference of capacity of a nuclear fuel cycle facility [7]. Thus, it is necessary to convert the nuclear fuel cycle unit cost with high uncertainty into reliable information through normalization.
This paper reports on an examination into the influence that the uncertainty of the parameter used in the equilibrium model of the cost evaluation has on the nuclear fuel cycle cost. In addition, we clarified which unit price has the most in- fluence on the nuclear fuel cycle cost by analyzing the sensi- tivity of the unit cost in each phase of the nuclear fuel cycle. Namely, the uncertainty of the parameter that considerably affects the nuclear fuel cycle cost is quantitatively indicated
by calculating the contribution to the variance.
2.Materials and method
2.1.Nuclear fuel cycle cost estimation: three options
To calculate the nuclear fuel cycle cost using the equilibrium model, this study set three nuclear fuel cycles [pyro-SFR (so- dium-cooled fast reactor), PWR-MOX (pressurized water reactor, mixed oxide fuel), and direct disposal] as the target of the analysis.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA, USA [4] evaluated direct disposal as the most economical option. Further, the PWR-MOX nuclear fuel cycle can use an aqueous reprocessing method that was most prevalently used in nations with advanced nuclear power generation technology [8], and the Pyro-SFR nuclear fuel cycle is currently being recognized as a nuclear technology of the future as well as an advanced nuclear fuel cycle.
In particular, the Pyro-SFR nuclear fuel cycle is highlighted as a competitive alternative to direct disposal in terms of economic efficiency, because an efficient reprocessing method is being re-examined in many states of the world, such as the cancellation of the Yucca Mountain Repository project in the United States. Furthermore, we cannot be certain that direct disposal is more economical than the Pyro- SFR nuclear fuel cycle alternative when considering the social cost of a HLW repository, because the direct disposal unit cost that has been reported thus far does not include such social cost. Figs. 1e3 show the material flow for the three nuclear fuel cycle options that were considered to calculate nuclear fuel cycle cost.
Fig. 1 e Once-through (OT) cycle. NU : Natural Uranium; EU : Enriched Uranium; DU : Depleted Uranium; PWR SF : Pressurized Water Reactor Spent Fuel.
Fig. 2 e PWR-MOX recycling. MOX, mixed oxide (UO2 and PuO2) fuel; PWR, pressurized water reactor. MOX SF : Mixed OXide(UO2 and PuO2) Spent Fuel; PUREX : Plutonium-URanium EXtraction; HLW : High-Level Waste.
2.2.Cost estimation models
The models that can be used to evaluate the nuclear fuel cycle cost are the equilibrium model and the dynamic model [9].
The largest difference between the equilibrium model and the dynamic model is whether time-dependent information can be produced or not, because the time subject to evaluation is flexible. Namely, they can be divided into an equilibrium model that can produce only cost information at a certain time and a dynamic model that can calculate the cost ten- dency for the long term simultaneously.
While the dynamic model can calculate the material flow and cost of the nuclear fuel cycle facility in each year as time elapses, the equilibrium model can calculate the material flow and cost of the nuclear fuel cycle facility at a certain time.
Furthermore, the equilibrium model used is usually based on a factor study, but a dynamic model is mainly used for a logical study. Thus, while the dynamic model can apply feedback to the prior and back-end relations of the event, the equilibrium model can be copied for only a static status.
The two models (equilibrium model and dynamic model) are efficient tools to evaluate the economic efficiency of the nuclear fuel cycle option. The merit of the equilibrium model is to easily analyze the economic efficiency of certain nuclear fuel cycle options, roughly and quantitatively, by assuming a
stable status. However, its demerit is an inability to calculate the tendency of long-term cost fluctuation simultaneously. Thus, it is mainly used to roughly grasp whether the cost of a certain nuclear fuel cycle alternative is relatively economical. This study used the equilibrium model by considering the high uncertainty of nuclear fuel cycle unit cost and the con- venience of calculation, because the result of a distorted calculation can be drawn by estimating the annual cost of high uncertainty for a long time through the dynamic model. The equilibrium model draws rough information helpful to decision making at a certain time to generally produce infor- mation necessary to establish the policy of the nuclear fuel cycle. When the equilibrium model is used to calculate the nuclear fuel cycle cost, the general procedure is composed of the following phases. First, the material flow of the considered nuclear fuel cycle option is calculated. Second, the process cost spent in each phase of the nuclear fuel cycle is calculated by multiplying the material quantity and unit cost on the basis of the material flow, and then the cost of all process phases is summed to calculate the total cost of the nuclear fuel cycle. Third, the total cost of the nuclear fuel cycle is divided by the generation quantity to obtain the unit cost of the nuclear fuel cycle. Fourth, the most economical nuclear fuel cycle option can be drawn by comparing the total cost and unit cost of each
nuclear fuel cycle option.
Fig. 3 e Pyro-SFR recycling. SFR : Sodium-cooled Fast Reactor; TRU : Trans Uranium.
Table 1 e Equations for the nuclear fuel cycle cost estimation using an equilibrium model.
The equilibrium model based on the assumption of a stable status needs some basic premises. Namely, that the reference reactor and the nuclear fuel cycle facility already exist and that the reactor type is of the reasonable ratio and in complete operation status.
Although the time required to reach equilibrium status, and the restriction in technical development of the nuclear fuel cycle, cannot be reflected in the equilibrium model, the equilibrium model has a notable merit, i.e., to easily analyze the merits and demerits of the nuclear fuel cycle options quantitatively. Therefore, the equilibrium model can promptly provide a decision maker with some cost informa- tion related to the nuclear fuel cycle. Thus, the goal of the equilibrium model is to produce general information that is helpful to understand diverse nuclear fuel cycles systemati- cally and comprehensively.
The largest limit of the equilibrium model is that it does not consider the change in the unit cost of the nuclear fuel cycle process. Namely, the equilibrium model can
calculate the unit cost of the nuclear fuel cycle at a certain time only.
The total cost of the nuclear fuel cycle is generally calcu- lated by multiplying the process quantity in each phase of the nuclear fuel cycle process with the unit cost [10]. Furthermore, the unit cost of the nuclear fuel cycle can be acquired by dividing the total cost of the nuclear fuel cycle by the generation quantity with the levelized cost estimation method [11].
If the future nuclear fuel cycle cost is calculated as a nominal value, it is converted to the present cost by applying the nominal discount rate. However, if it is calculated as a constant value, it can be converted into the present cost using the real discount rate [12].
Unless there are a lot of data on the process unit cost of a particular nuclear fuel cycle at present, it can be converted into the process unit cost of the nuclear fuel cycle of the desired year by using past data. Then, the escalation is used as the conversion factor.
Table 2 e Descriptive statistics of fuel cycle unit cost using 10,000 random sampling with Monte-Carlo method.
If the cost occurrence times vary in each option, the concept of the average cost is used to judge the relative eco- nomic efficiency of each nuclear fuel cycle option. Such nu- clear fuel cycle cost is called the levelized unit cost. It is often used as ground data when evaluating the economic efficiency of each nuclear fuel cycle option.
As this study used the equilibrium model to calculate the cost at a certain time, the nuclear fuel cycle cost is calculated by using Eqs. 1e14 in Table 1, which does not consider the discount rate.
Because the equilibrium model used in this study calcu- lates the cost at a certain time, it is unnecessary to discount the yearly cost. Thus, the equilibrium model can be drawn to easily calculate the nuclear fuel cycle cost, if assuming the discount rate is 0 [13].
3.Results : comparative analysis of the results of the calculating cost
3.1.Input data
Generally, the economic efficiency of the nuclear fuel cycle is set on the basis of direct disposal and evaluated using the relative rate of nuclear fuel cycle costs, because direct disposal is known to be economically efficient [4].
As the technology related to the nuclear fuel cycle can be developed later, the unit cost in each phase of the process can change, and such change should be reflected in the nuclear fuel cycle cost. For instance, the disposal unit cost or the pyroprocess unit cost will be reduced as SF disposal technol- ogy or pyroprocess technology is developed. A more precise cost evaluation model should be developed to reflect such cost reduction. To this end, cost drivers should be grasped exactly, and the cost pool of costly processes should be subdivided, because the nuclear fuel cycle cost can be calculated more exactly by converting an indirect cost into a direct cost [14].
Since the unit cost for each nuclear fuel cycle process is drawn from the environment varying in each state, data should be normalized first to reduce the uncertainty of the cost data and to increase the reliability of the calculation re- sults. If the economic efficiency of the nuclear fuel cycle op- tion is evaluated using the unit cost without normalization, the result of the evaluation can be distorted. Thus, cost data should be normalized by analyzing the main factor that cau- ses uncertainty. This study used @Risk software (Palisade corporation, www.palisade.com) to draw the probability dis- tribution function of the normalized estimated cost [15]. Further, the feasibility of the probability distribution was confirmed using the goodness of fit method of SPSS software (Statistics version 21) (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) [16], and the probability distribution of the unit cost of the nuclear
Table 3 e Probability distribution function of fuel cycle unit cost.
Table 4 e Input parameters of reference reactor.
fuel cycle in Table 2 was drawn by referring to Table 3 [24,25]. In addition, the parameters of standard deviation were calculated for the sensitivity analysis of unit costs.
Generally, the reliability of data on the cost of nuclear fuel cycles is verified from the following three viewpoints. First, whether the data were measured by a reliable method; sec- ond, whether the utility and limit of cost information were specified; and third, whether the evaluation of uncertainty by analyzing the sensitivity was identified [17].
It is also necessary to check the detailed level of data to keep the quality of each data set and determine whether consistent ground data were used [18]. Then, an independent review of the data should be conducted. The reference reactor used in this study and the input variable of the nuclear fuel cycle are indicated in Tables 4 and 5; and the reactor cost was referred from the Organization for Economic Co- operation and Development (OECD)/Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) report [19].
3.2.Result of calculating a deterministic nuclear fuel cycle cost
The result of calculating the nuclear fuel cycle cost using the deterministic method is shown in Table 6, and the most likely value in Table 2 was used as the unit cost of each fuel cycle process. The NFCC (Nuclear Fuel Cycle Cost estimation program) Version 01 code developed by the KAERI (Korea Atomic Energy Research Institute, Daejeon, Korea) is used to calculate the fuel cycle cost.
According to the calculation, the  direct  disposal  cost  and Pyro-SFR nuclear fuel cycle cost including reactor cost were found to be 66.41 mills/kWh and 77.82 mills/kWh
Table 6 e Fuel cycle cost and reactor cost (unit: mills/ kWh).
(1 mill ¼ 1,000 of a dollar, i.e., 10—3 $). Therefore, the direct disposal is found to be the most economical alternative, fol- lowed by the Pyro-SFR nuclear fuel cycle.
3.3.Result of calculating the probabilistic nuclear fuel cycle cost
The unit cost in each phase of the nuclear fuel cycle, as the estimated cost instead of the real cost, is used as input data to evaluate the economic efficiency of the nuclear fuel cycle. Thus, the uncertainty of the unit cost can absolutely affect the overestimate or underestimate of the nuclear fuel cycle cost [20]. Therefore, it is necessary to calculate the probabilistic cost so as to provide the decision maker of the nuclear fuel cycle policy with more useful information.
A triangular distribution function, uniform distribution function, and normal distribution function are generally used as a distribution function for the unit cost of each phase of the nuclear fuel cycle to calculate the probabilistic fuel cycle cost. A triangular distribution is used when the maximum value, minimum value, and the most likely value are known, and a uniform distribution is used when the maximum value and
Table 5 e Input parameters of the fuel cycles.
Fig. 4 e Direct disposal cost.	Fig. 6 e Pyro-SFR fuel cycle cost. SFR, sodium-cooled fast
reactor.
minimum value are known, but the most likely value is un-
known [21].
Calculating the nuclear fuel cycle cost by the probabilistic method with the distribution function value of the fuel cycle unit cost in Table 2, the nuclear fuel cycle cost of each option is indicated in Figs. 4e6. This can provide decision makers with some information about the uncertainty of nuclear fuel cycle costs.
The descriptive statistics are indicated in Table 7. Fitting the distribution function of the nuclear fuel cycle cost using @Risk software, it was found to be proximate to the Beta distribution. By calculating the nuclear fuel cycle cost by a probabilistic method, the nuclear fuel cycle cost of direct disposal and Pyro-SFR, except for the reactor cost, were finally found to be 7.47 mills/kWh and 6.40 mills/kWh on the basis of the most likely value. Namely, the Pyro-SFR nuclear fuel cycle was evaluated to be a more favorable option than direct disposal. However, if the reactor cost was considered,
Fig. 5 e PWR-MOX fuel cycle cost. MOX, mixed oxide (UO2 and PuO2) fuel; PWR, pressurized water reactor.
the result is opposite to the result found by calculating the nuclear fuel cycle cost by the deterministic method by inputting the most likely value of the unit cost in Table 3.
4.Sensitivity analysis
The regression coefficient of the unit cost was calculated by using @Risk software to clarify the factors of the unit cost that considerably affect the nuclear fuel cycle cost [22].
The influence of the uncertainty of the unit cost on the nuclear fuel cycle cost can be calculated using a contribution to variance, as shown in Eq. (15) [20]:
@15
where CVi ¼ contribution  to  variance  at  phase  i,  and  CCXi ¼ correlation coefficient of X variable at phase i.
The sensitivity analysis conducted to analyze the influence that the unit cost in each phase of the fuel cycle process has on the nuclear fuel cycle cost showed that the uranium cost is the most influential factor on the nuclear fuel cycle cost in all
Table 7 e The probabilistic cost estimation results for three fuel cycle options (unit: mills/kWh).
Fig. 7 e Sensitivity of direct disposal unit cost.	Fig. 9 e Sensitivity of Pyro-SFR fuel cycle unit cost. SFR,
sodium-cooled fast reactor.
three options, as shown in Figs. 7e9. In particular, the disposal unit cost was found to be the second influential factor after
uranium costs in the direct disposal option of Fig. 7. As shown in Fig. 9, the Pyroprocess unit cost was found to be the influential factor in the Pyro-SFR fuel cycle option. Thus, the disposal technology and Pyroprocess technology should be constantly developed to reduce the nuclear fuel cycle cost.
5.Conclusion and discussion
The nuclear fuel cycle cost of three options (Pyro-SFR, PWR- MOX, and direct disposal) was calculated by two methods (deterministic method and probabilistic method) with the equilibrium model.
If the probabilistic method is used, the nuclear fuel cycle cost of direct disposal and Pyro-SFR (excluding the reactor cost) are found to be 7.47 mills/kWh and 6.40 mills/kWh, respectively, on the basis of the most likely value. Therefore, the Pyro-SFR nuclear fuel cycle option is the most economical in the probabilistic method that uses the probability distri- bution value. However, after considering the reactor cost, the generation costs of the direct disposal option and the Pyro-SFR nuclear fuel cycle option in the deterministic method are found to be 66.41 mills/kWh and 77.82 mills/kWh, respec- tively. Such difference may be caused by the fact that the SFR cost is considerably expensive [19].
In addition, many differences were found between the re- sults of the calculating cost by using the deterministic input
Fig. 8 e Sensitivity of PWR-MOX fuel cycle unit cost. MOX, mixed oxide (UO2 and PuO2) fuel; PWR, pressurized water reactor.
value, and that of the calculating cost using the probabilistic input value, although the same equilibrium model was used. Thus, it is judged that the probabilistic nuclear fuel cycle cost should be evaluated by reflecting the uncertainty.
Further, decision making related to the policy of the nu- clear fuel cycle is related to the propensity of the decision maker. If a risk-loving decision maker has nuclear fuel cycle cost information calculated by the probabilistic method, the deviation of the nuclear fuel cycle cost will be large, but the low-cost alternative would be preferred. However, a risk- avoiding decision maker will prefer an alternative with a relatively high cost, but a low cost deviation [23].
Analyzing the sensitivity of the nuclear fuel cycle process on the unit cost, the uranium cost is found to be the most influential factor in all three options. In the case of direct disposal and the Pyro-SFR fuel cycle option, the disposal unit cost and Pyroprocess unit cost are found to be influential factors after the uranium cost. This may be caused by the fact that the deviation of probability distribution of the relevant unit cost is relatively large.
Particularly in the case of the direct disposal option, the uncertainty of the nuclear fuel cycle cost is increased when reflecting the social cost to acquire the repository site. Thus, a probabilistic cost calculation will be more necessary.
However, the equilibrium model used in this study is subject to a limitation, that is, the inability to calculate time- dependent material flow and cost. It may be necessary to develop a dynamic model later to comparatively analyze the results of the calculation of the equilibrium model and the dynamic model.
Conflicts of interest
All authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported financially by the Ministry of Sci- ence, Information and Communications Technology (ICT), and Future Planning under the Nuclear R&D Project, for which the authors express their sincere gratitude.
