<title>High precision measurements on ﬁssion-fragment de-excitation</title>
<Affiliation>a.European Commission, Joint Research Centre, Directorate for Nuclear Safety and Security, Unit G.2, Retieseweg, 2440 Geel, Belgium
b.Extreme Light Infrastructure – Nuclear Physics (ELI-NP)/Horia Hulubei National Institute for Physics and Nuclear Engineering, 077125 Bucharest- Magurele, Romania</Affiliation>
<author>Stephan Oberstedt, Angélique Gatera, Wouter Geerts, Alf Göök, Franz-Josef Hambsch,
Marzio Vidali, Andreas Oberstedt</author>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier Ltd</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radphyschem.2017.02.042</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2017.02.042 </URL>
ABSTRACT
In recent years nuclear ﬁssion has gained renewed interest both from the nuclear energy community and in basic science. The ﬁrst, represented by the OECD Nuclear Energy Agency, expressed the need for more accurate ﬁssion cross-section and fragment yield data for safety assessments of Generation IV reactor systems. In basic science modelling made much progress in describing the de-excitation mechanism of neutron-rich isotopes, e.g. produced in nuclear ﬁssion. Benchmarking the diﬀerent models require a precise experimental data on prompt ﬁssion neutron and γ-ray emission, e.g. multiplicity, average energy per particle and total dissipated energy per ﬁssion, preferably as function of ﬁssion-fragment mass and total kinetic energy. A collaboration of scientists from JRC Geel (formerly known as JRC IRMM) and other institutes took the lead in establishing a dedicated measurement programme on prompt ﬁssion neutron and γ-ray characteristics, which has triggered even more measurement activities around the world. This contribution presents new advanced instrumentation and methodology we use to generate high-precision spectral data and will give a ﬂavour of future data needs and opportunities.
Keywords:
Nuclear ﬁssion Nuclear de-excitation Fission γ rays
Prompt ﬁssion neutrons Nuclear applications
1.Introduction
Nuclear ﬁssion is a rather complex process, which, even after almost 80 years since its discovery, is still not understood in all details. In recent years nuclear ﬁssion research has undergone a renaissance. Interest from the nuclear energy as well as the basic science community motivated several new measurement programmes. The ﬁrst group is represented by the OECD Nuclear Energy Agency (), who expressed the need for more accurate ﬁssion cross-section and fragment yield data for safety assessments of Generation-IV reactor systems (Rullhusen, 2006). Concerning the second, modelling of the de-excitation mechan- ism of neutron-rich isotopes, as particularly produced in nuclear ﬁssion has recently advanced so much (Becker et al., 2013; Litaize et al., 2014; Talou et al., 2014; Serot et al., 2014; Stetcu et al., 2014; Schmidt et al., 2015; Vogt and Randrup, 2014) that precise experimental studies are necessary as benchmarks and references.
The energy released in nuclear ﬁssion is distributed in kinetic and excitation energy of the two fragments. The excitation energy manifests itself in fragment deformation and intrinsic excitation energy. The ﬁrst step of ﬁssion fragment de-excitation takes place at a very early stage after scission through the successive emission of neutrons and γ rays (see the schematic in Fig. 1). In nuclear applications the prompt energy release by neutrons and γ rays accounts for about 5% of the total
prompt heat set free in nuclear ﬁssion. At a later stage, the residual fragments are still unstable and release their excitation energy through β and subsequent γ-decay forming isotopes approaching the valley of nuclear stability. This delayed release of excitation energy contributes to the so-called decay heat. The knowledge about this particular quantity is related to the ﬁssion fragment yields and is highly relevant for the assessment of the nuclear fuel inventory and the eventual waste management.
Properties of the emitted particles prior to the onset of weak decays are important for the better understanding of the mechanism of ﬁssion- fragment de-excitation. Precise experimental data on prompt ﬁssion neutron and γ-ray emission, e.g. multiplicity, average energy per particle and total dissipated energy per ﬁssion, preferably as function of ﬁssion-fragment mass and total kinetic energy, are key input to benchmark nuclear ﬁssion models attempting to describe the competi- tion between prompt neutron and γ-ray emission.
Some years ago, a collaboration of scientists from JRC Geel (the former JRC IRMM) and other institutes took the lead in establishing a dedicated measurement programme on prompt ﬁssion neutron (Kornilov et al., 2010; Göök et al., 2016) and γ-ray characteristics (Billnert et al., 2013; Lebois et al., 2015; Oberstedt et al., 2013a, 2016, 2014; Oberstedt et al., 2015; Oberstedt et al., 2015). They contributed with a number of precise measurements of prompt neutron and γ-ray
Fig. 1. Schematic of the nuclear ﬁssion process indicating the characteristic time frame for the transition of the compound nucleus from its ground-state to the formation of the ﬁssion fragments, occasionally accompanied by a light charged (ternary) particle and for the emission of prompt neutrons and γ-rays. In the box the impact of the diﬀerent components on nuclear applications is given.
spectral data from spontaneous, thermal- and fast-neutron induced ﬁssion of several compound systems, which has triggered even more measurement activities around the world.
2.Challenges in nuclear (ftssion) physics research
The evidently progressive global warming requires a steady de- crease of production of greenhouse gases. A considerable percentage must be attributed to energy production through the combustion of coal and gas. One economically viable way of essentially CO2-free energy production is oﬀered by nuclear ﬁssion of 233U, 235U and/or 239Pu. Nuclear power reactors of the Generation-IV type are being designed under the condition to maximize the eﬃciency of the nuclear fuel and to minimize the production of long-lived radioactive waste as
e.g. minor actinides. For reliable design studies and safety assessments of future nuclear reactors precise nuclear and in particular neutron- induced reaction data are an essential pre-requisite.
Despite the many decades of experimental and evaluation work devoted to neutron-induced reaction data the presently contemplated technologies cover a very diﬀerent regime of incident neutron energies, calling for a new generation of nuclear data. As one example, in the domain of heat production in and close to reactor cores discrepancies between evaluated nuclear data and integral experiments became apparent some years ago (Rimpault, 2006) pointing to a lack of understanding of the heat production related to the reactor core (NEA Nuclear Energy Agency, 2006). The goal towards more eﬃciently reducing long-lived nuclear waste, e.g. by means of a fast-neutron spectrum and a higher burn-up, require measuring ﬁssion fragment yields as well as the neutron spectrum at relevant incident neutron energies. One may summarize important nuclear ﬁssion data needs in the following, although not exhaustive, list:
1.High mass-resolved ﬁssion fragment yield data for the main actinide isotopes from uranium and plutonium as well as from long-lived minor actinides as 237Np, americium and curium isotopes
2.Prompt neutron multiplicity and spectrum characteristics in neu- tron-induced ﬁssion
3.Prompt ﬁssion γ-ray spectrum characteristics relevant for the heat production in the core and the surrounding of the Generation-IV nuclear reactors.
All these data are needed for incident neutron energies ranging from the so-called resolved-resonance region, i.e. the eV range, to that of fast neutrons up to 20 MeV kinetic energy, as the impact of excitation energy is illustrated in Fig. 2. Furthermore, those measure- ments reach out to the investigation of neutron-rich isotopes, far from nuclear stability and towards the neutron drip-line. They may help to reveal whether nuclear magic shells still exist at large deformation and
strong neutron excess, which is relevant for astrophysical applications such as describing the nucleosynthesis in the universe by the s- and r- process.
3.Recent instrument developments
The generation of high-precision spectral neutron and γ-ray data was achieved by implementing advanced instrumentation and metho- dology. New technologies, concerning particle detectors and data acquisition as well as data analysis techniques, require benchmarking experiments to link present and new data to the past.
In the following we will discuss two major technical achievements, which were key to the latest advancements in the area of prompt particle measurements emitted in nuclear ﬁssion.
3.1.A 4π position-sensitive double Frisch-grid ionization chamber (FGIC)
In a typical experiment to measure prompt neutron emission in ﬁssion one needs a device to detect the ﬁssion event and a neutron detector to measure the emitted prompt neutron. The latter is typically made from a scintillating liquid, which allows distinguishing between incoming neutrons and γ rays, but does not possess a good pulse height resolution for γ rays.
For the purpose of acquiring nuclear data only, the measurement of the neutron spectrum characteristics in the laboratory frame, i.e. spectral shape, mean neutron energy per ﬁssion and average multi- plicity, is suﬃcient.
However, if we want to learn about the underlying physics, we need to measure the fragments' kinetic energy and the emission angle of the emitted neutron relative to the ﬁssion axis in the centre-of-mass frame (see upper part of Fig. 3). A double Frisch-grid ionization chamber (FGIC) is often used to measure both the kinetic energy of each ﬁssion fragment (from which also its mass can be derived) and the angle relative to the chamber axis, as shown on the left part of Fig. 3 (Budtz- Jørgensen and Knitter, 1988; Al-Adili et al., 2012; Göök et al., 2014). FGIC are radiation resistant and have a geometrical eﬃciency of 4π.
The Frisch-grid is a mesh of wires with a typical diameter of
0.035 mm and a period of 0.5 mm. The chamber is usually operated with P-10, a counting gas consisting of 90% Ar and 10% CH4, at a pressure of 108.5 kPa and under a constant ﬂow of about 80 ml/min. By placing the neutron detector along the chamber axis this angle coincides with the angle relative to the momentum direction of the detected neutrons. Hence, the projection of the neutron momentum on the fragments direction of travel is known, and the relevant kinematics in the ﬁssion fragment rest-frame can be reconstructed.
Employing an array of neutron detectors, necessary for collecting a signiﬁcant number of events, each detector forms an axis of symmetry around which the ﬁssion fragment direction of travel needs to be known (see illustration in Fig. 3). As a consequence the traditional Frisch-grid ionization chamber is no longer suﬃcient to reconstruct the kinematics in the fragment rest-frame. Therefore, we have replaced the ionization chamber anode-plates by a position-sensitive read out structure, which allows determination of all three space-components
{x, y, z} of the ﬁssion fragments' direction of travel (Göök et al., 2016b). The position sensing structure consists of two parts, a plane of parallel wires and a strip anode. The wire plane is placed 4 mm above the Frisch-grid and the strip anode is placed 4 mm further above the wire plane, with the strips oriented perpendicular to the wires. Details and viewgraphs of the wire plane and the strip anode may be found in Göök et al. (2016b). Tungsten wires of 0.025 mm radius are soldered 2 mm apart to the support structure, made from a circular printed circuit board (PCB) of 17.76 cm diameter with a 10 cm×10 cm quadratic hole exposing the wires. In total 51 resistors of 100 Ω are surface-mounted in electrically insulated soldering pads forming a resistive charge- divider. The near and far-end of the charge divider is connected to
Fig. 2. Average prompt neutron multiplicity, , in the reaction 237Np(n,f) as a function of the pre-neutron fragment mass, Apre, for two diﬀerent incident neutron energies (left part); it appears that the additional excitation energy leads to enhanced neutron emission for heavy fragments only. Depending on the assumption in the data analysis, whether excitation energy is equally distributed amongst both fragments (average) or not (heavy only) leads to a signiﬁcantly diﬀerent fragment yield distribution, Apost (right part).
Fig. 3. (a) Kinematics of prompt neutron emission and transformation from laboratory system into centre-of-mass frame; (b) Sketch of a double Frisch-grid ionization chamber (FGIC) for ﬁssion-fragment measurements (left) and the arrangement of various neutron detectors relative to the FGIC and the incoming neutron beam (right); the detector indicated by the red circle is placed along the chamber symmetry axis and represents the traditional arrangement to obtain emission data in the centre-of-mass frame. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
charge-sensitive pre-ampliﬁers. The induced and collected charge on the wire plane and the anode, respectively, are divided between the near and far end pre-ampliﬁers giving two position ﬁgures {x, y}1,2 per chamber side. The third coordinate, z, is extracted from the average electron drift-time, which is related to the electron drift-velocity. For both x and y we achieve a spatial resolution better than 1 mm at 1σ. From the set {x, y}1,2 and z1,2 the emission angles θ and ϕ are determined (see Fig. 4); for details about the extraction of the coordinates we refer to Göök et al. (2016b). In Fig. 5 the ﬁnal angular distributions of prompt neutrons relative to the ﬁssion axis in the laboratory frame are shown (symbols). The green line indicates the angular distribution averaged over all 12 detectors.
The new position-sensitive twin Frisch-grid ionization chamber is presently coupled to an array consisting of 22 neutron detectors measuring prompt neutron spectra and angular distributions from the resolved resonance-neutron induced ﬁssion on 235U and 239Pu as a function of ﬁssion fragment mass and total kinetic energy.
3.2.
Lanthanide-halide detectors for prompt ﬁssion γ-ray spectral (PFGS) measurements
When an excited ﬁssion fragment cannot emit a neutron due to the spin and parity of the daughter nucleus a γ ray is emitted instead. This is known as the neutron-γ competition during ﬁssion-fragment de- excitation. In order to benchmark nuclear de-excitation models knowl- edge about the prompt γ-ray spectral shape is required. Here, isomeric states within the cascade have a great impact and cannot be modelled. To gain comprehensive γ-ray data, an ideal detection system would possess at the same time a good energy resolution and excellent timing properties in the sub-nanosecond range. In recent years lanthanide- halide detectors, made from cerium-doped LaCl3 and LaBr3 as well as CeBr3, appeared on the market and were introduced to nuclear decay measurements. In particular their suitability for PFGS measurements was successfully demonstrated (Billnert, 2011; Oberstedt et al., 2012; Lutter, 2013; Oberstedt et al., 2013b).
In coincidence with a ﬁssion trigger, provided by e.g. ionization chambers or diamond detectors, we achieve a timing resolution well below 2 ns with lanthanide-halide detectors of size 51 mm×51 mm (diameter×length) integrated over γ-ray energies between 100 keV and about 8 MeV. This allows an eﬃcient separation of prompt ﬁssion γ- rays from neutrons by applying the time-of-ﬂight (TOF) technique as well as measuring isomeric γ-decays with half-lives down to around 1 ns. The typical energy resolution at 662 keV is as good as 2.8% for LaBr3:Ce detectors, which provides a superior selectivity for γ transi- tions compared to traditional NaI(Tl), BaF2 or BGO detectors.
A typical spectrum obtained with a cerium-doped lanthanum- bromide detector is shown in Fig. 6. In the left part (Fig. 6a) the γ- ray energy vs. time-of-ﬂight is depicted in logarithmic scale. The dashed rectangle contains the prompt peak within ± 2.5 ns centred around zero, and the adjacent region to the right shows isomeric transitions. From about 5 ns on γ-rays from inelastically scattered prompt ﬁssion neutrons are visible. The horizontal stripes are caused by intrinsic background, e.g. the decay of natural 138La at 1460 keV and from inelastically scattered prompt ﬁssion neutrons, e.g. 27Al(n,n′
843.6keV). In Fig. 6b) projections of the three components onto the energy axis are shown, corresponding to prompt ﬁssion γ rays (red), isomer decay and γ rays from inelastically scattered neutrons (green), environmental background (blue), respectively.
After unfolding the energy-dependent response of the lanthanide- halide detectors to γ rays the emission spectrum of ﬁssion γ rays is obtained. Fig. 7 shows emission spectra from diﬀerent ﬁssion reactions that we studied in the past few years, in logarithmic energy scale. Our results are compared to a spectrum taken with an array of BaF
Fig. 4. Position of ﬁssion fragments in the x,y-frame for selected cuts on the cosine of the polar angle θ obtained in the neutron-induced ﬁssion of 236U*.
Fig. 5. Measured angular distribution of prompt ﬁssion neutrons relative to the ﬁssion axis in the laboratory frame for 12 diﬀerent detectors (symbols) compared to the angular distribution averaged over the same 12 detectors (green line). For the sake of clarity each individual angular distribution has been displaced by 0.4 units. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
detectors (Chyzh et al., 2013). Thanks to the good energy resolution of lanthanide halide detectors we observe distinct structures at γ energies below 1 MeV, which are entirely absent in the spectra taken with BaF2 detectors due to a worse energy resolution. The relative intensities of the γ peaks within the structure change with the ﬁssioning system,
reﬂecting their diﬀerence corresponding ﬁssion fragment mass dis- tributions.
4.From basic research to applications
Both examples of recently developed instrumentation presented above and already implemented in nuclear research give a ﬂavour of the improvements that can be achieved in obtaining high quality data. In the near future we will couple the position-sensitive FGIC with an array of lanthanide-halide detectors. The combined features will allow investigating a complete correlation of prompt ﬁssion γ-ray spectrum characteristics as a function of fragment mass and kinetic energy. Of particular interest is the angular distribution of the emitted γ rays in order to disentangle their multipolarity.
Apart from applications in basic research, those developments may serve also in other domains. Provided that the neutron-induced ﬁssion cross section and the neutron ﬂuence into a given angle relative to the beam axis are known, the position-sensitive FGIC can be used for sample characterization with respect to areal density of the actinide layer. In turn, if the actinide sample was characterized to a suﬃcient degree by other means, e.g. an alpha spectroscopic scan, the neutron ﬂux distribution as a function of angle relative to the incident particle beam axis can be mapped out.
The diﬀerent properties of lanthanide-halide detectors oﬀer their distinct opportunities:
•The combination of excellent timing and good energy resolution allows optimizing the contrast of PET systems by setting narrower
gates on both the energy around the 511 keV annihilation photons and the coincidence timing window for the two photons emitted in opposite direction.
•The very low intrinsic activity of the CeBr3 material makes those
detectors very well suited for environmental monitoring, where the
use of germanium detectors may turn out diﬃcult because of the
Fig. 6. Typical spectra obtained with a cerium-doped lanthanum-bromide detector: a) γ-ray energy vs. time-of-ﬂight; the dashed rectangular contains the prompt peak within ± 2.5 ns, and the adjacent region to the right shows isomeric transitions. From 5 ns on γ-rays from inelastically scattered prompt ﬁssion neutrons are visible. The horizontal stripes are due to intrinsic background, e.g. the decay of natural 138La at 1460 keV and from inelastically scattered prompt ﬁssion neutrons, e.g. 27Al(n,n′ 843.6 keV); b) Projections of the three spectral components onto the energy axis: prompt ﬁssion γ rays (red), isomer decay and γ rays from inelastically scattered neutrons (green), environmental background (blue). (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)
Fig. 7. Prompt ﬁssion γ-ray emission spectra taken with a LaBr3:Ce after unfolding the energy-dependent detector response to γ rays from diﬀerent ﬁssion systems, 252Cf(sf) (Billnert, 2013), 235U(nth,f ) (Oberstedt et al., 2013a) and 241Pu(nth,f ) (Oberstedt et al., 2014), viz. The spectra are compared to a PFGS measurement of 252Cf(sf) with an array of BaF2 detectors (Chyzh, 2013).
necessary cooling. The good energy resolution again provides a suﬃciently high selectivity for the radiation of interest. The absence of intrinsic background at low-energy, i.e. below 500 keV, might leave them useful also for characterizing nuclear waste, nuclear forensics and for tomography of nuclear waste drums.
Those tempting ﬁelds of nuclear applications need still to be explored in more details, because lanthanide-halide crystals are avail- able at suﬃciently large size only since recently.