<title>Update 2017 on Target Fabrication Requirements for High-Performance NIF Implosion Experiments</title>
<Affiliation>a.Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, California 94550
b.Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico
c.General Atomics, P.O. Box 85608, San Diego, California 92186</Affiliation>
<author>S. W. Haan, D. S. Clark, C. R. Weber, S. H. Baxamusa, J. Biener, L. Berzak Hopkins, T. Bunn, D. A. Callahan, L. Carlson, M. J. Edwards, B. A. Hammel,
A. Hamza, D. E. Hinkel, D. D. Ho, W. Hsing, H. Huang, O. A. Hurricane, M. A. Johnson, O. S. Jones, A. L. Kritcher, O. L. Landen, J. D. Lindl, M. M. Marinak, A.
J. MacKinnon, N. B. Meezan, J. Milovich, A. Nikroo, J. L. Peterson, P. Patel, H. F. Robey, V. A. Smalyuk, B. K. Spears, M. Stadermann, J. L. Kline, D. C. Wilson, A.
N. Simakov & A. Yi</author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>FUSION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/15361055.2017.1387014</DOI>
<URL> https://doi.org/10.1080/15361055.2017.1387014</URL>
Abstract — Experiments and analysis in the 2 years since the 2015 Target Fabrication Meeting have resulted in further evolution of the requirements for high-performance layered implosions. This paper is a status update on the experimental program and supporting modeling, with emphasis on the implications for fabrication requirements. Previous work on the capsule support has continued, with various other support options being explored in experiments and modeling. Work also continues on ablator composition non- uniformities, with important new results from CH experiments on Omega, and the first three-dimensional X-ray transmission measurements of Be capsules on the National Ignition Facility. Work on hohlraums continues to include near-vacuum hohlraums and U hohlraums without a gold lining. Overall, the under- standing that has been achieved, along with the progress in fabrication technology, represents good continuing progress toward the goal of fusion in the laboratory.
Keywords — National Ignition Facility, target design, target requirements.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
Implosions of fusion capsules at the National Ignition Facility1 (NIF) require demanding specifications on the fabrication of the targets. As they were in place for the 2012 National Ignition Campaign,2 these requirements have been described in Refs. 3 and 4 and were presented at previous target fabrication conferences.4,5 Since  the last conference in 2015, various NIF experiments have continued to explore several issues that reduce the per- formance of the targets and that require development from the target fabrication community in order to produce
better-performing experiments in the future. This paper summarizes these fabrication-related issues for the igni- tion campaign and the corresponding updated requirements.
The targets being discussed here have the geometry shown in Fig. 1. The fusion fuel in the center of the  target is enclosed in an ablator shell, which is supported between two Formvar foils called  the  tent  (Fig.  2)  (Ref. 6). For most NIF implosions the ablator has been    a CH plastic called glow discharge polymer7 (GDP). Experimental campaigns are also underway with abla- tors made of beryllium8,9 and high-density carbon10–12 (HDC). The major component of the target is a 1-cm-long cylinder called the hohlraum, typically
Fig. 1. Ignition target. (a) The hohlraum enclosing the central spherical capsule, made of Au optionally lined with 7 µm of U and optionally 0.7-µm Au innermost lining. At the indicated angles, 48 “quads” of laser beams enter, and Si paddles support the hohlraum. (b) Pie dia- gram of the central capsule, with the fill tube and hole indicated.
Fig. 2. Drawing of the support tent on the capsule, indicating the contact ring and contact angle (the angle beyond tangent at which the film leaves the capsule surface).
made of Au with a 7-µm U inner liner that is in turn usually lined with 0.7 µm of Au. The hohlraum is heated by laser beams coming through entrance holes at  the ends of the cylinder. The interior of the hohlraum comes to a peak radiation temperature of about 300 eV. Deposition of these nearly Planckian X-rays onto the central capsule drives the implosion of the deuterium- tritium fuel along with some remaining shell material. The experiments in the last couple of years have  explored a number of variants on this basic structure, changing the pulse shape, the hohlraum  structure  and gas fill, and the ablator material.  These  experiments have clarified a variety of issues as discussed in the following sections.
The purpose of this conference summary is to pro- vide context for the target fabrication development that is currently being done or that needs further attention to increase the probability of NIF ignition. Most of the content of this presentation has been previously published or is being published elsewhere by the teams involved and will be only briefly summarized here with the rele- vant references. As previously reported preliminary con- clusions suggested,5 several key aspects of the implosion have been identified as needing improvement. Experiments and simulations have defined better under- standing for these issues: the perturbations seeded by the capsule support films, time-dependent radiation asymme- try, impact of the fill tube and hole, and inhomogeneneity in the ablator.
The simulations that underlie this interpretation of NIF target performance are discussed below and are pre- sented in detail in Refs. 13 through 17, and experimental evidence for these phenomena is described in Refs. 18 through 24 and is discussed more specifically below. As a summary comment, it is very important to note that the combination of these known factors is generally sufficient to explain the degraded performance of the NIF implo- sions. While there is occasional experiment-to-simulation disagreement in some details, there is a growing body of work indicating that the fundamental physics of the implosion is consistent with simulations, with the implo- sion quality degraded by these known factors.15,16 Mitigating these issues is accordingly the much needed next step for the NIF program. In addition to these implo- sion issues, considerable effort has gone into unexpected hohlraum efficiency factors that reduced the energy avail- able for the implosion25; these factors have little connec- tion with target fabrication and are not discussed here.
These imperfections are now the principal issues  that
the indirect-drive inertial confinement fusion (ICF) pro- gram faces as we move forward. These four topics formthe outline of the paper: the support tent, Sec. II; fill tube, Sec. III; time-dependent radiation drive asymmetry and possible use of shimming to correct it, Sec. IV; and perturbations seeded by irregularities in the  ablators,  Sec. V. Summary  and  conclusions  are  presented  in  Sec. VI. Note that we have incorporated material  into  this paper that was presented at the conference  by two   of the authors (Weber and Clark), in addition to the first author, rather than submitting three separate papers to this proceedings.
II.SUPPORT TENT
It was known from the early stages of NIF planning that the tent supporting the capsule in the center of the hohlraum would seed hydrodynamic instability growth around the two rings where the tent lifts off of the capsule surface (see Figs. 1 and 2; the rings where perturbations grow are about 45 deg from each pole). The size of these perturbations was originally estimated as described in Refs. 3 and 4, but the approximation used at that time substantially underestimated the early time ablative Richtmyer-Meshkov growth that is seeded by vorticity imparted by the exploding tent during the first nanose- cond of the implosion. Kelvin-Helmholtz instability could also play a role since simulations indicate that a key parameter is the contact angle, indicated in Fig. 2. The perturbation growth that results has been observed to be a factor of five to seven times bigger than was expected.17–21 The perturbation seeded by the capsule support tent is large enough to be the dominant single factor in reducing the neutron yield of many classes of NIF implosions.15,16 Simulation techniques developed by one of us (Hammel) in 2014 and  further developed by two of us (Clark and Weber) produce results that are in good agreement with the experimental measurements of the tent perturbation as described in Refs. 17 through 23. A wide variety of alternate capsule support architec- tures are being considered.17,22,23 The capsules already have a 10-µm borosilicate fill tube for fuel loading, which experiments and simulations indicate has an acceptable impact on the implosion in many instances (see Sec. III for more discussion). Configurations in which this fill tube alone might support the capsule with adequate posi- tioning accuracy, perhaps by supporting the tube at a safe distance from the capsule, are favored but difficult. One arrangement that is being considered is to have the 10-µm tube supported by another fiber perpendicular to the fill tube. This auxiliary hardware is acceptable as long as it is more than about 300 µm from the capsule and does not
have enough mass to affect the mass already in the hohlraum from the ~1 mg/cm3 He  fill.  Experiments  have confirmed the impact on the implosion of a cross- wire supporting the fill tube at various distances from the capsule surface (100, 200, and 300 µm). At the largest  distance of 300 µm, the tube has acceptable impact; at 200 µm the impact is marginal.17,22 Also, the capsule could be supported with larger tubes or stalks;  these  were also tested in experiment and simulation,17 and tubes or stalks bigger than 20 to 30 µm are likely to be unacceptable.
Supporting the capsule with fibers tangent to the capsule surface remains to be tested in detail. Currently, simulations indicate that the fibers must be smaller than about 1 µm in diameter.17 Supporting the capsule with a foam annulus between the tent and the capsule was tested and appears to be unacceptably sensitive to perturbations launched by the structure in the foam.17
At this time either a tent or a supported fill tube can be a viable support, with the specific optimization depending on the details of the ablator choice and pulse shape. The tent appears to be several times less important for Be and HDC implosions than for CH, although the specific needs will depend on the drive and the purpose of the shot. In many cases a standard use of a 45-nm tent will be adequate for these ablators. Having 15-nm tents available as an upgrade for more sensitive implosions might be valuable.
III.FILL TUBE
NIF imploded configurations frequently show fea- tures whose location and shape indicate they are from instabilities seeded by the fill tube. A number of experi- ments in the hydrodynamic growth radiography configuration20,21 have quantified the fill tube perturba- tion in-flight. It has proven to be a complex feature, the details of which are sensitive to the specifics of the implosion.24 The fill tube appears to be a more significant issue for HDC implosions than for GDP. One remarkable and unexpected feature is that the bright spots in the hohlraum, where the laser beams hit the hohlraum wall, cast shadows arrayed around the fill tube. These grow to be substantial perturbations.
Experiments with a 5-µm fill tube indicate that this tube size is acceptable for fielding and results in signifi- cant reduction in the resulting perturbation. The program is accordingly emphasizing 5-µm tubes for the future. Unfortunately, the use of a 5-µm tube restricts  options for using the tube for capsule support. Fully optimizing
this support–versus–tube-size trade-off, along with appro- priate optimization of the ablator and pulse shape, is work for the future.
The details of the glue fillet can significantly affect the evolution of the fill tube feature. Of course, too much glue is ultimately bad, but there can be cancellations and details of the hydrodynamics that result in an optimal glue fillet—sometimes too little glue can be worse than an optimal amount. Experiments defining this optimiza- tion are now being considered.
IV.TIME-DEPENDENT ASYMMETRY, HOHLRAUM DESIGN, AND SHIMMING
Optimizing the hohlraum is essential for indirect- drive ICF. The hohlraum design determines imploding fuel mass, velocity, and adiabat, and time-dependent radiation symmetry. The work determining an optimum hohlraum continues to drive new development of a vari- ety of hohlraum options. Optimizing the shape, gas fill, and performance of the hohlraum is a major thrust of the current NIF ignition program. From the target fabrication perspective, this requires extensive, innovative, and wide ranging production efforts to support the variety of options being considered. The three major fabrication options—Au, bare U inner liner, or an Au-U-Au double liner—all provide different details of the hohlraum energy efficiency and the spectrum of the radiation driv- ing the capsule. All three continue to be of interest, and the optimal choice varies from experiment to experiment. These design alternatives are typically expected to be within the standard set of requirements3,4 describing the quality of the hohlraum fabrication and characterization. One activity that combines target fabrication, hohlraum design, and implosion is the introduction of intentional low- mode variations in capsule geometry to cancel asymmetry in the radiation bath, so-called “shimming.” The notion here is to make the capsule intentionally somewhat out-of-round, making a deviation from sphericity that is intended to cancel the deviation caused by radiation asymmetry. For example, Fig. 3 shows a machined perturbation on the outer surface of a GDP capsule with a shape corresponding to a P4 Legendre polynomial. The amplitude would be chosen to cancel the P4 that can be seen in 2DConA experiments.26 This cancel- lation is most effective for the P4 asymmetry in the radiation since the P2 features of the implosion asymmetry typically have complex time dependence that cannot be canceled with a single-parameter feature from target fabrication. A P4 perturbation is strongly attracted by Rayleigh-Taylor instability growth into an eigenmode that correlates the
Fig. 3. Atomic force microscopy traces showing the  outer surface of a capsule that has been  machined  to have a P4 shape to cancel the effect of a P4 radiation asymmetry. The capsule is thinner at the poles and the equator and thicker at 50 and 130 deg. The step at the equator is an undesirable feature.
velocity, density, and shape aspects of the perturbation, which can then be canceled. Also, P4 is difficult to eliminate via hohlraum design because the control parameters that can change it—beam pointing, hohlraum aspect ratio, and cone balance—also change P2. Good progress is being made on machining a P4 modulation into the outer surface of GDP capsules, as shown in Fig. 3, working toward acceptable roughness of the machined capsule surface. These capsules will be tested in the coming year.
V.ABLATOR IRREGULARITIES
At the previous target fabrication conference, we discussed the impact of oxygen nonuniformity on GDP implosions.5,14,27 This work has been tested in the Omega experiments and extended to include Ar and O in Be and features in HDC.
For O in GDP, the Omega experiments were done with oxygen modulations deposited via exposure to blue light.28 As measured with a two-dimensional velocimeter,29 the oxygen modulations seed hydrody- namic velocity modulations of approximately the expected amplitude.30 As is often the case with O  in GDP, the primary uncertainty at this point in the compar- ison with simulation is the characterization of the oxygen distribution in the foils. Within the ~25% error bars of that characterization, the simulations and experiment agree. The details of this experiment will be in a publication being submitted around the time of this writing.30 In NIF experiments, modulations that are believed to be seeded by oxygen have become a regularly encountered feature of GDP experiments.20–22
In Be, variations in Ar and O appear to be important. In one 2009 Be capsule, the Ar composition was characterized in detail by one of us (Huang). It varied by ~0.04 at. % over lateral scales of 20 to 50 µm. Simulations say these varia- tions are large enough to be equivalent to 150- to 200-nm surface roughness, which would exceed the surface rough- ness requirement by a  factor of several.  There are  also  O modulations that can be 2 to 3 at. %, with the O pre- dominantly at the grain boundaries. This also would result in perturbations larger than the at-specification surface roughness. Further work to characterize these inhomogene- ities and their impact is important.
For HDC there are various less important homogeneity issues. There are no reported ubiquitous contaminants except hydrogen, which has a negligible impact because of its low mass and opacity. There are voids and density uniformity, but these appear to be adequate, as the column density variations appear to be dominated by the surface roughness. Dopant uniformity is evidently not an important issue; as long as the column density modulations are domi- nated by surface roughness, the dopant uniformity is accep- table. The surface roughness of the doped-layer boundaries must be controlled by polishing the capsules after deposit- ing the doped layer. There does appear to be one important ablator homogeneity issue: micron-scale inclusions of for- eign material, evidently Mo, which need to be controlled. It is important to characterize any inclusion with a volume larger than about a cubic micron; the specific requirement will depend on the purpose of the shot in question. Experiments on Omega with the OMEGA high-resolution velocimeter do indicate shock nonuniformities,10 but they are believed to result from shock propagation and equilibra- tion issues that are not directly related to target fabrication or characterization.
VI.SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
At the previous target fabrication conference, we cited three important issues where target fabrication development was an important ingredient for progress toward ignition.5 These same three issues remain important, and the fill tube has been shown to be an additional important issue. In summary, the issues and their status are the following:
1.Optimizing time-dependent radiation symmetry and coupling efficiency continues to require a variety of hohlraum sizes, shapes, and fills and the option of U
hohlraums without a gold liner. The prospect of shim- ming the capsule shape may be a valuable additional tool in the optimization of the symmetry.
2.The capsule support needs to be optimized as well as possible. This includes developing the thinnest possible tents with optimization of all the relevant features and continued exploration of alternate support systems.
3.The fill tube is an important feature, and 5-µm tubes are a valuable option. Optimizing the glue and hole geometry is also important.
4.Ablator quality is essential, beyond the familiar surface smoothness requirements. Developing alternate ablators is valuable, along with experimentally character- izing all seeds for hydrodynamic instabilities.
Other than the implosion quality as affected by these areas, there is no evidence from the experiments of more fundamental issues that could affect ignition on NIF. The program is excited to move forward, solving these issues and proceeding toward ignition. Continued quality and devel- opment of target fabrication is a vital part of this progress.
Acknowledgment
This work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under contract DE-AC52-07NA27344.
