<title>Investigation of Craze and Cracks of Polystyrene Shells During Drying Process</title>
<Affiliation>a.China Academy of Engineering Physics, Laser Fusion Research Center, Mianyang 621900, China
b.Sichuan University, School of Chemical Engineering, Chengdu 610065, China</Affiliation>
<author>Dawei Pan, Weixing Huang, Qiang Chen, Sufen Chen, Zhanwen Zhang, Meifang Liu & Bo Li</author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>FUSION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/15361055.2017.1372678</DOI>
<URL> https://doi.org/10.1080/15361055.2017.1372678</URL>
Abstract — Drying is one of the most important processes to prepare the hollow polystyrene (PS) shells which meet the requirements for the inertial confined fusion experiments. A tracing experiment was taken by white light interferometer to explore the drying process. The results indicate that the inner water drop passed through the PS shells with the state of water stream molecule. During the experiment, three structures were observed by digital microscope: the structure of craze, mixture of craze and cracks, and cracks. With ongoing drying, the decrease in the interfacial energy was regarded as the inducing factor for the formation of craze, while the residual stress inside the PS shells was the primary cause. Once the craze formed, it not only reduced the strength of the PS shells but also served as the stress concentration point. In the function of adequate time and stress, the voids of craze would coalesce resulting in the cracks formation. High-temperature treatment to the PS shells at 75°C for 3 h was taken to eliminate the residual stress so that the integrated PS shells would be produced. In addition, the comparison of surface roughness between all of the drying conditions is discussed.
Keywords — Polystyrene shells, drying process, craze and cracks.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
Nuclear fusion energy, known as an ideal enAbstract — Drying is one of the most important processes to prepare the hollow polystyrene (PS) shells which meet the requirements for the inertial confined fusion experiments. A tracing experiment was taken by white light interferometer to explore the drying process. The results indicate that the inner water drop passed through the PS shells with the state of water stream molecule. During the experiment, three structures were observed by digital microscope: the structure of craze, mixture of craze and cracks, and cracks. With ongoing drying, the decrease in the interfacial energy was regarded as the inducing factor for the formation of craze, while the residual stress inside the PS shells was the primary cause. Once the craze formed, it not only reduced the strength of the PS shells but also served as the stress concentration point. In the function of adequate time and stress, the voids of craze would coalesce resulting in the cracks formation. High-temperature treatment to the PS shells at 75°C for 3 h was taken to eliminate the residual stress so that the integrated PS shells would be produced. In addition, the comparison of surface roughness between all of the drying conditions is discussed.Keywords — Polystyrene shells, drying process, craze and cracks.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
ergy, is green and effective so far. Inertial confinement fusion (ICF) experiments driven by laser are the most possible way to control the utilization of fusion energy.1–3 Due to good mechanical properties, polystyrene (PS) shells have been widely used in the experiments. For example, PS shells can be used as the base of typical multilayer hollow plastic shells. The increase in laser driver size for fusion experimentation from the Nova laser to the National Ignition Facility laser has necessitated correspondingly larger fuel capsules. However, one technically
challenging application of large-diameter PS shells in  ICF implosion experiments is the preparation of inte- grated shells which meet the specifications for sphericity, wall thickness uniformity, and surface finish.4,5 All char- acteristics are required to obtain the proper implosion characteristics.
Generally, PS shells have been made by the micro- fluidic technique in which water-oil (W1/O) compound droplets are formed first, then the solvent in the O phase is removed by evaporation, and finally the inner water  drop is also removed by drying. To meet the stringent specifications for the PS shells, a lot of research work has been done on studying the W1/O compound droplet gen-eration and curing process. Shao et al. performed a com-prehensive study on size control over the droplets generated in the dropping flow regime and established the theoretical model to predict the size of W1/O compound droplets under different conditions from the view of force analysis.6 Bei et al. fabricated the highly concentric shells using a uniform alternating current electric field to induce dipole/dipole interactions.7 Nagai et al. investigated the mass transfer of the solvent during the curing process and found the curing process was governed by dissolution from the oil phase to the external phase.8 Our previous work studied the effects of density matching during the curing process on the wall thickness of the resulting shells.9 Meanwhile, our previous experiments found that a lot of craze and cracks appear on the surface of PS shells after drying, especially for large-diameter polymer shells. However, as far as we know, there is no report about studying the effects of the drying process on the quality of PS shells.
To clarify the effect of the drying process on the
craze and cracks of PS shells, the focus of this technical note is to study the dehydrating behavior of inner water drop during the drying process and the structure of the cracks after drying. The mechanism of craze and cracks formation is also discussed. To obtain the PS shells with a well-finish surface and mechanical properties, an opti- mized method is put forward to reduce the formation of cracks in this technical note. The advantage of the exchange between the inner water and ethanol is also discussed.
II.EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
II.A.Materials
Polystyrene (MW = 250 kg/mol, ρs = 1.05 g/mol) (Across  Organics  Inc.),   polyvinyl   alcohol   (PVA) (MW = 85 ~ 124 kg/mol, 87% ~ 89% mole hydrolyzed) (Aldrich Company), calcium chloride (CaCl2), and abso- lute ethyl alcohol (Chengdu Kelong Chemical Reagent Factory) were all used as received without further purifi- cation. Fluobenzene (FB) (Shanghai Jingchun Reagent Ltd.) was purified by distillation. Deionized water was used in the preparation of all aqueous phases.
II.B.Preparation of PS Shells
W1/O/W2 compound droplets were generated by a triple orifice droplet generator (shown in Fig. 1a). Pure water was used as the W1 phase. The PS/FB solution with 15 wt% PS was used as the O phase. An aqueous solution of PVA and CaCl2 was used as the W2 phase.
Fig. 1. Preparation process of PS shells (a) fabrication process of W1/O/W2 compound droplets by a triple ori- fice droplets generator; and (b) curing process of W1/O compound droplets in W2 phase with a rotating cylind- rical flask.
In order to meet the density matching, the mass frac- tions of PVA and CaCl2 in the aqueous solution were 1.5% and 1%, respectively. As shown in Fig. 1a,  the W1, O, and W2 phases were transported into the triple orifice droplet generator by three syringes controlled  by three pumps. At the end of  the W1 tube, the W1 and O phases grew simultaneously. The W1 phase left the W1 tube and surrounded the O phase, which is called the “one-step” method.6 Then, in the competition of interfacial tension force, drag force, inertia force, and so on, the water in oil (W1/O) compound droplets were stripped off from the W2 phase, forming the water-in- oil-in-water (W1/O/W2) compound droplets. After  that, the W1/O/W2 compound droplets were collected  in a cylindrical flask filled with 150 ml of the W2 solution.
To avoid the possible effects of shell size and wall
thickness on the craze and cracks, the inner diameter (i.d.) and wall thickness were set as 2500 and 30 μm, respectively. With the assumption that the i.d. in the W1/O/W2 compound droplets and the amount of PS do not change, to obtain the given i.d. and wall thickness the initial thickness of the O layer in the corresponding W1/O/W2 compound droplets can be calculated  when  the initial mass fraction of PS is known. The correspond- ing i.d. and O layer of the W1/O/W2 compound droplets were controlled by adjusting the flow rate of the W1, O, and W2 phases. The experimental results show that the
i.d. and wall thickness are in the range of 2500 ± 50 and 30 ± 10 μm, respectively.
Fifty W1/O compound droplets were collected in a cylindrical flask. Then the cylindrical flask was put on  the heated water bath at 55°C and rotated horizontally at 35 rpm for 48 h, as shown in Fig. 1b. After the curing process, the FB was removed totally, forming the solidi- fied PS shells containing inner water drop.
II.C.Drying of PS Shells
The PS shells were transferred to another breaker and washed several times with deionized water and ethanol to remove residual PVA and CaCl2. To avoid the effects of defects produced during the solidifying process, the PS shells were immersed in the ethanol to fully make the exchange with the W1 phase. After this, the PS shells were observed using a digital microscope. The floating PS shells without cracks were picked up. Finally, these totally washed PS shells were dried at atmospheric pres- sure for several days to obtain the dry PS shells.
II.D.Characterization
II.D.1.Morphology and Dimension of W1/O Droplets and PS Shells
The morphology of the W1/O droplets was charac- terized by digital microscope. The i.d. and outside diameter (o.d.) of these  W1/O  compound  droplets  in  the W2 phase were obtained from these micrographics. The initial thickness of the O layer in the  W1/O dro-  plets could be calculated by the o.d. and i.d. values.  Thus, the dimensions of the  resulting  PS  shells  could be estimated. The o.d. and i.d. of the PS  shells  with inner water drop were also characterized by digital microscope. Simultaneously, the craze  and  cracks  of  the PS shells were also observed using the digital microscope.
II.D.2.Surface Finish of Hollow PS Shells
The surface finish of the hollow PS shells was measured by white light interferometer. Three PS shells of each sample and three locations of each measured shell were character- ized. The dimensions  of  the  measured  locations  were  736 × 480 μm. The arithmetic average of all measured values represented the surface finish level of the hollow PS shells.
II.D.3.Contact Angle of PS-Water
The contact angle of PS-water was measured by a drop shape analyzer. The results indicate that the contact angle of  PS-water  is  about  150  deg  (shown in Fig. 2).
II.E.Experimental Plan of Drying Process
The influence factors on craze and cracks consist of residual stress, drying temperature, and so on. In light of the influence factors, some experimental plans are put forward as shown in Table I. In our work, four cylindrical
Fig. 2. Contact angle of PS-water.
TABLE I
Experimental Plans for Drying  Process
flasks were used to solidify the PS shells. After the curing process, two of the flasks were put in a heated water bath at 75°C for 3 h, while the temperature for the other two flasks remained constant. After the treatment at 75°C, one flask was put in the oven at 45°C (sample 1) to dislodge the inner water drop. The other 75°C-heated flask was put at room temperature (sample 2). The flasks with a constant tem- perature used the same drying conditions: drying at 45°C (sample 3) and drying at room temperature (sample 4). It is worth noting that a full exchange between the inner water drop and ethanol should be made to pick up the PS shells with initial defects before drying.
III.RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
III.A.Drying Process of PS Shells with Inner Water Drop
The process of drying the PS shells with inner water drop is that the W1 phase is dislodged into the atmosphere through the PS shells constantly. In order to study the drying process, a tracing experiment for the PS shells was taken in this work utilizing a white light interferometer. The drying process is shown in Fig. 3. In the pictures in Fig. 3, the white part inside the PS shell represents the inner water, while the black part represents the air. The area of the black part becomes greater as time goes on, until in Fig. 3f, the black part occupies the whole space inside the PS shell. This indicates that the W1 phase of the PS shells has been wiped off totally. Based on the pictures in Fig. 3, the time of the drying process can be calculated. It is about 4 h, not very long. Therefore, the state of inner water through the PS is probably water vapor molecule. The reason is that
liquid water with aggregation state is difficult to pass through the gap between polymer chains and the molecular thermal motion is slow.
Therefore, the drying process can be described as follows. When the PS shells are placed in the atmosphere, the inner water vaporizes first, resulting in the formation of water vapor. Meanwhile, air enters the PS shells. Finally, all space within the PS shells is full  of  air,  which indicates that the drying process is completed.  Due to the entry of air, two new additional interfaces, called PS-air and air-water interfaces, occur during the drying process. In addition, the diffusion of water vapor does not uniformly spread along the spherical surface, but starts from the top of the PS shells.
III.B.Failure Modes of Dry PS Shells
To investigate the failure modes of dry PS shells, we observed all of the dry PS shells by digital microscope. The results indicate that there are two typical failure modes (see Fig. 4). One is that the PS shells become deflated (shown in Fig. 4a). Another mode is that a great many lines which are reflected as three structures appear on the surface of the PS shells (shown in Figs. 4b, 4c, and 4d).
In order to further classify the three structures, we have carried on the high-temperature treatment to the PS shells to observe the changes of lines. The PS shells with craze and cracks were transferred to an oven at 100°C for 1 h. Then they were cooled to room temperature naturally. Finally, they were observed by digital microscope. The results are shown in Fig. 5. After high-temperature treatment some obvious changes were observed. In the first group, all of the lines disappeared. In the second group, a part of the lines
Fig. 3.  Drying process of PS shells with inner water drop at room temperature.
Fig. 4.   Failure modes of dry PS shells.
This also reveals that the craze on the surface of the PS shells can be eliminated by high-temperature treatment.
During the drying process, the entry of air causes a new additional interface. At the interface of PS and air, the balance equation of the interface forces can be expressed as
@1
The PS material with  hydrophobicity  will  result  in  cosθ < 0 by measuring the contact angle  between  PS and water, so
@2
The interfacial energy of the PS shells with inner water drop continuously reduces with the increase in the area of air. When the drying process finishes, the interfacial energy reaches minimum value. The forming of craze will produce a new interface. Before the drying process, the work of producing the new interface per unit area can be expressed as
@3
During the drying process, the work of producing the new interface per unit area can be expressed as
@4
Therefore, drying is advantageous to the formation of craze. At the same time, reduced interfacial energy will promote meniscus instability, which is regarded as the induction factor.11–14 In essence, on one hand, the residual stress formed due to nonuniform plasticization during the curing process is the key factor. Surely, the stress which is caused by the combined action of Laplace pressure, osmo- tic pressure, and the pressure difference between external atmospheric pressure and saturated vapor pressure in the PS shells promotes the forming of craze effectively. On the other hand, the existence of defects in the PS spherical shell can lead to stress concentration as it will make the stress of local points increase sharply.
In conclusion, with ongoing drying, the interfacial energy will decrease constantly, which acts as the induc- tion factor. Furthermore, the combined action of residual stress, the decrease of interfacial energy, and the defects together promote the formation of craze.
Once the craze forms, it not only reduces the strength of the PS shells but also serves as the stress concentration point. In the function of adequate time and stress, the voids of craze will coalesce resulting in the cracks formation.
III.C.Optimization of the Drying Process
III.C.1.Effect of Inner Water Exchanged by Ethanol on the Craze and Cracks
Related literature reports that the way to pick  up good shells is to make the full exchange between isopro- pyl alcohol and the inner water.15 It is a pity that the exchange results and mechanisms have not been described in detail. So, we carry out the analysis of the exchange results and mechanisms.
After curing, the shells are transferred to a sample bottle. They are washed several times with deionized water to remove residual PVA and CaCl2. The thoroughly washed shells are then placed with absolute alcohol in a small sample bottle. Then they are placed for several days until the good shells float.16 Finally, all of the shells are put under a digital microscope to observe the exchange results (shown in Fig. 6).
After the exchange, there are two results. One is that the PS shells float and there are some air bubbles inside the PS shells (see Fig. 6a), which indicates that the shells are good. The other one is that cracks are formed on the shells (shown in Fig. 6b), which indicates that the PS shells have initial defects.
When the PS shells are put in the alcohol, the inner water and the alcohol diffuse through the spherical shell, driven by osmotic pressure. The diffuse rate of water through the PS shells is faster than alcohol due to the different molecule size. So, during the exchange process, air will enter the PS shells along with the alcohol. Owing to the buoyant force, the PS shells will float on the top of the sample bottle. In addition, alcohol is one of the
Fig. 6. Exchange results: (a) good shells and (b) shells with cracks.
surface-active substances which can impel the formation of craze. So, under the effects of alcohol, the craze forms rapidly on the surface of the PS shells with initial defects. Once the craze forms, it will turn into cracks under enough time and stress. In a word, the purpose of the alcohol exchange is to find the PS shells with initial defects.
Moreover, we also investigate the influence of the alcohol exchange on the formation of craze and cracks. The experimental results are shown in Fig. 7. The probabil- ity of craze and cracks forming on the PS shells decreases due to the exchange between the alcohol and the inner water drop except for sample 1 (75°C drying at 45°C). One reason is that the pressure difference decreases due to the air bubbles inside the PS shells after the exchange. So, the stress also decreases. Meanwhile, the saturated vapor pres- sure of alcohol is larger than water, which also contributes to decrease the stress. In addition, the alcohol exchange will avoid the influence of the PS shells with initial defects on the drying experimental results. Accordingly, the alcohol exchange can improve the percentage of PS shells without craze and cracks in a sample.
III.C.2.Effect of Heat Treatment Before Drying on the Craze and Cracks
After the exchange between the inner water drop and alcohol, we put the PS shells in an oven at 45°C or at room temperature to dry for several days. When the inner water drops are dislodged totally, we observed all of the PS shells from the samples with different conditions by digital microscope.
After observing the PS shells, we counted the percen- tage of craze and cracks of all the PS shells under different conditions. The statistical results are shown in Table II.
Fig. 7. Effect of alcohol exchange on the craze and  cracks of PS shells.
TABLE II
Experimental Results Under Different Conditions.
Obviously, the percentage of good shells with treat- ment at 75°C is more than the PS shells which were not treated. The glass-transition temperature of PS is 110°C. But when the PS shells are in an environmental fluid that is regarded as a plasticizer, the glass-transition tempera- ture will decrease owing to the absorption of fluid.17 So, when the PS shells are placed in a heated water bath at 75°C, which approaches the glass-transition temperature, the polymer chains move for rearrangement to release a great deal of residual stress so that the probability  of craze and cracks formation decreases observably.
III.C.3.Effect of Drying Temperature on the Craze and Cracks
Table II also indicates that the drying temperature at 45°C is advantageous to prevent the formation of craze and cracks. The stress imposed by pressure during the drying process can be expressed as
@5
where
σ = total stress in the drying process
σr =  residual stress
φ =  revised factor
ΔP = algebraic sum of pressure which is acted on the PS shells (shown in Fig. 8), which can be expressed as ΔP ¼ PE — ðPL þ POÞ
Fig. 8. Diagrammatic sketch of PS shells during the drying process.
of cracks formation in principle. However, the effect is not prominent due to the very tiny change in the amount of saturated vapor pressure relative to the total pressure. On the contrary, the increase in drying time will make the forma- tion of craze and cracks easier. Generally, the formation of craze and cracks requires adequate time and stress. In the competition of the two aspects, drying at room temperature is not effective to prevent the craze and cracks. Meanwhile, drying at room temperature increases the fabrication period, which is adverse to producing the PS shells. So, the drying temperature at 45°C is a suitable condition.
III.C.4.Comparison of Surface Roughness Between All of the Drying Conditions
To investigate the effects of various drying condi- tions on the surface roughness, we measured the surface roughness of all of the samples using the white light interferometer. The experimental photographs  selected  to represent the average level are shown in Fig. 9. The specific average values of the PS shells under different
conditions are shown in Table III.
The data in Table III indicate that the surface rough- ness of the PS shells under different conditions is slightly changed. The influence of surface roughness mainly R =  inner  radius  of the drying PS shells
t = wall thickness.
At room temperature, the saturated vapor pressure is smaller than 45°C. This explains that the stress at room temperature will decrease, which will reduce the probabilitydepends on the bubbles and defects  on  the  surface of the PS shells. However, the defects and bubbles are mainly formed in the curing process, which has nothing to do with the drying process. CaCl2 is added in the external water phase under all conditions to prevent the formation of bubbles. So, the different drying conditions do not have an obvious effect on the surface roughness.
IV.CONCLUSIONS
Drying is one of the most important processes to produce the integrated PS shells. Tracing experimental results indicate that the inner water drop passed
Fig. 9. Surface roughness under different conditions.
TABLE III
Average Values of Surface Roughness Under Different Conditions
through the PS with the state of water stream molecule and the interfacial energy decreases along  with  the  entry of air during the drying process. During the experiment, three structures were observed by digital microscope: the structure of craze, mixture of craze and cracks,  and  cracks.  High-temperature  treatment   of   the PS shells at 75°C for  3  h  was  taken  to eliminate the residual stress. The drying experimental results explained  that  the  appropriate  drying  condition   is  that the PS shells must be treated with high temperature after curing and the drying temperature should be 45°C. In addition, the influence of the  drying  conditions  on the surface roughness is not effective. Obviously, the elimination of residual stress is the best way to produce the PS shells to satisfy the requirements for the ICF experiments.
Acknowledgments
We gratefully acknowledge the funding from the China Academy of Engineering Physics (2014B0302052) and National Natural Science Foundation of China (U1530260).
