<title>PUMPING EQUIPMENT FOR NUCLEAR ENERGY AND THE NON-NUCLEAR MARKET</title>
<Affiliation>OKBM Afrikantov, Nizhny Novgorod, Russia</Affiliation>
<author>D. L. Zverev, A. V. Vasyaev, S. V. Babushkin, I. B. Korobov,G. G. Afrikantov, S. V. Novikov, M. N. Borovkov, S. E. Belov,V. V. Gladkov, S. V. Motkov, and D. V. Makarychev</author>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>ATOMIC ENERGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Springer</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI> 10.1007/s10512-021-00719-6</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1007/s10512-021-00719-6</URL>
Abstract
OKBM Afrikantov possesses unique experience in developing different types of highly reliable pumping equipment. The pumping equipment developed at the enterprise possesses high safety and reliability metrics at minimum operating cost. OKBM accomplishments in the design and manufacture of pumping equipment over the last 20 years are shown and the basic phases involved in the development of electric pumps for nu- clear steam-generating plants, other systems on naval ships and vessels, and pumps for NPP and research and experimental reactor installations as well as electric pumps for the non-nuclear market are described.
OKBM Afrikantov is one of the leading enterprises working on the development of reactor technology. Nuclear re- actors of the nuclear industry and nuclear steam-generating plants (NSGP) for naval and civilian ships require thermomechan- ical equipment, including pumping equipment with heightened safety and reliability metrics. After working in the design, fabrication, and operation sphere for 75 years, OKBM has accumulated unique experience in developing highly reliable pumping equipment of different types. Over the indicated period hundreds of unit sizes of pumps have been designed and put into operation. The number of serially produced products exceeds 3200 [1, 2].
In the present article, the results of work performed over the last 20 years are presented and the basic phases involved in the development of electric pumps for NSGP, other systems on naval ships and vessels, and pumps for nuclear energy, re- search, and experimental reactor installations as well as electric pumps for the non-nuclear market are described.
Pumping equipment for ship reactor installations. The history of the development of sealed electric pumps com- mences with the main circulation pump of the NSGP on the world’s first nuclear icebreaker Lenin. The second hermetic electric pump was the main circulation pump developed for the NSGP OK-300 on a second-generation nuclear submarine. Its design differs significantly from that of the electric pump on the icebreaker Lenin: vertical implementation, two-speed electric motor with plain bearings, and an autonomous cooling loop.
Before 2000, hermetic pumps with different unit sizes were developed for NSGP of third- and fourth-generation submarines and ground-based prototype stands. A one-speed electric pump for the NSGP OK-650B was developed at the Aleksandrov Research Institute of Technology (NITI) for the KV-1 stand. It was the basis for the electric pump developed for the NSGP OK-650B-3 that served as a base for modifications. Subsequently, electric pumps were developed for the NSGP of fourth-generation submarines.
Aside from the primary-loop main circulation electric pumps for submarine NSGP, electric pumps were developed for purification and cooling systems and electric pumps for the cooling loop, meeting the modern specifications for the vibra- tional noise characteristics and reliability.
A recirculation pump – a small emergency unit (Fig. 1) – was developed for the NSGP of Borei class submarines. Based on its operational model, it has a geared flowpath. A frequency converter, powered from a dc source, was provided for controlling an electric motor. The main differences from the general commercial samples consisted in operation of a hot water Fig. 1. Small pumping unit NR 1.2/200.
Fig. 2. NSO 250/15 electric pump for cooling the general systems on ships.
pump with a large pressure head (up to 200 m) and low delivery flow (1.2 m3/h). The development of a hermetic drive did not present any difficulties, but the geared pump required prolonged testing associated with the development of the bearings and housing material.
In the 2000s, OKBM was enlisted to develop a secondary-loop electric pump (pumps for the steam-turbine plant) for Yasen class submarines. The electric pumps were first designed by two enterprises jointly – KTZ (Kaluga) designed the flow- path and its elements and OKBM designed the electric drive with the bearings. For the first time a hermetic implementation of the condensate and feed pumps was used in the steam-turbine design. In terms of the vibrational noise, the developed electric pumps surpassed the pumps with a face seal, from the Kharkov Plant, and were installed in the lead ship Severodvinsk. After the collapse of the USSR, the electric pumps NSO 250/15 and NSO 250/30, in 2003–2013, to replace the for-
eign-made products, specifically, the BEN type pumps from PO Moldavgidromash. The new pumps were the first pumps that were required to meet in full all modern specifications in terms of vibrational noise, including hydrodynamic noise (Fig. 2). NPO Polyus developed the APU-20 and APU-40 power supply and control units, likewise meeting all modern specifications. A stand was built at OKBM for testing the pumps.
In the process of designing the NSO 250/15 electric pump, with no experience in meeting the hydrodynamic noise specifications, several variants of the impellers and guide vanes were designed and subjected to computational analysis.  The parametric, vibrational noise, and hydrodynamic characteristics of the pump in all operating regimes were secured after full-scale testing and additional optimization of the flowpath. Computational algorithms for designing the flowpaths were
Fig. 3. Primary loop electric pump used in the RITM-200 installation.
determined on the basis of the experience gained during the testing. The calculations incorporate hydraulic and acoustic mod- eling and make it possible to determine at the design stage the level of vibrational noise and the hydrodynamic characteristics.
Full-scale testing for impact resistance was conducted on an impact testing machine after preliminary tests of the pilot pump. Subsequently the electric pumps underwent acceptance tests and were recommended for serial production. Hermetic electric pumps with high reliability and safety metrics meeting modern stealthiness requirements of nuclear submarines were developed, on the basis of experience, by continuously improving the design, materials, and manufacturing technology.
At the end of the 1990s, shipbuilding went through difficult times. The construction of new ships to meet the needs of the navy was sharply curtailed. In this connection, it became necessary to extend the operating time of surface ships and nuclear submarines. OKBM, working within the limits of maintenance service, successfully extended the service life of reac- tor facilities, including the pumping equipment. This made it possible to keep the nuclear fleet in service before next genera- tion nuclear submarines could be put into operation.
Pumping equipment of ship nuclear installations. A series of unit sizes of hermetic electric pumps was developed for the NSGP of the nuclear icebreaker fleet: primary loop circulation pump and its modifications, cooling pump, and tertiary
loop pump. The pumps operated without qualifications, the maximum operating time was equal to 1.85·105 h with a service
life of 35 years.
In the designing of the first small floating nuclear energy installation Akademik Lomonosov, modifications of the following were developed for the NSGP KLT-40S: primary loop circulation pumps, TsNR 9/35 cooling circulation pumps, tertiary loop system pumps, recirculation pumps, and spent-FA storage. Improved bearings with siliconized graphite friction pairs were used in all of these electric pumps.
Primary loop circulation pumps were developed for the RITM-200 reactor facilities of the next-generation nuclear submarines which were under construction and were installed on ships in 2016–2017 (Fig. 3). These pumps were imple- mented using the scheme for NSGP KLT-40 pumps but unlike the prototype they possess a one-speed electric motor and an axial flowpath. A frequency converter is used to supply power to the electric pump and to change the frequency. Likewise, the TsNR 9/35 electric pump was modernized for the RITM-200 facility. Electric pump sets have now been installed on the icebreakers Arktika, Sibir, and Ural. In 2019, three new unit sizes of hermetic electric pumps were developed for the NSGP of the icebreaker Lider: primary loop circulation pump, TsNR 15/42 cooling pump, and tertiary loop pump. Pilot models are now being built.
At the end of the service life and exhaustion of the expected life of the pumping equipment in the ship NSGP, the operation of some electric pumps was extended to 2.3·105 h.
Main circulation pumps for RBMK-type reactors. OKBM is the developer of unique main circulation pumps (MCP), having no analogs at the time they were developed, for NPP with RBMK. The MCPs incorporating novel solutions to techni- cal problems were developed in the 1960s–1970s. The first lots of TsVN-7 (1972, 8 items) and TsVN-8 (1978, 8 items) pumps
Fig. 4. TsVN-7 (TsVN-8) pump for the Leningrad, Kursk, and Smolensk NPP.
Fig. 5. Main circulation pump GTsN-2 for BN-600 (a), GTsN-1 for BN-800 (b), and GTsN-2 for CFR-600 (China) (c).
were shipped to the Leningrad NPP (Fig. 4). Currently, 16 TsVN-7 pumps and 64 TsVN-8 pumps are operating at the Leningrad, Kursk, and Smolensk NPPs. In the last ten years their service life and expected life have been extended in connec- tion with the elaboration of assigned reliability metrics. OKBM justified the operation of MCP for 45–50 years with a design service life of 30 years.
Main circulation pumps for fast reactors. OKBM has a great deal of experience in developing primary and sec- ondary loop main circulation pumps for sodium-cooled fast reactors (Fig. 5a). The main circulation pumps of this type operate for many years in the reactor installations BN-350 (Aktau, Kazakhstan), BOR-60, BN-600 in the No. 3 unit of the Beloyarsk
NPP (Table 1). The operating age of individual pieces of equipment for these installations exceeds 2.8·105 h and the service
life 40 years.
Work on the development of the main circulation pumps for the primary and secondary loops of BN-800 was resumed in 2003 (see Fig. 5b). Reliable and safe operation required the development of new GTsN-1 and GTsN-2 with a large unit capacity. In terms of technical characteristics, they surpassed by many-fold the existing analogues in the world (Table 2). For example, the capacity of GTsN-1 (5000 kW) and GTsN-2 (2500 kW) in BN-800 exceeds the capacity of the pumps in BN-600 by factors of 1.4 and 1.7, respectively, and in the Phoenix reactor (France) by more than factors of 6 and 5, respectively.
TABLE 1. Main Circulation Pumps of the Primary and Secondary Loops of BN-350, BOR-60, and BN-600
TABLE 2. Main Circulation Pumps of the Primary and Secondary Loops of BN-800 and CEFR (China)
Considering the positive operating experience for pumps, in BN-600, GTsN-1, GTsN-2, BN-800 the following was accomplished using a similar structural layout: vertical, centrifugal, submersible, with a free sodium level and argon gas cav- ity above them, with top radial-axial hydrodynamic bearing operating in oil, bottom radial hydrostatic bearing situated in sodium, upper face seal for gas, and electric drive adjustable from a frequency converter.
For full-scale testing of the head and serial samples on water as well as complex testing and certification of their electric drives, the following stand with the following characteristics was designed, fabricated, and put into operation in 2009:
flow range 1000–15500 m3/h, pressure to 1.9 MPa, installed power 9 MW, and voltage 6000 V.  The stand with two autono-
mous circulation loops and adjustment, maintenance, and measurement systems makes it possible to simultaneously conduct full-scale testing of the primary and secondary loops. On the stand, it is also possible to conduct a full-scale testing of pumps with even higher unit capacity for reactor installations of the type BN-1200 and CFR-600.
In 2010–2013, all pumps were fabricated and tested on a stand, delivered to the No. 4 unit of the Beloyarsk NPP with three aggregated units going the primary and secondary loops and with one each as a spare removable part for them. In December 2013, the pumps of the primary loop were put into operation in order to maintain the reactor temperature. In 2014, the pumps of the secondary loop were put into operation by turns.
In 1999, in the context of international collaboration with the Chinese People’s Republic, a contract was signed for delivery of the main circulation pumps for the primary and secondary loops for the 65 MW Chinese experimental fast reactor CEFR (see Table 2). The pumps were designed, fabricated, tested on a special stand, and successfully tested on site. The GTsN-1 and GTsN-2 pumps of the CEFR reactor installation have been successfully operating in different regimes since startup. In 2018, the collaboration with the CPR was enhanced by a contract for delivery of primary and secondary loop main circulation pumps for the CFR-600 reactor installation which was then under construction (see Fig. 5c, Table 2).
Currently, OKBM is working on the development of the primary and secondary loop main circulation pumps for the BN-1200M modernized reactor installation.
Next-generation pumps for NPP safety systems. Since the 1990s, OKBM has been working on the development and modernization of the pumping equipment for the VVER-1000 safety systems. The work performed in this direction was Fig. 6. TsNR 800-230R pump (TsNSA 700-140R) for the Balakovo and Rostov NPPs.
Fig. 7. Emergency cooling pump TsNR 800-230T (a), emergency boron injection pump ATsNSB 150-110 (b), and auxiliary feed pump ATsNSB 150-90G (c) of the Rostov NPP.
determined by the need to increase the reliability of the design of the operating pumps as a key element of the active safety systems of NPP. The main equipment includes the emergency- and scheduled-cooling pumps for the primary loop, pumps for introducing (injecting) boron, and sprinkler and emergency feed pumps as well as high capacity booster pumps and auxiliary feed pumps.
OKBM specialists primarily analyzed in the pump designs the least reliable pumps and pumps having the greatest effect on the unit as a whole – radial and axial bearings of the pump, relief devices, shaft seals, couplings, and housing ele- ments of the pump – and thereby determined ways of improving them. The design of the modernized units was based on tested solutions for RBMK-type MCP and the MCP of reactor installations on ships.
By 1995, a new layout with fundamental differences was developed for emergency- and scheduled-cooling pumps TsNR 800-230R for the primary loop (Fig. 6): built-in hydrostatic bearings on the pumped medium without the use of external lubrication and cooling systems, flexible lamellar coupling, and one face seal. This layout formed the basis of the design of serially produced pumps for cooling and sprinklers. It can also be used to modernize the operating pumps by using the existing housing of the pump in the primary loop of a nuclear energy installation. This design with enhanced reliability and safety metrics has no analogs in modern NPP.
At the beginning of the 2000s, a new design was proposed for the housing of the cooling pump, eliminating many de- ficiencies of the old design and subsequently adopted (Fig. 7a). Next, a unit size series of multi-step pump units, encompassing the entire line of pumps for the safety systems in VVER-1000 and the promising VVER-1200 with modifications, was formed. At the completion of the appropriate developmental work, the hydrostatic bearings were replaced by simpler and more reli- able hydrodynamic bearings. For testing the pumping equipment, a universal stand, having no analogs at that time in terms of functionality and making it possible to perform full scale parametric calculations of the entire list of pumps in the technological systems of NPP, was developed for testing the pumping equipment. As a result, pumps were developed for emergency- and
Fig. 8. TsVA artesian pump for the Tianwan NPP (China).
scheduled-cooling of the primary loop, pumps for introducing boron, sprinkler pumps, emergency feed pumps, and auxiliary feed pumps for the Nos. 2, 3, and 4 units of the Rostov NPP and the No. 1 unit of the Balakovo NPP (see Fig. 7b, c).
The following have now been developed: high and low pressure pumps for emergency and scheduled cooling of the primary loop, pumps for introducing (injecting) boron, and high-capacity boosting pumps for foreign NPP which are under construction. This equipment can also be used in NPP which are under construction in our country. Special development work is being conducted on pumping equipment with individual requirements in terms of operating conditions.
Artesian-type pumping units and semi-submersible pumps for NPP. In the context of the program for expanding the list and delivery volume of equipment, including for foreign NPP, at the beginning of 2000 a contract was signed for de- livering several size units of artesian-type class-3 and -4 pumping units for the NPP under construction in Tianwan (China). These pumps are intended for delivering seawater into the cooling system of the equipment (intermediate cooling loop of crucial consumers), washing the rotating screens, and also drainage systems (Fig. 8). In designing pumps and selecting the design of the main units, problems concerning the corrosion resistance of materials in seawater, seismic resistance, and re- source metrics of the equipment were solved. On the basis of specific operating conditions (operation in a subtropical marine climate, pumping corrosive sea water with high concentrations of chloride and other ions), in collaboration with the Central Research Institute of Structural Materials Prometey (CRISM Prometey), as basic methods, sea-water resistant materials in combination with protective coatings for the inner and outer surfaces in contact with the pumped medium, together with deposition of anti-corrosion coatings on them, were determined. To prevent biological fouling, greatly lowering the corrosion resistance of materials, of the pump housings, a system was developed for complex anti-corrosion and anti-fouling of the outer and inner surfaces of housing parts in contact with seawater.
When designing the pumps, special attention was devoted to confirming the operability of the main units, which determine the reliability of the entire unit, by prolonged operation of similar pumping equipment or its units under similar conditions at operating installations. For this group of pumps, to validate the declared reliability metrics (assigned operating life 60000 h, service life 40 years, MTBF ≥ 8000 h), a program was developed for qualification, establishing methods for con- firming the ability of the pumping equipment to perform its functions during the entire period of operation under conditions of the installation taking into account the effect on it of the actual environmental factors during the operating period. To confirm that the equipment meets the declared specifications, a stand was developed for performing full-scale testing (pump height up to 20 m). Two circulation loops make it possible to simultaneously test two pumps installed on their sites. The stand makes it
possible to test pumps with flow up to 3500 m3/h.
In 2004–2005, 52 pumping units of the artesian type were delivered to the Tianwan NPP. Five additional units were delivered in 2008.
Fig. 9. TsVA 20-30 pump for the Kudankulam NPP (India).
Fig. 10. TsPN 2/52 submersible pump.
Continuing the expansion of range of fabricated equipment, during the last decade OKBM developed five size units for artesian pumps, totalling 80 pieces, for the Leningrad NPP-2 and Belarus NPP. The reliability metrics of these units is higher as with those delivered to the Tianwan NPP (assigned life to overhall 105000 h, assigned operating time 50 yr, MTBF ≥
≥ 13000 h). Semi-submersible pumps were developed in parallel: TsVA 20-30 (Fig. 9) and PPN 2/25 for Kudankulam NPP (India), PPN 160-29 and PPN 2/25 for the Leningrad NPP-2.
Submersible electric pumps for NPP. Since the 2000s, OKBM has developed submersible electric pumps of safety class-3 and -4 for special sewage and special water-treatment systems at NPP. The first electric pumps TsPN 2/25, TsPN 2/50, and TsPN 100/25 were delivered to the Tianwan NPP (Fig. 10). The TsPN electric pumps – submersible, centrifugal, vertical implementation, single-block type, with face seal and a built-in electric motor – are intended for pumping radioactive and contaminated waste water and leaked water from the NPP systems.
In 2010, an agreement was made to deliver a large volume of safety class-3 and -4 pumping equipment for the Leningrad NPP-2. The specifications included already-developed electric pumps TsPN 2/25, TsPN 2/50 as well as the new
TABLE 3. Hermetic Electric Pumps from OKBM for the Petrochemical Industry
pumps GEN 16/30 and TsPN  25/20. In 2012 and 2015, submersible electric pumps were delivered to the No. 2 unit of     the Leningrad NPP-2. The total number of delivered electric pumps exceeded 200. Currently, two unit-size electric pumps TsPN 2/52 and TsPN 5/50 are being fabricated for the power units of the Ruppyr NPP in Bangladesh.
The technical solutions incorporated in the design of the submersible electric pumps and confirmed by prolonged operation of analog electric pumps in the NEI make it possible to get operating life at least 600000 h, which results in lower operating costs and higher reliability.
Pumps for the oil-refining and petrochemical industry. In the context of product diversification, in 1991 OKBM began to develop, based on assimilated technologies of pumping units for nuclear energy installations, hermetic electric pumps for the oil refining and petrochemical industry. The choice of the oil refining industry is associated with the need on the one hand to increase the explosion and environmental safety at industrial sites and on the other hand to replace imports. In 1991, an agreement was reached with the Sayan Production Association Khimprom (Zima City) to develop and deliver two hermetic pumps KhGN 200.170 and KhGN 200/210 for pumping vinyl chloride. In the development of the electric pumps, maximum use was made of the experience gained in hermetic electric pumps for nuclear steam generating plants. Later, five unit sizes of electric pumps for pumping liquid dichloroethane and dichloromethane mixture were developed. The electric pumps GEN 60/150 and GEN 80/220 (horizontal implementation) for pumping a mixture of phenol and oil at temperatures up to 350°C were developed for Lukoil-Nizhegorodnefteorgsintez.
Thus, in the 2000s, OKBM formulated a parametric series of hermetic electric pumps with 5–180 kW built-in electric motor for pumping fire and explosion hazardous toxic liquids and liquified gases with intake temperature from
–50 to 360°C and density 420–1300 kg/m3, such as petrol, vinyl chloride, dichloroethane and dichloroethane mixtures,
Fig. 11. Hermetic electric pumps from OKBM: a) GEN 50/400; b) GEN 170/190-03.
oil-dichloromethane, liquefied gases (ethylene, propylene, NGL), phenol, and phenol-oil. Maintaining in the development work the high requirements associated with radiation and nuclear safety guaranteed the reliability of hermetic electric pumps in operation. The electric pumps have an assigned working life of 40000 hours and an assigned service life of 10–20 years; they are certified to be compliant with explosion protection requirements and later also with the technical regulations TR TS 010/2011 and TR TS 012/2011 (Table 3).
The electric pumps with the maximum production time exceeding 120000 hours without disassembly and repair are GEN 80/220 and GEN 60/150, which were put in operation at the Lukoil-Nizhegorodnefteorgsintez in 1999 еo pump a solu- tion of phenol and oil with temperature 350°C. Such reliability metrics were achieved after service life extension and exten- sion of the assigned operating time on the basis of certification of the technical condition of the equipment and computational validation of reliability taking into account the operating experience and model. Another example of the high reliability of the equipment are the pumps GEN 50/400 operating at Tatneft since 1999 and intended for batch shipment of the wide fraction of light hydrocarbons (Fig. 11a). A feature of the operation is the frequent (two to three times per day) starts, during which the bearings sustain maximum wear and the insulation of the electric motor also sustains maximum loads. Currently, some elec- tric pumps GEN 50/400 have production times exceeding 40000 hours with the number of starts exceeding 7000. There were no failures during operation and disassembly and repairs were not performed.
Sleeve bearings (radial and thrust), lubricated by the pump liquid, are used in all hermetic electric pumps. The axial force acting on a thrust bearing during operation is regulated and brought to the optimal level in the working range of delivery during factory tests. The hydraulically unloaded thrust bearing and a very small load on the radial bearings owing to the ver- tical implementation and, in consequence, absence of wear of the bearings over the entire period of operation of equipment are distinguishing features of the electric pumps produced by OKBM. The vertical layout and the hydraulic unloading of the thrust bearings make it possible to reliably operate the GEN electric pumps when pumping different liquids, including low boiling liquefied gases. An example of such operation is the GEN 170/190 pump pumping ethylene at temperature –29°C in the EP-450 setup at the ethylene plant Nizhnekamskneftekhim (see Fig. 11b). The reliable operation of the electric pumps for three years from startup confirms the correctness of the technical solutions incorporated in the design of the electric pump and the circuit part of the project, ensuring trouble-free operation.
In summary, the GEN electric pumps can operate without disassembly and repair during the assigned operating life and service life, including work under severe conditions (high temperature, frequent starts, low-boiling liquids). The ser- vice life and operating life can be extended on the basis of the results of a revision of the electric pumps after operating for the assigned service life and operating life. The use of hermetic pumps GEN at enterprises of the oil refining and chemical industries as well as enterprises occupied with the transport of petroleum products makes it possible to increase the reli- ability of systems and bring them into compliance with modern requirements concerning industrial safety. In 2008, electric pumps GEN 10/40,GEN 50/400, GEN 30/160, GEN 130/60, GEN 50/125, GEN 60/150, GEN 80/220, GEN 170/190, and
GEN 90/100 produced by OKBM became laureates of the “100 best products of Russia” competition.
Fig. 12. Assembly of the pump ENK 268/205 during liquid-nitrogen tests at Efremov NIIEFA (St. Petersburg).
Cryogenic pumps for liquefied natural gas. As part of the implementation of the import-substitution program OKBM is developing, fabricating, and delivering equipment for fuel-energy complex enterprises. It is participating in many projects involving the development of pumping equipment for medium and large tonnage production of liquified natural gas as fuel, for gas-transport ships and vessels using liquified natural gas, for gas carriers and ships using liquified natural gas as fuel, and for different onshore facilities (shipping terminals, bunkerage and regasification points, and cryo-filling stations).
For purposes of situating critically important equipment and technologies for the production of liquified natural gas, OKBM has developed two types of cryogenic electric pumps for the Arctic Cascade project of the Yamal SPG plant. Two cryogenic electric pumps ENK 268/205 and one ENK 40/400 were delivered in 2019 (Fig. 12). The first type of electric pump is intended for delivering liquefied natural gas from a flash tank to the storage system, and the second type allows liquid eth- ane to be pumped from an emergency drainage tank.
To realize this project the following problems were formulated and solved:
–use of a submersible electric motor as a drive with a ‘wet’ stator cooled by the pumped medium;
–use of ball bearings with ceramic balls and a fiberglass polytetrafluoroethylene separator, which were lubricated by the pumped medium;
–development of a structural layout scheme of hydraulic unloading of a vertical rotor from an axial force;
–creation of the flowpath of multistage pumps that is characterized by high efficiency, simplicity, and ease of man- ufacture with a limited outer diameter as well as improved cavitation characteristics;
–development of a method for cryogenic processing of parts with an unstable austenitic structure;
–development and implementation of the concept of phased experimental substantiation of the main technical solu- tions incorporated in the design of electric pumps.
The concepts of phased experimental substantiation of the main technical solutions provided for the following:
–testing of model variants of screw-centrifugal flowpath on a water test stand with heightened rotational speed;
–confirmation of the efficacy of hydraulic unloading of bearings from an axial force, evaluation of the pressure head and cavitation characteristics of a standard flowpath on a water test stand;
–inspection of the quality of the assembly, confirmation of the guaranteed performance and hydraulic characteristics for specified requirements, and certification in a cryogenic environment with liquid nitrogen.
As part of the project, the screw-centrifugal flowpath design was tested on models to obtain high cavitation coeffi- cients of speed. Standard flowpaths were tested on a water test stand. During the preliminary testing of the lead sample of an electric pump on liquid nitrogen, the rotor became jammed because of a change in the geometric shapes of the parts caused by martensitic transformation in austenitic steel at low temperature. The rotor was modified and cryogenic treatment of all parts by means of a specially developed technology was performed. The testing continued, and delivery of the first homemade
cryogenic electric pumps ENK 268/205 and ENK 40/400 was accomplished in full. In October 2019, the electric pumps were assembled on site.
In August 2019, OKBM commenced the development of an experimental cryogenic electric pump ENK 1750/188 for the LNG plant of the Yuzhno-Tambeiskoe gas-condensate field, intended for transporting liquified natural gas from storage to a gas tanker. The electric pump was developed using a technology for fabricating flowpaths by casting from aluminum al- loys, the experience gained in designing the first electric pumps was taken into account, and schemes were worked out for external cooperation for deliveries of the component equipment. In June 2020, a prototype was successfully tested on liquid nitrogen and shipped to the customer for pilot tests on site.
Conclusion. OKBM Afrikantov is now the leader in the development of circulation pumps for ship and stationary nuclear energy installations and other centrifugal pumps for similar purposes. The pumping equipment developed by OKBM is operating as part of the main and auxiliary systems of NPP, reactor facilities and ship systems of submarines and surface vessels, and nuclear icebreakers as well as in oil-refining industries, and in pumping liquefied natural gas, and it meets all the required specifications in terms of the reliability, safety, and operating life of the installations and systems.
