<title>A numerical investigation of SBLOCA scenario in nuclear heating reactor</title>
<author>Meng Lu & Heng Xie</author>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Affiliation>Institute of Nuclear and New Energy Technology, Collaborative Innovation Center of Advanced Nuclear Energy Technology, Key Laboratory of Advanced Reactor and Engineering and Safety of Ministry of Education, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2019.1621782</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2019.1621782</URL>
ABSTRACT
Small break loss of coolant accident (SBLOCA) is one of the most important severe accidents   in nuclear heating reactor. Nuclear heating reactor designed by Tsinghua University, whose primary loop is integrated layout and designed without main  pump.  The  initial  water  volume in  the  reactor vessel is  important  to determine whether the reactor will be cooled    or not as no safety injection system is designed for coolant makeup during the  whole  scenario. This paper simulates SBLOCA in nuclear  heating  reactor  based  on  RELAP5. Transient behavior of relevant thermal parameters is speciﬁcally analyzed. Moreover, inves- tigation also has been made on SBLOCA scenario based on diﬀerent residual heat removal correlations and found the long-term residual heat removal capacity is decisive in deter- mining the loss of coolant. The mathematical form of residual heat removal correlation is speciﬁcally deducted and can be widely applied to diﬀerent  situations.  The  envelope  line that diﬀerentiates the region whether the core is safe or  not  under  diﬀerent  maximum  PRHRS capacity is also given.
KEYWORDS
Small break loss of coolant accident; residual heat removal; severe accident; nuclear heating reactor
1.Introduction
1.1.Development of nuclear heating reactor
Nowadays, integral pressurized water reactors (IPWRs) have been widely investigated by many researchers. Their advantages lie in their safety and wider application over large loop-type reactors [1,2]. Their passive safety system design greatly eliminates the accident initiators by applying gravity, natural force-driven system instead of electricity-driven sys- tem in some cases. Several types of IPWRs have completed their prototype design such as mPower, NuScale, SMART and so on [3].
Nuclear heating reactor (NHR), one kind of integral pressurized reactors designed by Tsinghua University aims at achieving the goal district heating and electri- city production. The research on NHR has gone through three stages, namely NHR-5MW, NHR- 200MW   (I),   and   NHR-200MW   (II) [4–6].  NHR-
5MW and NHR-200MW (I) are speciﬁcally designed only for district heating. They show strong safety mar- gin in the ﬁeld of heat supply as thermal parameters are lower than most PWRs. By contrast, NHR-200MW
(II) is designed for both district heat supply and elec- tricity production. It shows strong cost eﬀective com- pared with NHR-5MW and NHR-200MW (I). Thermal parameters designed in NHR-200MW (II) have been improved to meet the standard of both district heating and electricity production (Table 1). The reactor safety analysis is obviously indispensable for the reactor design and assessment.
The potential severe accident analysis on NHR is less complicated than large loop PWR as NHR simpli- ﬁes the reactor design. The heat released from the core is transferred to the main heat exchanger through natural circulation to avoid the failure of large primary loop pipe system and main pump. The upper part of RPV, acted as pressurizer, is occupied by steam and nitrogen. There are several accidents in NHR-200MW
(II) including control rod ejection accident, plant blackout, loss of feed water accident and so on. These accidents have been widely studied through numerical simulation and experiment tests in integral pressurized reactors [7–9]. Among these accidents, small break loss of coolant accident is speciﬁcally investigated as no safety injection system designed.
The NHR-200MW (II) includes three loops, namely primary loop, intermediate loop and second- ary loop. The primary loop is integrated layout within the reactor vessel. The coolant is heated when ﬂow through the core and cooled downward through the main heat exchangers (MHX). All the heat released from the core is transferred to the intermediate loop by natural circulation. The upper space of RPV  is ﬁlled with nitrogen acted as a self-pressurizer. Therefore, this design eliminates large pipe penetrat- ing the reactor vessel, which could result in LBLOCA. The working ﬂuid in intermediate loop is single-phase water. The intermediate loop is driven by circulating pump, aiming at transferring the heat from MHX to steam generators. The secondary loop, which is not shown in Figure 1, is designed for generating steam
Table 1. Steady state parameters among nuclear heating reactor and AP1000 [4,16,17].
Figure 1. Schematic of NHR-200MW (II).
to drive the turbine. Once SBLOCA happens, the circulating pump stops and  feed  water  isolation valve (FIV) is closed. The passive residual heat removal system (PRHRS) is activated by opening passive residual heat removal system isolation valves (PRHRS-IV). The residual heat transfer to the MHX may experience from single-phase water natural cir- culation to steam condensation as mixture level is decreasing during the accident. The heat transfer in the intermediate loop is all by means of single-phase water natural circulation between passive  residual  heat removal system heat exchanger (PRHRS-HX)  and MHX. The cooling tower is acted as  ultimate  heat sink transferring the residual heat from  reactor  to the surroundings by air natural convection.
1.2.Comparison SBLOCA among NHR-200MW (II), NHR-5MW and AP1000
The chronology of SBLOCA in PWRs is quite diﬀerent from NHR-200MW (II) as safety injection system in PWRs is critical to cope with LOCA scenario. For example, the AP1000 main safety system activation chronology is much more complicated than NHR- 200MW (II) (Table 2). The precise model establishment of each main safety system plays an important role in simulating SBLOCA of AP1000. By contrast, fewer com- ponents of safety system in NHR-200MW (II) are put into action, which indicates higher inherent safety. That means the simulation will not have to cover so many factors as demonstrated in AP1000 SBLOCA analysis in the references.
A demonstration of pressure response under SBLOCA is shown in Figure 2. The SBLOCA usually ends within 5000s in AP1000 when core is refueling and cooled down. The RPV pressure response in NHR-5MW shows a gradually  decreasing  in  the long run while containment pressure constantly ris- ing due to coolant discharge. Obviously, the SBLOCA will end within 5000s when pressure balance has reached between containment and RPV. Unlike SBLOCA of AP1000 and NHR-5MW will both end within 5000s, the long time eﬀect is non-negligible when comes to the NHR-200MW (II). Without safety injection system, the accident may not end soon like AP1000. Moreover, as thermal parameters of NHR- 200MW (II) are much higher than NHR-5MW, the pressure balance between RPV and containment will not reach as quickly as NHR-5MW does. More cool- ant will be discharged into the containment threaten- ing the safety of the core. The residual heat is removed  all  by  means  PRHRS,  which  indicates the
Table 2. Comparison of SBLOCA event chronology between NHR-200MW (II) and AP1000 [10,17].
Figure 2. Comparison of pressure response between NHR- 5MW and AP1000 [7,8].
residual heat remove capacity plays a decisive role in maintaining the core cooling. Therefore, SBLOCA of NHR-200MW (II) has its unique characteristics com- pared with other types of light water reactors that need to be fully investigated.
This paper presents SBLOCA simulation results in NHR-200MW (II) based on RELAP5. RELAP5 code
is the best estimate transient analysis code to cope with severe accidents in light water reactor. Section 2 presents detail information of SBLOCA in NHR- 200MW (II) as well as RELAP5  nodalization.  As  long time eﬀect is particularly important in NHR- 200MW (II), Section 3 speciﬁcally illustrates the pas- sive residual heat removal system and heat transfer correlation deduction. Section 4 presents the simula- tion result and analysis involving steady state of NHR-200MW (II) and chronology of SBLOCA sce- nario. The study on coolant loss rate and total coolant loss under diﬀerent passive residual heat removal capacities is also analyzed. An envelope line that diﬀerentiates the region whether the core is cooling  or not is proposed in this paper. The envelope line is comprised by minimum PRHRS capacities under dif- ferent situation. It is meaningful in PRHRS design in order to satisfy the demand of residual heat removal in NHR-200MW (II).
2.NHR-200MW (II) SBLOCA description
2.1.SBLOCA scenario
There are mainly three kinds of SBLOCA in the reactor. They are probably caused by safety valve failure, boron injection pipe breaks and control rod drive mechanism (CRDM) intake  pipe  breaks (Figure 3). The CRDM intake pipe and boron injec- tion pipe are horizontally penetrating the RPV while safety valve located at the top of the RPV. The SBLOCA simulation in this paper will not include safety valve failure as it shows the lowest threat to  core cooling. By contrast, the CRDM intake pipe is located at the lowest altitude indicating the most severe coolant loss in the long  run.  Therefore,  in  this paper, we only simulate CRDM pipe break and  its long-term eﬀect on coolant loss. The inner dia- meter of CRDM intake pipe of NHR-200MW (II) is 30mm. The height of CRDM break is 3.15m higher than the top of the reactor core.
The sequence of SBLOCA scenario is shown in Table 3. It should be noted that SBLOCA happens after 2005s as previous time is used for reactor steady state calculation. The sequence of these events is less complicated compared with AP1000 SBLOCA. Once the scram signal is activated, the ﬂowrate of inter-mediate loop gradually decreases to zero within 10s meanwhile the PRHRS is put into use at the same time. That means PRHRS is the only heat sink during
Figure 3. Schematic of three types of SBLOCA in NHR- 200MW.
Table 3. Event chronology of SBLOCA scenario.
the simulation whereas steam generator may still be available in the real plant. Supposing 2s is the time delay before reactor start to shut down. Other com- ponents shown in Table 3 are also activated with 2s time delay.
Once SBLOCA happens, coolant loss is also accompanied by RPV depressurization. In the actual process, the scram signal is activated by satisfying the primary pressure warning or collapsed level decreas- ing warning (Table 4), namely T = min (T1, T2). The size and location of the break greatly inﬂuence which signal will be activated ﬁrst. However, for the con- servative concerns in severe accident analysis, the scram signal is activated by both satisfying depressur- ization threshold and collapsed level threshold, namely T = max (T1, T2) in this paper.
2.2.Parameters of primary and intermediate loop
Apart from the parameters of primary loop shown in Tables 5 and 6, the bottom of MHX is 3.45m higher than the top of reactor core. The length of MHX is
Table 4. Time of scram signal activated for SBLOCA scenario.
Table  5.  Steady state  data  of NHR-200MW(II).
Table 6. Parameters of fuel assembly.
Figure 4. Decay heat power correlation.
3m and its heat transfer surface is about 70m2. The  design of RPV is thin and tall whose height is 13m in order to enhance natural circulation. The diameter of intermediate loop piping system is 530mm. The volume of self-pressurizer is approximate 30m2. The initial total coolant mass is 87000kg.
The decay heat power obeys the following correla- tion (Figure 4), with 1.2 times factor of ANS-79.
2.3.NHR-200MW(II) RELAP5 nodalization
The SBLOCA scenario has been modeled by numerous researchers based on RELAP5. RELAP5, the best esti- mate transient code, is applicable in modeling SBLOCA of SMR and large loop type reactors such as AP1000  [8–11].  Therefore,  NHR-200MW   (II),   one
kind of SMR, is also appropriate to be simulated by RELAP5. The nodalization of RELAP5 model is shown in Figure 5. The primary loop consists of reactor core, rising region, self-pressurization region, MHX (pri- mary side), downward region and bottom part of reac- tor  vessel. The  component  number of reactor core is
101. The pipe component includes 8 volumes sur- rounded by fuel rods. The radial mesh of fuel rod includes the pellets, intervals, and cladding. The rising region  includes  hydrodynamic   component   110, 105
and 115, involving 42 volumes. The MHX at the pri- mary side and intermediate side is modeled by hydro- dynamic component 130 and 223, respectively. Both of them consist of 30 volumes. The downward region consists 135 and 140. The control rod drive mechanism intake pipe is slightly lower than MHX, 3.15m higher than the top of reactor core. The steady state is simulated through transient calculation. The isolation valve 175 is initially open and connecting to the time- dependent volume 176. The single volume 161 provides the steam space for self-pressurizing. The time- dependent volume 176, also connecting to the volume 161, is set to maintain the pressure boundary 8.0MPa in the RPV. The void fraction of volume 161 is
0.84. The isolation valve 175 is closed after SBLOCA happens. The break of CRDM intake pipe is modeled by trip valve 137. The trip valve 137 is closed in the steady state simulation. It is controlled to be open to simulate SBLOCA. Its ﬂow area is the same as CRDM intake pipe. After SBLOCA happens, the coolant con- stantly discharges into the containment. The contain- ment pressure starts to rise. The containment pressure response is not speciﬁcally modeled through numerical approach but given by pressure boundary. The pres- sure boundary varies with time and it is modeled by time-dependent volume component 138.
The intermediate loop consists of feedwater piping system, intermediate side of MHX and  pressurizer. For simplicity, the ﬂowrate in  intermediate  loop  is not simulated by circulating pump but by time- dependent junction. The time-dependent junction between  pipe  component  201  and   205   is  set   to   a speciﬁc ﬂowrate (1081kg/s) under steady state. The ﬂowrate gradually decreases to zero within 10s once the scram signal activated. 226 is single volume com- ponent to monitor the pressurizer, meanwhile 228 is time-dependent volume to maintain the intermediate loop pressure.
The coolant loss rate is also inﬂuenced by pres- sure response in the containment. The coolant discharged will vaporize and increase containment pressure. However, it will also narrow the pressure diﬀerence slowing down the coolant loss  in  the  long run. Considering RELAP5 cannot precisely simulate the containment response, the pressure boundary of the break is set to a constant value 0.135MPa during  the  whole  SBLOCA  scenario. The coolant loss caused by diﬀerent pressure response in containment will be analyzed in sec-  tion 4.2.
3.Passive residual heat removal system
3.1.Passive residual heat removal system
PRHRS consists of piping system (hot leg, cold leg), heat exchanger, isolation valves (Figure 5). The cold
Figure 5. RELAP5 nodalization for control rod drive mechanism intake pipe breaks.
leg 310, 312 and hot leg 240 in piping system are simulated by pipe hydrodynamic components with 40 volumes inside. Once the scram signal is activated, PRHRS-IV 303 and 315 will be immediately open while FIV 233 and 208 will be immediately closed. The inner diameter of the piping system is 0.144m. The PRHRS-HX is 27m higher than top of MHX. The length of PRHRS-HX is 6m. The inner diameter of heat transfer tube is 0.02m. Each tube is circled with ﬁns to increase heat transfer coeﬃcient and heat transfer area. Hundreds of tubes are triangularly dis- played in the cooling tower waiting for the surround- ing air to take away the heat by natural circulation (Figure 6). The lift height of the cooling tower is 10m. The cross-section of cooling tower is 8 × 8m.
However, the heat transfer through cooling tower cannot be directly simulated by existing models in RELAP5 codes. As most models in RELAP5 are Figure 6. Schematic of display of staggered heat transfer tubes.
mainly based on the physical behaviors of water and steam. There is no suitable model to simulate the air crossing ﬂow over the heat transfer tubes by air natural convection. Therefore, a correlation is pro- posed in section
3.2 between residual heat removal  capacity of cooling tower and water temperature inside the PRHRS HX.3.2.Residual heat removal correlation in PRHRS
Section 3.2 aims at deducing the correlation between residual   heat   removal   power   Q   and   ΔT,   where
ΔT ¼ T1 þT2  — t . t   denotes the inlet air temperature of cooling tower. Suppose t1 equals a constant value 300K.	1 2  2     can  be  approximately  regarded as aver- age water temperature inside the heat transfer tubes.
The correlation is deducted by pressure head balance and energy balance in the PRHRS.
The heat transfer process between PRHRS and cooling tower is relevant to the ﬂuid behavior in the heat transfer tubes and air convection in the cooling tower. The air ﬂowrate is one of the most important factors that determine the heat removal capacity. It is determined by driven pressure head and resistance pressure head in the cooling tower. The resistance pressure head results from the air crossing ﬂow through horizontal and staggered heat transfer tubes. The resistance pressure head obeys following general form [12,13].
@1
Briggs   and   Robinson   investigated   staggered circle
ﬁnned tube bundles under diﬀerent Reynold number
and tube space [14]. They proposed a general form ofresistance coeﬃcient f .
@2
Where S1  and S2  denotes horizontal and vertical tube
space, respectively. Once the cooling tower that NHR-200MW(II) equipped with is determined, f 0 only varies with ﬂuid Reynold number. It is given by:
@3
Where C denotes a constant that depends on diﬀerent types of ﬁn.The driven head is pertinent to the height of natural convection h2 and temperature diﬀerence ΔT2 between inlet and outlet in the cooling  tower. The driven head ΔPd linearly correlates with speciﬁc volume of air if ΔT2 < 200K.
@4
γ denotes the linear coeﬃcient. A stable natural con- vection air ﬂowrate will reach once the driven head equal the resistance head in the cooling tower.
@5
The energy balance equation is shown below.
@6
Combined with Equation (1)-(6), the heat transfer power in the cooling tower is inﬂuenced by the spe- ciﬁc structure of cooling tower and temperature diﬀerence.
@7
The driven head in the piping system of PRHRS  obeys the similar form of driven head in cooling tower. The density of water varies little if
ΔT1 < 100K, thus it can be written as
@8
α denotes the linear coeﬃcient. The pressure  head loss in PRHRS involves frictional resistance and local resistance in main pipe and heat exchanger.
@9
The pressure head loss due to frictional drag in main pipe of PRHRS is given by Equation (10).
@10
The local pressure loss due to benders and valves in piping system of PRHRS is written as:
@11
Ø1 denotes the local pressure loss in piping system of
PRHRS.
The pressure head loss due to frictional drag inheat transfer tubes	in PRHRS	is given by Equation (12).
@12
The local pressure loss in heat exchanger of PRHRS is
given by:
@13
Ø2 denotes the local pressure loss in heat exchanger of PRHRS.
The frictional coeﬃcient is written as Blasius equation:
@14
The overall pressure loss in PRHRS is highly corre-
lated with mass ﬂow in piping system. K1 denotes the overall pressure loss coeﬃcient determined by the design of PRHRS.
@15
A stable natural circulation water ﬂowrate will reach once the driven head equals the resistance head in the PRHRS.
@16
The  energy  balance  inside  the  heat  transfer  tube is shown as Equation (17). The heat transfer capacity  inﬂuenced by height diﬀerence h1 and temperature ΔT1 is shown as Equation (18).
@17
@18
The heat transfer process from PRHRS to cooling
tower can be written as Equation (19).
@19
Supposing the convective thermal resistance is the most important factor, thermal resistance is written as:
@20
Briggs and Young investigated the heat transfer when air cross ﬂow through staggered circle ﬁnned tube bundles [15]. They proposed a correlation  covering the factors inﬂuenced by diﬀerent types of ﬁn, Reynold number. According to the speciﬁc design of cooling tower in NHR-200MW(II), the air convective coeﬃcient h0 can be given in a simple form as Equation (21). Where η varies with diﬀerent types of ﬁn.
@21
The water convective coeﬃcient hi can be deduced from Dittus-Boelter Equation
@22
The average heat transfer temperature diﬀerence Δtm
is given as Equation (23).
@23
Combing the above Equation (1)-(23), the residual heat removal power Q and temperature diﬀerence between PRHRS and cooling tower is given as Equation (24).
@24
Where
W1 and W2 reﬂect the water and air heat transfer capacity to some extent. Equation (24) can be also written as Equation (25).
@25
Where K denotes the simpliﬁed total coeﬃcient. It is determined by structure of PRHRS  and  cooling tower. The power exponent β ranges  from1.40  to1.67. The minimum  PRHRS  capacity  ensuring core safe can be determined by testing  diﬀerent  K and β which will be speciﬁcally illustrated in Section speciﬁcally illustrated in Section It should be noted that above deduction is based  on the steady state. The correlation may not be sui-table simulating residual heat removal at begin as thermal parameters vary strongly. Only after the nat- ural circulation ﬂowrate in PRHRS is stable, the cor-relation will be suitable to model the physical process. Nevertheless, the ﬂuctuation of natural circulation will end within a few hundred  seconds  after  SBLOCA happens. From then on, the natural circula- tion ﬂowrate gradually decreases which indicates the correlation is still proper in the long run.
4.Result and discussion
4.1.Stage before safety system activated
The stage before safety system activated involves nor- mal  operation  of  steady  state  and  part  of SBLOCA
scenario.  The  steady  state  of  NHR-200MW  (II)  is simulated and most thermal parameters agree well with design value except that primary loop coolant ﬂowrate is slightly deviated. It can be considered that the steady state has basically reached (Table 7).
The time delay of scram signal determines the coolant loss in a short time before reactor shut down.T1 and T2 in Table 4 is approximate 13s and 63s,respectively. It shows the RPV pressure drops much faster   than   collapsed   level   decreasing   rate, which
indicates	the	scram	signal	is	activated	by depressurization.
Table 7. Steady state parameters of NHR-200MW (II) calcu-  lated  by RELAP5.
4.2.Threshold of core melt and safe region
After the safety system activated, the coolant loss rate highly depends on the PRHRS capacity, in  the form of Equation (25). The core will be exposed to the steam and melted if losing too much coolant. Diﬀerent combination of K and β means diﬀerent characteristics of PRHRS cooling curves. Each cool- ing curve will determine  whether  the  core  is  melt  or not.
Section 4.2 only focuses on the static state at the end of SBLOCA, namely whether the core is melt or not. By numerous test, a threshold line of PRHRS capacity diﬀerentiating the core safe and melt region is thus given in Figure 7. It shows a speciﬁc average temperature  of  PRHRS  will  always  correspond  to  a residual heat removal power during SBLOCA sce- nario. Those lines are highly deviated from each other when temperature is high while much closer when temperature is low. It indicates the residual heat remove   power   when   temperature    is    low   plays a more important role determining whether the core will be cooled or not.
As the cooling curve Q ¼ 1600ðT — 300Þ1:67  and
Q  5551  T    300  1:4  almost determines the bound- ary of envelop line, thus following analysis will not include others. The PRHRS capacity ratio η is intro- duced for better comparison and deﬁned as
@26
Supposing for a speciﬁc PRHRS and cooling tower, η is limited by the maximum residual heat remove capacity,namely η
max
. The cooling curve Q ¼ 1600ðT — 300Þ1:67
Generally, the decreasing coolant loss rate is accom-
and Q ¼ 5551ðT — 300Þ1:4 can be written in the form of  PRHRS capacity  ratio,  namely   η ¼ 2:78 ×  10—5ðT — 300Þ1:4      and    η ¼ 8 × 10—6ðT — 300Þ1:67,
respectively.     In    general,     the    cooling     curve    η ¼
KðT — 300Þ     is not only inﬂuenced by coeﬃcient K,
Figure 7. Envelop line diﬀerentiating safe and melt region.
but also inﬂuenced by ηmax that speciﬁc PRHRS could provide.
The threshold of core safe and melt region is  shown in Figure 8. The envelope line can be linearly ﬁtted. It shows such threshold is inﬂuenced little between diﬀerent exponent 1.40 and 1.67. The threshold line moves rightward as back pressure increase. The safe region expands while the melt region shrinks. Notably, ηmax of each threshold line also decreases with increasing back pressure. That means coolant loss is mitigated to some extent if containment pressure increases a lot  during  SBLOCA. As balance between RPV and containment could be reached at higher pressure, the requirement of maximum PRHRS capacity that ensures core safe also decreases.
4.3.Transient analysis of intake pipe breaks of CRDM
Except static analysis whether the core is melt or not when SBLOCA ends, this section focuses on transi- ent response of  thermal  parameters  during SBLOCA. The pressure in the RPV has experienced    a rapid depressurization in a few hundred seconds after SBLOCA happens (Figure 9).  The  SBLOCA  end around 40000s after pressure balance  has  reached between RPV and containment. Notably, the pressure will experience stepwise decreasing region in a few hundred seconds after SBLOCA happens. It is mainly attributed to ﬂow pattern changed near the break that inﬂuence the  coolant  loss rate as well as depressurization.
Generally, the decreasing coolant loss rate is accom-panied by depressurization of RPV. Particularly, it dramatically increases at begin while decreases drasti- cally with slight ﬂuctuation (Figure 10). The coolant loss rate is small and maintain quite a long time before SBLOCA ends.
Figure 8. ηmax diﬀerentiating safe and melt region under diﬀerent back pressure.
Figure 9. Pressure transient response in RPV.
Figure 10. Coolant loss rate varies with time.
The varied coolant loss rate could be partly explained in the view of ﬂow pattern change (Figure 11). The coolant loss rate dramatically decreases in a few seconds after SBLOCA happens and bounces up back before 2300s. This is attributed to vapor suddenly form and block near the break however condensate after reactor shut down. The coolant loss rate drastically decreases below 40kg/s, owing to large amount of vapor form again as depressurization. The ﬂow pattern has experi- enced from bubbly ﬂow to slug ﬂow as swelling level approaching to the break. The vapor discharge rate becomes strong again as break is gradually exposed in  the steam. The generating vapor  greatly  agitates  the bulk of water, resulting in stronger liquid entrainment and coolant loss rate around 3000s. The ﬂow pattern suddenly returns back to the bubbly ﬂow due to liquid and vapor intermittently discharge. It completely  turns to annular ﬂow after 3500s when swelling level falls far below the break.
The temperature response of MHX reﬂects  the heat transfer capacity after SBLOCA. As Figure 12 demonstrated, the temperature between core outlet and MHX outlet suddenly becomes uniform after reactor shut down. The temperature of MHX inlet suddenly abruptly decreases to 300K since the water
Figure 11. Comparison of coolant loss rate and void fraction near the break.
Figure 12. Temperature transient response in primary loop and PRHRS.
in PRHRS is initially cold (300K). After that, it bounces back and gets closer to the temperature of core inlet. The temperature in the core becomes uni- form around 4000s, then the temperature of  core inlet shares the same decreasing tendency with the temperature of MHX inlet.
Figure 13 shows natural circulation in primary  loop immediately stops after SBLOCA happens. The mass ﬂowrate experiences a large ﬂuctuation around 4000s almost the same time when break is completely exposed in the steam. The ﬂuctuation becomes inten- siﬁed in the long run, indicating the coolant in RPV experiences strong saturation boiling. The unusual intermittent peak between 30000s to 40000s is con- sidered as numerical error. Usually, vapor generation rate increases along the height in the core. However, these peaks usually happen when vapor generation
Figure 13. Mass ﬂowrate in reactor core.
Figure 14. Mass ﬂowrate in PRHRS.
rate greatly decreases along the height in the local region of the core. Nevertheless, this phenomenon could happen in micro scale due to pressure surge. However, it should not exist during RELAP5 simula- tion as RELAP5 only reﬂects macro phenomenon
The mass ﬂowrate in PRHRS reﬂects the natural circulation ability after SBLOCA happens (Figure 14). The mass ﬂowrate is strong at begin while gradually decreased in the long run. This can be partly attrib- uted to the inertia circulating ﬂowrate in the inter- mediate loop and the PRHRS is initially cold (300K). The mass ﬂowrate becomes stable without any ﬂuc- tuation once the natural circulation is established.
The maximum pellet and cladding temperature are another indication of whether the core is melted or not (Figure 15). They do not outweigh the value in  the normal operation but gradually fall down in the long run which means the core is safe.
4.4.Transient analysis under diﬀerent PRHRS capacities
This section investigates transient thermal parameters response under diﬀerent PRHRS capacities. The
Figure 15. Maximum temperature of pellet and cladding.
cooling curves of PRHRS are chosen based on Equation (27).
@27
Where K = 1600, 1850, 2500, 3000
The transient residual heat remove power and decay heat power is shown in Figure 16. They are deviated from each other within 10000s whereas almost overlap with each other and closely trace the decay heat power in the long run. It indicates stronger the PRHRS is, more residual heat will be removed at begin. In the long run, energy balance could reach that all the decay heat generated is removed by PRHRS.
Figure 17 shows the pressure transient behavior under diﬀerent PRHRS capacities.  The  pressure  drop almost at the same tendency at begin whereas deviate from each other in the long run, indicating  large pressure diﬀerence not PRHRS capacity plays an important role in coolant loss rate at begin.
The coolant loss rate almost overlaps with each other before drastically falling down around 2300s (Figure 18). Such sudden drop results from the
Figure 16. Comparison of passive residual heat removal power and decay heat power.
Figure 17. Primary pressure under diﬀerent PRHRS capacities.
Figure 18. Comparison of coolant loss rate under diﬀerent PRHRS capacities.More  investigation  is  focused  on  the  correlation
between   coolant   left   over   the   core   at   end   and
swelling level falling below the break. PRHRS capa- city plays an increasingly important role in loss rate when break is exposed in the steam. Stronger the PRHRS capacity, smaller coolant loss  rate  in  the  long run.QPRHRS
— Qdecay during SBLOCA under diﬀerent PRHRS capacities. QPRHRS — Qdecay represents the dif-
ference between total heat removed by PRHRS and total decay heat during SBLOCA scenario. More cool- ant will be cooled in the RPV if QPRHRS — Qdecay is large. Figure 19 shows coolant left over the core and QPRHRS — Qdecay share almost the same quasi-linear tendency as PRHRS capacity increases. This correla- tion can be used to predict coolant left under diﬀer- ent PRHRS capacities.
5.Conclusion and prospects
This paper investigates the SBLOCA scenario in NHR-200MW (II), which is the most severe accident
Figure 19. Cumulative coolant loss under diﬀerent PRHRS capacities.
in NHR. Much attention has paid to  intake  pipe break of CRDM, one type of SBLOCA scenarios which is simulated by RELAP5. The innovation method and meaningful conclusion is shown below. A correlation in PRHRS is especially deducted and written into input card as no suitable code simulating air heat transfer in cooling tower. This correlation is also widely applicable in other studies concerning air heat transfer. In our simulation, this correlation is helpful to simulate SBLOCA under diﬀerent PRHRS
capacities.
The long-term cooling of PRHRS plays a decisive role in maintaining the core safe. The SBLOCA sce- nario will last over 30000s in most cases, thus coolant loss at begin plays a less dominant role during the whole scenario. The SBLOCA will end when pressure balance between RPV and containment is established instead of reactor refueling by safety injection system like most PWRs.
The threshold (envelop line) diﬀerentiating whether the core is melt or not under diﬀerent PRHRS capacities is proposed here.  Diﬀerent  types of PRHRS correlation shows little impact on deter- mination of such threshold whereas back pressure of the break inﬂuences a lot. The PRHRS capacity ratio
required to cool the reactor will be smaller than 2% if the back pressure >0.4MPa. Moreover, the threshold line is helpful in reactor design to match the most appropriate PRHRS.
The transient analysis of thermal parameters response is also made and compared under diﬀerent PRHRS capacities. The coolant loss rate is highly correlated to the ﬂow pattern variation  near  the  break during SBLOCA scenario. The ﬂow pattern reverses to bubbly ﬂow when swelling level approach- ing the break. However, it turns back to slug or annular ﬂow when swelling level falls far below the break. Moreover, the stepwise of RPV pressure response also reﬂects such ﬂow pattern change synchronously.
Acknowledgments
This work is help with the assistance of Yang Liu and Haijun Jia.
