<title>Inter-relationships between performance shaping factors for human reliability analysis of nuclear power plants</title>
<Affiliation>a Department of Nuclear Engineering, Chosun University, 309 Pilmun-daero, Dong-gu, Gwangju, 501-709, Republic of Korea
b Integrated Safety Assessment Team, KAERI, 989-111 Daedeok-daero, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 34057, Republic of Korea</Affiliation>
<author>JJooyoung Park a, Wondea Jung b, Jonghyun Kim a, *</author>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>NUCLEAR TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2019.07.004</DOI>
<URL> https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2019.07.004</URL>
a b s t r a c t
Performance shaping factors (PSFs) in a human reliability analysis (HRA) are one that may inﬂuence human performance in a task. Most currently applicable HRA methods for nuclear power plants (NPPs) use PSFs to highlight human error contributors and to adjust basic human error probabilities (HEPs) that assume nominal conditions of NPPs. Thus far, the effects of PSFs have been treated independently. However, many studies in the ﬁelds of psychology and human factors revealed that there may be re- lationships between PSFs. Therefore, the inter-relationships between PSFs need to be studied to better reﬂect their effects on operator errors. This study investigates these inter-relationships using two data sources and also suggests a context-based approach to treat the inter-relationships between PSFs. Cor- relation and factor analyses are performed to investigate the relationship between PSFs. The data sources are event reports of unexpected reactor trips in Korea and an experiment conducted in a simulator featuring a digital control room. Thereafter, context-based approaches based on the result of factor analysis are suggested and the feasibility of the grouped PSFs being treated as a new factor to estimate HEPs is examined using the experimental data.Keywords:
Performance shaping factor Human reliability analysis Digital main control room Inter-dependency
Inter-correlation1.Introduction
A performance shaping factor (PSF) is deﬁned as a variable that may affect human performance in a human reliability analysis (HRA) [1,2]. Most currently applicable HRA methods for nuclear power plants (NPPs) use PSFs to highlight human error contributors and adjust basic human error probabilities (HEPs) that assume nominal conditions in NPPs [3,4]. PSFs that are generally adopted in HRA methods include experience, complexity, stress, adequacy of procedure, humanesystem interface, and workload. They are also called by different terminologies depending on the HRA methods, such as performance inﬂuencing factors (PIFs) in Holistic Decision Tree (HDT) [5], performance affecting factors (PAFs) in Cognitive Reliability Assessment Technique (CREATE) [6], error producing conditions (EPCs) in Human Error Assessment and Reduction Method (HEART) [7], or common performance conditions (CPCs) in Cognitive Reliability and Error Analysis Method (CREAM) [8].
There is sufﬁcient evidence in the ﬁelds of psychology andincreasing in the HRA ﬁeld. A few approaches deal with the mutual dependency between PSFs in a systematic way, such as CREAM [8], Standardized Plant Analysis Risk-HRA (SPAR-H) [13], and Informa- tion, Decision, and Action in Crew context (IDAC) [14]. CREAM de- scribes how PSFs affect each other in a qualitative way [8], whereas IDAC tries to analytically describe the mutual relationships among the states of PSFs and is a very complex application that requires a great deal of effort by the analyst [14]. Boring [15] introduced a statistical correlation between PSFs and discussed the proper number of PSFs that should be considered by HRAs. Groth [16] performed correlation and factor analyses on PSF data and found four groupings to be the best ﬁt for the data. De Ambroggi and Trucco [17] suggested a systematic approach for modeling and assessing dependent PSFs using the analytic network process, based on expert judgments. Although a few studies suggested a quantitative relationship between PSFs, they did not provide pro- cedural guidance on using it to estimate HEP. In addition, a more objective guide needs to be developed so that analysts can handle inter-relationship between PSFs.
This study aims to investigate the inter-relationship between PSFs using two data sources and suggest context-based approaches based on the result of a factor analysis. First, this study analyzes the correlation between PSFs in NPPs. The data sources used are event reports for unexpected reactor trips in Korea from the Operational Information System (OPIS) database and an experiment conducted in a simulator featuring a digital control room. Correlation and factor analyses were performed to investigate the relationship be- tween PSFs and thus, perform PSF grouping. A few groups of PSFs were identiﬁed from the factor analysis. Thereafter, context-based approaches based on the result of a factor analysis are suggested and the feasibility of the grouped PSFs being treated as a new factor to estimate HEPs is examined using the experimental data.
2.Review of current techniques: modelling inter- relationships among PSFs
2.1.Application of PSFs in HRA methods
Most HRA methods select PSFs that are the most relevant to and inﬂuential in the task analyzed, and then calculate HEPs by consolidating the respective effects of PSFs through simple multi- plication or addition. Table 1 shows how HEPs are calculated in popular HRA methods. In the Technique for Human Error Rate Prediction (THERP) [1] and Korea standard HRA [18], HEPs of diagnosis and execution are calculated using the product of basic HEPs and PSF multipliers, and then these are summed for the ﬁnal HEPs, as shown in Eqs. (1) and (2), respectively. In the Success Likelihood Index Method using the Multi-Attribute Utility Decomposition [19] method, the values of Success Likelihood In- dexes (SLIs) are calculated by multiplying the normalized weight and state of PSFs, and then the ﬁnal HEP is computed with a log- arithmic equation using the values of SLIs, as in Eq. (3). SPAR-H [13] considers two equations: Eq. (4) is used to calculate the HEP when negative PSFs are fewer than three, and Eq. (5) is applied to situa- tions with more than three negative PSFs. Lastly, HEART [7] esti- mates ﬁnal HEPs by multiplying nominal human unreliability with assessed effects which are calibrated from the multiplier of each EPC as shown in Eq. (6). Though these methods use different equations for calculating HEPs, they fundamentally handle PSFs independently in the formulas.
2.2.Approaches to modeling inter-relationships among PSFs
Some HRA methods and studies have tried to consider and model inter-relationships between PSFs. CREAM [8], SPAR-H [13],
and IDAC [14] try to provide guidance on how to consider mutual relationships between PSFs at the level of factor assessment. In addition, some researchers, such as Boring [15], Groth [16], De Ambroggi and Trucco [17], and Groth and Swiler [20], have raised an issue about the inter-relationship between PSFs. The following sections provide a brief description of the HRA methods and studies.
2.2.1.Cognitive Reliability Error Analysis Method (CREAM) [8].
The CREAM method brieﬂy discussed how each CPCs may in- ﬂuence the others among nine CPCs in Chapter 6.5 of [8]. For example, the adequacy of organization has an effect on the general working condition. On the other hand, the working conditions have a direct impact on the number of simultaneous goals  that  the  user  must attend to in the sense that improved working conditions may lead to a reduction in the number of goals. It also discusses the qualitative relationship between CPCs, e.g., if the working condi- tions improve, the number of simultaneous goals is reduced. However, quantitative relations are not provided in the method.
2.2.2.Standardized Plant Analysis Risk-human reliability analysis (SPAR-H) [13].
SPAR-H provides guidance for HRA practitioners regarding the issue of mutual relationships between PSFs, though it does not attempt to quantify every aspect of the mutual inﬂuences and re- lationships between PSFs [13]. SPAR-H provides information for preventing analysts from double-counting PSF inﬂuences. Table 2 can be used as a guide to assigning a qualitative rank (low, me- dium, or high) to the degree of correlation between the eight PSFs that are used in this method. Below are the strongest correlations in the relationship:
Available time on stressdinsufﬁcient available time increases the stress on each operator.
Stress on complexitydstress can make the situation appear more complex because it prevents the operator from perceiving information.
From Table 2, SPAR-H can be used to draw two preliminary conclusions. First, the inﬂuence between PSFs may be one way. In other words, PSF 1 may have a strong effect on PSF 2, while PSF 2 may have little or no inﬂuence on PSF 1. For example, the available time has a strong correlation with stress, but stress has a low in- ﬂuence on available time because available time is sensitive to the product of system conditions and equipment unavailability. Sec- ond, some PSFs have an inverse relationship. That is, when the ef- fect of PSF 1 increases, that of PSF 2 decreases. For example, if an operator's experience is higher, they may have a higher tolerance for stressful situations through their ability to deal with the con- ditions effectively.
2.2.3.Information, decision, and Action in Crew context (IDAC) model [14].
The IDAC model was developed for use in a computer simulation platform to probabilistically predict the responses of NPP control room crews in dealing with system anomalies, and considers inter- relationships between PSFs [14]. IDAC considers 50 PSFs, which are entirely composed of 11 hierarchically structured groups. Each group consists of several PSFs; for example, the physical factor group includes fatigue and physical limitations. The PSFs within each group are independent, while PSFs in different groups may have mutual inﬂuences on each other.
2.2.4.Some recent studies on inter-relationships between PSFs
Some researchers have raised an issue about the inter-
Table 1
Equations for human error probabilities (HEPs) in several human reliability analysis (HRA) methods. Table 2
The relative relationships among SPAR-H PSFs [13].
relationship between PSFs in HRA. First, Boring [15] analyzed the correlation of PSFs based on 82 incident reports from the U.S. In his research, which PSFs should be used in HRA and how many PSFs should be included in an analysis are the main contents, based on Galyean's suggestion, which is to account for the entirety of human performance using only three PSFsdthe individual, the organiza- tion, and the environment [21]. Correlation analyses for the 8 SPAR- H PSFs across 651 subtasks were performed, and signiﬁcant cor- relations that had mutual relations above ±0.20 and a signiﬁcance level at a p-value of <0.05 were collected to show heavily related PSFs. As a result, the signiﬁcant correlations, particularly for the action PSFs, suggested two groupings of PSFs:
Grouping 1: Available time, stress/stressors, complexity, expe- rience/training, ﬁtness for duty
Grouping 2: Procedures, ergonomics/human-system interface (HSI), work processes
In the case of Galyean's suggestion, the ﬁrst group contains factors related to the individual (experience/training and ﬁtness for duty), the environment or situation (available time and complexity), and a combination of the two. The second group consists of factors related to the organization and environment (procedures, ergonomics/HSI, and work processes). While the grouping does not exactly match Galyean's proposed PSFs, it does lend credence to Galyean's concerns about the possibility of double-counting performance effects.
Groth [16] also developed a “9-Bubble” model that provides a quantitative model of the inter-relationships between PSFs and links PSFs to error contexts. First, in order to reduce sets of PSFs to error contexts, a correlation analysis was performed to determine which PSFs could be combined. Then, a factor analysis was carried out to link the PSFs to error contexts. Below are the results of the factor analysis for the 9 PSFs; 4 error contexts were created:
Error Context 1: Training, team, loads/perceptions, complexity Error Context 2: Organizational culture, attitude, knowledge Error Context 3: Organizational culture, attitude, loads/percep- tions, complexity
●Error Context 4: Resources, complexity
De Ambroggi and Trucco [17] modeled and assessed dependent PSFs through the Analytic Network Process (ANP). This study dealt with the development of a framework for modelling the mutual inﬂuences existing among PSFs and a related method for assessing the importance of each PSF in inﬂuencing the performance of an operator, in a speciﬁc context, considering these interactions. ANP is a method for deciding comparative importance in multi-criteria decision making, and it is very useful for structuring  problems that are judged on the basis of the knowledge or experience of the subjects [22]. The core of the method lies in the modeling process, which is divided into two steps: ﬁrst, a qualitative network of inter- relationships between PSFs is identiﬁed, and then the importance of each PSF is quantitatively assessed using the ANP.
Groth and Swiler [20] suggested a Bayesian network model to represent PSFs’ interactions. Bayesian networks offer a framework for integrating different sources of information into one model, and they can be easily updated or expanded with new information. For HRA purposes, a Bayesian network provides the opportunity to explicitly contain multiple types of information and data (e.g., cognitive literature, insights from operational events, statistical data, and expert judgments) in the HRA process. In their work, a Bayesian network was developed for inter-relationships among the PSFs with SPAR-H guidance.
2.3.The treatment of inter-relationships between PSFs in HRA
There is a consensus that HRA methods need to consider the inter-relationships between PSFs in estimating HEPs. However, it is known that one of the main weaknesses of current HRA methods is their limited ability to model the mutual inﬂuences among PSFs and PSFs’ inﬂuences on human performance [23]. Traditional methods including THERP, the Accident Sequence Evaluation Program (ASEP) [24], and the Cause-Based Decision Tree (CBDT) [25] method developed by the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) do not directly address the inter- relationships between PSFs.
SPAR-H and CREAM try to provide guidance on how to adjust the levels of PSFs based on dependencies but do not consider the categorization of PSFs or the quantitative impact of one PSF on another when estimating HEPs. However, some recent studies, such as those by Boring [15] and Groth and Swiler [20], analyzed the inter-relationships between PSFs based on the SPAR-H method and suggested a few groups in which some PSFs show similar patterns through factor analysis. However, these studies do not provide guidance on how to use the PSF groups to estimate HEPs. Therefore, the characteristics of PSF inter-relationships, as well as how to treat the inter-relationships in the HRA, have to be further studied.
This study attempts to answer three questions regarding the treatment of inter-relationships between PSFs. The ﬁrst question is, which PSFs have inter-relationships and how strong are the relationships between them? For identifying the relationships between PSFs and estimating their correlation coefﬁcients, this study carried out a correlation analysis using two data sources: 1) the event history of unplanned trips and unplanned actuation of safety systems in Korean NPPs, and 2) an experiment conducted in an NPP simulator with high ﬁdelity and licensed operators. The two data sources considered in this study may report different types of information on PSF inter-relationships. Analyzing the PSF
inter-relationships from event reports where the events already occurred by mechanical or human failures may ﬁnd those corre- lations among PSFs that is likely to lead to human error. On the other hand, the PSFs collected from the simulation experiments may include all the joint occurrences, even those that may not be related to the human error. In this study, it is assumed that the PSFs have correlation to each other regardless of whether human errors occur or not, but it affects only the strength of the correlations.
The second question is, are the PSFs correlated each other and can PSFs that inﬂuence others or each other be categorized into groups? To answer this question, we reviewed several statistical approaches such as structural equation modeling [26], Bayesian modeling [16], exploratory factor analysis [27], and conﬁrmatory factor analysis [27]. First, the structural equation and Bayesian modeling are more specialized to identify potential cause and effect relations between variables. Second, the exploratory factor analysis is a method to combine multiple variables that are highly corre- lated, then uncover their relationships, i.e., factor groups, where the researcher does not have a priori hypothesis about factor groups or patterns of variables. Lastly, the conﬁrmatory factor analysis is used to verify and test the hypothesis that a relationship between the variables and their underlying latent factors or constructs is adequate and needs to have an authoritative theory underlying their model before analyzing data. In this study, the exploratory factor analysis was selected as the most adequate method to identify a PSF group in which PSFs showed similar patterns, because there is no ﬁxed group of PSF. It may be also effective to reduce the number of PSFs considered in an HRA, because the excess of PSFs is a problem with existing HRA methods [15].
The third question is, how can a group of PSFs be applied to the quantiﬁcation of HEPs? This study suggests context-based ap- proaches based on the results of the factor analysis and investigates the feasibility of the grouped PSFs being treated as a new factor to estimate HEPs using the experimental data. The reason why we only considered the PSF groups from the experiment is that it is favorable to verify the effect of PSF groups on HEPs with error rates which are estimated by experiment data. Meanwhile, the PSF groups identiﬁed from the event reports do not include the infor- mation for the error rates. For the PSFs identiﬁed from the event reports, it is compared with other studies related to the inter- relationship of PSFs.
It is also possible to model some sorts of inter-relationships of PSFs for estimating a HEP using some existing HRA quantiﬁcation techniques such as Bayesian network [16] or decision trees [28]. Many researchers, such as Groth and Swiler [20], and De Ambroggi and Trucco [17], have modeled the relations between PSFs with considering casual relationships. However, in order to model these relations, it is important to generate statistical evidences for sup- porting the relationships between PSFs. In this study, we tried to suggest the way to transparently estimate the inter-relationships from the empirical data and to model the mathematical equation of HEP as a case study.
3.Inter-relationships of PSFs based on event reports
This study analyzed the inter-relationships of PSFs based on event reports for Korean NPPs. First, eight PSFs were selected using the SPAR-H method. Then, event reports on unexpected reactor trips and initiations of safety systems from the OPIS database were reviewed and analyzed with respect to the selected PSFs. A corre- lation analysis was performed to quantify the inter-relationships between PSFs. Finally, an exploratory factor analysis was per- formed to generate a couple of PSF groups in which some PSFs were closely related to each other.
3.1.PSF selection
Eight PSFs from SPAR-H were considered for the analysis: 1) experience/training, 2) stress/stressors, 3) complexity, 4) proced- ures, 5) ergonomics/HSI, 6) available time, 7) work processes, and
8) ﬁtness for duty. Brief descriptions of those PSFs are given below [13]:
3.1.1.Experience/training
This PSF refers to the experience and training of the operator involved in the task. This includes years of experience of the indi- vidual or crew, whether or not the operator/crew has been trained in the relevant type of accident, and whether or not the operator/ crew has been involved in a similar scenario.
3.1.2.Stress/stressors
Stress refers to the level of undesirable conditions and circum- stances that impede the operator from easily completing a task. Stress can include mental stress, excessive workload, or physical stress.
3.1.3.Complexity
Complexity refers to how difﬁcult the task is to perform in the given context. Complexity considers both the task and the envi- ronment in which it is to be performed.
3.1.4.Procedures
Procedures refer to the existence and use of formal operating procedures for the tasks under consideration. This includes situa- tions where procedures give wrong or inadequate information regarding a particular control sequence.
3.1.5.Ergonomics/HSI
Ergonomics/HSI refers to the equipment, displays, controls, layout, and quality and quantity of information available from instrumentation, and the interaction of the operator/crew with the equipment while carrying out tasks.
3.1.6.Available time
Available time refers to the amount of time that an operator or crew has to diagnose and act upon an abnormal event. A shortage of time can affect the operator's ability to think clearly and consider alternatives.
3.1.7.Work processes
Work processes represent factors that can affect operators while performing tasks: for example, inter-organizational factors, safety culture, work planning, communication, coordination, manage- ment support, and policies. How work is planned, communicated, and executed can affect individual and crew performance.
3.1.8.Fitness for duty
Fitness for duty refers to whether or not the individual per- forming the task is physically and mentally ﬁt to perform the task at the time. Things that may affect ﬁtness include fatigue, sickness, drug use, overconﬁdence, personal problems, and distractions.
3.2.Analysis of PSF contributions to human errors
Event reports from the OPIS database [29] were reviewed to investigate the correlations between PSFs in NPPs. In Korea, when an NPP experiences an unplanned reactor trip, actuation of engi- neered safety systems, or actuation of an emergency diesel gener- ator, the regulatory body carries out an in-depth investigation through various approaches, such as a review of the plant's
operational log and parameter history, interviews with operators, and a work-down of the plant. Then, a detailed event report, including the cause, progress, consequence, and corrective actions of the event, is added to the OPIS database. The report contains the following information:
●Event sequence with timestamps
●Cause of event
●The trend of main plant parameters
●Adequacy of plant operation status at the time of event initiation
●Adequacy of the response operation
●Evaluation of safety
●Lessons learned and corrective actions
A review of the causes, errors, and failures of 222 events from 2002 to 2017 was conducted. Among them, 64 events contained operator errors in the cause and/or mitigation. PSFs that contrib- uted to human errors in 64 events were analyzed with respect to the 8 PSFs mentioned above. Fig. 1 shows an example of the analysis of PSF contributions to human errors. If the event report mentioned that a PSF contributed to human errors, the PSF was coded as “1” on the spreadsheet; if not, it was coded as “0.”
Table 3 shows the percentage of events in which a PSF inﬂu- enced human errors. Two or more PSFs can inﬂuence a human error in a single event. The procedure was the inﬂuential factor in the largest percentage of events (73%), followed by experience and training (63%). Fitness for duty was identiﬁed as the lowest inﬂu- encing factor in only 6%.
3.3.Inter-relationships of PSFs: correlation and factor analyses
3.3.1.Correlation analysis from event reports
A correlation analysis was carried out on the results for the PSFs’ contribution to human errors in the event reports. For the corre- lation analysis between the PSFs which are composed of binary data, Phi correlation coefﬁcient that represents a measure of the degree of correlation between two binary variables is applied [30], while the correlation analysis is generally carried out between two continuous variables and its result is indicated as Pearson correla- tion coefﬁcient. Table 4 shows the results of correlation  analysis  from event reports. The results indicated that noticeable correla- tions existed between the PSFs with p-values, which mean the probabilities that we would have found the current result if the correlation coefﬁcient were in fact zero (null hypothesis). If the p- values are lower than the conventional 5% (P-value < 0.05), the correlation coefﬁcient is called statistically signiﬁcant with 95% conﬁdence level. As a result, a statistically signiﬁcant and very strong correlation was found between stress/stressor and available time (R 0.651). Relatively strong relations  (R > 0.5) were also  found  between  procedureseexperience/training   (R   0.646), ﬁtness for dutyestress/stressors (R 0.593), complexityestress/ stressors (R 0.588), work processesecomplexity (R 0.526), and available timeecomplexity (R 0.524). Fig. 2 illustrates the re- lationships between the PSFs, along with the range of correlation factors.
3.3.2.Exploratory factor analysis and PSF grouping
As introduced in Section 2.3, the exploratory factor analysis is a method to combine multiple variables that are highly correlated, then uncover their relationships, i.e., factor groups, where the researcher does not have a priori hypothesis about factor groups or patterns of variables [27]. In this study, an exploratory factor analysis was performed to investigate PSFs’ relationships and then to identify groups in which some PSFs had similar patterns. Table 5 shows the results of factor analysis based on event reports. The
Fig. 1.  An example of the analysis of PSFs' contributions.
Table 3
The percentage of contributions to events by PSFs.factors, i.e., Factor Group 1 and 2, are deﬁned as a construct oper- ationally deﬁned by its factor loadings, which mean the correla- tions between a variable and a factor. The numbers in Table 5 represent the factor loadings that are the correlations  between  each PSF and Factor Group 1 or 2. Only PSFs that the factor loadings over 0.5 are generally included in the factor groups, while the others are removed. The eigenvalue indicates the total amount of variance for the factor. Only factor groups that have eigenvalues greater than 1 are recognized as the result of factor analysis. Lastly,
% of variance indicates how much each factor group accounts for the total variance.
The factor analysis identiﬁed two factor groups on the basis of eigenvalues that were over 1.0, as shown in Table 5. Factor Group 1 included ﬁve PSFs: ergonomics/HSI, procedures, work processes, complexity, and experience/training. Those factors were related to the design elements of human factors engineering (HFE) in NPPs. HFE aims at designing stafﬁng, procedures, training programs, and HSI to improve human performance [31]. The work process and complexity were largely affected by stafﬁng and procedures, respectively. Therefore, it could be said that Factor Group 1 repre- sents design factors in the HFE.
Factor Group 2 included available time, complexity, stress/ stressors, and ﬁtness for duty. These factors were those that inﬂu- enced the workload perceived by operators in the task. Available time, complexity, and ﬁtness for duty were factors that typically affected an operator's mental workload. Stress/stressors directly indicated the operator's workload. Therefore, it could be concluded that Factor Group 2 represents the PSFs that are related to the operator's mental workload.
4.Correlations between PSFs based on an experiment in a simulator with a digital control room
This study investigated the relationships between PSFs in the
Table 4
Results of correlation analysis from event reports.Fig. 2. An illustration of relations between PSFs with the range of correlation coefﬁcients.
Table 5
Results of factor analysis based on event reports.digital control room of an NPP, based on the authors' previous experiment [12]. One of the beneﬁts of this experiment was that it was possible to control and measure the PSFs directly, which is almost impossible when analyzing event reports. Therefore, more ﬂexibility was possible in the experiment for the study of inter- relationships between PSFs. This study selected six  PSFs  that  were controllable and measurable. Then, correlation and factor
analyses for those PSFs were performed using the experiment's results.
4.1.PSF selection
Six PSFs were selected for the analysis: operator experience, available time, task complexity, workload, situation awareness, and secondary task. Among them, two PSFsd operator experience and task complexitydwere controlled in the experiment, while three PSFs, dworkload, situation awareness, and the secondary taskdwere measured. Available time was a combination of controlled and measured variables.
4.1.1.Operator experience
Operator experience is equivalent to experience/training in Section 3.1. The experiment saw subjects divided into two groups: an experienced group and a less-experienced group. All crew members in the experienced group had operating licenses for a reactor of the same type as the simulator. The less-experienced crew group was composed of operators possessing operating licenses for reactors that were different from the simulator.
4.1.2.Available time
Available time was deﬁned by comparing the time available and the time required. Time available (i.e., deﬁned differently from the available time) was the period within which the operators should perform the task. Time available was identiﬁed from the assump- tion of a deterministic safety analysis as well as from operator time windows from a probabilistic safety assessment. The time required was the duration of time the operators take to complete the task. It was obtained by averaging task completion times in the experi- ment. The available time is determined as a ratio of time required to time available. This study used three levels of available time- dsufﬁcient, nominal, and insufﬁcientdas follows:
Sufficient: time required ≤ 0:2 × time available
ðequivalent to time available ≤ 5 × time required in the SPAR — HÞ
Nominal : 0:2 × time available < time required
≤ 0:8 × time available
Insufficient: time required > 0:8 × time available
4.1.3.Task complexity
To control task complexity, which is equivalent to complexity in Section 3.1, the scenarios were divided into three groups: (1) nominal, (2) moderate, and (3) complex. The nominal group of scenarios included design-based accidents. The moderate group included a scenario where there existed a masking of information or a minor discrepancy from procedures (or operator's expectancy). The complex group contained scenarios of beyond-design-based accidents. Additionally, this classiﬁcation was also evaluated  by the factors contributing to task complexity suggested in the SPAR-H method. The large number of actions required, misleading or absent indicators, or a large amount of communication required are the examples of the contributing factors.
4.1.4.Workload
Workload corresponds to stress/stressors in the SPAR-H method. A modiﬁed Cooper-Harper rating scale [32] was used for measuring the workload in the experiment.
4.1.5.Situation awareness
Situation awareness refers to the perception of elements in the environment within an extent of time and space and the compre- hension of the meaning and projection of the status of the elements
in the near future [32]. Situation awareness is not a general PSF considered in HRAs, although it is a popular human performance measure in the ﬁelds of human factors engineering and psychology. However, situation awareness is considered a cognitive factor affecting operator performances in HRA methods: for example, THERP. In particular, situation awareness is more emphasized in a digital control room, where operators' cognitive behavior plays a more important role in the operation than in analog control rooms [33]. A situation awareness rating technique (SART) was used to measure the subjects’ situation awareness in the scenario.
4.1.6.Number of secondary tasks per instruction
Secondary tasks are also called interface management tasks. They refer to the tasks required to access information in a digital control room, such as conﬁguring, navigating, arranging, interro- gating, and automating the interface. They are considered as a potential PSF in a digital control room [31,34,35]. The number of secondary tasks per procedural instruction was also counted in the experiment.
4.2.Experimental design
4.2.1.Scenarios
Six scenarios were developed to reﬂect the different conditions of two PSFs (available time and task complexity). They are sum- marized in Table 6. Scenarios 1, 2, and 3 included actions that needed to be performed within 30 min after the initiation of a failure or reactor trip. The PSF of available time was calculated by using the completion time of subjects: that is, the time required. In Scenario 2, the failure of N16 indicatorsdthat is, the radiation in- dicator on the steam linedwas expected to make the diagnosis of a steam generator tube rupture (SGTR) difﬁcult since the detection of radiation in the steam line is a critical cue in determining such an accident. The SGTR with the failure of N16 indicators was also used as a difﬁcult scenario in the human factors engineering validation for NPPs [32]. An interface loss of coolant accident (LOCA) was evaluated as being moderately complex because the plant behavior was different from typical LOCAs.
4.2.2.Subjects
Six crews (18 operators) participated in the experiment. Each crew included three operators: a shift supervisor, a reactor oper- ator, and a turbine operator. All of the operators in the experienced group had operating licenses for the reference plant, which was a pressurized water reactor with a digital control room. The other nine operators in the less-experienced group did not have oper- ating licenses for the reference plant, but had licenses for other
Table 6
Summary of the scenarios.Table 7
Comparison of the two groups with respect to operator experience.
Fig. 3.  APR1400 simulator.
types of plant. The average age of the participants was approxi- mately 43 years, and the average experience in plant operation was approximately 12.5 years, as shown in Table 7.
4.2.3.Experimental facility
An NPP simulator with high ﬁdelity was used as the experi- mental facility (see Fig. 3). It contained digital instrumentation and control and a digital main control room. The advanced control room design incorporated extensive computerization and automation of facilities to enhance operator decision-making and reduce operator
workload. The simulator consisted of a large display panel and an operator console that could accommodate three operators. Each operator had three computer screens. Operator performance data, such as time, error rate, and secondary tasks, were collected through observation, audio/video recording, and simulator log data. Three or four HRA experts observed the operators’ task perfor- mance to collect operator error data in the scenario. Audio/video recordings were also used to analyze time performances and errors. Operator log data in the simulator were stored to analyze the time and secondary tasks.
4.2.4.Experimental procedure
Each crew dealt with six scenarios; performance data for a total of 36 scenarios were collected. Each crew took approximately 6 h to address the six scenarios. Prior to conducting the scenarios, an introductory session was held to provide an overview of the experiment and convey information on the tasks that needed to be performed within 30 min. An additional day of training was con- ducted for the less-experienced group, to allow them to familiarize themselves with the digital MCR. A test scenario conﬁrmed that the groups showed a consistent level of performance prior to entering the scenarios.
4.3.Inter-relationship of PSFs: correlation and factor analyses
In the experiment, a total of 36 scenarios were conducted. Two PSFs were controlled by the experimental conditions: experience and task complexity. Three were measured in the experiment:
Table 8
Experimental conditions of PSFs.
Table 9
Results of the correlation analysis for six PSFs from the experiment.workload, situation awareness, and the number of secondary tasks. Available time was estimated by using a combination of controlled and measured variables. Table 8 shows the experimental conditions of the PSFs for the 36 scenarios and the quantitative values of the conditions used for the correlation analysis. The quantitative value is based on the multiplier of PSFs in the SPAR-H method.
Table 9 presents the results of a correlation analysis between PSFs. The correlation between experience and task complexity was not analyzed because both were controlled variables. The results indicate that the relationships of six pairs of PSFs were statistically signiﬁcant. Fig. 4 shows the relationships between the PSFs with correlation coefﬁcients and statistical signiﬁcances. A strong cor- relation was found between workload and the number of second- ary tasks (R ¼ 0.507). Workload and situation awareness showed a
strong negative correlation (R 0.551).
Two factor groups were identiﬁed through the exploratory factor analysis, on the basis of their eigenvalues being over 1.0, as shown in Table 10. In Factor Group 1, three PSFsdworkload, situ- ation awareness, and the number of secondary tasksdshowed a similar pattern, while the Factor Group 2 included experience and available time PSFs. For the workload and number of secondary tasks in Factor Group 1, these contributed positively to this group, while situation awareness contributed negatively.
5.Context-based approaches to treating the inter- relationship of PSFs
This section suggests a context-based approach based on the PSF
Fig. 4. An illustration of the correlations between six PSFs from the experiment.
Table 10
The results of the exploratory factor analysis from the experiment.groups identiﬁed from experimental data. Then, the feasibility of the grouped PSFs being treated as a new factor to estimate HEPs is examined using experimental data.
This study identiﬁed two PSF groups from the experiment. Fig. 5 shows the two factor groups and the factor scores of PSFs, which indicate the weightings between a PSF and the factor. Using the deﬁnitions of the factor analysis, Factor Group 1 from the experi- ment consists of three variables: the number of secondary tasks, workload, and situation awareness, while Factor Group 2 includes two PSFs, i.e., operator experience and available time. The contri- bution of PSFs to the factor group can be represented by their factor scores, as shown in Fig. 5.
This section shows a case study for the feasibility of applying PSF groups to the estimation of HEPs. The experiment in Section 4 also measured operators’ errors while following the instructions for the procedures used in each scenario. This section investigates how the results of the factor analysis could be used to estimate the HEP in the experiment. First, we deﬁned a PSF group score to evaluate the effect of a PSF group that contained PSFs. A PSF group score can be calculated by the sum of multiplications with a factor score of PSF (See Fig. 5) and a normalized score of an individual PSF. This also corresponds with the method to estimate a factor group score in  the theory of exploratory factor analysis [27]. The normalized score of an individual PSF represented the result of a PSF evaluation in the HRA. For instance, if the scenario was evaluated as “extremely complex,” we assigned “1 (highest score)” to the normalized score of complexity. Thus, the PSF group value was calculated as follows:
n
PSF group score	factor score of PSF i
i@7
(n the number of PSFs in the group).
Table 11 shows an example of the normalized scores of indi- vidual PSFs for Scenario 2 in the experiment. Workload, situation awareness, and number of secondary tasks in the scenario were evaluated as 0.30, 0.53, and 0.49, respectively. Then, the PSF group score for Group 1 for the scenario could be calculated using the factor scores in Fig. 5, as shown below:
PSF group score for Group 1 ¼ 0:394 × 0:30 — 0:368 × 0:53
þ 0:438 × 0:49
¼ 0:14
Next, the process to calculate the total PSF score was outlined. As mentioned in Section 3.3.2, a factor is deﬁned as a construct operationally deﬁned by its factor loadings in the exploratory factor analysis. The factor is a condensed statement describing the rela- tionship between a set of variables, while the factor loadings are the correlations of a variable with a factor. The sum of squares of the factor loadings for each factor reﬂects the proportion of variance explained by each factor. An eigenvalue is the total amount of variance for the factor. The average of the squared loadings of a factor (i.e., eigenvalue/the number of variables in the factor) shows the percentage of variance explained by that factor. For instance, if a factor  has  an  eigenvalue  of  1.74  and  four  variables,  then,  1.74/
4 0.43; thus, the factor can explain 43% of the variance in the correlation matrix.
The total PSF score is the weighted sum of the PSF group scores. This score evaluates the effect of total PSFs that were inﬂuential in a scenario. As a weighting factor, the score used the “eigenvalue of a factor/the number of variables in the factor,” which means the extent to which the factor could explain the variance in the cor- relation matrix, as mentioned above. The total PSF score could be calculated by using the following formula:
@8
Total PSF Score for Scenario 2 ¼ 2:044 × 0:14 þ 1:253 × 0:063
¼ 0:13
In addition, we performed multivariable linear regression analysis for both factor groups, PSF Group 1 and 2 with error rate. equation (9) below indicates the relationship between the error rate and PSF group scores. It is also satisﬁed with a statistically signiﬁcant level (p-value < 0.05) and indicates an R-square value of 0.281, which means a goodness-of-ﬁt measure for the regression model. In the equation, the coefﬁcients for PSF group score of group
1 and 2, i.e., 0.026 and 0.008, are statistically signiﬁcant  (p-  value < 0.05), while the constant, i.e., 0.0013, is not satisﬁed with statistical conﬁdence level.
Error rate ¼ 0:0013 þ 0:026 × PSF group score of group 1@9
Fig. 5.  Identiﬁed PSF groups from the experiment.
Table 11
An example of calculating PSF group scores.Lastly, we performed the correlation analysis on 1) PSF group score of group 1, 2) PSF group score of group 2, 3) total PSF score, 4) error rate predicted by equation (9), and 5) SPAR-H PSF score with error rate estimated by the experiment. For the SPAR-H PSF scores, the experimental conditions of PSFs in Table 8 were used. For instance, the multiplication of PSF quantities for Scenario 1 of Crew 1 could be calculated as follows:@
Table 12 presents the results of the correlation analysis. The results show that the correlations on PSF group score of group 1, PSF group score of group 2, total PSF score and error rate predicted by equation (9) with error rate estimated by the experiment are statistically signiﬁcant, respectively. Especially, the error rate pre- dicted by equation (9) showed a stronger correlation with the error rate estimated by the experiment. However, the SPAR-H PSF score did not show any statistical correlation with the error rates.
6.Discussion
6.1.Comparison of the results with those of other studies
The PSFs collected from event reports in this study are found in the SPAR-H method which has been broadly used by both industry and regulators in its intended area of use (i.e., NPPs in the U.S.), as well as in other industries [36,37]. Moreover, these are also rela- tively common when comparing with the other studies.
This section compares the results of this study from the event report analysis with those of others related to the inter-relationship of PSFsdthat is, Groth's [16], Boring's [15], and Gaylean's [21] works. Table 13 summarizes the comparison of PSF grouping from those studies.
Some similar patterns can be observed in the groupings of PSFs. First of all, the results of this study showed a similar pattern to Boring's study. Three PSFsdergonomics/HSI, procedure, and work processesdare common between Group 1 (i.e., HFE design factor) resulting from the event report analysis of Section 3 and Grouping 2 of Boring's study. The HFE design factor also shares three PSFs (ergonomics/HSI, procedure, and experience/training) with the organization environment in Gaylean's study.
Group 2 (i.e., workload factor) from Section 3 of this study also includes common PSFs with Error Context 1 of Groth's study and Grouping 1 of Boring's study. Three PSFs (available time, complexity, and stress/stressor) are shared by all three. Addition- ally, ﬁtness for duty is found in the groups of this study and in that of Boring. Even though the data were obtained from different countries (i.e., Korea and the U.S.), these studies showed similar patterns in the grouping of PSFs.
In summary, these comparison results may indicate that the PSFs which have been considered individually in the existing HRAs could be combined into a lower number of PSF groups. As a next step, an approach to treat these PSF groups needs to be further suggested for estimating HEPs while reﬂecting the effect of inter- relationships between the PSFs.
6.2.Feasibility of context-based approaches to treating the inter- relationship of PSFs
This study suggests two different context-based approaches to treat inter-relationship of PSFs based on the PSF groups. One is to calculate the total PSF score, while the other one is to use multi- variable linear regression analysis for factor groups. In Table 12, it is identiﬁed that the both approaches are statistically signiﬁcant, but the latter one shows the higher correlation coefﬁcient.
For the total PSF score, it is useful to combine all the effects of PSF into a value. The method for calculating the total PSF score basically depends on weighting values, i.e., factor scores or eigen- values, which are based on the results of the factor analysis having statistical backgrounds [38]. However, it may be difﬁcult to generalize that the total PSF score could be accountable for error rates, even if we identiﬁed a statistically signiﬁcant relation be- tween the total PSF score and error rates. It's because this study does not include how much the total PSF score indicates the error rates. Therefore, this study may conclude that the latter approach is more feasible to treat the inter-relationship of PSFs. The approach showed the higher correlation coefﬁcient as well as the direct relation between the PSF group score and error rates.
The SPAR-H PSF score did not show any statistical correlation with the error rates. In fact, the multiplier values for the eight SPAR- H PSFs are mapped from the data suggested by THERP [39]. How- ever, most of the available data for estimating HEPs in THERP are basically relying on expert judgment, and sparse empirical and experience-based data mostly from non-nuclear experience [40]. Therefore, this result may highlight a fundamental issue of current HRA which is still a lack of data in terms of addressing the effects of the PSFs on a HEP and estimating the HEP with determination of
Table 12
Correlation analysis for the PSF group values and error rates in the experiment.Table 13
Comparison of PSF groupings from four studies.PSF quantiﬁcation values [41,42].
This study tried to treat PSF inter-relationships by involving all the possible interactions between the states of the PSFs and be- tween the inﬂuences of the PSFs on human performances, such as correlation, dependency, overlapping, or combinational effects with the causal relations. Then, as a relatively simple approach, we suggested how to estimate HEPs based on the result of factor analysis, i.e., PSF groups combining all the possible interactions between PSFs. However, identifying and understanding these in- teractions are still remaining issues in this research. In fact, the factor analysis only shows that there are relations between the variables, but cannot explain the reasons why there are the re- lations or how they are related each other. In HRA, it is important to account for whether there are relationships with casual effects, whether some of PSFs always affect each other, whether the PSFs have different phenomena affected by the same cause, or whether the experimental design is misconstrued. Representatively, the grouped PSFs in this study might be inﬂuenced by the experimental design, because how a PSF related to other PSFs was controlled by experimental design. For example, for Factor Group 2  (See Table 10), the available time and operator experience PSFs are grouped into a factor, although these do not have any correlation. In fact, the available time is independent with experience because it is determined by scenario or accident severity. Nevertheless, they might be grouped into a factor because the relation between available time and experience simultaneously shapes a temporal pressure to operators. If this is true, these two PSFs have a relation supporting a combinational effect. This effect has been observed in the other study. Kim et al. [43] identiﬁed that some sort of HEP can dramatically increase when quality of procedure and experience are evaluated as low, although these PSFs may not have any cor- relation. Therefore, these issues need to be further studied in the future.
7.Conclusion
This study investigated the inter-relationships between PSFs for HRAs of NPPs. Although it is obvious that PSFs have relationships with each other, current HRA methods do not treat the combined effect of PSFs on human errors sufﬁciently. Based on the two data sources of event reports from Korean NPPs and an experiment with a simulator, this study performed correlation and factor analyses. As a result, several PSF groups in which PSFs showed a similar pattern were identiﬁed. Finally, this study discussed the feasibility of using the identiﬁed PSF groups to estimate HEPs in the results of the experiment.
Acknowledgment
This  work was  partially supported  by the Nuclear Research  &
Development  Program  of  the  National  Research  Foundation  of
Korea Grant, funded by the Korean government, Ministry of Sci- ence, ICT & Future Planning (grant number: 2017M2A8A4015291), and by Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning (grant  number: 2016R1A5A1013919).