<title>Fabrication of Low-Density Shock-Propagation Targets Using Two-Photon Polymerization</title>
<Affiliation>a.Schafer Livermore Laboratory, 303 Lindbergh Avenue, Livermore, California 64551
b.University of Nebraska–Lincoln, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588-0511
c.Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, District of Columbia 20375</Affiliation>
<author>O. Stein, Y. Liu, J. Streit, J. H. Campbell, Y. F. Lu, Y. Aglitskiy & N. Petta</author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>FUSION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/15361055.2017.1406237</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1080/15361055.2017.1406237</URL>
Abstract — Low-density foam targets were fabricated by direct laser writing using two-photon polymer- ization (2PP). The targets were used in high-energy-density shock-propagation experiments carried out on the NIKE laser system at the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL). The basic target comprised a rectilinear foam rod with a log-pile-like microstructure with overall dimensions of 2000 × 250 × 315 μm3 and a nominal density of ~100 mg/cm3. The foam block is topped with a 15-μm-thick, full-density ablation layer that is integrated into the 2PP printing process. The main challenge in fabricating the foam targets comes in maintaining dimensional and structural stability during 2PP postprocessing particularly during devel- opment, drying, and release from the substrate. Twelve 2PP foam rods were characterized and then built into targets. The characterization data show shrinkage of ~5% to 15% in overall dimensions attributed mainly to shrinkage of the acrylic resin (IP-Dip). Continuing development shows that use of the more stable IP-S commercial resin leads to significantly improved foam structure stability, reduced shrinkage, and a lower number of inherently weak stitching boundaries. The 12 targets provided to NRL have been shot; an example of the type of data obtained is presented.
Keywords — Low-density, foam targets, high energy density.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
Two-photon polymerization (2PP) is a laser-driven direct-write technology for fabrication of precision micro- scale components (micron scale to millimeter scale) with nanoscale resolution. Details of the technology and recent advancements have been reviewed in a compilation of papers edited by Baldacchini.1 The 2PP process is initiated by simultaneous absorption of two photons by a photoinitiator in a reactive monomer/oligomer resin and thus depends on the square of the laser irradiance. In practice, an initiator is selected that has negligible absorption at the incident funda- mental laser frequency but measurable two-photon absorption at the second harmonic. Two-photon absorption cross sec- tions are very low,1,2 on the order of 10–54 m4·s·photons−1. Therefore, the probability of reaction initiation is negligible except near laser focus and also decays rapidly beyond the focal plane. This leads to the threshold nature of the process where polymerization initiates only at the very peak of the focal irradiance profile and generates a volumetric polymer dot (voxel). The voxel is generally smaller than the diffraction-limited spot size and is a strong function of the laser peak power. Voxels as small as ~10 nm have been reported3 but more typically are between 100 and 300 nm  for permanent structures similar to those reported here.4–7 Structures are created by moving a repetition-rated laser beam through the resin thus generating overlapping voxels  that,  with  proper  scanning  control,  are  built  into
computer-aided-design (CAD) three-dimensional shapes. Unreacted resin is later removed during a postwriting devel- opment process leaving a polymeric replica of the CAD structure.
Direct-write 2PP technology has attracted attention as a means to create laser target components with nanoscale pre- cision directly from CAD-generated design files. In the first published work in this area, Bernat et al.4 and Jiang et al.5–7 reported use of 2PP to print simulated fill tubes and low- density foamlike structures, respectively. Recent work by Oakdale et al.8 showed that ultraviolet posttreatment of 2PP target structures can improve mechanical strength for certain acrylate resins. Jiang et al.9 have also demonstrated structure strength improvement by using custom-formulated thiol-ene click-reaction resins.
This paper reports the fabrication of set of foam laser targets for use in the continuing work by one of us (Aglitskiy) for quantifying shock Hugoniots in low-density materials.10,11 Despite the widespread use of these materials, the primary Hugoniots remain largely unknown.  In  brief, the Hugoniot relates material states on both sides of a propagating shock wave.
Low-density materials have a number of important uses in inertial confinement fusion (ICF) and high-energy-density (HED) physics, such as (1) fuel retention layers in ICF targets, (2) study of radiation transport and shock propagation, (3) creation and study  of warm dense matter with temperatures of a few elec- tron volts, and (4) experiments on Rayleigh-Taylor and other growth instabilities to name but a few. Typical conventional foam targets consist of a random distribu- tion of pores and matrix material with a given average density. In contrast, 2PP offers the ability to print designer foams with a defined density or density distri- bution of known pore size. In the application reported here, 2PP is used to print a series of low-density polymeric foam rods (2000 × 250 × 300 μm3 in length, width, and height, respectively) with a 15-μm-thick full- density ablative top layer. The foam section has a design density of 100 mg/cm3. Both the foam rod and ablation layer are printed in one step using 2PP.
Supercritical drying is used to reduce deformation due
to shrinkage and capillary stresses generated during devel- opment and drying; however, as noted in our prior work, it does not completely eliminate it.5,7 Measureable resin shrinkage contributes to variations in part density and to some axial bowing of the long, narrow rod structure. A target mount has been designed that can correct for bowing in these initial targets. A continuing development effort is focused on understanding and reducing shrinkage and improving  foam  structure stability.12  We  show here  that
use of the commercial resin IP-S significantly reduces foam shrinkage and deformation while still maintaining the required high CH content of the foam matrix.
II.EXPERIMENTAL
The microfabrications were carried out using a Photonic Professional GT 2PP system (from Nanoscribe GmbH). Two-photon excitation is accomplished using the 780-nm frequency-doubled output from an Er-fiber laser (1580 nm, TEM00, M 2 < 1.2) operating at 80 MHz with a temporal pulse length of ~100 fs. An integrated set of beam transport optics directs the laser output to a final focusing objective that dips directly into the photoresist. The incident average laser power was measured by a photodiode located at the input to the focusing objective. The passive losses in beam propaga- tion to the sample plane were assumed to be constant and accounted for in Nanoscribe’s as-built system calibration. The laser output power was controlled by an acoustooptic modulator and can be adjusted over a range of approximately 2 to 50 mW (average power).
Structures were created using the Nanoscribe built- in software package DESCRIBETM, which  generates the needed General Writing Language files  directly. The Photonic Professional GT system uses both a piezoelectric stage and two coupled galvo-scanning mirrors to write the structure. The galvo-mirror system allows rapid x, y scanning at up to 20  mm/s over an  area 200 µm in diameter when using the 63× final focusing objective or 400 µm in diameter  using  the 25× objective lens. The vertical (z) motion is controlled by the piezo stage and the built-in z-drive of the focus- ing objective. The focusing range is up to several millimeters in height. The system can print structures with an area of up to 25 × 25 mm2 by using the motorized stage and stitching the structures together. The size of the structures printed in this application  was 2 mm in the largest dimension. The stitching accuracy is typically 1 to 4 µm (Ref. 5).
Two  commercial negative-tone acrylate-based photo-
resists were used: IP-Dip and IP-S (Nanoscribe). Only IP-Dip was used to prepare the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) foam targets. IP-S was used in follow-on work aimed at improving foam stability during postprocessing. Both IP-Dip and IP-S are designed for  use with Nanoscribe’s Dip-in Laser Lithography technology13 and serve the dual function of immersion fluid and photosensitive material. Specifically, both resins match the refractive index of the final focusing object and can achieve the highest numerical aperture (NA) and thus
best resolution at a given magnification. In the case of IP-Dip resin, a 63× objective with 1.4 NA was used for printing whereas with IP-S, the objective was 25× with
0.8 NA.
IP-Dip is highly fluid and recommended for use in high-resolution applications. In contrast, IP-S is much more viscous and designed for mesoscale printing. IP-S gives lower shrinkage and higher mechanical stability than IP-Dip. The elemental compositions and key properties of the resins are summarized in Table I. The elemental com- positions were determined using the procedure discussed in Ref. 5 and are important for this work as they deter-  mined the X-ray opacity of the foam. The IP-Dip polymerized (solid) resin density is 1.2 g/cm3 based on prior work5; IP-S is assumed to be the same although measurements are lacking. Lemma et al.14 report Young’s modulus values for IP-Dip ranging from 0.75 to 3.5 GPa depending on the degree of conversion; the upper limit agrees reasonably with 4.5 GPa from Nanoscribe. Values for all other physical and mechanical properties in Table I are from Nanoscribe.
The photoresist is deposited as a drop on a
25 × 25 × 0.7-mm3 glass substrate mounted in an aluminum sample tray. The tray, with substrate and resist, inserts into the Nanoscribe GT housing and is attached to a precision piezoelectric-driven stage. All operations were carried out under yellow room lighting to avoid any polymerization by direct single-photon ultraviolet excitation.
Structures written in IP-Dip resin often adhere strongly to the glass substrate. Therefore,  in  certain cases a 500-nm-thick release layer (LOR, Microchem Corporation) was first applied to the substrate by spin  coating. In contrast, structures written  in  IP-S  resin  have lower adhesion to the standard indium tin oxide
(ITO)–coated glass substrate and are generally released during development and subsequent drying.
Table II provides a summary of the conditions used to write the low-density foam structures in IP-Dip and IP-S. The print time in IP-Dip was ~1.5 h for foam rods with a 15-µm ablation layer and ~1 h for just the foam section. All foam rods used for target shots were printed within a period of 2 weeks using IP-Dip photoresist from the same batch (i.e., bottle). The print time in IP-S was somewhat faster at ~1 h for the rod plus top layer; the same batch of IP-S was used for all structures.
After 2PP printing, the sample substrate with IP  resin was removed from the holder and developed at room temperature for ~30 to 60 min in 50 mL of pro- pylene glycol monomethyl ether acetate (PGMEA) fol- lowed by a 1-h soak in 25 mL of isopropyl alcohol  (IPA). If a release layer was used,  then  the  substrate plus structure was removed from the IPA and then directly immersed in the Microchem specified release agent (Remover PGTM). The resulting free-standing structures, still immersed in IPA, were then supercriti- cally dried using CO2 and a commercial drying system (SPI-DRYTM). Completion of IPA  solvent  exchange with CO2 during supercritical drying was determined using gas chromatography, and exchange was termi- nated when the residual IPA attained a level less than 0.03% in the monitored CO2 effluent.
During the development phase, the IP-Dip foam rods were printed, developed, and air dried at the University of Nebraska–Lincoln (UNL). However, during production, the rods were printed at UNL and then shipped overnight to Schafer Livermore Laboratory where they were developed using PGMEA, rinsed in IPA, and then supercritically dried.
TABLE I
Composition and Key Properties of IP-Dip and IP-S Resins
TABLE II
Top-Level Summary of 2PP Writing Conditions Used to Prepare Low-Density Structures
The completed structures were characterized by opti- cal microscopy and, in some cases, scanning electron microscopy (SEM). SEM images were obtained using a Hitachi model S4700. To obtain high-quality images, the samples were sputter-coated with 25 nm of chromium or gold. The imaging voltage was kept low (<10 kV) to avoid damaging the structures.
III.RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
III.A.Fabrication of Low-Density Targets
III.A.1.2PP Printing of Rectilinear Foam Blocks
The overall dimensions and required density of the target foam rods were specified by NRL. Previously, rod targets were fabricated from cast di-vinyl benzene (DVB) (C10H10) foams. The DVB foams have a nom- inal 1- to 4-μm pore size,15 comparable to  the  2PP foam design presented here. DVB is pure CH whereas IP-Dip also contains about 13.7 at. % O. The level of oxygen in IP-Dip is acceptable for this current target application.
The CAD files for 2PP printing the foam rods with and without a 15-μm top layer are shown in Fig. 1. The total rod length and width are 2000 and 250 μm; the rod height is either 300 or 315 μm, where the latter includes the 15-µm top layer.
The foam section consists of vertical stacks of rectilinear-type beams ~1.0 μm high and  ~0.4  μm  wide (aspect ratio ~2.5). The beam cross section is elliptical due to the ellipsoidal shape of the voxels produced by the spatial distribution of the light inten- sity near focus. The beams are printed in alternating orthogonal directions and offset in x and y (Fig. 1d). The  resulting  structure  has  an  effective  pore  size of
~4 μm with a calculated density of 106 mg/cm3. The calculated density is based on the CAD and assumes the  beams are fully reacted polymer with a  density  of
1.2 g/cm3. In Sec. III.A.2 we compare the computed density with the measured density determined from the rod mass and measured dimensions.
Fabricating large structures, like the NRL targets, requires printing smaller subelements and stitching them together into the full-size part. The need for stitching is due to the limitations in the scanning range of the galvanic mirror  system in the x, y  plane. Specifically,  the scan area in limited to 125 × 125 μm2 and
250 × 250 μm2 when using the 63× and 25× final objectives, respectively.
For the case of the NRL target application, individual subblocks of the log-pile structure were sequentially printed in IP-Dip such that when summed together they produced the full structure. This is shown in the SEM images in Figs. 2 and 3 where the individual blocks and stitching interfaces are clearly visible. These rods were printed in IP-Dip resin using the 63× objective with a maximum subblock size of 125 × 125 um2.
Fig. 1. CAD solid models with dimensions of the rectangular foam rods fabricated by 2PP (a) without and (b) with a 15-µm-thick full-density ablation layer. (c) Magnified view of the ablation top layer and foam section. (d) The foam consists of vertical stacks of rectilinear-type beams 1.0 μm high and ~0.4 μm thick and laterally separated by 6.2 μm. In addition, each layer is laterally offset from the one below by half the lateral spacing (i.e., 3.1 μm). The dashed black squares represent the ends of the repeating cell volume of the structure with dimensions of 6.2 × 6.2 × 4 um3.
Stitching boundaries are areas of inherent weakness simply because the structural units (beams) are not contin- uous across the boundary. Stitching boundaries are located at the ends of the continuous writing range of the system for a given final objective configuration. The boundary weak- ness is particularly evident in the images in Figs. 2c and 2d where structural deformation and plastic yield are evident at the stitching locations.
The foam rods in Figs. 2a through 2d are still attached to the substrate and show the deformation at the foam-to- substrate interface caused by shrinkage during develop- ment. The amount of shrinkage is a function of the foam density and is generally greater in low-density than in high- density regions5 and is evident in the foam region adjacent to the fully dense top layer. Figures 2e and 2f are examples of optical images of the rod obtained in both top and side views, respectively. A slight bowing of the structure, due to the differential shrinkage between the top layer and foam, is evident in the side view in Fig. 2f.
The SEM image in Fig. 3a is a top view of the printed foam structure and clearly shows the 125×125-μm repeating block that is the scanning limit for the galvo mirror system when using the 63× (1.4-NA) objective. Also shown are the stitching interfaces between the blocks. The SEM image in Fig. 3b shows details of the line size and spacing and the general overall structure quality. One word of caution: Some
shrinkage occurs during development, and we cannot ade- quately quantify it from the SEM images. Consequently, we show the line spacing as ~6.2 μm, which is the design spacing. The actual spacing after development is perhaps as much as 10% less based on data presented in Sec. III.A.2 and our other recently published work that deals specifically with shrinkage.12
After the foam structures are released from the substrate, they are weighed (Cann microbalance  model C-31) and also characterized by optical micro- scopy to quantify the final rod dimensions and assess the degree of shrinkage and deformation.
III.A.2.Effects of Development, Drying, and Removal of 2PP Printed Foam Structures
Development, drying, and removal of the targets from the substrate were carried out as described in Sec. II. The risk of overall structure deformation or localized plastic yield is greatest during these process steps due to stresses introduced by shrinkage, handling, capillary drying, and substrate release. Figure 4a shows examples of the dama- ging effects of shrinkage-induced plastic yield that, in the worse cases, can lead to bending and delamination at stitch- ing boundaries and also at the substrate and top-layer inter- faces. The degree of strain induced in the cell structure near Fig. 2. SEM images of two rods fabricated using  IP-Dip resin (a) with and (b) without the 15-μm-thick full-density top layer. (c) and (d)  Magnified views of the end regions within the dashed boxes. Adhesion of the foam to the substrate is evident by the associated deformation at the base of the structure. Similarly, the deformation at the interface between the top cap and foam is caused by variation in shrinkage with density. Also note the inherent weakness at the stitching boundaries as evidenced by the plastic yield of the material at those locations. (e) and (f) Optical micro- graphs in top view and side view, respectively, of the same free-standing target no longer attached to the substrate.
Fig. 3. SEM images of a foam rod printed  in IP-Dip resin (without the cap layer) showing (a) the stitching interface between the repeating 125 × 125-μm subblocks and (b) details of the cell structure.
the stitching boundaries for these same structures is shown in the corresponding magnified SEM images in Fig. 4b.
Problems with shrinkage are largely a function of the resin type and are particularly problematic for acrylic resins such as IP-Dip used here. The measured shrinkage in the length, width, and height for the 12 targets prepared in this work vary from ~5%  to  16%  as summarized in  Table  III. In general, the shrinkage  is consistent in a given direction as indicated by the narrow standard deviation (Table III). In all cases, shrinkage was greatest in the vertical direction. The full-density cap layer tends to restrain shrinkage  in both the longitudinal and the lateral directions, parti- cularly in the region bordering the cap as shown  in Figs. 2a and 2d. This may also explain why vertical shrinkage is the greatest.
Fig. 4. SEM images of foam structure  written  in  IP-Dip and developed in PGMEA, rinsed in IPA, and  air dried as described in the text: (a) at low magnifica- tion and (b) at high magnification, respectively,  and with the foam still attached to the substrate. Both localized and long-range plastic yields are apparent, particularly at stitching boundaries.
Additional damage/deformation can occur during removal of the target from the substrate. IP-Dip has significant adhesion to the silicate glass substrates and generally does not naturally release during development and drying. In particular, manually removing the foam rods from the substrate usually results in some damage, and in some cases the structure is unusable.
Interfacial capillary forces that occur during air drying can also contribute to bending of 2PP printed lines and overall cell deformation for large unsupported beam spacing.5,12 Consequently, supercritical drying was intro- duced as a means to remove the IPA solvent and eliminate capillary force effects.5,16 Supercritical drying has an added benefit when using IP-Dip in that the parts often release from the substrate during the supercritical process making them easier to retrieve and handle without damage.
During conventional solvent removal by air drying, the capillary pressure P within the foam structure with an effective pore diameter (or interbeam distance) L can be estimated using the Young-Laplace equation:
@1
where γ is the solvent surface tension and θ is the wetting angle. We assume the capillary pressure exerted on the beams of the 2PP structure follow this dependence during air drying. Applying Eq. (1) to the simulated foam structure in Fig. 1d and assuming an IPA surface tension of 21.7 mN/m (Ref. 17) and the worst case of a fully wetted structure (θ = 0 deg) gives an estimated maximum capillary pressure of ~15 kPa. The predicted capillary pressure is rather low and at first glance would not be expected to cause significant deformation. In fact, this partially explains the integrity in the core cell structure after air drying as shown in Fig. 3.
The risk of cell deformation and collapse becomes greater as the pore size increases rather than decreases. This seems counterintuitive because the capillary forces decrease as 1/L [Eq. (1)]. The reason for this behavior is that the strength of the structure decreases at a much greater rate with pore size than does the capillary pres- sure. Specifically, the ratio of the yield strength σy,foam for a 2PP-type open-foam structure to that of material alone σy,m is given by Ashby18 as
@2
where t is the beam thickness and L is the distance between adjacent beams. Note that  L  is  equivalent  to the pore size. For reference, the yield strength  σy,m  of the fully polymerized IP-Dip resin  is  reported  to  be 67.2 ± 4.7 MPa (Ref. 19).
There are other factors that contribute to the low strength of the 2PP foam structures. First is the incom- plete photopolymerization of the acrylic-based resins as investigated in earlier work by Jiang et al.,9,20 who show that 2PP-driven conversion (polymerization) of commer- cial IP acrylic resin is below 50%. This low degree of polymerization would dramatically reduce the mechanical strength and could explain the structure deformations reported here.
TABLE III
Key Properties and Associated Statistics of 2PP Foam Rods Fabricated Using IP-Dip Resin and Assembled into HED Targets*
A second factor is the degree of polymerization through the beam thickness. It is probable that the con- version is nonuniform due to the variation in laser inten- sity at focus. In other words, the center of the beam is likely to be more polymerized than the outer edge. This would result in the beam having a smaller effective thickness than one with equal resin conversion through- out. Consequently, the foam yield strength would be dramatically reduced by small changes in the effective beam thickness given the cubic dependence of strength on thickness given by Eq. (2).
Recent elastic modulus measurements by Lemma et al.14 on 2PP fabricated structures show a strong dependence with laser power. In particular, the elastic modulus for IP-Dip was determined to vary linearly from 0.75 to 3.5 GPa for Nanoscribe system average laser powers  between  ~5  and 13 mW at a writing speed of 100 μm/s. This is in agreement with the expected incomplete resin conversion at lower powers.20
It is likely that a combination of the above two effects, i.e., low resin conversion and a smaller effective beam width, contributes to a significantly weakened structure that is easily deformed during  development  and air drying as well as during removal and handling.
In summary, deformation control of 2PP foam struc- tures remains a challenge. In particular, structures with low densities and large dimensions fabricated from com- mercial acrylate resins are prone to significant shrinkage and deformation including failure due to bending, buck- ling and/or shearing as well as damage during removal from the substrate and handling. Methods to control deformation by using custom resin formulations with greater mechanical strength coupled with finite element analysis to improve the overall structure design and reduce the impact of postprocessing methods (developing and drying) continue to be studied in our laboratories.20
III.A.3.Foam Target Assembly, Characterization, and Initial Shot Results
A series of twelve 2PP foam targets was supplied to NRL as summarized in Table III. The foam densities were calculated from the measured mass of the target and mea- sured target dimensions. The densities varied from 59 to 144 mg/cm3 with an average value of 88 mg/cm3 and standard deviation of ±28 mg/cm3. The range in densities is likely due to the accuracy and precision of the weighing process. The weighing accuracy for the balance is ±2.8 μg and for these small mass targets represents a possible average error of ±16%. Another possible contribution is variation in the Nanoscribe system 2PP printing
reproducibility as recently reported by Guney and Fedder.21 Their data show a standard deviation in dimen- sional repeatability of approximately ±20% for 2PP line structures printed in IP-Dip using conditions similar to those reported here. However, it is likely that line-to-line variations average out over the full printed structure. Consequently, weighing is the most likely source of error in determining the foam densities reported in Table III.
Each foam target was assembled on a NIKE laser target holder as illustrated in Fig. 5. The finished targets were packaged into custom-fabricated shipping containers designed to prevent handling damage.22 Upon receipt at NRL, the targets were inspected and stored until required for experiments.
All of the targets in Table III were shot  on  the NRL NIKE laser in March 2017, and Fig. 6  provides an example of the type of experimental data  gener- ated. Specifically, the results in Fig. 6c show the location in time of the ablation and shock fronts in a 2PP printed foam target as viewed normal to the incident laser (i.e., in the side view of the target). Dashed lines were added in Figs. 6b and 6c to indi-  cate the locations of the slight density variation due to the 2PP stitching boundaries. These density variations are visible in the diagnostic images in Fig. 6c. Simulations are needed to further quantify stitching boundary line effects, if any, on the shock-propagation results. Such variations may offer an advantage, par- ticularly in terms of opportunities to add custom, nanoscale diagnostic markers at given locations within the foam or target structure. Further details of the shot results using the 2PP fabricated foam targets have recently been reported by Aglitskiy et al.23
III.B.Ongoing Process Improvements
Efforts to improve the 2PP foam fabrication process are ongoing with a focus on improvements in dimen- sional stability, accuracy, and precision. Different resins and processing conditions are being used with special attention paid to resin conversion chemistry  using  in situ micro-Raman spectroscopy techniques.
Recent experiments using Nanoscribe resin IP-S show particular promise for improved structures. In con- trast to IP-Dip, IP-S has lower shrinkage and greater mechanical stability. Also, IP-S is designed for mesoscale printing using a 25× objective that increases the subblock size from 125 × 125 μm2 to 250 × 250 μm2 thus reducing the number of intrinsically weak stitching boundaries by 4×. An example of the improvement achieved using IP-S
Fig. 5. (a) CAD drawing of NIKE laser target holder with foam rod installed on mounting platforms and held in place with retaining caps. (b) Side view and (c) top view of an actual 2PP foam target mounted in the target holder. The 2-mm-long foam spans the 1.4-mm gap between the two mounting platforms.
to print the NRL-style foam rod is shown in Fig. 7. The part shown here was air dried, further demonstrating improved strength and structural stability.
Recent work reported by Oakdale et al.24 suggests possible alternative writing methods for mitigating and strengthening stitching boundaries that may offer further improvements in overall structural stability.
IV.CONCLUSIONS
We have demonstrated the design and 2PP fabrica- tion of foam rod targets for HED physics experiments. Twelve foam rod targets were fabricated, characterized, assembled, and delivered to NRL on NIKE-specified target holders. Those targets have been shot, and an example of the type of experimental data achieved is provided.
The major challenge in printing long foam rod structures is dealing with the inherent shrinkage and low strength of the resulting IP-Dip polymer particu- larly during developing and air drying. Supercritical drying reduces the amount of plastic deformation but does not eliminate it for structures printed  using IP-Dip. We suggest this is because of the low resin- to-polymer conversion (<50%) in these acrylic-based resins thus leading to greater shrinkage and lower than expected strength for the  printed  part.  In  addition,  the process of removing the 2PP structure from the substrate can be problematic because of the  adhesion  of polymerized IP-Dip to the glass substrate. Use of a lift-off release layer eliminates this problem.
Stitching defects at the boundaries of the struc- tural subblocks create subtle density variations across   a narrow region at the printed boundary that are Fig. 6. (a) Schematic representation of the experimental setup showing the 2PP target and incident laser beam (not to scale).
(b) Static diagnostic radiograph of the foam target. Arrow indicates the solid, full-density ablation layer that appears as a dark line. (c) Ablation and shock front propagation through a 100 mg/cm3 foam rod target when irradiated at a power of 10 TW/cm2 and viewed normal to the incident laser (i.e., in side view of the target). Dashed lines were added to indicate the locations of the stitching boundaries.
Fig. 7. SEM images of NRL-type foam rod printed in IP-S photoresin. (a) Oblique view of the 2 × 0.25 × 0.3 mm3 foam rod and magnified views of (b) the top ablation layer and foam microstructures and (c) the stitching interface. The x, y, z cell dimensions are 5 × 5 × 3 µm3, and the 2PP printing speed (scan rate) was 10 mm/s at an average laser power of 17 mW. The superior mechanical properties of IP-S over IP-Dip are evident by comparison of the quality of this part with the ones shown in Figs. 2 and 4.
visible by the diagnostics during the NIKE experi- ments. Such variations can be problematic but  may  also offer an advantage in terms of  opportunities  to add custom nanoscale diagnostic markers at given locations within the foam (or other) target structure.
Significant reduction in shrinkage and improve- ments in the structure strength and rigidity are achieved by using IP-S resin. Initial tests show great improve- ments in the printed rod dimensional stability and with  up to 4× fewer stitching boundaries. Polymerized IP-S also has much lower adhesion to standard ITO-coated silicate glass substrates; this aids removal of the part at the end of development and drying with little if any damage.
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the U.S. Department of Energy under contract DE-NA0001385. The assistance of R. Cahayag and A. Pastrnak of Schafer Corporation on various processing, handling, and assembly issues in final target preparations is greatly appreciated. We greatly appreciate certain SEM images prepared by L. Jiang of University of Nebraska-Lincoln.
