<title>Study of the optical properties and the carbonaceous clusters in DAM-ADC	 solid state nuclear track detectors</title>
<Affiliation>a.Physics  Department,  Faculty  of  Science,  Menouﬁa  University,  Shebin  El-Koom,  Egypt
b.Physics  Department,  Faculty  of  Sciences  and  Arts,  Najran  University,  P.O.Box.  11001,  Najran,  Saudi  Arabia
c.Promising  Centre  for  Sensors  and  Electronic  Devices,  Faculty  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  Najran  University,  Saudi  Arabia</Affiliation>
<author>Y.S. Rammah, A.M. Abdalla</author>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier Ltd</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radphyschem.2017.06.016</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2017.06.016</URL>
ABSTRACT
The optical properties of DAM-ADC solid state nuclear track detectors (SSNTDs) were investigated. Samples of DAM-ADC detector were irradiated at room temperature with gamma doses in the range of 100–500 kGy using
1.25 MeV 60Co source of dose rate 4 kGy/h. The optical characterization of these detectors have been studied through the measurements of UV–visible absorption spectra of blank and γ- irradiated samples. The optical energy band gaps, Eg for the detectors were obtained from the direct and the indirect allowed transitions in K- space using two methods (Tauc's model and absorption spectrum ﬁtting (ASF) method). The absorbance of DAM- ADC detector was found to increase with increasing of the gamma absorbed dose. The width of the tail of localized states in the band gap, Eu was evaluated with the Urbach's method. The number of carbon atoms per conjugated length (N), the number of carbon atoms per cluster (M), and refractive index (n) for the present samples were determined. Both of the direct and the indirect band gaps of DAM-ADC detector decrease with increasing of the gamma absorbed dose. Urbach's energy decreased signiﬁcantly for the detector. An increase in N, M, and n with increasing of the gamma absorbed dose was noticed. Results shed light on the eﬀect of gamma irradiations of DAM-ADC SSNTDs to suitable industrial applications and to modify the optical properties through gamma-induced modiﬁcations of the polymer structure.
Keywords:
DAM-ADC
Gamma-radiation UV–visible spectra ASF
Optical energy band gaps Urbach energy
Carbon clusters
1.Introduction
Solid-state nuclear track detectors (SSNTDs) are extensively used for the detection of several types of radiation and they are being widely used in many applications. The importance of polymers has increased very rapidly during the last few decades because of their low cost, easy processability, insulating properties, low weight, high quality surfaces and easy fabrication of thick and thin samples, etc. (Fink and Hnatowicz, 2007; Nikezic and Yu, 2004).
Polymer based solid-state nuclear track detectors SSNTDs have many advantages, since they have attractive characteristics compared to other detectors. They are used in diﬀerent applications. These ap- plications include up-to-date studies in nuclear and ﬁssion physics; X- ray reﬂectivity, alpha particle autoradiography, neutron, and charged- particle radiography; cosmic ray studies and astrophysics; porosity, sensors and production of micro and submicron ﬁlters; alpha- and neutron-dosimetry; uranium prospection and radon-emanation mea- surements; radiological protection and monitoring; radiobiology and nuclear medicine measurements made on meteorites, lunar samples, in stratospheric balloons and from space vehicles, as well as search for
super heavy elements, and low linear energy transfer radiation dosi- metry (Durrani and Bull, 1978; Fleischer et al., 1975; Seguin  et  al., 2003; El Ghazaly, 2011a, 2011b; Pugliesi and Pereira, 2002; Amemiya  et al., 2002; Lee et al., 2007; Pugliesi et al., 2004).
Diallyl maleate (DAM), allyl diglycol carbonate (ADC), and mixtures of them (DAM–ADC) (15–85%) were cast in to polymer plates under three kinds of polymerizing conditions. The copolymer plates of DAM and ADC showed inter- mediate characteristics. These characteristics are suitable for control of the sensitivity as the nuclear track detector (Tsuruta et al., 2011; Ashry et al., 2012; El-Samman et al., 2014; Rammah et al., 2015).
DAM-ADC is transparent material which has high compact strength. This leads it an advantageous material for several applications such as microelectronics and biosensor production technologies.
When a polymeric nuclear track detectors is exposed to high in- tensity gamma radiations, induces modiﬁcations in their structural, physical and chemical properties (Darraud et al., 1997). The changes in these properties after exposure to high energy radiation have been evaluated by many techniques. The eﬀect of gamma radiation on the physical and chemical properties of polymers has been reported
(Charlesby, 1960; Chapiro, 1962). Moreover, the gamma ray interac- tion with polymers leads to complex phenomena such as chain scission, chain aggregation, radical composition, bond breaking, creation of unsaturated bonds, intermolecular cross-linking, free radicals forma- tion, hydrogen release and some oxidation reactions. As a consequence of this, the physico-chemical properties like optical, electrical, me- chanical, chemical, and track properties of the polymer are modiﬁed (Sinha et al., 1997; Sinha and Dwivedi, 1998; Phukan et al., 1999; Mishra et al., 2000, 2001).
The eﬀectiveness of these changes produced depends upon the structure of the polymer and the experimental conditions of irradiation like energy and ﬂuence. The study of these changes may enhance their applications in diﬀerent ﬁelds, e.g. for the evolution of high radiation doses (Singh and Prasher, 2004; El-Badry et al., 2007). A long latent tracks of energetic ions in polymers, carbonaceous clusters of small nano-size particles containing fewer than 104 atoms or molecules were formed. Overlapping tracks formed by irradiation with low-energy light particles are known to produce giant clusters with sizes exceeding   100 nm. These clusters are supposed to be carriers of electrical con- ductivity in ion irradiated polymers and inﬂuence the optical properties of such materials (Fink et al., 1988). Several experimental approaches used to study these clusters. Among these are: transmission electron microscopy (TEM), scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), magnetic force microscopy (MFM), atomic force microscopy (AFM) and UV–vi- sible spectrometry. UV–visible spectroscopy is sensitive to the optically active cluster region i.e., visible cluster size. The formation of these carbonaceous clusters can be studied from the absorption edge of ul- traviolet visible (UV–VIS) spectra of irradiated polymers. UV–VIS spectroscopy gives an idea about the value of optical band gap (Eg) and the type of transition.
In this work, we focus on the eﬀect of gamma radiations on the UV–VIS spectra of DAM-ADC nuclear track detector as the spectroscopic studies. The behaviors of band gap and Urbach energy with increasing gamma dose were investigated using Tauc's model and absorption spectrum ﬁtting (ASF) method. The simultaneous existence of indirect and direct band gap in DAM-ADC polymer, number of carbon atoms per conjugated length (N), and number of carbon atoms per cluster (M) are also determined.
2.Material and irradiation methods
The co-polymer of DAM–ADC detector used in the present study manufactured by Yamamoto Kogaku Co., Ltd., Japan, and its chemical composition is C22H30O11 with thickness is 1 mm and density is 1.2 g/ cm3. The main constituents of the detector plate are 15: 85% from DAM and ADC, a small amount of di-isopropyl peroxy dicarbonate (IPP) was used as a polymerizing initiator. Samples of DAM-ADC detector with an area of 1.0 × 1.0 cm2 were carefully cut with laser beam. Fig. 1 depicts the chemical structure of DAM and ADC polymers (Abdalla et al., 2016). Samples were irradiated at room temperature with 1.25 MeV 60Co gamma source of dose rate 4 kGy/h in air, which is available in Egyptian Atomic Energy Authority (EAEA,), Cairo, Egypt. The samples were irradiated for various times in order to obtain gamma doses up to 500 kGy. The absorbed dose in samples was calculated from air Kerma by the mean of relative mass stopping power of the studied samples to
Fig. 1. The chemical structure of ADC and DAM (adapted from Abdalla et al., 2016).
Fig. 2. UV–visible spectra of the pristine and gamma-irradiated DAM-ADC at diﬀerent doses.
that of air from the following relation:
@
where (μ/ρ)sample and (μ/ρ)air are the mass stopping power for samples and air, respectively. The mass stropping power of samples and air were calculated from WinXCom software, where values of 6.02 × 10−2 and
5.69 × 10−2 cm2/gm, respectively were extracted. Then  the ratio
(μ / ρ)sample   is found to be 1.06, and the absorbed gamma dose in the
(μ / ρ)air
samples was calculated by (irradiated gamma dose × 1.06). UV–vis
measurements of pristine and irradiated DAM-ADC samples were per- formed with Jasco V-576 (Japan) model double-beam spectro- photometer where its wavelength range is from 190 to 1000 nm, keeping air as a reference.
3.Results and discussion
3.1.UV–vis spectroscopy
The nature changes in the UV–vis absorption spectra of unirradiated and gamma irradiated DAM-ADC samples are shown in Fig. 2. A re- markable increase can be observed in the optical absorption for irra- diated samples compared with unirradiated one. These increases may be due to the formation of some electronic levels inside the forbidden gap after irradiation with gamma rays (Grodzinski, 1999; Abdul-Kader, 2013). It is clear that a shift of absorption edge towards longer wave- length with increasing of gamma irradiated dose can be readily ob- served. This shift may be attributed to irradiation-induced defects in the polymeric materials (Singh and Prasher, 2005; Zaki, 2008). Irradiation of DAM-ADC with diﬀerent gamma doses induces cleavage of C-C bond and dehydrogenation of the polymer chains and this in turn produce conjugated C=C bonds. The increase in the numbers of conjugated C=C with the increase of gamma irradiated dose shifted the absorption band towards higher wavelength (Moura et al., 2004; Abdelfattah et al., 2002). This shift is related also to the structure of the energy band gap of the polymer blend (Abdelfattah et al., 2002). This change which indicates a lowering in energy band gap leads to an increase in the electrical conductivity of the bombarded polymer sample due to for- mation of extended system of conjugate double bonds C=C and the formation of a hydroxyl and carbonyl clusters resulted from the energy transferred from the gamma rays to the DAM-ADC detector. The ab-
sorption bands in the investigated range of wavelength are associated to the  π-π*   electronic  transitions.  This  type  of  transitions  occurs  in  the unsaturated centers of the molecules i.e. in compounds containing double or triple bonds and also in aromatics. The excitation of π elec- tron requires smaller energy and hence, transition of this type occurs at longer wavelengths. Results in Fig. 2 show that the absorbance for the Fig. 3. Variation of absorbance as a function of irradiated gamma dose at wavelengths 326, 332, and 338 nm.
gamma irradiated samples with respect to pristine (unirradiated) sample is maximum at irradiated gamma dose 500 kGy for wavelengths 326, 332, and 338 nm. Then we have chosen these wavelengths as the characteristics wavelengths. Fig. 3 depicts the variation of absorbance of irradiated samples as a function of irradiated γ- doses (Absorbed γ- dose × 1/1.06) at characteristic wavelengths of 326, 332, and 338 nm.  It is clear that absorbance increases with increasing of irradiated γ- dose indicating that the DAM-ADC detector has more response to optical change by γ- irradiation. The induced changes in the absorbance due to
γ-rays irradiation of DAM-ADC detector provide a better method for γ-
dose measurements. This behavior was previously proved in a newly developed nuclear track detector called (PNADAC) homo-polymer (Rizk et al., 2009).
3.2.Optical energy band gaps determination
3.2.1.Tauc's method (Tauc, 1974)
The optical absorption coeﬃcient (α) was calculated from the ab- sorbance, (A) using the following equation (Fox, 2001):
@1
where A(hν) is the absorbance, it is given by A = log(Io/I), where Io and I are the intensity of incident and transmitted beams, respectively. l is the thickness of the sample measured in cm. The absorption coeﬃcient of non-crystalline materials is expressed as a function of optical energy gap between the valance and the conduction bands Eg and the photons energy hν by Tauc's (Tauc, 1974) and modiﬁed by Davis and Mott as the following relation (Mott and Davies, 1979):
@2
where hv is the energy of the incident photons and Eg is the value of the optical energy gap between the valence band and the conduction band. n is the power, which characterizes the electronic transition, whether it is direct or indirect during the absorption process in the K-space. Spe- cially, n is 0.5, 1.5, 2 and 3 for direct allowed, direct forbidden, indirect allowed and indirect forbidden transitions, respectively (Singh and Prasher, 2004). The factor B is constant depends on the transition probability and can be assumed to be constant within the optical fre- quency range. The usual method for the determination of the value of Eg involves plotting (αhv)1/n against (hv). The best ﬁt of indirect transi- tions is obtained for n = 2, meanwhile for a direct transition the best ﬁt is obtained for n = 1/2. The indirect and direct band gaps are de- termined by plotting (αhν)1/2 and (αhν)2 as a function of the photon energy (hν), respectively. The extrapolation of the straight parts of the curves to the energy axis (hν) yields the indirect and direct band gaps for pristine and irradiated DAM-ADC samples. Figs. 4 and 5 illustrate the variation of (αhν)1/2 and (αhν)2 as a function of the photon energy (hν),   respectively.   From   extrapolating   the   straight   parts of  these
Fig. 4. Variation of (αhν)0.5 with (hν) for pristine and DAM-ADC samples irradiated with diﬀerent doses of gamma rays.
Fig. 5. Variation of (αhν)2 with (hν) for pristine and DAM-ADC samples irradiated with
relations to the hv axis, indirect and direct band gaps have been de- termined for pristine and irradiated DAM-ADC polymer with diﬀerent γ- doses. The values of diﬀerent transition energies are summarized Table 1. The values of energy gaps indicate the simultaneous existence of indirect and direct band gap in DAM-ADC polymer detector with decreasing tendency at higher γ- dose. Furthermore, the values of direct band gap have been found to be higher than the corresponding values for the indirect band gap. The values of both indirect and direct band gap are decreased with increase in the exposure dose. The decrease in the optical energy values is due to formation of carbon enriched clusters due to partial evolution of hydrogen molecules (Rizk et al., 2009). In other word, these decreases may be attributed to irradiation induced defects and/or increase the number of conjugated bonds (–C=C–). This means that the conductivity of the bombarded polymer surface with gamma radiation is greater than that of the bulk. This conﬁrms that the ion beam technique can be used in fabricating electronic devices. In addition, such a decrease in Eg may be attributed to the formation of new photochemicals, which form the trap levels between the HOMO and LUMO energy states, making the lower energy transitions feasible and results in the reduction of the optical band gap.
The values of localized states energy give more details about the optical behavior of the pristine and various irradiated DAM-ADC de- tector. The Urbach's energy (Eu) corresponds to the width of the loca- lized-states tail within an optical band gap. The Urbach's energy is correlated to the optical absorption coeﬃcient, α in the lower energy region of the fundamental edge and can be described by Urbach's
Table1
Optical band gap, Eg, Urbach energy, Eu, number of carbon atom per conjugated length (N), number of carbon atom per clusters (M), and refractive index (n) for pristine and γ-irradiated DAM-ADC samples obtained from Tauc's method.
with diﬀerent doses of gamma rays.
formula (Urbach, 1953):
@3
where αo is a constant, E = hν is the photon energy and Eu is Urbach's energy, which represents the inverse logarithmic slope of the absorp- tion coeﬃcient. Variation in the logarithm of the absorption coeﬃcient as a function of the photon energy for all unirradiated and γ- irradiated samples was studied and Urbach energies are normally calculated using the slope of the linear portion of the curves of pristine and gamma ir- radiated samples (curves not shown here). The values of Urbach en- ergies are listed in Table 1. One can notice that the Eu decreases with increasing of the irradiated gamma doses which may be attributed to the improvement of disorderness in the DAM-ADC polymer (Zaki, 2008).
3.2.2.Absorption spectrum ﬁtting (ASF) method
It has been found experimentally that the absorption coeﬃcients of amorphous semiconductors obey an equation similar to Eq. (2) (Tauc and Menth, 1972). Absorption spectrum ﬁtting (ASF) is a method in which the band gap can be calculated avoiding the ﬁlm thickness measurement which commonly could not be measured precisely (Alarcon et al., 2007; Souri, 2011; Souri and Tahan, 2015). In this procedure, band gap can be determined when only measurement of the material absorbance is available. In this method, one can start with Eq.
(2) and rewrite it as a function of the wavelength (λ) (Alarcon et al., 2007; Souri, 2011; Souri and Tahan, 2015):
@4
where α(λ) is the absorption coeﬃcient which can deﬁned by the Beer–Lambert's law as: α(λ) = (2.303/l)A, considering l and A as ﬁlm thickness and the ﬁlm absorbance, respectively. n is the index which can takes values 0.5, 1.5, 2 and 3 for direct allowed, direct forbidden,
indirect allowed and indirect forbidden transitions, respectively (Souri, 2011; Souri and Tahan, 2015). λg, h and c are the wavelength corre- sponding to the optical gap, Planck's constant and the velocity of the light, correspondingly. Using the Beer–Lambert's law, Eq. (4) can be rewrite as:
@5
where  D  =  [B(hc)n−1  l/2.303].  Using  Eq.  (5),  one  can  calculate  the optical band gap by an absorbance spectrum ﬁtting method without any need to the ﬁlm thickness. Thus the value of band gap, in eV, can be calculated from the parameter λg using,
@6
In other word, the value of λg can be calculated by extrapolating the linear region of (A/λ)1/n against to (1/λ) curve at (A/λ)1/n = 0. Using the optical absorption spectra of pristine and gamma irradiated DAM- ADC detector samples (shown in Fig. 2), the variation of (A/λ)0.5 and (A/λ)2 vs. (1/λ) were plotted as shown in Figs. 6 and 7, respectively.
The values of E ASF  are summarized in Table 2. The result of ASF  band gap for the present samples are in good agreement with the previously
reported optical gap by Tauc's model (see Table 1). One can notice that the values of energy gaps of indirect and direct band gap in DAM-ADC polymer detector decreasing with increasing of the irradiated gamma dose. Furthermore, the values of indirect band gap have been found to be lower than the corresponding values for the direct band gap as
Fig. 7. Variation of (A/λ) with (λ for pristine and DAM-ADC samples irradiated with diﬀerent doses of gamma rays.
Table 2
Optical band gap, Eg, number of carbon atom per conjugated length (N), number of carbon atom per clusters (M), and refractive index (n) for pristine and γ-irradiated DAM-ADC samples obtained from ASF method.
Fig. 8. The dependence of the optical energy gap Eg on irradiated gamma dose for pristine and DAM-ADC samples irradiated with diﬀerent gamma doses.shown in Fig. 8.
3.2.3.Carbonaceous cluster determination
The optical gap band Eg is correlated with the type, number, and structural arrangement of the carbon bonds per molecule (Nikezic and Yu, 2004). In a polymer characterized by a linear chain structure such as DAM-ADC polymer, the shift in the absorption edges towards the visible from the ultraviolet could be attributed to an increase in the conjugation length. For a linear structure the number of carbon atoms per conjugation length, N, is given by (Nikezic and Yu, 2004):
@7
where 2β gives the band structure energy of a pair of adjacent π sites. The  value  of  β is  taken  to  be  −2.9 eV  as  it  is  associated  with  π–π* optical transitions in –C=C– structure. Eq. (7) can be applied to the DAM-ADC detector to calculate the number of carbon atoms per con-
jugate length N in direct and indirect transition using energy gap values which obtained in both Tauc's and ASF methods.
For the DAM-ADC detector, which is an aromatic polymer, a slight shift in the absorption edge from the ultraviolet to the visible is prob- ably attributed to a condensation of the aromatic rings into a compact carbonaceous cluster. Thus, carbonaceous cluster is one of the im- portant parameters that enhances the optical properties of the poly- meric material. This is due to that the carbonaceous clusters are rich with charge carrier, which enhances the surface conductivity of the polymers. The number of carbon atoms per cluster, M, is given by (Nikezic and Yu, 2004):
@8
The values for carbon atoms cluster M in pristine and γ- irradiated DAM-ADC samples were calculated using Eq. (8). The values of N and M are listed in Tables 1 and 2. It is clear that the number of carbon atoms per conjugate length, N and the number of carbon atoms per cluster, M for the indirect band gap higher than that for the direct energy band gap, and their values increase with increasing of the irradiated γ- dose. This increasing is attributed to cleavages of C–H bonds during the ir- radiation and, as a consequence, to the release of hydrogen.
3.2.4.  Refractive  index  determination
The refractive index, n of the present DAM-ADC samples can be calculated using the obtained values of the energy gaps for direct and indirect transition in both Tauc's and ASF methods by the following equation (Dimitrov and Sakka, 1996):
@9
The values of refractive index, n for the pristine and gamma irra- diated samples are summarized in Tables 1 and 2. The refractive index of the present samples for the indirect band gap more than that for the direct energy band gap, and its value increases with increasing of gamma dose. This result leads to open the door to usage γ-irradiated DAM-ADC detectors in optoelectronic devices, since the wave propa- gation is strongly inﬂuenced by the distribution of the refractive index.
4.Conclusion
UV–visible spectra of pristine and γ-irradiated DAM-ADC polymer detector studied in the present work. UV–vis reveals a shift toward the lower photon energy (longer wavelength) with increasing of gamma irradiated dose. The optical energy gaps were calculated by Tauc's and the absorption spectrum ﬁtting (ASF) methods. Both the direct and the indirect band gaps of DAM-ADC detector are correlated with γ-dose, decreasing with increasing of irradiation dose. This implies that the gamma irradiated DAM-ADC detector leads to the appearance of the energy states that are induced upon irradiation and that depend on the irradiation dose. The results of the values of the direct and indirect band gap (Eg) show a decrease with increasing of gamma irradiated doses as estimated from the linear part of optical spectra. Meanwhile the number of carbon atoms per conjugated length (N) and number of carbon atom per clusters (M) raise when gamma irradiated dose in- crease. However, the Urbach's energy is signiﬁcantly reduced, which may be attributed to the disorderness of DAM-ADC detector samples after gamma irradiation. The refractive index of the present samples corresponding to the indirect band gap appears more than that for the direct energy band gap, and its value increases with increasing of gamma irradiated dose. In conclusion, the induced modiﬁcations in the optical properties of the DAM-ADC detector are correlated with the γ-irradiation  dose  and  it  is  recommended  that  more  studies  on  the
modiﬁcations  of  γ-irradiated  DAM-ADC  detector  of  diﬀerent doses
should be carried out using FTIR and Raman spectroscopy, which will lead to a better understanding of the modiﬁcations mechanism.
Acknowledgements
The author wish to express their appreciation to Prof. Dr. A. Hussein, Prof. of Radiation Physics, Faculty of Science, Menouﬁa University, Egypt and Prof. A.R. El-Sersy, Prof. of Radiation Dosimetry, National Institute for Standards (NIS), Egypt for their fruitful help, valuable comments, and their helping to achievement this work.
