<title>Practice and prospect of advanced fuel management and fuel technology application in PWR in China</title>
<author>Min Xiao, Hong Zhang, Cang Ma, Chengfei Bai, Zhou Zhou, Lei Wang and Xiaojun Xiao</author>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Affiliation>China Nuclear Power Technology Research Institute (CNPRI), China General Nuclear Power Corporation (CGN), Jiang Su Building, Yitian Road, Futian District, Shenzhen, 518028, China</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2015.1029557</DOI>
<URL> http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2015.1029557</URL>
Since Daya Bay nuclear power plant implemented 18-month refueling strategy in 2001, China has com- pleted a series of innovative fuel management and fuel technology projects, including the Ling Ao Ad- vanced Fuel Management (AFM) project (high-burnup quarter core refueling) and the Ningde 18-month refueling project with gadolinium-bearing fuel in initial core. First, this paper gives brief introduction to China’s advanced fuel management and fuel technology experience. Second, it introduces practices of the advanced fuel management in China in detail, which mainly focuses on the implementation and progress of the Ningde 18-month refueling project with gadolinium-bearing fuel in initial core. Finally, the paper introduces the practices of advanced fuel technology in China and gives the outlook of the future advanced fuel management and fuel technology in this field.
Keywords: advanced fuel management; fuel technology; Ningde nuclear power plant; initial core gadolinium- bearing fuel; 18-month refueling
1.Introduction
Daya Bay Nuclear Power Plant (NPP) is China’s first 1000 MWe large-scale commercial NPP, initially using traditional 12-month refueling mode. After Daya Bay, China has built NPPs, such as Ling Ao, Hongyanhe, Ningde, Yangjiang, Taishan, Qinshan II, etc. Currently, NPPs in operation in China have reached 22 units, and 26 units are under construction. By 2020, total amount of power generation by the NPPs in operation will reach 58 GWe, and the construction units will reach 30 GWe. As the core and fuel are critical components of nu- clear reactors, their technology characteristics are an im-
portant mark of reactor advanced level.
20 years ago, Daya Bay NPP used the traditional an- nual refueling mode with the 12-feet AFA2GTM assem- bly without mid-span-mixing-grid as a starting point (MSMG, a small and a flat grid between two normal grids to enhance thermal mixing, it is one of the design feature in AFA3GTM fuel assembly which is used later on in 18-month project).
Since Daya Bay NPP put into power operation in 1994, fuel management and fuel technology have been improved continuously, with the goals to obtain high
burnup, high capacity factor and higher economy. The methods of the improvement include high-performance fuel cladding, advanced fuel assembly design, advanced core design and fuel management, etc. Daya Bay NPP successfully implemented 18-month fuel management strategy using AFA3GTM fuel assembly with MSMG and gadolinium burnable neutron absorber  from  cy- cle 9 in 2001. After that, Ling Ao NPP successful im- plemented high-burnup Advanced Fuel Management (AFM) project in 2007. The latest innovative and most challenging project was the Ningde 18-month refuel- ing project with gadolinium-bearing fuel in initial core, which was successfully implemented in 2013.
The purpose of this paper is to introduce and sum- marize the practice, development and application of ad- vanced fuel technology and fuel management in the cur- rent 1000 MWe pressurized water reactor (PWR) fleet
(CPR1000 + , ACPR1000) in China.
2.Advanced fuel management practices in China [1]
China advanced fuel management practices have gone through step-by-step development process from
Figure 1. Historical development and near-term plan of nu- clear fuel management in China. The red, blue and white boxes refer to unit names, reactor core and fuel design features, and fuel types, respectively.
beginner to advanced level [2–7], which lasted nearly 20 years and involved a number of commercial NPPs include Daya Bay, Ling Ao, Hongyanhe, Ningde, Yangjiang, Fangchenggang, Taishan, Qinshan II, Tian- wan, etc., seen from Figure 1.
2.1.Daya Bay 18-month refueling project [1]
Daya Bay 18-month refueling was China’s first 18- month refueling project, using AFA3GTM fuel assem- blies with MSMG and M5TM cladding for the first time in China. Fuel assembly manufacturing in China was achieved at the beginning of this century. The core de- sign adopted gadolinium-bearing fuel (integrated fuel pellet contains dispersed gadolinium) [1,2] and 235U en- richment of 4.45% for the first time with the cycle length of 460–510 equivalent full power days (EFPD) plus stretch-out operation. The average fuel burnup was 43– 45 GWd/tU, and plant capacity factor was above 90%. Daya Bay 18-month refueling was successfully imple- mented from the ninth cycle in 2001.
2.2.Ling Ao high-burnup quarter core refueling project [1,2]
Ling Ao high-burnup quarter core refueling project (i.e., AFM projects, 1/4 fuel assemblies in the core were replaced in each refueling outage instead of original 1/3) began planning from 2000 before commercial opera- tion. The project fully utilized the successful experience from the Daya Bay 18-month refueling project. Before AFM project implementation, the original AFA2GTM fuel assemblies were replaced by AFA3GTM ones from the second cycle, and the fuel enrichment was increased from 3.2% to 3.7% from the third cycle, which paved the way for the further implementation of AFM project. Af- ter several years’ analyses and licensing application, the AFM project implementation started from the sixth cy- cle with high-burnup quarter core refueling mode. AFM project uses AFA3G-AATM (All M5 AFA3G) fuel as- sembly with fuel cladding, control rod guide tubes and spacer grids all using M5TM material.
The design cycle length for Ling Ao AFM project was around 316 EFPD, with the ability of 30 EFPD stretch-out operations. The fuel assembly actual maxi- mum burnup was 51. 6 GWd/tU with the design moder- ator temperature coefficient 3.6 pcm/K, initial boron concentration (Cb) 1957 ppm and shutdown margin 2892 pcm (design limits value is no less than 2300 pcm). Ling Ao AFM project started in the sixth cycle in 2007. Fuel economy of the Ling Ao AFM project was quite good in which the discharged fuel assembly (spent fuel) burnup can reach 52–57 GWd/tU, which is currently the highest level in commercial NPPs in China.
2.3.Ningde 18-month refueling project with gadolinium-bearing fuel in initial core
For the purpose of energy conservation, fuel ef- ficiency improvement and reduction of high-level ra- dioactive waste, the third-generation  NPP  proposed the requirement (such as Utility Requirements Docu- ment [8] from USA) of 18-month refueling from ini- tial core. Ningde NPP applied and implemented the ini- tial core 18-months refueling technology with integrated gadolinium-bearing fuel for the first time in the world. Ningde NPP canceled the original separate borosilicate glass (Pyrex) burnable poison assembly, and adopted the integrated dispersing gadolinium burnable poison in the fuel (the Gd-bearing fuel) in the initial core, which greatly optimized the core design and reduces the high- level radioactive waste. Ningde NPP began to use 4.45% 235U enrichment fuel assembly from the second cycle, with the cycle length of 450 EFPD, close to that of the equilibrium cycle.
The project feasibility study began from the early
2007. In the same year, the special project study was offi- cially launched. After almost five years, the project stud- ies, including core design, safety analysis, fuel design, system demonstration, equipment periodic test justifica- tion, etc., were completed. On 14 June 2011, final safety analysis report was submitted to the National Nuclear Safety Administration (NNSA); on 1 October 2012, unit 1 completed fuel loading and on 1 May 2013, unit 1 suc- cessfully put into commercial operation.
2.3.1.Core characteristics of Ningde initial core 18-month refueling [9,10]
The reactor type of Ningde NPP is  CPR1000 (name for one 1000 MWe reactor type in China) with three loops. The initial core was composed of 157 new AFA3GTM fuel assemblies with gadolinium burnable poison insides fuel pellets.
The core operating mode is mode-G (with gray rod bank to control reactor power level during load fol- low). Rod cluster control assemblies (RCCA) are divided into control rod groups and shutdown groups, in which the control rod groups were divided into power con- trol rods and temperature adjustment rods. Because the
Table 1. Ningde 18-month refueling and Daya Bay 18-month refueling fuel management mode data (C1, C2, etc., refers to cycle 1, cycle 2, etc., respectively).
integrated Gd-bearing fuel rods in the fuel assembly do not occupy the position of the guide tube, the total num- ber of RCCA were 61 starting from the initial cycle (if the original separate Pyrex burnable poison assemblies would use for Ningde NPP, the total RCCA should be less than 61).
Mass percentage of gadolinium burnable poison for the first cycle was 9%, and the value of the following cy- cle of gadolinium burnable poison was 8%. The first cy- cle fuel assemblies contained three types of 235U enrich- ment: 1.8%, 2.4% and 3.1%. From cycle 2 the fresh fuel 235U enrichment is 4.45%. The design enthalpy rise fac- tor was FOH  1.65 and hot spot factor was Fq  2.45. The cycle length for equilibrium cycle is expected to be 460–510 EFPD.
2.3.2.Ningde 18-month refueling and Daya Bay 18-month refueling scheme comparison
Ningde 18-month refueling used the integrated gadolinium-bearing fuel assembly in the initial cycle with the cycle length of 12 months and fast transition (cycle length extending) to 18 months from the second cycle, in which the second and third cycle are the transi- tion cycles. The equilibrium cycle starts from the fourth cycle.
Ningde 18-month refueling equilibrium cycle length uses 17 to 19 months alternating programs similar to the Daya Bay 18-month refueling. 235U enrichment and burnable poison characteristics in the transition and equilibrium cycle use the same proven design similar  to the Daya Bay 18-month refueling. The main differ- ences from the Daya Bay 18-month refueling are that Ningde using integrated gadolinium-bearing burnable poison fuel from initial cycle and fast transition to 18 month from the second cycle. Table 1 provides the data for Ningde and Daya Bay fuel management mode.
As shown in Table 1, in addition to significant dif- ferences for burnable poison, the fuel management dif- ference between the two projects is that Ningde project adopted the integrated design from the initial core with
the fast transition to 18 months from the second cycle, and through the envelope analyses (using limiting safety parameters of all cycles for safety analyses) to avoids the 18-month refueling modification later on after commer- cial operation.
2.3.3.Project study scope of Ningde initial core 18-month refueling project
The special project analysis scopes for Ningde initial core 18-month refueling project cover the whole scope for initial core design including fuel design, core design, accident analyses, system design, licensing application, etc.
2.3.4.Ningde unit 1 initial core physics tests at zero power [11]
Ningde unit 1 first core zero power physical test scope includes: critical boron concentration, control rod worth, isothermal temperature coefficient, neutron flux distribution, etc. Table 2 shows the comparisons of mea- sured and calculated critical boron concentrations at zero power with the indication of discrepancies (errors) between them as well as the acceptance criteria.
The core design and other analyses for Ningde ini- tial core 18-month refueling project are more complete and accurate, and thus lay sound foundation for project licensing, implementation, operation and core physics tests.
All test results meet the requirements, where the dis- crepancies between the measured and designed parame- ters for the control rod worth, the boron concentration and other parameters are much lower than the refer- ence core (for instance, the actual discrepancy of con- trol rod worth between theoretical value and test re- sult is only around 3% while the acceptance criterion is 10%. The discrepancies for critical boron concentration at the zero-power and the acceptance criteria are shown in Table 2). The design of initial core 18-month refueling with gadolinium-bearing fuel has been proven through
Table 2. Critical boron concentration at the zero-power for Ningde unit 1.
the actual core physics tests for the first time in Ningde project in the world. The success in the startup physics tests and subsequent smooth operation  have  proved the correctness, safety and reliability of the Ningde 18- month refueling project with gadolinium-bearing fuel in initial core. The knowledge and experience lay sound foundation for the promotion of such core design mode in China.
2.3.5.Ningde unit 1 first cycle core operation physics monitoring test data
The periodic test parameters and core power distri- bution during the whole first cycle were normal. The safety parameters in full core (neutron) flux map test of the cycle met the acceptance criteria of the periodic core physics test. Monitoring data of the boron concentra- tion of the core was normal, and the deviation from the theoretical value was quite small. Ningde unit 1 was shut down on 28 January 2014 as planned for the first outage.
2.3.6.Ningde unit 1 cycle 2 core compositions and main startup physics tests results
The core of Ningde unit 1 cycle 2 is composed of 68 fresh fuel assemblies with an enrichment of 4.45% 235U, among which 8 fuel assemblies are gadolinium-free rod, 20 fuel assemblies with 8 gadolinium rods, 12 fuel as- semblies with 16 gadolinium rods and 28 fuel assemblies with 20 gadolinium rods. The other 89 AFA3G fuel as- semblies (total fuel assemblies are 157) are from cycle 1, among which 41 fuel assemblies with an enrichment of 2.4% 235U, 48 fuel assemblies with an enrichment of 3.1% 235U and the central assembly with an enrichment of 2.4% 235U.
Compared to  the  theoretical  values,  Ningde  unit 1 cycle 2 main startup physics tests (including critical boron concentration, isothermal temperature coefficient and control rod worth) showed excellent results which all
meet the acceptance criteria requirements (discrepancy against the theoretical value, refer to the explanation in Section 2.3.4).
After the verification of the first core startup physics tests, the periodic physics tests during the first cycle operation and the second cycle startup physics tests, the designs of Ningde 18-month refueling project with gadolinium-bearing fuel in initial core have proved to be correct. The first cycle operation was smooth, the core was in good condition, the first refueling core design was in line with expectations, no abnormal events were ob- served during startup and operation.
3.Advanced fuel technology practices in China
NPPs in China in the early 1990s employed AFA2GTM 17 17 fuel assemblies. In the early 21st century, the Daya Bay 18-month refueling project began to use AFA3GTM 17 17 fuel assembly with MSMG. Ling Ao AFM projects started with AFA3G AATM as- semblies in 2007. AFA3GTM and AFA3G AATM grad- ually achieved manufacturing in China except for fuel tube and grid straps. Starting from 2014, M5TM cladding tube, grid and straps achieved manufacturing in China. TVS-2MTM fuel assemblies used in Tianwan VVER units will achieve manufacturing in China from 2015.
In the feasibility study of advanced high-burnup 18- month refueling mode, equilibrium cycle uses AFA3G- AA assemblies, the number of new assemblies were 60, with in–out (low neutron leakage) loading mode, 4.95% 235U enrichment, 489 EFPD expected cycle length, 52 GWd/tU batch discharge burnup and 90% plant capac- ity factor.
In the MOX and UO2 fuel mixed fuel manage- ment feasibility study, equilibrium cycle utilizes AFA3G AATM fuel assembly, in which 56 are new UO2 fuel as- semblies and 16 are new MOX fuel assemblies, with 24 re-used MOX fuel assemblies in the core. MOX  share is 20%. Using in–out loading mode, fuel enrichment is
Table 3. Chinese PWR fuel usage.
4.45% 235U, the cycle length is 480 EFPD and discharge burnup is 42 GWd/tU.
PWR fuel usage in China is shown in Table 3 below.
4.Prospects of future fuel management and fuel technology
4.1.Subsequent first cycle core design and fuel management in China
Ningde, Yangjiang, Hongyanhe Phase II, Fangchenggang ACPR10001 will use the 18-month refueling with gadolinium-bearing fuel in initial core, with rapid transition to 18-month refueling from the second cycle using 4.45% enrichment following the successful practice of Ningde project.
Taishan EPR unit first core adopts gadolinium- bearing fuel assembly, 18-month refueling mode, the fuel assemblies are length-extended all M5 AFA3G-LETM assembly, the fuel assembly enrichment is 4.95%. The fuel assembly from cycles 1 to 10 will be supplied from France. Taishan EPR is expected to put into operation around 2016.
The AP1000 unit also adopts first core 18-month re- fueling mode, assembly is robust fuel assembly (RFA) type, and 235U enrichment is 4.45% and 4.95% with in- tegrated fuel burnable absorber type burnable poison. Fuel manufacturer, China Beifang nuclear fuel plant, will provide refueling fuel assemblies. AP1000 in China is expected to put into operation in two years from now.
4.2.Future nuclear fuel assembly technology
Westinghouse next-generation fuel assembly (NGF) discharge burnup will be greater than 70 GWd/tU, with optimized ZirloTM or AXIOMTM cladding, improved assembly growth suppression performance and pellet cladding interaction (PCI) performance, optimized grid and fuel assembly design. Twelve-feet NGF can further increase the safety margin of about 10%, which can be applied to 12-feet core such as CPR1000 , ACPR1000 and ACP1000 units. Westinghouse ADOPTTM pellets use UO2–Cr2O3–Al2O3 composite material. The use of large size grain technology improves PCI performance, reducing the fission gas release and reducing the degree of core damage after accident.
In AREVA’s  advanced PWR fuel type GAIATM, the
pellets add Cr2O3 (1600 ppm), hold-down spring volume
is reduced, and pellet density increases to 95%–97%, pel- lets use improved Chromia-UO2 pellets.
4.3.Innovative fuel assembly technology
In Fukushima accident, the fuel zirconium water re- action occurred during the loss of coolant accident to generate hydrogen and triggered the explosion which caused severe nuclear disaster, which truly reflect the de- fects in the existing UO2–Zr fuel in terms of resistance to severe accidents. The inherent safety with zirconium alloy cladding fuel is very low under severe accidents.
Non zirconium alloy cladding study has been car- ried out at the international level for many years. Af- ter the Fukushima accident, related research has been accelerated. SiC cladding has the advantage of corro- sion resistant, anti-radiation, good neutron economy,
good temperature performance (2700 ◦C) and does not
react with water. United States, Europe, Japan and so on have conducted related research work actively. After the Fukushima accident, the related countries accelerate the pace for research. SiC is expected to become one of the new generation of fuel cladding material in the future.
One of the fuel development direction is high bur- nup, high stability and strong tolerant pellet technology. TRISO fuel based Fully Ceramic Micro-encapsulated (FCM) fuel has potentials.
Metal fuel in water reactors and fast reactors has greater potential applications. One metal fuel assembly design for PWR is the semi-metallic seed-and-blanket fuel assembly with metal fuel rods in fuel assembly cen- ter and UO2 fuel rods around periphery of metal fuel rods. This fuel design can promote PWR power from 10% to 17%, refueling cycle length can be increased to 24 months, and this fuel assembly is also applicable to the PWR units currently in operation.
China has been conducting a series of research and development activities on new fuel projects for PWR in- cluding fuel assembly for CAP1400 (14 feet), CF-32 (12 feet). The TRISO fuel for High Temperature gas cooled Reactor (HTR) demonstration project is scheduled to be manufactured in China in a few years and the fuel plant construction is underway. After Fukushima acci- dent, China pay proper attention to accident tolerance fuel (ATF), and the research project for ATF will be launched soon supported by Government.
5.Conclusions
Based on the unique experiences and practices of the core design and fuel management improvement projects in China General Nuclear Power Corporation in the past 20 years in China, the new innovative project of the 18- months refueling with gadolinium-bearing fuel in initial core has been successfully implemented in Ningde NPP and other ACP1000 reactors in China, which meets the requirement for third-generation reactors.
The improvement and innovation of core fuel man- agement and fuel assembly technology are important areas of continuous  improvement  and  development  of nuclear reactor. The improved direction of core fuel management and fuel technology should provide more safety margin in the core and fuel, and more benefit to generate power. The innovation of fuel management and fuel technology should be closely combined with actual application. Therefore, we need to consider the balance of innovation, safety and economy, which are ultimately examined by the practice.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by China General Nuclear Power Corporation (CGNPC), China Nuclear Power Technology Re- search Institute (CNPRI) and Ningde nuclear power plant.
