<title>Activation analysis study on Li-ion batteries for nuclear forensic applications</title>
<Affiliation>a.Radiation Monitoring Devices Inc., 44 Hunt Street, Watertown, MA 02472, United States
b.Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, United States</Affiliation>
<author>Erik B. Johnson , Chad Whitney, Keith E. Holbert , Taipeng Zhang, Tyler Stannard,
Anthony Christie, Peter Harper, Blake Anderson, James F. Christian</author>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research A</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nima.2015.01.046</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2015.01.046</URL>
a b s t r a c t
The nuclear materials environment has been increasing signiﬁcantly in complexity over the past couple of decades. The prevention of attacks from nuclear weapons is becoming more difﬁcult, and nuclear forensics is a deterrent by providing detailed information on any type of nuclear event for proper attribution. One component of the nuclear forensic analysis is a measurement of the neutron spectrum. As an example, the neutron component provides information on the composition of the weapons, whether boosting is involved or the mechanisms used in creating a supercritical state. As 6Li has a large cross-section for thermal neutrons, the lithium battery is a primary candidate for assessing the neutron spectrum after detonation. The absorption process for 6Li yields tritium, which can be measured at a later point after the nuclear event, as long as the battery can be processed in a manner to successfully extract the tritium content. In addition, measuring the activated constituents after exposure provides a means to reconstruct the incident neutron spectrum. The battery consists of a spiral or folded layers of material that have unique, energy dependent interactions associated with the incident neutron ﬂux. A detailed analysis on the batteries included a pre-irradiated mass spectrometry analysis to be used as input for neutron spectrum reconstruction. A set of batteries were exposed to a hard neutron spectrum delivered by the University of Massachusetts, Lowell research reactor Fast Neutron Irradiator (FNI). The gamma spectra were measured from the batteries within a few days and within a week after the exposure to obtain sufﬁcient data on the activated materials in the batteries. The activity was calculated for a number of select isotopes, indicating the number of associated neutron interactions. The results from tritium extraction are marginal. A measurable increase in detected particles (gammas and betas) below 50 keV not self-attenuated by the battery was observed, yet as the spectra are coarse, the gamma information is not separable from tritium spectra. The activation analysis was successful, and the incident neutron spectrum was reconstructed using materials found in lithium batteries.
Keywords: Activation analysis Nuclear forensics Lithium batteries
1.Introduction
Nuclear forensics is a deterrent for prevention of the detona- tion of a nuclear weapon in that the actors involved can be attributed to the weapon. One part of the nuclear  forensics analysis is collecting and determining information regarding the neutrons generated in the explosion. The neutron  spectrum emitted from a nuclear weapon provides insight into the weapon's mechanical construction, chemical composition, and nuclear iso- topic content. A powerful tool would be to provide neutron spectra over the large area exposed to the detonation, requiring the use of a ubiquitous material with known properties. Lithium batteries meet these requirements.
1.1.Nuclear weapons
The unclassiﬁed neutron spectrum for nuclear devices is pro- vided in [1,2]. The spectra are based on models from the World War II weapons (Fat Man and Little Boy) and a thermonuclear weapon. From [2], Dr. Preeg provided spectra of Fat Man, Little Boy, and a typical ﬁssion spectrum. The ﬁssion spectrum peaks around 1–2 MeV, where the spectra from the weapons are signiﬁcantly attenuated. The spectrum from Little Boy peaks around 1 keV, where the spectrum from Fat Man is dominated  by  neutrons below 1 keV. The  difference  in  these  two  spectra  from  10 keV up to 1 MeV is roughly 2 orders of magnitude with the Little Boy
weapon producing more neutrons within this spectral region. The cause of this difference is due to the weapon construction, where the nuclear material in Fat Man is completely surrounded by explosive materials used to implode the plutonium to a super- critical mass.
The process of boosting uses a combination of deuterium and tritium to generate energy through a fusion process. The nuclear materials are compressed to a supercritical mass, with the result- ing explosion bringing the D-T to a temperature where fusion can take place [3]. For fusion reactions that produce neutrons, the energy released is 3.7, 17.6 and 11.3 MeV for 2Hþ2H, 2Hþ3H, and 3Hþ3H respectively. One byproduct of these reactions is neutrons
103
102
101
100
10-1
10-2
10-3
Fe	Cu	C	O	Ni	Cr	Li	Mn	Al	F	Co	P Element
that will carry off a signiﬁcant fraction of the energy produced.  This excess energy adds to the explosive power of the device, as well as creating more ﬁssion reactions throughout the ﬁssionable material. There will be a large contribution to these fusion  reactions from the 2H 3H reaction, where 14 MeV neutrons are generated. The resulting neutron spectrum from a ﬁssion weapon can have a large contribution from these neutrons, as shown in [1]. The neutron energy spectrum from ﬁssion reactions falls  off rapidly around 10 MeV, where fusion weapons involving tritium can be identiﬁed by detection of high energy neutrons.
1.2.Activation analysis
Correlating nuclear weapons to the output spectrum generated from their detonation provides attribution as the weapon con- struction can be related to the output neutron spectrum. A method used for reconstructing the incident neutron spectrum is neutron activation analysis. These analysis methods are used to determine constituents within a material of unknown composition [4–6], but nuclear scientists have used this method to determine the incident neutron spectrum based on known material compositions [1,7]. Neutron activation analysis is typically done with a variety of elementally pure metal foils of known mass and volume.
1.3.Lithium batteries
The lithium battery is composed of a cathode and anode with metal substrates, where the anode and cathode are separated by a porous material, such as polypropylene. Ion exchange is done through an electrolyte medium. The cathode is typically made  from some lithium oxide, where the anode is usually graphite. The battery casing may consist of aluminum or stainless steel. The battery is inherently a set of metal foils and materials that have a potential to be used for activation analysis. The lithium content might be used to provide additional sensitivity.
All except one of the batteries used in this analysis are coin cell batteries. The majority of coin cell batteries consist of a single layer of cathode and anode. A porous membrane is placed between them. The battery layers are placed in a case along with electro- lyte, where the case is pressed closed. A diagram of a coin cell battery is shown in Fig. 1. The other type of battery is an ultrathin cell, consisting of very thin layers of anode and cathode on a steel substrate.
Fig. 1. Diagram of a coin cell battery. The battery consists of multiple layers of material pressed together. The steel anode and cathode cases are spaced with a gasket, while the anode and cathode materials are divided by a porous material (the separator).
Fig. 2. The percentage of atomic content for the twelve most abundant elements in
the batteries used in this analysis is shown.
2.Experimental setup and methods
2.1.ICP-MS results
To conduct activation analysis, the content of each of the batteries needs to be well known. A number of lithium batteries were broken up and dissolved for inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) measurements to determine the chemical content. Though not all of the components of the battery were measured using the mass spectrometer, we conducted the analysis to determine the entire composition. The organic materials could not be measured by ICP-MS, as well as the electrolyte, since the electrolyte evaporated once the battery was opened. The process for determining the battery content is discussed in detail in [8].
A large number of batteries were processed, and the atomic concentration for batteries used in this analysis is shown in Fig. 2. From the ICP-MS analysis, the major constituent is iron for the coin cell batteries, as expected, since the battery casing is stainless steel. In the stainless steel, there is a large concentration of chromium, nickel, and manganese. As shown, there is a large concentration of lithium, yet an important element in small amounts, not shown, is gold, which is present in the ultrathin battery, the ML2020, and the VL2020 batteries. These inputs will be used in the activation analysis.
2.2.UMass FNI
Similar battery models purchased at the same time as those using in the ICP-MS analysis were exposed to neutrons from the University of Massachusetts, Lowell research reactor. A vessel (Fast Neutron Irradiator, FNI) was constructed to allow for fast neutron irradiation. The vessel is placed next to the reactor core and is designed to attenuate gammas and low energy neutrons. The end product is a lower neutron ﬂux, 4.33 1011 n/cm2/s compared to
1.81 1013 n/cm2/s for irradiations in the reactor core basket, but the spectrum is signiﬁcantly harder. The major advantage to the FNI is that it allows for multiple samples to be exposed simulta- neously in a uniform beam, reducing run to run variations [9]. The x  or  y  proﬁle  of  the fast  neutron ( 40.1 MeV), thermal  neutrons  ( o1 eV), and gammas is shown in Fig. 3. A diagram of the sample holder is drawn to scale to illustrate that the samples  were  exposed to a roughly uniform beam. From [9], the beam is also uniform in the z direction for the placement of the samples.
The sample holder was made from nylon foam (McMaster 3623K74), and a number of regions were cut out of the foam to allow the batteries to be press ﬁt into the foam. The batteries were simply held in place from the compression of the foam on the battery. The holder diagram in Fig. 3 is a linearly scaled drawing of the holder, where the cut out regions actually were. The ﬁgure indicates a hole for an AA battery for reference, while the coin cell battery holes are pointed out as well. In this diagram, four of the coin cell batteries used in this analysis are drawn. Two of the
Fig. 3. Plot of the ﬂux of neutrons from [9]. To scale, a diagram of the sample holder is provided, indicating where the batteries and activation foils are present.
Table 1
Activation foils used in both experimental runs.
batteries are in the upper left of the diagram, and two of the coin cell batteries are in the lower right. Only two types of coin cell batteries (LIR2032 and CR2032) were used in the run associated with the drawing. The picture also indicates a circle for one of the activation foils, while in this diagram all circles of this size are activation foils. There were ten foils placed on the perimeter of the batteries, where each has a diameter of 1.27 cm. The foil elements and parameters are located in Table 1. There were two runs at the FNI. The diagram is for the second run, and the ﬁrst run has a similar sample arrangement. The ﬁrst arrangement included a set of different  batteries,  but  with an identical set of activation foils placed on the perimeter of the batteries. The ﬁrst run included an additional pair of coin cell batteries (VL2020 and ML2020) as well as the ultrathin battery. The batteries were exposed for approximately 1200 s for each
experimental run for a total of 5.2 ~ 1014 n/cm2.
2.3.Gamma spectroscopy
The initial step after irradiating the batteries and foils was to let them cool off for roughly a day. This is done primarily because of the FNI vessel, which is made from aluminum. Once the batteries
are removed from the vessel, the gamma spectrum is measured from each of the batteries and activation foils. The typical time to record the gamma emission spectrum was 30 min. A HPGe detector (Canberra GR1320) was used to capture the gamma spectrum. The HPGE detector has a built in preampliﬁer, and a shaping ampliﬁer (Princeton Gamma Tech 347) was used  to further amplify and integrate the output charge from the HPGe.
The  shaping  ampliﬁer  was  set  to  a  4 μs  shaping  time,  and  the
signal output from the shaping  ampliﬁer was grounded through  50 Ω. An Amptek Pocket MCA was used to capture the pulse height  from the  shaping  ampliﬁer and  generate  the  spectrum. In
order to see longer lived isotopes, the spectra were measured a number of times after irradiation.
The spectra were calibrated using a set of test sources (22Na, 57Co, 137Cs, and 60Co). The energy peaks from the sources provide the linear conversion from ADC channels into keV. The activities from each of the sources are well known, and the distance from   the Ge face is measured for each source. The test sources were placed several feet from the detector, and the sources are fairly small, allowing for a simple point source calculation to determine the expected number of incident gammas for each gamma line from the test sources. The detector efﬁciency is determined  from the ratio of the number of measured gammas found in each energy peak from the test sources to the incident gammas. This efﬁciency is only valid from 122 keV to 1332 keV.
To extend the calibrated range, further analysis using the activation foils was done. The emission spectrum from 24Na has a gamma line at 2754 keV, which has an intensity of 99.855%, compared to the intensity of 99.9936% at 1369 keV. Taking the emission spectrum from the activated Al foil, the peak at 2754 keV is roughly a factor of 2 times smaller compared to the 1369 keV peak. This indicates a smaller efﬁciency at this energy for the Ge detector compared to 1369 keV. The efﬁciency at 1369 keV is assumed to be similar to that at 1332 keV, and the efﬁciency at 2754 keV is estimated to be 3%. A ﬁt was made to the data to interpolate the efﬁciency from 122 keV to 2754 keV.
The geometry of the battery must be considered, as the batteries were placed close to the Ge detector. The emission of gammas is assumed to be uniformly distributed over the entire volume of the
battery and emit over 4π. The distance of the battery was recorded,
as well as the battery dimensions. A piece of C   code was written to simulate the fraction of emitted gammas from the batteries that were incident on the Ge detector.
The induced activity is back calculated for each of the measured radioisotopes. This is done by measuring the number of gammas
detected  for  an  energy  peak  corresponding  to  a  speciﬁc   radio-isotope. In this analysis, isotope identiﬁcation is done by deduction, where the battery constituents are known leading to a limiting number of possible radioisotopes. Correcting for the detector efﬁciencies, the total rate of emission is determined, providing the activity when the gamma spectrum was measured, and the initial activity after the exposure was calculated. For nuclear forensics, the time of detonation is expected to be a well-known parameter.
Sample spectra from the 1st and 11th days after the exposure are shown in Fig. 4. The spectra were taken from the same CR2032 battery, where the day after irradiation is shown as the upper spectrum. A few of the peaks are identiﬁed based on the known possible radioisotopes that can be produced with the starting battery materials. The upper spectrum is dominated by the gammas from 56Mn, which has a half-life of 2.6 h. By the eleventh day, the 56Mn has all but decayed away, and a number of longer decay isotopes can be identiﬁed, such as 59Fe and 58Co.
2.4.Liquid scintillator tritium counting
The batteries will attenuate the low energy radiation.  To  extract the low energy component, the battery was opened, and a Fig. 4. Sample spectra from the CR2032 battery. The upper spectrum is captured 1 day after the exposure, while the lower spectrum is after eleven days.
measurement of the emission spectra was measured before and after the battery was opened. The measurement before the battery was opened is considered the baseline (or background) measurement.
A group of six coin cell batteries was gathered, and each of the batteries was taped to the lid of separate glass jars. A white electrical tape was used to preserve as much light yield from the scintillator as possible. A 2 in. diameter glass jar (Uline S-15846M) is used to hold a liquid scintillator cocktail (MP Universol). Once the jar was ﬁlled with the scintillator, it was wrapped with Teﬂon tape and placed on a 2 in. photomultiplier tube (Hamamatsu R6231- 100).  The PMT was  biased to	900 V and connected to a Cremat CR113 preampliﬁer. The signal from the preampliﬁer was sent to a shaping ampliﬁer (Princeton Gamma Tech 347), which was set to a shaping time of 250 ns. The Amptek MCA was used to capture the spectra. The glass jar was optically coupled to the PMT with silicone grease (Saint-Gobain BC-630). To provide energy calibration, a 241Am source was used to expose the scintillator to 60 keV gammas. The spectra of the batteries were measured. This provides a measurement of the high energy radiation from the battery that is not stopped by the battery components, primarily the  stainless steel casing. The scintillator will break down the glue used for the electrical tape, so haste is required between when the battery is
submerged and the emission spectrum is collected.
The electrolyte within the battery will evaporate under normal pressure and temperature. To preserve all battery constituents, procedures were developed to save the electrolyte, where we suspect that a large fraction of the produced tritium may reside. Tritium produces beta particles with an end-point energy of
18.6 keV and with a mean energy of 5.7 keV. The  beta  particles will not escape the stainless steel casing of the battery. The procedure used in this analysis is to ﬁrst cool the battery, pry it open and then dunk it into some liquid scintillation material.
A cold plate was built using a piece of aluminum stood off of the table with foam. Baths of dry ice and ethanol were made and placed on the aluminum plate, and the plate was covered in a thin layer of ethanol to maintain thermal conductivity. The battery was inserted into the dry ice bath to initiate the cooling. The plate was left to cool for about 30 min until the plate was noticeably cold (frosting from the ambient moisture in the air was observed). Any pliers or small chisels were partially submerged in the dry ice bath to keep these parts cold, while handling the battery. The battery was clamped down to the cold plate. A small chisel was used to pry open the battery by chiseling back the outer lip of the coin cell battery, as shown in Fig. 5. Pieces of dry ice were placed near the battery while it was being pried open to provide additional cooling near the battery beyond the dry ice baths that were set on the cold plate.
Using the same scintillator and jar as used in the previous measurement where the battery was taped to the lid of the jar, a bead of glue (Loctite #409) was placed on the lid of the jar, which was used to hold the battery components. The purpose of suspend- ing the batteries and battery part to the lid is to keep the parts away from the bottom of the jar, which is coupled to the PMT. Initial trials of the analysis showed that when the parts were allowed to rest at
Fig. 5. Picture of a lithium coin cell battery on a cold plate. The battery is partially pried open. The dry ice in the picture is sited near the battery to ensure that the battery remains cold, while a thin layer of ethanol covers the plate to maintain good thermal conductivity.
the bottom of the jar, the light yield from the scintillator volume onto the PMT was too low and suspension methods were required. Once the glue began to set a little bit, the batteries were removed from the cold plate and bath and quickly dried and set into the bead of glue. Once the battery components were positioned, the lid was secured gently to the top of the scintillator ﬁlled jar. A picture of one of the samples is shown in Fig. 6. The glass jar is wrapped with Teﬂon tape and optically coupled to the PMT. The same readout used in the background measurements is used, and the 241Am source is used for calibration.
A plot of the sample spectrum is shown in Fig. 7. The spectrum is calibrated from the 60 keV peak from exposure to gammas from 241Am. Once the spectra are calibrated, their binning needed to be redone to allow for subtraction of the background. A Cþþ code was written to take the number of counts in the original  energy  bin and to add them to a new energy  bin, where these new bins  are consistent from spectrum to spectrum spanning 3 keV per bin. The code took the total number of counts from the original energy bin that resided within the new bin, but for original bins that spanned across the edge of the new bin, a fraction of counts was added to the new bin, while the remaining counts were added to the succeeding bin. The fraction was determined by the width of the bin that resided in either of the new bins such that no counts were dropped. At this point, the spectrum before the battery was
opened was subtracted from the spectrum after the battery was opened, providing the difference spectrum shown in Fig. 7.
2.5.MCNP code
The simulations conducted for this analysis were done to compare the data from the tritium extraction spectra to a MCNP
Fig. 6. An assembled sample with the battery components in pieces. The picture is taken from the bottom of the glass jar, where the battery components are glued to the lid of the jar. The jar is wrapped in Teﬂon tape.
Fig. 7. A plot of sample spectra of the liquid scintillator set up. The short dashed line is the spectrum when the battery is opened up and glued to the lid of the scintillator jar. The long dash line is when the battery is sealed close and taped to the lid. The difference in the spectra is the solid line. The spectra were collected over a 15 min period.
model. From [8], the MCNP code uses a battery model based on the results of the ICP-MS. The battery is divided up into various components consistent with the geometry of the battery. The reference describes a similar, but not identical, battery, and this analysis generated new input cards to account for the differences using the input deck from [8] as a template. The simulations were run using a measured neutron spectrum from the FNI facility using the activation foils. The F4 and FM4 tally cards are used to obtain the number of tritium isotope reactions per unit volume per source particle produced, and a weighting factor is applied to convert the normalized tritium counts into absolute terms. The weighting factor is determined in the following manner. The integrated neutron ﬂux, determined from the activation foils, is multiplied by the exposure time and area of the battery's front face incident with the source. This value is then divided by the tracks entering the battery's front face and multiplied by the incident source particles. Using the half-life of tritium, a measurement of the expected number of tritium isotopes decayed in the measure- ment window was made for comparison.
2.6.
SAND-II code
The SAND-II code is provided through the RSICC via Oak Ridge National Laboratory. The code was developed for activation foils and requires input of the foil mass. The activities of the reaction product radioisotopes are used to generate the spectrum. For each radioisotope,  a  unique  reaction  is  related  to  the  parent isotope,
such as 63Cu (n,γ) 64Cu. The code was used such that only one
parent is correlated to one of the byproducts. Of the set of batteries used in this analysis, the number of inputs was down sampled such that they met this criterion, excluding radioisotopes that have multiple production channels. The cross-section for each of the associated radioisotope reactions is used to ﬁt the activities and parent isotope masses to generate a neutron spectrum. The cross- sections within the SAND-II library were utilized, while the masses used originate from the manufacturer in the case of the foils or from the ICP-MS analysis for the batteries. The code requires an initial starting point to begin the iterative ﬁtting process, and the spectrum from [9] was used.
2.7.Input spectrum calibration using activation foils
Ten foils were exposed and thirteen reactions produced radio- nuclides with signiﬁcant activities in each experiment. Initially, all thirteen reactions and the measured activities were input into SAND-II; however, the code stopped after less than eight iterations with deviations between the measured-to-calculated activities ranging from 15% to 610% for both experiments. SAND-II ceases its iterative solution process once the measured-to-calculated activities become stable (to within less than one percent change per iteration).
To reduce the deviation of the activities, the inter-consistency of different foils and reactions was evaluated by eliminating and/or adding one or more reactions to the SAND-II input. After trial and error, a best solution was found using 6 foils and 6 reactions for the ﬁrst experimental run. Those results are shown at the top of Table 2. The solution was achieved after 43 iterations and the deviations in the measured-to-calculated activities are less than 0.02%. The results for experiment 2 using the same 6 reactions are also listed in the middle of Table 2 for comparison. After 31 iterations, the difference between measured and calculated activ- ities was less than 0.02% as well. The best solution for the second experiment was achieved with 7 foils and 7 reactions, shown in the bottom of Table 2. The code stopped running after 421 iterations and the deviations in the measured-to-calculated activ- ities had become stable, within 0.06%.
The spectrum generated from the SAND-II code was placed into
81 bins and is shown in Fig. 8. The reconstructed spectra for experiments 1 and 2 using the same 6 reactions are close in shape, except that the ﬂux level for experiment 1 is slightly lower  than  the second experiment.  The reconstructed spectra for experiment  2 using the two different reaction sets agree with each other in  both shape and ﬂux level until around 1 MeV. This shows the impact that different foil reactions in the input have on  the spectral reconstruction. An average of the logarithms of  spectra was calculated and then the average was taken to the power of 10, providing the average spectrum shown in Fig. 8.
3.Results and discussion
3.1.Tritium counts and comparison
The spectrum before the battery was pried open was subtracted from the spectrum after the battery was opened. In addition to the beta particles emitted from tritium, low energy gamma rays will
Table 2
SAND-II results for activation foils used in both experimental runs.
Fig. 8. The reconstructed spectra from three data sets. Data set 1 is associated with 6 reactions from the ﬁrst experiment. Data set 2 is the same 6 reactions for the second experiment, while data set 3 is from 7 reactions from the second experiment.
Energy (keV)
Fig. 9. The attenuation length of photons in stainless steel used in the batteries. The composition used was Fe (71.1%), Cr (19.0%), Ni (8.3%), Mn (0.9%), Cu (0.2%), Co
(0.2%), Mo (0.1%), V (0.1%), and P (0.1%). These data are provided from [10].
be attenuated by the stainless steel casing of the coin cell batteries. For reference, the casing is roughly 320 μm thick, and the attenuation length in stainless steel is shown in Fig. 9. Around
50 keV, the attenuation length is close to the thickness of the battery. Another note is that the energy resolution of the detector around 60 keV is 38.9% (FWHM) based on the calibration done with  the 241Am  source.  A ﬁnal  note  is  that  the spectrum  below 3 keV contains signiﬁcant statistics associated with PMT and electronic readout noise, and these counts  were  disregarded  in  the analysis. With all of these considerations, a correlation to an expected value from MCNP models is sought.
The counts from 3 keV to 30 keV fall within the range of counts to be correlated to tritium produced in the MCNP model. The counts beyond 50 keV are considered to be not attenuated signiﬁcantly, and therefore should show little to no difference in the number of counts. This latter value provides a measurement of the systematic error for this measurement.
The results are shown in Table 3 for the six coin cell batteries tested. The total number of counts determined from the tritium betas and low energy gammas is roughly an order of magnitude larger than the difference in counts above 50 keV. This indicates that the systematic error is roughly 10%, which is derived by considering a counting error of 10 s of thousands over 100 s of thousands of measured counts. The counts from the MCNP simulation only associated with tritium are provided for compar- ison. The MCNP simulation provides the number of reactions that occurred that results in a tritium particle. The ratio of  the difference in counts from 3 to 30 keV over the number of counts from the MCNP simulations is shown with an average of roughly  6 times more counts measured compared to the simulations. The error reported is the standard deviation of the ratio values.
Because of the large differences in the ratio along with the large systmatic error, these results are marginally conclusive. The data does not provide an accurate measurement of the tritium content.
To provide a complete analysis, a larger data set is required. This dataset should consist of a large number of similar batteries for a large variety of batteries. Additional studies to make more accurate measurements of the beta particles could provide more informa- tion without the need for MCNP data. These measurments could include electric or magnetic ﬁelds to isolate the electrons from the neutral gamma rays, highlighting the difﬁculty of isolating the tritium from standard nuclear methods.
3.2.Spectral  reconstruction  of FNI
As mentioned, a limited number of reactions were employed in the neutron spectrum reconstruction using the batteries. The results of the SAND-II code are given in Table 4, showing the four reactions over the two batteries used. Each of the batteries generated a separate neutron  spectrum,  which  is  shown  in Fig. 10. The spectra are averaged in the same way the activation foil spectra were averaged.
The activation foil spectrum is compared to the battery spec- trum in Fig. 11. The spectra are in good agreement to with a factor of 10. The error bars shown in Fig. 11 are the minimum and maximum values used in the average for each energy bin. From [2], the differences in the expected neutron ﬂux  from 10  keV up to 1 MeV are more than an order of magnitude. With this  limited data set, the neutron spectrum can be readily obtained from only a couple batteries.
There are deviations from the activation foil spectrum asso- ciated with separate energy regions. A part of the difference is due to the limited number of reactions used in the spectrum recon- struction done with the batteries. The cross-sections for the four reactions are shown in Fig. 12. In the initial region, the recon- structed spectrum is high from 10—8 MeV to 10—4 MeV, where 198Au and  64Cu  reactions  are  utilized.  From  10—4 MeV  to 10—2 MeV, the cross-sections for these two reactions have multi- ple resonances and on average have a fairly similar cross-section, and the output spectrum is consistent with the one measured
Table 3
Counting results from the tritium extraction measurements.
using the foils. The SAND-II code would have to weigh activities from these radioisotopes more similarly. From 10—2 MeV to 1 MeV, we return to a state where the 198Au reaction cross-section  is  higher, and the output spectrum is high. Above 1 MeV, all four reactions are considered, and the output spectrum is low. This suggests a systematic effect from the ﬁt, and it is believed that  more input data will correct these errors.
Fig. 10. The spectra generated from the SAND-II code using battery activities. The solid line is the average from the two battery spectra.
Fig. 11. The average activation foil spectrum (dotted line, Fig. 8) compared to the battery spectrum (solid line, Fig. 10). The error bars are the maximum and
Table 4
SAND-II results for the ﬁtting of the radioisotopes from the batteries.minimum values used in calculating the averages.
Fig. 12. Plot of the cross-sections for the four reactions used in the battery neutron spectrum reconstruction. The proton emission reactions have threshold values just below 1 MeV, where the radiative capture reactions are exothermic.
4.Conclusions
The extraction and measurement of the tritium production provided marginal results. We measured a large unattenuated activity from the batteries, after the batteries  were  pried  open, and  on average  the number of counts correlated  to tritium was a factor  of
6 larger than expected from MCNP data. Additional analysis of hundreds of battery samples would be required to establish some reference for the tritium data to be useful. As the neutron spectrum is reconstructed with other types of reactions, a measurement of the tritium content is moot. This leads to the conclusion that the lithium content is not relevant, and any type of battery should be considered. The analysis of the lithium batteries for nuclear forensics shows that the lithium battery can be used to reconstruct the incident neutron spectrum. This particular analysis only required four reactions from two batteries to reconstruct the spectrum to within a factor of 10 when compared to the spectrum generated from a more standard method using activation foils. The accuracy of this analysis is sufﬁcient for nuclear forensics, yet it is understood that this spectrum can be signiﬁcantly more accurate given a larger
input data set.
The advantageous nature of a battery is that it is mass produced and ubiquitous within all environments. The cell phone and other portable electronics are not only pervasive within developed
countries; these devices can be found in all countries across the globe. For this analysis, we consider the special case of thin, lithium batteries to provide the spectrum. The majority of future analysis could be the development of a database of battery constituents for nuclear forensic purposes. These would include all battery types, and updated when new technology enters the market.
The spectral information from batteries provides a piece of information for a complete forensic analysis, where the battery can be considered a point source for this information. This is extremely useful in this context as the battery environment will signiﬁcantly change the incident neutron spectrum. When few variables are needed to reconstruct the incident spectrum, the conﬁdence level regarding a nuclear forensic analysis improves. This analysis on a few lithium batteries proves that a battery can provide this  one  key component, where spectral data can be obtained over a large geographical area.
Acknowledgments
We are thankful to DTRA as this work was completely funded by a Basic Research Grant (HDTRA1-11-1-0028). We would also like to take the staff at the University of Massachusetts for assisting in the exposure of the batteries at the Lowell research reactor and providing space for us to make measurements using our germanium detector.
