<title>CIELO Collaboration Summary Results: International Evaluations of Neutron Reactions on Uranium, Plutonium, Iron, Oxygen and Hydrogen</title>
<Affiliation>1.Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA
2.NAPC–Nuclear Data Section, International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, Austria  3.National Nuclear Data Center, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973-5000, USA 4.European Commission, Joint Research Center, Retieseweg 111, B-2440, Geel, Belgium
5.Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831-6171, USA
6.Institut de Radioprotection et de Surete Nucleaire, Paris, France
7.Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180, USA
8.National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, USA
9.CEA, DAM Ile de France, F-91297 Arpajon, France
10.Nuclear Energy Agency, OECD, Paris, France
11.CIEMAT, Centro de Investigaciones Energ´eticas Medioambientales y Tecn´ologicas, Madrid, Spain
12.Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain 13.China Nuclear Data Center, P.O. Box 275-41, Beijing 102413, P.R. China 14.China Institute of Atomic Energy, P.O. Box 275-41, Beijing 102413, P.R.  China
15.Nuclear Physics Department, Bucharest University, Bucharest-Magurele, Romania
16.CEA, Nuclear Energy Division, Cadarache, Saint-Paul-lez-Durance, France
17.PI Atomstandart at SC Rosatom, Moscow,  Russia 18.Institute of Physics and Power Engineering, Obninsk, Russia 19.Japan Atomic Energy Agency, Tokai-mura, 319-1195 Japan 20.Knolls Atomic Power Laboratory, Schenectady, NY, USA 21.Idaho National Laboratory, Idaho Falls, ID, USA
22.Jozef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia
23.Department of Nuclear Engineering, Michigan University, Michigan, USA 24.Canadian Nuclear Laboratories (CNL), Chalk River, Ontario, Canada 25.Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA, USA
26.Korean Atomic Energy Research Institute, Daejeon, South Korea
27.Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany
28.Centro  At´omico  Bariloche,  Argentina
29.Institute for Nuclear Research and Nuclear Energy, BAS, BG-1784 Soﬁa, Bulgaria
30.Naval Nuclear Laboratory, P.O. Box 1072, Schenectady, NY 12301-1072
31.Nuclear Research and Consultancy Group, P.O. Box 25, NL-1755, ZG Petten, The Netherlands
(Received 21 August 2017; revised received 31 October 2017; accepted 1 November 2017)
</Affiliation>
<author>M.B. Chadwick,1, ∗ R. Capote,2 A. Trkov,2 M.W. Herman,3 D.A. Brown,3 G.M. Hale,1 A.C. Kahler,1
P. Talou,1 A.J. Plompen,4 P. Schillebeeckx,4 M.T. Pigni,5 L. Leal,6 Y. Danon,7 A.D. Carlson,8 P. Romain,9
B. Morillon,9 E. Bauge,9 F.-J. Hambsch,4 S. Kopecky,4 G. Giorginis,4 T. Kawano,1 J. Lestone,1
D. Neudecker,1 M. Rising,1 M. Paris,1 G.P.A. Nobre,3 R. Arcilla,3 O. Cabellos,10 I. Hill,10 E. Dupont,10
A.J.  Koning,2  D.  Cano-Ott,11  E.  Mendoza,11  J.  Balibrea,11  C.  Paradela,4  I.  Dur´an,12  J.  Qian,13
Z. Ge,13 T. Liu,13 L. Hanlin,14 X. Ruan,14 W. Haicheng,14 M. Sin,15 G. Noguere,16 D. Bernard,16
R. Jacqmin,16 O. Bouland,16 C. De Saint Jean,16 V.G. Pronyaev,17 A.V. Ignatyuk,18 K. Yokoyama,19
M. Ishikawa,19 T. Fukahori,19 N. Iwamoto,19 O. Iwamoto,19 S. Kunieda,19 C.R. Lubitz,20 M. Salvatores,21
G. Palmiotti,21 I. Kodeli,22 B. Kiedrowski,23 D. Roubtsov,24 I. Thompson,25 S. Quaglioni,25
H.I. Kim,26  Y.O. Lee,26  U. Fischer,27  S. Simakov,27  M. Dunn,5  K. Guber,5  J.I. M´arquez Dami´an,28
F. Cantargi,28 I. Sirakov,29 N. Otuka,2 A. Daskalakis,30 B.J. McDermott,30 and S.C. van der Marck31</author>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>NUCLEAR DATA SHEETS</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier Inc.</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nds.2018.02.003 </DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nds.2018.02.003 </URL>
The CIELO collaboration has studied neutron cross sections on nuclides that signiﬁcantly impact criticality in nuclear technologies - 235,238U, 239Pu, 56Fe, 16O and 1H - with the aim of improving the accuracy of the data and resolving previous discrepancies in our understanding. This multi-laboratory
pilot project, coordinated via the OECD/NEA Working Party on Evaluation Cooperation (WPEC) Subgroup 40 with support also from the IAEA, has motivated experimental and theoretical work and led to suites of new evaluated libraries that accurately reﬂect measured data and also perform well in integral simulations of criticality. This report summarizes our results on cross sections and preliminary work on covariances, and outlines plans for the next phase of this collaboration.
I.FOREWORD
The Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) of the Organiza- tion for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) supports the need for high quality nuclear data for nu- clear applications. These applications encompass not only energy production, but also handling of waste, radiologi- cal protection and medical isotope production. Several of these are still very demanding upon adequate and accu- rate nuclear data for design purposes and demonstration of safety.
For many years the NEA has supported international collaborative advances in evaluated cross-section nuclear databases via its Working Party on Evaluation Coopera- tion (WPEC). The work described in this article presents the CIELO project as an example of a recent important advance made by the international nuclear reaction data community, under WPEC Subgroup 40. Furthermore, it represents a continuing collaboration to take advantage of new cross section measurements, advances in theory, and information from integral experiments analyzed using various neutron transport and sensitivity computational tools. This article demonstrates the results of an inten- sive collaborative eﬀort by more than 70 contributors over several years.
The future role of the NEA in this context will be to continue to assist the NEA member countries in their
scientiﬁc development of modernised data, including new formats, visualization tools and software able to
eﬀectively manipulate the data on a large scale. In addition it can make a valuable contribution to the
testing and validation of the nuclear data against its vast and unique collection of integral experiments.
II.INTRODUCTION
The Collaborative International Evaluation Library Or- ganization (CIELO) project [1, 2], coordinated by the Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) Working Party on Eval- uation Cooperation (WPEC) NEA/WPEC Subgroup 40 since 2013, has stimulated advances to the neutron cross section evaluations of nuclides that signiﬁcantly impact our nuclear technologies: hydrogen, oxygen, iron, and se- lected uranium and plutonium isotopes. The beneﬁts of a CIELO-coordinated eﬀort between experts in nuclear science from around the world has led to the advances de- scribed in this paper, which also represents the Summary Report of NEA WPEC Subgroup 40.
The primary motivation for the CIELO project was the desire to more-rapidly expedite improvements in these im- portant cross sections. Improving the evaluated data for such nuclides is a major undertaking, desired by nuclear science and technology communities around the world. We felt that this could best be accomplished by establishing a more formal collaboration arrangement for experiments, and for theory and simulation components. The intention was to document open questions and issues that were re- solved through the collaboration, and create evaluated data ﬁles that embody the advances. From the very be- ginning we have considered the collaboration process to be as important as the new evaluations being produced.
Since nuclear criticality applications are impacted by the integrated eﬀects of neutron reactions on many nu- clides, our goal was also to create data ﬁles that (neutron- ically) perform well together as a suite. This was sum- marized in an article developed at the beginning of the CIELO collaboration [1] in 2013. It was anticipated that
the data ﬁles that we would produce would be available for adoption – in part or as a whole – by the major evalu- ated database eﬀorts of ENDF, JEFF, JENDL, CENDL, and so on. And indeed, the CIELO-1 and CIELO-2 sets of cross section data described in this report have been adopted by the ENDF and JEFF communities, respec- tively. Other papers in this issue of Nuclear Data Sheets describe the CIELO eﬀorts in more detail [3–8] and also describe the major ENDF/B-VIII.0 database release [9] that adopts CIELO-1 including the new standards [3].
Computational nuclear science and computing advances have played a key role in CIELO’s progress. Fast comput- ers have enabled large-scale nuclear criticality and trans- port simulations, mostly with the MCNP§R   version 6 code [10], to assess the performance of proposed evaluation changes, with a feedback loop leading to the optimization of the reaction model parameters and ultimately of the evaluated data ﬁles. These iterations took place in hours, instead of weeks/months as was the established tradition for previous evaluations.
Nuclear reaction theory and modeling codes for coupled channels, statistical reactions and ﬁssion, and R-matrix, continue to be reﬁned. The community is also starting to understand the beneﬁts, and use of, sensitivity tools such as the NEA’s NDaST codes to help focus research eﬀorts and to eﬃciently select relevant integral experiments for data testing. Also, various insights from the NEA/WPEC Subgroup 39 adjustment project have been useful.
Experimental work has always been the foundation of nuclear reaction data evaluations, and must remain so despite the costs and time involved in executing new mea- surement concepts to determine cross sections to unprece- dented accuracy. The rallying of eﬀorts behind CIELO has led to measurements over the course of this pilot project, most notably at JRC–Geel, CERN n TOF, RPI, Los Alamos, and TUNL, see Table I.
TABLE I. Notable experimental contributions during the course of the CIELO project, since 2013. This tabulation does not include additional measurements impacting the new stan- dards evaluation [3].
released in 2017, and is also documented in this issue of Nuclear Data Sheets [3]. An IAEA Coordinated Research Project (CRP) on prompt ﬁssion neutron spectra (PFNS)
[11] has also positively impacted CIELO.
III.CIELO EVALUATIONS CREATED
The CIELO pilot project has a goal of resolving some previous discrepancies in the evaluated data, via peer re- view interactions together with new experiments, theory, and simulation. But it is also recognized that – in some cases – diﬀerences of opinion will persist, reﬂecting open unsolved problems and uncertainties, as well as diﬀerences in evaluation methodology. In these cases the goal is to document the diﬀerences (see Refs. [1, 2, 12, 13]) and re- ﬂect them in alternate data evaluations. We account for  this diversity by creating and archiving two sets of ﬁles, CIELO-1 and CIELO-2, with each set of ﬁles designed to work together as a suite in criticality applications. Many   of the cross section updates have  compensating impacts  on criticality. For example, for CIELO-1, in thermal sys- tems involving uranium and oxygen the increased criti- cality from the lower average-energy 235U prompt ﬁssion neutron spectrum (PFNS) is compensated by the changes  to 235U capture (increase), 235U resonance region prompt nubar (decrease), and oxygen that lower the criticality (increased (n,α) leads to more neutron absorption; and a lower scattering cross section leads to more leakage and less moderation).
In practice, CIELO-1 has been adopted by the ENDF community in ENDF/B-VIII.0, and CIELO-2 by the JEFF community in JEFF-3.3. These are illustrated in Table II.
TABLE II. Lead laboratories evaluating CIELO-1, -2 databases. CIELO-1 is being adopted by ENDF, CIELO-2 by JEFF. Many other labs contributed, including with data measurements. For each isotope we separately tabulate the work done on the resonance range and the fast region (e.g., keV and above for actinides).
ed in the latest reaction mod- eling codes that use a modern coupled-channel optical model formulation [17–19] to generate needed transmis- sion coeﬃcients. Since the previous 235U and 238U evalua- tions performed fairly well in many thermal, intermediate, and fast critical validation benchmarks [20], creating new evaluations with equal or even superior performance has been a challenge (and one that we feel we have met).
Within the CIELO project, two almost independent evaluations were produced. The CIELO-1 evaluation adopted the aforementioned new standards data; and achieved an excellent agreement with newly available cap- ture data while both CIELO-1 and CIELO-2 allowed small modiﬁcations to the prompt ﬁssion neutron multiplicity to optimize matches to integral simulations of nuclear crit- icality. The CIELO-1 evaluation also adopted a resonating ﬁssion neutron multiplicity below 75 eV as reﬂected in measured data that have been neglected in previous 235U evaluations.
In the early stages of the CIELO project, the resonance analysis developed by Leal, ﬁrst at ORNL, and later at IRSN, accounted for new sets of capture data measured at LANL and RPI, as well as a better ﬁt of the standards ﬁssion integral in the 7.8–11 eV range (the CIELO-2 ﬁle). Pigni (ORNL) in collaboration with the IAEA built on Leal’s work with extensive modiﬁcations in the very im- portant region below 100 eV for the CIELO-1 evaluation, as described below and in Ref. [5].
The 235U resolved resonance CIELO-1 evaluation re- cently released within the ENDF/B-VIII.0 nuclear data library has also been developed on the basis of newly evalu-
ated thermal neutron constants [16] as well as of new ther- mal Prompt Fission Neutron Spectra (PFNS) [11, 14, 15] and the new standards ﬁssion cross section [3].
The softer thermal PFNS of the CIELO-1 evaluation (Eav= 2.00 MeV versus the earlier 2.03 MeV) increases  the calculated thermal criticality keﬀ, especially for high- leakage benchmarks. This introduces a strong positive slope for  C/E  (calculation/experiment)  keﬀ  criticality  as a function of increasing Above-Thermal-Leakage-Fraction (ATLF), for highly-enriched uranium solutions with ther- mal neutrons (HST) benchmarks, which needs to be re- moved (as described below).
For energies below 100 eV, this work restores benchmark performance for 235U solutions by combining changes to the  prompt  resonance  ν¯  and  the  resonance  parameters. In achieving this, the present set of resonance parameters yields cross sections still in reasonable  agreement  with the suite of experimental data included in the previous resonance evaluations. Additionally, the set of η measure- ments performed by Brooks [21] in the mid-sixties at the Atomic Energy Research Establishment (Harwell) were analyzed and included in the ﬁt for incident neutron en- ergies up to 20 eV, and also new sets of data measured at CERN by the n TOF collaboration [22, 23].
Our earlier CIELO summary paper, Refs. [2, 24], shows comparisons of SAMMY calculations with measurements by Brooks [21] in the incident neutron energy range up to 5 eV, and by Wartena and Weigmann [25] in the low energy range between 0.0015–0.45 eV. These studies and Ref. [5] address the value of including measured data on η = ν (1 + α)−1 (ν being the average number of neutron per ﬁssion and α = σγ /σf; by deﬁnition it is a quantity independent of any normalization factor in the cross sec- tions). Despite the large uncertainties above 2 eV, the CIELO-1 η (decreased) values are on average in better agreement  with  the  experimental  data  than ENDF/B-
VII.1 values. By including this set of η measurements, the changes in the cross sections were evident in the valley of the resonances while keeping their peak values mostly unchanged, as seen in the resonance at En=2 eV. Fig. 1(a) shows the cross sections reconstructed from the resonance parameters of CIELO-1 and ENDF/B-VII.1 evaluations compared to De Saussure’s capture data [26, 27] where the increased capture cross sections in the valleys are evident. As shown in Fig. 4 of Ref. [2, 24], for neutron incident energies	4 eV, the result of an increased capture cross section is also evident in a decreased ﬁssion cross sec- tion, mainly in the valleys of the neighbour resonances. A similar eﬀect is also shown in Fig. 1(b) that compares
CIELO-1 with recent n TOF ﬁssion data [22].
The use of a softer PFNS and the newly ﬁtted ther- mal neutron constants (with higher thermal ﬁssion) com- pensated the decreased criticality that would result from a decreased neutron balance suggested by Brooks’ data. Moreover, an additional constraint to the values of the resonance parameters was introduced by cross section in- tegrals, e.g., the ﬁssion integral in the incident energy
FIG. 1. (Color online) n+235U capture measurements of De Saussure [26, 27] and n  TOF ﬁssion measurements [22] compared  to the ENDF/B-VII.1 and CIELO-1 (=ENDF/B-VIII.0) evaluations.
range between 7.8–11 eV,
@1which is close to the standard reference value, If = 247.5(3.0) b eV, recently adopted by Carlson [3] in the international evaluation of neutron cross section stan- dards on the basis of an earlier recommendation by Wage- mans [28]. Recently, the 2006 reference value of If was adopted as a normalization factor for the newly measured n TOF ﬁssion cross section data [22].
The diﬀerent prompt ﬁssion neutron average multiplic- ity evaluations are shown in Fig. 2 (bottom panel) for CIELO-1 (IAEA CIELO) and CIELO-2 (CEA CIELO).
This νp quantity remains one of the most inﬂuential pa- rameters aﬀecting nuclear criticality. It is typically known fairly accurately, to better than a percent, but the un- certainty range with which it is known still allows for diﬀerent evaluation choices, and in practice it remains a widely-used “knob” that is adjusted (slightly) to optimize criticality simulations. The IAEA/ORNL evaluation for CIELO-1 has introduced ν-ﬂuctuations in the low energy resonance region, as was also done for 239Pu, see Fig. 2 (upper panel).
The CIELO-1 (=ENDF/B-VIII.0=IAEA CIELO) aver-
age 235U capture cross section from 500 eV up to 3 keV is shown in Fig. 3 (lower panel). It follows recent Los Alamos (Jandel et al.) [30] and RPI (Danon et al.) [31] measure- ments, lying signiﬁcantly (20–40%) below ENDF/B-VII.1 [32]. A good agreement with the RPI measured ﬁssion yield is observed in the upper panel of the same ﬁgure. The measured yield at RPI is the fraction of neutrons incident on a sample that produce a particular reaction (capture or ﬁssion). It includes reactions which occur in the ﬁrst neutron interaction (primary yield) and those which occur after multiple scattering. The capture mea- surements observed the gamma-rays emitted using the RPI multiplicity detector [34]; ﬁssion events were sepa- rated from gamma events based on the gamma cascade total energy deposition and the multiplicity of the gamma
FIG. 2. (Color online) n+235U prompt ﬁssion neutron mul- tiplicity in CIELO-1 (IAEA CIELO) and CIELO-2 (CEA
CIELO), in the resonance (upper panel) and the  fast  (bot- tom panel) energy ranges. Data taken from EXFOR [29].
cascade [31].
The 235U capture cross section from 3 to 80 keV is shown in Fig. 4; the new CIELO-1 evaluation lies above ENDF/B-VII.1 for energies from 3 to 20 keV closely fol- lowing Los Alamos Jandel data [30]. The CIELO-2 (CEA
FIG. 3. (Color online) Average 235U(n,f) and 235U(n,γ) cross sections from ENDF/B-VII.1 [32], JENDL-4 [33] and CIELO-1
libraries are compared with RPI thick-target data [31] from 500 eV up to 3000 eV.
FIG. 4. (Color online) 235U(n,γ) cross section comparing IAEA CIELO (CIELO-1=ENDF/B-VIII.0) and CEA CIELO
(CIELO-2=JEFF-3.3)  vs  selected  experimental  data. The IAEA CIELO (CIELO-1=ENDF/B-VIII.0) follows the Los
Alamos Jandel data.
CIELO) evaluation is signiﬁcantly higher than CIELO-1 from 15 to 80 keV. A priority was also made in CIELO- 1 to match the Wallner Accelerator Mass Spectrometry (AMS) measurements of capture [35], see Table III.
The inelastic scattering cross section has been reevalu- ated as part of a new optical [17, 19] and statistical model analysis of direct and compound reactions [5, 36, 37]. CIELO-1’s total inelastic scattering is reduced compared to ENDF/B-VII.1, see Fig. 5; CIELO-2 features the high- est inelastic scattering cross section below 500 keV, but then agrees pretty well with CIELO-1 cross section in the important range from 500 keV up to 2 MeV. CIELO-2 inelastic cross section becomes 10% lower than CIELO-1 at 5 MeV. Preequilibrium processes become important for incident energies above about 10 MeV. These, together with inelastic scattering reactions involving the excitation of collective states, are included in EMPIRE model calcu- lations, allowing for the modeling of 14 MeV secondary neutron emission data measured by Kammerdiener at Liv- ermore shown in Fig. 6. The 235U(n, 2n) and 235U(n, 3n) cross sections are shown in Fig. 7; IAEA CIELO-1 evalu- ation is in excellent agreement with Frehaut and Veeser measured data for (n,2n) and (n,3n) reactions, respec- tively. The CEA CIELO-2 evaluation is higher than Fre- haut data at the (n,2n) threshold and lower above 11 MeV. The CEA CIELO-2 evaluation overestimates the (n,3n) Veeser data at 20 MeV.
FIG. 5. (Color online) 235U total inelastic cross sections in the IAEA CIELO-1 and CEA CIELO-2 evaluations.FIG. 6. (Color online) 235U neutron emission spectra. IAEA CIELO-1’s secondary neutron spectra, for 14 MeV incident en-
ergy, compared to measurements and to ENDF/B-VII.1. Fis- sion neutrons are included.
The importance of the need for a better understand- ing of the prompt ﬁssion neutron spectra (PFNS) from actinides, owing to its large impact on criticality calcu- lations, led to a multi-year IAEA Coordinated Research Project, the results of which are now documented in a major article [11]. An important conclusion was that the PFNS from thermal neutrons on 235U should have a lower average energy, 2.00 MeV, versus the previous 2.03 MeV, based on an IAEA analysis of spectra and dosimetry ac- tivation measurements. This is a ﬂashback to the past: Watt’s seminal 1952 Physical Review paper, from the early days of Los Alamos, parameterized the data of the time with a functional form that had an average energy of
2.00MeV! However, the evaluated PFNS is signiﬁcantly
TABLE III. AMS data for 235U and 238U(n, γ) from Wallner [35]. The experimental data are compared to the spectrum-averaged data calculated for the IAEA CIELO-1=ENDF/B-VIII.0, and CEA CIELO-2, cross section values.harder than spectra predicted by the Madland-Nix model (e.g., ENDF/B-VII.0 PFNS) for outgoing neutron ener- gies above 10 MeV. This behavior signiﬁcantly improves agreement of calculated spectrum average cross sections with measured data for high-threshold reactions.
At higher incident neutron energies - 0.5 up to 20 MeV incident energy - CIELO adopts the calculated values by Neudecker [6] which were based on an extension of the Madland-Nix model, calibrated to measured data reported in this issue of Nuclear Data Sheets. This spectrum is seen to agree well with the NUEX data of Lestone and Shores in Fig. 8  for incident neutrons  with an  average  energy  of about 1.5 MeV. It is evident from the average PFNS energies shown in Fig. 9 that the trend of the Neudecker PFNS evaluations above 0.5 MeV incident energy matches the new IAEA spectrum average energy at thermal, and removes the previous ENDF/B-VII.1 unphysical kink in the neutron average energy near 3 MeV (which was based on matching one particular data set, that of Boykov [29]). Above 5 MeV the Neudecker evaluation is inﬂuenced by the new Los Alamos “Chi-nu” PFNS data [8], also de- scribed in this issue.
B.238U Neutron Reactions
Prior to CIELO, evaluation projects have been strongly inﬂuenced by the 238U resonance analyses by Derrien, Courcelle, Leal, and Larson in the resolved resonance re- gion, and Fro¨hner in the unresolved resonance region, used in many of the world’s various libraries. Previous higher energy neutron cross section evaluation work in the US
FIG. 7. (Color online) 235U(n,2n) and (n,3n) comparing  IAEA CIELO (CIELO-1=ENDF/B-VIII.0) and CEA CIELO
(CIELO-2=JEFF-3.3). The asterisk indicates that the original published data values were modiﬁed by the evaluator.
FIG. 8. (Color online) 235U(n,PFNS). CIELO-1’s prompt ﬁs- sion neutron spectra compared to NUEX data and to ENDF/B-
VII.1, for 1.5 MeV incident energy.
FIG. 9. (Color online) Major actinide averaged prompt ﬁssion neutron energy in CIELO-1 versus ENDF/B-VII.1.
was led by Young and Chadwick, and Madland for PFNS (LANL); in Europe by Romain, Morillon (CEA), and Vla-
duca and Tudora for PFNS, and in Japan by Iwamoto, Otuka, Chiba, Kawano, and Ohsawa for PFNS.
The present CIELO evaluation work was done by Capote, Trkov, Sirakov, Schillebeeck, Kopecky, Kahler, Sin, Talou, Neudecker, Rising, Morillon, and Romain. It in- volves both a new resonance analysis that takes advan-  tage of new measurements at  Geel, and  a  new  analysis of fast reactions using a coupled-channels optical model treatment, together with Hauser-Feshbach and preequilib-rium modeling of compound and direct reaction processes and ﬁssion. The CIELO-1 evaluation is described in de- tail by Capote et al. in Ref [5] as well as in the main ENDF/B-VIII.0 paper [9], both in this issue of Nuclear Data Sheets.
The new evaluation for neutron induced reaction on
FIG. 11. (Color online) 238U(n,γ) comparing IAEA CIELO-1 (=ENDF/B-VIII.0) and CEA CIELO-2 (=JEFF-3.3).
238U in the resonance region was carried out consider- ing well documented experimental data in the literature, and new measurements carried out at n TOF, LANL, and Geel. Resonance parameters of individual resonances be- low 1200 eV were adjusted from a simultaneous resonance shape analysis of capture data obtained at GELINA [38] and transmission data obtained at a 42 m and 150 m sta- tion of ORELA [39, 40]. The contribution of the bound states was adjusted to produce a parameter ﬁle that is fully consistent with these data. This is illustrated in  Fig. 10 which compares the experimental transmission Texp and theoretical transmission TM for the uranium sample with a 0.175 at/b areal density. Using the param- eters of ENDF/B-VII.1, which are adopted from Derrien et al. [41], the theoretical and experimental transmission are not consistent. This suggests that Derrien et al. [41] applied a normalization correction to the experimental transmission to get a consistent ﬁt.
In the unresolved resonance region average capture and total cross sections were derived from a least squares anal- ysis of experimental data reported in the literature using the GMA code [42]. The generalised ENDF-6 model to- gether with standard boundary conditions was used to parameterise these average cross sections in terms of
measured at RPI, can be useful for validation [5, 47].
The CIELO-1 and CIELO-2 evaluated 238U(n,2n) cross sections are shown in Fig. 15, compared to ENDF/B-VII.1 and to data. The earlier ENDF/B-VII.1 evaluation rose to higher values in the 6-8 MeV region above the thresh- old compared to some of the other evaluations (not shown in ﬁgure), and this same behavior is continued in the new CIELO-1 evaluation, informed in part by new Kr- ishichayan measurements [54] from TUNL.
FIG. 12. (Color online) n+238U prompt ﬁssion neutron multi- plicity in IAEA CIELO-1 in the MeV-energy range.
FIG. 13. (Color online) 238U total nonelastic cross sections in
the IAEA CIELO-1 and CEA CIELO-2 evaluations.
FIG. 14. (Color online) 238U(n,n’) cross sections in the IAEA CIELO-1 and CEA CIELO-2 evaluations.
FIG. 15. (Color online) 238U(n,2n) comparing IAEA CIELO (CIELO-1=ENDF/B-VIII.0) and CEA CIELO (CIELO-
2=JEFF-3.3) with data, including recent TUNL measure- ments.
The previous ENDF/B-VII.1 evaluation was motivated by old LANL Knight data, together with integral measure- ments of (n, 2n) reaction rates in critical assemblies (see Refs. [9, 32]), and this behavior is corroborated by the TUNL and other measurements, which guided the model calculations used in the present analysis. The new 14 MeV
FIG. 16. (Color online) Integral neutron transmission through a depleted uranium sphere, for a Cf spontaneous ﬁssion neutron source, compared with simulations that use CIELO-1 data (ENDF/B-VIII.0).
CIELO-1 evaluation is a little higher than the previous ENDF/B-VII.1’s value.Detailed discussions of integral data testing results of the uranium evaluations are given in Refs. [5, 9]. Here we show just one example: the neutron leakage spectra from a depleted uranium (0.2% of 235U) sphere of diameter 24 cm (R=12, r =4 cm). These were measured by the ToF technique at IPPE, Russia with 252Cf and D-T neutron sources, see Simakov et al. [55]. The californium sponta- neous ﬁssion source result is shown in Fig. 16, and 14 MeV transmission data is shown in Capote’s paper [5]. The mea- sured and MCNP§R    version 6 simulated neutron spectra leaking from the outer surface of this sphere are shown in Fig. 16. It is evident that both CIELO-1 (ENDF/B-VIII.0) and ENDF/B-VII.1 reasonably reproduce the measured data, providing a useful validation of the evaluated data for neutron transport applications.
239Pu Neutron Reactions
Prior to CIELO, evaluation projects have been strongly inﬂuenced by the plutonium resonance analyses by Der- rien, Leal, Larson, de Saussure, Fort, and Nakagawa. Higher energy neutron cross section plutonium evalua- tion work in the US was led by Young, Arthur, Chadwick, Talou, and MacFarlane, and Madland for PFNS (LANL); in Europe by Romain, Morillon, and Delaroche (CEA);
FIG. 17. (Color online) n+239Pu prompt ﬁssion neutron mul- tiplicity in CIELO-1 and CIELO-2, in the resonance and the fast range.
and in Japan by Iwamoto, Otuka, Chiba, and Kawano. In the last three years the CIELO collaboration on
239Pu adopted the earlier WPEC Subgroup 34 work on resonances by de Saint Jean, Noguere, Peneliau, Bernard, Serot, Leal, Derrien, Kahler, and McKnight, and updated the fast region ﬁssion, nubar, PFNS, and capture cross sections (work by Romain, Morillon, Chadwick, Talou, Neudecker, Kawano, Kahler, Capote, Trkov).  CIELO-1 has adopted the recent new standards ﬁssion cross sec-  tion [3], which increased the 239Pu ﬁssion reference cross section by about 0.4% in the 0.1 keV to 1 MeV range relative to the earlier standards. The diﬀerent prompt ﬁs- sion neutron average multiplicity evaluations for CIELO-1 and CIELO-2 are shown in Fig. 17. This ν quantity re- mains one of the most inﬂuential parameters in aﬀecting nuclear criticality. As for the evaluation for 235U, it was adjusted (slightly) to optimize criticality simulations. The CEA evaluation for CIELO-2 has slightly renormalized the WPEC Subgroup 34 ﬂuctuating values, see Fig. 17 (upper panel). The prompt ﬁssion spectrum for CIELO-1 is taken from ENDF/B-VII.1 below 6 MeV (though at thermal a very small modiﬁcation was made, making it slightly harder), and at higher incident energies it is based on a recent analysis by Neudecker [6].Earlier evaluations, such as ENDF/B-VII and JEFF-  3.1, JENDL-4.0 suﬀer from a longstanding deﬁciency: an overprediction of plutonium solution criticality in trans- port simulations by approximately 500 pcm (0.5% in k-eﬀ) [20]. The proposed resonance and prompt nubar updates  by WPEC Subgroup 34 remove approximately half of this over-prediction.  Further, the inﬂuence of our 16O CIELO- 1 evaluation and the new scattering kernels recommended by WPEC/Subgroup 42, now lead to much-improved ther- mal plutonium solution criticality predictions as discussed below in Sec. V.
Additional improvements must follow this pilot project. In the coming years we expect to see new plutonium prompt ﬁssion spectra (PFNS) and ﬁssion cross section data from the Los Alamos Chi-nu and TPC experiments and consideration of newly evaluated (softer) thermal PFNS from the  IAEA  CRP  for 233U and  239Pu  [11];  as an interim step we included the Neudecker PFNS spec- trum for incident energies above 5 MeV, which provides an improved treatment of the eﬀects of multi-chance ﬁs- sion and preequilibrium processes. Also, the recent Mosby et al. DANCE capture data should impact a future plu- tonium resonance analysis in the unresolved and resolved resonance regions, analogous to how DANCE data inﬂu- enced the 235U CIELO-1 evaluation described above.  In the fast region above 30 keV, these data [7] motivated the capture cross section change shown in Fig. 18.
FIG. 18. (Color online) 239Pu(n,γ) in CIELO-1 versus
ENDF/B-VII.1, showing the inﬂuence of the new Mosby [7]
Los Alamos DANCE detector data.
56Fe Neutron Reactions
A new eﬀort by the CIELO collaboration to improve iron cross sections was deemed important based on sen- sitivity studies of nuclear criticality and shielding, and thermal and fast reactor design work. For example, uncer- tainty assessments performed by the WPEC Subgroup 26 for innovative reactor systems show that the knowledge of the inelastic scattering cross section of 56Fe should be FIG. 19. (Color online) Photon yields (capture reactions per in- cident neutron) from the 56Fe(n,γ) calculated with the CIELO- 1  and ENDF/B-VII.1  cross  section  using  MCNP§R    version  6
compared to RPI thick-target data.
improved to meet the target accuracy requirements for these systems.
The previous 56Fe evaluations in the various libraries from diﬀerent regions are largely independent, with some exceptions such as the resolved resonance parameters. They relied on the optical model and statistical model calculations, where the secondary particle energy and an- gular distributions play an important role in radiation shielding calculations. The evaluations can be separated into four energy ranges: (a) the resolved resonance region up to 850 keV, (b) from 850 keV to about 7 MeV where ﬂuctuations still persist in the measured total cross sec- tion, (c) from about 7 MeV to 20 MeV, and (d) above
20 MeV. F. Perey and C.  Perey  of ORNL evaluated the resolved resonance parameters for ENDF/B-VI, and ENDF/B-VII.1 and CENDL have the same resonance parameter set. Other evaluations (JENDL, JEFF, and ROSFOND) adopt a modiﬁed version of the resolved reso- nances by Fro¨hner, performed for the JEF-2.2 evaluation. The present CIELO-1 work was performed by Her- man, Nobre, Brown, Arcilla, Trkov, Capote, Leal, Plompen,
Danon, Qian, Ge, Liu, Hanlin, Ruan, Sin and Simakov, and is described in detail in this issue, in Ref. [4].
In the MeV energy region, the ﬂuctuation behavior seen in the experimental total cross sections, which an optical model cannot reproduce, should be represented in the eval- uated ﬁles as this can be important in neutron transport and shielding calculations. Usually the total cross sections in this energy region are obtained by tracing the exper- imental data available. For the other reaction channels,
the Hauser-Feshbach model calculations are used for the evaluation, though the model codes employed are diﬀer- ent.
The CIELO-1 evaluation in the resonance region essen- tially adopts JENDL with a correction of a typo for one resonance, deletion of one spurious resonance at 59.8 keV (pointed out by K. Guber), and modiﬁcations to the back- grounds below. Up to 4 MeV, the evaluated data for total, elastic cross sections and angular distributions, and in- elastic scattering are based on measured data. At higher energies, EMPIRE nuclear model calculations played an important role, including the use of a soft-rotor optical model potential [56, 57].
FIG. 20. (Color online) 56Fe(n,γ) in CIELO-1 versus ENDF/B- VII.1.
The resolved resonance range extends up to the ﬁrst inelastic scattering level (847 keV). Then, up to 2 MeV, capture cross sections were guided by the recent RPI ex- periment [58]. Fig. 19 shows comparisons of the γ-yields from the 56Fe(n,γ) reaction (comparisons for natFe are given in Ref. [4]). The CIELO-1 representation matches the RPI data better than the earlier ENDF/B-VII.1 eval- uation.
As in previous evaluations, “background” modiﬁcations to the cross sections above 400 keV were added by Trkov, to account for hypothesized missing p- and d-wave reso- nances and to avoid an unphysically-low neutron capture cross section. This background is, however, about 50% lower  than in ENDF/B-VII.1 (see Fig. 20).  In addition,     a background was added in the 10 eV–100 keV region to extend the “1/v” dependence (see Fig. 20), and to better reproduce the measured ORELA capture data by Spencer et al. as seen in Fig. 21. This additional background was also motivated in part by a desire to better model the ZPR-34/9 critical assembly.
The inelastic scattering in CIELO-1 up to 4 MeV fol- lows experimental data from Geel (Negret) and from Dupont (renormalized by Trkov); the latter  data  hav- ing a higher resolution. Above 4 MeV, EMPIRE model calculations are used, which were validated against the Negret and the Nelson (Los Alamos) measurements of
FIG. 21. (Color online) 56Fe(n,γ) in CIELO-1 versus ENDF/B- VII.1, showing ORELA Spencer’s data, near 28 keV resonance.
inelastic scattering followed by γ-ray emission. Compared to ENDF/B-VII.1, the inelastic scattering cross section in CIELO-1 is larger, for the energy range from threshold up to 14 MeV (Fig. 22).
FIG. 22. (Color online) 56Fe(n,inel) in CIELO-1 versus ENDF/B-VII.1. Region from 0.995 to 1.055 MeV is enlarged
in the insert.
E.16O Neutron Reactions
The previous ENDF/B-VII.1 database comes from a merging of R-matrix analyses by Hale of LANL above 3.4 MeV, and by Lubitz and Caro of KAPL below 3.4 MeV, together with higher energy data from measurements and model calculations by Young and Chadwick. This evalua- tion has been adopted by (or at least strongly inﬂuenced) many other evaluation projects, for example JEFF-3.2, CENDL, and ROSFOND. But the CIELO-1 researchers recognized that some signiﬁcant modiﬁcations are now warranted; for example, a previous renormalization of the (n, α) cross section downwards by 32% for ENDF/B-VII  is now removed, as described below. We note that this conclusion diﬀers from that summarized in our CIELO document at the beginning of the project three years ago
[1](our views changed). CIELO evaluation work for oxy- gen has been performed by Hale, Leal, Lubitz, Kunieda, Plompen, Kopecky, Kawano, Quaglioni and others. Two sets of evaluations were created for testing: Hale’s (CIELO- 1), and Leal’s (CIELO-2), the latter having  two  options for the (n,α)  cross  section  that  can  be  studied. 16O(n,α): The 16O(n,α) reaction is important in nuclear criticality applications involving oxide fuels, and water, and its inverse – the 13C(α,n) reaction – plays an essen-  tial role in nucleosynthesis studies, being a major source  of neutrons in the s-process responsible for many of the elements produced above the iron peak.
Hale, Paris [59] and Kunieda [60] have been making the point, for over a decade, that R matrix calculations constrained by unitarity, together with 16O total and elas-  tic scattering data, point to the need for a signiﬁcantly higher (n,α) cross section in the 3-6 MeV range. This view was adopted for the CIELO-1 evaluation, where the cross section was increased by 40% over this range, with fur- ther increases as the incident energy extends to 9 MeV. Even though the Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) NDaST sensitivity calculations of Hill show a very small sensitiv- ity of the most-sensitive benchmarks to this cross section (about 3 pcm per % change in (n,α)), because of the very large 40% change in the cross section one ﬁnds signiﬁcant changes in calculated criticality (over 100 pcm).
The (n,α) experimental data (and its inverse) support- ing this change have been analyzed by Giorginis [61]. This (re-)analysis primarily concerned itself with, in the inverse reaction (α,n), the data of Bair and Haas [62] (BH73), Harissopulos [63] (Har05), Heil [64] (Heil08) and compared it to that of Giorginis [65](IRMM07) for the ‘forward’ (n,α) reaction.
The conclusion of this analysis indicates the following scale factors, assumed energy independent, should be ap- plied to the data as given in the respective publications:
@2
@3
@4
Here, σorig,corr are the original and corrected (by energy- independent scalings shown here) data of the angle- integrated cross sections from the publications noted in parentheses. We discuss each of these factors and their physical origins.
The ratio σcorr(Har05)/σorig(Har05) 1.36 was deter- mined through a re-analysis by Giorginis [61] of the target thickness of the 99 2%-enriched 13C target employed. The evaluation of the target thickness by Har05 was ac- complished by analyzing γ yield of 1,747 keV protons impinging on the enriched 13C target and comparing to the known resonance in the 14N system. Giorginis [61], however, notes that the absence of a plateau in the γ yield in Fig.(1) of Har05 indicates that the target thickness is comparable to the width of the energy resolution function and requires a deconvolution (via Voight proﬁle) analysis
in order to accurately determine the target thickness. The original target thickness calculation by Har05 employed the FWHM of the γ yield which mischaracterizes the tar- get thickness. This correction results in a smaller 13C surface density by roughly 30% and the corresponding scale factor of 1.36 in the cross section. The scale factor   of 1.36 applied to the original Har05 cross section is in fairly good agreement with the scale of the data of Heil08, IRMM07 and, incidentally, with scale factors determined in unitary descriptions of data by Hale [59] and Kunieda [60].
Turning now to the topic of data reported in BH73, we discuss the origin of the factors (0.70 1.36) appearing  in Eq.(3) for the corrected BH73 cross section:
@5
@6
which is approximately equal, for a range of energies, to the Har05 corrected data as indicated by Eqs.(2)–(4).FIG. 23. (Color online) 16O(n,α) in CIELO versus ENDF/B- VII.1, showing the higher cross section in the new evalua-
tion. Hale’s R-matrix calculation in the CIELO-1 evaluation, adopted by ENDF/B-VIII.0, agrees very well with Giorginis’ recommendation based on a factor 0.95 times the original Bair and Haas published data.
The factor 1.36 discussed above is applied similarly to the thick-target yields of BH73 to transform them to thin- target cross sections as determined by Giorginis [61]. The factor 0.70 is the neutron eﬃciency correction determined in an analysis by Plompen [66].
The present discussion goes some way to addressing the discrepancy between the ENDF/B-VI.8 evaluation scale and that of ENDF/B-VII.1 and -VIII.0. Note, however, that the shape of the Har05 (α, n) cross section data remains inconsistent with the evaluation of Hale and has been removed from the evaluation.
Giorginis recommends renormalizing up his own Geel data, ﬁrst published at the Nice ND2007 conference, to be consistent with the 0.95-normalized Bair and Haas data, though so far Giorginis has distributed Geel data only in the 6.3–9 MeV range. (We assume that the Khryachkov (IPPE, Obninsk) data remain in contradiction with the scale of the new recommendation).
Thus, progress has been made on clarifying what can only be said to be a messy state of aﬀairs. But it is recog- nized that future experiments are needed to corroborate   the large, approximately +40%, changes being made in CIELO-1 (Fig. 23). Indeed, new experimental eﬀorts have been initiated by Los Alamos (Hye Young Lee et al.) using the LENZ detector, and by astrophysical groups pursuing low-background underground measurements (Wiescher et al.), and we look forward to the publication of these data. 16O(n,tot): The total 16O(n,tot) cross section plays an im- portant role in our understanding of neutron reactions in oxygen, in part because of its inﬂuence on the (n,α) reac- tion via unitarity.  Historically there have been questions  at the 3-4% level regarding the absolute normalization of this cross section: for example the Cierjacks 1968 data being discrepant with the high-resolution Cierjacks 1980 data. Danon et al. [67, 68] have advanced our understand- ing here with a novel method in  which the normalization of a measurement using a water target was made at 2.3 MeV, where the oxygen “window” (where the total cross section falls to almost zero owing to a destructive inter- ference eﬀect) allows the normalization  to  be  made  to the very well known hydrogen standard value. These new RPI data agree with Cierjacks 1968 to about 0.04%. These measurements were also treated as blind validation data, and Fig. 24 shows they largely support the new Hale eval- uation, which was done prior to the measurement. The Hale evaluation [9] agrees with the Danon RPI total cross section data to better than 1% over  the  energy  range  from 0.2–9 MeV. It is now thought that  the  Cierjacks 1980 total cross section data need to be renormalized up  by approximately 3.2-3.8%.
16O(n,elas): The other important change for oxygen is the lower total elastic scattering cross section adopted, from thermal to 10s of keV energies. An assessment by Kopecky and Plompen led to a recommendation of a low-energy value of 3.765 b (CIELO-2); Hale’s latest value of just un-
FIG. 24. (Color online) 16O(n,tot) total cross section in CIELO-1 from Hale, calculated prior to the measured RPI
data from Danon.
der 3.8 barns in the CIELO-1 ﬁle - which was inﬂuenced also by the Schneider (1976) measurement - is about 1.5% lower than the previous ENDF/B-VII.1 evaluation (3.852 b), Fig. 25. This seemingly-modest decrease has a signiﬁ- cant impact on criticality applications (for example, the NDaST sensitivity tools indicate HST benchmarks are sensitive at the 100 pcm per % change in the elastic scat- tering cross section between 1 eV and 100 keV). Kozier, Roubtsov, Plompen and Kopecky [69] have noted that some heavy-water criticality benchmarks also suggest a lower thermal scattering cross section.
F.1H Neutron reactions
The n–p cross section is a primary standard in nuclear physics, featuring the lowest uncertainty of all measured cross sections. The n–p cross section plays an essential role in many neutronics simulations of transport and crit- icality for special nuclear materials (SNM) in solution systems and lattices, and is the ultimate standard for high- accuracy relative cross section measurements of neutron- induced reactions.
The R-matrix analysis for the n–p cross section was performed by G. Hale and M. Paris of LANL as part of the IAEA standards project [3], and it was adopted into the most recent ENDF/B-VIII.0 evaluation and also for CIELO-1 set. The earlier n–p standard [70], also from Hale, was previously adopted by ENDF/B-VII, JEFF, JENDL-4.0 and ROSFOND.
The changes in the n–p scattering cross section at en- ergies below 20 MeV are quite small (and within the un- certainties of recent evaluations), resulting from including in the new evaluation nucleon-nucleon scattering data at energies up to 50 MeV. It should be noted that a com- mon systematic uncertainty of 0.34% was added to the estimated R-matrix uncertainty of the ﬁt. The additional
FIG. 25. (Color online) 16O(n,elastic) elastic scattering cross section in CIELO-1 at low energies.
uncertainty was estimated from the spread in ﬁtted nor- malization of absolute measurements, and represents the “unknown” uncertainty of the method. This additional un- certainty increases the minimum uncertainty of the n–p standard scattering cross section up to about 0.5% [3].
G.	Thermal Scattering Law for Liquid Light and Heavy Water
New evaluations from the thermal scattering law (TSL) of neutrons scattered in liquid light and heavy water are very important in reactor applications. Signiﬁcant eﬀorts within the CIELO project addressed these data needs, coordinated by the Nuclear Energy Agency WPEC Sub- group 42, with a leading role played by the Argentinean group from the Centro At´omico Bariloche (CAB).
TSL evaluations for light and heavy water were gener- ated by Ma´rquez Damia´n, Granada and Cantargi at CAB, in collaboration with Roubtsov from the Canadian Nu- clear Laboratories. Evaluations were based on the CAB Model for Light/Heavy Water [71] and were prepared us- ing NJOY99.396 with updates to extend the calculation grids. Details of the model and its validation with experi- mental data can be found in Refs. [71, 72].
However, the TSL data in ENDF format  are  not  easy to interpolate.  A  TSL  Interpolator  has  been made available online at the IAEA/NDS webpage www- nds.iaea.org/TSL-LibGen that generates the TSL ﬁle in ENDF-6 format at the user-selected temperature from
273.15 up to 8000K.
Compared with the ENDF/B-VII H-H2O evaluation by Mattes and Keinert [73], many changes were introduced which are described in detail in the ENDF/B-VIII.0 pa- per [9]. These changes allowed an improved agreement with experimental neutron cross section data, and better represent the reduction in the total cross section on heavy water at sub-thermal energies (0.3 - 3.0 meV), which was already found in the ENDF/B-VII.1 evaluation [32]. They also reproduce a reduction of the experimental total cross section in the thermal range (10 - 50 meV) which was not possible with previous evaluations. This reduction in the total scattering cross section can be traced to the eﬀects of coherent scattering in oxygen, which were not included in previous evaluations.
IV.COMPARISON WITH FEEDBACK FROM ADJUSTMENT PROJECT
The WPEC Subgroup 39 project develops methods and approaches to provide feedback from nuclear and covari- ance data adjustment considerations. The project has per- formed several cross section adjustments [74] based on a Bayesian approach. It uses available covariance data, sen- sitivity coeﬃcients, and discrepancies between measure- ments and calculations, not only for criticality and reac- tion rate (spectral index) measurements but also for sam-
ple irradiations, reactivity and neutron transmission mea- surements. The Subgroup 39 researchers emphasize that past adjustments did not necessarily point to physically- correct nuclear data, owing to limitations in the method, including non-unique solutions, possible unappreciated systematic errors in the experiments, and compensating eﬀects. In fact most of the activity of that Subgroup has been devoted to develop methods that help avoid compen- sating eﬀects, to detect systematic errors in the experi- ments [75] and to select integral experiments that provide information on separated physics eﬀects [74].
Here we brieﬂy summarize some of the cross section changes made for CIELO-1, compared to insights provided by the WPEC Subgroup 39 Adjustment project.
Fast reactor sodium worth reactivity measurement in Japan suggested a substantially (20-40%) reduced 235U capture cross section in the 0.5–2 keV region, compared to ENDF/B-VII.1 (Fukushima et al. [76]). CIELO concurs with this, following corroborating cross section measurements at LANL/DANCE [30] and RPI [31]. CIELO-1 also adopts a higher cap- ture cross section from 2.25-50 keV based on the Jandel DANCE data. This is partly consistent with the Japanese adjustment guidance, except for 6–20 keV where the adjustment goes in the opposite di- rection (however, we note that the sensitivity of the Japanese SWR measurements is almost negligible from 6–20 keV (Fukushima et al. [76]).
238U inelastic is suggested to be lower than ENDF/B-VII.1 in the 2-5 MeV region, and in the 0.1–1 MeV region, according to Palmiotti [74]. This is partly consistent with the CIELO-1 changes; CIELO-1 is lower than ENDF/B-VII.1 from 0.2–0.6 MeV, but it is higher from 0.6–1 MeV. The values in the CIELO-1 ﬁle appear to be also consistent with the conclusions from Santamarina in a JEFF ad- justment study [77]. We note though that changes
that the evaluators made for CIELO-1 (and ENDF/B- VIII.0) one sees that they agree only for about half the cases. For the cases where the new CIELO evaluation choices disagree with the adjustment feedback, we are in- clined to think that the CIELO changes are more likely to be correct, as they were generally guided by fundamental data measurements. This is not necessarily always true, but adjustment feedback often have suﬀered from the ad- justment process having non-unique solutions, together with the deﬁciencies in the evaluated covariance data. For example, given the absence or the deﬁciency of covariance data for many angular and energy distributions in the evaluated data ﬁles, the adjustment process will tend to assume (incorrectly) that such distributions are perfectly known and thus not subject to change, and instead put the adjustments into other cross sections where covariance data are present.
Thus we conclude that integral data simulations can be used to guide the evaluation process, but should not replace it when better, more convincing evidence is pre- sented. We also note that the production of “adjusted libraries” is a perfectly reasonable and warranted step beyond the creation of an evaluated data library, for ap- plications that demand very high agreement with integral data, and especially where the application (e.g. a reactor) is neutronically similar to the critical assembly integral data that was used for the adjustment.
V.CRITICALITY VALIDATION TESTING
A.General
Validation testing of CIELO ﬁles was done throughout the evaluation process, providing feedback on the data libraries and how they perform, in concert together, for thousands of criticality and neutron transmission bench- marks (although this type of global test however can hide
in CIELO inelastic scattering were driven by funda-
compensations  [78]).  The  MCNP§R
version 6 transport
mental improvements in nuclear reaction and struc-
ture modeling, not Subgroup 39 feedback.
239Pu neutron capture is suggested to be higher in the 1–10 keV region, and in the region up to 100 keV, based on the impact of the PROFIL experiment. CIELO-1 has increased the capture in the fast region from 30–100 keV, consistent with this. But CIELO-1 has not yet addressed an upgrade of the unresolved resonance region up to 30 keV.
56Fe. Palmiotti suggests a reduced inelastic scatter- ing cross section just above its threshold, compared to ENDF/B-VII.1. But the CIELO-1 change near threshold goes in the opposite direction, an increase. We note JENDL-4 remains signiﬁcantly higher than ENDF/B-VII.1 in the 0.9-3 MeV region.
Comparing the proposed changes by the Subgroup 39 (Adjustment Project) with the changes to ENDF/B-VII.1
code was used, after the data were processed by NJOY. Most of the testing was done by Kahler (Los Alamos), Trkov (IAEA), Hill (NEA), Brown and Arcilla (BNL), Noguere (CEA), Morillon (CEA), Kodeli (Ljubljana), Wu (CIAE) and Palmiotti (INL).
Owing to space limitations, we do not report here in detail on the results, but instead point the reader to com- panion papers in this issue, most notably the ENDF/B-
VIII.0 data testing [5, 9], and the summary results from NRG/Petten below. Compared to ENDF/B-VII.1 the CIELO-1 ﬁles used in ENDF/B-VIII.0 perform as follows: For fast Pu and U critical assemblies, they perform equally well, with some improved performance for fast reﬂected as- semblies; for intermediate and thermal energy assemblies the performance is also comparable, though for plutonium thermal solutions (PST) the previous large ( 500 pcm) overprediction is largely removed in the CIELO-1 evalua- tions, as discussed further below. The CIELO 235U evalu- ations also appear to ﬁx the problems noted by Japanese researchers on modeling sodium void reactivity in fast critical assembly (FCA) experiments.
An example of the progress made by CIELO-1 is shown in Fig. 26, from an IAEA (Trkov) analysis. Over the suite of 119 benchmarks that have been systematically mod- eled by Los Alamos for many decades (e.g., see Ref. [79]), and compared with measured k-eﬀ criticality, the overall Chi-squared value is seen to have been cut by almost a factor of two from near 4 (in ENDF/B-VII.1) to near 2 (ENDF/B-VIII.0 with CIELO-1). As can be seen in the ﬁgure, notable improvements were obtained in the model- ing of the Jemima and Zeus assemblies. The reason that the overall chi-squared is not unity is that this compari- son of MCNP6§R   version 6 calculation versus measurement does not include any uncertainty in the calculated quanti- ties, arising from nuclear cross section data uncertainties. Although such comparisons are valuable, one should re- member that they can be strongly inﬂuenced by certain integral experiments where the quoted k-eﬀ uncertainties are very small. We have simply adopted the recommended ICSBEP benchmark experiment uncertainties, even for cases where they are probably unrealistically small.
We have used the NEA’s NDaST sensitivity tools to assess the impact of some of the CIELO-1 cross section changes, relative to ENDF/B-VII.1. Below we use the changes to 16O (n,α) and (n,elastic) as an illustrative ex- ample. Ian Hill has analyzed over 3000 criticality bench- marks to characterize the eﬀects.
The role of the increased CIELO-1 16O (n,α) reaction in absorbing neutrons and reducing criticality was found to be of order -100 pcm on LCT experiments, and about -50 pcm for HST experiments. The reduced low energy elastic scattering in CIELO-1, on the other hand, was  found to   be about -50 pcm on LCTs (but a higher value, -150-200 pcm on heavy water benchmarks), while for HST exper- iments the reduction is about -100 pcm for low-leakage systems (owing to reduced moderation), but as high as
FIG. 26. (Color online) The cumulative chi-squared deviation for the new CIELO-1 (in ENDF/B-VIII.0)  evaluation, ver- sus ENDF/B-VII.1, for a suite of 119 assemblies deﬁned by Mosteller et al. [79]. An overall factor of 2 improvement is seen for the full suite.
-300 pcm for high-leakage systems where reduced scat- tering increases the leakage. The overall eﬀect is that simulations of HST highly-enriched solution thermal criti- cal assemblies typically change by -100-200 pcm, whereas LCT low-enriched uranium thermal assemblies change by
-150-200 pcm. Some heavy water benchmarks change by almost -300 pcm. As noted earlier, compared to ENDF/B- VII.1, these reductions in criticality are compensated (in part at least) by other changes to the 235U resonance and nubar data and the thermal PFNS.
For plutonium solution thermal (PST) critical assem- blies, previous ENDF/B-VII.1 and earlier JEFF and JENDL libraries largely overcalculated the criticality, by 500 pcm on average. The adoption of WPEC Subgroup 34’s plutonium resonances and nubar in CIELO removed about one half of this discrepancy. The aforementioned changes to oxygen further reduced the overprediction by 100-200 pcm with an average eﬀect of about 150 pcm (of which about 3/5 was due to the reduced elastic channel, and 2/5 to the increased (n,α). Further small reductions came from the adoption of the new scattering kernel for water, and from the use of a slightly harder thermal PFNS
for plutonium.
Morillon and Bauge have done a useful study to iden- tify  the  impact  of remaining diﬀerences  in CIELO-1 and
FIG. 27. (Color online) Simulations of criticality k-eﬀ for 235U for two critical assemblies: a fast assembly (Godiva, HMF-1),
and a thermal assembly (HST-9). This ﬁgure shows that both IAEA CIELO-1 (ENDF/B-VIII.0) and CEA CIELO-2 (JEFF-
3.3)predict similar k-eﬀ values, but do so for very diﬀerent reasons. The changes in criticality are evident when individ- ual cross section channels are substituted between the two evaluations.
CIELO-2 ﬁles, on a variety of critical assemblies. They start with one set of ﬁles, their CEA evaluations in CIELO- 2, and then make one-at-a-time substitutions of cross sec- tions from CIELO-1 (ENDF/B-VIII.0), noting the change in calculated criticality, until the ﬁnal ﬁle is essentially CIELO-1. This study helps identify where the big lever diﬀerences are, see Figs. 27, 28. We can observe that sub- stantial diﬀerences, with important eﬀects, are found be- tween the CIELO-1 and CIELO-2 ﬁles: they both predict overall criticality well, but for very diﬀerent reasons. One (or most likely, both) are deﬁcient in a variety of ways.
For 235U and 239Pu fast assemblies one can observe that the largest eﬀects are from diﬀerences in ﬁssion (especially the prompt neutron multiplicity and the PFNS spectrum) and inelastic and elastic scattering. Future work will be needed to make more progress on understanding such neutron reactions for ﬁssile actinides.
B.Large-scale Testing from NRG Petten
As was done for the ENDF/B-VII.0 and ENDF/B-VII.1 releases of the library in 2006 and 2011, the new CIELO-1 data in ENDF/B-VIII.0 have been tested by  performing
FIG. 28. (Color online) Simulations of criticality k-eﬀ for 239Pu for  two  critical  assemblies:  a  fast  assembly  (Jezebel, PMF-
1), and a thermal assembly (PST-4). This ﬁgure shows that both LANL CIELO-1 (ENDF/B-VIII.0) and CEA CIELO-
2 (JEFF-3.3) predict similar k-eﬀ values, but do so for very diﬀerent reasons. The changes in criticality are evident when individual cross section channels are substituted between the two evaluations.
calculations for a large number (2515) of criticality safety benchmark cases, taken from the International Handbook of Evaluated Criticality Safety Benchmark Experiments. Among the benchmark cases are ones for a variety of fuel types (leu, ieu, heu, mix, pu, u233); for many diﬀerent physical forms of the ﬁssile component (compound, metal, solution, miscellaneous); and for many types of neutron spectra (thermal, intermediate, fast, mixed).
For the criticality safety calculations performed at NRG, the nuclear data (beta4 release of ENDF/B-VIII.0) were processed by NJOY-12.50, except for the thermal scatter- ing data for H in ZrH, Be in Be, Be in BeO, graphite, and H in CH2, which were processed by NJOY-99.364. The reason for using the older version of NJOY was a data pointer problem when using the NJOY-12.50 version for these thermal scattering data.  All  data  were  processed for room temperature (293.16 K), except for benchmark cases with elevated temperatures. For cases 2, 4, 6 of ieu- comp-therm-002 and for all cases of heu-sol-therm-039 the nuclear data were processed for the temperatures speciﬁed by the benchmark.
The criticality safety calculations were performed with MCNP§R    version  6.1.1.  The  average  results  for all these calculations are summarized in Tables IV–V, for each main category of the International Criticality Safety Benchmark Evaluation Project (ICSBEP). In these tables the results based on ENDF/B-VII.1 are also listed (for exactly the same benchmark cases), for easy comparison. All 2515 benchmark cases were calculated with both ENDF/B-
VII.0and ENDF/B-VII.1. The values for ENDF/B-VII.1 diﬀer from those in Ref. [32], because many benchmark cases have been added since. The values in the tables are averages and standard deviations around the averages, and it is therefore hard to interpret the diﬀerences be- tween the libraries, but in combination with ﬁgures (not shown) several observations can be made:
Results for most of the compound cases with a thermal spectrum have decreased slightly, while the spread in the results is roughly the same, e.g. for the leu cases, the average C/E	1 has decreased from 77 to	144, while the standard deviation around
it is virtually unchanged.
The average for the leu-met-therm cases has im- proved, which is mainly due to the results for leu- met-therm-015 (2% enriched uranium in heavy wa- ter). The cases with 16 cm pitch are now within the experimental uncertainty band, which the 8 cm cases already were.
The standard deviation for the heu-met-inter cases has improved because of a better performance for  the varying C/235U ratio in heu-met-inter-006 (Zeus, a graphite-heu core surrounded by a copper reﬂec- tor), although the mean has increased.
The average for pu-met-inter cases is much better due to the improved description of pu-met-inter-002 (ZPR-6, Assembly 10, a plutonium-carbon-stainless
TABLE IV. The average value of C/E	1 in pcm (100 pcm=0.1%) for CIELO-1 in ENDF/B-VIII.0 (beta4) per main ICSBEP category for compound and metal systems. Shown in italics are the values for the ENDF/B-VII.1 library.
TABLE V. The average value of C/E	1 in pcm (100 pcm=0.1%) for CIELO-1 in ENDF/B-VIII.0 (beta4) per main ICSBEP category for solution and miscellaneous systems. Shown in italics are the values for the ENDF/B-VII.1 library.
steel core with stainless steel and iron reﬂector), a benchmark for which all calculations so far were far too high (in fact, the calculated value for pu-met- inter-002 is still more than 1500 pcm too high).
The averages and standard deviations for heu- met-fast and pu-met-fast cases have changed only slightly.
The average for mix-met-fast cases has come down by 135 pcm, while at the same time the standard deviation around this average has decreased signiﬁ- cantly. This is because the results for mix-met-fast- 002 and -007, which are spherical cores with uranium and beryllium reﬂectors, are lower, while the result for mix-met-fast-008, which is a k-inﬁnity bench- mark, is higher.
The average and standard deviation for u233-met- fast cases have both improved somewhat, as a result of higher results for the u233-met-fast-002, 003, 004, and 005 benchmarks, all of which are spherical cores (with diﬀerent reﬂectors).
The average for pu-met-mixed cases has gone down by 158 pcm, which is an improvement. This is due
to better results for cases 1 and 2 of pu-met-mixed, while cases 3–6 have stayed the same, leading to an increase of the standard deviation.
Most of the pu-sol-therm and u233-sol-therm cases have lower results than before, which is an improve- ment. The spread in the results is roughly un- changed, however.
The mix-sol-therm cases also have lower results than before, which in this case is not an improvement.
The results of all criticality benchmark calculations are consolidated in Fig. 29. All the benchmark cases with e.g. a thermal spectrum are lumped together, and a normal distribution is ﬁtted to the distribution of C/E values (expressed in units of a standard deviation). In case of “perfect” nuclear data (and “perfect” benchmark evalua- tions), the distribution of C/E would be the normal distri- bution with average zero and standard deviation one. The Figure shows that for thermal and fast spectrum cases, the distribution based on ENDF/B-VIII.0 is slightly more peaked than the one based on ENDF/B-VII.1, which is an improvement. For the intermediate and mixed spectrum cases, the statistics are too low for ﬁrm conclusions, but for these cases there appears to be a bias in the keﬀ calcu- lations that is roughly identical for ENDF/B-VIII.0 and FIG. 29. (Color online) The distribution of C/E, in units of the
combined benchmark and statistical uncertainty. The normal distribution (in black) would be the perfect situation.
ENDF/B-VII.1: for most of the intermediate spectrum cases the calculated value lies more than one standard deviation below the benchmark value, whereas for mixed spectrum cases most of the calculated value lie more than one standard deviation above the benchmark value.
VI.COVARIANCES
The CIELO covariance data need continued attention. In the ENDF community, ENDF/B-VII.1 [32] had a fo- cused eﬀort on providing covariances for a large range of isotopes and reactions. Nevertheless, numerous questions remain regarding the quest to represent “credible” un- certainties, especially following comparisons of ENDF/B-
VII.1uncertainty assessments with those in JENDL and JEFF ﬁles, and even when comparing uncertainties as- sessed in the resonance range versus those at energies slightly above the boundary for the fast range. The Nu- clear Energy Agency WPEC Subgroup 39 has provided a valuable assessment of such questions and discrepancies, in a paper by Dr. Ishikawa [80]. This paper pointed  out that – even for very important reactions such as major actinide ﬁssion, capture, and inelastic scattering – diﬀer- ences in uncertainties as large as an order-of-magnitude  are not uncommon for certain energy regimes, and as we will see below this situation has not changed signiﬁcantly. A cynic would note that this reﬂects the enduring diﬃ- culty in deﬁning credible uncertainties in nuclear science (and other ﬁelds of research). The CIELO project includes work that will continue beyond this pilot project, with an aim of resolving some of these questions.
Although work on CIELO covariances is currently in- progress, we provide a summary of some of the uncer- tainty data choices made in CIELO-1, in the Beta-5 ver- sion of the ENDF/B-VIII.0 ﬁles. A focus here on 239Pu and 235U covariance data illuminates the  current status of the work: the covariances for plutonium come from Talou and Neudecker (LANL), and for uranium isotopes come from Capote, Trkov, and Neudecker (IAEA, LANL), and also from the IAEA standards group for the ﬁssion cross sections. Examples of these uncertainties are given in Table VI for 239Pu and Table VII for 235U, for a typical neutron energy of 1 MeV for CIELO-1, ENDF/B-VII.1 and the latest JEFF and JENDL evaluations, together with their impact on the calculated criticality k-eﬀ in Jezebel (PMF-1) (Table VIII) and Godiva (HMF-1) (Ta- ble IX). (A summary of the PFNS uncertainties is given in Ref. [9], showing how these have changed in the re- cent CIELO-1 work for ENDF/B-VIII.0). The criticality uncertainty results were obtained by Ian Hill and Oscar Cabellos (NEA) [81], using the NDaST and MCNP codes, and by Yokoyama and Ishikawa [82]. Of course the various uncertainty data are used for all the appropriate incident neutron energies in the calculations; we tabulate here only
the 1 MeV values owing to space limitations.
TABLE VI. 239Pu cross section uncertainties at 1 MeV in- cident neutron energy, 1-sigma. Values are given for CIELO-
1  (ENDF/B-VIII.0beta5),  ENDF/B-VII.1,  JEFF-3.3 (derived
from CIELO-2, in version JEFF-3.3) and JENDL-4.0u1. The full uncertainty information – values at all incident energies, and correlations – can be obtained from the numerical ﬁles. Comparisons at 1 MeV are useful to illuminate the large diﬀer- ences between the diﬀerent evaluations, which impact diﬀerent Jezebel calculated criticality uncertainties (Table VIII).
TABLE VII. 235U cross section uncertainties at 1 MeV incident neutron energy, 1-sigma, see Table VI caption (note that the
CIELO-1 uncertainty of the PFNS average energy of 1.8% re- places the ENDF/B-VIII.0beta5 value of 0.9% in anticipation of a forthcoming change). Comparisons at 1 MeV are useful  to illuminate the large diﬀerences between the diﬀerent eval- uations, which impact diﬀerent calculated Godiva criticality uncertainties (Table IX). The CIELO-1 total inelastic uncer- tainty MT4 is estimated here as MT51 + MT851.We can make the following observations on covariances, based on the results shown in Tables VI, VII, after which
TABLE VIII. Jezebel (PMF1) criticality k-eﬀ uncertainty, based   on   NDaST   and   MCNP   simulations   that   use the
239Pu  covariance  uncertainty  data,  for  CIELO-1 (ENDF/B-
VIII.0beta5), ENDF/B-VII.1, JEFF-3.3 (derived from CIELO- 2, in version JEFF-3.3) and JENDL-4.0u1. Units are in “pcm”, where 1000 pcm is 1% in k-eﬀ. The summed value is less than the summed individual values in quadrature owing to corre- lations between the various channels. The experimental k-eﬀ value is shown below the calculated (Summed) value for com- parison, and below that is given the absolute diﬀerence between the calculated k-eﬀ and the measured k-eﬀ, C-E.
TABLE IX. Godiva (HMF1-1) criticality k-eﬀ uncertainty, based on NDaST and MCNP simulations that use the 235U covariance uncertainty data, see Table VIII caption.
we will comment on the calculated resulting k-eﬀ uncer- tainties in fast critical assemblies:
1.In comparing diﬀerent evaluator’s assessments of un- certainties, see Tables VI, VII, one is struck by how much they vary, often diﬀering by factors of 2–5 or more! Given that the various covariance evaluators are recognized experts in their ﬁelds, that they have access to the same world-wide measured data, and that they use somewhat similar modeling and eval- uation computational tools, this seems surprising. We must conclude that deﬁning credible uncertain- ties – those that are neither unrealistically large nor small, remains a challenging problem. This partly reﬂects the fact that uncertainties are not physical quantities but instead represent assessments of our knowledge, and such assessments can be subjective.
2.The ﬁssion cross section and nubar uncertainties have increased substantially in CIELO-1 owing to recent considerations by the IAEA standards group, who include an assessment of “unrecognized system- atic uncertainties” (USU), that in some cases dou- ble the previous assessments. Yet the JEFF ﬁssion uncertainty for 239Pu (but not for 235U) is much reduced, in contradiction to this.
3.The 235U neutron capture uncertainty is signiﬁ- cantly smaller in CIELO-1, owing to IAEA evalua- tion considerations that include an improved under- standing following various measurements (including LANSCE/DANCE, RPI, and AMS measurements). The 239Pu neutron capture uncertainty is also re- duced, but to a lesser degree as the experiment at DANCE was not as accurate as that employed for the 235U target. (This is actually more evident in the k-eﬀ results in Tables VIII, IX, since capture occurs mostly at lower energies, below 1 MeV.)
4.The CIELO-1 uncertainty assessments for elastic and inelastic scattering have not changed substan- tially. For 239Pu, CIELO-1 data were just carried over from ENDF/B-VII.1, and the uncertainties are seen to be much larger than those in the JEFF and JENDL ﬁles.
5.The CIELO-1 PFNS evaluation uncertainty for 235U is substantially reduced, owing to the improved eval- uation methodology aided by Starostov, Kornilov, Vorobyev and Chi-Nu new data sets and an im- proved uncertainty quantiﬁcation of experimental data and model values; No change was made to plu- tonium in the fast range between ENDF/B-VII.1
[83] and CIELO-1. Tabulations of the new CIELO-1 PFNS covariances, versus ENDF/B-VII.1, are given in Ref. [9].
We now comment on the implications that these un- certainty data have on calulated k-eﬀ uncertainties for integral fast critical assemblies, see Jezebel (Table VIII) and Godiva (Table IX):
1.The total “Summed” calculated k-eﬀ uncertainties, which often exceed 1000 pcm (1% in k-eﬀ), are very large. This reﬂects the uncertainties in our nuclear physics understanding, and is the reason for contin- ued nuclear science (and CIELO!) research. They are unacceptably large for many applications in nu- clear technology, but fortunately much more accu- rate measurements of integral criticality are avail- able where k-eﬀ is measured to better than a few hundred pcm uncertainty, see the “Exp. unc.” in the tables. In practice the evaluated libraries are either calibrated to match such integral data (the C E values are small) via a nubar tweak (e.g. CIELO-1), and/or are adjusted in a post-evaluation process to match such data (WPEC Subgroup 39).
2.Because of the aforementioned calibration process, the calculated summed k-eﬀ uncertainty for the Jezebel and Godiva assemblies are “discrepant” with the measured (much smaller) diﬀerence in C-E in comparison with the k-eﬀ integral data. This situa- tion is understood. One could avoid the calibration, obtain a worse C-E value, which would now be con- sistent with the above calculated summed criticality uncertainty, and only remedy the worse performance through subsequent “adjustment” to the accurate integral data using Bayesian methodologies. The CIELO-1 researchers will pursue the merits of this approach in the coming years, with Subgroup  39, but at the present time it was not adopted owing      to the lack of a widely-available adjustment capa- bility in all relevant nuclear technology applications communities.
VII.MAIN CONCLUSIONS & FINDINGS
Here we brieﬂy tabulate our main conclusions and ﬁnd- ings from this CIELO pilot project:
How did the collaboration work? Our initial goal of obtaining one consensus CIELO evaluation for each nucleus proved to be unachievable at this ﬁrst stage of the collaboration, and instead we cre- ated two sets of evaluations, CIELO-1 and -2, that spanned the diﬀerent opinions. This was also a con- sequence of the (very reasonable) view that diﬀer- ent evaluation communities desired to maintain in- house capabilities and control of their  evaluated data. But we still feel major accomplishments were made in the evaluations and in the related data that were measured.
Use of standards. Adopting the new IAEA stan- dards cross sections without modiﬁcation, while maintaining good integral performance in criticality simulations, is not easy when there is limited time to work through the various issues in a project with a completion deadline. Still, we showed this to be pos- sible in CIELO. The CIELO-2 evaluation adopted ﬁssion cross sections consistent with previous 2006 standards, which are close to the current ones.
Experiment  versus  theory? Both CIELO-1 and
-2 evaluators used a combination of theory and mod- eling, and experiment, in making evaluated decisions. But one can see something of a diﬀerence in empha- sis. The CIELO-2 evaluators from France empha- size the elegance of evaluations being generated con- sistently by modeling codes that provide a global
match to data with emphasis on integral data per- formance; while the CIELO-1 evaluators tended to be motivated by the desire to represent each indi- vidual measured data set while still achieving the best possible integral performance. This perhaps re- ﬂect Gallic (theory) versus Anglo Saxon (empirical) sensibilities, although the CIELO-1 evaluation com- munity was truly international!
Searching for “minima”. When creating a new CIELO evaluation, it is important to include studies across the breadth of reaction channels involved (ﬁs- sion, PFNS, nubar, capture, scattering, and so on), since they all contribute in concert, in criticality ap- plications. Only in this way can new, and hopefully more accurate, minima be found in a Chi-squared assessment (calculation versus experiment) of the accuracy of the evaluations.
235U, 239Pu ftssion cross section. Recent stan- dards work has doubled the ﬁssion uncertainties ow- ing to assessments of large (1.2%) unrecognized sys- tematic uncertainties in previous experiments, and we included this in CIELO-1. Future studies, as well as the publication of new measurements such as those from the LLNL-LANL TPC detector, will contribute to continued assessments of these uncer- tainties, which have a substantial impact on our applications.
235U PFNS. There is a compelling case that the thermal PFNS in 235U should be softer than in ear- lier evaluations such as ENDF/B-VII.1; likewise, at fast energies near 1 MeV, the PFNS is softer than in earlier evaluations.
235U capture. The capture should be lower in the 1 keV region than in earlier evaluations such  as ENDF/B-VII.1; In the 10s of keV region, although there are indications from some data (LANL/DANCE) that the capture should be higher versus earlier evaluations, more accurate measure- ments are needed for a deﬁnitive understanding.
235U scattering. Uncertainties remain in elastic and inelastic cross sections and angular distribu- tions, in the fast region (100s keV to MeVs), which will need new measurements for their resolution. The semi-diﬀerential scattering type of measurement, pi- oneered at RPI, is a useful technique to pursue.
235U and 239Pu nubar. Nubar is a parameter that evaluators adjust to optimize agreement with crit- icality measurements. Criticality depends so very sensitively on nubar that, even though it is often known to better than a percent, it can be adjusted based on integral data and remain consistent with the fundamental measurements. Perhaps this is no bad thing. There is little optimism that super-high- accuracy fundamental nubar measurements will be- come feasible any time soon.
238U capture. Three new experiments have been carried out for this very important reaction conﬁrm- ing cross section values derived within the IAEA Neutron Standard project (2006 and 2017). An ex- cellent agreement is also achieved by CIELO-1 evalu- ation with pioneering AMS experiments by Wallner et al.. CIELO-1 evaluation adopted reference cross sections from Standards, which agree with latest measurements. However, the CIELO-2 evaluation is about 5% lower around 20–30 keV.
238U inelastic. Advances have been made to scat- tering, through theory work together with the re- cent semi-diﬀerential RPI measurements, but work  is still needed to understand and resolve diﬀerences between CIELO-1 and CIELO-2 evaluations.
239Pu, 235U PFNS. New data from the Chi-nu LANL-LLNL experiment is now being published, that should better constrain the various evaluations (which presently show signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the mean values and in their covariances).
239Pu inelastic. Advances have been made to scat- tering by CIELO-2 (JEFF-3.3), though this rep- resents future work for CIELO-1. Work is still needed to understand and resolve diﬀerences be- tween CIELO-1 (unchanged from ENDF/B-VII.1) and CIELO-2 evaluations, including the very diﬀer- ent (factor of 5) covariance assessments. Future work will beneﬁt from semi-diﬀerential RPI-type measure- ments.
56Fe reactions. Developing an improved evalua- tion for isotopes of iron has proved to be a chal- lenge. A detailed representation of the resonating cross sections is important to quite high incident energies, as is a proper accounting of neutron cap- ture and scattering processes, and we conclude that large uncertainties in existing measurements result  in inadequately-constrained evaluated data. This al- lows various evaluation choices, with a consequence that great attention is needed to optimally match integral criticality and transport data. Our ﬁnal CIELO-1 evaluation in ENDF/B-VIII.0 performs fairly well for criticality applications, but future work on elastic and inelastic scattering cross sec- tions and angular distributions is needed to improve simulations of neutron transmission through macro- scopic quantities of iron.
16O reactions. A consensus was established for the correct value for the low energy neutron elastic scat- tering cross section, and for the magnitude of the total cross section up to the many-MeVs of inci- dent neutron energy range. This was accomplished through analyses that integrate careful studies of experimental data with theoretical R-matrix analy- ses. While such analyses also support the CIELO-1
larger (by 40%) (n, α) cross section in the few-  MeV region, future experimental work is still needed to corroborate this result.
VIII.FUTURE WORK
This CIELO pilot project is ending in 2018. Ongoing work on covariances for the CIELO data will be included into the ﬁnal ﬁles.
There are additional details regarding the  evaluated  data for CIELO nuclides that have intentionally not been addressed in the CIELO collaboration, owing to time and scope limitations. Fission product yields were not studied, although another NEA WPEC subgroup (Subgroup  37) led by R.W. Mills has made progress here. The IAEA is co- ordinating studies on ﬁssion product data. Another topic   is inelastic scattering. It has been central to the 235,238U CIELO advances, but we were limited in the amount of time available for subject matter experts to work collabo- ratively across diﬀerent laboratories to resolve diﬀerences for 239Pu. The challenges were laid out in a useful IAEA document by Plompen et al. [13]. There remain open questions on the magnitude of the inelastic cross sections, as well as the merits of diﬀerent treatments for angular distributions in both the MeV and the 10s-of MeV pree- quilibrium regions, ranging from quantum to semiclassical approaches [50, 84, 85].
We feel that our CIELO collaboration has stimulated much progress in nuclear experiments, theory, evaluation, and simulation. Many of the results have been adopted by regional evaluation eﬀorts, such as ENDF and JEFF. In the long term, the community will continue CIELO collaborative eﬀorts in nuclear science, under the auspices of both the IAEA and NEA, the IAEA focusing on ad- vancing the underlying cross section data in the CIELO evaluations, and the NEA focusing on sensitivity studies and integral validation testing and feedback.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) for techni- cal secretariat support for the WPEC Subgroup 40 collab- oration and for providing a venue for bringing the CIELO research members together, and the IAEA Nuclear Data Section for related collaborative support. We also thank Dr.  Pavel  Obloˇzinsky´  for  valuable  feedback  on  the  pa- per. Our thanks to all colleagues who have worked on this project during the last ﬁve years.  We  are grateful  to all participant laboratories for their assistance in the work and for their support, with special mention of exper- imental work by the n TOF collaboration at CERN, and staﬀ at Los Alamos, RPI, and JRC–Geel. Work at Los Alamos National Laboratory was carried out under the auspices of the National Nuclear Security Agency of the
U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC52- 06NA25396. ORNL is managed by UT-Battelle, LLC, for the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE- AC05-00OR22725, with the U.S. Department of Energy Nuclear Criticality Safety Program sponsoring the work here. Work at Brookhaven National Laboratory was spon- sored by the Oﬃce of Nuclear Physics, Oﬃce of Science of
the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE- AC02-98CH10886 with Brookhaven Science Associates, LLC. Work at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory was performed under Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344.
