<title>Design Considerations for Secure Wireless Sensor Communication Systems in Harsh Electromagnetic Environments of Nuclear Reactor Facilities</title>
<author>Faranak Nekoogar & Farid Dowla</author>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Technology</Journal>
<Affiliation>a.Dirac Solutions Inc., 5776 Stoneridge Mall Road #226, Pleasanton, California 94588
b.Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, 7000 East Avenue L-183, Livermore, California 94551</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>ANS</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00295450.2018.1452418</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1080/00295450.2018.1452418</URL>
Abstract — Wireless sensors can potentially play a significant role in safety, efficiency, and reliability of the instrumentation and control process in current and next generation nuclear power reactors. While conventional narrowband wireless sensors have shown a certain level of success in some nuclear power plants (NPPs), the radio frequency (RF) propagation challenges posed by the heavy metallic and cluttered environment of NPPs  has prevented their widespread use in such operations. These challenges include RF wave propagation in harsh (reflective, absorptive, cluttered) environments, data security issues, and RF interference to and from other devices in the vicinity of a nuclear reactor core. In this paper, first we address how ultrawideband (UWB) RF technology can complement the narrowband (i.e., WiFi) solutions that have been used in some NPPs by providing an alternative solution in addressing the signal propagation  issues  in  such  electromagnetically  harsh environments. Second, we discuss and present the UWB software simulation results on multipath harsh environments, and then address the data security issues. In the final sections of the paper, we present the experimental results of using UWB signaling in a representative harsh environment conducted at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology research reactor site. We plan to develop the UWB communications hardware based on the results of this paper and report on its performance in the field with emphasis on the security aspects of the system in a subsequent paper.
Keywords — Nuclear power reactor, secure ultrawideband communications, wireless sensors.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
A typical nuclear power plant’s (NPP’s) instrumentation and control system includes many hundreds of sensors and several kilometers of cables for reporting sensor data. The issues with cable integrity and reliability as well as the cost and time needed for structural modifications of cable maintenance have been a daunting challenge for existing NPPs (Refs. 1 and 2). Figure 1 shows an example of a published cable maintenance issue.
Removing the cables from sensors and replacing cables with reliable wireless radio frequency (RF) links not only
increases the reliability of the monitoring and control systems, it also improves the safety and efficiency of the process while minimizing the maintenance required for cable integrity and longevity. To date, several valuable research and development efforts have been conducted for identifying the needs and requirements of wireless technology and characterizing their use in NPPs (Ref. 3). Past research in this area, through an extensive survey, has identified the importance of wireless sensors as well as key issues that need to be resolved for reliable sensor data communications in a nuclear reactor environment. The major concerns regarding wireless transmission in a nuclear reactor have been identified as data security, RF interference, communi-cations through obstructions, and the heavy metallic
Fig. 1. Cable connector problem could add several days of delay to NPP operations.1
(reflective) environment of a nuclear reactor that degrades conventional RF communications.
In this paper, the motivation behind designing a secure and  reliable  wireless  sensor  communication   system   is to address the concerns discussed in previous studies. Therefore, this paper focuses on the low power transmission of RF pulses through walls and barriers (Fig. 2). The electro- nics used in this paper are currently subject to study under various levels of radiation and a subsequent paper will discuss those results and plans for radiation hardening of them.
II.CHALLENGES AND POTENTIAL SOLUTIONS TO WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS IN NUCLEAR REACTORS
In this section we briefly describe the challenges of RF communications in NPPs and discuss our solutions for mitigating each problem.
II.A.Wireless Communications in Harsh Environments
Heavy metallic environments combined with the amount of electromagnetic interference (EMI) and the thick concrete
walls of nuclear reactors are considered a hostile channel for RF signals. Signal degradation and ultimately cancellation can be caused by multiple reflections or non-line-of-sight (NLOS) paths from metallic surfaces that destructively add to the originally transmitted direct signal or line-of-sight (LOS) path. In addition, penetration through thick walls or other barriers and high EMI can reduce the signal strength of already degraded signals, making wireless communications a significant challenge in nuclear reactor environments (Fig. 3). Our approach for reliable RF communications in harsh propagation channels is a fundamental transition from just narrowband techniques (such as WiFi, Bluetooth, ZigBee,4 etc.) to employ novel ultrawideband (UWB) RF signaling as building blocks of communications. This significant transition allows one to move away from continuous wave- forms in conventional narrowband systems with high- power spectral density at a particular frequency to UWB signaling that uses short-duration RF pulses operating over several gigahertzes of bandwidth and with a lower power
spectral density5,6 as shown in Fig. 4.
From the theoretical perspective, the nature of UWB short-duration pulses reduces the chances of multipath cancellation and EMI degradation and allows for penetra- tion through walls and barriers for the following reasons:
1.Multipath immunity: With the short duration of UWB signal, the reflected multipath signal, NLOS, from an adjacent wall or metallic surface only has a short time window (equal to the pulse width of ~100 ps to several nanoseconds) to destructively add to the original LOS pulse, making the multipath degradation less probable.
Resistance to interference/jamming: The frequency diversity of UWB signals shown in Fig. 4 reduces the effect of EMI, as even when some frequencies are degraded, the rest of the frequencies in such large spectrum can deliver the Fig. 2. (a) Current method: wired sensor communications, and (b) our vision for next generation reactors: secure, reliable wireless sensor communications.
Fig. 3.  Example of hostile RF environment in nuclear reactors: multipath, EMI, and attenuation.
Fig. 4. Comparison of a typical narrowband signal with a UWB pulse in both time and frequency domains: (a) narrowband, continuous waveform and (b) UWB, pulse based.6
3.Penetration properties: The low frequency com- ponents of the UWB pulses allow for penetration through walls while the higher frequency components allow for propagation through small gaps and openings—all in one pulse. Therefore, for concrete walls with rebar, UWB signal is often the optimal solution for propagation challenges.
However, even with all these advantages, when it comes down to practical implementations, careful UWB pulse design and modulation technique are necessary to overcome such challenges for reliable RF communications. Hence, in this paper we develop and present a software simulation analysis for UWB wave characterization in various multipath and interference-induced channels. In addition, we have designed and developed software simulation algorithms for UWB modulation and interference mitigation methods that provide additional immunity to multipath and EMI signal degradations in practical situations. We will discuss the details of our unique approach to channel degradations in Sec. III.
II.B.Wireless Data Security
Since wireless systems transmit and receive data over air interface, they are vulnerable to detection, intentional
jamming, and injection of wrongful messages by an attacker within the communication range. Such concerns have been discussed in an extensive research publication from the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission7: “Wireless systems in nuclear reactors require various remedies, including confi- dentiality, authenticity, integrity, access control, replay detection, and protection against jamming, for ensuring proper information transmission.”
To address data security, we discuss how UWB signal- ing could provide maximum immunity to intentional jamming similar to its resistance to EMI degradation,  which was discussed in Sec. II.A. In addition to the UWB signal’s inherent resistance to jamming, in this paper we also investigate two additional security methods that together can significantly secure the digital data transmission. This hybrid security method consists of physical layer encryption, as well as media access control (MAC) layer encryption.
Our method of physical layer encryption is achieved by pulse coding shared between the transmitter and  receiver that practically looks like noise to any unauthorized receiver or intruder. The pulse coding techniques in UWB could be a combination of varying time delays between the adjacent pulses and changing their shape and polarity for digital information modulation and data transmission. For MAC
layer security, our unique pulse coding is integrated with the
U.S. Nuclear Security Agency–approved advanced encryp- tion standard (AES) algorithm for an additional level of security. The simulation results for this combined approach are presented in Sec. III.
III.UWB SIMULATIONS AND ANALYSIS
For UWB communications, we have developed and simulated a unique modulation technique that allows for reliable communications while reducing the need for strin- gent synchronization that usually causes difficulty in the UWB hardware design of receivers. Wireless communication concerns addressed in this section include UWB interference to other equipment, EMI degradation to UWB, multipath effect in reflective environments, and data security at physical layer.
III.A.Systems Analysis of Secure and Reliable Sensor Communications
In this section, we discuss a novel, robust UWB com- munication technique that not only offers reliable commu- nications in the presence of multipath reflection and EMI, it also allows for physical layer encryption of pulses. This technique, called encrypted transmitted reference (ETR), is an extension to previously developed transmitted-reference (TR) modulation6 with added data security. Before discuss- ing the ETR technique, we introduce the basic concept of  TR modulation to set the background for ETR and address the simulation results presented in Sec. III.B. Transmitted- reference modulation is defined as the transmission of a pair of pulses or doublets separated by a unique delay for each channel to represent data bits. The first pulse in a  TR doublet is a data modulated pulse “data,” which is followed by an unmodulated reference pulse “ref,” separated in time by “D” interval. The TR demodulation scheme relies on the
correlation (similarity) between the received signal with its delayed replica. Therefore, spacing D between the ref and data pulses plays a crucial role in recovering data for each channel at the receiver. Figure 5 shows a TR doublet and a block diagram of a TR receiver.
As shown in the receiver block diagram in Fig. 5, the success of TR modulation in high multipath reflective environments can be traced back to the fact that the incom- ing pulse is compared against its own delayed replica. Since both the original signal and delayed signal have gone through the same RF channel degradations, they are both distorted with the same level of noise and interfer- ence, as well as the same level of multipath degradations. Therefore, the receiver will always find strong correlation between the received signal and its delayed replica. Figure 6 shows an example of reliable data recovery in a noisy and reflective channel with respect to the TR recei- ver block diagram in Fig. 5.
As shown in Fig. 6, the multipath channel has the same stretching effect on both the ref and data pulses. Therefore, due to high correlation between these two pulses at stage “C” the overall signal energy in the correla- tion receiver is increased. The delay between the pulses known to the TR receiver also serves as an automatic synchronization technique which removes the challenges of UWB pulse sampling (i.e., only baseband sampling is required) and stringent short-pulse synchronization for hardware implementations.
Leveraging the basic TR modulation for improving the communication fidelity in hostile RF channels, we have developed the ETR method to add physical layer encryption to UWB communications (Fig. 7). In the ETR technique, randomized delay between the pulses produces a noisy signal over the air interface, where this noisy signal cannot be interpreted by an unauthorized receiver—only the intended ETR receiver is capable of demodulating the transmitted noisy bits.
Fig. 5. (a) Transmitted-reference pulse modulation symbol for data bit “1” and symbol for data bit “0”; and (b) transmitted- reference receiver block diagram where a delayed replica of the received pulse is matched to the original pulse.
Fig. 6. Illustration of TR demodulation in the presence  of noisy and multipath channels.
III.B.System Characterization and Simulation of UWB Communication Performance
In Secs. III.B.1 through III.B.4, we outline various experiments and simulations that we performed in an effort to come up with design specifications of UWB RF systems in NPPs. The particular design we studied included center frequency, bandwidth, pulse repetition frequency (PRF), delay between coded pulses, and range and attenuation.
III.B.1.UWB Interference to Existing Devices—Study of PRF
PRF and bandwidth have a direct effect on UWB average transmitted power. Although UWB pulses are inherently low power, in order to reduce UWB interference
with other RF equipment at NPPs, the PRF has to be reduced. Our simulations show UWB interference can be significantly reduced by low PRF while using short-pulse low-power UWB transmission (Fig. 8).
III.B.2.EMI to UWB—Study of Integration Period
Specific to TR modulations, integration period is an important parameter in UWB pulse design for high EMI environments. Although a long integration period helps the multipath environments as shown in Fig. 6, our simulations show that in high EMI NPP environments the optimal window of integration should be equal to the pulse width to prevent additional noise and EMI accumulation during the pulse correlation at the receiver. Bit-error-rate (BER) perfor- mance as a function of signal-to-noise (SNR) interference is summarized in Fig. 9.
III.B.3.Study of Multipath Effect in Highly Reflective Indoor Channels
Given NPP environments are prone to multipath due to several signal reflections, we have studied various mul- tipath interference models with UWB communications. In particular, we used the channel frequency response at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Reactor (MITR) using Green’s function to model and test communication BER performance for harsh environments (see example of impulse response in Fig. 10).
Our simulation results indicate that even in high multi- path situations UWB communication performance is extre- mely robust. In particular, even at very low SNR interference (~3 dB), the BER performance at the optimal PRF and fractional bandwidth, we see near perfect RF links. The
Fig. 7.  Transmitted-reference transmitter and receiver with physical layer encryption.
Fig. 8. Low PRF for various bandwidths results in lower average power.
Fig. 9. BER performance versus input SNR interference with different values of integration period for pulses of 100-ns duration. The optimal integration period is 100 ns equal to pulse duration. As the integration period increases to 250 ns, the performance degrades due to accumulation of noise.
price for this robust link is simply the lower data bandwidth. For a communication bandwidth of 100 Kbps or less, UWB links are optimal techniques for wireless RF communications in harsh environments including NPPs. These simulation results are consistent with our experimental results (Fig. 11) at the MITR discussed in Sec. IV.
III.B.4.Data Security Study—PRF Versus Dithering
We have also addressed the data security issues from a number of different angles, including encryption and physical layer covertness (to prevent jamming). In this section, we describe the ability to include encryption in the physical layer using both PRF and delay codes in our newly developed ETR UWB modulation technique. We show that while UWB is inherently covert due to short-duration (subnanosecond) pulses, by varying the interpulse delay both for PRF and for the delay between the coded pulse in TR, the spectrum is almost entirely whitened (i.e., noise like). This is illustrated with an example in Fig. 12.
This delay between the pulses could also be a time adaptive code which will allow the development of highly secure physical links. Furthermore, MAC layer AES can be implemented on top of the secure physical layer for added security as shown earlier in Fig. 7.
IV.FIELD EXPERIMENTS
In the following, we summarize preliminary field experiments performed at the MITR, where an existing UWB transmitter from Dirac Solutions Inc. (DSI) was placed at various challenging locations inside the equipment room and a receiver was placed inside the control room with closed door, receiving temperature data. The environment was
Fig. 10. Channel frequency response at the MITR.
Fig. 11. (a) Indoor multipath channel modeled based on data collected from the MITR and (b) BER performance of UWB pulse using the reflective indoor channel model. This simulation is an approximation of the performance, and with a higher number of trials, a lower BER performance of 10–6 could be observed.
Fig. 12. With PRF and delay dithering, the (b) physical channel is completely flattened even at very close proximity of the transmitter. (a) The physical layer power density spectrum for the nondithered modulation is shown by the spectrum.
specifically challenging for RF signals with respect to multipath phenomenon due to the heavy metallic channel in the equipment room, a double-layered concrete wall of 4-ft thickness, and a fully closed metallic door shown in Fig. 13. The goal of this experiment was to characterize UWB signal propagation for reliable communications in a reac- tor facility. The UWB transmitter and receiver used were battery powered and integrated with a temperature sensor.
Figure 14 shows the UWB hardware unit which is capable of both transmission and reception.
In this experiment, one UWB receiver unit was placed in the control room and a UWB transmitter unit was placed at various locations in the equipment room as shown in Fig. 15. In this field experiment, the UWB signals propagated through the heavy metallic channel of the reactor equipment room, including the TX4 location behind the storage tank and
Fig. 13. Example of harsh RF propagation environment of the reactor facility: (a) equipment room, (b) double-layered thick  walls, and (c) fully closed steel door between the control room where the receiver was placed and equipment room where the Fig. 14. DSI’s UWB sensor communication hardware used at the MITR experiments.
the main heat exchanger, approximately 50 ft through double- thick concrete walls and a fully closed steel door (illustrated in Fig. 15, and shown in Fig. 13). Figure 16 shows a sample of the receiver graphic user interface (GUI) reporting on increased temperature inside the equipment room.
As shown in Fig. 16, the temperature is reported reliably from various locations inside the instrument room to the control room. As expected, the received signal strength indi- cator (RSSI) is reduced as we go through more barriers in this experiment. The RSSI at every location is consistent with the expected value as the RSSI after one wall is higher than the RSSI after three walls. Some discrepancy in the RSSI report- ing is due to the movement of the transmitter from one location to another location while the measurements were being recorded.
In summary, our field tests with UWB communication systems at the MITR demonstrated that UWB links can
perform reliably in very harsh NLOS environments. Our tests included placing the sensor transmitters at various positions near the reactor core and the receiver at the monitoring room. We have  had  a high  degree  of  success in wireless sensor data communication fidelity for these preliminary experiments.
V.CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH
In this paper, we addressed the capabilities of UWB communications for NPP environments and demonstrated preliminary results with prototype hardware and field experiments at the MITR, as well as with computer simulations. The secure UWB communication system is fully designed and developed in software. Our results show that UWB signals could be successfully designed for the harsh environments of NPPs with the right choice of design parameters; example parameters are summar- ized in Table 1.
Although, we had successful field tests with UWB signals at the MITR, the hardware used in these field experiments was a UWB transceiver developed at DSI for another harsh environment application and was not optimized for NPP environments. The next steps in our research will be to employ hardware and software avail- able from this initial study to fully develop a secure UWB communication system based on software-defined radio (SDR). Since every NPP environment might be different,
Fig. 15. Three-dimensional rendering of the reactor facility showing the location of the receiver (green, RX) and various  locations of the transmitter (red, TX).
Fig. 16. UWB receiver GUI reporting increased temperature as the transmitter (TX) is moved more inside the equipment room (from 83.2°F to 85.7°F to 87.1°F).
SDR is a better option compared to fixed-architecture hardware systems as the communication  parameters  such as center frequency, bandwidth, pulse shape, link capacity, and duration between the pulses can be mod- ified in software to adapt to site-specific environments.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Nuclear Energy for support of this project. The authors would also like to thank Al Queirolo, PhD, Director of Reactor Operations at MIT Nuclear Reactor Laboratory, for facil- itating the field experiments.
