<title>The National Direct-Drive Program: OMEGA to the National Ignition Facility</title>
<Affiliation>a.University of Rochester, Laboratory for Laser Energetics, Rochester, New York
b.Schafer Corporation, Livermore, California
c.General Atomics, San Diego, California
d.Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Plasma Science and Fusion Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts
e.Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, California fNaval Research Laboratory, Washington, District of Columbia gLos Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico
</Affiliation>
<author>S.P. Regan, V. N. Goncharov, T. C. Sangster, E. M. Campbell, R. Betti, K. S. Anderson, T. Bernat, A. Bose, T. R. Boehly, M. J. Bonino, D. Cao, R. Chapman,
T.J. B. Collins, R. S. Craxton, A. K. Davis, J. A. Delettrez, D. H. Edgell, R. Epstein,
M. Farrell, C. J. Forrest, J. A. Frenje, D. H. Froula, M. Gatu Johnson, C. Gibson,
V. Yu. Glebov, A. Greenwood, D. R. Harding, M. Hohenberger, S. X. Hu, H. Huang, J. Hund, I. V. Igumenshchev, D. W. Jacobs-Perkins, R. T. Janezic, M. Karasik, R. L. Keck, J. H. Kelly, T. J. Kessler, J. P. Knauer, T. Z. Kosc, S. J. Loucks,
J. A. Marozas, F. J. Marshall, R. L. McCrory, P. W. McKenty, D. D. Meyerhofer, D.
T. Michel, J. F. Myatt, S. P. Obenschain, R. D. Petrasso, N. Petta, P. B. Radha, M.
J. Rosenberg, A. J. Schmitt, M. J. Schmitt, M. Schoff, W. Seka, W. T. Shmayda,
M. J Shoup III, A. Shvydky, A. A. Solodov, C. Stoeckl, W. Sweet, C. Taylor, R. Taylor, W. Theobald, J. Ulreich, M. D. Wittman, K. M. Woo & J. D. Zuegel</author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>FUSION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/15361055.2017.1397487</DOI>
<URL> https://doi.org/10.1080/15361055.2017.1397487</URL>
Abstract — The goal of the National Direct-Drive Program is to demonstrate and understand the physics  of laser direct drive (LDD). Efforts are underway on OMEGA for the 100-Gbar Campaign to demonstrate and understand the physics for hot-spot conditions and formation relevant for ignition at the 1-MJ scale, and on the National Ignition Facility to develop an understanding of the direct-drive physics at long scale lengths for the MJ Direct-Drive Campaign. The strategy of the National Direct-Drive Program is described; the requirements for the deuterium-tritium cryogenic fill-tube target being developed for OMEGA are presented; and preliminary LDD implosion measurements of hydrodynamic mixing seeded    by laser imprint, the target-mounting stalk, and microscopic surface debris are reported.
Keywords — Direct-drive inertial confinement fusion, 100-Gbar Campaign.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
The goal of the National Direct-Drive Program is to demonstrate and understand the physics of laser direct
drive1–3 (LDD). The program is based on the 100-Gbar Campaign on the 60-beam, 30-kJ, 351-nm OMEGA  laser4 and the Megajoule Direct-Drive (MJDD) Campaign at the 192-beam, 1.8-MJ, 351-nm National Ignition Facility5 (NIF). The 100-Gbar Campaign on OMEGA explores the formation of hot-spot conditions relevant for ignition at the 1-MJ scale. OMEGA deuter- ium-tritium (DT) cryogenic implosions are hydrodynami- cally scaled from NIF ignition designs.1,3 The hot-spot pressure Phs is an invariant metric with respect to laser energy; consequently, achieving 100 Gbar on OMEGA ensures that 100 Gbar would be achieved on the NIF assuming similar energy coupling at the two target scales.Current DT cryogenic implosions on OMEGA achieve a Phs = 56 ± 7 Gbar, which is nearly half of the ignition- threshold pressure Phs = 120 to 150 Gbar for direct-drive inertial confinement fusion (ICF) scaled to NIF energies.6 The 100-Gbar Campaign involves improvements to
OMEGA, improvements to the targets, enhancements in diagnostics, and new modeling and simulation capabil- ities. In particular, it requires the development of a DT cryogenic fill-tube target having stringent tolerances for physical dimensions, material composition, surface roughness, and cleanliness.7 The MJDD Campaign  on the NIF investigates direct-drive physics at long density scale lengths and high temperatures characteristic of cor- onal plasmas of direct-drive ignition targets.8,9 Currently only polar-direct-drive10 implosions can be performed on the NIF with the current beam configuration8–10; how- ever, spherical direct drive is the ultimate goal of the National Direct-Drive Program. A reconfiguration study is underway to convert the NIF from the current polar arrangement of laser beams around the target chamber to a spherical distribution. The National Direct-Drive Program aims to demonstrate that direct-drive ignition- scale coronal plasmas meet the laser-plasma interactions (LPIs), energy coupling, and laser-imprint requirements on the NIF and to demonstrate 100 Gbar on OMEGA in the early part of the 2020 decade. The first fill-tube DT cryogenic implosion on OMEGA is expected in 2020 (Ref. 7).
This paper concentrates on the 100-Gbar Campaign
on OMEGA and the development of the fill-tube DT cryogenic target. Section II highlights the ignition thresh- old pressure and the generalized Lawson criterion without alpha heating. Section III describes the research areas of the 100-Gbar Campaign and presents the target specifica- tions for the fill-tube DT cryogenic target based on hydro- dynamic simulations. Section IV describes initial target physics experiments that examine these specifications. Section V presents our concluding remarks.
II.LASER DIRECT DRIVE
The Phs and conversion efficiency of the laser energy Ehs are critical parameters for ignition. The hot-spot pressure scales1 as
where
Pabl = ablation pressure
vimp
= implosion velocity (maximum mass–aver- aged shell velocity) α = adiabat, defined as the mass-averaged ratio of
the fuel pressure to the Fermi-degenerate pres- sure PFermi in the dense imploding DT shell α ; P=PFermi.
In the cross-beam energy transfer (CBET) process,11–13 nonabsorbed light that is reflected/scattered from its critical surface or refracted from the underdense plasma acts as an electromagnetic seed for the stimulated Brillouin scattering of incoming (incident) light.14 For irradiation conditions appropriate for ignition capsule designs, CBET has been shown to reduce the capsule absorption and resulting Pabl in OMEGA direct-drive implo- sions by  as  much  as  40%  (Refs.  11,  12, and 13) and simulations indicate that a reduc- tion in Pabl as large as 60% could occur in NIF-scale implosions.9 In addition to CBET, hydrodynamic instabilities and  low–mode drive asymmetries can reduce Phs and generate a mix of cold fuel/ablator into the hot spot, impacting the implosion performance rate.15 Also, suprathermal electron generation by the two-plasmon-decay (TPD) instability and sti- mulated Raman scattering16, 17 (SRS), which can preheat the DT fuel, can raise α, and can lower the hot-spot pressure for a given Pabl and vimp. However, experiments and modeling indi- cate that suprathermal electrons from TPD in OMEGA implosions can at the utmost reduce areal densities in moderate-adiabat implosions (α ~ 4) by 10% and are not considered to be the dominant mechanism for the reduction in per- formance. SRS is not observed on OMEGA for the typical cryogenic implosions.The ignition threshold pressure is plotted as a func- tion of the hot-spot thermal	energy Phs  > 250 Gbar=inFig.1(Ref.18).ncreasing laser coupling and Ehs reduces Phs required
Fig. 1. The ignition threshold pressure Pth as  a function of the hot-spot energy Ehs. LDD and LID implosion performances are highlighted. LDD requires a hot-spot pressure above 120 Gbar to achieve ignition. CBET reduces the efficiency of coupling  the laser  energy  to the hot spot and decreases the predicted Ehs from 40 to
30 kJ (corresponding to the energy-scaled OMEGA implosion achieving Ehs = 0.44 kJ without CBET mitiga- tion) and raises Pth to 144 Gbar. The energy-scaled gen- eralized Lawson criterion without alpha heating for the OMEGA direct-drive DT cryogenic implosions χnoα (energy scaled) is similar to the generalized Lawson criterion without alpha heating χnoα achieved with current indirect-drive implosions at the NIF.
for ignition. Symmetric direct-drive–ignition capsule designs on the NIF are predicted  to couple up to  40 kJ  to the hot spot, resulting in a required pressure of Phs
= 120 Gbar, as shown in Fig. 1, which could be achieved in an implosion with a convergence ratio (CR) of 22 and an in-flight aspect ratio (IFAR)—defined as the shell radius divided by its thickness at maximum implosion velocity—of 24 if the energy coupling losses from CBET have been mitigated. Current OMEGA implosions6 reach Ehs = 0.44 kJ without any CBET mitigation. When scaled to 1.8 MJ of ultraviolet energy on the NIF with scaled CBET losses, these OMEGA implosions are predicted to reach Ehs ≈ 30 kJ, increasing the required Phs to 144 Gbar (see Fig. 1). With this Ehs, capsule designs with CR = 25 and an IFAR of 33 are required to reach the ignition conditions albeit with decreased robustness to hydrody- namic instabilities and low–mode drive asymmetries. Because of the required Ehs for direct-drive ICF, the ignition-relevant Phs and CR are lower than the require- ments for laser indirect-drive (LID) ICF: Phs = 350 to  400 Gbar and CR = 30 to 40 (Ref. 19). An inferred Phs of 226 ± 37 Gbar has been reported for NIF indirect-drive ICF implosions,20 demonstrating that it is possible to compress DT to a pressure that exceeds the requirements for direct-drive ignition.
The highest hot-spot pressure achieved with direct- drive ICF cryogenic, layered DT implosions on OMEGA is Phs = 56 ± 7 Gbar (Ref. 6). The implosion had a calculated adiabat of 3.2. This is nearly half of the igni- tion-threshold pressure of 120 to 150 Gbar for direct-drive ICF scaled to NIF energies. Three-dimensional (3-D) simulations suggest that low-mode distortion of the hot spot seeded by laser-drive nonuniformity and capsule- positioning error reduces the neutron rate and inferred  Phs (Refs. 6 and 15). As discussed in the literature, a generalized Lawson criterion without alpha heating21, 22 was calculated for each implosion and energy scaled22, 23 from the OMEGA laser energy of 26 kJ to the maximum NIF laser energy of 1.9 MJ (Refs. 6 and 22). The mea- sured compressed areal density ρR, measured neutron yield, and one-dimensional (1-D)–calculated shocked  DT mass at stagnation are used to evaluate the energy- scaled, generalized Lawson criterion without alpha heat- ing χscaled, which is plotted in Fig. 2 as a function of fuel adiabat. The blue symbols, red symbols, and orange line represent the experimental results, the 1-D simulations including CBET, and the 1-D simulations with CBET Fig. 2. The energy-scaled, generalized Lawson criterion without alpha heating (χscaled) is plotted as a function of fuel adiabat. The diamond symbols, square symbols, and upper solid line represent the experimental results, the 1-D simulations including CBET, and the 1-D simula- tions with CBET mitigated, respectively. The experimen- tal points where the inferred Phs > 50 Gbar are highlighted as circle symbols.
mitigated, respectively. These hydrodynamically scaled OMEGA implosions achieved a χscaled of ~60% (Refs. 6 and 22), similar to indirect drive.19–21 Here Phs and confinement time τ are estimated  without  accounting  for alpha heating to assess the pure hydrodynamic performance of the implosion. The laser-plasma cou- pling is assumed to be the same for OMEGA and the NIF; experiments at  the  NIF  are  ongoing  to  assess  this assumption. As the adiabat is reduced from α = 6,  the experimental points (blue symbols  in  Fig.  2)  deviate  from  the  1-D  simulations  including  CBET (red symbols in Fig. 2). This behavior  is  attributed  to the long-wavelength perturbations caused by laser-drive nonuniformity and capsule offsets. The χscaled for the experimental points (blue symbols  in  Fig.  2)  peaks  at α ~ 3.5 and then decreases with decreasing adiabat. This behavior is attributed to hydrodynamic instabilities seeded by short-wavelength perturbations from micro- scopic surface debris, engineering features from the tar- get stalk, and laser imprint affecting the implosion performance, in addition to the long-wavelength modes. Figure 2 shows that more-robust, higher-adiabat ignition designs could be considered if CBET were mitigated and long-wavelength perturbations were reduced.
III.100-GBAR CAMPAIGN
The 100-Gbar Campaign is underway on OMEGA to understand the physics of assembling an ignition-relevant hot spot. Laser improvements are being made to drive a more uniform implosion and to mitigate CBET. The current method of filling the DT cryogenic capsules via permeation will be extended to a fill-tube capsule to accommodate nonpermeable ablator materials used to mitigate laser imprint and laser-plasma interactions.1,3 The fill-tube capsules will have less microscopic surface debris and defects, and the quicker capsule fill time will lead to less radiation damage to the ablator, which will reduce the seeds for hydrodynamic instabilities. Enhancements in diagnostics with multiple lines of sight and new modeling and simulation capabilities have been initiated to understand the 3-D effects on implosion per- formance. Achieving 100 Gbar on OMEGA is a critical part of the National Direct-Drive Program and will require a detailed scientific understanding of  direct-  drive physics.
The 100-Gbar experimental campaign is divided into ten research areas, which are outlined in Table I. Laser power balance experiments are conducted quarterly on OMEGA to understand and minimize the laser-drive
TABLE I
Research Areas of the 100-Gbar Campaign
nonuniformity. The target with the development of quality is being improved the fill-tube target. Laser
upgrades for CBET mitigation using spatial and spectral techniques are under active investigation. Simulations— both two-dimensional (2-D) and 3-D—including CBET and hot-electron production are being developed and routinely run for DT cryogenic implosions on OMEGA. A 1-D Implosion Physics and Experiments Campaign is being conducted to (1) investigate 1-D trends in the measured performance and (2) determine if the measured performance reaches the 1-D predictions for the limiting case of a high-adiabat implosion having a low level of multidimensional effects. A fundamental  understanding of CBET will be explored in multibeam experiments  with the tunable OMEGA P9 beam or the 61st beam of OMEGA under construction on OMEGA. Fuel preheat caused by suprathermal electrons generated by TPD is examined in OMEGA implosion experiments. Shock tim- ing is measured and modeled for each laser pulse shape used to drive DT cryogenic implosions on  OMEGA  (Ref. 24). Diagnostics are developed to meet the 100-Gbar Campaign requirements. An understanding of laser imprint is being developed with the goal of mini- mizing the effects of laser imprint on implosion perfor- mance. Focused experiments that test the models of the microphysics in the hydrodynamics, equation of state, opacity, thermal conductivity, and stopping power are conducted to improve the fidelity of the implosion simulations.
Improvements to the OMEGA laser are required and ongoing research will refine these needs. The 100-Gbar Campaign has 80 Gbar as a first near-term goal. The approach of the 100-Gbar Campaign is to fix the laser- drive nonuniformity while developing ways to mitigate CBET. As can be seen in Table II, the laser system requirements are less demanding for 80 Gbar. To achieve 80-Gbar hot-spot pressure with a DT cryogenic implosion having a plastic ablator and an on-target, beam-to-beam power balance averaged over 100 ps of 3% root mean square (rms) is required based on hydrodynamic simula- tions. CBET mitigation and multilayer ablators are not required for 80 Gbar. Achieving 80 Gbar on OMEGA will be a touchstone for physics understanding and simulations. To achieve 100-Gbar hot-spot pressure, a beam-to-beam power balance averaged over 100 ps of 1% rms and the implementation of a CBET mitigation technique (spatial, spectral, or temporal) are required. The on-target, overlapped laser–intensity uniformity depends on the laser power balance and the far-field intensity distribution of each beam on target, as well as accurate target positioning. Ultraviolet and X-ray diag- nostics and experiments are being developed to charac- terize the laser–drive nonuniformity level on target.
Improvements  in  targets   are  required   and ongoing
research will refine these needs. The DT cryogenic fill-tube target requirement for the 100-Gbar Campaign is based   on   three   factors3:    (1)   mitigating   laser-plasma
TABLE II
Laser Requirements for 80-Gbar and 100-Gbar Campaigns
interactions using nonpermeable ablator materials, (2) minimizing target debris and defects, and (3) minimizing radiation damage to the ablator. The plastic ablator will have an embedded, nonpermeable Si layer to mitigate laser-plasma interactions and possibly a Si-doped outer plastic layer to mitigate laser imprint.1,3 Since the fill- tube capsules are stored exclusively in the controlled clean–room environment of the shroud until the target is imploded, the target will have drastically less microscopic surface debris and defects than the permeation-filled tar- gets, which sample many vacuum environments before shot time. The quicker capsule fill time of the fill-tube target compared to the permeation-filled target (i.e., days versus weeks) will lead to less radiation damage to the ablator of the fill-tube target. Both of these improvements will reduce the seeds for hydrodynamic instabilities.
Microscopic features, including debris, domes,
and depressions, on the surface of the target are con- sidered the main seed of short-scale mix.25 Characterizing cryogenic targets at the shot time is crucial for understanding target failure mechanisms. Two-dimensional implosion simulations were con- ducted for the target with a mass perturbation on the surface and laser pulse shown in Fig. 3. The simulated mass-density contours highlight the effects  of  the shock interactions with a local feature on the target surface. Simulations show that the shell mass modula- tion caused by the initial surface features are ampli-  fied by Richtmyer-Meshkov (RM) instability during shock transit by a  factor of  3 to  5.  As the shell starts to accelerate, these modulations are further amplified by the Rayleigh-Taylor (RT) instability growth. It  is well known that the ablation-front RT growth is sig- nificantly reduced26 by the mass-ablation effects when the amplitude modulation is small ka < 1,  where k  is  the modulation wave number and  a is  the  amplitude. In contrast, when the perturbation amplitude is  large and ka > 1 (nonlinear regime), the mass ablation enhances the growth.27 The evolution of the instability seeded by the perturbation at the target surface in the nonlinear regime is shown in Fig. 4.  Each feature on  the surface of the target has the potential to produce a hole in  the  shell, injecting ablator and cold  DT into  the vapor region. Injected mass as a result of instabil- ity growth should not significantly exceed the original vapor mass, which is approximately equal to  0.14 μg  for OMEGA targets. Detailed target metrology analy- sis shows hundreds of micron-scale features on glow discharge polymer (GDP) shells, which according to simulations is more than sufficient to inject 0.14 μg of cold material into the hot spot.25
Fig. 3. Two-dimensional simulations highlighting the effects of hydrodynamic instabilities seeded by a microscopic mass perturbation on the target surface.
Fig. 4. The late time evolution of the hydrodynamic instability presented in Fig. 3. The feature on the surface of the target produces a hole in the shell, injecting ablator and cold DT into the vapor region.
The target-debris specifications shown in Table III were selected to reduce the amount of mix mass to tolerable levels. The 80-Gbar Campaign will be used as a platform to investigate the most challenging require- ments of target-positioning accuracy and tolerable level of microscopic features on the target surface with con-
given in units of micron.
i¼0
trolled experiments. Initial  experiments  will  use  the  DT permeation-filled targets. The 80-Gbar Campaign requires  a  target-positioning  accuracy  of   less   than  10 μm and a tolerable amount of microscopic features and engineering features on the surface quantified as follows:
1. Count all surface defect features, including depressions, having lateral dimension  d  (defined  as the direction parallel to the capsule surface) with 0.5μm ≤ d ≤ 5 μm and a height h (defined as the direction perpendicular to the capsule  surface)  such that h/d ≥ 0.02. Such features  represent  nonlinear seeds for RT growth during shell acceleration.
2.Count all surface features having d > 5 μm and h > 50 nm, including the glue securing the stalk or fill tube. These defects are amplified by linear growth of
~5 during the RM phase and  another factor  of 100 to 150 during the RT phase.
3.Each feature, as it breaks out of the shell, injects fuel and ablator mass equivalent to 4 to 5 times that of the fraction of the initial shell mass covered by the surface feature. Requiring that the total injected mass into the hot-spot region should be smaller than the initial vapor mass of 0.14 μg leads to a mix fraction fmix defined as a ratio of the injected mass to the initial vapor mass, not exceeding unity. For all of the n surface features the mix
fraction is calculated as fmix ¼ P 10—3  d2   , where d  is given in units of micron.
Polystyrene ablators having a superior surface smoothness to GDP shells are being explored in current experiments. Experimental results from the 80-Gbar Campaign will be used to define the target specifications for the 100-Gbar Campaign.
A conceptual design review has been completed for the fill-tube target, and a technique to characterize the surface features based on dark-field imaging has been defined. The delivery date for the fill-tube target on OMEGA is 2020.
TABLE III
Target Requirements for 80-Gbar and 100-Gbar Campaigns
IV.TARGET PHYSICS EXPERIMENTS
Initial target physics experiments have been con- ducted on OMEGA to examine the hydrodynamic mixing seeded by laser imprint, the target-mounting stalk, and microscopic surface debris. As shown in Fig. 5a, a trace amount of Ge (0.7% atomic) was added to the plastic ablator to track hydrodynamic mixing of the ablator through the DT ice layer by the ablation-front instability and into the hot-spot region as illustrated in Fig. 5b. If Ge reaches the hot  spot,  it  will  emit  K-shell  emission.28  A time-integrated, spatially resolved X-ray spectrum of the Ge Heα and satellite emission at ~10 keV of photon energy was recorded as shown in Fig. 5c. This measure- ment experimentally confirms that the ablator material is mixing into the hot spot. The hot-spot mix mass inferred from the Ge Heα and satellite emission will be used
to constrain the simulations and refine the target require- ments, similar to target physics experiments conducted on the NIF (Refs. 29 and 30). Although this technique can detect levels of Ge-doped CH to the nanogram-level, it is only sensitive to mass from the Ge-doped ablator. It cannot detect any DT mass that has mixed into the hot spot. In future experiments the absolute X-ray power radiated by the hot spot will be monitored and compared to the neutron yield to infer the amount of total mix mass in the hot spot,31–33 and the effects of a fill tube on implosion performance will be investigated.
V.CONCLUSIONS
The goal of the National Direct-Drive Program is to demonstrate and understand the physics of LDD. The
Fig. 5. (a) The plastic ablator is doped with a trace amount of Ge to study hydrodynamic mixing; (b) a schematic highlighting the mixing of ablator material through the DT shell and into the hot spot; and (c) the measured time-integrated and spatially resolved Ge Heα and satellite emission from the hot spot, indicating abla- tor material mixed into the hot spot.
100-Gbar Campaign on OMEGA and the MJDD Campaign on NIF are underway to demonstrate that direct-drive igni- tion-scale coronal plasmas will meet the requirements for LPIs, energy coupling, and laser imprint on the NIF  and  will demonstrate 100 Gbar on OMEGA in the early part of the 2020 decade. The 100-Gbar Campaign involves improve- ments to OMEGA, improvements to the targets, enhance- ments in diagnostics, and new modeling and simulation capabilities. In particular, it requires the development of a DT cryogenic fill-tube target having stringent tolerances for physical dimensions, material composition, surface rough- ness, and cleanliness. The first fill-tube DT cryogenic implo- sion on OMEGA is expected in 2020. Initial target physics experiments have been conducted on OMEGA to examine the hydrodynamic mixing seeded by laser imprint, the target- mounting stalk, and microscopic surface debris.
Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the U.S. Department of Energy’s (DOE’s) National Nuclear Security Administration under award DE-NA0001944. Part of this work was performed under the auspices of the DOE by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under contract DE-AC52- 07NA27344. This report was prepared as an account of work sponsored by an agency of the U.S. Government. Neither the
U.S. Government nor any agency thereof, nor any of their employ- ees, makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or use- fulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process dis- closed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately owned rights. Reference herein to any specific commercial pro- duct, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorse- ment, recommendation, or favoring by the U.S. Government or any agency thereof. The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of the U.S. Government or any agency thereof.
