<title>Uranium nitride fuels in superheated steam</title>
<author>Mikael Jolkkonen, Pertti Malkki, Kyle Johnson & Janne Wallenius</author>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Affiliation>Department of Reactor Physics, Royal Institute of Technology, Alba Nova University Center, Stockholm, Sweden</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2017.1291372</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2017.1291372</URL>
ABSTRACT
Uranium mononitride (UN) pellets of different densities were subjected to a superheated steam/argon mixture at atmospheric pressure to evaluate their resistance to hydrolysis. Complete degradation of pure UN pellets was obtained within 1 h in 0.50 bar steam at 500 °C. The identi- fied reaction products were uranium dioxide, ammonia, and hydrogen gas, with no detectable amounts of nitrogen oxides formed. However, the reaction could not be carried to completion, and the presence of uranium sesquinitride and higher uranium oxides or uranium oxynitrides in the solid residue is indicated. Evolution of elemental nitrogen was seen in connection with very high reaction rates. The porosity of the pellets was identified as the most important factor deter- mining reaction rates at 400–425 °C, and it is suggested that in dense pellets, cracking due to internal volume increase initiates a transition from slow surface corrosion to pellet disintegration. The implications for the use of nitride fuels in light water reactors (LWR) are discussed, with some observations concerning hydrolysis as a method for 15N recovery from isotopically enriched spent nitride fuel.
KEYWORDS
Fuels; uranium nitride; light water reactor;
accident-tolerant fuels; hydrolysis; reprocessing
1.Introduction
Mononitride nuclear fuels feature higher fissile density and much higher thermal conductivity than standard oxide fuels, opening up for new and improved reactor designs but potentially also for more efficient and safer power generation in existing reactors (lower centre- line temperature giving greater margin to melt despite increased linear power). The fuel may consist of pure uranium mononitride (UN) or solid solutions of ura- nium, plutonium, americium or curium mononitrides, optionally diluted with an inert component such as zir- conium mononitride.
UN shows good compatibility with most metallic and gaseous coolants but tends to react with water at high temperatures. While there would be economical gains from using nitride fuels in standard light water reactors (LWRs) [1,2], the lack of chemical inertness raises concerns that, in case of pin failure, nitride pellets could lose integrity and fuel material be dispersed in the coolant [1–4]. This tendency is expected to be stronger with plutonium nitride [5]. Successful development of nitride fuels for LWRs would require a deepened under- standing of both the chemical interactions as such and of the mechanism of physical pellet degradation.
In contrast, the envisioned future (GEN IV) reactor designs, typically based on a fast neutron spectrum and metallic or gaseous coolant, are well suited for nitride fuels [6]. The fuel cycle would involve extensive recy- cling of spent fuel including the long-lived waste frac- tions.
It has been argued [3,7] that the nitrogen compo- nent should be highly enriched in 15N in order to sup- press the (n, p) formation of 14C, which otherwise must be recovered in reprocessing and converted to stable form (e.g. cement) [8]. Both in the Gen IV and the  LWR cases, the cost of 15N becomes prohibitive unless it is recovered and re-introduced into fuel fabrication. This has consequences for the choice of reprocessing method, since dissolution in nitric acid would cause iso- topic dilution of 15N. Alternative methods have been proposed, such as first converting the spent nitride pel- lets to oxide by voloxidation and collecting the nitrogen oxides formed [9]. We note that the same reaction of nitride fuels with hot steam that complicates their utili- sation in LWRs may have practical value as a reprocess- ing step, and hence both aspects will be considered in this study.
The proposed [10,11] reaction of quantitative con- version of UN to oxide is
@1
As an intermediate step, a fraction of the nitrogen atoms are incorporated in the residual nitride as U2N3 [10,11]. This step can be summarised as [12]
@2
The formation of U3O8, typical for UN oxidation in air, was not reported in hydrolysis.
The ammonia combines with excess steam  to  form condensed ammonium hydroxide, which can be collected for 15N recovery. For  practical  application, it would be advantageous if the process does not also produce elemental nitrogen (necessitating additional recovery steps) or nitrogen oxides (risk for formation of explosive ammonium nitrate, NH4NO3).
The existing literature on UN hydrolysis is not very extensive, but some detailed observations regarding the hydrolysis reaction as well as analogously performed oxidation experiments are found in [10–13]. These studies used materials of different structures and puri- ties (powders, microspheres and arc-melted solids), for which reason some variance can be expected, but a fre- quently encountered result is the incomplete release of nitrogen from the solid materials.
It was earlier established at our laboratory that expo- sure to steam/water at 300 °C (at 84 bar) for 1 h causes UN pellets of high density (up to 99% theoretical den- sity (TD)) to fragment into millimetre-sized granules [14], while more porous UN pellets typically decom- posed to a fine oxidic powder. However, the set-up (sealed capsule) did not allow real-time collection of data. It could also not be excluded that the build-up  of reaction products, including ammonium hydroxide, might interfere with the reaction. Few investigations of UN corrosion rates in hot alkaline solutions were found; one study [4] reports little effect up to pH 10.3, but  only describes experiments performed below the boil- ing point of water.
In  the  present  work,  real-time  monitoring  of the hydrolytic degradation of UN pellets in pure unpressurised steam/argon is combined with post- experimental quantitative analysis of solid and gaseous reaction products. The effect of pellet  porosity  on  the onset and rate of reaction is given particular attention, as this has implications for the design of LWR-compatible nitride fuels. The higher densities tested are such as have earlier only been achievable by arc melting. Observed pellet fracturing/disintegration is compared with the extent of chemical reaction to draw some conclusions about the likely mechanism of structure loss. The results from chemical analysis of reaction products are further used to evaluate hydroly- sis as a novel method for 15N recovery in reprocessing of nitride fuels.
2.Materials and methods
2.1.Nitride powders
UN powders were produced from depleted  ura-  nium metal (Manufacturing Sciences Corporation, Oak Ridge, TN, USA). The synthesis was performed by hydriding the solid metal and nitriding the resulting UH3 powder, followed by stoichiometry adjustment to near ideal mononitride composition, as described in [15].
2.2.
Pellet manufacture
Spark-plasma sintering (SPS) of UN was performed as in [15,16], using two Dr. Sinter SPS machines, made available by courtesy of Diamorph AB, Stockholm, Sweden and of the National SPS Facility, Department of Materials and Environmental Chemistry, Stockholm University. Pellet densities were determined by the Archimedean method, using chloroform as immersion medium, and the extent of open porosity was either determined as described in [16] or inferred from the there presented correlation to overall porosity; above TD = 96.5%, the open porosity can be regarded as nil. Typical nitrogen content was 5.35–5.45 wt%, with an impurity level of about 0.1% of O and C, respectively [16].
2.3.Hydrolysis experiments
UN pellets of varying porosity were subjected to hydrol- ysis in superheated steam, with purified argon serv- ing as carrier for the gaseous reaction products. The hydrolysis apparatus, built of SIS 2348/AISI-316 stain- less steel and operating at atmospheric pressure, fea- tured separate inlet lines at pellet height for steam and argon, with a top-side outlet line. The steam was pro- duced in an internal capillary steel tube with a 100  (±1) µl/min feed of de-gassed de-ionised water sup- plied by an LKB 2248 high-performance liquid chro- matography (HPLC) pump (LKB, Bromma, Sweden), and mixed with a 124 ml/min flow of purified argon (flow controller: Bronkhorst High-Tech B.V., Ruurlo, The Netherlands) to give a steam partial pressure of
0.50 bar. The apparatus was installed in a VCG model FE-2N furnace (VCG Ventura SRL, Pieve Emanuele, Italy), purged with argon, and brought to nominal tem- perature before steam delivery was initiated; for reac- tion rate studies, 400–425 °C was used. By elemental analysis of deliberately exposed thin samples, it was ver- ified that the SIS 2348/AISI-316 steel takes up neither oxygen nor nitrogen during ongoing UN hydrolysis, but remains fully inert.
The outlet design allowed splitting of the off-gas into one very small sampling stream, drawn through  a heated capillary, for mass spectrometric (MS) anal- ysis (Hiden QGA model HAS-301-1073, Hiden Ana- lytical Ltd., Warrington, UK) and one nearly undimin- ished stream to a wash bottle filled with a known vol- ume of 0.05 M H2SO4 for capturing the formed NH3. In this configuration, the entire composition of the uncon- densed steam/argon exhaust could in principle be mon- itored, but with a significant amount of noise added due to fluctuations in the high vacuum of the mass spec- trometric detector, apparently caused by downstream condensation in the pumping system. Also, no accu- rate mass spectrometric quantification of ammonia was
possible due to overlap with OH fragments of water in mass channel 17.
In another configuration, the sampling stream was instead drawn after the wash bottle, hence after sepa- ration of ammonia and most of the water vapour. This mode allowed more accurate monitoring of reaction rates and was used for collecting the here reported mass spectrometric H2 and N2 data. The mass spectrom- eter was found to exhibit a concentration-dependent bias at low to moderate H2 concentrations, for which reason a calibration curve was produced using known H2/Ar mixtures and all collected H2 data were corrected according to this. A certain degree of error could still not be excluded at very low H2 concentrations.
Run times were varied according to the observed rate of hydrolysis and the purpose  of  the  individ- ual experiment. The reacted fraction of UN was esti- mated by four different methods: gravimetric (mass gain in solid residues), titrimetric (quantification of NH3 absorbed in wash bottle, by titration of excess H2SO4 with 0.100 M NaOH), mass spectrometric (integration of produced H2 over time), and by elemen- tal analysis of nitrogen and oxygen content in the solid residues (inert-gas fusion method, as described in [16]). X-ray diffraction (XRD) of solid residues was per- formed using a Siemens D5000 X-Ray Diffractometer
(Cu K-α, Ni filter, 35 kV/40 mA, 25 °C).
3.Results and discussion
Similarly to what had been noted in earlier, pressurised experiments [14], no single typical temperature for the onset of rapid UN hydrolysis was observed, but the required temperatures were higher in the present study. This is attributed to the lower steam pressure used (0.5 bar); whether the continuous removal of reaction prod- ucts also has some effect is not known.
It was found that dense pellets (>95% TD) could withstand 300 °C for 90 min with zero weight change. No reaction rate data were obtained at similarly low temperatures (below detection limit). Temperatures of 400 °C or greater were required to, within 3 h, visibly degrade any UN pellets regardless of porosity. Most of the here reported experiments were performed in that temperature region, where the different behaviour of porous pellets (complete or near complete degradation) and dense pellets (partial or slight degradation) could be easily observed. At 500 °C, all tested pellets were completely converted to a fine powder.
Analysis of the uncondensed off-gas, as described in Section 2.3, detected no NO or NO2 production dur- ing hydrolysis. As an additional test for nitrous gases, a sample from the wash bottle was subjected to nitrogen analysis at Eurofins Environment Testing Sweden AB (Lidköping, Sweden), which confirmed that our own ammonia analysis was accurate and that nitrate was below detection level. Ammonia nitrogen was reported
identical with total nitrogen within the stated accuracy of measurement. To test for solid nitrates, the amount of water-soluble salts in a sample of the solid residue was determined by agitation with de-ionised water, which after ultrafiltration (Sarstedt Filtropur S 0.45 µm) was evaporated on a small dish. No  residual mass could  be detected, indicating lower than 0.05 wt% of soluble content in the residue (as calculated from sample amount and balance sensitivity). Hence, it seems excluded that any nitrates or other water-soluble salts are present in the solids. In conclusion, we found no indication of any side reaction producing N–O com- pounds.
Almost no detectable evolution of elemental nitro- gen gas occurred during slow to moderately rapid reac- tion; that is, at rates not reaching their maximum in 1 h, typical for the denser pellets. Porous pellets undergoing rapid reaction often exhibited a burst-wise evolution of N2. This was suspected to reflect events of sudden igni- tion in steam alternating with smouldering combustion, but that could not be verified since the reaction vessel does not allow visual inspection.
A hydrolysis run with particularly high and unchar- acteristically continuous evolution of N2 is shown in Figure 1. This reaction, so energetic that the externally measured temperature was at times observed to exceed the setpoint of the furnace, was observed with a pellet of uncommonly low density (77.6% TD, with estimated open porosity > 15%). An initial rapid hydrogen pro- duction was followed by an untypical reaction mode producing mainly N2; overall, nearly one-third of the total released nitrogen was N2.
In the idealised reaction, the proportions UN:NH3:H2 are 2: 2:1 (Equation (1)). This was not strictly the case even in the absence of any signifi-  cant N2 production. In early or incomplete reaction,
Figure . Progress of hydrolysis reaction, UN pellet of .% TD at  °C, . bar steam. Shown as an example of an excessively rapid reaction with large production of elemental nitrogen; sud- den bursts of reaction may represent intermittent combustion.
 kPa equals  vol% in oﬀ-gas.
Note: Black line: hydrogen evolution, as measured online after condensation of steam and ammonia; red line: nitrogen evolu- tion, as above.
Figure . Overlay of three representative hydrolysis experi- ments. Samples of sintered UN of diﬀerent density, dynamic con- ditions, . bar steam. In black: . mmol UN, .% TD,  °C. In red: . mmol UN, .% TD,  °C. In green: . mmol UN,
.% TD,  °C.
Note: Solid lines: H partial pressure in oﬀ-gas after steam con- densation, showing the progress of the hydrolysis reaction.
.% TD line has an artefact at  min (brief gas ﬂow inter- ruption); dotted lines: cumulative production of hydrogen (log- arithmic scale). Roughly equal to half the reacted UN amount (cf. Equation () and Section ).
formation of U2N3 will lead to lower NH3 and higher H2 amounts (Equation (2)). As will be seen, there is however an unexplained residual  nitrogen  fraction  in the solid residue even after apparently complete hydrolysis. In addition, it cannot be excluded that MS measurements of hydrogen may be somewhat inaccu- rate for slowly progressing reactions (densest pellets; measurements at H2 levels below calibration range).
Nevertheless, the H2 levels in the off-gas allowed us to follow the reaction in real-time; the weight increase in the solids, the amount of collected NH3, and ele- mental analysis of the residue all give only information aggregated over the entire run of the experiment. The influence of pellet porosity on reaction rates is illus- trated in Figure 2, showing the hydrolysis of three pel- lets of low, intermediate, and high porosity. While the most porous pellet (77.6% TD, same as in Figure 1) was consumed in 1-½ h, the densest (97.7%, near zero open porosity) only showed slight signs of reaction, as determined by H2 production, after 6 h at the same con- ditions.
Table 1 shows the extent of UN conversion to oxide, as estimated by the four different methods described in Section 2.3. Percentages relate to the theoretically expected values following complete reaction according to Equation (1). Fairly large differences are observed depending on method, which can at least partially be attributed to the already mentioned sesquinitride for- mation and other residual nitrogen, which will not only affect the H2/NH3 ratio but also the gravimetric results. Due to the small relative mass increase in the reaction, any small deviations, arising from the presence of by- products or from random errors such as incomplete sample recovery or carry-over, will be amplified in the gravimetrically calculated yield. Hence, the composi- tion of the solid residue deserves particular attention.
If the reaction does not convert all UN exclusively to UO2, then an interpretation of yields according to Equation (1) will be an oversimplification. It has been noted earlier [10] that the reaction can frequently not be carried to completion, and the formed uranium oxide has been suggested [11,13] to contain dissolved nitro- gen or be accompanied by some unfamiliar oxynitride phase. In a related study, Rao et al. [12] report that residual nitrogen is invariably observed in the product from dry oxidation of highly pure UN. The same report appears however to state that the U2N3 + x formed dur- ing hydrolysis was eventually converted to UO2. As the emphasis in that report is on dry oxidation, there are few details about the composition of the hydrolysis product. The amount of nitrogen remaining in the solid residue, as determined by elemental analysis, is in itself a useful measure of the extent of reaction, if that is defined as the decomposition of any U–N com- pound, which is one of several possible and essentially different criteria. Regardless of reaction mechanism or chemical form, the residual nitrogen should con- stitute the complement amount to the  nitrogen  in the gaseous products (NH3 and N2). An additional, prolonged (over 8 h) hydrolysis at 500 °C (96% TD pellet, ca 1% open porosity) was performed for the specific purpose of getting a maximally oxidised product. While XRD analysis  identified the residue as UO2 (Figure 3), a large fraction  of nitrogen was still found in the residue (Table 2). The only case where residual nitrogen was found to  be below 20% of original content was the extremely porous 77.6%
Table . Selected results from hydrolysis, with emphasis on diﬀerent methods to estimate the degree of com- pleteness of the reaction. ‘Completeness’ is here deﬁned according to Equation () (e.g. assuming that the solid residue is only UO and unreacted UN), which is an oversimpliﬁcation and explains some of the appar- ent discrepancies.
Figure . XRD spectrum (θ °–°, Cu K-α, Ni ﬁlter,  kV/ mA,  °C; step .°, step time  s) of solid residue from hydrolysis (.% TD pellet,  °C,  min). Pattern is identical with UO despite a . . wt% nitrogen content in sample. Red bars represent reference pattern for UO (ICDD/PDF- database).
TD pellet, which had reacted in untypical manner with significant production of  N2.  In  all  other  cases, including some here unreported pre-studies, hydrolysis runs carried to apparent completion left a solid residue still containing more than one-fifth of the original nitrogen, apparently in a form highly resistant to further reaction with steam.
The interpretation of elemental analysis data  is  less than straightforward, which issue is illustrated in Table 3. As XRD analysis failed to provide supporting data on the nature of the residual nitrogen-containing phases, the observed elemental constitutions could be
matched against a continuum of uranium oxide/nitride systems, in particular since the sesquinitride has a wide stoichiometric range. Sugihara and Imoto [11] suggested a N/U ratio of 1.7 in the residual sesquinitride; this value was, for lack of a better estimate, used for some calculations shown in Table 3.
If the solid product consists of nothing more that uranium oxide of a given composition and uranium nitrides (sesquinitride phases formed during hydroly- sis and unreacted original UN), then the fraction of the total U which is in excess over U in the oxide phase will equal the amount of U in the nitride phase. Thus,
Table . Selected results from hydrolysis, with emphasis on nitrogen recovery. ‘N in residue’ as determined by ele- mental analysis. All percentages are per cent of total nitrogen in the original sample. The lower values of ‘N in N’ are imprecise as the data were collected close to background level.
Table . Elemental composition of solid residues as determined by inert-gas fusion analysis. Interpretation alternatives based on hypothetical oxide and nitride stoichiometries are appended, and serve to illustrate the interdependence between oxide and nitride stoichiometry. The ‘ratio of N over “excess” U’, where ‘excess U’ is deﬁned as the fraction not in the oxide phase, would ideally represent the stoichiometry UNx of the uranium nitride part, and the two rightmost columns show the unreacted fraction of the starting material as calculated from the stated assumptions; see Section  for further discussion of these values.Figure . Appearance of solid residue at diﬀerent stages of partial hydrolysis. Note: Left pane: .% TD,  °C,  min. Right pane: .% TD,  °C,  min.
the ratio of N over ‘excess’ U (Table 3) would represent the overall stoichiometry of the uranium nitride part. (For completeness, these ratios are shown not only for the assumed oxidic composition of UO2, but also for U3O8.)
The emerging values are however in many cases  incompatible with any combination of uranium mono-
, sesqui-, and dinitrides. In consequence, calculation of remaining, unreacted mononitride amounts did often not yield meaningful results.
The assumption that the resulting oxide is UO2.00 gives reasonable nitride stoichiometries only for the least oxidised pellet (97.7% TD). The impact of any assumed oxide stoichiometry on the apparent nitride stoichiometry is, however, for mathematical reasons, quite small in such oxygen-poor samples and increases with the relative amount of oxide vs. nitride in the sample.
While the earlier-mentioned 500 °C hydrolysis failed to displace all nitrogen, it did give a higher oxygen content in the residue, and here the residual nitrogen (Table 3) exceeds by far what the calculated ‘excess’ ura- nium can coordinate into any reasonable nitride phase (N/U ratio > 9). While this would seem to require a higher oxide stoichiometry, it might instead indicate the presence of an oxynitride as discussed in [11] and [13], which latter report also mentions the formation of ‘poorly crystalline’ phases not detectable by XRD. Dell et al. [10], using gravimetric methods, also arrived at residual ‘sesquinitride’ stoichiometries incompatible with the assumption that the formed oxide was UO2; they concluded that part of the nitrogen was present in some other form than U2N3 + x.
The 77.6% TD sample, suspected to have undergone
combustion in steam, shows a light atom to U ratio incompatible with any combination of likely uranium oxides and nitrides, which lends some support to the theory of residual nitrogen being dissolved in an oxide phase.
Extensive structural failure of pellets seemed to occur at an early stage of reaction, a behaviour noted already in [14]. In the present study, porous pellets
merely crumbled, but the densest pellets cracked into larger and smaller fragments, often with quite sharp edges, before any visible surface corrosion had set in. An example is shown in the left panel of Figure 4; the right panel shows a later stage of pellet degradation. We suggest that this cracking constitutes an important step in the hydrolytic degradation of nitride pellets. It increases the exposed surface and produces rapid diffu- sion paths for steam to reach the interior of the pellet, both of which serve to accelerate the attack. Such loss of integrity may be the reason for the observed increase in reaction rate after 150 min (Figure 2) for the 87% TD pellet, of ca 10% open porosity. The most likely mech- anism is internal swelling due to conversion of UN to UO2 + x and U2N3 + y, and possibly also an oxynitride of unknown composition. That this occurs also in pellets with completely closed porosity indicates a fairly rapid oxygen diffusion, most likely along grain boundaries.
It follows that from the point of reactor safety, the
amount of UN reacted over a certain period of time may not be the best indicator of the pellet’s tolerance to water/steam exposure. If early physical degradation of the pellets causes fuel dispersal in the coolant, it will be of less importance whether the particles consist of largely unreacted UN or of an oxidic reaction product. The separate issue of H2 production will however still be coupled to the chemical reaction rate.
While reduction of porosity significantly slows the hydrolysis of UN pellets, the further pursuit of a ‘water- proof’ nitride fuel would benefit from a microstructural model of the cracking phenomenon. Were it possible to suppress the fragmentation so that pellets only were consumed by progressive surface oxidation, the time until fuel dispersal could be considerably extended. The introduction of a lower-melting component, embed- ding the nitride grains in a matrix by liquid-phase sin- tering, might be helpful in achieving this aim.
From the point of reprocessing of nitride fuel, and recycling of the 15N  content,  the  hydrolysis  of  UN is in principle a promising concept. We have estab- lished – like others before us – that under appropriate conditions, the nitrogen is near exclusively given off as
NH3, which is technically simple to recover and is a suitable reagent for nitriding of uranium by several methods [17]. One drawback is the remarkable degree of retention of nitrogen in the solid product, also earlier noted in dry oxidation experiments after which it could only be liberated as N2 by pyrolysis [12,13]. Sugihara and Imoto [11] reported that continued hydrolysis up to 600 °C served to liberate part of the residual nitrogen, but again largely as N2 rather than NH3. While our find- ings are in good agreement with those reported in [10], where with one exception (5%) the residual nitrogen was 20% or more, any successful application of hydrol- ysis as a 15N recycling method would require a signifi- cantly higher conversion ratio of UN to NH3 than was achieved in this study.
4.Conclusions
The rate at which spark-plasma sintered UN pellets are degraded in a hot water/steam environment is depen- dent of pellet porosity. While it is obvious that the sur- face exposed to steam is orders of magnitude greater in a highly porous pellet than in a dense one, we sug- gest that an important contributing factor is mechani- cal fragmentation due to internal volume increase. This step, which initiates a continuously accelerating reac- tion by exposing additional surface and shortening dif- fusion pathways, is delayed when diffusion only can operate along grain boundaries or bulk. In dense pel- lets, fragmentation was observed to occur before any extensive hydrolysis was noted. Hence, the successful development of nitride fuels for LWR systems would be facilitated by fabrication methods that reduce or com- pletely eliminate open porosity and reduce diffusion along grain boundaries.
Exposure to superheated steam/argon at 500 °C reduce all so far tested nitride fuels to a fine oxidic powder suitable for conventional extractive reprocess- ing. The nitrogen content is released as ammonia, which offers a convenient way to recycle isotopically enriched 15N in an undiluted form usable as feedstock in pro- duction. Additional studies would however be needed to establish whether quantitative nitrogen recovery as ammonia can be achieved by hydrolysis, or whether some residual nitrogen will inevitably remain in the oxi- dic product.
Acknowledgments
Parts of this work were funded within the ASGARD project (European Atomic Energy Community’s Seventh Framework Programme) [grant number GA269665]; and by the Swedish Centre for Nuclear Technology (SKC).