<title>STRATEGY FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF NUCLEAR ENERGY IN RUSSIA AND ENVIRONMENTAL MATTERS</title>
<Affiliation>1.Frumkin Institute of Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences (IPCE RAS), Moscow, Russia.
2.Bochvar High-Technology Research Institute of Inorganic Materials (VNIINM), Moscow, Russia; e-mail: yavoskresenskaya</Affiliation>
<author>A. Yu. Shadrin,V. B. Ivanov,M. V. Skupov,V. M. Troyanov, and A. A. Zherebtsov</author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>ATOMIC ENERGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Springer</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10512-020-00632-4</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10512-020-00632-4</URL>
Abstract
Issues concerning the completeness and integrity of a strategy for the development of nuclear energy in Russia to 2050 and the prospects for the period to 2100 are examined. It is shown that questions concerning the final stages of the lifecycle and environmental aspects associated with the use of nuclear technologies are not duly reflected in the strategy. The authors believe that the strategy cannot be implemented without purposeful work on conclusive validation of the role of nuclear energy in the decarbonization of the econ- omy and the formulation and development of theses concerning its environmental safety. To implement the strategy, it is necessary to perform a careful analysis of issues concerning the management of spent nuclear fuel and radioactive wastes and harmonization of the stages of development of nuclear energy and forma- tion of a unified state system for radwaste management. It is proposed that a fundamental analysis of the infrastructure needs for Russia’s two-component nuclear energy be performed, an appropriate supplemen- tary public document be developed, and a document with the provisional title “Environmental rationale for the development of nuclear energy in Russia and humanitarian aspects” be prepared.
In 2018, the Rosatom State Corporation formulated the basic provisions of a strategy for the development of nuclear energy in Russia to 2050 and the prospects for the period to 2100 [1]. The appearance of the strategy was profoundly positive:
–a rationale for discussing long-term outlook appeared;
–its actualization is envisaged as technological forks in the road are passed, which could have something to do with a molten-salt reactor as well as gas-cooled hydrogen producers;
–the complexity of long-range assessment and the need for converting this work into a regular and broader founda- tion are demonstrated, since the future of nuclear energy is determined not only by the construction, design, and operating organizations but also by the public’s attitude toward its safety and environmental acceptability.
Being staunch supporters of nuclear energy and having studied the problems of its safe development for more than 30 years now we believe that the proposals must be formulated in certain directions of action in order to fulfill the strategy [2]. First, in our opinion, certain remarks made in [3] concerning the strategy merit discussion, including about the ap-
proach to its economic rationale, assessments of uranium reserves, comparison of data, based on operating experience, with evaluated data for the designs being developed for power-generating units. But we do not agree with the conclusion that at- tention should be focused on planning for shorter stages, specifically, on the temporary horizons of technological forks in the road. The time interval to 2100, as chosen in the strategy, is shorter than two service lives of modern NPP and hence, this is already tomorrow, and this tomorrow must be constantly forecasted taking into account the possible temper of nuclear energy and all other significant aspects.
We shall now make some of our own remarks and suggestions.
On economic criteria. The Levelized Cost of Electricity (LCOE) is chosen as the primary tool for evaluating com- petitiveness in the strategy. Without going into a detailed analysis, we note that initially this indicator was intended in making local decisions concerning the development of business in the sphere of electricity generation and is admissible as a first step in the evaluation of economic acceptability. At the same time, a more significant role is given in the documents to the financial and economic stability compared with questions regarding radiation and environmental safety security as well as public ac- ceptance. Although the strategy contains an indication of guaranteed safety more precise desired facilities, which are lacking in the strategy, are given in other documents from the Rosatom State Corporation. For example, it is declared in the program of [4]: “Safety has the highest priority, which cannot be exchanged in favor of efficiency ...” Of no less importance is the fact that the growing significance of environmental criteria must be taken into account and, correspondingly, the future growth of the cost of environmental taxes and payments must be predicted. Such assessments are not contained in the strategy.
On the sources of uncertainties in forecasts. The concept ‘uncertainty’ with respect to the period to 2100 is encoun- tered in the strategy only once, and exclusively in the sense that it is successfully overcome. In respect to calculations, uncer- tainty is not mentioned at all. For comparison: in a document with similar scope [5] the section on economics starts with an analysis of uncertainties. It is our conviction that the main sources of uncertainty today are, and will remain so for a long time, environmental assessments and public acceptance. In addition the latter is important not only in respect to the safety of nuclear reactors, which is examined in the strategy, but also on a wider plane, i.e., in respect to the entire nuclear fuel cycle.
The possibility of objective public perception of the contents and methods for solving problems of the global environ- mental safety can be realized in the future only if adequate efforts are made. The strategy must show a necessity for such efforts and determine their direction. For example, the theses concerning the advantages of nuclear power in the sphere of nuclear, radiation, and environmental safety must be formulated, supported, and actualized. For the time, an unfavorable situation has developed in this sphere. Nuclear energy is perceived as a dangerous technology, to reject which people in some countries, for example, in Germany, are prepared to accept costs on a scale of tens of billions of euros. Strategies for full reproduction of NPP capacities are being implemented only in individual countries with limited resources, and strategies for intense growth are being realized only in developing countries, adapted to higher levels of risk in order to achieve economic results.
The environmental friendliness of nuclear energy has remained unacknowledged for a long time. Global environmen- tal initiatives, included in the agenda at the end of the last and in the present millennium (conference in Rio and others), were
close to engaging powerful financial tools for preventing carbon emissions, including trading quotas, and so forth. Nonetheless, nuclear energy generation (almost 400 GW/yr), preventing the emission of carbon in amounts of about 2.5·109 t/yr in terms of
coal- and gas-fired TPP, was excluded from the flexibility mechanisms afforded by the Kyoto protocol. Its level of acknowl- edgement is well illustrated by the fact that the prevented emission volumes are of the same order of magnitude as the contri- bution of all forests on Earth.
The situation was somewhat corrected at the end of the Paris climate accord, which does not contain direct prohibition of nuclear energy. However, among the variants of greenhouse gas emissions reduction nine countries, including Argentina, India, China, and Japan, pointed to it [6]. The global initiative of the nuclear industry in the program Harmony under the aegis of the Global Nuclear Association can serve as a stimulus for future movement. According to calculations, to 2050 nuclear generation should be configured so as to support at least 25% of the world production of low-carbon electricity [7]. Arguments concerning the role of NPP in the decarbonization of the economy are not contained in the strategy, which in our view is a conspicuous omission.
The formulation of global environmental problems and their solution are unavoidable in the near future 10–20 years. Large countries, such as USA and China and in some cases Russia also, which resist full-scale development of these process- es, are clearly overestimating the degree of their economic and geographic protection from cross-border pollution. One of the regions of Russia where cross-border effects will appear is the Far East. In this connection, the observations performed in 2017–2018 jointly with specialists at the Far-East Federal University with support from the Rosatom State Corporation are interesting. In the course of organizing environmental monitoring in the Far East, an investigation was performed of the fine structure of aerosols of the main pollutants and the source of their appearance was accurately determined – industrial plants in China. The contribution of the aerosols was found to be greater than the contribution of natural sources (dust aerosols in droughty zones and emissions from plants). Industrial aerosols were found not only in border regions of the Far East but also in Yakutiya, i.e., several thousands of kilometers from the industrial regions of China. The obtained data confirmed the serious misgivings expressed previously [8].
The subject of industrial aerosols, evidently, with time will crowd out many other environmental problems. For ex- ample, for the European continent epidemiologists associate with such emissions hundreds of thousands of additional deaths per year [9, 10]. Moreover, aerosols are the basis for cloud formation and, therefore, precipitation, and one of the reasons for the climate variability by analogy with CO2. Going back to nuclear energy, we note that it emits hardly any aerosols. This is another strong environmental advantage in addition to the absence of greenhouse gas emissions and combustion of oxygen. Another advantage is diligence toward natural resources, including uranium and water, in a closed fuel cycle – virtual inde- pendence from them.
The theses about the radiation safety of nuclear energy must also be formulated, supported, and developed taking modern challenges into account:
–high operating reliability of NPP with minimal effect on the surrounding environment;
–practical proofs of the possibility of realizing a full lifecycle of objects and materials of nuclear energy, including decommissioning in the “green meadow” variant and reliable disposal of all wastes; in respect to long-lived high-end medi- um-level waste high readiness toward their final isolation with safety guarantees already exists or research programs directed toward the confirmation of long-time safety of disposal are being implemented;
–a high level of safety culture, expressed in, among other things, the presence of a branched system of checks and extremely low indicators as compared with other energy sectors and industries.
The absence of negative consequences of irradiation during normal operation of NPP is confirmed by aggregated, on a world level, results of radiation epidemiological studies (UNSCEAR [11]), comparative analysis of the risks from radiation and chemically harmful substances [12, 13], data on the cancer deaths in the general population living in regions of the world with high levels of radiation from native sources, and inhabitants of other territories [14, 15], and data on the cancer deaths among workers in modern nuclear enterprises [16, 17]. At the same time, a demonstration of the safety of nuclear energy in the public arena requires new approaches that are unencumbered by the accumulated negativism of the public perception of radiation risks. The limited nature of the radiological consequences of all large radiation accidents must be positioned in a similar manner. Concluding the subject of environmental and humanitarian uncertainties we can state that the trend of their development largely depends on the volume and quality of the data presented to the public on the problems of safety in terms of public health and the environment. A strategy oriented toward the development of nuclear energy must clearly indicate the need for work on increasing the volume and evidentiary standards of data in this sphere.
The management of nuclear fuel, radwaste, and decommissioning of NPP requires separate discussion. Today this is one of the key aspects of the public perception of nuclear energy. Unfortunately, the strategy does not contain any questions concerning the decommissioning of power-generating units. The issues concerning the handling of spent nuclear fuel and radwaste are expounded as theses in a style characteristic for the first programs of the development of nuclear energy, where only the commissioning of power-generating units was discussed, and everything else was postponed “until later.” These circumstances are dispiriting, since more than 10 years have passed from the start of large-scale work on the nuclear legacy and eight years from the start of the formation of the legal foundations of the modern system for management of radwaste, which are specified by the appropriate federal law. The direct participation of the authors of the present article in the validation of the necessity of legacy work and its subsequent informational support, just like in the formulation of the basic idea of the law on radwaste, makes it possible to affirm the initial understatement of the accumulated problems and difficulties of the adaptation of the organizations of Rosatom to the conditions of functioning in the logic of the full lifecycle of objects and materials [18]. The definite risks in this sphere, which were predicted at the initial phase of the formulation of the unified state
radwaste management system, have already been realized in part [19, 20]. At the same time, the unified state radwaste man- agement system has acquired the necessary components, and today there is every reason to assert that it functions and clear plans for development in many directions are present [21]. Scientific discussions of the problems and advancements in this field are discussed in the specially created scientific and technical journal Radioaktivnye Otkhody [Radwastes].
The limited examination of the issues concerning the management of spent nuclear fuel, radioactive waste, and de- commissioning of NPP looks logical from the standpoint of the developers of the strategy: the strategy has determined differ- ent variants of the contours for the development of a reactor stock, and the rest – fuel production and management of spent nuclear fuel and radioactive waste, including the type of recycling – will be adjusted to the reactor technologies. The authors of the present article adhere to a different point of view – questions concerning the management of spent nuclear fuel, rad- waste, and decommissioning of NPP determine the public and environmental acceptability of nuclear energy and its compet- itiveness in the present and future. In this connection, it is important to indicate in support for the implementation of the strategy at least two conditions required for the development of nuclear energy and to maintain its potential in terms of the construction of NPP abroad:
1.The necessity of understanding the development in the full cycle, i.e., not only in the form of a schedule for intro- ducing new capacity, but also the start and completion of work on the decommissioning of power-generating units and disposal of radwaste, including from the reprocessing of spent fuel. New power-generating units must be denominated as 100% highly environmentally friendly, i.e., with fully reckoned completion of the lifecycle of the power-generating unit itself, reprocessing of spent fuel, and disposal of radwaste. The content of the strategy and supporting materials does not inspire confidence, which is fully taken into account in the LCOE used.
2.The need to tailor the stages of development of nuclear energy and the formation of the unified state radwaste management system. The harmonizing is needed for many large and urgent issues. Five of them are examined in detail in [22].
We shall discuss the first three.
1.Heat-release of vitrified wastes. Until very recently the vitrification technology for radioactive wastes from the reprocessing of spent fuel was realized in our country only at the Mayak Association. The heat release of the glass made it possible to dispose of the waste after a certain decay time or without it. Currently, a new facility with higher heat-release is starting up in the prototype demonstration center for reprocessing of spent fuel at the Mining and Chemical Combine. There arises the question of how the spent fuel will be reprocessed – in order of arrival or in a more organized manner, as proposed in [23]. This is a very simple but graphic example of long-time matching of work in different directions – here we are talking about starting times for the disposal of borosilicate glass – 2050–2060. A close situation with start-up of prototype demonstra- tion of the BEST-300 energy technologies, where a new flow of radwaste will be formed, which even taking fractionation into account at the early stages will require geological disposal [24].
2.Reactor graphite. Within the operative norms reactive graphite is a class-2 waste. Everyone well understands the high cost of such disposal. In addition, there are prerequisites for validation of the possibility of disposing of graphite at a much lower depth. A timely solution in searching for an appropriate site is important. Other variants, viz. deep disposal of graphite or its additional storage or continuation of the current practice as content of RBMK graphite masonry – are much more expensive.
3.Disposal of liquid wastes. Even today, aside from discussions at IAEA concerning the acceptability of pumping such wastes, there is the example of combining its termination with large international contracts. For example, at the Siberian Chemical Combine, for example, in securing such a contract a radwaste vitrification complex is built. Its prospects are limited in spite of the measures adopted for safety validation of the pumping practice [25]. Nonetheless, the operating organizations delivering liquid waste for disposal, including the Mining and Chemical Combine and the Research Institute of Nuclear Reactors, have still not fully recognized the seriousness of the requirements in closing the point of deep disposal of liquid radwaste in the context of international activity and export technologies, specifically, the construction of NPP abroad and the reprocessing of foreign spent fuel.
Aside from the enumerated urgent questions, there are also more remote problems in respect to agreement. Currently, it is important to determine the time period when it will be necessary to start a detailed analysis of the mutual harmonizing of the development of new reactor technologies and the corresponding transformation of the unified state radwaste disposal system. An example of such a time period is to determine the passage through the technological forks in the road arising in the strategy, of which the first one, probably, should be the experience gained in operating the BREST-OD-300 reactor, i.e., after the dateline 2030. Progress in the development of technologies will be a signal for a detailed analysis of the transforma- tion of systems for the management of spent fuel and radwaste.
We shall now dwell one other point associated with the final isolation of wastes. The volume of the accumulated wastes and the existing and being-built reactor facilities and nuclear technologies predetermine the need for creating a full- scale system for isolation of all types of waste that would function for many decades [4, 5]. This policy is supported at the state level in all countries that have ratified the joint convention on the safety of the management of spent fuel and the safety of the management of radioactive wastes, and is acknowledged by most specialists in the world and Russia. But, the strategy presents a different opinion. In the strategy it is indicated that the “safety of the disposal of spent nuclear fuel for hundreds of thousands and millions of years casts fully justifiable doubts on the reliability of such long-term predictions.”
This thesis raises objections for two reasons. In the first place, it completely ignores the fact that an unprecedentedly large amount of especially dangerous wastes, which are stable, are produced in the world, and their disposal does not raise strong objections. For this reason, the long-lived wastes must be positioned as wastes that do not fully possess the positive property of radioactive decay over several centuries but still are better than dangerous stable wastes. In the second place, this thesis undermines the conviction in the environmental advantages of nuclear power. The questions concerning validation of the long-time safety are currently solved by using cutting-edge scientific methods and a high level of international cooperation and openness.
In closing, we wish to point out that the strategy must be supplemented with public documents concerning the tech- nical policy or time periods of its analysis with respect to all hot topics concerning the final stages of the lifecycle. There are many such important topics, and for many of them there is no scientific literature or public documents pertaining to them, which can be interpreted as postponement of the problems to some future time. This includes topics such as the longest stor- age times for RBMK-1000 and VVER-1000 spent fuel, production of wastes at NPP in Russia, including NPP with new de- signs, including in comparison with foreign analogs, the time periods and cost of the decommissioning of existing and newly built generating units of NPP, the strategy and decommissioning times for the Bilibino NPP, and others. The particular char- acter of some of them does not preclude wide-ranging discussions in the future, including within the context of the develop- ment of nuclear energy. An example is when the appearance of a document of this kind simplified in many ways the discussion of the problem among specialists and the public – this is the construction of the immediate objects of a point of disposal of the deep type. The ambiguity of the naming of the project, which could indicate its rapid development, initiated definite re- gional stress and a significant number of questions from different countries in the course of the discussion of the national re-
port of the Russian Federation on meeting the obligations emerging from the joint convention. The publication of the strategy for creating a point of deep disposal of radioactive waste, clearly positioning the stages of the work [26], including the cre- ation and operation of an underground research laboratory in the period to 2030, has completely removed these questions.
In summary, the formulation of a long-term strategy for the development of nuclear power in Russia has reached a fundamentally new level – the base document was approved at the end of 2018 [1]. The concentration of the strategy on the base reactor technologies has created lacunas in it, including directions such as the final stages of the life cycle, validation of environmental acceptability, and environmental incentives for development.
The exposed lacunas must be closed by a careful examination of all infrastructure issues accompanying the construc- tion and operation of NPP including management of spent fuel, radioactive waste, and decommissioning of NPP and their colligation in analytical materials and documents. Time will be required for the preparation of an analysis with the provisional title “Infrastructure support for two-component nuclear energy of Russia.” A vision of the future look for the base scenario of development in the period of the passage through the technological forks in the road can be formed in two to three years. After this and with subsequent passage of the strategy through the stipulated technological forks in the road, it will be possible to develop a vision of the infrastructure of two-component nuclear energy.
Another document must also be organized with the provisional title “Environmental rationale for the development of nuclear energy in Russia and humanitarian aspects.”
