<title>Evaluation of Direct Drive Capsule Fill-Tube Assembly Survivability in Support of the 100 GBar Campaign</title>
<Affiliation>a.General Atomics, P.O. Box 85608, San Diego, California 92186-5608
b.University of Rochester, Laboratory for Laser Energetics, 250 East River Road, Rochester, New York 14623</Affiliation>
<author>L. C. Carlson, P. Fitzsimmons, S. Pajoom, R. Petzoldt, A. Tambazidis, D. Harding, R. Chapman, J. Ulreich & M. Wittman</author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>FUSION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/15361055.2017.1406240</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1080/15361055.2017.1406240</URL>
Abstract — Capsule fill-tube target assemblies (CFTAs)  for direct drive have been demonstrated in the  past for Laboratory for Laser Energetics (LLE) cryogenic layering studies, evolving and building upon successful deliveries for the National Ignition Facility [Saito et al., Fusion Sci. Tech., Vol. 55, p. 337  (2009); Johal et al., Fusion Sci. Tech., Vol. 55, p. 331 (2009); Saito et al., Fusion Sci. Tech., Vol. 59, p. 271 (2011); Moreno et al., Fusion Sci. Tech., Vol. 59, p. 46 (2011); and Rice et al., High Power Laser Sci. Eng., Vol. 5, p. 7 (2017)]. The current 100 Gigabar (GBar) Campaign requires tighter specifications over prior CFTA work in terms of robustness and reduced fill-tube diameter and glue spot size, which impact the survivability of the CFTA. To tackle these challenges, General Atomics and LLE are developing a direct- drive CFTA that survives all fabrication activities, from assembly and qualification testing to transport, cryogenic layering, and target chamber insertion at the Omega Laser Facility.
Fifty-five CFTAs of three main designs have been constructed and tested to date, building off the current LLE cryogenic layering study of CFTA design (typically 870-μm-diameter × 25-μm-thick wall capsule). Variations of glass fill tube sizes ranged from 30, 20, and 10 µm in diameter. Testing protocols were developed to enable comparison of different designs against one another and to evaluate their robustness at room temperature. The testing protocols include leak checks, resonant vibration mode identification, and vibration survival testing against a power spectral density input. This paper compares the different design trade-offs, measurements, and results including room temperature survivability, ring- down response, leak tests, and scanning electron microscope images taken of failed fill tubes and glue joints. A design recommendation is put forth meeting the design constraints, which consists of a polymicro- composite tube and 10-µm fill tube, ensuring survivability at cryogenic temperature, a higher first- resonance mode, and smaller fuel volume.
Keywords — Capsule fill-tube assembly, 100 GBar, direct drive.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
The 100 GBar Campaign addresses the critical next step in achieving ignition through the means of laser direct- drive inertial confinement fusion. The central stagnation pressure in the implosion must reach pressures in excess of 100 GBar to achieve ignition.1 The specific target
requirements of the 80 and 100 GBar Campaigns necessi- tate improvements to capsule fabrication, metrology, and capsule fill-tube assemblies (CFTAs) (see Appendix). Relevant to CFTAs are the requirements for target surviva- bility and transportability both at room temperature and while filled at cryogenic temperature, which is the essence for this work. Additionally, capsule positioning of less than 5 µm at the chamber center and fill-tube glue spots less than 30 µm to minimize implosion asymmetry are also provided by the CFTAs. This translates to tangible assem- bly, characterization, and transport challenges. The fill tube is required to be able to fill the capsule through its non- permeable wall and the tube’s small size (from 30 down to
10 µm in diameter) and small glue fillet requirements necessitate a study of survivability.
The initial premise was to develop a testing protocol by which a variety of designs could be tested against each other to evaluate their robustness for survivability. The three CFTA designs build off the current Laboratory for Laser Energetics (LLE) cryogenic layering study design with variations of borosilicate-glass fill tubes of 30-, 20-, and 10-µm diameters and a composite tube using polymi- cro (polymeric coating around a fused silica tube) and glass pipettes. Fill tubes were assembled into laser-drilled holes in glow-discharge polymer (GDP) capsules and then leak tested at room temperature to confirm the assemblies were leak tight. Next they were vibration tested to find their resonance modes with the requirement to be removed from known vibration mechanisms (e.g., cryogenic pump- ing and filling equipment around 60 Hz) and then tested with a power spectral density (PSD) of frequencies from 20 to 1200 Hz for survivability testing. High-speed camera footage was taken to measure the resonance mode ampli- tudes. In addition, both room temperature and cryogenic leak tests were performed to validate the CFTA surviva- bility at liquid nitrogen temperatures. CFTAs were noted as passing or failing the testing protocols during any handling or transportation phase.
This paper focuses on assessing the baseline LLE CFTA design for robustness at room temperature, the testing protocols developed in concert with LLE to be able to field a viable direct-drive CFTA design, a sum- mary of the data, trends observed, and future work.
II.EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH AND APPARATUSES
The fabrication of CFTAs are explained in detail in Refs. 2, 3, and 4. Once the CFTA has been fabricated and is confirmed leak tight, it is placed in a fixture for trans- port and is then ready for testing.
As of this writing (mid-2017), 55 CFTAs consisting of the three different designs have been constructed and tested, building off of glass-pipette fill tubes from prior experience using 30-, 20-, and 10-µm-diameter tubes, and an additional polymicro-composite design. Note that not all 55 CFTAs were available for complete testing through all the protocols as some failed along the way. The types of fill tubes and their quantity follow:
1.Design 1: a quantity of 27 stainless steel tube + tapered glass pipette (Fig. 1a)
2.Design 2: a quantity of 8 fill-only design, tapered glass pipette for cryogenic fill testing (Fig. 1b)
3.Design 3: a quantity of 20 polymicro + glass pipette (Fig. 1c).
Fig. 1. Conceptual drawings (not to scale) of (a) tapered-tube design utilizing a stainless steel tube over a drawn glass pipette,
(b) fill-only design with glass pipette for cryogenic fill testing, and (c) and (d) polymicro composite design with glass pipette inserted into the polymicro.
II.A.Testing Protocols
The testing protocols were developed with LLE to define a baseline test by which all CFTAs could be tested and compared. These protocols allow for CFTAs of dif- ferent designs to be tested against each other for assess- ment as to each one’s survivability during room temperature handling and for transport and vibration resonance characteristics. The vibration testing was per- formed on mass-equivalent GDP capsules, which have a thicker 25- to 27-µm wall to simulate the equivalent mass of the capsule if it were filled with a 60- to 80-µm layer of deuterium ice.
The vibration testing device (Fig. 2) is a low-mass voice coil to which the CFTA is adhered securely to the coil using a fitting connection or clamp. A high-speed, high-resolution camera system tracks the capsule motion relative to the nonflexing mount or stainless steel support tube. An accelerometer mounted on the coil measures the acceleration at the base of the CFTA.
II.B.Leak Checking
CFTAs with the ferrule fitting (designs 1 and 3) were pressurized at 30 psi and held for 10 min to check for any catastrophic failure of the glue joints. A leak creating a greater than 1 psi pressure drop during the testing time constituted a failure. Leak testing ensures the glue  joints and fittings are leak tight.
II.C.Resonant Modes Identification
Once the CFTA was assembled and confirmed leak tight, it was then mounted to the voice coil for vibration testing. The sinusoidal input was manually swept from
~20 to 1200 Hz at 0.5-g acceleration to excite and iden- tify the resonant modes of vibration of the CFTA using
Fig. 2. Voice coil vibration testing mechanism to couple sinusoidal motion or a frequency function to the CFTA.
the high-speed camera. Typically, the capture rate of the camera was 20× the input vibration frequency to smoothly track the motion. Once a peak was roughly determined, video was recorded at frequencies  above  and below the  resonance  frequency  to  best  identify  the peak amplitude of the capsule. The video  images were then postprocessed to track the capsule with respect to the base of the fill tube using the high-speed video software’s feature tracking capability. The amplitude of the capsule vibration was then plotted against the swept frequency and the peaks identified to ±5 Hz. Recording the resonance modes ensures the natural frequency of the CFTA can be kept away from known vibration inputs at the facility and filling and layering equipment.
II.D.Ringdown to Shock Input
The window of time from when the layering sphere’s protective shroud is opened and the target is exposed to the vacuum chamber environment to when the lasers fire is approximately 4 s. Ideally the CFTA damps down and stabilizes in less than half that time to allow for adequate stability (less than 5-µm positional error) at shot time. For this test on the shaker table, high-speed video was recorded to track the capsule position after the vibration input was removed. The capsule was then tracked until no more motion could be perceived at the resolution of the camera system of ~5 µm. Ringdown tests ensure the CFTA has damped down and the capsule is motionless before the shot.
II.E.PSD Survivability
A PSD function was developed to simultaneously excite all relevant frequency modes (~20 to 1200 Hz) at constant acceleration as a room temperature survivability test. The PSD was derived from actual data taken from accelerometers on the current LLE mobile cryogenic carts encompassing the lifetime of a filled capsule from CFTA insertion into the chamber, engagement, gripping, and shroud pull.5 A time-series graphic depiction  of  the  PSD signal is shown in Fig. 3. The PSD function is delivered by a digital function generator to  the  voice  coil on which the CFTA is secured. The PSD recom- mended for acceptance testing was 10/f g2s from 20 to
2000 Hz. This results in a maximum amplitude of ± 4 g,with a standard deviation of 6 g, for 30 s. An extended testing period of 10 min was conducted on a few CFTAs to extend the cycle and assess long-term fatigue of the assemblies and glue joints at a lower amplitude of 2 g Fig. 3. Time series derived from the PSD that excites all modes from 20 to 1200 Hz, with a maximum amplitude of 24-g peak and a standard deviation of 6 g to simulate the vibration spectra of the CFTAs during transport, filling, layering, and insertion. Tests are usually conducted over 30 s, with some lasting as long as 10 min at reduced amplitude (2 g).
The PSD test ensures the CFTA can withstand common and regular handling and transport acceleration.
During PSD testing on the vibration platform, the CFTAs are connected to a leak detector to facilitate per- forming helium leak tests in conjunction with vibration tests. The CFTAs are leak tested before and after PSD vibration testing to verify that no leaks developed. Passing the PSD test means the CFTA does not exhibit any catastrophic failure nor leak after the cycle is complete. The PSD is meant to be a worst-case vibration spec- trum that the CFTA could experience in handling using LLE’s current-day filling and insertion equipment and protocols. Typical hand-carrying of CFTAs does not reg- ularly exceed 2 g yet a range of frequency modes are excited over extended periods of time (~day). However, most postassembly failures occur when a  high-g-force shock is sent though the CFTA after being coupled from a metal-to-metal strike or drop, and the capsule is liable to “whip” off the glass pipette. The CFTAs are for the most part fairly resilient, with 13 having been success- fully hand-carried from General Atomics (GA) in San Diego, California to LLE in Rochester, New York, but unintentional rough handling can couple high-energy
shocks to dislodge the capsule from the fill tube.
II.F.Cryogenic Leak Testing
All vibration tests for these protocols have been at room temperature for the first phase of CFTA testing. On the way to ultimately vibration testing the CFTAs at cryogenic tem- perature, leak testing was performed on five tapered-tube CFTAs before, during, and after the CFTAs were cycled using ~77-K liquid nitrogen (LN2). A residual gas analyzer (RGA) was used to measure normal permeation through the capsule at room temperature and to detect potential leaks through the CFTA glue joints from a pressurized
containment vessel immersed in LN2 containing 6 psi of deuterium. Over a 2-h temperature cycle, the CFTA is cooled down from room temperature to 77 K and allowed to thermally equilibrate. The leak rates are recorded during this process. Once warmed back up to room temperature after a ~15-min soak at 77 K, the RGA indicates if there was a failure in the CFTA by a catastrophic leak rate. This cycle is repeated twice for testing and verification.
III.RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Fifty-five CFTAs consisting of the three different designs have been constructed and tested  (see  quantities per design in Sec. II. Note that not all 55 CFTAs were available for complete testing through all the protocols due to assembly and handling failures. Seventeen CFTAs (designs 2 and 3) were delivered to LLE for fill testing to assess their robustness for survivability during cryogenic filling. Three CFTAs of design 1 passed all build, vibration, and PSD testing protocols including leak checks at room and cryogenic temperatures. Additionally, six CFTAs delivered to LLE have been successfully used for cryogenic fill testing. The eight CFTAs of design 2 were not vibration tested. Eleven CFTAs of design 3 with an 8-µm wall passed the room temperature leak test and were delivered for fill testing and therefore not vibration tested. Test results for the remaining 36 CFTAs are listed in Table I
and discussed in Secs. III.A through III.F.
III.A.Leak Checking
Of the 27 tapered fill tube CFTAs, 8 failed the room temperature leak testing, 5 failed due to excessive leak- ing, and 3 failed due to handling errors. All nine of the
TABLE I
Test  Results Summary
available polymicro CFTAs in Table I passed the room temperature leak testing.
III.B.Resonant Modes Identification
The first resonant mode manifests itself by causing the capsule to swing wildly about one point of inflection along the glass pipette tube, sometimes up to two capsule diameters (±1.5 mm), which is recorded as the displace- ment at the first resonant mode. This typically occurs in the 50- to 100-Hz range for the 10-µm fill tube, mass-  equivalent capsule CFTA, as shown in Figs. 4a and 4c. The second mode is a symmetric mode occurring at the same frequency as the first mode and the side-view
camera does not accurately image this  mode  into  and out of its viewing plane. In fact, sometimes the first two modes couple together and the capsule rotates in an apparent circle or figure-eight and can be seen when viewed end on. The third mode is a torsional mode and   is not measurable by the camera system. The fourth mode usually occurs at 700 to 800 Hz for the 10-µm fill tube, mass-equivalent capsules and has two points of inflection as shown in Fig. 4b. Thicker fill tubes are stiffer and thin- wall capsules have lower mass, which result in resonance at higher frequencies. This result is shown in Table II, which displays the frequencies at the largest capsule displacement for tested CFTAs. Initial builds utilized fill tubes that varied from 30 to 10 µm in diameter but Fig. 4. (a) Frame capture of a design 2, 10-µm fill tube CFTA bending in “whipping” motion during the PSD test, showing arduous coupling of frequency modes to the fill tube. (b) Design 2, 10-µm fill tube bending at maximum capsule displacement  (~1 mm) at its first resonant mode. (c) Frequency response testing of a design 1, 10-µm-diameter glass fill tube, stainless steel tubing not visible.
TABLE II
Peak Resonance Frequencies for CFTA Capsules Increase with Fill Tube Diameter and Decrease with Capsule Mass/Wall Thickness subsequent builds narrowed down on 10-µm fill tubes  due to their smaller capsule perturbation over larger fill tubes and survivability results.
The first resonance frequencies of design 1 using mass-equivalent 25-µm wall capsules and only  10-µm fill tubes were found to be 46 to 65 Hz. The first resonance frequencies of design 3 polymicro using mass-equivalent 25-µm wall capsules and 10-µm fill tubes were found to be 95 Hz (Tables I and II). The CFTAs of design 2 were not tested since they were for fill testing only and purposefully were made with lar-   ger glue fillets.
III.C.Ringdown to Shock Input
As shown in Fig. 5, the ringdown time was mea- sured to be approximately 1 s after the vibration input was removed for a number of 10-µm polymicro CFTAs using mass-equivalent capsules of the tapered-tube and polymicro designs. These designs met this room tem- perature requirement within the camera system resolu- tion of 5 µm, although the specific ringdown at  cryogenic temperature will be different and must be tested.
III.D.PSD Survivability
Of the tapered-tube design 1, three CFTAs passed the PSD test and five failed this test (Table I). Five of the polymicro design passed this test and none failed. Of those CFTAs which passed the test, all passed the sub- sequent leak test afterward. Three 10-min-long PSD tests were performed at lower acceleration to assess longer-  term fatigue of the joints, and these passed as well.
CFTA 024 ringdown vs time (s)
2.3
2.1
1.9
1.7
1.5
1.3
0	0.5	1	1.5	2
Time (s)
Fig. 5. Ringdown: 10-µm CFTA with mass-equivalent capsule damps down from ±400-µm displacement to
~5 µm in ~1.2 s after vibration input was removed.
III.E.Cryogenic Leak Testing
Three CFTAs of the tapered-tube  design  fully passed the cryogenic leak test and two failed due  to  gross handling errors while removing them from the system. Avoiding direct gas exchanges near the CFTA while filling and evacuating the test chamber is neces- sary for CFTA survivability. Metal-to-metal shocks must also be minimized, which directly couple to the CFTA and can fling off the capsule, such as metal wrenches on fittings while tightening the stainless steel fittings on the system.
Seventeen CFTAs have been delivered to LLE and are currently being used in ongoing cryogenic filling and layering tests using a new cryostat layering sphere design, which includes testing of the insertion, filling, and layer- ing process. The polymicro-tube design has not yet been cryo-leak tested.
III.F.Failure Analysis
A total of 14 failed CFTAs, including 3 recovered capsules, were analyzed by scanning electron micro- scope (SEM) to assess the cause of failure (Table III). The objective was to investigate whether the failures  were caused by the glass pipette fracturing, glue-to- pipette failure, or capsule wall–to-glue failure. The CFTA failures typically occurred during the PSD vibration test- ing, frequency sweep, or handling due to extraneous impulses.
The main cause of the failures was found to be the glue shearing off the glass pipette, which identifies the glue-to-glass bond as a weak point of the CFTA assem- bly. Of the analyzed failed CFTAs, 8 out of the 14 had almost all of the glue fillets missing while 4 of the CFTAs still had fragments of the glue fillet  attached (Fig. 6). Another cause of failure was due to the glass pipette fracturing (Fig. 7). Most of these CFTAs failed due to an impulse force during handling when sudden movement of the capsule induced a bending moment on the glass pipette. Three of the pipettes showed signs of fracture on the detached cross section; however, it is not known if these fractures were the main cause of the failure.
The third cause of failure was the pipette pulling out of the capsule with a partial glue fillet remaining attached to the pipette. In two out of the three retrieved capsules this was the case; however, it was very difficult to see by SEM inside the capsule wall through the drilled hole to search  for  possible  fracture  pieces  of  the pipette  at the
TABLE III
SEM Analysis of Failed  CFTAs*
Fig. 6. (a) Design 1, 10-µm fill tube failed during handling and shows no glue left on the glass pipette. (b) Design 1, 15-µm fill tube failed during PSD vibration testing and shows remnants of the glue fillet still attached to the pipette.
very end of its insertion depth. In addition, there is a fracture mark on the cross section of the glass pipette that indicates the possibility of a broken pipette’s fragments left inside the capsule (Fig. 8). The third capsule had a portion of the glass pipette attached to it. None of the capsules’ walls failed.
The CFTAs delivered to LLE for fill testing also experienced similar failures including handling errors during gluing of the CFTAs into the stainless steel tubing for fielding on the cryostat. The CFTAs with glue fillets even much greater than 100-µm diameter were still sus- ceptible to gross handling errors and shocks. Out of the 26 CFTAs that had fillets greater than 100 µm, 13 failed either during the PSD testing (4) or during handling (9). Out of the 29 CFTAs that had fillets less than 100 µm, 21 failed either during the PSD testing (9) or during handling Fig. 7. (a) Design 1, 10-µm fill tube and (b) its recovered capsule failed due to a puff of air dislodging the capsule during cryogenic testing. The images show that the pipette came out of the capsule, possibly fracturing inside the capsule, and the glue fully dissociated from the glass pipette.
Fig. 8. (a) Design 1, 10-µm fill tube failed during PSD testing, showing glue remnants. (b) Design 3, 10-µm fill tube failed during handling at the pipette-to-polymicro interface (dark region is glue). (c) Design 3, 10-µm fill tube failed during handling due to an impulse.
(12). Although outside the desired specification of 30-µm diameter, larger fillets do not necessarily result in a more robust CFTA, although they may help with leak tightness at cryogenic temperature.
IV.SUMMARY
Fifty-five CFTAs of three different variations were assembled, leak checked, and vibration tested with a subset delivered to LLE for cryogenic fill testing. CFTA survivability has been tested by a protocol including leak, resonant mode response, ringdown, PSD vibration survi- vability, and cryogenic cycling tests. Postfailure analysis included SEM images of the failures and a summary of the observable failure modes and trends.
It has been shown that CFTAs of the tapered-tube design of both 20- and 10-µm pipettes can survive all leak and vibration testing protocols in addition to cryo- genic temperature cycling. The polymicro design has not yet been tested in this respect (vibration testing then cryogenic cycling), but this is planned for later in 2017. At LLE, four polymicro and two-tapered tube designs have survived multiple filling and initial layering tests, thus we are encouraged with both designs surviving both room temperature assembly and handling and cryogenic filling operations.
The purpose of this work was not necessarily to down select to a certain design, but to show survivability of different designs using the same testing protocols and to evaluate their robustness at room temperature. For optimal survivability, it is recommended that the first resonant mode be high (greater than ~80 Hz) in order to be removed from extended dwell periods in susceptible low-frequency regions near 30 to 60 Hz where motion could be coupled directly from shrouds, filling equipment, cryogenic pumps, and low-frequency motion imparted to the CFTA while under transport. On the other hand, the CFTA must not be so stiff, as with the 20- and 30-µm fill tubes, that the glue joint receives all of the bending energy, but rather the energy is dissipated along the length of the glass pipette. For these reasons, the polymicro CFTA has the advantage over the tapered-tube design in its slightly higher first-resonant mode since the energy is distributed by the polymicro tube and not solely by the pipette and glue joint. The polymicro also provides better fuel-filling control and maintains less  fuel volume in the fill tube due to its constant smaller inner diameter over the continuously widening fill tube.
CFTAs with glue fillets greater than 100-µm dia- meter were still susceptible to gross handling errors, shocks, and PSD testing failure, so large fillets are not expressly needed for target robustness. While not expli- citly advantageous from a target survivability point of view, the  small fillets  aid in  the physics requirement  of a small surface perturbation less than 30 µm as well as leak tightness and this is deemed achievable through more consistent glue dispensing.
The path forward to ensure CFTA survivability all the way from assembly to fielding in the OMEGA chamber favors the 10-µm fill tube polymicro design for a slightly higher first-resonance frequency, smaller fuel volume in the tube, and survivability at both room temperature vibra- tion testing and cryogenic fill testing. Target losses due to gross handling errors and extreme shocks must be miti- gated by better handling and equipment, fittings, and fix- tures that minimize metal-to-metal shocks.
Future testing will include vibration testing while at cryogenic temperatures after assessment of cryogenic fielding, fill testing, and layering tests have been com- pleted. Future work includes (1) fielding additional CFTAs of both tapered-tube and polymicro designs on the LLE cryogenic test station, (2) layering sphere tests using deuterium-tritium (D-T), and (3) vibration testing while cold. Ringdown tests in a vacuum chamber while cold will also be beneficial since the frozen D-T in the fill tube is expected to increase the natural frequency of the CFTA. Thus far, all vibration testing has occurred  at room temperature, whereas the fuel-filled capsule will ultimately be filled and transported within the facility while cold, and the vibration response and survivability will change. More CFTAs of the polymicro design are to be built this year and vibration tested with the addition of cryogenic temperature cycling. The redesign of the target insertion system at LLE, as an additional effort for the 100 GBar Campaign, is anticipated to have a frequency signature better (lower g-force) than that of the current system, and it would be worth revisiting the PSD function with updated accelerometer data to ensure the best repre- sentation of the fielding system.
APPENDIX
100 GBAR SPECIFICATIONS FROM THE LLE 100 GBAR PRESENTATION IN JUNE 2016
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the U.S. Department of Energy under contract DE-NA0001808 and by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under contract DE-NA0001808. This document is the property of GA. Any transmittal of this docu- ment outside GA will be in confidence. Except with the written consent of GA, (1) this document may not be copied in whole or in part will be returned upon request or when no longer needed by recipient and (2) information contained herein may not be communicated to others and may not be used by reci- pient only for the purpose for which it was transmitted. The government may disclose information contained herein as necessary for authorized purposes if the disclosure bears the appropriate restrictive legend and proprietary information notice permitted by the applicable government regulations related to the protection of proprietary information. This docu- ment is prepared for the contracting agency. The results and data may be preliminary or tentative and therefore are subject to revision and correction. This document may contain patentable material on which patent applications have not yet been filed and further distribution of this report should not be made with- out prior approval of the contracting agency or the contractor.
