<title>In-laboratory development of an automatic track counting system for solid state nuclear track detectors</title>
<Affiliation>Sarayköy Nuclear Research and Training Center/Turkish Atomic Energy Authority, Atom Street No: 27 Saray, Kazan, Ankara, Turkey</Affiliation>
<author>Sefa Kemal Uzun, Işık Demiröz, İzzet Ulus</author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier Ltd</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radphyschem.2016.08.009 </DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2016.08.009  </URL>
H I G H L I G H T S
●Automatic track counting system was developed for SSNTDs in laboratory.
●The developed system was tested for radon detectors.
●The developed system is introduced for radon measurement service.
●The developed system can be easily adapted for other SSNTD applications.
a b s t r a c t
In this study, an automatic track counting system was developed for solid state nuclear track detectors (SSNTD). Firstly the speciﬁcations of required hardware components were determined, and accordingly the CCD camera, microscope and stage motor table was supplied and integrated. The system was com- pleted by developing parametric software with VB.Net language. Finally a set of test intended for radon activity concentration measurement was applied. According to the test results, the system was enabled for routine radon measurement. Whether the parameters of system are adjusted for another SSNTD application, it could be used for other ﬁelds of SSNTD like neutron dosimetry or heavy charged particle detection.
Keywords:
SSNTD
Radon CR-39
Track counting Image processing
1.Introduction
Solid state nuclear track detectors (SSNTD) are widely used for radon activity concentration measurements at indoors around the world. Besides, there are also other application ﬁelds of SSNTDs like neutron dosimetry, heavy ion detection. Operation of the so- lid-state nuclear track detector is based on the fact that a heavy charged particle causes extensive ionization of the material when it passes through a medium. Nikezic and K.Y. (2004) This ioniza- tion generates a latent track on detector surface. Because of track formation potential and low fading rate, SSNTD materials are se- lected from polymer based materials like CR-39, Lexan. By apply- ing chemical or electro-chemical etching process, the tracks are enlarged until they become countable under an optical micro- scope. The measured quantity (activity concentration, dose, etc.) can be calculated from track number with an appropriate calibration factor. The counting of tracks with eye under micro- scope is very cumbersome and also counting with eye have large uncertainty. Therefore track counting process is generally done by automatic track counting systems. In this study, an automatic track counting system has been developed that it is consisting of stage motor table, microscope, camera and software. The software of the system was designed and written specially. The validation of the track counting system for radon measurement was done by the repeatability, linearity and proﬁciency tests and the system was introduced as track counting system for radon detectors.
2.Material and method
The main concern of the developed system is counting of the charged particle (protons, alphas, ions) tracks clearly by distin- guishing from noisy images (dirt, scratch etc.). If it is considered that the dimensions of etched tracks are in the order of micro- meters, to count the tracks distinctly, the image of the SSTND detector should be magniﬁed by a microscope. The minimum re- quired magniﬁcation rate depends on track size and track size
depends on charged particle type, etching conditions. When the image of the SSNTD surface is magniﬁed, only a portion of the SSNTD will be screened so the SSTND surface should be scanned step by step thus, in the system, stage motor table which mounted on microscope was used for scanning detector surface. Another component of the system is the CCD camera that is attached on microscope. By the camera, the image of the SSNTD is transferred to the PC for track counting. Beyond the hardware components, a software should be to manage the system and to count the tracks by image processing. For this purpose, a speciﬁc software was developed on Visual Studio Express platform.
2.1.Hardware speciﬁcations
The microscope is the main component of the system so the choice of the microscope type is important. Firstly, the optical magniﬁcation should be enough to distinguish the tracks from dirt or scratches. Another required feature of the microscope is that the frame of the microscope should be stable while motorized table is moving. Otherwise, moving of the frame would bring a large uncertainty. Besides microscope should be suitable for mounting the stage motorized table and CCD camera. In the sys- tem, Nikon Eclipse LV100ND type microscope was used that meets the all of the required criteria. The microscope includes two objective lenses which have 5 , 10 magniﬁcation rates. The microscope has also ocular lens which has 10 magniﬁcation rate. Maximum 100 optical magniﬁcation can be obtained by these lenses. The illumination of the microscope is carried out by 12 V, 50 W halogen lamp which is placed at the bottom of the stage motorized table.
Another component of the system is the stage motorized table that is used for scanning the detector surface precisely. The stage motorized  table  is  controlled  over  the  Tango  controller. Wetzlar
s
(2010)   For   this   process,   Marzhauser     (75 mm ~ 50 mm)  stage
motorized table was selected. Stage motorized table has a mini- mum 0.01 mm step size and 73 mm positioning sensitivity. Fur- thermore, for automatic focusing another step motor is used and
this motor is also controlled by same control unit. The stage mo- torized table and  focusing  motor  is  shown  in  Fig. 1  as  number 1 and 3 respectively.
Track counting operation is done by image processing algo- rithm in the software of the system. The prerequisite of image processing is transferring the magniﬁed image of the SSNTD to the computer by the camera. The camera should be attached the on microscope and it should send the image in a suitable format to   the software. The CCD camera was used as shown in Fig. 1 with number 2.
2.2.Software Speciﬁcations
The software of the system was developed specially with VB. Net programming language. The software was classiﬁed into three modules which are image acquisition, image processing and motor control. The image acquisition module consists of the software development kit (SDK) of the camera which is used with some modiﬁcations. (Sensor Technologies America) By the modiﬁca- tions, the image is converted to monochrome and dimensions  of the image are reduced to 1600 600 pixels. In this way, un-  necessary usage of memory is prevented. In the motor control module, the commands are sent to stage motorized table for po- sitioning by the functions of Tango library. (Wetzlar) On the other hand, the step motor for focusing is controlled by the same library thereby automatic focusing is done before counting of tracks for each detector. In the image processing module, for focusing, a numerical indicator was deﬁned that shows the clearness of the image. This indicator is a ratio which is derived from division of
Fig. 1. Picture of track counting system.
diameter of the track to the center pixel color code of the track. While step motor is moving in z direction, the indicator is calcu- lated for each z plane. The focus plane is selected according to the maximum value of the indicator. The image processing module is consisting of the core algorithm of track counting. By this algo- rithm, the tracks are counted according to the some deﬁned parameters. The basic parameters for track counting are the minimum diameter, maximum diameter, darkness threshold and roundness. The dimensions of the captured images are 1600 ~ 600 pixels, this means that each captured image matrix have 960,000 elements. The pixels are the integer numbers that show the color of the points of the image. In the software, because of image is converted to monochrome, pixel has a one color code that is be- tween 0 and 255. In the case of 0, it means that the pixel is full black, in the case of 255, the pixel is full white. By searching the pixel color codes that have smaller values than threshold value, the dark points are determined and by the circle equation they are tested whether a circle is occurring or not. With the roundness parameter, the pixels that are not forming an exact circle but forming a shape like a circle, they can be counted as a track. A sample magniﬁed image of radon exposed SSNTD is given at Fig. 2. The counted tracks are marked with black circle. It is required scanning of detector surface step by step because of magniﬁcation, so the SSNTD surface is scanned 14 step in y direction, 7 step in x direction and 120 discrete (15 ~ 8) images are acquired and pro- cessed for each detector. The multi thread function of . Net fra- mework is used to accelerate the image processing accordingly the image is divided four region and the algorithm is worked in four thread. By this way, the focusing and track counting time for whole detector surface (set of 120 images) is reduced to 90 s
Fig. 2.  A sample picture of magniﬁed image  of  tracks.
2.3.Tests
The developed track counting system is intended primarily for radon activity concentration measurements so tests  of  system  were conducted with radon exposed track detectors. While de- veloping the software of the system, to adjust the parameters and to check the algorithm accuracy, the comparison tests was done qualitatively with RadoSyS track counting system. (RS Radosys Ltd._Man63-RadoSyS User Manual) In this manner when the ac- ceptable track counts has been obtained, the other tests were in- itiated. In the repeatability test, 10 track detectors which were exposed to radon at same level counted 20 times. The track counting values and standard deviations of repeatability test are given in Table 1.
The track counting system was tested also from point of line-
arity for radon activity concentration measurement. A group of SSNTD was exposed to radon at ﬁve different level by the primary radon laboratory of Public Health England. The detectors were etched and tracks were counted with the developed system. Thus obtained track densities varies linearly according to reference ex- posure as shown at graphics in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3. Linearity test graphics of track counting system.
3.Results and discussions
Because of SSTNDs are used at various ﬁelds of radiation measurement, the software of track counting system was devel- oped parametric. According to the current requirements of la- boratory, the parameters of the system were set for counting of alpha particle tracks intended for radon activity concentration
Table 1
The data of repeatability test.
Fig. 4.   Result table of the blind test.
measurements. In this scope a set of test was applied to verify the track counting system.
The uncertainty sources of track counting system can be grouped as systematic and random errors. The systematic errors can be eliminated with a correction factor, however the random errors cannot be removed completely. Even so it should be proved that the random errors are low enough. By the repeatability tests,  it was shown that the random errors are acceptable. Finally before introducing system for measurement service, the authors were participated with developed track counting system to  the  blind test that was organized by BFS (Germany). The 35 radon detectors (RSKS type) were sent to BFS radon laboratory and the detectors were exposed to radon at 4 different level. For each level 7 detec- tors were selected and remaining 7 detectors were used as transit detectors. Chemically etched detectors were counted by developed track counting system and results were reported to the laboratory. The certiﬁcate of blind test is given in Fig. 4. According to the re- sults, it is proven that the developed system can be used as a track counting system for radon measurement service. On the other hand the track counting system can be adapted for neutron dosi- metry or another SSNTD application by setting  the  parameters. The system also can be adjusted for different sized SSNTDs as permitted by the hardware components limits.
Acknowledgements
This study was funded by Turkish Atomic Energy Authority.
