<title>A feasibility study on low-enriched uranium fuel for nuclear thermal rockets e I: Reactivity potential</title>
<author>Paolo F. Venneri, Yonghee Kim</author>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Affiliation>Department of Nuclear and Quantum Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), 291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-701, Republic of Korea</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2015.05.003</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2015.05.003 </URL>
a b s t r a c t
This paper is concerned with the possibility of implementing Low-Enriched Uranium (LEU) fuels in NERVA (Nuclear Engine for Rocket Vehicle Application) type Nuclear Thermal Rockets (NTR). It presents a detailed study of the requirements for implementing LEU in a NERVA type NTR revolving around the softening of the neutron spectrum. This work has been done to demonstrate the possibility to enhance the proliferation resistance of these nuclear space systems in the hope of fostering the groundwork for their eventual commercial use. The necessity of thermalizing the neutron spectrum is discussed along with a detailed study of various methods by which this can be achieved. The effect of minimizing non ﬁssion neutron loss through the selection of appropriate structural materials is then presented along with a cursory study of various options. Finally a reference conceptual reactor conﬁguration is proposed and compared with previous NTR designs where its relative shortcomings and obvious advantages are presented and discussed. It is concluded that an LEU-NTR is not only a deﬁnite possibility, but also offers distinct advantages over existing Highly-Enriched Uranium (HEU) NTR designs, particularly the increased proliferation resistance of the system and the reduction of the fuel cost and development schedule. Finally, some suggestions are made for future work that would enable the progression of the current conceptual design to a more ﬁnalized reactor design.
Keywords:
Nuclear Thermal Rocket NERVA
Carbide fuels
Low-enriched uranium (LEU) Hydrogen coolant Proliferation resistance
1.Introduction
For human spaceﬂight beyond Low Earth Orbit (LEO), the Nu- clear Thermal Rocket (NTR) is considered as one of the most promising propulsion technologies. This technology, however, after demonstration in the 1960s and 1970s by the US NERVA/ROVER program (Boussard and DeLauer, 1965; N Division, 1969), has been largely dormant due to a series of reasons including a change in government funding priorities, NASA mission goals, and public opinion. Recently, NTR-related research has been rekindled due to increasing interest in long-range spaceﬂight including manned and unmanned missions to Mars (Borowski et al., 2012).
The drive for NTR development stems from the need for a high thrust and high speciﬁc impulse (Isp) propulsion system (Borowski et al., 2012). It is generally perceived that the traditional propulsion system of chemical rockets (solid and liquid) are unable to fulﬁll both requirements. While chemical rockets are known to be able to produce massive amounts of thrust and are effective at getting payloads off the Earth's surface and into orbit, they are severely limited in terms of Isp (between 300 and 500 s). This results in a non-negligible mass fraction of the initial mission mass being dedicated solely to the propellant (Sutton and Biblarz, 2010), making them an unattractive option for missions beyond LEO. On the other end of the spectrum lies electric propulsion, which, while being able to operate at an extremely high Isp, delivers a thrust that would be measured in milli N rather than kN. This results in a highly efﬁcient system, yet one that would be unable to deliver a payload in a timely fashion while still having a reasonable system mass.
NTR systems, on the other hand, ﬁt into a unique niche in the space propulsion performance space. Due to their ability to use the lightest possible propellant (hydrogen) in combination with an extremely high propellant temperature (~3000 K), they are able to deliver relatively high thrust (hundreds of kN) while operating with a high Isp (>900 s). The result is a propulsion system that is able to deliver payloads to distant destinations in a timely fashion and do
Fig.  1.  Schematic of NERVA type nuclear rocket engine.
so with a minimum fraction of the total mission mass dedicated to propellant. This compromise of performance parameters makes the NTR the ideal candidate for missions inside of the solar system, particularly in the case of a manned mission (Mars Architecture Steering Group, 2009). A rendition of the NTR propulsion system  is shown in Fig. 1 (Durham, 1972a) showing how the reactor ﬁts into the larger propulsion system including the turbo pumps, external shield, and nozzle.
Despite the clear performance and technical advantages of NTR propulsion systems, they have thus far remained unimplemented in long-range space missions, and what were previously successful R&D programs have been relegated to low levels of funding and eventual termination. One of the contributors to this was the large quantities of weapons grade highly-enriched uranium (HEU) used in the traditional NTR designs. Through the implementation of HEU fuel, two things are guaranteed. First of all, the ownership and running of any NTR research and development should be strictly under the purview of the national government. This in turn pre- vents the private sector from becoming involved in the technology itself and prevents NTRs from becoming an economically self- sustaining technology. Secondly, by utilizing HEU fuel, the pro- pulsion system becomes a non-negligible proliferation risk in the case of a mission abort or an accident in which the reactor should return to the Earth's surface in a non-nuclear weapon country.
A clear solution to these issues is to replace HEU with low- enriched uranium (LEU) fuel. It is clear that  by  implementing  LEU1 fuel, the above-mentioned concerns would no longer be applicable to the technology, and would therefore signiﬁcantly facilitate further development and eventual implementation. It would also be of further beneﬁt by signiﬁcantly reducing the ma- terial costs of the fuel as well as the development costs associated with security, testing, and non-proliferation concerns, which would then improve the development times of the nuclear system as a whole. To date, however, there has been no effort to study the technical feasibility of implementing LEU fuels in a NTR system outside research connected with the authors.
The introduction of LEU as an alternative fuel to HEU in a NTR brings a new set of design criteria and challenges that are unique to a LEU-NTR system. Previously in HEU-NTR designs, almost the entire uranium fuel was ﬁssile material. In contrast, the LEU-NTR has  at  most  one  in  ﬁve  U  atoms  being  ﬁssile.  This  drastically reduces the probability of ﬁssion occurring in the fuel. In order to increase the probability of a ﬁssion reaction and improve the neutron utilization within the core, two major changes have to be addressed: softening of the neutron spectrum and minimizing non- ﬁssion parasitic neutron absorption. These methods and some preliminary results have been previously presented by the authors (Venneri and Kim, 2013a) (Venneri et al., 2013) (Venneri and Kim, 2013b).
The reference design and reactor studies of historical NTRs presented in this paper are all based on the Small Nuclear Rocket Engine (SNRE) developed by the NERVA team at Los Alamos Na- tional Laboratory (Durham, 1972a, 1972b) and later revisited by Dr. Bruce Schnitzler et al. at Idaho National Laboratory (Schnitzler and Borowski, 2007). The neutronic calculations in this study were all done using MCNP5 (X-3 Monte Carlo Codes, 1987) in combination with the ENDF/B-VII cross section library (Chadwicket al, 2011). The MCNP runs were done using 50,000 particles over 250 active cycles preceded by 50 inactive cycles. This achieved a typical standard deviation of .00022 for the neutron multiplication factor.
1.1.Rocket performance
In order to better understand the performance of the NTR, three basic metrics are presented and explained. The three metrics are thrust, thrust-to-mass ratio, and speciﬁc impulse (Isp). Thrust (measured in Newtons) is a measure of the accelerating force created by the propulsion system and is particularly useful to have when large changes in velocity (DV) are required in a short time, such as during ascent into planetary orbit. However, once the spacecraft is in orbit, thrust becomes less relevant. This is because, especially with a high Isp engine, acceleration can be sustained for an extended period of time in order to achieve the same DV. The thrust-to-weight ratio identiﬁes how much thrust can be effec- tively applied to the space craft. If the thrust of an engine is high, but its mass is equally high, then the majority of the force applied will be used to move the engine itself rather than the rest of the space ship and its payload.
Isp (measured in seconds) is a metric to measure the efﬁciency of a rocket or jet engine. It represents the force created by the engine with respect to the amount of propellant used per unit time. The importance of speciﬁc impulse is that it determines how much propellant is required in order to reach a certain velocity (Sutton and Biblarz, 2010). The relationship between thrust  and  Isp  is  given in Eq. (1):
@1
where F is thrust, m_  is the propellant mass ﬂow rate, and g0  is the acceleration due to gravity. The Isp can also be deﬁned in terms of the ratio of speciﬁc heat at constant pressure to speciﬁc heat at
constant volume g, the propellant exit temperature T, the ratio between the exit and chamber pressures pe and pc, the gas constant R, the molar mass of the propellant M, and the acceleration due to gravity g0. This is given in Eq. (2) (Sutton and Biblarz, 2010):
@2
adequate approximation for the Isp because the only variables it has are the propellant exit temperature and g, which in turn can be approximated by a linear relation to temperature at temperatures above 500 K. The result is that by assuming operation in a perfect vacuum, the Isp can be easily approximated using the results of the basic thermal analysis done for the reactor core. Once the Isp is calculated, the  thrust can then  be easily determined using  Eq. (1).
2.The SNRE reactor model
The SNRE was the culmination of the almost 20-year NERVA program (Durham, 1972a). It was the distillation of all the design experience and material research that was done during the course of the project to ﬁnally produce a wealth of design, material, and experimental data. The SNRE can be subdivided into three sections: the active core, the reﬂector, and the forward section. The active core is a cylinder that measures 89 cm in height and roughly 60 cm in diameter. It is composed of 820 hexagonal elements, each of which has a ﬂat to ﬂat distance of 1.905 cm. The core  elements come in two varieties: fuel elements and moderator elements (in previous literature these were referred to as tie-tube elements). The fuel elements are made of a (U,Zr)C-graphite composite with 19 coolant channels with a diameter of 2.56 mm. The (U,Zr)C com- posite has a .64 g/cm3 uranium loading with a carbon content of 35% by volume. The fuel is described in detail in Taub (1973). Of note are its excellent behavior at elevated temperatures (high melting point and good thermal conductivity) and its high carbon content that assists in moderating the neutron spectrum. The inside of each coolant channel is then coated by a thin layer of ZrC in order to prevent the loss of fuel due to interaction with the hot hydrogen coolant as it passes through the reactor.
The  purpose  of  the  moderator elements  was to provide struc-
tural support for the core and anchor it to the core support plate,provide a pathway to preheat some of the hydrogen coolant to run the turbo pumps, and to create an epithermal spectrum in the core. This is evident in the design of the element as shown in Fig. 2. The elements are composed of seven nested components: the inner hydrogen, the inner tie tube, the moderator sleeve, the outer hydrogen, the outer tie tube, the thermal insulator, and the graphite body of the elements. The tie tube components are the structural load bearing component, the inner and outer hydrogen serve as the
hydrogen  heating  system  and  cooling  of  the  moderator  sleeve which is the  moderating component in the  core.  On the outside of
the element are the thermal insulator and graphite body to protect
the inner components and to interface with the surrounding
elements.
The reﬂector region of the core is a beryllium metal reﬂector housing 12 rotating beryllium drums that are distributed radially around the active core. Each drum has a 120○ section of surface covered by a thin hafnium plate which can be exposed to the
neutron ﬂux from the active core in varying degrees by rotating the drums. In doing so, the reactivity of the reactor can be varied and thus controlled. The control drums are rotated by a system of ac- tuators above the core, arranged such that they don't impede the ﬂow of hydrogen into the core.
The forward region of the reactor includes the reactor support structure, control drum actuators, and hydrogen pump system. For the purpose of neutronics calculation, these components are ho- mogenized and considered as single blocks of the majority material for each component. Immediately above the active core is the reactor support plate, to which the active core is anchored by the tie tubes, and is made of the aluminum alloy 2219-T87. Above it is the internal shield made of borated lithium hydride to act as a neutron shield between the active core and the components and the space ship above the reactor. To the side of the forward region are the control drum actuators, which, for the purpose of the neutronics calculations, can be homogenized as blocks of aluminum 2219-T87. The axial and radial geometry for the SNRE can be seen in detail in Fig. 3. Here, the radial reﬂector with radial control drums can be clearly seen surrounding the active core consisting of the moder- ator and fuel elements. The detailed geometry is given in Table 1. Further details regarding the speciﬁcs of the SNRE, including detailed mechanical design of the components, are given in Durham (1972a, b).
Fig. 2.  Moderator element geometry.
Fig. 3.  SNRE radial and axial  geometry.
3.Neutron spectrum softening
Due to the fast and epithermal spectra in traditional NTRs, any reduction of the ﬁssile content is difﬁcult to compensate in the current SNRE reactor. Table 2 shows the k-eff values of the SNRE core for several U enrichments, and one can observe that the reactor is extremely subcritical for a 20% U enrichment. In order to implement LEU fuel, the neutron economy of the reactor core should be signiﬁcantly improved. This can be achieved by increasing the neutron ﬁssion cross-section of the ﬁssile material (235U) and the minimization of non-ﬁssion neutron loss comprised of parasitic absorption and core leakage. Both of these can be addressed through the softening of the neutron spectrum which consequently has two major effects on the neutron population of the active core:
1.First of all, the ﬁssion rate in the fuel will increase. This is a result of the ﬁssion cross section increasing faster than the absorption cross section as the neutron energy decreases. This will in turn increase the reactivity of the core. This can be seen in Fig. 4 (Chadwicket al, 2011) where the ﬁssion and capture cross- sections for U-235 are presented, showing how while both cross-sections increase in the thermal region, the ﬁssion to capture ratio is signiﬁcantly higher in the thermal region than in the epithermal region.
2.Second is the reduction of the neutron mean free path both in the fuel and in the reﬂector region. This will in turn increase the neutron non-leakage probability and further increase the reac- tivity of the system.
Table 1
Detailed SNRE core geometry.
Fortunately, the mechanism by which the neutron spectrum can be sufﬁciently thermalized already exists in the traditional NERVA NTR design: the moderator elements. With the system already in place, it becomes a matter of repurposing it to increase the moderating power in order to further soften the neutron spectrum. In doing so, the primary purpose of the moderator elements is no longer to provide structural support (yet remains an important role for the elements) but rather to moderate the system. This repur- posing happens in two ways. The ﬁrst is through choosing a high performance moderator and maximizing the size of the moderator sleeve in the moderator element. The second is by rearranging how the moderator and fuel elements are distributed in the active core to maximize the presence of the moderator elements in the core without unduly sacriﬁcing fuel content. Once the spectrum has been softened, however, the increase in parasitic neutron loss to the structural material also has to be taken into account. This is done through the selection and implementation of an appropriate structural material.
3.1.Moderator selection
In this study, four different types of solid moderators were considered: zirconium hydride (ZrH1.8), lithium hydride (LiH), beryllium, and graphite. The reason only solid moderators were chosen is to avoid redesigning the entire moderator element and having to take into account axial density variations in the moder- ator. Additionally, with the exception of water, solid moderators are also the highest density moderators, making them the ideal choice in terms of having limited space inside the active core region. In the
Table 2
Calculated k-effective comparison for the SNRE (std. dev. ~ .00015).Fig. 4.   Capture and ﬁssion cross-section for U235.
selection of the moderator, there are a series of parameters that must be considered. The most important of these is its moderating power per unit volume followed by the moderator's ability to survive at elevated temperatures and elevated hydrogen pressures and its behavior in the elevated neutron ﬂux expected in the active core.
The moderating power per unit volume of the moderator is critical in the moderator selection. This can be easily calculated as has been done for the four different moderators in order for them to be adequately compared. The calculated average slowing down decrement and the resulting slowing down power and moderating- to-absorption ratio for the various moderators are shown in Table 3. These were calculated using thermal spectrum cross-sections at
.0253 eV from the ENDF/B-VII.1 library (Chadwicket al, 2011). Densities and compositions were found in the PNNL Compendium of Material Composition Data (McConn and et al., 2011).
In Fig. 5, the effectiveness of the different moderators is compared for the speciﬁc geometry in the proposed reactor. The study takes the basic fuel geometry using the (U,Zr)C fuel used in the SNRE core design (Durham, 1972a), and then places it within a
Table 3
Moderating characteristics for various moderators.
larger hexagon of moderator. The edges of the external hexagon are made to have reﬂective boundary conditions, allowing it to simu- late an inﬁnite hexagonal lattice and determine the k-inﬁnity of the arrangement. For each moderator, the size of the external hexagon is varied such that the k-inﬁnity is found as a function of the ratio of moderator pitch to the ﬂat-to-ﬂat (ftf) fuel size (pitch-to-ftf ratio in Fig. 5). This provides a qualitative estimate as to how much of each moderator is needed in order to achieve a critical state and at what point the reactor will be over or under moderated. Two signiﬁcant conclusions can be drawn from Fig. 5 and Table 3. First of all is that ZrH and LiH are much better moderators than beryllium and graphite, especially when the volume of moderator is severely limited as it is in a NTR. Second is that there is an optimum amount of ZrH and LiH that can be implemented beyond which the core will become over-moderated.
Following the moderating power comparison, each moderator must also be evaluated in relation to its ability to operate at elevated temperatures. Of the four, graphite has the highest oper- ating temperature, but is prone to non-negligible hydrogen corro- sion and is rather brittle. Beryllium, on the other hand, has the best mechanical properties in addition to having a relatively higher thermal conductivity than the other moderator types. The two hydrides have signiﬁcantly worse operating parameters. Both are  brittle, have signiﬁcantly lower melting temperatures, and in the absence of a positive hydrogen pressure, are prone to dissociate at temperatures well below their melting temperatures. Of the various ZrH structures, ZrH1.8 has the most favorable characteris-
tics, making it the mechanically best performing of the hydride options.  In  addition  to  having  close  to  the  maximum hydrogen
content, it is also the structure with the highest fracture toughness Libowitz, 1961).
Fig. 5.  Comparison of moderator effectiveness.
Finally, in terms of behavior in an elevated neutron ﬂux, two of the selected moderators have signiﬁcant reactions that affect their usability. First is beryllium. In an elevated and fast neutron ﬂux, beryllium undergoes a (n,2n) reaction, acting as a neutron multi- plier. However, this positive reactivity insertion is countered by the resulting production of He which can result in the loss of structural integrity as it accumulates throughout the reactor lifetime. Lithium hydride has a similar problem. Not only does the lithium have to be close to one hundred percent enriched 7Li, there are also neutron reactions with 7Li that result in the production of 6Li, tritium, and helium. These lead to similar problems as the beryllium moderator except that the negative reactivity insertion over time is much stronger because of the high absorption cross section of the resultant 6Li. The relationship between the 7Li enrichment and the reactivity of the reactor is shown in Fig. 6. Here, the moderator comparison shown in Fig. 5 is repeated for LiH using different en- richments of 7Li, and clearly shows how even minimal amounts of
6Li have a very serious negative effect on the ability of LiH to act as a
moderator.
Once the appropriate moderator has been selected, the moderator density in the active core can be easily increased by increasing the volume of the already built-in moderator compo- nent. In the existing moderator element, the chief moderator component takes up less than 10% of the total volume. The majority of the element is occupied by the graphite hexagonal element. While this component is necessary in order to act both as a thermal insulator and as the interface between the moderator elements and the fuel, it does not need to be as thick. The major thermal insulator is the 50% theoretical density zirconium carbide between the outer tie tube and the graphite layer, and the graphite is not a load bearing component (Durham, 1972b). The combination results in the moderator element requiring signiﬁcantly less graphite. There  is still, however, a limitation to how much graphite can be removed from the element as it still has to be thick enough to be both manufacturable and structurally sound on its own. There is, how- ever, signiﬁcant room into which both the outer and inner radius can be respectively decreased and increased in order to increase the moderator volume fraction in the active core. The effect this has on the core reactivity is shown in Fig. 7. The reactor conﬁguration used in this analysis is the standard SNRE core where ﬁrst the outer and
then inner radius of the moderator elements were respectively increased and decreased to the maximum geometrical allowable limit.
3.2.Moderator element geometry and arrangement
Another method by which the moderator density in the active core can be increased is by changing the active core geometry such that the ratio of moderator to fuel elements is increased. In existing NTR designs, the ratio has typically been either 1 to 3 (SNRE) (Durham, 1972a) or 1 to 2 (Pewee) (N Division, 1969) in order to create an epithermal spectrum in the core. In order to achieve criticality, the reactor design emphasized elevated fuel content over moderation. However, as has been shown, the opposite is necessary for a LEU NTR. Consequently, a variety of different moderator element arrangements can be implemented in order to achieve the optimal moderator-to-fuel ratio. A variety of conﬁgurations were studied in detail and applied to a tungsten-fueled LEU-NTR at the Center for Space Nuclear Research which were then applied to the graphite core (Venneri et al., 2013). These conﬁgurations and the resulting k-effectives are shown in Table 4 and Fig. 8 (Venneri et al., 2013). These calculations were done for an arbitrary core in order to compare the effect each conﬁguration has on the k-effective.
It is important to note that in the case of the Inverse Beta Stacking, the effect of having a reduced fuel loading outweighs the additional moderation of the core. If the arbitrary core for the study presented in Table 4 had been larger, the k-eff for the in Inverse Beta Stacking would have been higher than the Inverse Alpha stacking for both fuel types. The effect each different core arrangement has on the core average neutron spectrum is shown in Fig. 9. Here it becomes clear that with the increasing moderator to fuel ratio, the population of thermal neutrons in the active core is signiﬁcantly increased. This, in turn, has a direct effect on the reactivity of the reactor.
3.3.Mitigation of structural parasitic neutron loss
In addition to thermalizing the neutron spectrum, the neutron economy can be improved by preventing neutron loss that is not directly associated with ﬁssion and the production of other Fig. 6.   Effect of Li7 concentration on reactor reactivity.
neutrons. Unfortunately, because of the required softening of the neutron spectrum, the neutron absorption of most materials is also enhanced. This can be mitigated by the appropriate selection of materials that have low neutron absorption in the thermal energy spectrum. The chief reactor component whose relatively high
neutron absorption cross section can affect the reactivity of the reactor is the tie tube. The impact of replacing the tie tube material in a thermalized SNRE core with a material having a lower neutron absorption cross-section is shown in Fig. 10. Here, the SNRE core was modeled with Zircaloy tie-tubes at different reﬂector
Fig. 7. Effect of increasing moderator volume in the active core region.
Table 4
Active core element arrangements for LEU-NTR cores (std. dev. ~ .00025).
thicknesses. In addition to illustrating the effect of having a low neutron absorption structural material, Fig. 10 also shows the effect of the reﬂector on the reactivity of the core.
Historically, the tie tubes in the NERVA type reactor have been made of Inconel-718. This is a high strength nickel super alloy that was designed and used for high temperature aerospace applica- tions. In the past, it was selected as the tie tube material mainly because of its ability to operate at elevated temperatures and ability to sustain the strain of being the primary structural component in the reactor. It is also strong enough to withstand the strain of maintaining the fuel elements in compression despite the mismatch in coefﬁcients of thermal expansion. This mismatch re- sults in even higher stress values which more than justify the need for the strength of Inconel. Inconel, however, is composed largely of nickel, chromium, and iron (Hunt and Foote, 1977), all of which have signiﬁcant thermal absorption cross-sections. As a conse- quence of this, with the enhanced softening of the neutron spec- trum in the core, it becomes necessary to study alternative materials for the tie tubes which, in addition to having to be strong structural materials, must also have relatively low neutron ab- sorption cross-sections.
Among the candidate materials, three in particular stand out: enriched molybdenum alloys (TZM), zirconium alloys (Zircaloy 4 or E635), and SiC composites. A comparison of various key parameters is shown in Table 5. All four materials have lower neutron ab- sorption cross sections and are either inert or can be made inert in a hydrogen atmosphere. Unfortunately, none of them has the same strength as Inconel-718. As a consequence of this, depending on which material is chosen, some changes to the mechanical struc- ture of the moderating elements may have to be implemented.
Regardless, each of the materials has some signiﬁcant advan- tages and disadvantages. In the case of Inconel, as mentioned earlier, it has the major advantage of high strength but relatively high absorption cross-section. The molybdenum has the advantage that it keeps its relatively high strength even at elevated temper- atures, is inert in a hydrogen environment without further pro- cessing, but requires isotope enrichment in order to reduce its absorption cross section. With the enrichment of Mo-92, the neutron absorption cross-section can be brought down to levels similar to that of Zirconium. Without this enrichment, it has a similar absorption cross sections as Inconel. Zirconium alloys have the major advantage of being largely transparent to neutrons, but the major disadvantages of being signiﬁcantly weaker than the other options as well as requiring signiﬁcant treatment in order to prevent embrittlement by the hydrogen. Finally, SiC composites have the beneﬁt of having the combination of having a relatively high strength even at elevated temperatures along with a relatively low neutron absorption cross-section. It does, however, have the signiﬁcant draw-back of being a brittle material, making it a po- tential single point failure if it were put under too much stress.
However, due to the importance of having to reduce parasitic neutron absorption, it is critical that a material such as a zirconium alloy or SiC (with an extremely low neutron absorption cross
Fig.  8.  Different core lattice conﬁgurations.
Fig. 9. Core average neutron spectrum for different core arrangements.
section) be used in any ﬁnal design. Both however have a serious issue that needs to be resolved. For the SiC it is its brittle nature while for the zirconium alloys it is their serious loss in structural strength at elevated temperatures (Whitmarsh CL, 1962). Of the two, the zirconium alloys have the most experience both in terms of
research and industry implementation. As such, a zirconium alloy is currently seen as the preferred material, and is used as the tie-tube material in the reference reactor core presented in this paper.
In order to use a zirconium alloy as the structural component in the LEU-NTR, two criteria have to be kept in mind. First of all, is that
Fig.  10.  Effect of tie tube material on SNRE reactivity.
Table 5
Tie tube material comparison.the traditional zirconium alloys implemented in the US and Europe are unable to operate at the required temperatures. As can be seen in Table 5, Zircaloy-4 is by far the weakest of the given materials, and weakens further at higher temperatures. An alternative example is the Russian zirconium alloy E635 which has a tensile yield strength similar to that of TZM, and is signiﬁcantly lighter in addition to having a lower overall neutron absorption cross- section. This can be mitigated by ﬁrst, minimizing the stress on the tie tube components. This could be done by increasing the thickness of the tie tubes, ensuring that the inner tie tube is the chief load bearing component, and by increasing the number of moderating elements in the core, thus distributing the load of having to anchor the core to as many support elements as possible. Second, it can be mitigated by keeping the temperature of the tie tubes below the melting temperature of the alloy (this temperature will vary from alloy to alloy). This is in order to avoid the cata- strophic reduction in the strength of the zirconium alloy due to changes in the internal crystalline structure of the alloy (Hunt and Foote, 1977). The second criterion that needs be addressed is the potential hydrogen embrittlement of the Zircaloy during operation. This can be mitigated through the implementation of a hydrogen barrier on the surface of the tie-tubes. If these two criteria are successfully applied, zirconium alloys such as E635 should be successfully implemented as the support material in the LEU-NTR. For the current study, Zircaloy-4 was still implemented as the structural material as it is neutronically almost identical to other zirconium alloys, and the material deﬁnition is well known to the authors.
4.Reference LEU reactor conﬁguration
With the knowledge gained from the various parameter studies conducted, a ﬁnal baseline reactor conﬁguration was established to demonstrate the implementation of LEU fuel. The proposed reactor baseline retains the same fuel element geometry and material composition of the original SNRE design, but differs signiﬁcantly in the design of the moderator element. Here, the thickness of the ZrH moderator sleeve was increased to the maximum geometrical limit. Additionally, the thickness of the tie-tubes increased slightly from the legacy tie-tube used in the SNRE design in order to counter the decreased strength of the zirconium alloy tie-tube material. The strength of the tie-tube material can be further strengthened by implementing a high strength zirconium alloy such as E635. While this will make a difference structurally, it should have little impact on the neutronic characteristics of the design. The remainder of the reactor baseline conﬁguration continues to use the same materials and dimensional relationships as the original SNRE design.
The core conﬁguration which was ﬁnally selected was the In- verse Alpha LEU core. The reason for this selection stems primarily from the study of the effect different core conﬁgurations have on the reactivity. It was shown that of the studied reactor conﬁgura- tions, the Inverse Alpha conﬁguration offered the potential of having the largest reactivity with the smallest core size. This then lends credence to the belief that with further optimization, the
Table 6
Final reactor conﬁguration.Inverse Alpha core can be brought down in mass and still have sufﬁcient positive reactivity to function for the required operational period.
The ﬁnal core conﬁguration is summarized in Table 6 along with the moderator element geometry in Table 7. The performance of the core along with the peak temperature of the various components was then calculated using an early beta version of the Space Pro- pulsion Optimization Code (SPOC) being developed by the Center for Space Nuclear Research (CSNR) (Husemeyer et al., 2015). The results of the code have been qualitatively veriﬁed (in addition to a rigorous development methodology) by comparing them with the experimental results of the NERVA PEWEE program (N Division, 1969; Durham, 1972a). We found that the results produced by the beta version of SPOC follow the same axial and radial behavior reasonably well. This can be seen in Fig. 11 where the axial tem- peratures proﬁles for the SNRE and the calculated temperature of the central fuel elements of the presented LEU-NTR are shown. It must be noted that this version of the thermal code was designed to overestimate the temperature of the various components, giving conservative results for the purpose of ensuring that they can be maintained within their operating limits. The resulting peak operating temperatures along with their failure threshold tem- peratures are given in Table 8. Here it is shown that in the current conﬁguration, the materials are either within, or at their operating limits. This demonstrates the feasibility of the design and indicates that there is still room for further improvement of the baseline design.
In terms of operating performance, the presented Carbide LEU- NTR design is able to provide similar levels of performance to
Table 7
Moderator element detailed geometry.
Fig. 11.  Comparison of the temperature proﬁles of the central fuel elements calculated for the Carbide LEU-NTR using a beta version of SPOC (left) and the one provided in the SNRE deﬁnition study (right) (Durham, 1972b).
previous and current HEU fueled NTR designs, except for in terms of the Isp. In this instance, the current design operates at 775 s due its average exit coolant temperature being on the order of 1748 K. This is because of the large radial power peaking factor of 1.5 preventing the majority of the core from approaching the maximum allowable coolant exit temperature. If the temperature proﬁle is adequately ﬂattened either through radial power proﬁle ﬂattening or oriﬁcing, the speciﬁc impulse can be easily increased up to the desired 900 s along with the consequent improvement in the system's other performance parameters. In doing so, the Carbide LEU-NTR will be able to meet the general operating requirements of the NASA Mars Mission Design Reference Architecture 5.0 (Mars Architecture Steering Group, 2009). Consequently, the Carbide LEU-NTR can be considered to be a viable option for such a mission. More surpris- ingly however, and perhaps most importantly, the mass for the LEU-NTR system, even when un-optimized, is similar to that of the HEU-NTR systems. This means that in terms of operating perfor- mance, the two systems are potentially quite comparable and can be used for the same missions without any signiﬁcant performance loss either way. This can all be seen in Table 9 where the perfor- mance values for the Pewee (N Division, 1969), SNRE (Durham, 1972a), and the reference Carbide LEU-NTR are provided. Of note is that the Isp for Pewee and SNRE have been recalculated using Eq.
(2) in order to make an adequate comparison between the Isp of the various systems.
Yet most importantly, the core has been shown to be a viable design in that a critical core conﬁguration is possible using LEU fuel. Furthermore, the core is able to remain critical throughout the required mission operating time of 2e4 h of total operation (Mars
Table 8
Reactor components limiting and peak operating temperatures in K.
Table 9
NTR comparison (Durham, 1972b; Mattas, 1994).
Architecture Steering Group, 2009). This can be seen in Fig. 12 where the longest burn time has been identiﬁed for the  pre-  sented reference core at about 4 h, showing that it is able to operate for the full required duration of a mission from Earth to Mars. Additionally, what Fig. 12 does not show is that the majority of the reactivity loss in the system is due to the build-up of ﬁssion prod- ucts in the core, and that provided sufﬁcient time is left between full power burns, the reactor can operate for at full power for signiﬁcantly longer periods of time (Venneri and Kim, 2014).
5.Conclusions and future work
In this paper, the requirements for implementing LEU fuels in a NERVA type NTR have been thoroughly examined. It has been
Fig. 12.  Reactivity change during reactor burn  up.
shown that through the implementation of a thermalized neutron spectrum in the active core, not only is it possible to design a viable NERVA type NTR, but that such a core is able to have comparable performance characteristics relative to the traditional fast spectrum HEU cores.
It has been determined that the most effective method for successfully implementing LEU fuel is to increase internal moder- ation in combination with the implementation of materials with low neutron absorption cross sections. In particular, it was shown that the most efﬁcient method by which the neutron spectrum can be thermalized is to increase the moderator density inside of the active core. This was done through a combination of increasing the size of the internal moderator components as well as by varying the active core geometry to increase the moderator to fuel element ratio.
The signiﬁcance of this work is potentially far reaching because it signals the beginning of an alternative methodology to past and current NTR designs, which relied on the implementation of HEU fuel. With this departure from HEU systems and opening the po- tential of implementing LEU fuels, this study hopes to usher in a period of research that looks towards the wider application of space nuclear technology to non-governmental institutions and open its development to commercial entities. With the conclusion of the current study, future work will revolve around the development of an optimized LEU-NTR core. Such a core will have to address a series of difﬁculties that are speciﬁc to the LEU-NTR including the full-submersion criticality accident, structural integrity of the tie- tubes, and reactivity transients involving the build-up of ﬁssion products.
Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank Dr. Stephen Howe along with the Center for Space Nuclear Research LEU-NTR team for all of their help in the development of the LEU-NTR.
