<title>Declassiﬁcation of radioactive water from a pool type reactor after nuclear	 facility dismantling</title>
<Affiliation>a.Institute for Industrial, Radiophysical and Environmental Safety (ISIRYM), Universitat Politècnica de València, Camino de Vera s/n, 46022 Valencia, Spain
b .GD Energy Services SAU, Avda Cortes Valencianas, 58, Sorolla Center  local 10, 46015  Valencia, Spain
</Affiliation>
<author>J.M. Arnal, M. Sancho, B. García-Fayos, G. Verdú, C. Serrano, J.T. Ruiz-Martínez</author>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier Ltd</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radphyschem.2017.03.027</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2017.03.027</URL>
ABSTRACT
This work is aimed to the treatment of the radioactive water from a dismantled nuclear facility with an experimental pool type reactor. The main objective of the treatment is to declassify the maximum volume of water and thus decrease the volume of radioactive liquid waste to be managed. In a preliminary stage, simulation of treatment by the combination of reverse osmosis (RO) and evaporation have been performed. Predicted results showed that the combination of membrane and evaporation technologies would result in a volume reduction factor higher than 600. The estimated time to complete the treatment was around 650 h (25– 30 days). For diﬀerent economical and organizational reasons which are explained in this paper, the ﬁnal treatment of the real waste had to be reduced and only evaporation was applied. The volume reduction factor achieved in the real treatment was around 170, and the time spent for treatment was 194 days.
Keywords:
Evaporation
Radioactive liquid wastes Reverse osmosis Treatment
1.Introduction
The decommissioning of a nuclear installation includes the management of the radioactive waste generated. This work arises from the dismantling of a nuclear facility with an experimental pool type reactor, and describes the decontamination of the water from the pool and from some storage tanks.
1.1.Technologies for the treatment of radioactive water
The treatment of radioactive liquid wastes produced during the operation of nuclear reactor and at the fuel cycle facilities is carried out worldwide by diﬀerent well-established processes (IAEA, 2001). The most usual technologies applied to radioactive liquid wastes are: chemical precipitation, ionic exchange, membrane processes and evaporation. Usually, it is a combination of several of these technologies what produces the optimal results. Precipitation and ionic exchange are more speciﬁc process with some restrictions of application. Evaporation is a well- established process which is very often applied in the nuclear industry. It can produce high decontamination factor values and also volume reduction rates. However, it is a relatively expensive process as a result of high energy consumption, so it is more suitable for the treatment of small volumes of high active liquids. Membrane technologies performed by pressure have been proved to be very eﬃcient in the removal of radioactive components of liquid wastes (Chmielewski et al., 2001; Arnal et al., 2003; Ambashta and Sillanpaa, 2012; Sancho et al., 2013). In most cases, membrane processes
are used in combination with other treatments to increase decontamination factors and maximize volume reduction. When combined with evaporation, the overall treatment has lower energy consumption than when applying evaporation alone (Sen Gupta et al., 1995).
1.2.Description of the treatment for the preliminary simulation
For all the advantages mentioned before, a combination of reverse osmosis and evaporation was considered as the more suitable treat- ment for decontamination of the radioactive water from a dismantling nuclear facility equipped with a pool type reactor. Fig. 1 shows a scheme of the treatment proposed as more suitable. Radioactive water would be treated ﬁrst by several stages of reverse osmosis to produce a permeate (treated water) with an activity level below legal discharge limit, and a concentrate ﬂow which would be recirculated during the treatment in order to reduce volume as much as possible. The ﬁnal concentrate volume of reverse osmosis would be later treated by evaporation, to produce a condensate liquid free of radionuclides and suitable for discharge, and a ﬁnal radioactive liquid waste to dispose.
The objectives of this work are:
•Simulation of the treatment by reverse osmosis and evaporation to deﬁne the number of stages and passes, and to estimate the
characteristics of main ﬂows after treatment.
•Description of the ﬁnal treatment performed to the real waste.
Fig. 1. Proposed treatment for radioactive water from a pool type reactor.
Table 1
Main characteristics of radioactive water.
2.Materials and methods
2.1.Radioactive water characteristics
Radioactive liquid waste to treat consisted in water from the reactor pool and water from storage tanks of radioactive liquid wastes. This last water mainly comes from the regeneration of resins used in water puriﬁcation. Table 1 shows the main characteristics of the reactor pool water and of radioactive water in tanks. Water from pool had a low content of salts (conductivity lower than 12 μS/cm) and a value of activity concentration around 47·103 Bq/m3 mainly associated to radionuclides Cs-137 and Sr-90. Water from storage tanks had a higher content of salts (500-100 μS/cm) and a value of activity concentration around 378·103 Bq/m3, also associated to radionuclides Cs-137 and Sr-90. Other radionuclides present in both waters were U- 235, U-238, Pu-238, Pu-239. Pu-240 and Am-241. However, activity concentration values of these nuclides are negligible (between 0.01 and 30 Bq/m3) as compare with values of Cs-137 and Sr-90 (Ruiz-Martínez et al., 2014).
2.2.Simulation conditions
Equations of simulation for dynamic performance of reverse osmosis were: total mass balance, component balance (total salts) and activity balance, which is analogous to salt balance as concentra- tion and activity can be assumed as linear in the ranges of activity of this work (Sancho et al., 2006). By this system of equations, it was calculated the evolution of volume, concentration and activity inside the tank, as a function of time (by order 4 Runge-Kutta method). Objectives of each phase was to minimize the volume in the tank and getting a ﬁnal permeate activity below 0.7·103 Bq/m3 (the value of
activity that guarantees an annual dose level below 0.1 mSv/year for the general public) (Directive 2013/59 EURATOM, 2013).
Evaporation was simulated by a simple eﬀect evaporator, where the concentrate from reverse osmosis was fed to the process to obtain a condensate free of salts and radionuclides, and a concentrate eﬄuent with most of the radionuclides. Macroscopic mass balance (total, salts and activity) were used as equations to simulate the treatment by evaporation.
3.Results and discussion
3.1.Results of preliminary simulation
Treatment of the radioactive liquids described in Table 1 was simulated in three phases:
–Phase 1. Treatment by reverse osmosis of the water from the reactor's pool. The simulation of this treatment resulted in two RO stages, with two passes of permeate in the second one. Permeates of ﬁrst stage and the second pass of the second stage could be discharge.
–Phase 2. Treatment by RO of water from storage tanks mixed with the concentrates of reverse osmosis from phase 1. Simulation of this phase resulted in one stage of RO with two permeate passes. Permeate of the second pass would be suitable for discharge.
–Phase 3. Treatment by evaporation of reverse osmosis concentrates from phase 2.
Fig. 2 shows a scheme of the overall treatment, with the values of volume and activity of main ﬂows. From the initial 691 m3 (649 m3 of water from the pool plus 42 m3 of water from the storage tanks), around 690 m3 would be declassiﬁed, producing a ﬁnal concentrate volume of 1 m3 approximately that should be disposed as radioactive waste. The volume reduction factor of the total treatment, which is the relation between the decontaminated volume and the initial volume, would be around 691.
The time necessary to complete the treatment was estimated in 650 h, approximately, which means around 25–30 days operating 24 h/day.
The ﬁnal wastes after the global treatment would be approximately 1 m3 of liquid waste that will contain most of the initial activity (activity concentration of 46.2·103 kBq/m3), the cartridge ﬁlters previous to membranes and the RO membranes.
3.2.Final treatment conditions
The proposed and simulated treatment was later valued from diﬀerent points of view to deﬁne the ﬁnal treatment to apply. The following criteria were critical to select evaporation without previous reverse osmosis as the ﬁnal treatment: type of application, time for equipment acquisition, investment cost and ﬁnal wastes produced.
Although the combination of reverse osmosis and evaporation Fig. 2. Proposed treatment for radioactive water from a pool type reactor.
consumes less energy (5–7 kwh/m3) than evaporation alone (12– 15 kwh/m3), thus having lower operational costs, the investment required for both technologies oﬀsets when the facility is going to operate in a continuous way. For a prompt and punctual application as this one, investment in the membrane plant is not worth.
On the other hand, the time required for the acquisition of the equipment for the treatment by both technologies was longer than the time when decontamination should had ﬁnished.
Furthermore, the treatment only by evaporation results in the production of less radioactive wastes since membrane modules should be managed as radioactive solid wastes in the case of treatment by reverse osmosis process.
Another point to choose evaporation alone was its simplicity of operation and maintenance, so exposition of workers to radiation is lower.
3.3.Description of the treatment ﬁnally performed
Due to reasons explained in the previous point, the treatment of the radioactive water was performed by evaporation. Water was ﬁrstly ﬁltrated to eliminate solid particles, and then it was treated in a low- pressure evaporator with a power value of 45.5 kW. The treatment lasted 194 days (operating 24 h per day). A total of 681 m3 were discharge to the environment, through a water treatment plant. Discharges were performed according to the discharge formula ob- tained with the software FRAMES-GENII 2.10 to meet a maximum eﬀective dose lower than 0.1 mSv/year for employees of the water treatment plant and for general public (Ruiz-Martínez et al., 2014).
The ﬁnal radioactive waste consisted of 10 m3 of wastewater (volume reduction factor of 69.1), besides the ﬁlters used before the evaporator. Around 6 m3 of the residuary water were used in concrete production, and the rest 4 m3 were ﬁnal concentrate radioactive waste, resulting approximately 1 m3 of them with very high speciﬁc activity. So the ﬁnal volume reduction factor of the treatment was 172.7 (considering the 4 m3 of ﬁnal concentrate).
4.Conclusions
Because of a dismantling of a pool type reactor plant, treatment of radioactive water was necessary to reduce the volume of radioactive
liquid waste. The most usual and eﬃcient treatments for this type of water are membrane technologies and evaporation techniques. A preliminary simulation of a combination of both treatments was carried out, which resulted in a volume reduction factor of 691 (1 m3 of ﬁnal radioactive waste). In spite of this simulation, ﬁnally, the treatment consisted only of evaporation because of economical and organizational reasons it can be stated that the treatment was very successful as 681 m3 of initial 691 m3 were discharge to the environ- ment without radiological relevance (maximum eﬀective dose lower than 0.1 mSv/year).
In case a continuous decontamination treatment is needed, the combination of reverse osmosis and evaporation is a very suitable option since it consumes less energy and reduces time of treatment, as it has been showed in the simulation carried out in this work.
Acknowledgements
Authors would like to express their gratitude to people from GD Energy Services SAU Company for their collaboration in this work.
