<title>Formation of proliferation-resistant nuclear fuel supplies based on reprocessed uranium for Russian nuclear technologies recipient countries</title>
<Affiliation> Obninsk Institute for Nuclear Power Engineering, National Nuclear Research University “MEPhI”, Studgorodok, Obninsk, Kaluga Region 249040, Russia； Rosatom Central Institute for Advanced Training, 21 Kurchatov Street, Obninsk, Kaluga Region 249031, Russia</Affiliation>
<author>M.I. Fedorov, A.I. Dyachenko , N.A. Balagurov, V.V. Artisyuk</author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Energy and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nucet.2015.11.023</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nucet.2015.11.023</URL>
Abstract
The paper presents different strategies for the conversion of VVER-1000 reactors to reprocessed uranium fuel for estimating the time required to form a proliferation-resistant VVER-1000 fuel load based on uranium extracted from spent fuel of reactors of the same type cleared of minor actinides and fission products. It has been shown that the change in the proliferation resistance status of generated plutonium in the VVER-1000 spent nuclear fuel is achieved by denaturation of plutonium through the increase in the concentration of 238 Pu plutonium isotope in irradiated fuel. The initial presence of 236 U uranium isotope in fresh uranium fuel of the VVER-1000 reactor has been shown to have an effect on the accumulation of 238 Pu, a key isotope in the context of the barrier against unauthorized proliferation. Saving of uranium resources has been additionally analyzed for the considered strategies to convert VVER-1000 reactors to reprocessed uranium fuel for the purpose of improving the resource base of NPPs in Russia and recipient countries.
Keywords
reprocessed uranium; burnup; resources saving; spent nuclear fuel;
1.Introduction
The present-day strategic objectives of Rosatom State Cor- poration are aimed at forming the Corporation’s global techno- logical leadership in nuclear industry. One of such objectives is global expansion of the VVER reactor technology platform. It is aimed at improving the Corporation’s position at international market of nuclear technologies, with the associated growth in the supplies of the Corporation’s products and services for all stages of the NPP lifecycle [1]. The absence of nuclear material enrich- ment and reprocessing technologies in newcomer countries leads to the need for the transport of fresh and spent nuclear fuel and, as a sequence, requires a great deal of effort to ensure the safe- guards against unauthorized proliferation of nuclear material.
Production of reprocessed uranium from irradiated fuel repa- triated from customer countries or from domestic amounts of spent fuel offers an additional capability for strengthening the resistance to unauthorized proliferation of nuclear fissionable materials. On the positive side, the use of recycled nuclear fuel (RNF) based on reprocessed uranium leads to saving of ura- nium resources and to a decrease in the share of the raw ma- terial component in the fuel cost. For the client countries, the use of reprocessed uranium is expected to improve the uranium resource potential for the saving at a level of about 17 to 18 % from the reactor core full loading with the fuel of an equivalent enrichment [2].
To date, a more than 30-year experience has been gained in the Russian Federation in commercial use of reprocessed uranium for the fabrication of nuclear fuel based on Russian specifications (VVER-440 spent nuclear fuel (SNF) is used to fabricate fuel for RBMK reactors), and a more than 15-year experience in the manufacturing of fuel from reprocessed uranium for NPPs with PWR and BWR reactors in Western Europe (Germany, Switzerland, Sweden, Holland, and Great Britain). Presently,
Fig. 1. Flowchart for the VVER-1000 reactor conversion to reprocessed uranium for the three strategies.
over 3000 FAs have been fabricated for supplies under a contract with AREVA NP [3].
Given that one fifth of the reactor core is refueled annually with the current scheme of refueling [4], the time required to form the VVER-1000 reactor fuel loading based on reprocessed material is estimated. Different strategies have been considered for converting the VVER-1000 reactors to reprocessed uranium depending on the available resources of reprocessed uranium: from one reactor (a newcomer country), from six reactors (a country with sufficiently developed nuclear power), from six reactors with reprocessed material formed from onsite-stored SNF (838 FAs) [5] (a country with developed nuclear power and accumulated SNF). A change in the proliferation resistance status of the plutonium generated in the VVER-type reactor SNF depending on the time of the reprocessed material use in the fuel cycle has been demonstrated and the uranium resources saved have been estimated.
Formation of VVER-1000 fuel loads based on reprocessed uranium
Fig. 1 presents the flowchart for the formation of fuel loads based on reprocessed material for the three strategies.
In strategy 1 for the conversion of VVER-1000 reactors to re- processed uranium, spent ENU (Enrichment Natural Uranium) fuel, following the five-year cooling in the cooling pool, is placed in storage with the required quantity of material accu- mulated for forming one fifth of the reactor core loading, and is then shipped to the SNF processing plant. The extracted ura- nium (RepU – Reprocessed Uranium) is additionally enriched to the needed level, with the presence of 236 U taken into ac- count, and shipped for the fabrication of ERU (Enrichment Re- processed Uranium) nuclear fuel. The assemblies equipped with such fuel are loaded into the reactor core. The compensation for the initial presence of 236 U was taken into account as described in [4].
It takes six years to accumulate the material for the fuel for- mation to refuel one fifth of the core with reprocessed-uranium assemblies and another six years to reprocess the accumulated material; therefore, the initial loading with reprocessed-uranium fuel may take 12 years (Fig. 2). In this strategy, the share of the raw material component in the fuel cost is reduced insignif- icantly due to a small number of the reprocessed assemblies involved.
In an analysis for strategy 2, spent fuel from six VVER-1000 reactors was reprocessed using the same flowchart as in strategy
1. The so equipped fuel assemblies are loaded into the core of one of the six reactors. It shall be taken into account when forming the fuel to be loaded that the SNF from six reactors is not used in full to form one fifth of the loading for the core of one reactor. Throughout the operating time, a sufficient amount of material is accumulated to form several refueling batches for the second reactor’s core (Fig. 3).
In strategy 3, thanks to the involvement of onsite-stored spent fuel in the fuel cycle, it is possible to cut the time for  the ENU fuel use in one of the six reactors by four years   (Fig. 4).
Fig. 2. Flowchart for the reactor refueling using reprocessed-uranium fuel (strategy 1).
Fig. 3. Flowchart for the reactor refueling using reprocessed-uranium fuel (strategy 2).
Fig. 4. Flowchart for the reactor refueling using reprocessed-uranium fuel (strategy 3).
Loss in the attractiveness of generated Pu in VVER-1000 SNF Reprocessed uranium (RepU) contains several uranium iso- topes, namely 232 U,  233 U, 236 U and 237 U not contained in natural uranium. Out of these, only 236 U has a crucial role in the 238 Pu formation process [6]. The isotopic composition of RepU changes greatly in the process of recycling (Fig. 5).
It can be seen from the figure that the content of 236 U in ERU increases for the time of its use in the reactor from 3.84 to
Fig. 5. A change in the isotopic composition of RepU: (a) strategy 1; (b) strategy 2; (c) strategy 3.
5.75 %. The increase in the concentration of 236 U leads to a major growth in the content of 238 Pu (Fig. 6).
This means that the proliferation resistance properties of gen- erated plutonium in spent ERU fuel, though depending on the initial concentration of 236 U in unirradiated fuel, are neverthe- less better than in ENU-based fuel in terms of increased for- mation of 238 Pu. Thus, at the end of the ENU fuel irradiation, the content of 238 Pu was 3.39% from the total quantity of plu- tonium, and that of 236 U was 0.73% from the total quantity of uranium. After 20 years of operation of an NPP with ERU from its own spent fuel, the content of 238 Pu is 9.38% from the to- tal quantity of Pu due to the increased content of 236 U in ERU. Therefore, reprocessing of SNF (strategies 2 and 3) will en- sure that, in 40 years of using ERU fuel, one of the six reactors will be fully loaded with fuel after the burning of which the content of 238 Pu at the end of life will be more than 12%, this being in conformity with the Kessler proliferation resistance criterion [7].
Saving of uranium resources
The saving of uranium resources from the conversion of a VVER-1000 reactor to reprocessed material from its own spent nuclear fuel amounts to 10–15%, depending on the operating time. When strategy 2 is used to convert VVER-1000 reactors to reprocessed uranium, the uranium saving increases due to a major involvement of generated plutonium isotopes in the total energy release, and, therefore, the saving of uranium resources reaches 17.5 %. The involvement of onsite-stored spent fuel in the VVER-1000 reactor fuel cycle and its consistent recycling provide for an 18.6% smaller amount of makeup material to be required to form fuel of an equivalent enrichment (Fig. 7).
Fig. 6. A change in the isotopic composition of Pu in RepU SNF: (a) strategy 1; (b) strategy 2; and (c) strategy 3.
Fig. 7. Saving of uranium resources from the consistent return of VVER-1000 spent nuclear fuel into the fuel cycle.
Conclusion
The results of studying three strategies for the VVER-1000 reactor conversion to reprocessed uranium are presented. Es- timates show that it is possible to form fuel loads with an in- creased resistance to unauthorized proliferation for the strategy with recycling of uranium from one VVER-1000 reactor after 20 years of the unit operation. A greater involvement of repro- cessed uranium will lead to the capability of forming additional fuel loads. The involvement of onsite-stored spent fuel in the VVER-1000 fuel cycle makes it possible to cut the time of us- ing “proliferation-nonresistant” fuel by four years.
An analysis into the saving of uranium resources for different scenarios of the VVER-1000 reactor conversion to reprocessed uranium has shown that the saving of natural uranium for the 60 years of the unit operation varies in a range of 15–18.6%, depending of the strategy selected for the reactor conversion to reprocessed material.
