<title>Dynamic Modeling and Performance Analysis of a Two-Fluid Molten-Salt Breeder Reactor System</title>
<author>Vikram Singh, Matthew R. Lish, Alexander M. Wheeler, Ondřej Chvála & Belle R. Upadhyaya</author>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Technology</Journal>
<Affiliation>University of Tennessee, Department of Nuclear Engineering, Knoxville, Tennessee 37996-2300</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>ANS</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00295450.2017.1416879</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1080/00295450.2017.1416879</URL>
Abstract — A nonlinear dynamic model for the two-fluid molten-salt breeder reactor (MSBR) system is presented. This work is partly inspired by a preliminary dynamic model of the concept studied at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL). The core heat transfer model has been revised to accurately reflect the design exemplified in ORNL-4528—the last report on the two-fluid design. A brief description of the reactor system and the effects of reactor poisons and a discussion of temperature feedback mechanisms are presented. This back- ground information is followed by an overview of the modeling approach and a discussion of the revised lumped parametrization, along with detailed descriptions of the modeling methodology and model limitations. All equations and parameters used in the model are presented to aid in model reproduction and adaptation for  other molten-salt reactor designs. Model stability is analyzed by observing the uncontrolled response to reactivity perturbations. Simulations illustrate stable behavior at all power levels investigated. Temperature-induced feedback effects lead to stable dynamics for both large and small reactivity transients. Stable and smooth changes in the various nodal temperatures are also observed. The frequency response of the system indicates no dynamics problems at all operating power levels and is consistent with the transient response. Characteristic features in the frequency response plots due to feedback effects are also discussed. Finally, the load-following capability of the MSBR system is studied for various ramp rates of the power demand in the final heat sink. The temperatures in all salt-containing parts of the system are observed to vary about an average during the load-following maneuver. It is observed that the MSBR system exhibits a self-regulating behavior, minimizing the need for external controller action for load-following operations.
Keywords — Dynamic modeling, molten-salt breeder reactor, feedback.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
A recent survey of the advanced nuclear industry conducted by Third Way reports that there are eight  North American companies or institutions working on molten-salt reactors (MSRs) which use molten salts as both coolant and fuel.a Considering such enthusiasm, it is an opportune time to study dynamic modeling methods that can accurately describe the peculiarities presented by MSRs, and circulating fuel reactors in general. Whilesome companies have displayed an interest in breeders utilizing the thorium cycle, others are developing an array of designs specialized for various purposes ranging from stockpile reduction to desalination and district heating. Given the breadth of design choices under consideration, it is appropriate to pursue models and modeling methods that properly characterize the dynamic behavior of these systems while being easily adaptable to changes in design and physical parameters. This paper presents one such modeling method and describes its specifics as applied to a two-fluid molten-salt breeder reactor (MSBR). An ear- lier work1 presented results of the simulation using the dynamic model focusing on reactor control strategies. The primary goal of this paper is to present a revised model with nonlinear neutronics and a refined primary system heat transfer model of the two-fluid MSBR, to detail the modeling methodology, and to elaborate on the dynamic features of this model both in the time domain and in the frequency domain. Results are presented for various reactivity perturbations under normal operating conditions. The details of model development are described to aid independent reproduction and to serve   as a basis for future models. All models used in this paper are available publicly on Github.b
Conceptual designs of a two-fluid MSBR power station were drafted from 1966 to 1970 at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) as part of a larger effort on studying MSRs. A primary goal then was to enable the use of the thorium/233U fuel cycle to extend nat-  ural uranium resources. This modular design, detailed in Robertson et al.,2 consisted of four reactor modules with an electrical output of 250 MW/module. Each module in the two-fluid design consisted of a graphite-moderated reactor “with  a  7LiF-BeF2-UF4 fuel salt circulated through the core and a 7LiF-ThF4-BeF2 blanket salt circulated through sepa- rate flow channels distributed throughout the core, as well as in a surrounding under-moderated region.”2 These concepts are often referred to as a liquid fluor- ide thorium reactor to emphasize the use of fluoride salts and the thorium fuel cycle and to  distinguish  them from other MSR concepts.
While the priorities of the original  proponents  of  the two-fluid design were different, the advantages and future potential of the reactor appear attractive. The system may be potentially cheaper than current reactors due to passive safety, high-temperature, and low-pres- sure operation.
Thorium-232 is fertile, and upon absorbing a neutron and undergoing two beta decays it is converted to 233U, a fissile isotope. Depending on the fission-to-capture ratio of
233U, some 234U is formed; this is converted to 235U, another
fissile isotope, upon neutron absorption. Therefore, com- pared to 235U fuel cycle, minor actinide production is sig- nificantly lower in the thorium fuel cycle which may reduce the need for long-term geologic storage.
This two-fluid design can be implemented as an iso- breeder, eliminating the output of fissile material from the system. While designing and enacting appropriate safe- guard strategies is a major concern (and outside the scope of this paper), the two-fluid MSBR offers a safe and practical reactor design that satisfies all the requirements of the Gen-IV reactor goals.3
Besides the potential advantages offered by MSRs, recent interest has seen a resurgence thanks to the availability of a library of information assembled at ORNL during the design, construction, and operation of the Molten Salt Reactor Experiment (MSRE) from 1960 to 1969.c MSRE demonstrated several key features of MSR systems including passive safety and relatively long- term operability. The experimental results gathered from various studies conducted at MSRE serve as the only benchmark for evaluating simulations of MSR systems, such as the one presented in this paper.4 Hence, a similar model has been developed for the MSRE by extending the approach detailed here. The results from model simulations compare well with experimental data and are presented  in Ref. 5.
The model development presented here is inspired by preliminary work carried out at ORNL (Ref. 6) and is similar to methods employed in studying the dynamics of the MSRE (Ref. 7). The model discussed here is inherently nonlinear, unlike the linearized  model in Ref. 5. Major revisions have been  made  based on the reactor design described in Ref. 2. This paper presents simulations for various cases of reactiv- ity perturbation and demonstrates the stability of the reactor dynamics, temperature feedback effects, and load-following capability of the MSBR system.  Section II provides a brief overview of the MSBR conceptual design followed by a  detailed description of the lumped parameter model for the fluid fuel reactor core, blanket fluid loop, graphite moderator, fuel-salt heat exchanger (FSHX), and the blanket-salt heat exchanger (BSHX) systems in Sec. III. The results of simulations are provided in Sec. IV, followed by con- cluding remarks in Sec. V. All physics parameters of interest are verified carefully and are listed Table I and Fig. 4, with additional parameters in the Appendix and all included in the online repository.
II.DESCRIPTION OF THE MSBR SYSTEM
The objective of this section is to provide a sufficient background to develop the dynamic model. Section II.A provides a brief overview of the two-fluid MSBR system. Section II.B discusses the MSBR fuel and reactor poison behavior. This is followed by a qualitative discussion of the temperature feedback effects due to the various core components in Sec. II.C.II.A.General Description
Each modular core of the MSBR is composed of a matrix of hexagonal graphite assemblies for neutron mod- eration. Machined hollow spaces in the graphite allow for the fuel and fertile salt to flow through the core while remaining separate. The intended fuel salt contains UF4 (0.2 mol %) dissolved in a 7Li-BeF2 (67-33  mol  %) carrier salt. This carrier salt is a eutectic  mixture  and has a liquidus temperature of 450°C, lower than either ingre- dient alone. It is heated up above this liquidus temperature and pumped through the reactor where it enters the core vessel through a lower plenum at ~537°C. The fuel salt then flows up through hollow cylindrical sleeves in the graphite assemblies before flowing down through bores drilled in the center of each assembly. The fuel salt leaves the core at the bottom of the reactor vessel after fissions raise its temperature to ~705°C. It then enters a heat exchanger where the heat from the primary coolant is transferred to a secondary coolant salt. This  secondary salt composition is chosen to maximize heat transfer  while closely resembling the characteristics of the fuel salt. For MSRE, a 7LiF-BeF2 (66-34 mol %) mixture was used. This salt is expensive due to the use of enriched lithium, and given the large volume of the MSBR system, a NaBF4-NaF (92-8 mol %) mixture was deemed more suitable. The coolant salt is pumped in series, first through the FSHX and then through the BSHX where it picks up heat from the fertile salt.
The fertile blanket salt contains ThF4 (2 mol %)
dissolved in the same carrier salt mixture as the fuel salt. It has a liquidus temperature of about 560°C. It also enters the core vessel at the bottom and flows upward through both interstitial spaces between gra- phite cells and an array of  blanket cells surrounding  the core in an undermoderated region. It then exits the reactor vessel near the top before making its way to the BSHX. The coolant salt leaves the heat exchangers at a temperature of ~607°C and enters a steam generator and reheater system that produces superheated steam. A schematic of the MSBR system is shown in Fig. 1.
Of the total heat generated in the core, 94.75% is assumed to be carried away by the fuel salt while 5.25% is carried by the fertile-salt stream. The fertile-salt flow rate is also much lower than the fuel salt to encourage breeding. Major changes in reactivity in the MSBR sys- tem are made by changing the composition of the fuel salt, that is, by adding small amounts of uranium fuel. Minor changes in reactivity are made using control rods to maintain temperatures and to hold core power at a steady value.2
II.B.MSBR Fuel, Breeding, and Reactor Poison Behavior
The actinide composition in the MSBR salt is determined by breeding performance of the  system. The low-atomic number fluoride carrier salts were chosen to enhance moderation and reduce parasitic absorption. Enriched 7Li is used in the salt to reduce parasitic neutron capture and tritium formation.
Helium is used as the cover gas in the pump bowl and all other salt surfaces in the system. It also serves as the medium for sparging gaseous fission products from the salt. Small bubbles of helium (~0.5% salt volume) are injected into the salt in the suction line to the pump to encourage nucleation of 135Xe, 83Kr, and small quantities of other gases formed due to both fission and fission product decay. These gases are only slightly  soluble  in the high-temperature salt mixture and readily nucleate with the helium bubbles. The helium is then  removed with its burden of xenon and krypton in a centrifugal separator in the line from the outlet of the heat exchanger to the reactor vessel.8 This mechanism is illustrated in  Fig. 1 at the core fuel-salt outlet. With a 33% removal  rate per fuel transit cycle (~15 s for MSBR), the time to process the complete fuel inventory would be ~45 s. It was shown that a poison fraction of 0.5% or less can be achieved for the MSBR design with the above removal rate.9 Additionally, the graphite assemblies are coated with pyrolytic carbon to reduce their permeability to gaseous fission products. Since only a small fraction of the fissions take place in the blanket, there is no need for a gaseous fission product removal system for the blanket stream.
II.C.Temperature Coefficients of Reactivity
Analysis of reactivity excursions in the two-fluid MSBR system requires knowledge of the reactivity effects due to temperature changes in the fuel and fertile salts and the graphite moderator composing the core. The temperature coefficients of reactivity are listed in Table I. They are adopted as is from Ref. 2. The coeffi- cients were calculated by plotting the multiplication factor δk versus temperature for the various components of the core in the operating temperature range. The slope of this dependency for a given component is its temperature coefficient of reactivity. The fuel-salt coef- ficient is highly negative, while the graphite and fertile- salt coefficients are positive.2,6
Since the molten fuel salt is also the primary coolant, and since most of the heat is generated in the fuel salt (88%), the majority of the reactivity feedback during a power transient is Fig. 1.  Schematic of the two-fluid MSBR. [Source: ORNL-4528 (1970) (Ref. 2)].
due to temperature changes in the fuel salt. The thermal expansion of the fuel salt decreases its density and therefore reduces its macroscopic cross sections. This density change is the primary inherent mechanism of the reactor system to compensate for reactivity additions. As the temperature of the graphite increases, the thermal peak is shifted up in energy and the reactivity increases. This is specific to 233U fuel due to its fission cross-section behavior near 1 eV (Ref. 10). In the case of the fertile salt, as the temperature increases its density decreases leaving more neutrons to be absorbed in fuel.
The total reactivity feedback coefficient of the MSBR system is strongly negative and dominated by the fuel-salt reactivity feedback. Even when all core components undergo equal temperature changes, the fuel temperature coefficient dominates keeping the overall reactivity coefficient of the reactor system negative. It must be noted that these values were determined assuming there were no void fractions in the core and for a given set of uranium concentrations. In an operating MSBR, however, the reactivity values would differ slightly due to the presence of small quantities of gas in the core. The reactivity coefficients will be evaluated by a full- core neutronics model using modern simulation tools in an upcoming paper.
III.DEVELOPMENT OF THE LUMPED PARAMETER MODEL
This information is presented in order to facilitate model reproduction and to simplify extension to other
MSR designs. The modeling approach is discussed  in Sec. III.A, with Sec. III.B detailing the core neutronics and heat transfer. Section III.C discusses reasons for modifying the preliminary model presented in Ref. 6 based on geometry data presented in Ref. 2. Sections III.D and III.E detail the heat exchangers and the boiler/reheater system, respectively. A brief note on assembling the model in MATLABTM Simulink is presented in Sec. III.F. Finally, all equations describing the lumped parameter model are pre- sented in Sec. III.G. A digital version of all the modeling parameters will be made available along with the publication of this paper. The parameters of interest are listed in the body of the paper as necessary.
III.A.Modeling Approach
The unique dynamic behavior of MSRs, or any cir- culating fuel reactor, can be attributed to the change in the delayed-neutron fraction in the core over time as  some delayed-neutron precursors decay outside the core. Since the fuel salt is the primary coolant, the circulation has the added effect of introducing delayed temperature changes and associated delays in reactivity feedback. These effects can be described using high-fidelity models that offer great versatility but are resource intensive. In the early stages of development, demonstrating the feed- back mechanisms inherent to the system and evaluating the range of safe operational states is more important. These data in turn lend themselves to informed choices in both reactor design and control strategies. Thus, the objective here is to build a model that adequately describes the effects of fuel circulation on neutron dynamics and thermal hydraulics and determines the resulting temperature-based feedback reactivity for the MSBR system, with the purpose of analyzing reactor transients encountered during both routine operation and credible incident scenarios. As mentioned in Sec. I, a similar model that extends the approach that has been developed for the one-fluid MSRE comparison of model simulations with experimental measurements is reported in Ref. 5. The focus of this paper is to describe this nonlinear model for the MSBR and evaluate its response to various perturbations.
The model provides integral quantities of interest such as thermal power and total reactivity, and significant local quantities such as the graphite temperature and temperatures of all salt volumes in the system. The stan- dard approach in this type of study is to model the dynamics of neutron density (reactor power), core heat transfer, and the thermodynamics of the heat exchangers by spatially nodalizing the various masses involved. These include the graphite assemblies in the core, all piping segments in the system, all heat exchangers, and the flowing fuel and fertile salts. For these lumped para- meter nodes, the time evolution of mass and energy is described using appropriate differential equations and all spatial variations are ignored. The model developed here is similar to the one in Ref. 6, but with nonlinear neu- tronics so it is valid for large transients. Ignoring the spatial flux also means ignoring the spatial importance   of temperature changes and the resulting spatial resolu- tion in feedback response. Besides, any spatial drift of delayed-neutron precursors through the core is also ignored. This simplification results in the reactor model presented here to be more conservative within the time frame of fuel-salt core transit compared to a model that spatially resolves the neutron dynamics of the core.
The model limitations and modeling assumptions are
summarized here:
1.The model presented is inherently nonlinear with neutronics coupled to thermal hydraulics.
2.For neutronics purposes, all spatial variations in neutron flux, salt and graphite nuclear temperatures, and delayed-neutron precursor concentrations in the core are neglected.
3.All power is assumed to be generated in the moderated region of the core, i.e., fissions outside core and fission product decay heat are ignored.
4.Axial heat transfer between graphite nodes is ignored.
5.All fluid nodes are assumed to be well mixed with the temperature of the fluid exiting the node the same as the temperature of the fluid in the node.
6.The dynamics of the boiler/reheater system is not modeled, instead a heat removal term is used.
7.Reactivity effects due to xenon poisoning and circulating void fractions are ignored.
8.Fission product removal is not modeled.
9.There is no control action.
III.B.Core Neutronics, Heat Transfer, and Temperature-Based Reactivity Feedback
The core herein refers only to the moderated region with fuel-salt channels. Blanket refers to the undermod- erated region surrounding the core where 2.5% of the power is assumed to be generated in the blanket fertile salt. The rest of the power is assumed to be generated in the core. Gamma heating due to fission product decay in the transiting salts is ignored. Of the rest of the heat, 88.4% is generated in the fuel salt, 7.4% in the graphite, and 1.7% in the fertile salt in the interstitial spaces. The interstitial fertile salt is exposed to more neutrons to promote breeding and hence produces more energy per unit mass than the surrounding blanket salt.
The core is modeled in two parts:
1.neutron dynamics with reactivity feedback
2.heat transfer in the fuel, graphite, and fertile salt.
The neutron dynamics is based  on  a  modified point kinetics model with six delayed-neutron precur- sors and accounts for delayed-neutron losses in the external loop through the heat exchanger.  Expressing the neutronics equations in this form allows for the fractional power to be determined without  requiring  any quantitative knowledge of the neutron density or the precursor concentrations. The underlying premise here is as follows. A fuel mixture and a set of average delayed-neutron precursor groups with appropriately determined decay constants are provided. A set of physical parameters for the rest of  the  reactor system is also given. Then the reactor power will be propor- tional to neutron density, given  all  other  parameters are held constant. Thus, no considerations about spa- tial variations in the neutron flux are needed in this model. The neutronics is coupled with the core heat transfer to simulate temperature changes in the system following a reactivity perturbation and  to  determine  the resulting temperature-based reactivity feedback. Figure 2 is a simplified block diagram of the core model.
III.C.Development of the Revised Model
Figure 3 shows the original lumped parameter model from Ref. 6. The core heat transfer consists of three solid graphite nodes, two fuel upward flow nodes, two fuel downward flow nodes, and two fertile flow nodes. This nine-node model and all the corresponding state variables are described by ordinary differential equations. This model is based on the 40 kW/liter design mentioned in
Table 5.1 of Ref. 2, as evidenced by the use of the listed parameters in the calculations detailed in Ref. 6. The revised nodal model is based on the reactor designs and physical parameters for the 20 kW/liter reactor that is detailed in Ref. 2.
Figure 4 shows a cross section of the  hexagonal  core graphite channels from Ref. 2. The graphite is  shown in gray. Notice that the fuel salt in the up and down flow streams are in  contact  with  either  side  of the cylindrical mass of graphite, meanwhile the inter- stitial fertile salt is in contact with the outer surface of  the graphite. Additionally, the two salt streams in con- tact with the graphite have vastly different flow rates. These aspects of heat transfer in the core are not accurately represented in the preliminary model.6
Fig. 2.  Simplified representation of the core model with coupled neutronics and heat transfer.
Fig. 3.  Lumped parameter model of MSBR from MSR-67-102 (Ref. 6).
Fig. 4. Cross section of hexagonal graphite fuel cell.2
Also, the interstitial and blanket fertile–salt streams are not separated.
The revised lumped parametrization of the core model, with the following modifications, is shown in Fig. 5.
III.C.1.Separating the Fertile Salt Stream into Two
The incoming fertile salt stream is split into two with four nodes representing the salt in the interstitial spaces and two nodes representing the blanket. The mass of salt in each stream is calculated from the information given in Ref. 2. The two streams are mixed in a mixing plenum before exiting the core.
III.C.2.Dividing the Graphite and Salt Masses According to the Geometry of the Graphite Assemblies
The fuel salt flows up and then down each graphite assembly as it is heated by fissions. Thus, the cylindrical mass of graphite separating the two streams is in contact with fuel salt at different temperatures on either surface. The rest of the graphite mass is in contact with upward- flowing fuel salt on the inside and interstitial fertile salt (also upward-flowing) on the outside. The heat transfer through the different graphite masses resulting from bounding temperature differences is represented in the revised model by dividing the graphite and salt nodes axially and radially. In doing so, the axial heat transfer between graphite nodes is ignored because the transiting salt nodes are at different temperatures. The mass of graphite in contact with upward and downward flowing fuel-salt streams is represented using four nodes. Similarly, four nodes represent the mass of graphite
Fig. 5. Revised lumped parametrization of MSBR core dynamics.
with fuel on one side and fertile salt on the other for a total of eight graphite nodes. The mass of the graphite nodes is determined geometrically from the designs in Ref. 2. In each axial half, there is radial heat transfer across the pair of graphite nodes in contact with differ- ent salt streams. In addition, there are four fuel upward- flow nodes and four fuel downward-flow nodes.  The  fuel is mixed in a mixing  plenum  with  a  residence  time of 1 s before exiting the core. Hence, the revised model improves upon the preliminary model in  Ref. 6  by offering increased resolution of the dynamics due to   a greater number of nodes and a more accurate
representation of heat transfer between the various gra- phite and salt masses in the core.
III.D.Heat Exchangers
The counter-current heat exchangers are modeled as follows. The FSHX is modeled using 11 nodes. These include two heat exchanger tube metal nodes, two fuel downward-flow nodes, a fuel mixing plenum, two fuel upward-flow nodes, and two coolant salt downward-flow nodes. The BSHX is similarly modeled with one tube metal node, two fertile salt nodes, and two coolant salt nodes. The coolant salt flows opposite to the direction of the primary salt flow in both the heat exchangers as seen in Fig. 3. Furthermore, all liquid nodes in the model are assumed to be well mixed, with the temperature of the liquid exiting the node at the same temperature as the liquid in the node.
III.E.Steam Generator and Reheater System
The dynamics of the steam generator and  the reheater system are not included in the current model. The coolant-salt inlet temperature is a function of the dynamics on the secondary (or steam) side which is not modeled in this work. Instead a constant rate of heat removal is assumed in the final heat sink. Of the total
power generated, 87% is assumed to be removed by the steam generator and 13% by the reheater. These power removal fractions can be varied as an external input to simulate changing demand power.III.F.Modeling the System of Equations in Simulink
The model was developed in MATLAB–Simulink using  appropriate  tools  for  solving   nonlinear  equations and for the graphical representation of the  nodal model.11 Solving the neutronics equations explicitly required solving delayed-differential equations (DDEs). Since Simulink does not offer a built-in DDE solver, the delayed-neutron precursor concentration terms are stored and passed on to the solver after an appropriate time delay. The Simulink block diagram for the assembled model is shown in Fig. 6. Important parameters are listed in Table I.
III.G.Equations Used in Modeling and Their Motivation
The neutron dynamics is described by the modified point-reactor kinetics equations (PKEs) for circulating fuel reactors, similar to those employed in the study of MSRE (Ref. 7). These are a system of seven, coupled, nonlinear, DDEs, shown here in Eqs. (1) and (2):
Fig. 6. Effect of fuel-salt flow rate on ρo.
@1
@2
where
n(t) = neutron density
Ci(t) = i’th delayed-neutron precursor concentration (where i = 1 . . . 6)
⍴(t) = total reactivity as a function of time (input)
βi = delayed-neutron fraction of the i’th delayed group
β = total delayed-neutron fraction
S(t) = source perturbation term
τC = fuel transit time in the core (5.83 s)
τL  =  fuel transit time in the external loop (9.25 s).
For the purposes of this modeling, the spatial effects due to precursor drift through the core are ignored and the precision and the spatial fidelity of a more complex and computationally intensive model is traded for reduced accuracy and increased simplicity and speed of calculations.
The left side of Eq. (1) describes the neutron density in the reactor as a function of time. The first term on the
TABLE I
Physical Parameters for Core  Components
right accounts for the difference between the production rate of prompt neutrons and the loss rate of all neutrons. This product of reactivity and neutron density in the first term makes the system of equations nonlinear. The sec- ond term on the right is the sum of the production rates of neutrons from the six (i = 1 . . . 6) delayed-neutron groups. The delayed-neutron data are shown in Table II. In the MSBR fuel, 93.4% of the fissions occur in 233U  and 6.6% in 235U. Thus, the β (MSBR) term in Table II is a weighted average for this composition.
Equation (2) is a set of six equations accounting for the time change in the concentration of each of the six delayed- neutron precursor groups. The circulating fuel has the effect of reducing the delayed-neutron fraction as delayed neutrons are emitted outside of the core region in the circulating fuel. The circulation also reduces the rate at which the tempera- ture in the fuel salt changes during power changes. This in turn introduces delayed temperature feedback effects from the various components of the core. Additionally, the longest decaying group has a half-life of just under 1 min. Hence, the circulating fuel also has the effect of introducing neutrons into the reactor after a time delay equal to the transit time of the fuel in the external loop (9.25 s, in this case). This
TABLE II
Delayed-Neutron Group Data*
characteristic is unique to circulating fuel reactors. Equation (2) explicitly accounts for this loss of delayed neutrons during the fuel salt’s transit through the heat exchanger loop. The first term in Eq. (2) shows the produc- tion rate and the second term shows the decay rate of the precursors. The third term on the right is the rate of removal of the precursor from the core due to the fuel flow. The last term accounts for the fraction of delayed-neutron precursors that did not decay in the external loop and are reintroduced
into the core after a delay of τL. This modification also makes these a system of delayed differential equations.12 Steady-state solution is readily obtained by setting the time derivatives to zero.
Equations (1) and (2) imply that the time-dependent reactor behavior modeled using point kinetics assumes that the spatial shape of the neutron flux in the core is time- invariant. However, this approximation breaks down in cer- tain scenarios of interest. For example, one of the most important cases for safety analysis involves the uncontrolled withdrawal of the highest-worth control rod. This results in a strong localized perturbation in the core leading to a large deviation in the shape of the spatial flux from steady state thereby invalidating the point-kinetics model. Likewise, the point-kinetics equations are incapable of predicting the beha- vior of rapid reactivity transients initiated by rapid local changes  in core  reactivity.  This  applies  to both  static fuel
and circulating fuel reactors and is especially important for low-power and high-frequency perturbations.13 Hence, when not altering the flow rates, this model can be considered valid only for relatively high-power (>1 MW) operation and for transients of timescales longer than the core transit time of the fuel salt.5
With the above modifications, the reactivity necessary for steady-state operation ⍴o is nonzero. It is obtained by setting the derivatives on the left side of Eqs. (1) and (2) equal to zero and solving for ⍴(t = 0). It is given by
@3
This ρo term is the reactivity change due to circulating fuel and accounts for delayed neutrons lost in transit. At opera- tional     flow     rates,     the      calculated      value      for   ρo = ~0.00127. When the reactor is at steady state operating at nominal power, the natural reactivity feedbacks from the various components sum up to this value. It can otherwise be viewed as the necessary reactivity that a control system would need to provide in going from a stationary fuel to a circulating fuel to compensate for lost delayed neutrons. Of course,different fuel-salt flow rates would lead to different values τ , τ , and hence ρ . At lower flow rates, fewer precursors decay outside the core leading to a lower ρo value, while at higher flow rates the value of ρo
increases until reaching a is shown in Fig. 6. Changes in flow rate therefore lead to reactivity perturbations. This is important in the case of a pump trip in the primary system. In this case, additional delayed-neutron precursors decaying in the core that would otherwise  have  decayed  in  the  loop  lead  to  a reactivityinsertion. However, the fuel-salt movement does not stop instantaneously due to its inertia. Although pump trips and other operational anomalies are not discussed in this paper, the model presented here can be extended for such scenarios. The results of simulations for pump trips and other opera- tional anomalies for MSRE are discussed in Refs. 5 and 14.
The total reactivity for the system is assumed as
@4
This feedback model is similar to the one used in the dynamics study of the MSRE (Ref. 7). The feedback reactivity ρfb(t) is contributed by changes in  the  fuel  salt, fertile  salt, and graphite temperatures.  It is given by
@5
where each of the terms represents a contribution from each component given by the product of the reactivity feedback coefficient (αf, αg, etc.) and the sum of the difference of the temperature of each node at time t from the steady-state temperature of that node. Thus, the sign of each term depends on the temperature variations of the
value. The net effect of the feedback is a deviation of ρ
from the steady-state feedback ρo by an amount ρfb.
The total energy from all fission is deposited in the various components of the core in the fractions mentioned before. Temperature change equations for the various nodes in the core account for any power generation in the node and energy transfer between nodes. For example, Eq. (6) describes the time rate of change of temperature in a fuel node as the sum of power generated in the node and energy transferred to the node from other fuel and graphite nodes:
@6
where
Wf= mass flow rate of fuel salt
mfi = mass of fuel node i
Kfi = fractional power generated in fuel  node  i hAfg = product of area and heat transfer coefficient
for the fuel-graphite interface
T = temperatures of the various nodes.
Note that depending on the temperature of the node,each of the heat transfer terms can be either positive or negative, i.e., heat transfer takes place both in and out of the  nodes.  Similarly,  Eq.  (7)  describes  the temperature
change in a fertile salt node as the heat generated in the node and the heat transferred to the node from other fertile and graphite nodes:
@7
where
Wb = mass flow rate of fertile salt
mbi = mass of fertile node i
Kbi = fractional power generated in fertile node i hAbg = product of area and heat transfer coefficient
for the fertile-graphite interface.
In the case of graphite, there is no flow term. Instead, there is only heat transfer between fuel/fertile node to graphite and between the graphite nodes. Additionally, there is power generation in the graphite nodes them- selves. Thus, a pair of graphite nodes are used to describe the radial heat flow in the graphite masses separating the various salt flows. For example, Eqs. (8) and Eq. (9) describe a pair of graphite nodes between the upward-  flowing fuel salt and the interstitial fertile salt:
@8
@9
where
g1 = mass of graphite in contact with the fuel-salt stream
g2 = mass in contact with the interstitial fertile-salt stream
mg1, mg2 = mass of graphite nodes 1 and 2, respec- tively
Kg1, Kg2= respective power generation fractions
hAgg = product of area and heat transfer coefficient for a region where mg1 is equal to mg2
Tf, Tb = temperatures of fuel and  fertile  salt nodes in contact with the graphite nodes.
The first term is a power generation term similar to the ones in the fuel- and fertile-salt equations. The second term in both Eqs. (8) and (9) represents the heat transfer between the respective salt stream and the graphite. The factor of two simply denotes that  there are two salt nodes
for every graphite node. The model uses two fluid lumps for every solid lump to circumvent the problem of defin- ing an average temperature for a single fuel lump. This way the temperature of the salt exiting the first node is the average of the inlet and outlet temperature and serves as the driving force for the heat transfer. Thus, the aver- age temperature in the second lump is also a better representation of the outlet temperature than the average temperature of a single lump. Furthermore, by providing an intermediate temperature to serve as an average tem- perature, a definite flow direction is also defined.
Ideally, mass flow rates are not intended to be changed in the MSBR system under normal operating conditions. Pumps are subject to mechanical vibrations leading to minor but unappreciable fluctuations in the mass flow rate. Thus, it is fair to assume that the heat transfer coefficients for the various  interfaces  do not change with time.   Moreover,  the ably within the operating temperature range and since the the salts is given simply by the product of the mass flow rate,specific heat capacity, and ΔT, the difference in the inlet and outlet temperatures of the salt. As mentioned before, the effects of gamma heating are ignored in this model.
Moving to the heat exchangers, Eq. (10) is represen- tative of a primary/fuel-salt node in contact with a tube
metal node:
@10
Equation (11) represents a tube-metal node in contact with the fuel salt on one side and secondary/coolant salt on the other side:
@11
The equations in the heat exchangers are set up such  that the coolant salt flows in series, first through the FSHX and then the BSHX. It also flows counter-current to the primary fluid in both heat exchangers as seen in Fig. 3. Equation (12) describes a mixing plenum in the fuel-salt stream:
@12
where in Eqs. (10), (11), and (12)
WP = mass flow rate of primary fluid (fuel or  fertile salt)mPi
= mass of primary fluid node 1
hAPi = product of area and heat transfer coefficient for the primary fluid to metal interface
hASi = product of area and heat transfer coefficient for the metal to secondary fluid (coolant salt) interface.
The final heat sink for MSBR (where the secondary coolant salt deposits its heat) was intended to be a boiler/ reheater system. As mentioned before, the dynamics of the boiler/reheater system are not modeled and instead they are approximated with constant power removal equations. Equation (13) shows this equation for the boiler; a similar equation is used for the reheater system:@13
where τboiler is the residence time of the secondary (cool- ant) salt in the boiler system, and Pboiler is the constant  power removal term. In this case, Pboiler = 0.87 Po. These fractional power removal terms can either be held con- stant or independently perturbed if necessary as an exter- nal input. They allow for simulating changes in power  demand.
Similar equations to the ones described here are constructed for all the nodes in the various plant sub- systems. Steady-state parameters, and hence the initial conditions of the model, are characterized by design temperature targets adopted from Ref. 2. Since the mass of the salts are distributed equally among the nodes in any given component of the plant, the temperature difference can also be divided equally between the nodes. For example, the ΔT between the cold salt entering the core from the heat exchanger and
the fission heated hot salt leaving the core, as deter- mined by design, can be divided equally between the various nodes. Now, the temperature of the final node is the same as the exit temperature of the salt and the temperature of each of the intermediate nodes increases by ΔT/n, where n is the number of nodes of the salt. In case  of  the  graphite,  the  nodes  have  different  masses and the steady-state temperatures are derived explicitly by setting the time derivative to zero in the above graphite node equations.
Appropriate time delays are added between the various components of the plant to simulate the transit of the molten salts. A graphical model is set up in Simulink,an overview of which is shown  in Fig.  7  where the sub-
system contains equations for the various nodes  shown in Figs. 3 and 5. The Fractional Power Demand block shown in Fig. 7 is used to change the fractional power removal terms in the boiler/reheater system. This block can be used to study the response of the plant to changes in power demand and to simulate load following.
IV.RESULTS OF TRANSIENT ANALYSIS AND PLANT LOAD FOLLOWING
This section discusses the results of simulations performed using the model described in Sec. III. Model stability is evaluated by simulations without controller action to examine its response to reactivity transients. Note that
various modeling parameters such as flow rates, heat capacities, heat transfer coefficients, reactivity feedback
coefficients, etc., are assumed to be constant in this model effect of such minor perturbations in parameter space to reactor response. Although, performing such an analysis is out of the scope of this paper. Hence, stability here refers to the response of the system such that a bounded input perturbation produces a bounded output.
As mentioned above, one aim of model development is to accurately characterize the dynamic features arising
Fig. 7.  Block diagram of the final model in Simulink.
because of fuel-salt transit. In this regard, Sec. IV.A presents a model response to step insertions in reactivity. The delayed temperature changes arising in the two fluids and the resulting feedback response are presented for various power levels.
The two-fluid MSBR described here also features self-regulating characteristics, with a tendency to return to nominal power level in response to both positive and negative reactivity insertions. This response is  shown  for large periodic changes in reactivity  presented  in  Sec. IV.B. Frequency response of the plant at different operating power levels is given in Sec. IV.C. This stability analysis is followed by a demonstration of the load-following capability of the plant to changing power demand at different ramp rates in Sec. IV.D.
IV.A.Response to Step Insertion
Figure 8 shows a plot of the fractional change in power for the uncontrolled MSBR system operated at thermal powers 56, 256, and 556 MW (labeled), to an external reactivity step of 2 × 10−4 (+20 pcm). As mentioned before, the feedback model assumes a linear change in reactivity response for change in temperature from steady-state values. Thus, at lower power levels, the temperature changes in the core components, particularly the fuel salt, are insufficient to generate a strong feedback and the reactor response is slightly damped as the power returns to equilibrium. For higher power operation, the response is progressively more damped at higher operating power levels and the power level returns to equilibrium faster than for lower power operation. Furthermore, the relative change in power is also larger at lower power levels for a given transient.
The transient response at nominal power of 556 MW (thermal) for a step reactivity of +10 pcm is shown in Fig. 9 along with the reactivity feedback resulting from step inser- tion. The power transient shows a prompt jump immediately following the step insertion. This prompt jump is followed by an exponential decrease due to a net negative temperature feedback effect. A plateau (local peak) is seen in the power excursion following the initial prompt jump and decrease. These plateaus in the power response profile are a feature unique to circulating fuel reactors as delayed-neutron precursors are reintroduced into the core by the fluid fuel after a trip through the heat exchanger. The duration of the peak corresponds approximately to the residence time of the fuel salt in the external loop, that is τL (9.25 s). Upon closer examination, subsequent peaks are also seen in the decaying part of the curve.
The reactivity feedback is such that the total reactiv-
ity of the reactor system varies around the steady-state feedback ρo. In this case, the net negative feedback com- pensates for the positive step input. There is also a local peak in the feedback reactivity, after the prompt jump, due to delayed changes in the core salt inlet temperatures following the reactivity perturbation. Since the fuel salt is also the primary coolant, the core fuel outlet and FSHX outlet temperatures are shown in Fig. 10. A prompt jump in core outlet temperature is seen following the step insertion which is the primary driver of the strong nega- tive feedback response. An eventual increase in the  FSHX outlet temperature corresponds to  the  warmer  fuel salt from the initial transient returning to the core. This returning fuel salt reintroduces delayed-neutron pre- cursors that decay in the core stabilizing power momen- tarily as the higher temperatures continue to drive down power leading to the plateaus seen in Fig. 9.
Fig. 8. Relative change in power in response to external reactivity step of +20 pcm for uncontrolled MSBR system at 56-, 256-, and 556-MW thermal power. Red line indicates steady-state value.
The fractional power in the core eventually returns to its nominal value after several minutes due to the constant power withdrawal in the final heat sink. The temperatures of the fuel and fertile nodes, however, acquire a slightly higher steady-state value to compensate for the  added step reactivity as evidenced from Fig. 10. The negative feedback reactivity of the fuel thus allows for a lower
steady-state ρ as seen in the bottom plot in Fig. 9. The reactivity feedback ends up opposite to the external reactivity input, that is ρfb ≈ −10 pcm.
Finally, the effect of the fuel-salt flow rate on power response is shown in Fig. 11. The corresponding ρo values are also listed. Since the area of heat transfer is constant, for this simulation the fuel-to-graphite and fuel-to-metal
Fig. 9. (a) Power and (b) feedback reactivity response to +10-pcm step insertion at nominal power of 556 MW(thermal). Steady- state values shown in red.
Fig. 10. Temperatures following a step reactivity input of +10 pcm at nominal power of 556 MW(thermal). (a) Core fuel exit temperature and (b) FSHX outlet temperature.
convective heat transfer coefficients are varied as h ∝ W0.8
of the nominal value for a reasonable approximation.15 At
higher flow rates the rapid removal and subsequent reintro- duction of delayed-neutron precursors into the core leads to pronounced peaks in the power response. At lower power levels the response profile approaches the static fuel case. Changes in the secondary salt flow rate only increase the heat extracted from the core and increase the power level. Thus, the MSBR system as modeled here is shown to be stable at all power levels investigated with stable power transients in response to external reactivity insertions.
Fig. 11. Power response to a step insertion of +10 pcm at various fuel-salt flow rates.
IV.B.
Response to Periodic Perturbation
The stability of the MSBR system under periodic changes is studied by external stepwise reactivity pertur- bation of ±60 pcm, as shown in Fig. 12. The bottom plot shows the inherent feedback response of the reactor, which is essentially the inverse of the reactivity inser- tions. The nature of the reactivity feedback is such that it drives the reactor toward its nominal power level in case of both negative and positive step insertions in reactivity. Similarly, other state variables such as fuel and graphite node temperatures also respond to periodic perturbations in a stable fashion. Figure 13 shows the temperatures of (a) fuel up-flow nodes with fuel salt entering at node f2b2, (b) fuel down-flow nodes with fuel salt exiting at node f1b1, (c) fuel-to-fuel graphite nodes, and (d) fuel-to-fertile graphite nodes. It is also noteworthy that a ~15% change in power is associated with a change in the fuel temperature ΔT of only about
~10°C.
IV.C.Frequency Response of the Plant to Reactivity Perturbations
Bode plots are beneficial in assessing the stability of a plant for a wide range of input frequencies. The con- ventional method is to linearize the plant model and determine appropriate transfer functions (TFs). A non- linear system such as the one presented here should, however, behave linearly for small deviations from steady
Fig. 12. (a) Power and (b) feedback reactivity response to periodic reactivity of ±60 pcm at nominal power of 556 MW(thermal).
Fig. 13. Nodal temperatures of: (a) fuel up-flow nodes, (b) fuel down-flow nodes, (c) fuel-to-fuel graphite nodes, and (d) fuel-to-fertile graphite nodes.
state. Within the range of linear behavior, the plant response frequency is equal to the  input  frequency.  Thus, the MSBR power-to-reactivity frequency response is found using a sinusoidal reactivity insertion of ampli- tude ~1 pcm. The resulting power response is measured and the change in magnitude and phase recorded for a range of input frequencies. Figure 14 shows the  frequency response of the MSBR plant  at  thermal  power levels of 556, 256, and 56 MW and zero-power
(~1 kW) to external reactivity perturbations. In each case, 94.75% of the heat generated in the core is carried away by the fuel salt and 5.25% by the fertile-salt stream. For this simulation, the primary loop flow rates are not chan- ged for high power levels. In the zero-power case, the absence of control action means the reactor is approxi- mated as a static fuel reactor and an appropriate TF is derived. In all cases, the frequency response results are indicative of a well-behaved system.
Fig. 14.  Bode plot showing MSBR frequency response of power to external reactivity at various operating power levels.
The frequency response plot at nominal power presented in Robertson et al.2  (Figure  6.12)  is  the only published Bode plot for the two-fluid MSBR. While it can be problematic to compare these results directly in the absence of the original model used in their analysis, close similarities are observed between the two.
The frequency domain magnitude plot exhibits peaks in the response for different operating power levels. At lower frequencies, distinct break frequencies are seen, generally below 0.1 rad/s. These break frequencies are characteristic of the time constant of the reactor. To illustrate this, Fig. 15 shows a block diagram of the closed-loop TF between neutron power and external reac- tivity. This TF is given by
@14
where G(s) is the open-loop transfer function and H(s) is
the feedback TF. One may assume H(s) to have the form
@15
In the case of the MSBR, Eq. (15) is an approximation   of   the   core-to-coolant   TF   with   the   parameter   a asFig. 15. Block diagram showing temperature feedback dynamics.
the heat transfer time  constant.  In  the  time  domain,  the time constant τ ≈ 1/a s. Thus, Eq. (14) may be rewritten as
@16
At low frequencies, G(s = jω) magnitude becomes large and the 1/G term goes to zero. The TF is then approxi- mated as
@17
Hence the TF frequency plot shows distinct break frequencies at the low frequency range 0.01 to 0.1 rad/s. The magnitude eventually goes to a constant value at very low frequencies (not shown). At high frequencies, the closed-loop transfer can be approximated by the open-loop function G(s) ≈ Go, since the frequency magnitude of H(jω) goes to zero for large ω. The high frequency break point is thus the same for all power levels as is seen in Fig. 14.
For the zero-power case, the magnitude increases at lower frequencies as would be for a system with little to no feedback. With increasing power, the frequency response magnitude is curtailed due to increased feed-  back. This behavior is consistent with the response shown in Fig. 8. Furthermore, characteristic dips (local minima) are seen in the magnitude at ~0.1 rad/s and ~0.3 rad/s at all power levels. These minima correspond to the circula- tion times of the coolant and the primary loops, respec- tively. This dependence was verified by changing the flow rates of the salts and observing the behavior of the dips. Consider a small mass of fuel salt entering at the bottom of the core following a reactivity insertion. After undergoing fissions, this warm mass of fuel salt with its load of delayed-neutron precursors reenters the core after one external loop through the heat exchanger. Thus, higher-temperature salt along with new delayed-neutron precursors are reintroduced into the core every τL + τC seconds affecting power and feedback response. Since there are two primary fluids in this reactor, the dip fre- quency is an average of the two loop times weighted by the heat carried by the respective fluids. Thus, the inher- ent negative feedback reactivity of the reactor is super- imposed on the input reactivity every cycle leading to a curtailed power response and a dip in the magnitude at a frequency of 2π/(0.9475·15 + 0.0525·130) ≈ 0.3 rad/s. This frequency corresponds to the time duration of tem- perature changes in the reactor core due to the two circulating fluids. In other words, for an input frequency of 0.3 rad/s, the temperature feedback effects in the core overlap with each cycle of the input perturbation. A similar effect due to the secondary coolant salt circulation leads to the dip at ~0.1 rad/s, which is also observed to be affected by changes in this flow rate. These temperature feedback effects are clearly demonstrated in the Bode magnitude plot of Fig. 14. Thus, the Bode plots indicate no obvious dynamics issues from the investigation pre- sented here.
IV.D.Load Following in the MSBR System
Nuclear reactors have traditionally offered a base-load power source. As more intermittent and weather-dependent
power sources are integrated into the power distribution grid, load following with nuclear power plants may become more desirable.16 As described above, MSBR has the tendency to move toward a nominal power level whether being subjected to positive or negative reactivity perturbations. Since the nominal power-level is dependent on the difference in the inlet and outlet temperature of the salts through the core, it should in theory be possible to drive the MSBR plant using power demand alone. In this scenario, the changing power demand and the changing temperature of the salts introduce feedback effects in the core that drive the plant to a different power level. In this model, the constant terms in the boiler and reheater equations are simply fractional heat removal terms representative of the power extracted by each system sepa- rately. These terms are used as external inputs to change the heat extraction, therefore simulating changing power demand.
Figure 16 shows the feedback reactivity–induced
response of the MSBR system to a ramping down of demand power at a rate of 1% per minute down to 50%  of nominal power, and a subsequent ramp up of 1% per minute up to full power. The top plot shows demand power, fractional power as calculated from the neutron density, and measured power. Power in the MSRE was measured using thermocouples placed on the outside of INOR-8 piping to measure changes in inlet and outlet temperature.4 This thermocouple-based measurement is simulated using a first-order lag with a time constant of   5 s and a 1-s pure time delay. Apart from small transients seen during sharp changes in the demand power signal, the response of the reactor is stable and exhibits minor delay. The bottom plot in Fig. 16 is zoomed-in to show the response of the neutron power and measured power to change in demand power; notice the different range of the time axes.
The response shown in Fig. 16 is particularly inter- esting considering that the reactor responds indepen- dently of any external control action. The reactor dynamics exhibit a self-regulation characteristic, with- out an explicit need for external reactivity perturbation for load-following maneuvers. It is observed that the natural feedback of the MSBR system is adequate to compensate for changes in power demand. The reactiv- ity feedback response is plotted in Fig. 17 correspond-  ing to the plots in Fig. 16. In the bottom plot of both figures, the demand changes at t = 500 s. The reactivity feedback only starts to change after about t ~ 510 s followed later by a change in the neutron power signal    at about t ~ 515 s. The delay in feedback and the  resulting change in fractional  power  is  a  consequence of the circulating salts and the time taken for the
Fig. 16. Response of MSBR system to load-following maneuver. The core power changes due to temperature feedback–induced reactivity.
Fig. 17. Feedback reactivity response during load-following maneuver.
temperature change in the final heat sink to be con-  veyed to the salts in the core. There are further delays  due to the time needed to heat up  the  heterogeneous core. The measured signal, as  mentioned  before,  is  from a simulated thermocouple.
As the demand power is varied, the temperature of the salt nodes vary about an average. As mentioned ear- lier, the measured power depends only on the difference in the inlet and outlet temperature ΔT of the fuel- and fertile-salt nodes. Thus, the temperature of the hottest leg
of the reactor core decreases and the temperature of the coldest leg increases as the reactor power level follows the demand load. This behavior is illustrated for the core fuel inlet and outlet temperatures in Fig. 18 for several ramp rates. The fuel-salt temperatures follow the power profile without significant lag. Also plotted is the fuel-salt liquidus temperature, i.e., the lowest temperature at which the fuel-salt mixture is completely liquid. From a reactor safety point of view, this temperature marks a key viola- tion. It is imperative that the various molten fuel salt– containing sections of the reactor be kept at least 50°C  above this liquidus temperature during reactor operation. It is the same with other salt-containing parts of the system, although those liquidus temperatures vary depending on the salt mixture.
A closer examination of Fig. 18 suggests that the
liquidus temperature can only be violated when the reactor power is ramped up from a lower power level at a very rapid rate. In this scenario, the coldest node temperature could decrease below the liquidus temperature. Similarly, in the case when the reactor power is zero, the salts in the various nodes will converge to some temperature Tavg.
Finally, to highlight the load-following ability of the MSBR, the response to a random demand load signal over  1 million seconds is shown in Fig. 19. The associated core fuel inlet and outlet temperatures are also plotted. The power demand is varied between 20% and 150% nominal power.
Again, the strong negative feedback behavior of the MSBR leads to a stable and rapid response without any undesirable transients and without the need for any external controller action. Any constraints on the load-following capability of these systems is likely to be imposed due to limitations in the secondary system. The load-following features of the MSBR, for different conditions on the balance-of-plant system of the plant, are being evaluated. These studies are under way and will be reported in a future paper.
V.CONCLUDING REMARKS
A nonlinear dynamic model for a two-fluid MSBR plant has been developed. The revised core heat transfer parametrization accurately represents the reference design presented in Ref. 2. The model is made available to the public on a Github repository with the intention of encouraging adoption and reproduction.
The stability of the MSBR system model is analyzed under different reactivity perturbations. The results of the simulations indicate that under the assumptions of  the  model and the range of parameter values in the current research, the two-fluid MSBR system is stable and operable at all power levels investigated. For a positive reactivity insertion, the model response is strongly damped at higher power levels due to higher reactivity feedback than at lower
Fig. 18. Temperature response of core fuel inlet and outlet temperature to various load-following maneuvers: (a) 1% per minute down to 50% Po, (b) 5% per minute down to 20% Po, (c) 10% per minute down to 20% Po, and (d) 25% per minute down to 5% Po and ramp up to 150% Po.
Fig. 19. Uncontrolled response of MSBR to changes in demand power: (a) fractional power over time and (b) core fuel inlet and outlet temperature.
power levels. Consequently, the relative change in power is observed to be greater at lower power levels when compared to higher power levels for a given reactivity input. A prompt jump in power (and neutron density) is seen immediately following the reactivity insertion, as expected. The prompt jump is followed by an exponential fall-off to nominal power. Plateaus or local peaks are seen on the otherwise smooth power response curve due to fuel circulation effects and the reintroduction of delayed-neutron precursors into the core after every loop. These peaks are more conspicuous at higher power levels. Additionally, a corresponding change in the average temperature of the nodes is observed that induces feedback reactivity to compensate for the step insertion. Similar stability is observed in the case of periodic reactivity excursions and the system tends to return to nominal power following both positive and negative reactivity perturbations. The frequency response Bode plots of the system for power-to-reactivity indicate stable behavior at all power levels. The zero-power case shows an increasing magni- tude at lower frequency due to the absence of feedbacks. For higher power operation, the magnitude curves show distinct break frequencies in the low-frequency range indicative of the system heat transfer time. At higher frequencies, the break frequency is observed to be the same for all power levels. Moreover, characteristic dips are seen in the response corresponding to the primary and secondary loop transit times and the associated feedback resonances. The observed frequency response is consis- tent	with	the	simulations	for	external	reactivity
perturbations. The smaller delayed-neutron fraction  in  the MSBR fuel compared to pure 235U fuel is not observed to cause any dynamics or stability problems. The phase space of modeling parameters is neglected here, and a sensitivity analysis is necessary to determine the effect of perturbation of parameters on reactor response. However, for the simulations carried out  in  this study there are no indications of dynamics issues under nominal operating conditions.
The MSBR system also displays a strong self-regulating behavior in response to changes in the demand power as simulated by changing the heat extraction in the final heat sink. The inherent feedback reactivity induced primarily due to changes in the fuel-salt temperature compensates for changes in demand power allowing the system  to respond by changing power level without significant delay. This uncontrolled load following is an emergent behavior of the MSBR system dynamics. It presents an exceptional opportu- nity to design a truly walk-away safe next-generation reactor. Furthermore, the temperatures in the various salt-carrying parts of the system are observed to move about an average temperature during the load-following maneuver. This means that the temperature of the hottest node decreases while the temperature of the coldest node increases, thereby preventing the salts in the system from freezing.
The  limitations  inherent  to  the  PKEs  apply  to the
presented model such that they are valid only for rela-  tively high power (>1 MW) and for transients longer than the core  fuel transit  time.  Barring  these  limitations, the
model successfully describes the dynamics features unique to circulating fuel reactors. This type of modeling study can lend itself to informed reactor design and is a first step toward understanding the dynamics of a reactor system and assessing its operability. This model can
easily be adapted to simulate various anomaly scenarios such as heat exchanger under cooling, and pump trips in the primary and/or the secondary loop. The model pre- sented here can also be readily modified to simulate the dynamics of other MSR designs.
TABLE A.I
Graphite Matrix Geometry Parameters
TABLE A.II
Fuel-Salt Heat Exchanger Parameters
TABLE A.III
Blanket-Salt Heat Exchanger  Parameters
TABLE A.IV
Boiler and Reheater Parameters
TABLE A.V
Pure Time Delays Between  Components
Acknowledgments
The research and development reported in this paper is sup- ported in part by a grant from Flibe Energy Inc., Huntsville, Alabama, with the University of Tennessee; and in part by the University of Tennessee Nuclear Engineering Enrichment Fund. The authors are grateful to Tom Kerlin, Professor Emeritus of Nuclear Engineering, University of Tennessee, and Syd Ball, ORNL (retired), for the technical discussion about MSRs. The authors would also like to recognize the contribution of the reviewers, whose comments and suggestions greatly enhanced this paper.
