<title>Nuclear security system effectiveness assessment using bounded analysis approach: a case study of different adversary scenarios</title>
<author>Ahmad Ciptadi Syuryavin , Sang Hoon Lee & Nur Syamsi Syam</author>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Affiliation>a.School of Energy Engineering, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, South Korea; b.Badan Pengawas Tenaga Nuklir (Nuclear Energy Regulatory Agency of Indonesia), Jakarta, Indonesia; c.Radiation Science Research Institute (RSRI), Daegu, South Korea</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2020.1771229</DOI>
<URL> https://doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2020.1771229</URL>
ABSTRACT
A security issue on nuclear facilities will give a significant effect on national security, economy, public health, or the combination among them. The evaluation of physical security effective- ness is done by  considering  it  as a  probability that  the  system  will  defeat  an  adversary  at  a particular time. This research examined the effectiveness of Physical Protection Systems (PPS) of a nuclear research reactor in Indonesia, as a role model facility. Three possible adversary scenarios were assessed. Estimation of Adversary Sequence Interruption model was implemen- ted to assess the physical security system. The estimation of the effectiveness of physical- cybersecurity combination was done by Bounding Analysis Approach. The effectiveness of security system with cyber system working properly was assessed and compared with the system receiving cyber attacked. The results showed that the system effectiveness is high (0.839, 0.949, and 0.837, respectively). The results showed that the assessment method is effective to examine whether a security element is working effectively or not in such facility. This work will be useful as base guidelines for nuclear regulatory body and licensee for the application and evaluation of PPS and provision of countermeasure strategies in RSG GAS, and for further benefit, it can be used by nuclear facilities.
KEYWORDS
Physical protection system; EASI; BAA; nuclear security
1.Introduction
Nuclear security includes all activities related to pre- vent, detect, and respond to criminal and unauthor- ized acts which target nuclear material, radioactive material, and related facilities that could directly or indirectly cause harmful and unexpected conse- quences, either radiologically or non-radiologically to persons, workers, or the environment [1].
The above definition indicates a close understand- ing between nuclear safety and security, especially on the consequences and objective of both terms. From the statement, it can be inferred that both safety and security have a common objective, which is to protect people and the environment from radiological hazards.
Implementation of Physical Protection Systems (PPS) at facilities is an important medium to establish nuclear security, in more specific, to prevent or miti- gate the loss of important assets. Unlike safety that is easier to quantify scientifically, the effectiveness of PPS is more difficult to evaluate. The closest way to quan- tify is by evaluating them as a probability that the security system defeats an adversary along a given path.
Probabilistic safety assessment has well-developed and successfully increased safety awareness and level of nuclear technology, while security assessment is still
developing. Every effective security system possesses three fundamental capacities which involve reliable detection of undesirable activity, delay of the act pro- gression, and effectively respond to prevent adversary completion [2]. In general term, effective security sys- tem can face many different adversary scenarios, detect and delay adversary actions, and thwart all malicious acts effectively.
Some researchers have done analysis on PPS effec- tiveness in interrupting the adversary, either using probability calculations or developed numerical model such as Estimation of Adversary Sequence Interruption (EASI) that is developed by Sandia National Laboratory (SNL) [3–5]. However, very few researchers did an assessment on security system effectiveness which employs cybersecurity system inside them. With the increasing reliance on cyber technology to operate and control physical security system components, there is a need for methods to assess and model the interactions between the cyber system and the physical security system to understand the effects of cyber technology on overall security system effectiveness. This study will evaluate the security system effectiveness that has combined cyber and physical security system. Three possible adversary path scenarios that might be included in Design Basis Threat (DBT) of facility were assessed.
The comparison metrics include probabilities of detection (PD), interruption (PI), and the probability of system effectiveness (PE), which is the probability that the system can thwart an adversary attack.  Probability of interruption of physical security system of the scenarios was analysed using EASI model. Assessment of PE has been done by many  facilities  for their physical security system but when the cyber- security system is added, the system becomes more complex and difficult to model. In this research, quan- tification of security system effectiveness of combined physical and cybersecurity system was done by Bounding Analysis Approach (BAA) which is also developed by SNL. Further, security system effective- ness with cyber system working properly and when it is facing cyber-attack were compared.
2.Multi-purpose reactor GA Siwabessy
The Multi-Purpose Reactor GA Siwabessy (RSG GAS) of Indonesia was designed and built by Interatom GMBH from Germany. Civil buildings and physical infrastructure were constructed by domestic engi- neers. The construction of the multipurpose reactor lasted around 4 years from 1983 to 1987. In its daily operations, RSG GAS  operates  with  a  capacity  of  15 MW for efficiency. That capacity is sufficient for research activities, isotope production for the field of industry and health applications, tests and material tests, science experiments, and others. In the same area, some other nuclear facilities were also  built, such as electron beam machine, radioactive waste treatment facility, radioisotope and radiopharmaceu- tical installations, experimental fuel element installa- tions and radio metallurgical installations [6].
The RSG GAS is located inside Science and Technological Centre Area (PUSPIPTEK),  Serpong. It lies on northwest side of the centre area. Consequently, the reactor west and north fence is the outer fence of PUSPIPTEK area, while its east fence relates to other facilities in the centre area.
Most early research reactors were not designed with security as a priority, which can complicate the task of providing  security.  The   reactors   were   built   with a focus on safety since there had been a massive devel- opment in the field of reactor safety during 80–90 s, triggered by a nuclear reactor accident. By the increase of nuclear applications and various type and size of radioactive materials, the awareness of security increased. To enhance the security culture within the organization, RSG GAS conducts a self-assessment of nuclear security culture within the nuclear facility regularly. Unfortunately, the physical security system assessment has not established yet. The regulatory body and RSG GAS are still cooperating to develop the established procedure of security assessment. The security assessment is expected to be able to provide confidence and assurance that the security system can be controlled, analysed, and it is really operating in      a normal and secure level. Thus, the assessment done in this research is expected to give a better procedure for the security assessment of nuclear facilities.
3.Methodology
3.1.Development of adversary scenario
In this study, RSG GAS research reactor is chosen to be a role model facility. Three scenarios were devel- oped and security systems were analyzed based on the scenarios.
The implementation of DBTs in the regulatory system by countries has successfully  enhanced nuclear material and facilities protection from high consequences malicious acts, in more specific,  such  as radiological consequence. Moreover, DBT imple- mentation can further protect any asset with asso- ciated high potential consequences, such as nuclear materials. Threat assessment and DBT normally involve using a national system of information clas- sification and associated protection measures [7].
In the simplest way, the security system probability of interruption (PD) involves the probability that the detector will sense abnormal or unauthorized activ- ities by the adversary (PS) and the probability of accu- rate assessment of the alarm (PA) [8]. The relationship among these performance measures for PD can be summarized as
@1
The assessment of security response and development of DBT scenarios are implemented in the value of PD, system response time (T), and the standard deviation (SD) which is obtained from emergency or security drill conducted by the operator. Since the values are confidential in terms of security, then we developed possible adversary scenarios for this research. The scenario paths and values are shown in Figure 1 and Table 1, respectively.
The scenario paths that are shown in Table 1 are developed using real map of RSG GAS and exact position of the current facility. Security  response  time (T) and standard deviation (SD) data should be developed from PPS performance testing of the facil- ity, which of course is confidential. For the purpose of this research and further benefit, the estimation of the data is done by considering the current security system and the real position of the facility.
3.2.Physical security analysis by EASI model
EASI is a calculation tool developed by SNL that quantitatively illustrates the effect of changing phy- sical protection parameters along a specific path.
Figure 1. Map of RSG GAS research reactor and three adversary scenario paths.
Table 1. Three different adversary scenarios that will be in RSG GAS facility.
The basic principle of the model is statistic calcula- tion of security system probabilities. It uses detec- tion, delay, response, and communication values to
compute the PI. But, since EASI is a  path-level  model, it can only analyze one adversary path or scenario at a time.
Even so, it can be used to perform sensitivity ana- lyses and analyze PPS interactions and time trade-offs along that path.
The input for the model requires (a) detection and communication inputs as probabilities that the total function will be successful or PD and (b) delay and  response inputs as mean times and standard devia- tions for each element or T and SD. In EASI, the probability of successful detection is given by the following formula:
@2
where PS is the probability that the security system will sense abnormal or unauthorized activities, PT is the probability that an alarm response will be transmitted to an assessment point, and PA is the probability of alarm to assess accurately.
The communication of an alarm condition to the response force is input into EASI as the probability of guard communication, PC. In most PPS, the likelihood of successful communication to the response force
increases with time. Evaluation of many systems designed and implemented by SNL indicates that most systems operate with188 a PC above 0.95, which we will use in this research. The estimated value of
0.95 is determined considering the conditions of traffic mobility, and equipment completeness in Indonesia is lower than in the US.
The output of EASI, PI, then can be written as:
@3
The interrelationship of both input of PD and PC will be very important to determine the output value of PI. Fast response of alarm detection, alarm assessment, and/or accurate alarm response will be worthless if communication with the response team is late and takes a long time. This also applies in reverse; the result will not be effective if the alarm detection, alarm assessment, and/or  accurate  alarm  response  is low.
3.3.Security effectiveness analysis by BAA approach
Malicious acts involving computer systems and rele- vant to nuclear security may be grouped as informa- tion gathering attacks, security attributes disabling and compromising, and combination attacks to cyber and physical security [1].
In principle, security effectiveness of security sys- tem having more than one type of system can be obtained using two approaches. First, combining all system types in every security layer and assessing the interruption probability all at once before analyzing the effectiveness. Secondly, separating all  system types in every security layer and assessing the inter- ruption probability of all security system types as an independent value, and then analyzing the effective- ness. Basically, BAA is using the second approach. After obtaining the interruption probability of both cyber and physical system for every layer, then the system effectiveness by putting cyber and physical system as a bounded system in every layer is analyzed. The BAA approach uses a separate value for cyber- security system (PEC) and physical security system (PEP). As indicated in Equation (4), PE is a product of the probability that the adversary defeats the phy- sical security system (1-PEP) and the probability that
the adversary defeats the cybersecurity (1-PEC).
@4
The PEP value is obtained by defining a PD and T for all security layers and running EASI with those values. The BAA  assumes  that  if  an  adversary  ‘infiltrates’  a cyber system, he can then eliminate those elements of the PPS that are controlled by that cyber network from the attack path [9]. Whether the cyber system controls an alarm element (e.g., alarm or sensor) or a physical barrier or delay element (e.g., magnetic lock), the adversary can essentially eliminate that ele- ment in the physical path to make the physical attack path quicker and/or easier.
Here, we introduce P as physical system installed in the facility, C1 as cyber system installed on security  layer 1 (offsite) and C2 as cyber installed on security layer 2 (confinement building). Because it was assumed that each cyber system path was progressively more difficult for the adversary to defeat, a simple arbitrary equation was used to show the increasing  effect of PEC for C2 + P (PEC2) and  C1+  C2  +  P  (PEC1-2) from PEC1 according to a consistent pattern.    If we assume PEC1 = 0.100 for this study, then PEC1, PEC2, and PEC1-2 will be calculated as the following equations.
@5
@6
@7
4.Results and discussion
4.1.Analysis of interruption probability of physical security system
An Adversary Sequence Diagram (ASD) is very important to describe and analyze PPS system layers applied in an adversary path scenario. The analysis is done by estimating adversary sequence and tactics to predict PPS weaknesses by measuring the probability of interruption [10]. This step is best applied in devel- oping adversary scenarios and designing DBT. Therefore, it is highly recommended to go through this step before analyzing the effectiveness of the sys- tem with EASI. Figure 2 shows ASDs for all three scenarios analyzed in this study.
Tables 2–4 are the results of EASI analysis of sce- narios 1, 2, and 3, respectively. From the result, it was obtained    the    probabilities     of    interruption     as a representation of physical security system effective- ness for the scenarios were 0.839, 0.949, and 0.837. Scenario 2 which has a tighter security system in layer 1 (Offsite) shows the highest interruption probability. It is interesting to see the interruption probability of scenario 1 that is only slightly higher than scenario 3. The difference between scenarios 1 and 3 is on the distance from outer fence to confinement building of scenario 1 which is about three times further than those of scenario 3. Therefore, it can be concluded that a distance may not have a significant effect on security system effectiveness. On a contrary, security measures will give significant effect to the system effectiveness.
Figure 2. Adversary Sequence Diagram of the three scenario paths.
Figure 3. BAA assessment for a facility with cybersecurity system working normally.
Considering the value range of 0.500–0.750 as the medium security effectiveness, then the results showed that the security system effectiveness of RSG GAS is high.
4.2.Effectiveness analysis of combination of physical and cybersecurity system
The advanced and complex technology has driven the development of cyber applications. Even in security, currently many companies including nuclear facilities
use cyber technology in their security systems. In this research, we use BAA to assess how much is the effect of cyber system implementation in the security system effectiveness.
Table 5 is the BAA assessment table of facility with cybersecurity system working normally. Column 1 shows the possible adversary attack paths. Columns 2, 2, and 4 are the security layers of the facility each with  a defined PI. Column 5 is the PEP, which is an output of EASI model for physical security system of facility.
Table 2. EASI analysis for scenario task 1.
Table 3. EASI analysis for scenario task 2.
Table 4. EASI analysis for scenario task 3.
Table 5. BAA assessment for facility applying cybersecurity system.
Column 6 is the PEC values for the cyber portion of the security system and column 7 is the PE for the whole system (combination of physical and cyber system).
The results show that scenarios 1 and 3 which have quite small PI will receive bigger advantage of cyber system installment, while scenario 2 which has
Table 6. BAA assessment for facility received cyber-attack.
relatively tight physical security system at layer 1 receives only small increase in its security system effectiveness. This method indicates that if the PI for all layers of physical security is low, it is not profitable for the adversary to attack the cyber system. It would be easier to attack the asset by the purely physical path than to introduce the added complexity and uncer- tainty of a cyber-attack. Physical and cybersecurity must be balanced to effectively deter or thwart an attack. The effectiveness of security layers in normal cyber system condition is shown in Figure 3.
To enhance its security system, a facility should be familiar with its advantages and disadvantages so that it can prepare the countermeasures or fail-safe actions once it got attacked. Table 6 is an example of a BAA assessment for a system that is undergoing cyber- attack. The x’s in the table are those metrics that are controlled by the cyber network noted in column 1 and affected by the attack. For this example, the C1  network controls security layer 1 and C2 controls security layers 2 and 3. If the adversary can defeat both C1 and C2, then they have the ability to zero out all  security layers. Please note that PEP for the attack paths and their eliminated metrics are different depending on the attacked security layer. When compared to Table 5, the changes in the PEP values can be seen on the paths with elements whose effectiveness has been eliminated via cyber-attack. As shown in the table, by excluding C1 + C2 + P which has the lowest system effectiveness, depending on the protective value of the cyber networks, the most advantageous path for the adversary starts out as the C1 + P for scenario 2, while it starts out on C2 + P for scenarios 1 and 3. The impact of cyber-attack on security system effectiveness for each scenario can be seen in Figure 4.
It is interesting to know that the tight  combination
of physical and cybersecurity system on security layer 1 of scenario 2 has brought the most effective system to face cyber-attack on layer 2. It indicates that tighter security system in layer 1 gives enough time for the
response force team to implement the countermea- sures and terminate the adversary action.
5.Conclusion
The main objective of a security system, whether it is physical system or combination of physical and cyber system, is to prevent the accomplishment of malicious actions  and  sabotage  to  the  valuable   assets  inside a facility. This work developed an analytical metho- dology for security system evaluation. Effectiveness of the security system in RSG GAS was determined by analysing three different adversary scenarios, evaluat- ing system effectiveness using EASI model for physical system and BAA for combination of physical and cybersecurity system.
The probability of interruption obtained for the physical security system are 0.839, 0.949, and 0.837
for scenarios, 1, 2, and 3, respectively. The results showed that the security system is high since the probability of interruption is greater than the medium security system range of 0.500–0.750. From the EASI analysis results, it can be concluded that a distance  may not have a significant effect, while security mea- sures such as detection capability will give a significant effect to the system effectiveness.
The BAA method is found to be effective for the cyber and physical security modeling problem because it allows us to see what happens if an adversary is able to “zero-out” a security element through a cyber- attack, thereby eliminating its ability to detect the adversary. A focus of our analysis is how the increas- ing reliance on cyber technology impacts the physical security systems. The BAA allows us to examine whether or not eliminating an element reduced the  PE enough for the adversary to want to continue on that specific path. This ability is very beneficial because a facility can determine what elements have the biggest impact on PE. If there is an element that does not affect Figure 4. BAA assessment when facility received cyber-attack.
PE if it is eliminated, the facility will have more options whether to install the security element or not since its effect on the overall security system is minimal.
This method indicates that if the PD for all layers of physical security is low, it is not profitable for the adversary to disable the physical elements through cyber networks. It would be easier to attack the asset by the purely physical path than to introduce the added complexity and uncertainty of a cyber-attack.
Based on the result, it can be concluded that the security assessment was conducted successfully. The com- bination of adversary scenario, if it is developed using real data of the operational nuclear facility, physical security analysis using statistical data probability, and security system effectiveness analysis of both physical and compu- ter system will give a comprehensive analysis procedure of security system in the facility.
These methods were able to assess a variety of security system characteristics to determine whether reasonable security decisions could be made based on their results. Further, this security assessment method will be useful as base guidelines for nuclear regulatory body and licensee for the application and evaluation of PPS and provision of countermeasure strategies not only in RSG GAS but also in other nuclear facilities.
Since nuclear security responsibility lies with the state’s government, computer security policy should be estab- lished by the government. Correspondingly, all nuclear facilities should therefore have a computer security policy which is endorsed and enforced by the site’s most senior
manager. The policy should specify the overall computer security goals at the facility. A computer security policy should be part of the overall site security policy and should be negotiated and coordinated with other relevant security responsibilities.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the Ministry of Research and Technology (KEMENRISTEK) of Indonesia for grant- ing a PhD scholarship through its Research and Innovation in Science and Technology Project (RISET-Pro No. 8245 ID) Program.
