<title>Fabrication of ZrN Barrier Coatings for U-Mo Microspheres Via Fluidized Bed Chemical Vapor Deposition Using a Metalorganic Precursor</title>
<author>L. Sudderth, D. Perez-Nunez, D. Keiser & S. McDeavitt</author>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Technology</Journal>
<Affiliation>a.Idaho National Laboratory, 1955 N. Fremont Avenue, Idaho Falls, Idaho 83415
b.Texas A&M University, Department of Nuclear Engineering, College Station, Texas 77840</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>ANS</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00295450.2017.1420336</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1080/00295450.2017.1420336</URL>
Abstract — A fluidized bed chemical vapor deposition (FB-CVD) system with an inverted reactor was used to develop barrier coatings of zirconium nitride on the surface of U 8 wt% Mo microspheres in order to examine the resulting coating structure and composition, as well as to evaluate the effects of certain process parameters on the coating properties. The process utilized the metal-organic precursor tetrakis(dimethylamino)zirconium heated to 51°C ± 2°C. Time-dependent studies analyzed the coating produced after 2 to 8 days of operation at 100 mL/min precursor carrier flow rate and 500 mL/min fluidization flow rate. Flow-rate–dependent studies produced coated samples using a total flow rate of 600 mL/min, with the precursor carrier flow rate ranging from 100 to 300 mL/min and the fluidization flow rate adjusted accordingly. Ultrahigh-purity argon was used for the precursor carrier and fluidization gas. The CVD reaction was carried out at 280°C ± 10°C with precursor transport tubes heated to 60°C to 75°C. The zirconium-based coatings were manufactured up to
2.2 ± 0.3 µm thick after 2 days of deposition. The estimated coating thickness was not significantly impacted by extending the duration of the deposition process or increasing the precursor carrier gas flow rate. Imaging of the microsphere cross sections provided evidence of uranium oxide, zirconium oxide, and zirconium nitride layers formed within the coating, with nitrogen content becoming more dominant farther from the bulk U-Mo surface. Certain modifications to the process would improve the results, including installing the system inside an inert atmosphere to limit oxygen contamination and higher resolution analyses to better determine coating structure, and finally, performance of a kinetic study of the coating process, particularly over the first 24 h in which the majority of the deposition was suspected to have occurred by enabling partial powder removal during FB-CVD operation to analyze samples from different points within a single experiment.
Keywords — FB-CVD, ZrN coatings, uranium-molybdenum particles.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) created the Material Management and Minimization Program, pre- viously called the Reduced Enrichment for  Research  and Reactor Program, in 1978 with the purpose of removing the need for the use of highly enriched ura- nium (HEU) in civilian applications by developing technology to convert the reactor fuels from HEU to low-enriched uranium.1 Conversion to higher-power density reactors requires higher uranium densities than currently developed fuels. A fuel plate consisting of a uranium-molybdenum (U-Mo) alloy dispersed in an aluminum matrix has been under development to meet these requirements.
Tests at the Advanced Test Reactor (ATR) at Idaho National Laboratory (INL) showed that U-Mo/Al dis-persion fuels with 6 to 10 wt% Mo exhibited lowswelling and stable irradiation behavior with loadings up to 8 gU/cm3 (Refs. 2 through 6). Further tests at the BR2 reactor at the Belgian Nuclear Research Centre demon- strated that the swelling in the U-Mo alloys under irra- diation was largely due to U-Mo/Al interdiffusion and  the interaction layer weakening the cohesion of the fuel meat, resulting in thermal-mechanical stresses.3,7,8 One proposed solution to mitigate the interaction of the fuel material with the aluminum matrix is to create a ZrN diffusion barrier coating on the surfaces of U-Mo microspheres.9
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) has been stu- died as a candidate process to create ZrN coatings on U-Mo powders.10 Achieving a uniform coating across U-xMo microspheres requires that the precursor  gas has sufficient interaction with the entire surface of  each particle. This may be accomplished using flui- dized bed chemical vapor deposition11 (FB-CVD). A common method for producing ZrN  via  CVD  utilizes a zirconium tetrachloride precursor with a N2/H2 mix- ture at a reaction temperature of 1170°C  (Ref.  12).  The high-temperature requirement makes this method incompatible with thermally sensitive  substrates.13 The major issue with this process on uranium sub- strates is the corrosion of uranium metal. The metal halide reacts with uranium metal to produce uranium chloride starting at temperatures lower than the deposition reaction temperature.14
Metal-organic (MO) compounds exhibit a low binding energy, allowing thermal decomposition and deposition to occur at relatively low temperatures.15
Various MO precursors have been  demonstrated  to create ZrN films, including Zr[N(CH3)2]4 (TDMAZ) (Refs. 13,16,17, and 18).  TDMAZ  was chosen for use  in the FB-CVD system due to its low decomposition temperature.10,17 An inverted FB-CVD reactor was developed to minimize material loss, demonstrating effective fluidization.10 This lab-scale system produced thin zirconium-based coatings at a substrate tempera-  ture of 280°C.
II.MATERIALS AND METHODS
II.A.FB-CVD System Setup
The experiments were conducted inside an open-air chemical fume hood. The reaction vessel and bubbler were  separately  loaded  with  U-8Mo  microspheres   (60-  to   125-µm   diameter)   and   TDMAZ   crystals   (≥ 99.99%), respectively, inside of an inert argon atmo- sphere glove box to minimize exposure to oxygen and moisture. The system configuration was established with flow patterns according  to  the  schematic  shown  in  Fig. 1. Ultrahigh purity argon gas (99.999%) was passed through an oxygen trap to remove oxygen and moisture from the sources gas and was then split into two flow directions, each equipped with a mass flow controller. The precursor carrier gas transported the vapor precursor from the bubbler to the reaction vessel. The fluidization gas was used to purge the reaction vessel  and fluidize  the particles.
Fig. 1.  Schematic of experimental setup and flow paths.
Previous work described separately by Kim et al.16 and Arrieta et al.19 demonstrates production of thin films containing ZrN using TDMAZ when the precur- sor container was heated  to  approximately 50°C (Refs. 10 and 16). These conditions were reproduced using a Swagelok stainless steel sample cylinder heated to 51°C ±  2°C by  heating tape and insulation, as shown in Fig. 2, to contain and heat the solid precursor. The transport tubes were wrapped with silicon heater tape to preheat the argon gas and pre- vent precursor condensation during transport. The temperature of the heater tapes was controlled by variable autotransformers and monitored by external Type K thermocouples.
The reaction vessel consisted of an aluminum housing connecting the stainless steel  inlet/outlet  tub- ing to the Pyrex®  reaction  chamber,  as  depicted  in  Fig. 2. The particle bed  was  heated to 280°C  ±  10°C  by placing the glass tube inside a movable aluminum annulus heated externally with high-temperature fiber- glass heater tape and monitored by internal and exter-   nal Type K thermocouples. The movable heater and Pyrex tube allowed for visual observation of the flui- dization of the particle bed and coating development along the glass walls.  The reaction vessel exhausted to    a particle trap consisting of a 500-mL  filtering  flask  with a rubber stopper connected by a polytetrafluor- oethylene hose to contain any material that was over- fluidized and blown out of the reaction vessel. A rotary vane vacuum pump was  attached to the filtering flask    to facilitate particle fluidization in the reaction vessel.
Fig. 2. (a) Precursor bubbler, and (b) inverted FB-CVD reaction vessel.
II.B.Procedure and Conditions
The reaction vessel was loaded with U-8Mo (10 g) inside the glove box. Once filled, the vessel was sealed and removed from the glove box and transferred to a chemical hood. The vessel was immediately  connected  to the fluidization flow line and particle trap and evacu- ated to remove air and moisture from the system. The vacuum pressure in the system was monitored by a dial gauge to provide indication of the presence of large leaks in the system. The fluidization Ar flow was then slowly opened at a flow rate of 0.3 L/min and ramped up until fluidization was observed at 0.5 L/min. The system was then maintained just below atmospheric pressure in an attempt to further facilitate fluidization and precursor transport. Power was applied to the vessel furnace to begin heating to 280ºC ± 10ºC.
TDMAZ crystals were stored in a refrigerator at 2°C to 8°C in a container sealed under argon. The precursor was placed into the bubbler inside the glove box to prevent exposure to air. Once filled, the bubbler was sealed and removed from the glove box.  The  bubbler was connected to the precursor carrier gas flow line and the reaction vessel but remained isolated.
The bubbler and connecting tubes were wrapped with heater tape and heated to 51ºC ± 2ºC and 65ºC ± 5ºC, respec- tively. Once all of the desired temperatures were achieved, the remaining valves were opened such that flow was per- mitted through the bubbler and to the reaction vessel. The precursor carrier flow rate was then incrementally ramped up to 100  mL/min.  The  CVD  process  proceeded  over  2  to 8 days.
At the end of the experiment, the bubbler was isolated, and the reaction vessel remained under argon flow while cooling. The vessel was sealed under vacuum and trans- ferred to the glove box along with the bubbler. The remain- ing reaction vessel and bubbler contents were weighed and stored inside the inert atmosphere glove box.
II.C.Experimental Matrix
Preliminary tests were initially performed using con- ditions described by Arrieta et al.19 in order to demon- strate coating production on the U-Mo particle surfaces.10 These tests were performed using a reaction temperature of 280°C, a bubbler temperature of 51°C, a transport tube temperature of 75°C, and a precursor carrier gas flow rate of 95 mL/min. Once the desired results were repeatedly achieved, experiments were designed to evaluate coating capabilities and study process variables including deposi- tion time and precursor carrier gas flow rate. The
TABLE I
Experimental  Variant Conditions
conditions of the experiments are listed in Table I. Baseline experiments (B3 and B5) were performed over  2 days with an initial precursor loading of 5 g. These experiments utilized a precursor carrier flow rate and fluidization flow rate of 100 and 500 mL/min, respec- tively. The duration of the CVD process was studied by increasing the deposition time of the experiments from    2 to 6 days (T6) and 8 days (T8). Since possible decom- position of the precursor with heat over time was a con- cern, different methods of handling the additional precursor required for the longer durations were attempted in experiments T6 and  T8. In experiment  T6, 5 g of TDMAZ was initially loaded into the  bubbler. After 4 days, the bubbler was isolated, cleaned, and filled with another 5 g of the precursor. The experiment was allowed to run for another 2 days. The reaction vessel remained unchanged during this process. In experiment T8, 10 g of TDMAZ was placed in the bubbler at the beginning of the experiment and was uninterrupted for  the 8-day duration. The process flow rates were also studied by varying the precursor carrier gas flow rate from 100 to 200 mL/min (F200) and 300  mL/min  (F300) with the fluidization flow rate adjusted accord- ingly to maintain a total flow rate of 600 mL/min.
II.D.Sample Preparation and Characterization
The coated particles were ultrasonically washed in etha- nol and dried using filter paper and a filtering flask to prepare for analysis. Approximately 0.5 g of the particles from each experiment were mounted on small carbon tape stubs to analyze the sphere surfaces. Another subset from each source (~0.5 g) was set in epoxy resin to analyze a polished cross section. Samples were carbon coated prior to characteriza- tion. Analysis of the samples was performed at the Electron Probe Micro-Analyzer (EPMA, Cameca model SX50) at the Texas A&M Department of Geology and Geophysics.
Samples were qualitatively characterized by back- scattered electron (BSE) imaging, energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS), wavelength dispersive X-ray
spectroscopy (WDS), and X-ray distribution mapping with the EPMA equipped with a Princeton  Gamma-  Tech energy dispersive system and a dedicated Sun work- station using a 15-kV electron beam.
BSE imaging was performed to examine coating tex- tures of the sphere surfaces and surface layers of the polished samples, and EDS analysis was performed to examine the composition of the surface layer of various particles. Both analyses used a beam current of 3 nA. WDS was performed on the coated sphere surfaces with a 50-nA current to detect nitrogen, oxygen, and zirconium presence. Several particles in each sample were analyzed using these techniques to assess the uniformity of the coatings in the sample.
On each polished sample, a coating section was selected for a more detailed analysis. The selection was made using three criteria. First, the coating must be representative of the majority of the sample population based on the BSE and EDS analyses. Second, the observed plane  must be near  the midplane of the particle so that the observed coating  can be assumed to be representative of the true thickness.   A surface that exhibited a diameter near the upper end of the particle size range could be assumed to be near the mid- plane, as this would represent the widest part of the particle. Third, if the first two criteria were met, particles in contact were chosen as these would exhibit fewer effects of surface rounding during polishing. X-ray maps of the suspected elements present (U, Mo, Zr, N, and O) were collected at polished sphere edges using a beam current of 50 nA to determine the elements present in the surface layers.
III.RESULTS
III.A.Preliminary Results
In the preliminary tests, significant particle coatings were produced using a run time of 4 days and fluidization flow rate of 1.6 L/min.
BSE images were taken of the coated and polished sphere surfaces and compared to that of the uncoated
U-Mo, as shown in Fig. 3. X-ray maps of the edge of the surface of the polished sample were taken to determine if a
layer of ZrN was present. Figure 4 shows the X-ray maps for	nitrogen,	molybdenum,	oxygen,	uranium,	and
Fig. 3. BSE images: (a) uncoated sphere surfaces, (b) polished cross section of uncoated particle, (c) coated sphere surface, and
(d) polished cross section of coated particles.
Fig. 4. Coating composition analysis: (a) BSE image of magnified particle interface; X-ray maps for (b) uranium, (c) molybde- num, (d) nitrogen, (e) zirconium, and (f) oxygen.
zirconium at the magnified interface of two spheres shown in Fig. 3d. From these images, a U-Mo oxide layer covered by thick, mostly even coating consisting of zirconium and oxygen was observed. There also appears to be nitrogen present in the coating, but the high background signal in the high-density material makes this difficult to observe.
A quantitative analysis was performed by WDS using UO2, Mo, Zr, and BN standards. Data points were col- lected using a 5 × 5 grid with 5-µm spacing on the surface of the two spheres. The average values of the atom percentages are shown in Table II. Negligible amounts of uranium and molybdenum were detected, suggesting that the coating is thick enough to prevent detection of the bulk particle and the oxide layer, i.e., at least 1 µm thick. The amounts of zirconium atoms and nitrogen atoms present in the coating were similar. Oxygen was observed at a slightly higher  percentage. The values were similar between the two spheres, sug- gesting consistent coating across the particle surfaces. The source of high oxygen content in the coating is unknown but may be attributable to high oxygen content in the Ar line, leaks in the system, or oxygen from the U- Mo oxide layer interacting with the coating atoms.
A sample from this preliminary test was also ana-
lyzed at INL via secondary  electron  (SE)  imaging  of the interface of two polished particles. Figure 5 shows three distinct layers on the surfaces of the bulk mate-   rial. EDS was performed to determine the composition  of each layer. The fractured innermost layer was iden- tified as uranium oxide, and the porous intermediate  layer was identified as primarily zirconium oxide. The outermost layer consisted of zirconium nitride and did  not appear to contain pores or columnar grains. The apparent thickness of the U-Mo oxide layer provided further evidence of the growth of an oxide layer within the system prior to coating. The appearance of distinct zirconium oxide and zirconium nitride dominant layers also provided evidence of the formation of multiple  layers during the CVD process.
Fig. 5. Secondary electron image of particle surface layers.21
III.B.Baseline Results
The following experiments utilize U-8Mo micro- spheres produced at INL as the deposition substrate.  Prior to use in these experiments, the particles were sieved and partitioned according to diameter and stored inside a glove box. Analyses were performed on these uncoated microspheres to determine the condition of the particle surfaces. The BSE images revealed a variety of surface textures and defects, shown in Fig. 6.
The surfaces of the spheres coated in experiment B3 are shown in the BSE images in Fig. 7. Upon comparison to the surface and texture of the  uncoated  spheres  in Fig. 6, the spheres from the baseline experiments appeared fully coated, and the surface texture was con- sistent among most of the population, indicating complete fluidization of the particle bed. The coating content was also consistent, observed by the similar EDS spectra of different particles in Fig. 8.
A magnified image of the interface between two spheres from Fig. 7, shown in Fig. 9, revealed an appar- ent coating on the surface of the bulk material. X-ray maps of expected elements confirmed that this layer was
TABLE II
Quantitative WDS Analysis of Coated Particle Surfaces
Fig. 6.  BSE images of uncoated sample: (a) microsphere surface and (b) polished microsphere cross sections.
Fig. 7.  BSE images of B3 coated microspheres: (a) microsphere surface and (b) polished microsphere cross sections.
Fig. 8.  EDS spectra of B3 coated microsphere surfaces.
a zirconium-based coating rather than rounding effects of polishing. Nitrogen was not observed in the coating using this technique, but a low concentration may be hidden by high noise from the dense bulk material. Oxygen was present throughout the coating. However,  the  oxide  layer appeared thicker than the zirconium coating,
suggesting the development of a U-Mo oxide layer prior to coating deposition. The thickness of the coating was measured using the zirconium X-ray map shown in Fig. 9 and comparing it to the length of the shown scale bar. The thickness of the zirconium layer was measured at 15 points across the surfaces of both spheres, resulting in   an average thickness measurement of 2.1 ± 0.5 µm.
III.C.Duration Dependence Study
The surfaces of the coated spheres and polished cross sections produced in experiments T6 and T8 were exam- ined by BSE as shown in Fig. 10. The two experiments produced varied surface textures but similar coatings around the cross sections. The dark rings around the surface of the sphere in the BSE images were suspected to be the zirconium-based coating, which was confirmed using X-ray mapping of the interface, shown for T8 particles in Fig. 11. The thicknesses of  the  coatings  were estimated by measuring the width of the zirconium
Fig. 9. Coating composition analysis: (a) BSE image of magnified particle interface; X-ray maps for (b) uranium, (c) molybde- num, (d) oxygen, (e) zirconium, and (f) nitrogen.
Fig. 10. BSE images of (a) T6 coated sphere surfaces, (b) polished cross section of T6 coated particle, (c) T8 coated sphere surface, and (d) polished cross section of T8 coated particles.
layer shown in the X-ray map across 15 sections and comparing it to the length of  the  corresponding  scale bar. Assuming that the coatings span the entire measured region as the image suggests, the average coating thick- ness was determined to be 2.4 ± 0.4 µm.
An increase in the nitrogen  signal  along  the edge of the sphere, shown in Fig. 11f, may represent higher nitrogen content in the coating. However, due to round- ing effects from polishing and the angle of the spectro- meter, further analysis was required to examine the nitrogen content. Qualitative WDS scans were  col-  lected on the coated sphere surfaces. While the zirco- nium signals were similar in all four experiments, the nitrogen and oxygen signals  varied  significantly  in  each of the experiments, as shown in Figs. 12 and 13, respectively. Both elements experienced a distinct increase from uncoated material, showing that both elements are present in the coating.
The conditions, estimated coating thickness, and coating composition for the experiments in the deposi- tion rate study are described in Table III. The peak signals described in Table III are  approximated  from  the qualitative WDS measurement described in Figs. 12 and 13 for comparison of the relative, not absolute, composition.  Although  a  trend  in  the  composition with the process duration or  coating  thickness  could  not be determined, the coatings with lower oxygen signals presented higher nitrogen signals,  and  vice versa.
III.D.Flow Rate Dependence Study
The coated microsphere surfaces and polished cross sections were examined using BSE imaging, shown for F200 in Fig. 14. The surface texture appeared consistent across the populations. The polished sphere cross sections revealed coatings with smooth surfaces and consistent thickness throughout the sample.
The surfaces of spheres were examined by X-ray maps of the polished cross sections, shown in Fig. 15. Nitrogen was observed in the outer regions of the coatings on both particle surfaces. The oxygen-rich layer appeared through- out the coating but appears at higher intensity in areas near the bulk material surface. The thickness of the coatings was estimated using the scale of the X-ray map. Measurements were made across the length of 15 normal lines correspond- ing to the thickness of the zirconium layers on the two particles. The resulting average thickness was determined to be 2.2 ± 0.3 µm.
Qualitative WDS scans were collected  on  the  coated sphere surfaces. Once again, the zirconium sig- nals were similar in these four experiments, and the nitrogen and oxygen signals varied significantly. The nitrogen and oxygen signals from each of the experi- ments are shown in Figs. 16 and 17, respectively. The nitrogen and oxygen content again appear to be indir- ectly related. Experiment F300 was observed as an  outlier as both large oxygen and nitrogen peaks were observed. This could be caused by the partial coating
Fig. 11. Coating composition analysis of T8 coatings: (a) BSE image of magnified particle interface; X-ray maps for (b) uranium,
(c) molybdenum, (d) oxygen, (e) zirconium, and (f) nitrogen.
Fig. 12. WDS peak analysis for nitrogen on particle surfaces.
Fig. 13. WDS peak analysis for oxygen on particle surfaces.
causing larger amounts of oxygen to be detected from    an underlying oxide layer.
The experimental conditions, estimated coating thicknesses, and coating composition for the experi- ments in the flow rate study are presented in Table IV. The peak signals described in Table IV are approxi- mated from the qualitative WDS measurement described in Figs. 16 and 17 for comparison of the relative, not absolute, composition.
IV.DISCUSSION
The deposition time allotted for each experiment did not appear to have a distinct impact on the coating thick- ness. Although longer operation times may have a small effect on the coating produced, the various durations tested did not produce a significantly different coating thickness within the error of the measurement technique. This suggests that the overall deposition time is not the dominant factor affecting coating deposition and corre- sponding thickness. Since the thickness of the coatings was similar in each experiment despite extended duration times, it was suspected that the majority of the coating occurred near the beginning of the experiment. This was also evident from the development of the dark coating on the reaction vessel that was observed to develop within the first 24 h of the CVD process.
The precursor carrier gas flow rate also did not notably exhibit a direct relation with the coating thickness. However, the coatings produced in experiment F200 were the most consistent and even across the surface, suggesting that this may be the most favorable combination of flow rates of those examined. Additional tests would be necessary to confirm these results and to identify the optimum flow rates.
The lab-scale FB-CVD inverted reactor showed the capability to consistently produce coatings of 1 to 2 µm thick within 2 days of deposition at a low reaction tem- perature of 280°C. Zirconium was the most identifiable element observed that was unique to the coating. Therefore, the coating was identified in each experiment using the EDS and WDS measurements of zirconium, and the thickness of the coating was examined using X-ray mapping of zirconium. Oxygen and nitrogen also appeared present in the coatings. Nitrogen was often challenging to detect due to characteristics of the measurement techni- ques, and oxygen was observed at higher intensities. However,  in  the  quantitative  analysis  discussed   in Sec. III.A, nitrogen was detected at a significant quantity, approximately 30 at. %, within the coating.
TABLE III
Summary of Experiments in the Time-Varying Study
Fig. 14.  BSE images of F200 coated surfaces: (a) microsphere surface and (b) polished microsphere cross sections.
Fig. 15. Coating composition analysis of F200 coatings: (a) BSE image of magnified particle interface; X-ray maps for (b) uranium, (c) molybdenum, (d) oxygen, (e) zirconium, and (f) nitrogen.
Fig. 16. WDS peak analysis for nitrogen on particle surfaces.
Fig. 17. WDS peak analysis for oxygen on particle surfaces.
TABLE IV
Summary of Experiments on the Flow Rate Study
Since zirconium has a high affinity for oxygen, oxygen impurities were expected in the coating even in a vacuum environment.20 It was observed from qualitative WDS data that the detected oxygen content and nitrogen content are indirectly related, suggesting competing deposition pro- cesses. Although the resolution of the analytical equipment used for the majority of the analyses was too low to evaluate the structure of the coatings, the formation of multiple layers was evident in the high-resolution SE image of the coatings produced in the preliminary tests (Fig. 6), with oxygen deposition appearing more favorable near the bulk material. The oxygen content within the coatings appeared to vary significantly between experiments and seemed uncor- related to coating thickness. This indicates that either ran- dom errors or unpredicted phenomena in the system setup and operation exist in the process that makes it difficult to evaluate the development of layers and changes in deposi-
tion rates over different periods of the experiment.
V.CONCLUSIONS
The duration of the CVD process was studied by varying the deposition time of the experiments from 2    to 6 to 8 days. The process flow rates were also studied by varying the precursor carrier gas flow rate from 100 to
200 to 300 mL/min, with the fluidization flow rate adjusted accordingly to maintain a total  flow  rate  of 600 mL/min. Trends corresponding to coating thickness with allotted deposition time and precursor carrier flow rate were not observed from the results presented  in Secs. III.C and III.D. The test-to-test variations of the system made it challenging to identify the factors deter- mining the deposition rate.
Coatings of zirconium, nitrogen, and oxygen 1  to  2 µm thick were consistently produced within 2  days  of operation and did not measurably continue to grow with longer durations. The  results continued to show  an indirect relationship between nitrogen and oxygen content in the coatings. High-resolution analyses
provided evidence that the zirconium-based coatings exhibited higher oxygen content in the inner region of the coating and higher nitrogen content in the outer regions, representing the development of oxide- and nitride-dominant layers within the coating.
The following modifications could be implemented to improve coating capabilities and better study the deposition process. The FB-CVD system should be installed inside an inert atmosphere glove box to minimize the oxygen con- tamination resulting from leaks into the system and air- exposed powder transfer steps. Performing the analyses using equipment with higher resolution and carbon detec- tion capabilities would better identify impurities in the coating and the composition of layers that may develop. Enabling partial powder removal during FB-CVD opera- tion would allow samples to be analyzed from different points within a single experiment. This would also enable a kinetic study of the coating process, particularly over the first 24 h in which the majority of the deposition was suspected to have occurred.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the DOE, Office of Nuclear Materials Threat Reduction (NA-212), National Nuclear Security Administration, under DOE-NE Idaho Operations Office contract DE-AC07-05ID14517. This manuscript was authored by a contractor for the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the U.S. Government retains a nonexclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, worldwide license to pub- lish or reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for U.S. Government purposes.
