<title>SOFTWARE PACKAGES FOR TECHNICAL AND ECONOMIC MODELING OF NUCLEAR-ENERGY SYSTEMS: STATUS AND DEVELOPMENT PROSPECTS</title>
<Affiliation>1.Obninsk Institute of Nuclear Power Engineering, National Research Nuclear University MEPhI, Obninsk, Russia.
2.National Research Center Kurchatov Institute, Moscow, Russia.
3.Russian Federal Nuclear Center – Zababakhin All-Russia Research Institute of Technical Physics (VNIITF), Snezhinsk, Chelyabinsk Oblast, Russia.
4.Rosatom State Corporation, Moscow, Russia; e-mail: pboptitsyn@rosatom.ru.
5.Dollezhal Research and Development Institute of Power Engineering (NIKIET), Moscow, Russia. 6.Proryv JSC, Moscow, Russia.
7.Concern Rosenergoatom, Moscow, Russia.</Affiliation>
<author>A. A. Andrianov,A. V. Gurin, E. V. Rodionova, N. D. Dyrda,I. R. Makeeva, S. A. Kvyatkovskii,P. B. Ptitsyn, N. A. Molokanov,E. V.  Murav’ev, and P. S. Teplov</author>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>ATOMIC ENERGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Springer</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI> 10.1007/s10512-020-00702-7</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1007/s10512-020-00702-7</URL>
Abstarct
The results of an analysis of the status and prospects for the development of software used in technical and economic modeling of nuclear-energy systems in systems-analytical and predictive studies of the validation of the prospects for nuclear energy are reported. A classification of the deployed software is given and the IT-particulars of such software are discussed. Actual problems and promising directions for improving the software used in technical and economic modeling of nuclear-energy systems are designated. This article is based on the proceedings of the industry seminar “Technical and economic modeling of multicomponent nuclear-energy systems” held in Moscow on February 13, 2020.
The computational and analytical tools used in technical and economic modeling, analysis, and assessment of nucle- ar energy systems and nuclear facilities are intended for validation of the directions of strategic development of the industry, comprehensive assessment, comparing and choosing promising nuclear energy and fuel cycle technologies for deployment in the future, and information-analytical support for experts’ analyses and selection of new products and services for the internal and external markets. The collection of tools is based on methods of mathematical modeling and systems analysis and takes into account the technical and economics features of the industry.
The changes in the economic situation, technical limitations, and external political conditions under which the nuclear industry will have to advance are accompanied by the expansion of requirements, factors, benchmarks, and efficiency metrics, which must be quantitatively evaluated and taken into consideration in analytical studies, including within the framework of strategic and business planning. Expanding in parallel with this are the possibilities presented by modern information technol- ogies and digital platforms, tools for working with large volumes of data, information processing, analysis, and visualization technologies, which it is necessary to use in developing modern software tools for scenario-dynamic analysis and support for making decisions in the nuclear industry. The noted circumstances indicate a need to improve existing and develop new com- putational-analytic means of technical and economic modeling and complex assessment of nuclear energy systems for use in purposeful practical applications in providing analytic support of the implementation of key programs in the industry.
In the present article, which is based on the industry seminar “Technical and economic modeling of multicomponent nuclear energy systems” held in Moscow on February 13, 2020, we analyze the status and prospects for the development of software used in systems-analytical and forecasting studies in the validation of the prospects for nuclear technologies.
Retrospective analysis of work on technical and economic modeling of nuclear energy systems. A large quantity of software intended for solving problems that arose as the nuclear science and nuclear industry came into being has been developed over the more than half-century history of this subject area. So, a significant number of optimization models of the advancing nuclear energy industry was developed in 1970–1980s [1–3]. The problems posed in that period of time by developers of systems models and the limited possibilities of computational technology required a simplified description of the technological features of the change-overs in the nuclear fuel cycle. The main problem under study was supplying fuel to the future national nuclear energy industry: the emphasis was on a search for structures that would provide either maximum economy of natural uranium or minimum monetary cost under conditions with limited reserves of natural uranium. At the same time, the NFC was not modeled in detail; the examination of problems such as management of spent nuclear fuel and radioactive wastes, the ecological effect of nuclear technologies on the surrounding environment, the economic risks, risks of unauthorized proliferation of nuclear materials and technologies and so forth, which are actual at the present time, were not systematic in character and were discussed only in individual publications.
New software for technical and economic modeling of nuclear energy systems appeared in the 2000s on the interna- tional and national levels [4–7]. The simulation approach to modeling is widely used. In the general ideology of this stage of development of world nuclear energy industry, called the “renaissance of nuclear energy,” the ultimate objective of the studies was seen in the presentation of comprehensive, transparent, reproducible, and verifiable information and data characterizing the efficiency of nuclear energy in terms of key aspects of stable development: for experts, interested parties, and members of the public. At this stage, the software developed and was perfected within the scope of national and international initiatives and projects in the following directions: detailing of the description of the technological processes of NFC objects and stages, structure and organization of the fuel cycle, especially in the final part, increase in the forecasting period to 100 years or more, calculation of economic, environmental, and socio-political metrics of efficiency taking into account regional factors of NFC organization, and multi-factor assessment of variants of development. Nevertheless, the studies that can be carried out using this software were of an academic character and did not form a base for real control decisions.
Currently, technical and economic modeling is trending toward analytical approaches, which are used in strategic management and business planning. In this paradigm, the scenario-dynamic analysis is used to assess the data on the evolution of the structure of the reactor stock, material flows in the fuel cycle, and key efficiency metrics. These data are presented in the form of info panels, which are convenient for business planning and comprehension by responsible individuals and there- by become the base for real management decisions. Accordingly, working groups at the national and international levels are developing new software packages that enable computational validation of nuclear energy of the future, improved methods of calculating technological processes at the stages of the fuel cycle in order to optimize the characteristics, as well as approaches to validation of competitiveness, safety, and environmental acceptability.
Almost all current scenario-dynamic models of the development of nuclear energy call for a detailed description of the basic stages of the open and closed NFC, promising nuclear energy facilities and fuel cycle technologies are examined, the possibilities of giving a detailed description of the external environments of the national and nuclear energy systems and the interrelation between them are realized [8–15]. Hybrid simulation optimization and alternative approaches to modeling are widely used.
Nuclear technologies under new conditions of development pose for software developers the problem of creating tools that could be used to search for the most acceptable solutions from the standpoint of not only conventional economic criteria but also efficiency metrics characterizing, in addition, environmental and socio-political factors.
Nevertheless, in spite of the obvious successes, it must be acknowledged that there are problems in the field of tech- nical and economic modeling, analysis and complex assessment of nuclear energy systems. They include the absence of uniformity in the description of many heterogeneous objects and technologies, which makes it impossible to unify and inte- grate particular technological models into one system. Ordinarily, groups of experts specializing in technical and economic modeling are uncoordinated and do not interact with one another, while the groups themselves are created in the presence of leaders who, as a rule, are pursuing different strategic objectives. For most local computing tools there is a lack of generally accessible mathematical descriptions and instructions for users, the employed computational algorithms and initial data are not transparent, and there is also an alienation from the developers – the developer is the main user of the program. These
TABLE 1. Classification of Technical and Economic Modeling Software
problems are not characteristic and specific exclusively to modern software. On the contrary they were inherited from previ- ous stages, where they were expressed to a significantly higher degree.
Classification of software for technical and economic modeling, analysis and comprehensive assessment of nuclear energy systems. Software is conventionally classified in accordance with the approaches used for modeling complex systems: analytical, simulation, and optimization (see Table 1). Analytical also included simplified approaches, presuming the use of programs for working with electronic tables Microsoft Excel without using macro commands and extensions based on the VBA programming language. Taking into account the growing use of alternative (systems-dynamics, discrete-event mod- elling, neural nets, and others) and combined simulation optimization approaches, probably, in the near future the methods of classification of systems-dynamic models of the developing nuclear energy system will be expanded.
We can see in Table 1 that most software is based on the simulation approach; there are two optimization programs and two more analytical (simplified) programs. It should be noted that the USM-1 tool is presented in two sections of the ta- ble: simulation and optimization. This is because an optimization model can be built on its basis (the dimension of the
problem is determined by the possibilities of the optimizer built into the Microsoft Excel electronic tables). However, in con- trast to MESSAGE, the optimization functional is supplementary more than basic.
In technical and economic modeling developers often use the Microsoft Excel program as a platform for developing analytical tools in this field, to create both simplified, for example, Strategiya-2018, ROADMAPS-ET, as well as more com- plex computational tools – TEM YaTTs, TEM YaES, USM-1.
In spite of the difference of the employed approaches to modeling and concrete computational techniques, a charac- teristic feature of modern systems-dynamic models is the presence of the following basic blocks in their structure:
–block describing the demand for a definite collection of energy products, as well as obligations in building NPP in foreign countries and in providing NFC products and services for export;
–block describing the composition of the nuclear energy system, including the structure and organization of the connected NFC taking into account the resource and infrastructure limitations;
–block for setting the parameters of reactor facilities, including assuming the setting of data required for modeling the nuclide kinetics in reactors and at the external stage of the fuel cycle;
–block responsible for the assessment of the metrics of efficiency of a variant of nuclear energy system, including economic metrics, resource utilization metrics, environmental impacts of a system, efficiency and managing spent nuclear Fuel, radwaste, and others.
Some tools include the geographic position of NFC enterprises and power reactors, and transport flows between objects are modeled. At the same time, the approximations used in the description of the nuclear energy system are different in different programs.
IT-features of the software for technical and economic modeling, analysis, and comprehensive assessment of nuclear energy systems. As a rule, the software is created by small groups of qualified specialists and usually used by the same experts. Cases where the developer of a program is only a single person are not rare. In most cases each such specialist is knowledgeable in the fields of nuclear engineering, industry economics, energy planning, and programming. The exceptions are specially developed commercial multifunctional software packages – modeling platforms – intended for solving diverse problems in technical and economic modeling and the analysis and comprehensive assessment of nuclear energy systems.
Most software is characteristically monolithic, closed, tied to a single platform, from which it is difficult to transfer to other platforms and operational systems, significant changes are expensive to make, and support provided by the developer is needed. At present, the software used for scientific purposes must meet the following requirements: flexibility, expand- ability, and transferability. This is understood to mean that programs must be modifiable, must allow the adoption of new mathematical methods of extending functionality, must be adaptable to possible changes in the object of research, and allow for new information technologies.
There are grounds for assuming that some software can be modified and adapted to new conditions. Nevertheless it must be acknowledged that most programs will be used in the form in which they exist, in view of the significant financial, organization, and technical difficulties arising in any attempt to replace/transfer them to new platforms.
It should be noted that the considered software takes into account the fundamental change, occurring in past decades, in the technology of the development of software for a scientific technical applications: instead of the structural paradigm of programming the developers began to use an object-oriented paradigm – most software is created on the basis of compara- tively new programming languages: Python, Java, C#, and others. In some software, presentation-level languages are also used (HTML, XML, JavaScript, JSP, ASP, .NET framework), structured query language SQL and specialized SUBD technol-
ogy for creating distributed object systems, which make it possible to combine different levels into a single system (CORBA,
RMI, DCOM, COM+, and .NET). There is a tendency to gradually transition to distributed object applications: rejection of an integral architecture in favor of a two-level architecture (client–server) and a distributed multi-level architecture. The appear- ance of such trends is natural and is due to the wide use and development of the web ideology. The systematic realization of this concept makes it possible to greatly increase the lifetime, expand the number of users, and facilitate commercialization of applied software.
Directions of improvement of software for technical and economic modeling of nuclear energy systems. We shall present some actual directions of improvement in technical and economic modeling software.
System of mutually consistent technological models of NFC stages. Currently, there exist in the industry many local technological and economic models of miscellaneous objects and technologies, which are being developed independently by different groups of specialists. Each model describes the studied object with a degree of detail that makes it possible to take account of the operational features of the corresponding facilities or enterprises. Ultimately, the objects are components of the national nuclear energy system. It would be natural to combine the models in order to create based on them a single industry technical and economic model in accordance with the bottom-up concept of the design of the software. At the same time, such integration of particular technological and economic models may turn out to be unfeasible because of the heterogeneity of the objects of modeling and inconsistency between formats of the input and output data.
In this connection, it is actual to perform preliminary development work on the concept of a through industry system of codes for technical and economic validation of objects using nuclear energy at different levels (NFC stages, NPP models, models of markets), where the requirements are formulated for local technological and economic models of facilities or enter- prises. Moreover, it is necessary to develop a through system of test problems for validation and verification of technical and economic modeling software. Being prepared in a systematic manner, such a concept in the top-to-bottom logic could become a platform for creating local mutually consistent computational tools, for example, by means of additional development of ex- isting software in correspondence with the formulated requirements, which would make their subsequent integration possible. Sensitivity/uncertainty analysis, risk assessment. Since different uncertainties associated with the technical and eco-
nomic data modeling the energy and fuel-cycle technologies and scenario assumptions are unavoidable in all systems-dy- namic models, the software must provide the possibility of analyzing sensitivity/uncertainty with respect to all such factors. Sensitivity analysis is performed to determine the response of the resulting functionals to a change in individual input param- eters. Analysis of uncertainty is performed in cases where it is necessary to study the impact, inherent in the entire collection of input data, on the final results. Uncertainty is indissolubly associated with risk, and the quantitative assessment of risk is important in making accurate judgments relative to the most promising variant when comparing technological options which are at different stages of readiness.
Currently, in most Russian technical and economic modeling software a corresponding functional is either absent or strongly limited. In this connection, it is important to include in the software tools for taking into account uncertainties and for assessing risks when using forecasted data on promising nuclear facilities/technologies.
Aggregation of estimates and multi-criteria analysis. An approach that presumes subsequent processing/aggregation of estimates made using systems-dynamic models, using analytic tools based on methods of multi-criteria analysis of solutions, for multi-factor comparison and ranking of variants of the unfolding nuclear energy systems, is coming into wide use. The methods of the theory of making decisions and the presence of many criteria make it possible to determine, on a systems basis, a promising alternative from a collection of possible alternatives taking into account the conflicting character of the criteria, characterizing technical metrics, demands and resources, economic metrics together with other efficiency metrics. With these methods decision-making becomes systematic, comprehensive, transparent, reproducible, and amenable to verification. The main benefit of combining experts’ assessments based on formalized mathematical methods lies in the possibility of structuring the analysis and organizing an effective experts’ analysis to reveal the most promising options or variants for taking action from among accessible actions showing the quantitative basis of the advantages and disadvantages of the compared variants. This makes it possible to present proven conclusions relative to the attractiveness of the studied options, which could be used to validate the adopted decision. Currently, when necessary, multi-criteria assessment of alternative variants of nuclear energy
systems, evaluated according to a collection of criteria using system dynamic, is performed using external specialized systems for supporting decisions. Considering the wide use of the approach to evaluating efficiency of alternative variants of nuclear energy systems based on a synthesis of systemsd-ynamic modeling and multi-criteria analysis it could be useful to include in the Russian technical and economic analysis software the tools for multi-criteria comparisons and ranking of variants.
Adoption of mechanisms of optimization and prioritization of passage through technological forks. Almost all Russian technical and economic modeling tools are simulation software programs. In spite of the obvious advantage of the simulation approach in describing a system with a high degree of detailing, the fundamental unavoidable drawback of simu- lation models is the absence of mechanisms for comparing individual variants of the development of the system and prioriti- zation of the requirements for interchangeable resources. Thus, the user must be able to make assumptions about all free
parameters of a model, including those which the user would like to determine on the basis of the results of computational modeling, for example, time intervals and scales of adoption of different energy technologies and fuel cycle technologies in the system, the structure of the loading of the fuel cycle enterprises, the sequence of the utilization of interchangeable resourc- es, reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel, and so forth.
This drawback can be compensated in part by using heuristic methods of optimization and simulation-dynamic mod- eling (systems-dynamics). A promising technique is to integrate simulation modeling with methods of studying the parameter space, which makes it possible to realize modern methods of multi-criteria optimization. It is expedient to include in the tech- nical and economic modeling software optimization computational mechanisms and mechanisms regulating the priority of the passage through the technological fork, in order to create on this basis improved simulation optimization software packages. Actual problems of technical and economic modeling of nuclear energy systems. Currently, diverse methodologi-
cal approaches to technical and economic modeling are being used, and different tools are created based on them and deployed. However, remaining open are questions of verification/validation, expropriation, extension, imparting of greater flexibility and functionality to the national software or technical and economic modeling and the associated databases. At the same time, there is isolation of the developers and users of the software and the absence of systematic interaction and coordination between them, which, undoubtedly, holds back further development of software of this kind. The extant situation is not acceptable under conditions of increasing significance of systems-analytic and forecasting research. In this connection the following directions of activation of interaction between developers and users of the technical and economic modeling software are actual:
1.Exchange of experience in developing and using technical and economic modeling software for nuclear energy systems. Exchange of development experience and the use of software is actual; it can be accomplished by taking measures in the format of industry seminars on a regular basis for information exchange between developers and users of the software and/or organization of specialized sections concerning technical and economic modeling within the framework of the indus- try’s scientific technical conferences. One objective of measures of this kind should be discussion of possible formats of co- operation in the areas of development, testing, and practical application of technical and economic software.
It is also important to organize purposeful work on collection, systematization, processing, and access to publica- tions on technical and economic modeling, including for the analysis and borrowing of the best international practices. In ad- dition, it is necessary to take account of international experience in improving methodological approaches and similar tools in developing the Russian technical and economic modeling software.
2.Forming data and knowledge bases on the technical and economic parameters and scenario conditions. Recon- struction of the technical and economic models of nuclear energy systems and collection of the data for them can be distributed between different specialists and organizations, which is an efficient solution to the problem of limited financial resources pro- vided for industry systems studies. Experience in preparing Strategiya-2028 showed the expediency of this approach: industry experts participated in the creation and verification of models – representatives of the NFC and NPP lifecycle management at the Rosatom State Corporation, Department of Strategic Management at the Rosatom Corporation, Design Office “Formation of SNF management system” at the Rosatom State Corporation, Rosenergoatom , Kurchatov Institute, Innovation-Technology Center for Project Proryv (Breakthrough), VNIITF, OKB Gidropress, and OKBM Afrikantov.
In this connection, the development, tracking, revision, and renewal of databases on the technical and economic met- rics of energy and NFC technologies, as well as scenario conditions is an important and actual problem in this field. Such a database can become the basis for forming unified scenario conditions in the validation of the strategic decisions made in the industry. In addition, it is desirable that the formed databases reflect the uncertainty in each of the characteristics entered into the database, as well as the risks associated with the development and adoption of fundamentally new technologies.
3.Verification of technical and economic modeling software. The verification of software in this subject area has not been given adequate attention. The situation is exacerbated by the absence of evaluated and recommended test problems, on which such verification, in principle, is possible. Currently, examples of such verification are singular [16]. The result of this is mutual non-recognition of the results obtained in systems modeling by different groups of specialists. Ultimately, the extant situation is holding back the practical interconnection of the results of variable scenario-analytical studies on the basis of such software in solving practical problems in the realization of key industry programs. For these reasons, verification based on concrete practical problems is expedient for models of the same type.
4.The requirements of next-generation technical and economic modeling software. The absence of clearly desig- nated requirements of model assumptions and functional possibilities of technical and economic modeling software for the nuclear energy system, which make it possible to use them for comprehensive assessment of its variants, has the result that problems with similar formulation can be solved using computational tools based on assumptions which can differ substan- tially in different programs. Each tool was initially developed for specific problems and for this reason possesses definite char- acteristic features owing to the basic skills and knowledge of the developers as well as the specific activity of the organization in which the development work was performed. In using such programs to solve different problems, there arises the question of the correctness of model assumptions and the need to validate the acceptability of these assumptions for a new class of problems. This imposes the requirement that the area of application of the software with an indication of all limitations must be clearly formulated in the user’s manual. As a rule, such an analysis is not made and the corresponding validation is not presented; quantitative assessments of some efficiency metrics of the system without a clear designation of the assumptions under which they were obtained are presented as results of the studies. When the mathematical descriptions of the realized computational models are absent, the final figures obtained in this manner are no longer valuable, since the procedure used to obtain them becomes opaque and unreproducible.
Unification of model assumptions and initial data and modeling tools, developed and used by different groups of industry specialists, can help to solve the problem in part. To this end, it is necessary to develop unified industry requirements of the technical characteristics of software used for systems analysis of nuclear energy.
5.Development of next-generation technical and economic modeling software. If it is possible to develop, match, and confirm guidelines for the technical characteristics of systems modeling software in order to take them into account in the industry specialized software, then on this basis it is possible to formulate a unified industry model integrating existing decisions for long-term forecasts of the technical and economic metrics of the development of the industry.
6.Assistance in introducing the results of scenario-analytical studies to support the implementation of key industry programs. Currently, in the industry, problems where some tools of the technical and economic modeling of nuclear energy systems are used for their solution are being studied in parallel: technical and economic validation 1) of the “balanced NFC” direction, 2) VVER-S reactor technology, 3) multi-component systems with thermal and fast reactors, 4) industrial energy complex with fast reactors, 5) development of the directions “hydrogen energetic” and “small and medium-sized nuclear power plants,” 6) Rosatom’s strategy, and 7) estimation of the size of foreign markets.
This list is far from exhaustive, and the demand for high-quality analytical tools continues to grow. For this reason a specialist could contribute to the corresponding work in order to establish a relationship between the results of variable sce- nario-dynamic studies and practical problems arising in the implementation of key industry programs. Thus, it is necessary to prepare a roster and designate priority directions and key industry programs in which approved means of systems modeling as well as suggestions for supporting and possible formats of the participation of developers and users on software are in demand. Unified industry catalog of technical and economic modeling software for nuclear energy systems. The actual technical and economic modeling software, developed and used by different groups of industry specialists, including both national and international computational tools, have been catalogued and systematized at the Rosatom State Corporation [17]. The catalog contains a description of nine program complexes for a scenario-dynamic analysis and technical and economic modeling and nine descriptions of program complexes of technical life and economic evaluation of individual components and objects using nuclear energy. The catalog gives brief descriptions of the software (developer, specialization, computation- al parameters, and others) and areas of their possible application for technical and economic modeling and comprehensive
assessment of nuclear energy technologies and NFC technologies.
Conclusion. Systems investigations and technical and economic modeling of nuclear energy systems over more than half a century has been used productively by industry specialists to search for and validate ways to increase competitiveness, efficiency, safety, and ecologically acceptability of the nuclear energy technologies and objects. In the last 10 years the actu- ality of such studies has grown in view of the growth in the uncertainty in the energy sector of economics, competition on the world market for nuclear technologies as a result of the appearance of new large players, and the tendency to reject the use of nuclear technologies. Moreover, there is a systematic expansion of the spheres of application of nuclear technology and universal recognition of the key role of nuclear technologies in geopolitical interests. For this reason, the appropriate technical
and economic validation of the efficacy of the objects using nuclear energy is now more actual then at any time in the past, and the depth and quality of the validations determine not only the present but also the future of nuclear technologies.
In this connection, significant attention is being devoted to the development and enhancement of technical and econom- ic modeling software and comprehensive evaluation of nuclear energy systems, to which no alternative is seen under the extant conditions. In spite of the diversity of tools, it must be acknowledged that a demand remains in the future for their enhancement and expansion of their functionality, which will give them the possibility of remaining actual means for supporting professional discussions concerning the future of nuclear technologies. The development and improvement of software of this kind at the current stage must be conducted taking into account the current trends in information technologies, which over recent years have undergone significant changes. First and foremost, this is the transition to work in local and global networks as well as the availability of new tools and technologies that make it possible to provide software that is flexible, expandable, and transferable. The Industry Center for analytical research and development of ChU NiI is grateful to V. V. Kuznetsov and
G. A. Fesenko at INPRO/IAEA for providing the computational tools for modeling and assessment of nuclear energy systems as well as P. A. Fomichenko, V. A. Nevinitse, and E. A. Andrianova at the Kurchatov Institute for valuable comments, which made it possible to improve this article.
