<title>System assessment of an FPGA-based RPS for ABWR nuclear power plant</title>
<author>Jun-Jen Lu , Teng-Chieh Hsu , Hwai-Pwu Chou</author>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Affiliation>a.Department of Engineering and System Science, National TsingHua University, No. 101, Section 2, Kung-Fu Road, Hsinchu City, 30013, Taiwan
b.Institute of Nuclear Engineering and Science, National TsingHua University, No. 101, Section 2, Kung-Fu Road, Hsinchu City, 30013, Taiwan</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2015.05.010</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2015.05.010 </URL>
a b s t r a c t
The instrumentation and control (I&C) systems for the Lungmen nuclear power plant (LMNPP) are fully digitized based on microprocessor and software technology, and extensively utilize multiplexing net- works. That is, undetectable software faults and common cause failures due to software errors may occur, and that will defeat the redundancy of a nuclear power plant (NPP). A diverse backup implementation for the digital I&C systems is an important means to defense against undetectable software faults.
This paper presents system assessment of a quad-redundant reactor protection system (RPS) design for an Advanced Boiling Water Reactor (ABWR) by utilizing the ﬁeld programmable gate array (FPGA) technology. The FPGA-based RPS has been assessed by using a full-scope engineering simulator for the LMNPP. Accident scenarios and abnormal conditions are inserted into the engineering simulator in order to activate the function of the FPGA-based RPS. In this study, conceptual design of the proposed quad- redundant FPGA-based RPS, including preliminary hardware architecture, software design and system assessment will be presented. The results demonstrate that the FPGA-based RPS system is a practical approach to implement a diverse backup for the digital I&C system of nuclear power plant applications. Also, the sensitivity study of probabilistic risk assessment (PRA) shows that RPS combined with ARI (Alternative Rod Insertion) contributes signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the core damage frequency (CDF)
calculation of LMNPP. The PRA sensitivity study is independent of the RPS technology.
Keywords:
Field programmable gate array (FPGA) Advanced Boiling Water Reactor (ABWR) Reactor protection system (RPS) Engineering simulator
Probabilistic risk assessment (PRA)
1.Introduction
Basically, an FPGA chip is a functional programmable semi- conductor contains millions of logic gates and several speciﬁc functional modules, such as memory blocks, bus controllers, UARTs (Universal Asynchronous Receiver/Transmitter). Similar to micro- controllers, an FPGA chip starts from blank/no-function and re- quires the designer to assign a deﬁnition or function for normal operation by using some kinds of language for coding hardware descriptions, compiling, conﬁguring the chip, testing and debug- ging the functions. But unlike microcontrollers, the hardware de- scriptions of an FPGA chip are converted into physical logics and circuits. The FPGA chip functions as a piece of hardware without on- line operating system and software (software-free). Due to the high density, reliability and low nonrecurring engineering (NRE) expense, the FPGA technology has been used extensively for commercial applications over the last two decades. But until recently, there are only few applications using FPGA technology for instrumentation and control systems in nuclear power plants.
In 2002, Wolf Creek Generating Station (WCGS, USA) started modernization by using microprocessor and software technology, but faced to regulatory licensing troubles from fall 2003, and informally rejected by U.S. NRC on spring 2004. On fall 2004, WCGS restarted the modernization by using FPGA technology. On March 2009, WCGS got the regulatory license, granted by NRC to retroﬁt the main steam and feed-water isolation system (MSFIS) (U.S. NRC, 2009).
From 2008 to 2011, the Research and Production Corporation (RPC, Ukraine) used FPGA systems (called “RADIY”) to modernize 6 engineering safety feature actuation systems (ESFAS) for Bulgarian NPPs (Kozloduy-5 and Kozloduy-6) (Yastrebenetsky et al., 2009). In 2009, Toshiba had developed safety-related I&C system (Power Range Monitor) by using non-rewritable FPGA technology (Miyazaki et al., 2009). In 2009, an FPGA-based safety-relative shutdown system for CANadian Deuterium Uranium (CANDU) reactor was implemented (She and Jiang, 2009).
The LMNPP, equipped with two identical 3926MWt nuclear steam supply systems (NSSS) and 1369.5MWe turbine generators, is currently under construction by Taiwan Power Company (Tai- power) in the north of Taiwan. It is based on the ABWR type design, and I&C systems are fully digitized based on microprocessor and software technology with extensively multiplexing networks. The fully computerized I&C systems provide operators easily Human- eMachine Interface (HMI) and more ﬂexible and powerful opera- tion capabilities. The LMNPP will be in operation soon and the diversity and defense-in-depth (D3) issues for the digital I&C sys-
tems will be examined by Taipower and venders during construc- tion, acceptance test and operation licensing. The undetectable software faults and common cause failures due to software errors may occur on a fully computerized NPP, and that will defeat the redundancy of a NPP. It is worthwhile to study a diverse backup implementation for the digital I&C systems to defense against un- detectable software faults. Because FPGA-based system operates without on-line operating system and software, the software-free FPGA-based nuclear safety system is an  easily  alternative approach for the modernization of Taipower's old nuclear power plant analog systems and may reduce uncertainties and regulatory licensing efforts due to undetectable software faults. A new appli- cation of quad-redundant FPGA-based reactor protection system (RPS) design for an ABWR was proposed (Lu et al., 2010). The proposed FPGA-based RPS is assessed by using a full-scope engi- neering simulator for the LMNPP in this study.
1.1.RPS of LMNPP
The SSLC (Safety System Logic and Control) is a microprocessor- based fully digital design with extensive multiplexing network, which is the automatic protection center of the LMNPP (Taiwan Power Company, 2009). The SSLC manages operations and control logics for RPS, ESF (Engineered Safety Features), LDI (Leak Detection and Isolation) system. The RPS, LDI and NMS (Neutron Monitoring System) are designed and manufactured by GE (General Electric), and the ESF systems are supplied by DRS Technologies. That is, the inherent design and equipment diversities decrease the risk of common case failure and increase the reliability for LMNPP safety systems. The SSLC consists of four physical separated, electrically independent divisions and is operated under either one of the four modes: Shutdown Mode, Refuel Mode, Startup Mode and Run Mode. Each RPS division consists of independent channel-of-sensors, division-of-trip-logic, trip actuators and  manual  scram  controls, as shown in Fig. 1. Most of the input signals of Lungmen RPS are hard-wired to Remote Multiplexing Units (RMU), and are trans- ferred through the highly secure multiplexing ﬁber optic network system. But some of the critical signals are directly hard-wired to the individual division. There are 11 conditions (such as reactor high pressure, reactor low water level, dry-well high pressure, operator manual scram, etc.) will trigger the RPS function. The quad-redundant output control signals of the RPS and Main Steam Isolation Valves (MSIV) are directly hard-wired to the actuators.
Furthermore, some manual control inputs are provided for abnormal and emergency operation.
Each digital trip module (DTM) compares each sensor input with the pre-setting threshold, and outputs four redundant discrete (Trip/Not-Trip) signals to every individual trip logic unit (TLU) of the four RPS divisions. The TLU is a microprocessor-based 2-of-4 voting machine. There are 11 different conditions to determine the reactor trip signal in TLU. The reactor trip signal is connected to output logic unit (OLU) to drive the trip actuator unless the RPS function is manual blocked.
Each trip actuator for individual RPS division contains two physical separated, electrically independent trip actuators. Each
trip actuator is composed of several solid state LDs (Load Driver) and relays. The output of the trip actuator for each independent RPS division is connected to a 2-of-4 voting machine, whose output connects to 103 sets of HCU (Hydraulic Control Unit) in the reactor building to drive 205 control rods to scram the reactor. Only one HCU drives the central control rod, and each one of the other HCUs drives two control rods.
In the main control room (MCR), the manual scram control pro- vides two separated, independent manual scram channels: A and B. Each channel equips with a button hard-wired to the four TLUs. The two buttons shall be pushed together to manual scram the reactor.
1.2.LMNPP full-scope engineering simulator
An LMNPP full-scope engineering simulator (Lee et al., 2009) is setup based on the WSC's (Western Services Corporation) 3Key- Master simulation platform with the advanced best  estimate reactor core computer codes, TRACS-NEMO, as shown in Fig. 2. NEMO computer code is a 3-D multi-nodes kinetic model calculates the neutronics of the ABWR reactor core, and TRACS (belongs to the TRAC computer code family) is the best estimate thermal-hydraulic computer code with modular structure and ﬂexible geometry capability. The performance of LMNPP full-scope simulator has been veriﬁed by Taipower and vendors. The full-scope simulator is designed and used not only as the operators training platform, but also provided for veriﬁcation and validation of the non-safety digital systems in the Lungmen project (Lee et al., 2009).
The full-scope simulator is hosted on a 6-core computer server with Microsoft Windows operating system. The detailed and complete ABWR reactor core modeling, 105 plant systems, over 20000 sheets of control logic diagrams and over 1000 graphical monitoring/control pages (soft panels) of LMNPP are implemented. The soft panels make the LMNPP simulator easily operable and portable. Additionally, there are hundreds of pre-deﬁned normal/ abnormal initial conditions and event/accident scenarios in the simulator, which can be manually initiated by the instructor or automatically inserted by pre-deﬁned timers or plant conditions.
The 105 LMNPP plant systems (built by utilizing 3KeyMaster platform) and interface software to/from TRACS-NEMO modules execute at 8 Hz. The neutron ﬂux and hydrodynamics in the reactor core change much quicker and the time steps of TRACS-NEMO computer codes are optimized.
The full-scope simulator also contains the whole LMNPP Human Interface System (HIS), which includes operator interface for the 105 plant systems. The monitoring and control functions of the 105 plant systems can be accessed through over 1000 graphical oper- ator pages (divided into 15 groups) on LCD touch screens, called Visual Display Units (VDU). As shown in Fig. 3, there are 12 safety LCD touch screens, 33 non-safety LCD touch screens, Wide Display Panel (WDP) projected on a large screen, Shift Superior Console (SSC) and Main Control Console (MCC) in the main control room.
2.Conceptual design of FPGA system
The conceptual design of the FPGA-based RPS of LMNPP was proposed in NPIC&HMIT 2010, Las Vegas, Nevada (Lu et al., 2010). By utilizing FPGA technology to implement the RPS functions of LMNPP, this study was proceeding in the following stages:
1.Setup a full-scope engineering simulator.
2.Design the FPGA-based RPS circuits.
3.Design and setup the interface between the FPGA-based RPS circuits and engineering simulator.
4.FPGA-based RPS circuits functional validation and system assessment on the engineering simulator.
Fig. 1. Lungmen NPP reactor protection system control diagram.
5.PRA sensitivity studies.
2.1.Generic  system platform
Due to the true ﬂash-based technology, 128-bit pass key write- protection security and superior reliability, Actel's SmartFusion intel- ligent mixed signal FPGA technology is chosen to be the target FPGA platform in this study. The SmartFusion FPGA chip integrates ﬂash- based FPGA fabric (logical blocks), a 100 MHz ARM Cortex-M3 32-bit microcontroller unit (MCU), digital peripherals and programmable
analog peripherals. The SmartFusion FPGA chip is an ideal solution for a true system-on-chip (SoC) solution (Actel Corporation, 2010).
SmartFusion FPGA Chip ¼ FPGA Fabric þ 32 — bit ARM Cortex
— M3 MCU þ Digital Peripherals
þ Programmable Analog Peripherals
The programmable analog peripherals on a SmartFusion FPGA chip	include	voltage/current/temperature	monitors,  12-bit
Fig. 2. Block diagram of the Lungmen full-scope simulator server.
successive approximation (SAR) ADCs (up to 600 Ksps), Sigma- Delta DACs, up to ten high-speed comparators, up to 32 analog inputs and 3 analog outputs. The digital peripherals on a Smart- Fusion FPGA chip include bus matrix, 512 KB ﬂash and 64 KB SRAM, external memory controller, Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) and Inter-Integrated Circuit (I2C) interface, 32-bit timers, USB (Univer- sal Serial Bus) UARTs, 10/100 Ethernet MAC.
2.2.Hardware design
Common components on each RPS boards include FPGA chip, voltage regulator, capacitors, resistors, bus-drivers, NVM (Non- Volatile Memory), optical-couplers, connectors, and several other passive components to accommodate the need of ﬂexibility as well as safety measures.
The 64 KB SRAM of the FPGA chip is divided into two partitions and all are fully Readable/Writeable for FPGA logic circuit. One of the two SRAM partitions is read-only for the USB UART to transmit status for real-time monitoring and maintenance purpose of the FPGA-based RPS circuit board.
The other digital peripheral functions of the FPGA chip are reserved in this application. The ARM Cortex-M3 MCU is also reserved for future expansion purpose, which integrated with the 10/100 Ethernet MAC can be connected to LMNPP's plant computer system or the multiplexing network system for non-safety-related processes.
As shown in Fig. 4a and b, the interface between the FPGA boards and LMNPP simulator is under the control of the LMNPP simulator through USB UART interface instead of Ethernet network in proposal (Lu et al., 2010). Additional control and communication software are developed to synchronize and integrate the data to/ from USB UART with the common share memory of the plant system models in LMNPP simulator to provide a real-time, virtual close-loop test environment for functional evaluation and system assessment of the FPGA-based RPS.
2.3. Software design
The software design of this study contains FPGA site and simulator site. The hardware descriptions on FPGA site implement hardware circuits and logics of the FPGA chip, and the software (Additional Share Memory & Control Module) added into the simulator communicates and synchronizes the data to/from bi- directional USB UART with the common share memory of plant system models.
The LMNPP simulator is running at 8 Hz, and the additional share memory & control module is triggered by the real-time ex- ecutive of the 3KeyMaster simulation platform every time step. The additional share memory & control module transmits data to and trigger hardware logics on FPGA boards through USB UART. The ﬁnal results of FPGA outputs are transmitted back to the additional share memory & control module through USB UART.
2.3.1.FPGA software design
As shown in Fig. 5a, the FPGA hardware logics are divided into DTM, TLU, OLU logics and other supporting logics. On each FPGA circuit board, the DTM, TLU and OLU logics associated with the safety signal path contain two sets of diverse logics. The two diverse logics are implemented by using two different hardware descrip- tion language (Verilog and VHDL), and/or one of the two logics is designed by using graphical schematic capture. Different output results of the two diverse logics on any FPGA circuit make that circuit board to be a failed one. All these design methods are fully supported by an Actel's FPGA integrated development tool called “Libero”. The hardware descriptions of FPGA-based RPS are
Fig. 3. Lungmen full-scope simulator layout & Human System Interface.
Fig. 4. a) Evaluation and assessment architecture of FPGA-based RPS (hardware), b) Evaluation and assessment architecture of FPGA-based RPS (software).
converted into physical logics and circuits. The conﬁgured FPGA- based RPS circuit functions as a piece  of  hardware without on- line operating system and software.
Each DTM compares each one of the 11 different plant condi- tions sensor input with the pre-setting threshold, and outputs four redundant discrete (Trip/Not-Trip) signals to every individual TLU of the four RPS divisions, as shown in Fig. 1. There are 11 2-of-4 voting machines in each TLU to determine the reactor trip signal based on the 11 different Trip/Not-Trip conditions from the four DTMs. The reactor trip signal is connected to OLUs to drive the trip actuators of RPS and MSIV unless the RPS function is manual blocked. The outputs of each OLU are transmitted back to LMNPP simulator to drive software simulated 2-of-4 voting LD solenoids, which actuate the software simulated MSIV valves and 103 sets of software simulated HCU to drive the 205 control rods to scram the reactor in simulator server.
2.3.2.Data ﬂow of FPGA-based RPS
The four FPGA boards are functioned simultaneously and inde- pendently. Fig. 5a shows the data ﬂow of FPGA circuit #1. USB UART receives data from LMNPP simulator twice every real-time step. The USB UART received data are classiﬁed as DTM and TLU (results
from other DTMs) data to be the input parameters and trigger DTM and TLU logics.
At ﬁrst, the in-coming DTM data are transferred to DTM logics and the DTM output data are sequentially sent back to the full- scope simulator and the on-board TLU logics. This data ﬂow con- tains the red and blue parts (in the web version) in Fig. 5a.
Secondary, the return DTM output results trigger the additional share memory & control software module in LMNPP simulator to transmit results from the other 3 DTM logics. The 11 different Trip/ Not-Trip conditions from the four DTMs determine the reactor trip signal in the TLU 2-of-4 voting logics. This data ﬂow contains the red and dark green parts in Fig. 5a.
Finally, the reactor trip signal output from TLU is connected to OLUs. The outputs of OLUs are sequentially sent back to the addi- tional share memory & control software module to drive the trip actuators of RPS and MSIV in the LMNPP simulator. This data ﬂow contains the black parts in Fig. 5a.
Although the LMNPP is running at 8 Hz, but because the FPGA circuits are triggered by the received USB UART data, so FPGA cir- cuits can follow the LMNPP simulator at any execution rate without modifying the circuits. The only limitation is the data bandwidth of the USB UART.
Fig. 5. a) Data ﬂow of FPGA-based RPS, circuit #1; b) A primary operator display page of LMNPP simulator.
2.3.3.System assessment software interface
Additional C program is added into the LMNPP simulator  modules to catch and record assessment parameters from the primary operator display pages, as shown in Fig. 5b. The caught and recorded assessment parameters are: APRM (Average Power Range Monitor), Rx (Reactor) Core Flow, Rx Temperature, Rx Water Level, Rx Pressure and RIP (Reactor Internal Pump) Speeds.
Each one of the 10 RIPs has the capability of 11% full recircula- tion ﬂow rate. Four RIPs (A, F, D and J) are directly AC powered, and the others are powered by 6 M-G (Motor-driven-Generator) sets. The inertia of M-G set provides additional 3-second operation capability after loss of its primary AC power. The 10 RIPs are divided into two groups, as shown in Fig. 5b. Four RIPs (A, B, C and D) are selected for observation to represent the two types of RIP in the two groups.
3.Functional validation of FPGA-based RPS circuit and system assessment
After the FPGA logic circuit implementation and integration with the LMNPP full-scope simulator, the present study was pro- ceeding by the following two stages to validate functions of the FPGA-based RPS circuit and assess the whole system responses. This article is focused on the system responses of the FPGA-based RPS integrated into LMNPP full-scope simulator.
3.1.Functional validation
The functional validation provided the end-to-end off-line testing of FPGA circuits from the input ends to the output ends. An engineering interface program (written in C language) was developed and pre-deﬁned test matrix tables were created to validate the test patterns between the prepared input ends and the output ends returned from the FPGA circuits.
Similar to A/D converters in RMU of LMNPP RPS as shown in Fig. 1, the engineering interface program scales the 11 measured plant conditions from physical engineering data (ﬂoating-point value) in LMNPP simulator into integer values then transmits scaled values to FPGA-based RPS circuit.
The FPGA-based RPS DTM logics contain 11 simple integer comparators which output TRUE/FALSE (Trip/Not-Trip). Reactor low water level (<Level 3, 364.6 cm) is one of the 11 conditions to scram reactor, which is chosen to demonstrate functional validation in this study. The engineering interface program scales reactor water level range from 400.0 cm to 800.0 cm into integer value from 0 to 65535 then transmits the scaled value to DTM logic. Table 1 shows the functional validation test matrix for “Reactor Low Water Level” DTM logic.
There are 11 2-of-4 voting machines in FPGA-based RPS TLU logics. The 11 outputs of voting machines are connected to an OR- gate, which is the output of TLU. The RPS OLU and MSIV OLU are the duplications of TLU output. Table 2 shows the truth table for functional validation of the 2-of-4 voting machines.
3.2.System assessment
In this study, the FPGA-based RPS circuits are integrated into the LMNPP full-scope engineering simulator to provide a real-time, on- line, virtual close-loop, dynamic and interactive environment for system responses evaluation. Design basis accidents (DBA) are selected from the Lungmen Final Safety Analysis Report (FSAR) Chapter 15. Different accident scenarios and component malfunc- tions are inserted into the engineering simulator to stimulate the FPGA-based RPS. The response of FPGA-based RPS can be observed by the APRM reading decreased to 0% rapidly while control rods are
Table 1
A functional validation test matrix example for DTM logics.
fully inserted into reactor. Some of the simulation results of DBA scenarios are presented in this paper.
Level 1.5, 2 and 3 referred in the following ﬁgures are the pre- deﬁned water levels to activate the safety systems for keeping the reactor water level.
3.2.1.Steam line B breaks inside dry-well
A pre-designed scenario in the LMNPP full-scope simulator, steam line B is damaged (from 0 to 100% leakage) on upstream of the inboard isolation valve, therefore the leakage cannot be iso- lated. In this study, setting 100% leakage to simulate a double ended line break event occurs on steam line B inside dry-well. This clas- sical loss-of-coolant accident (LOCA) happens at 10 seconds after an initial condition of 100% power.
The consequences of the LOCA accident responses are the pressure, temperature and radiation increase rapidly inside the dry-well. As the required in LMNPP FSAR, the LDI and dry-well high pressure signals activate RPS for immediate scram the reactor, the containment is isolated, the emergency core  cooling  systems (ECCS) are initiated for replenishing of reactor and heat removal, diesel generators start, radioactivity increases inside dry-well, and dry-well sprays for pressure decreasing.
As shown in Fig. 6a, the APRM reading (neutron ﬂux) drops to 0% rapidly after RPS scram the reactor and the reactor pressure drops gradually, then RIPs drop and maintain at minimum speed (about 31%), RIP A and D drop to 0% speed at about 80 seconds after the accident, RIP  B and C drop to 0% speed at about 160  seconds after   the accident.
As shown in Fig. 6b, the reactor temperature drops from 279 ○C
to 144 ○C gradually. The ECCS systems are initiated to replenish reactor to keep reactor water level and remove residual heat, including High Pressure Core Flooder (HPCF) and Reactor Core Isolation Cooling (RCIC) system are triggered by dry-well high pressure (>11.6 PaG) signal at the beginning of accident, and Low Pressure Flooder (LPFL, one mode of Residual Heat Removal, RHR system) starts when the pressure difference between reactor and RHR is less than 1550 kPaG. The reactor water level always main- tains above level 3 during this accident.
3.2.2.Feed-water line A double end breaks inside containment
A double ended line break accident occurs on the feed-water loop A between the RPV (Reactor Pressure Vessel) and contain- ment, so the leakage cannot be isolated. This is also a pre-designed scenario in the LMNPP full-scope simulator. This classical LOCA is initiated to happen at 10 seconds after an initial condition of 100% power, and the consequences are the pressure, temperature, radioactivity increases inside the containment, then the water level and temperature increase in the wet-well. As the required in LMNPP FSAR, the LDI system and dry-well high pressure activate RPS for immediate reactor scram, containment isolation, starting of ECCS systems.
As shown in Fig. 7a, the APRM reading (neutron ﬂux) drops to 0% rapidly after RPS scram the reactor and reactor pressure drops
Table 2
Truth table for 2-of-4 voting machine of RPS TLU logics.
gradually. RIP A and D trip a few seconds after the accident, and RIP  B and C drop and maintain at minimum  speed  (about  31%)  for  10e15 seconds, then drop to 0% speed.
As shown in Fig. 7b, the reactor temperature drops from 279 ○C to 144 ○C gradually. The reactor water level drops quickly a little
under level 1.5 due to the loss of coolant through feed-water line A. The ECCS systems are initiated to replenish reactor to keep reactor water level and remove residual heat. After the LOCA accident, the dry-well high pressure (>11.6 PaG) signal also triggers RCIC and HPCF systems at the beginning of accident. The LPFL starts when the pressure difference between reactor and  RHR  is  less  than 1550 kPaG or the reactor water level is less than Level 1.5 (triggered at about 63 seconds after this accident).
3.2.3.Simultaneous closure of all 8 MSIVs
Personnel error during surveillance test or an electronic failure on I&C systems may cause the 8 MSIVs full closed simultaneously. Initiating an event of all MSIV solenoids fail (valve discs fall to closed position) at 10 seconds after an initial condition of 100% power causes an automatic reactor scram on the pressure/ﬂux transient due to steam lines isolation. Consequences of this event are Safety Release Values (SRV) lift to maintain reactor pressure within safe limits and reactor water level is maintained by the Motor Driven Reactor Feed-water Pump (MDRFP).
As shown in Fig. 8a and b, the RIP A, B and D trip several seconds after the accident, and RIP C drops to minimum speed (about 31%) to keep reactor core ﬂow at about 14%.
Fig. 6.  Steam line B e break inside  dry-wall.
Fig. 7. Feed-water line A e double end break inside containment.
3.2.4.Loss of in-house AC power (EDGS start)
A pre-designed scenario in the LMNPP full-scope simulator for training purposes only, loss of in-house AC Power accident was proceeding in this study. This event loses AC power supply for all drives, motors, electric heaters and all AC motors OFF. The conse- quences of this event are low voltage alarms occur, reactor and turbine scram, all AC motor driven valves fail “AS IS00, and the batteries supply the DC buses for RCIC system. The Emergency Diesel Generator System (EDGS) starts to supply power for ESF systems and charge the batteries.
The four AC powered RIPs trip at the moment of loss AC power, and the six M-G set driven RIPs trip 3 seconds later, as shown in Fig. 9a. The RCIC system and SRVs are used to maintain water level and pressure of reactor, as shown in Fig. 9b. After reactor scram, the pumps of RCIC are driven by the residual heat/steam for replen- ishing reactor and heat removal, and RCIC system can keep oper- ation up to 8 hours without In-House AC power.
3.3.PRA sensitivity study
The development of LMNPP probabilistic risk assessment (PRA) was completed in 2007 following the ASME PRA standard. The purpose of LMNPP PRA is to quantify individual plant risk index that can be used in risk-informed applications for licensee change. Those index included core damage frequency (CDF) and large early release frequency (LERF). The initiating events included in LMNPP PRA were plant internal events, earthquakes, ﬂoods and ﬁres. The LMNPP PRA results are not open accessed, but summarized on page 12 (Section 1.4 Results of probabilistic safety assessments) of Tai- power's report (Taiwan Power Company, 2013).
A fault tree based on the LMNPP conﬁguration was modeled by Institute of Nuclear Energy Research (INER) to ﬁnd out and evaluate the weak points of LMNPP. There are thousands of sheets in the
LMNPP fault tree model and Fig. 10 shows two examples in the RPS fault tree model. Fig. 10a shows the most top-level of RPS fault tree models and Fig. 10b shows one of the 3rd-level of RPS fault tree model. A LMNPP event tree model was also built by INER using Scientech's WinNUPRA software to calculate CDF. Under the sup- ports of Taipower and INER, PRA sensitivity study on the LMNPP event tree was performed to evaluate the inﬂuence on CDF in this study.
The RPS and ARI (Alternative Rod Insertion) system are the two diverse mechanisms for inserting control rods. According to the result in LMNPP FSAR report, the “Failure of Inserting Control Rods” event occurs only when both failures of RPS and ARI, and the failure probability of inserting control rods is 1.00E-008 and the CDF (from internal events at power operation) is 1.55E-006/reactor year (Taiwan Power Company, 2013).
In the sensitivity study, the failure probability of inserting con- trol rods was overridden range from 1.00E-010 to 1.00, and Table 3 shows the inﬂuence on CDF.
As shown in Table 3, the failure probability of inserting control rods range from 1.00E-010 to 1.00E-005 is almost no inﬂuence on the CDF of LMNPP. LMNPP is based on the ABWR design, and all safety systems are physically separated and electrical independent. The diversity and defense-in-depth concerns of LMNPP signiﬁ- cantly reduce the inﬂuence on CDF in the “Failure of Inserting Control Rods” event.
But that doesn't mean RPS is not important in LMNPP. As shown in Table 3, the failure probability of inserting control rods range from 1.00E-004 to 1.00 increases CDF signiﬁcantly.
According to the result in LMNPP FSAR, the failure probability of inserting control rods is 1.00E-008 and RPS (electronic technology) is more reliable than ARI (mechanical technology) but without detail data. That is, RPS dominates over ARI on CDF calculation of LMNPP.
Fig. 8.  Simultaneous closure of all  8 MSIVs.
Fig. 9.  Loss of in-house  AC power (EDGS  start).
Fig. 10.  A fault tree example of LMNPP RPS.
4.Conclusions
A diverse implementation is achieved during the design of the FPGA-based RPS by using two different implementation methods, two different hardware description languages (Verilog and VHDL)
and/or graphical schematic capture. The simulation results show that the FPGA-based RPS system is a practical approach to implement a diverse backup for the digital instrumentation and control systems of nuclear power plant applications.
Table 3
PRA Sensitivity Study for “Failure of Inserting Control Rods” event of LMNPP.
The PRA sensitivity study is independent of the RPS tech- nology. The sensitivity study of PRA shows that the RPS com- bined with ARI contributes 50000 times inﬂuence on the CDF of LMNPP. Because FPGA-based system operates without on-line operating system and software, the software-free FPGA-based nuclear safety system is an easily alternative approach for the modernization of Taipower's old nuclear power plant analog systems.
Acknowledgment
This work is under the auspices of NSC (National Science Council) and INER projects. The authors are grateful to all the participants of ADT (A-D Technology Inc.), Taipower, Dr. Chun- Chang Chao and Dr. Hui-Wen Huang of INER for their valuable supports and comments.
