<title>Quantitative Submicron Particulate Characterization by Dark-Field Microscopy</title>
<Affiliation>Schafer Livermore Laboratory, 303 Lindbergh Avenue, Livermore, California 94551
</Affiliation>
<author>T. Bernat, C. Castro, A. Pasternak, J. Sin, O. Stein & N. Petta</author>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>FUSION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/15361055.2017.1406236</DOI>
<URL> https://doi.org/10.1080/15361055.2017.1406236</URL>
Abstract — The University of Rochester Laboratory for Laser Energetics Laser Direct-Drive 100-Gbar Campaign requires fuel capsules with specified limits on the number of localized surface defects in the 0.1- to 1-µm range. Schafer Livermore Laboratory has applied techniques of bright-field conventional imaging and charge-coupled-device–based dark-field microscopy as a possible method of characterizing the number and sizes of local particle-like defects on these capsules. Through simple experiments, we are able to correlate measured localized light-scattering levels with sizes of spherical polystyrene test particles. We have developed an engineering concept for whole-surface capsule scans based on quantitative dark-field microscopy as well as conventional imaging microscopy. This system and technique will be particularly useful during capsule development and capsule handling (transport, assembly, etc.) investigations.
Keywords — Sub-micron particles, dark-field microscopy.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
The elements that comprise the Direct-Drive Ignition Campaign include fuel capsules with unprecedented lim- its to localized particulate defects. The specification goal for the intermediate 80-Gbar Campaign as of March 2017 is stated as follows: “at shot time, fewer than ten particles in the range of 0.5 to 1.0 μm on the capsule surface and none larger than 1 μm with heights greater than 0.05 μm.” The ultimate 100-Gbar Campaign requirements are even more stringent: “at shot time, fewer than ten particles in the range of 0.1 to 0.5 μm on the capsule surface and none   larger   than   0.5   μm   with   heights   greater than
0.05 μm.” Atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) can easily resolve such sur- face features, but their effective fields of view are small, and they therefore would require long measurement times and very careful in situ manipulation to complete a full surface scan of a capsule that then has to be assembled into the cryogenic target positioner. While the specifica- tions refer to particles “on the capsule surface,” presum- ably similar limits will be placed on particles or voids within the capsule wall. AFM or SEM would not be able to detect these interior capsule features.
A suitable characterization technique for localized defects on capsules in this unprecedented size range is necessary not only to assess those capsules used in implo- sions but also during the development of processes to fabricate, transport, and assemble them. The  intent  of this paper is to evaluate the possibility of using optical microscopy to quantify the size and number of localized capsule particulate defects. The more relaxed 80-Gbar surface particulate requirements are at the practical limits of conventional microscopic imaging. For smaller parti- cles, using simple scattering estimates and proof-of- principle measurements with polystyrene beads as test particles, we show that scattered light measurements using quantitative charge-coupled-device (CCD)–based dark-field microscopy provide sensitive average size determination. This is consistent with earlier work.
Davidson and Haller1 used dark-field microscopy to  focus light scattered by latex spheres onto  the  focal plane of a Polaroid camera. While they did not directly quantify the scattered light, they correlated the size of the exposed focused Airy disks with the particle diameters in the range of 70 to 500 nm. Much later, Braslavsky et al.2 demonstrated strong diameter dependence of light scat- tered from polystyrene beads as measured with a CCD camera in the range from 60 to 800 nm.
II.BRIGHT-FIELD IMAGING
The simple Rayleigh optical resolution limit of a micro- scope objective with numerical aperture (NA) and with light
of  wavelength  λ is res:	0:61λ . For the work described NA
here, our objective had NA = 0.8 with white-light illumina-
tion, which we approximate as λ ~ 500 nm, so our resolution was about 400 nm. Images were recorded with a Leica EC3 CCD camera with 2048 × 1536 pixels, each 3.2 µm square. Samples were prepared by diluting aliquots of poly- styrene beads (purchased from Phosphorex, Inc.) in deio- nized water and placing a few drops onto cleaned glass microscope slides. The drops spread out and dried, leav- ing the beads attached to the slide by cohesion. Beads that are 100 nm were diluted 10 000:1, 500-nm beads were diluted 5000:1, and 1500-nm beads were diluted 100:1.
They were all photomicrographed in reflected bright-field and dark-field illumination at 100× with the 0.8 NA objective. Bright-field images of the 1500- and 500-nm beads are shown in Fig. 1. Superposed on the images are circles depicting their diameters if they were completely resolved on the CCD array. Lineouts through the centers of the images are also shown. While the 1500-nm particle appears resolved, the lineout shows that there is some ambiguity in determining the diameter. The lineout length is roughly equal to the particle diameter plus twice the resolution length, but identifying where the image stops and the background starts is inexact. This is similarly the case with the 500-nm bead, but there is even greater uncertainty in determining diameter. It is possible that  suitable statistics and correlations with bead diameters measured by independent means can decrease these uncertainties.a However, since it cannot be expected that actual contaminating particles will be spheres or have any other regular shapes, imaging will be of less value parti- cularly for smaller dimensions and may only be able to place limits on particle sizes. While particle sizes from imaging become increasingly unreliable below roughly
Fig. 1.  Bright-field reflected light images of (a) 1500 nm and (b) 500 nm polystyrene beads are on the edge of resolution.
500 nm, imaging in combination with quantitative dark-field techniques described in Sec. III can provide a characterization technique that covers the 80- and 100-Gbar ranges.
III.CCD-BASED LIGHT SCATTERING USING DARK-FIELD MICROSCOPY
III.A.Calculations
In dark-field microscopy, the object is illuminated by oblique incident light. The light reflected into the collect- ing objective forms the dark-field image. For particles that are smaller than the light wavelength and therefore are at or below the resolution limit, it is more appropriate to consider light scattered into the objective. Rather than imaging this light, quantitatively measuring the amount scattered can provide the size of the scatterer. While conceptually simple, the full wave equation solution to light scattering from a particle of arbitrary shape and material properties is computationally complex and not practical. However, for the simplifying assumption of spherical dielectric or metallic (i.e., conducting) scatterers isolated in space, the solution is the well-known Mie theory presented in many textbooks and monographs. Mie theory applies to scattering spheres with diameters extending from very small to several times the wave- length of the incident light. For very small particles, the theory converges to the Rayleigh limit, which gives that the scattering cross section for unpolarized light is pro- portional to the sixth power of the sphere diameter3:
@1a
where d is the diameter and s is the dielectric constant.
For polystyrene spheres, s ¼ 2:56, so
@1b
The work of Braslavsky et al. cited earlier2 did not fit scattered light measurements to particle diameters. However a simple overlay of a d6 line onto Fig.  6 of  Ref. 2 shows consistency with Eqs. (1a) and (1b).
Equations (1a) and (1b) are useful for simple approximations of scattering levels and to assess sig- nal-to-noise (S/N) levels for quantitative measurements. For digital microscopy, the scattered  light  is  collected by an objective and focused onto a CCD or complementary-metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) array. Photons are  converted  to  electrons  on  the  array,  which are read out to form a  digital  image.  For  our  case of dark-field scattering from  small  particles,  we  are interested in the total number of photons collected. Typical arrays are of the order of one megapixel, each about 10  µm  in size. The  array size  is of the  order of   1 cm2. The most basic questions are how many photons are detected in each pixel, and what is the S/N  ratio?  The signal depends upon the quantum efficiency of the device: the number of electrons produced per incident photon. This is wavelength dependent but is typically about 0.5.
For an order-of-magnitude scattering estimate, we con- sider a 100-nm polystyrene particle with incident light at 400-nm wavelength and an intensity of 1 W/cm2. The optical system is treated as a simple lens with radius a and with object and image distances z0 and z1, respectively, as in Fig. 2. The total scattered photon current Qs is by Eq. (1b) equal to about 2 × 107/s. We assume that the scattering is isotropic. (Even though there is an angular dependence to the scattering, for unpolarized light this is not a significant factor for this simple estimate.) The fraction of light col- lected QA is equal to the fractional solid angle subtended by the objective input aperture, which is a2=4z02. If a/z0 ~ 1, which is appropriate for NA ~ 1, then about 5 × 106 photons/s will be collected and focused onto the array focal plane. If the scattering particle is  considered  a  point  source,  the focused light will form an Airy disk in the  image  plane with radius
@2
where M is the magnification.4 For M = 100, which was the magnification used in this work, and λ = 400 nm,r0 ~ 24 μm, so the Airy disk will comprise about twenty 10 × 10-μm pixels. For a quantum efficiency of 0.5, this results in an average signal of about 1.25 × 105 electrons per pixel per second. Each electron produces one bit of signal when the CCD array is read out. This is an enor- mous signal since CCD or CMOS cameras are available with dark currents of a few electrons per pixel for expo- sure times of 1 s, and this can be reduced by an order of magnitude by cooling the array to −25°C. Therefore, we would expect a S/N of 105 to 106. Even if our simple estimates are off by a factor of 10 or if lower incident light intensities are used, there is still plenty of measur- able signal.
The above estimate was based upon a Rayleigh cross section for a free scatterer. A more exact theory
Fig. 2. Light scattering from a submicron particle, considered as a point source, is collected by microscope optics and focused onto a CCD array in the image plane.
appropriate to particles on or in the vicinity of a substrate is the Bobbert-Vlieger model.5 Using the Modeled Integrated Scattering Tool (MIST) code developed by Germer at National Institute of Standards and Technology6 (NIST), we computed the size-dependent scattering cross sections for polystyrene spheres on a glass microscope slide substrate, shown in Fig. 3. These cross sections are calculated for the light scattered into a 45-deg cone from light incident at 60 deg from normal. This is similar to the conditions of our measurements,
described below. The wavelength is 500 nm, which is midrange for white light such as in our measurements.
In Fig. 3, the cross-section scaling with d6 in the Rayleigh range is apparent. At larger particle sizes, the graph becomes parallel to the geometric cross section, and there is a transition region between diameters from 100 nm to a few hundred nanometers. Below, we describe measuring the scattering from particles of radii 50 and 250 nm, whose cross sections are indicated in Fig. 3, and we note that the cross-section ratio for those radii is about 260. The calculated
Fig. 3. Cross sections for scattering light from a spherical polystyrene particle on a glass substrate into an objective with NA ~ 1. The sphere is illuminated by light incident from one side at a 60-deg angle from the vertical. A calculated intensity pattern from this illumination onto the focal plane is also shown.
light distribution on the array in the focal plane is also displayed for the case of light incident from a single direction.
Quantifying particle size by measuring scattered light is material dependent. For dielectrics, Eq. (1a) gives the dependence on the dielectric constant, so for instance, if the beads were SiO2 (ε ~ 3.9), the prefactor in Eq. (1b) would be about 48, resulting in about a 12% error in assessed diameter if the particle was thought to be poly- styrene. For metals, considered perfect conductors, Eq. (1a) is replaced by (see Ref. 3)
@
So, the size error would increase to a factor of 1.65 or a
volume error of approximately 5×. This difference may be relatively unimportant for inertial confinement fusion or high-energy-density science applications since the quantity of interest is typically mass  rather  than  size, and a smaller metallic particle would have an offsetting higher density. If it were important to distinguish metals from dielectrics, it might be possible to compare forward to backward scattering since the backward/forward ratio for metals is much larger than for dielectrics.
Even though actual contaminating particles on cap- sule surfaces will almost assuredly not be spherical, it should be noted that particularly for particles in the Rayleigh range, the scattering is proportional to the square of the volume. This is easily understood for loss- less dielectrics, where the total scattered field is equal to the sum of the fields from individual molecular dipoles in the particle, which is proportional to the particle volume. The intensity then goes as the volume squared. If the actual shape of a particle in the 100- to 500-nm range   has to be determined, that requires information at spatial wavelengths smaller than the optical resolution, which means that optical techniques are not appropriate.b
Finally, quantitative scattering can also provide size information on voids or other particulates in the capsule wall. The Rayleigh scattering cross section for a spherical void inside polystyrene is about 1.8× that of the same- size polystyrene particle in empty space. This would lead to a 10% error in assessing the void diameter.
III.B.Data
To assess the feasibility of determining particle sizes by measuring scattered light with CCD-based micro- scopy, we used reflective  dark-field  illumination  with the same polystyrene spheres deposited on glass slides  described in Sec. II. We also used the same microscope and objective as Sec. II. The camera array was 16 bits deep (65 000 maximum counts per pixel) but had dark- current noise levels of about 10 to 12 bits (several thou- sand).  The  dark-field  illumination  of  the  Nikon  UM2
measurescope was not intense enough to produce measur-able scattered light even at 2-s exposure time for the 100-nm beads, so additional light was provided by direct- ing two approximately diametrically opposed beams from a Labsphere QH150 fiberoptic illuminator. The beams were positioned at illumination angles approximately 60 deg from the vertical axis of the microscope. During the measurements reported here, this additional light source was kept constant in intensity and position so that relative measurements could be made.
Figure 4 shows the scattered light from a 100-nm- diameter particle focused onto the CCD array.  Superposed on the image (Fig. 4a) is a circle indicating the particle size if it were resolved. A lineout (Fig. 4b)
Fig. 4. The light scattered from a 100-nm-diameter par- ticle is distributed over an Airy disk roughly 25 pixels in diameter, which is about 80 μm on the CCD array of our camera.
through the middle of the image yields an Airy disk diameter of about 25 pixels, which is about 80 μm on    the CCD focal plane. An  estimate  using  Eq.  (2)  for  z0/a ~ 1 and λ = 0.5 μm give an Airy diameter of about  60 µm for a point scatterer. Since the particle’s finite size would result in an extension of the point-particle Airy disk diameter by roughly 10 μm (i.e., 100 nm × 100 magnification),  the  estimated  size  would   be   about  70 μm, close to what was measured.
Figure 5 compares the collected scattered light from  a 500-nm particle with that of the 100-nm  particle  in Fig. 4. The exposure times were 0.4 and 2 s, respectively, but there is some saturation even with the shorter expo- sure of the 500-nm particle. To quantify the scattered light, after subtracting off the background, we integrated the pixel values inside the two circles indicated. (Note  that the diameter in pixels of the 500-nm particle is ~ 2× times larger than the 100-nm particle). To approximately account for the saturation, we  determined  that  about  115 pixels were saturated. In Fig. 5, the lineout through the saturated area, taken at about 30 deg from the vertical, shows that the average signal missing, per pixel, is about
10 000, which would add about 106 to the integrated signal.  This  is  not  a  significant  difference.  The results
(without the small estimated saturation correction) are shown in Table I.
Recall that the estimated total integrated signal for the 100-nm particle from Fig. 2 and the accompanying textual discussion is about 2.5 × 106 electrons, which is very close to the measured integrated signal. While this is gratifying, it is to a large extent just lucky given the approximate nature of the estimate, including the actual incident light intensity. However, the ratio of the measured signals is less approximate since it is dependent only upon the scattered light from the two particles. Accounting for the difference in exposure times, this ratio is equal to 77. From Fig. 3, we expect 260. This factor of 3 difference could be accounted for entirely by the smaller bead having  a  diameter of 120 nm rather than 100 nm. As noted in footnote a, the beads we purchased for these initial investigations had specified average diameters but an unspecified distribution in diameters.
To reliably use measured light scattering to quantify
individual bead sizes will require rigorous calibration with a fixed or measured light source and CCD camera, as well as scattering particles, either polymer or metallic, with traceable sizes. The measurements described here demonstrate the feasibility of this approach.
Fig. 5. Light patterns scattered onto the CCD array from 500- and 100-nm polystyrene beads. The signals are integrated inside  the circles shown. The graph is a lineout through the 500-nm bead saturated pixels at about 30 deg from the vertical, and a guess at the unsaturated profile.
TABLE I
Dark-Field Scattering Measurements from Polystyrene Spherical Beads
IV.ENGINEERING CONCEPT
To satisfy the stated limits to particulate contamina- tion on direct drive ignition capsules, their entire surfaces must be examined. Conceptually, this requires rotating the capsule around an axis as well as rotating the point   of view of the optical system, as schematically shown in Fig. 6a. Alternatively, the optical system can be held fixed while the system holding and rotating the capsule  is also rotated in the plane common to the optical system
axis and the capsule rotation axis. (This is the approach used for the phase-shifting diffraction interferometer and the capsule fill tube assembly mapping system developed at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.) At least one handoff from one vacuum chuck holding the capsule to a second is required so that the portion of the capsule initially held by the chuck can be examined. An engineer- ing concept that performs these functions is  shown in Fig. 6b. This concept incorporates precision air bearings for the rotations in order to limit bearing runout to less than a micron.
All sources of relative motion between the center of the capsule and the optical system can degrade particle size measurements, either by bright-field imaging or dark-field light scattering. The most severe  requirement is for imaging, where the maximum change in distance between the microscope objective and the capsule surface must  be  kept  less  than  one-half  the  depth  of  field, or
~0.5λ/NA (Ref. 6), which for large NA and 400- to 500-nm light is 200 to 300 nm. Relying on traditional imaging  for  particle  sizing  would  thus  require  severe
Fig. 6.  (a) The measurement concept and (b) a notional engineering concept based upon small runout precision air bearings.
Fig. 7. A 1-µm defocus changes the scattered intensity distribution but does not appreciably affect the integrated signal. (a) Light focused on CCD array and (b) particle defocused by 1 μm.
limits to bearing runout, as well as location of the centers of rotation of the capsules with respect to the optical axis of the inspection microscope. Incorporation of an auto- focus mechanism into the optical train would alleviate this difficulty, with the challenge being focal sensitivity to a weakly reflecting, nearly featureless surface. Measuring light scattering from  dark-field  illumination is more forgiving since the light is collected rather than imaged. Within limits, the light distribution on the CCD array from a single particle is not relevant. Only the total integrated signal on the array is important. In Fig. 7, we show that defocusing a 100-nm bead by 1 µm spreads the light out but leaves the integrated collected light signal essentially unchanged.
V.SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
In summary, we have shown that optical microscopy could be sufficient for characterizing isolated particulate contamination on laser direct-drive ignition capsules.  For the 80-Gbar Campaigns, imaging under reflected light is at the limits of resolution, but collecting suitable statistics may increase the confidence of the technique. We have also shown that measuring the light scattered under dark-field illumina- tion is sensitive to particle size. Careful calibration can pro- vide particle sizes for the later 100-Gbar Campaign. In the size region between Rayleigh scattering and the optically resolved images, a combination of imaging and light collec- tion is the best that can be done using optical microscopy.
Our analysis and measurements are appropriate to spherical particles, with the light scattering being propor- tional to sphere volume in the Rayleigh limit. We have not directly addressed departures from spherical shapes and plan to explore this by using sectioned fibers and
doublets and triplets of spherical particles. However, if lateral and vertical dimensions must be independently determined, quantitative dark-field microscopy will not  be adequate. We also plan to test different materials.
Acknowledgments
We are greatful to H. Huang of General Atomics for telling us of the existence of the MIST code and to T. A. Germer of the NIST for discussions and help with its use. This work was supported by the National Nuclear Security Administration of the U.S. Department of Energy under contract DE-NA00011430.
