<title>REACTOR INSTALLATIONS WITH SODIUM-COOLED FAST REACTORS FOR TWO-COMPONENT NUCLEAR ENERGY</title>
<Affiliation>1.Frumkin Institute of Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry, Russian Academy of Sciences (IPCE RAS), Moscow, Russia.
2.Bochvar High-Technology Research Institute of Inorganic Materials (VNIINM), Moscow, Russia; e-mail: yavoskresenskaya</Affiliation>
<author>S. V. Babushkin, B. A. Vasil’ev, A. V. Vasyaev, V. E. Vorontsov,S. A. Dushev, D. L. Zverev, A. I. Kiryushin,E. V. Marova,V. Yu. Sedakov, A. I. Staroverov, A. V. Timofeev, and S. F. Shepelev</author>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>ATOMIC ENERGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Springer</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI> 10.1007/s10512-021-00705-y</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1007/s10512-021-00705-y</URL>
Abstract
The experience of origination and operation of BN-600, -800 and development of BN-1200 commercial power units of two-component nuclear energy are recounted. Substantiation is given for the engineering solutions allowing efficient production of electricity and closure of the nuclear fuel cycle with sodium-cooled fast reactors.
The main purpose of fast reactors, as formulated by the founders of this direction E. Fermi and A. I. Leipunskii, is to convert power reactors to burning plutonium as the fissile material, which will make it possible to solve the problem of pro- viding fuel for nuclear energy. The necessity of bringing fast reactors into the nuclear energy structure and the origination of nuclear energy with two components were never in doubt, but they still have not been implemented. This can be attributed to two basic reasons: limited rates of development in connection with the problems of safety security in the operation of NPP, management of spent nuclear fuel, and absence of fast reactors meeting all requirements of the future nuclear energy.
On account of their physical features, fast reactors promote expanded fuel production, efficient utilization of pluto- nium and actinides, reduction of the consumption of natural uranium, repeated use of plutonium in a cycle, on which nuclear fuel cycle closure and a two-component nuclear energy system are based.
Russia has always been a leader in the development of fast reactors. At the initial stage of their development,
A. I. Leipunskii’s proposition of using sodium as the coolant was adopted in all countries. To this day only such fast reactors have been developed in the world. Today Russia is the only country in the world where NPP with fast reactors are operating
–Beloyarskaya NPP with BN-600, -800. On the basis of the successful origination and operation of BN-600, -800, OKBM Afrikantov (hereinafter – OKBM) is developing the BN-1200 reactor for commercial power blocks of two-component nuclear power, the transition to which, beginning in 2030, has been formulated in different strategic studies [1].
Stages of the assimilation of sodium-cooled fast reactors. Sodium-cooled fast reactors are one of the key direc- tions of OKBM. It includes the solution of the following basic problems:
–development of equipment, systems, and reactor installations as a whole;
–development of an equipment complex for fuel management;
–manufacturer and complete delivery of equipment for reactor installations and fuel management;
–services (technical maintenance, supervised installation of equipment at facilities, field supervision, operating life extension, expertise, and others).
Currently, OKBM is the chief designer and complete supplier of equipment for reactor installations with sodi- um-cooled fast reactors.
TABLE 1. Assimilation of Fast Reactors
Fig. 1. Progression of reactor installations based on fast reactors.
With phased origination and assimilation of fast reactors, ranging from BR-5, -10, BOR-60, BN-350 to BN-600,
-800, the draft-design, research, production, and operational infrastructure was created and became the foundation for subse- quent advancement of this direction [2, 3] (Fig. 1, Table 1).
OKBM was drawn to the development of fast power reactors since the beginning of the 1960s as the chief designer of BN-350, developer of the core, MCP, and executive mechanisms of the control and protection system (CPS). Currently, its capabilities make it possible to develop and originate power, research, and experimental reactors in our country and abroad.
BN-600 – the world’s only successfully operating commercial-capacity fast reactor operating in a commer- cial regime. In 1980, the No. 3 power unit with BN-600, whose reactor and power unit were developed by OKBM and    the Leningrad branch of Atomenergoproekt under scientific supervision by the Leipunskii Institute for Physics and Power Engineering (IPPE), started operating at the Beloyarskaya NPP in 1980. OKB Gidropress developed the steam generator. The main task in the development of BN-600 was to assimilate sodium-cooled fast reactors on a commercial scale. The key tech- nical solution was the integral arrangement of the primary-loop equipment in the reactor vessel, which determines the design changes in its main equipment.
In the process of implementing the project and operating the power block, procedures were worked out for start-up adjustment of the equipment and its operation, and making replacements and repairs, and steps were taken to ensure that  the leak detection and sodium fire fighting systems were operating at peak efficiency. In all the external sodium systems of BN-600 had 25 leaks to the outside, of which five were leaks of radioactive sodium and 12 were leaks in the steam generator. The last sodium leak to the outside occurred in 1994. The interloop leaks in the steam generator likewise were mainly associ- ated with fabrication defects discovered at the initial stage of operation of the reactor.
Reliable operation during the 30-year project period (to 2010) showed the choice of the integral arrangement of the reactor to be correct, and inspection of the equipment and validation made it possible to obtain a license for operation life extension to 2025 with the prospect of a subsequent extension to 2040.
Currently, BM-600 is a unique platform for assimilating different types of fuel for fast reactors: 75 FA with mixed uranium-plutonium oxide fuel were irradiated, and FA with dense nitride fuel are being tested.
BN-800 – base power-generating block for finalizing nuclear fuel cycle closure. The next phase became the development and construction of BN-800 as a fast power reactor designed to burn mixed uranium-plutonium oxide fuel for fi- nalizing the technological elements of the closed fuel cycle of nuclear energy. Physical and power startup of BN-800 occurred in 2014–2015. Commercial operation at full power commenced on October 31, 2016.
The construction of BN-800 made it possible not only to restore but also develop new, unique technologies for fab- ricating equipment and testing instruments and create stable cooperation between enterprises for their fabrication – more than 60 enterprises, of which 25 are large plants and two develop and test new engineering solutions for the base equipment, were brought in.
In BN-600 the base technical solutions are preserved and new solutions are introduced, the reactor power is forced by approximately 40%, and the number of turbo units is reduced from three to one. The ICUF is expected to be at the level
0.85.To enhance safety, an additional passive emergency shutdown system with hydraulically suspended rods, a system for emergency cooling with an air heat exchanger with a connection to a secondary loop, and a bottom plate beneath the pressure chamber for localizing the melt in the event of a severe beyond-design basis accident were introduced. The reloading system is modified in order to eliminate manual operations so as to allow handling of fresh FA based on high-background mixed uranium-plutonium fuel.
The production of mixed uranium-plutonium oxide fuel for BN-800 was developed at FGUP GKhK [4, 5]. At the first phase of operation, the initial fuel load was formed mainly from uranium oxide fuel, and only some of the FA (19% of the total number) contain mixed uranium-plutonium oxide fuel, fabricated in pilot plants at PO Mayak and the Research Institute of Atomic Reactors (SSC RIAR) using tablet and vibro-compaction technologies [6, 7]. Currently, as the commercial technology for manufacturing pelleted fuel is worked out at FGUP GKhK phased transfer to a core with a full load of such fuel is proceeding. Moreover, a variant where FA with dense uranium-plutonium nitride fuel (to 48 FA) are loaded into the core is being worked out.
The development and operation experience of BN-600 and the implementation of BN-800 afforded the development of sodium-cooled fast reactors and ensured their readiness for commercial assimilation in a two-component nuclear energy system.
Developmental design prospects for a BN-1200 serial commercial power-generating unit for operation in a closed nuclear fuel cycle. The goal of the developmental work is to originate a reliable commercial power-generating unit BN-1200 which is characterized by safety corresponding to the requirements of Gen-4 power-generating units and techni- cal-economic metrics comparable not only to VVER with the same capacity but also installations based on fossil fuel taking into account all costs in the life cycle of electric power plants, including a closed nuclear fuel cycle [3, 8, 9].
The use of new technical solutions together with the base technical solutions realized in BN-600, -800 afforded a substantial increase in safety and improvement of the main technical and economic metrics of a power-generating unit (Fig. 2, Table 2):
–integration of the main primary-loop equipment inside the reactor vessel with the exception of external pipelines
with radioactive sodium of the primary loop;
–use of new materials to increase the service life of the main equipment (steam generator, reactor vessel), fuel run (fuel-rod cladding);
TABLE 2. BN-600, -800, -1200 Metrics
Fig. 2. Secondary loop of BN-800, -1200: 1) evaporator; 2) sodium buffer tank; 3) distribution manifold; 4) steam generator piping; 5) superheater; 6) piping of the emergency cooling system; 7) air heat exchanger; 8) secondary-loop piping; 9, 13) main circulation pump of the primary and secondary loops, respectively; 10) reactor; 11) protector cap;
12) intermediate heat exchanger; 14) autonomous heat exchanger; 15) cold filter-trap of the secondary loop; 16) SAOT pipelines; 17) steam-generator module; 18) V250 emergency dump vessel; 19) dump pipelines; 20) pipelines of the overflow and gas compensation system; 21) compensator vessel; 22) sodium dilatation vessel.
–design change of a fuel rod and FA to increase the fuel run [6];
–design change of key equipment and systems (emergency heat removal system [SAOT], primary-loop cold trap, steam generator, MCP-1, -2, reloading systems);
–use of electricity release system (turbogenerator and others) standardized with AES-2006;
TABLE 3. Service-Life of the Replaceable Equipment of a Reactor Installation
Fig. 3. Steam generator (one module).
– change of arrangement solutions for the primary and auxiliary systems of the reactor installation and power-gen- erating unit.
Together with the specific consumption of material, the operating time influences the technical-economic metrics of a reactor installation. Currently, BN-1200 is based on 60 years, including technical decisions made to decrease radiation dam- age to non-replaceable structural elements, and on BN-600 operating experience. The design basis operating life of BN-600 is to be increased to 60 years; preliminary results are positive.
The replacement volume and frequency of all limited-life equipment significantly affect the economic efficiency. The largest amount of work and the highest costs are associated with the replacement of a steam generator and the removable part of the MCP (Table 3). Materials science studies are being conducted for the BN-1200 steam generator for service-life validation of modules to 60 years.
The experience gained in operating BN-600 and developing and implementing BN-800 made it possible to change the design of the steam generator (Fig. 3). The design makes use of the vertical direct-flow steam generators of the vessel type (eight modules) instead of the section-modular type for BN-600 (72 modules) and BN-800 (60 modules). As a result, the
specific construction volumes of the boxes are lowered from 32 to 16 m3/MW.
Moreover, a significant economic effect came from using new technical solutions for optimization of the reloading complex: use of a vertical elevator and elimination of the spent assemblies drum.
The development of a design of the BN-1200 core made use of the experience gained in developing and operating the cores of Russian and foreign fast reactors, and the problems of securing efficient operation in the context of two-component nuclear energy were taken into account. Such problems include nuclear safety, high nuclear-fuel utilization efficiency, and optimal fuel supply for the two-component energy system. In this connection a core with a sodium cavity at the top and an absorbing end screen, made from boron carbide, situated above it was developed for BN-800 [10]. A similar solution in terms
Fig. 4. FA run versus burnup with different heat density in the core: 1–4) VVER-1000, BN-1200, BN-600, BN-800; fuel-rod diameter, mm: 9.1, 9.2, 6.9, 6.9; average heat density, MV/m3: 120, 240, 400, 450, respectively.
of the arrangement of the core with a top sodium cavity is also adopted for BN-1200. The nuclear-fuel utilization efficiency is mainly determined by the fuel burnup, determining the fuel flow on fabrication and reprocessing. In terms of the yearly cost of fabrication of FA, the duration of a fuel run, which determines, among other things, the energy density in the core, is of great significance. In accordance with the previously adopted concept of minimizing the doubling time and plutonium production in the nuclear energy system, the BN-600, -800 core was developed with high power density, in connection with which fuel rods with the relatively small diameter 6.9 mm were used for these reactors.
Under current conditions with the presence of a large amount of plutonium, which is produced in VVER (separated or included in the makeup of the spent fuel), a low-density core with a large load of plutonium can be considered. This makes it possible to use large-diameter fuel rods in FA and increase the length of a fuel run with one and the same fuel burnup (Fig. 4).
Together with the fuel-rod diameter increased to 9.2 mm, FA with large span size was also chosen in BN-1200 in order to decrease the volume of the reloading operations [6, 11]. Moreover, as noted, a top absorbing screen was introduced into the makeup of the FA, which greatly decreases the non-replaceable radiation shielding volume in the reactor.
Currently, two types of fuel are being considered for BN-1200: conventional mixed uranium-plutonium oxide fuel and mixed uranium-plutonium nitride fuel, which gives a higher breeding level. In accordance with the Proryv [Breakthrough] stud- ies, nitride fuel is regarded as the primary fuel for fast reactors, supporting the development of large-scale nuclear energy [12].
The admissible depth of fuel burnup is largely determined by the radiation resistance of the fuel-rod cladding and for nitride fuel also by the mechanical interaction of the cladding with the swelling fuel. Austenitic steel ChS-68 c.d. was used as the cladding material for fuel rods in BN-600. As a result of the improvements made in the technology used to fabricate steel and shell tubes, the admissible damaging dose for fuel-rod cladding made from the steel reached 90 dpa. This made it possible to achieve maximum burnup of oxide uranium fuel in BN-600 11.8% h.a. The transition of BN-600 to operation with fuel-rod cladding made from austenitic steel EK-164 c.d., whose radiation resistance is predicted to be 115–120 dpa, commenced in 2019. The transition to this steel is also planned in BN-800. Given the existing limit 90 dpa for the steel ChS-68 c.d. the max- imum burnup of mixed, uranium-plutonium oxide fuel is equal to 9.5% h.a.
In the BN-1200 design, the steel EK-164 c.d. is to be used as the fuel-rod cladding material for the initial operating stage of the lead reactor. In the future a transition will be made to a more radiation resistant steel – ferrite-martensite and dispersion-hardened.
The serviceability of fuel rods with mixed uranium-plutonium oxide fuel and austenitic steel cladding is confirmed in BN-600, -800 to maximum burnup ~12% h.a. and in the case of uranium oxide fuel (with similar behavior under irradia- tion) to 13.5% h.a. Currently, preparations are being made to irradiate experimental FA in BN-600 in order to confirm the serviceability of fuel rods with axial breeding interlayer and EK-164 c.d. Cladding.
Intensive studies of the serviceability of fuel rods with nitride fuel are being conducted as part of project Proryv [13]. The maximum burnup attained in the experimental FA in BN-600 is equal to 7.5% h.a. After validation of the burnup required in the project this fuel will be used as the main fuel, taking into account the fact that its use lowers the required reactivity margin on burnup, which is favorable in terms of safety security of the reactor, and makes it possible to increase the time
Fig. 5. Change in the plan of the building: 1, 2) fast reactor, 2014 and 2017, respectively; 3) BN-800;
4) VVER-TOI; 5) AP1000 (USA).
interval between reloadings. Moreover, on using nitride fuel the breeding of plutonium is heightened (compared with mixed uranium-plutonium oxide fuel), which is important for faster development of nuclear energy.
Thanks to the improvement of safety systems – increase of the reliability of the emergency heat-removal system and introduction of additional rods of the passive emergency protection operating under the temperature principle – the safety of BN-1200 will increase even more. The probability of severe damage to the core for internal events when operating at power
is equal to 5·10–7 for BN-1200, which is approximately a factor of 3 lower than for BN-600, -800.
Analysis of severe beyond-design basis accidents with loss-of-coolant using the design codes as well as new-gener- ation codes showed that in the event of the most unfavorable development of an accident the population irradiation dose out- side the NPP grounds does not exceed the norms established in the documentation 50 mSv over the first year after an accident. Thus, it was confirmed that the requirement for eliminating the need to evacuate the population during accidents is satisfied. In the last few years the requirements of the specific physical metrics and the desired values of the reduced cost of production of electricity and its components, in particular, within the framework of the Proryv direction, have increased [14].
All the design solutions taken together have resulted in significant reduction of construction volumes, first and foremost, for the reactor compartment (Fig. 5) [15].
The uncertainties in the technical and economic metrics, associated with the search for and validation of new techni- cal solutions and the running phase of the project, can be removed in the course of the R&D program developed in the project.
A large volume of computational and experimental studies were performed to validate the design. R&D work is being performed to confirm the new technical solutions concerning the systems and equipment as well as BN-1200 safety [8]. In September 2017, at a meeting of the Governing Board of the Project Agreement of the Gen4 International Forum “Integration and Evaluation of Fast Sodium Reactors,” the BN-1200 concept was officially adopted and approved as meeting the require- ments imposed on Gen 4 reactors.
International collaboration. OKBM is doing important and extensive work on international collaboration in the field of sodium-cooled fast reactors. The first Chinese experimental fast reactor CEFR, built with the participation of OKBM and other enterprises in the country, was started up in 2015. The enterprise became the developer and complete supplier of the main equipment (primary and secondary loop pumps, reactor components, CPS actuators, heat exchanges, refueling equip- ment, sodium instrumentation, electromagnetic pumps), and it participated in installation supervision and personnel training. Currently, within the framework of an intergovernmental agreement on the reactor project CFR600, OKBM, in cooperation with the enterprises of the Rosatom State Corporation, is developing and supplying the main equipment and computational codes and is providing expertise services.
NFC closure based on sodium-cooled fast reactors for two-component nuclear energy. The operating efficiency of sodium-cooled fast reactors in two-component nuclear energy is determined, first of all, by the possibility of repeatedly us- ing plutonium and refabricated nuclear fuel. For VVER-admissible single-use, this will decrease the need for natural uranium by ~15%, which is associated with the determination of the isotopic composition of plutonium as a result of an increase in the amount of the higher isotopes. The change in the initial isotopic composition of plutonium in the loaded fuel of BN-1200 in the direction of an equilibrium composition, which is determined by the physical properties of the core, is shown in Fig. 6.
TABLE 4. Primary Fuel-Supply Metrics for BN-1200
Fig. 6. Isotopic composition of plutonium in the spent fuel of a VVER reactor with burnup 33 (1) and 60 MW·days/kg (2), mixed uranium-plutonium oxide fuel of VVER after the first recycle (3), equilibrium composition of the spent fuel in the sodium-cooled fast reactor BN-1200 (4) and weapons-grade plutonium (5).
This makes it possible to improve the isotopic composition of plutonium in a sodium-cooled fast reactor and to recycle addi- tional refined fuel in a VVER reactor.
It is most important to secure a breeding ratio >1. The need to maximize the breeding ratio by producing plutonium in the breeding screens must be determined taking into account the systems requirements in terms of plutonium balance and the economic aspects of the cost of fabrication and reprocessing of the breeding screens. For the initial stage of formation of a two-component nuclear energy, which is characterized by the presence of a large amount of plutonium accumulated in the spent fuel from a VVER reactor, a variant of reactor operation with steel lateral screens instead of breeding screens is consid- ered. For nitride fuel, a breeding ratio >1 is secured directly in the core, so that a steel end screen is considered in application to this fuel (Table 4).
On raising the requirements of plutonium provisioning with accelerated development of two-component nuclear ener- gy, aside from the maximum breeding ratio, the critical load in BN-1200 can be reduced by converting to a more compact core. The introduction of fast reactors into the structure of nuclear energy is important for decreasing the volume of radio-
active waste and increasing plutonium for energy production, which eliminates plutonium accumulation, which in a one-com- ponent system with VVER is equal to ~230 or ~160 kg/GW per year with possible one-time irradiation in refabricated fuel. Sodium-cooled fast reactors also make it possible to solve the problem of the accumulation of actinides. In VVER they are formed in amounts ~18 kg/GW per year, mainly, neptunium. After removal from the reactor, americium accumulates as a result of the decay 241Pu and presents the greatest danger. Taking into consideration the formation of 241Am the accumulation of actinides in the spent fuel after a ten-year hold-up period is estimated to be 32.4 kg/GW per year, including 18 kg/GW of americium per year [16].
Fuel containing americium and neptunium of its own is to be used in BN-1200. On irradiation their amount in     the fuel stabilizes at the level ~3% americium and ~0.5% neptunium. The establishment of an equilibrium composition is characteristic for actinides. Thanks to this, their accumulation will be needed in BN-1200. Moreover, in sodium-cooled fast reactors even the utilization of the americium formed in VVER in amounts above 50 kg per year is possible. The quantitative parameters of possible burnup of actinides in BN-1200 must be determined taking into account the safety and acceptability of the influence of the reactor itself as well as the fuel cycle, including the fabrication of special assemblies with actinides, on the economic metrics.
Conclusion. The practice of originating, developing, and operating power-generating blocks with sodium-cooled fast reactors has provided a representative groundwork for realizing the strategic direction of the Rosatom State Corporation for effective closure of the nuclear fuel cycle with origination of a two-component nuclear energy system based on VVER and fast reactors in constant synergistic development.
The operation of BN-600, -800, realization of the production of mixed uranium-plutonium oxide fuel at FGUP GKhK, and experience in reprocessing spent fuel at Mayak afford the development of a technology for closing the nuclear fuel cycle of a fast reactor operating on uranium-plutonium fuel. The subsequent assimilation of commercial sodium-cooled fast reactors into the nuclear energy system determines not only effective utilization of plutonium in the spent fuel from ther- mal reactors and the reduction of the volume of stored radioactive waste with concomitant burnup of actinides but also the development of an international business using both VVER and sodium-cooled fast reactors technologies.
