<title>Developments in Shell Surface Characterizations Using Holography</title>
<Affiliation>a.CEA DAM Bourgogne Valduc, Is sur Tille, France
b.Université de Toulon, Laboratoire des sciences de l’information et des Systèmes, UMR CNRS 7296, BP 20132, 83957 La Garde Cedex, France</Affiliation>
<author>A. Chobriat, O. Raphaël, C. Hermerel, E. Busvelle, A. Choux, P. Merillot, L. Reverdy & M. Theobald</author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>FUSION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/15361055.2017.1374813</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1080/15361055.2017.1374813</URL>
Abstract — The Digital Holographic Microscopy (DHM) technology allows fast three-dimensional (3-D) surface image acquisition in order to characterize and quantify defects on microshell outer surface. This device captures holograms and reconstructs a double image, one for the intensity and another for the phase. Depending on the used objective lens (20× or 50×) and the microshell diameter, several hundred or thousand pictures must be taken to cover both hemispheres (1170 pictures for a 2200-µm-diameter capsule). A specific handling system using two rotation axes has been developed to acquire automatically all 3-D hemispherical data without any manipulation. A new version of the 3-D surface rebuilding (using images stitching) and analyzing software is used to characterize (diameter and height measurement) and to localize individual defects, such as bumps or pits. Using a new version of the dedicated software, the pictures are filtered and stitched together to perform a 3-D surface mapping of the capsule. Postprocessing routines are able to detect defects and to sort them out. Specific
tools are also dedicated to the characterization of polishing defects, such as concave or clustered defects.
In addition to this, a study of the DHM metrology capabilities, including a comparison with a calibrated atomic force microscope, has been led.
Keywords — Target, microshell, characterization.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION: PRINCIPLE
The CEA designs, develops, and fabricates targets or components of targets to be experimented on the Laser Megajoule1,2 (LMJ). Among these parts, the ablator capsule3,4 outer surface must be mastered since surface defects might have a negative impact during high-power laser experiments.
The Digital Holographic Microscopy (DHM) technol- ogy has been used for several years in order to characterize and to count defects on microshell outer surface, thanks to its ability to acquire quite quickly a global three-dimensional (3-D) surface mapping of microshells.5,6 This device, as well as the associated data processing, must however be continuously upgraded to keep up with the improvements made in capsule manufacturing processes.
The principle of the DHM technology, provided by the Swiss firm Lyncee Tec,7 is based on a modified Mach Zehnder interferometer (Fig. 1). The main  advantage  of this technology lies in its ability to capture a digital hologram used to compute a 3-D reconstruction of the scanned area.
In order to achieve a full automated hemispheric survey of a microshell,  held under the DHM objective  by a vacuum chuck, a specific software-controlled mechanical device was designed (Fig. 2). Mainly based on the use of two perpendicular rotation axes, it enables the acquisition of the holograms needed for the mapping of various capsule diameter.
Depending on the capsule diameter and the mapping resolution, two objectives can be used. The 20× objective
Fig. 1. Holographic microscope schema in reflection scanning microshell surface.
Fig. 2.  Data acquisition principle for a LMJ microshell.
allows the acquisition of 250 × 250-µm2 pictures, with a lateral resolution of 0.38 µm·pixel−1 and a height resolu- tion  inferior  to  0.1  µm.  The  picture  size  drops  to 100 × 100 µm2 with the 50× objective whereas the lateral resolution improves to 0.15 µm·pixel−1, with the height resolution remaining <0.1 µm.
Acquired picture batches are processed by a specific software, developed in collaboration with the Universities of Burgundy and Toulon. Treatment is made up of the following steps: unwrapping of the hologram phase, removal of the spherical component (leveling), and pic- ture stitching for each acquired meridian.
Using pattern recognition routines, meridian stripes are finally stitched together to get a full mapping of the micro- shell, while a software treatment reduces bump redundancy which might occur in common regions of several meri- dians. A morphological analysis of the pictures8 makes it possible to get a global 3-D outer-surface mapping.
II.DATA PROCESSING SOFTWARE: IMPROVEMENTS
To begin with, every defect characterized and localized by the morphological analysis is now compared to a Gaussian-fitted profile so as to evaluate the correlation coefficient.
Bumps with a correlation coefficient <0.1 are auto- matically considered as irrelevant and excluded from the final counting. This improvement was made to ensure that bumps were not ghost ones, often detected with the pre- vious version of the software, due to the presence of unavoidable numerical greyscale gap between two images after the removing of the spherical shape (see Fig. 3a). As these detected defects are not real ones, the fit is inefficient and results in a correlation coefficient <0.1.
This advance in bump processing, besides plotting them on Haan’s diagram (revisions 3 and 5)9,10 with a shape code (function of the correlation coefficient) also enables getting an easy warning on critical big bumps (Figs. 3b and 3c).
Furthermore, a graphic tool included in the latest versions of the software provides the ability to inspect each meridian strip, looking for defect repartition and doubtful defects (Fig. 4).
Bumps and pits are actually pointed by squares on each strip. Except for pits and already detected bumps, marked specifically as seen on Fig. 4, the marking assigned to each square depends on the bump location   on Haan’s revision 3 specification curves (Fig. 3a): above double-line curve, between single-line and double-line curves, between dotted and single-line curves, below dotted curve provided that height >120 nm.
III.CHARACTERIZATION OF NEW KINDS OF DEFECTS
Microshell polishing could generate new kinds of defects (scratches and pits) which need to be characterized,
Fig. 3. (a) Example of an imaginary bump, also called ghost bump. (b) Examples of bumps versus the correlation coefficient regarding Haan’s curves (revision 3) representation.9 (c) Examples of bumps and pits versus full width at half maximum and correlation coefficient regarding Haan’s curves (revision 5) representation.10
Fig. 4.  Graphic tool to check the defect dimension on a reconstructed strip.
even if they cannot be fitted using a conventional mathematical model (spherical cap, Gaussian, etc.). This problem is solved by using a specific feature of these defects.
On microshells, scratches or pits form hollow volumes, of which borders delimitate an  S  surface  on the outer surface (Fig. 5).
Two  morphological  parameters  of  those  S surfaces
—concavity  γ and  stretching  α—allow  the  software  to sort out these defects as pits or scratches as defined in  Eq. (1):
@1
where
r = biggest inscribed circle radius for S, determined from its skeleton
R = smallest circumscribed circle radius for S, given by an Emo Welzl algorithm11
per(S) = perimeter of S
per(conv(S)) = perimeter of S convex envelope.
These parameters enable one to plot each defect on a concavity versus stretching graph (with a marking indi- cating the maximum depth of each plot), giving a rough
Fig. 5. Example of S surface.
idea of what kind of polishing defect is present on the microshell surface: pits remove italics from all characters (α; γ 1), rectilinear scratches (α 0; γ 1), curvilinear scratches (Fig. 6).
Nevertheless, some scratches are in fact dotted  curves made of a string of pits (Fig. 7) and cannot be characterized as a single defect using the preceding method. Therefore, an additional plug-in had to be designed to detect clusters of pits and characterize their global shape based on the k-means algorithm.12
This automatic clustering is performed in two stages. Distances between each of the previously detected pits  are first computed, and pits with a distance that is lower than a threshold value are clustered. Resulting clusters are then organized according to the graph theory and are sorted out by their geometry (scratches, conglomerates  of pits, or part of circles) (Fig. 8).
IV.METROLOGY CAPABILITY: UNCERTAINTIES
The metrology capability of the DHM to measure the kinds of defects detected on a microshell has been demonstrated by using a set of representative calibrated standards: an atomic force microscope (AFM) grid, a step, and a roughness sample.
Measurements made on the AFM grid and the step standard show that the DHM can measure 100-nm-high defects with a precision smaller than 3 nm (Fig. 9).
Moreover, a comparison was made between the DHM and an AFM, the latter being annually calibrated with a standard grid. An uncertainty lower  than  3% (Fig. 10) was evaluated after comparative measurements made on a 1-µm-high bump.
To evaluate its roughness measurement capabilities, a calibrated roughness standard was analyzed with theFig. 7.  Succession of pits forming a dotted curve.
Fig. 8.  Three kinds of clusters: (a) conglomerate, (b) scratch, and (c) circle.
Fig. 9. (a) DHM acquisition of a calibrated AFM grid (150 × 150 µm2), and (b) DHM acquisition of a 176-nm step standard calibrated.
Fig. 10.  (a) AFM and (b) DHM measurement comparison on a single bump.
DHM. The results (82.2 nm measured for 79.7 ± 2.5 nm), displayed in Fig. 11, were satisfactory.
V.FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS
Some work needs to be done in order to improve several aspects of the DHM scanning and data processing. The former is actually undergoing some improvements aimed at mastering more sharply the microshell position under the objective, in spite of its variable diameter and the complex displacement-stages  assembly  needed  for the holding. Real-time position tracking using pattern recognition routines is being examined. Its ability to repo- sition the microshell with the necessary precision remains to be shown however. Another work aiming to improve the focus on the outer surface is under development. Since the holographic microscopy enables getting an in-depth
characterization, some troubles occasionally appear in the mastering of the actual outer-surface scanning.
Regarding data processing, a new kind of picture filtering is currently under test. Originally designed for astronomical picture processing, this filtering is based on an iterative method for image background removal.13 A beta version of this algo- rithm already gives significant results as shown on Fig. 12. Nevertheless, the beta version of the algorithm still needs some computing optimizations, including multicore and Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) processing, to be fully functional.
VI.CONCLUSION
The DHM is a very efficient device with the capability to quickly perform a 3-D scanning. The latter is able to accurately characterize the microshell outer surface, leading to improvements in their manufacturing process. Its
Fig. 11. Results of a roughness standard measure made with the DHM.
Fig. 12.  View of meridian strips (a) without stellar filtering and (b) with stellar filtering.
metrology capability has been demonstrated with standard calibrated samples and with a comparison with AFM.
In order to compute the massive amount of data acquired for each microshell, specific software was designed to auto- matically localize and characterize every individual defect on the outer surface. This software is continuously undergoing improvements as manufacturing processes evolve. For exam- ple, microshell polishing could generate new kinds of defects (individual or clustered pits, scratches) that need to be char- acterized. It requires the implementation of dedicated rou- tines, which show their efficiency in microshell surface knowledge regarding the LMJ specifications.
Further developments are currently being led to enhance the scanning quality of the DHM and the postpro- cessing software.
Fig. 6.  Example of graph concavity versus stretching for pits and scratches characterization.
