<title>Automated separation and analysis of krypton‑85 from low‑volume gaseous effluent of nuclear power plant</title>
<Affiliation>1.Reprocessing Research & Development Division, Reprocessing Group, Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam 603102, Tamilnadu, India
2.Department of Chemical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Madras 600036, India
3.Raja Ramanna Fellow, Department of Atomic Energy, Mumbai, India
4.Homi Bhabha National Institute, Anushaktinagar, Mumbai 400094, India
5.Department of Chemical Engineering, Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai 400019, India</Affiliation>
<author>Yan‑Jun Huang· Gui‑Yin Guo· Chao‑Feng Chen · Li‑Tao Yang · Zhi‑Hong Shang‑Guan · Xiang‑Dong Sha· Jian‑Lin Yao · Chen Hu</author>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>NUCLEAR ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10967-019-06838-6</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1007/s10967-019-06838-6</URL>
Abstract
Based on the requirements of the lower detection limit for the low-volume gaseous effluent, we have designed an automatic separation apparatus of krypton (Kr). The principle of the apparatus is based on both the adsorption and desorption mecha- nism in the traps with the activated carbon particles and gas chromatography with 5A molecular sieves. The separation efficiency and overall recovery rate could be maintained at about (90.4 ± 4.2)% and (24.3 ± 1.3)%. The 85Kr could be radio- assayed on a liquid scintillation counter following the automatic separation and loading into the cryogenic count vial. The detection limit based the low-volume of 3 L is about 9.5 Bq m−3, and the expanded relative uncertainties are in the range of 13–18% for typical measurements.
Keywords Gaseous effluent · Nuclear power plant · Krypton-85 · Automated separation · Liquid scintillation spectrometry
Introduction
Krypton-85 is one of the most important radionuclides that released from the nuclear power plant (NPP) [1–3]. It has a half-life of 10.76 years and decays mostly (99.57%) to stable 85Rb by the release of beta particles with maximum energy of 0.687 MeV. The second decay is by beta particle emis- sion with the maximum energy of 0.173 MeV followed by gamma-ray emission with energy of 0.514 MeV [4].
The most relevant source of 85Kr in the atmosphere is from fuel reprocessing facilities, and the nuclear reactors in normal operation contribute only a minor source [5]. Even so, monitoring of 85Kr is considered necessary by the authorities in the most countries with NPPs, because it is the main radioactive noble gases from the aspect of release and the concerns of public health [1–3].
Regulations in China required each NPP operator to carry on the statistics of the release amounts of the radioactive noble gas including 85Kr generally [6, 7]. In actual situa- tions, there are two handling methods by the operators. The first is the method of reasonable estimation through the ratio of 85Kr and 133Xe from the monitoring results and the source term calculation of the reactor in most realistic cases [8–10]. The second is the method by using the traditional gamma spectrometry but with extremely high minimum detection of concentrations (MDC) for 85Kr. Both methods are unreason- able from the aspect of the requirements of the effluent mon- itoring [7]. The first method would lead to biassing results   as the ratios of 85Kr and 133Xe maybe vary in orders of mag- nitude. Preliminary investigation of the release amounts of 85Kr and 133Xe from the NPPs in France (19 NPPs) in the past 16 years (2002–2017) indicates that the ratios of 85Kr and 133Xe were in the range of 3.5 × 10−5 to 60.9, with the average and the standard deviation of 0.42 ± 3.64 [11]. It was indicated the unconvincing assumption of the consistent ratio that one can obtain the release amount of 85Kr from the data of 133Xe.
The second method has obvious disadvantages because the gamma spectroscopy typically with high-purity germa- nium (HPGe) detector for 85Kr could only give a pseudo data below a very prominent MDC in most situation. The reasons lie in that the absolute detection efficiency for the gamma ray of 85Kr is small (commonly below 1%), and the decay fraction for the gamma ray is also small (0.423%) [7, 9]. Typical MDC for 85Kr monitoring using the method is about tens of thousands of Bq m−3 [7]. In China, the regulations require the NPP operators to submit the report of the release amounts for the radionuclides with half of the concentration for that below MDC [6]. One can imagine that this is ridicu- lous if 85Kr is accounted according to the method because that would lead to the conclusion of the main contribution of 85Kr to the radioactive noble gas. So, statistics of noble gaseous effluent taking no accounts of 85Kr released from the stack of NPPs was generally allowed in China currently. For this reason, it is urgent to develop an effective method with lower MDC to solve the problem [7]. With the prin- ciples of the radioassay, the MDC is associated with the detection efficiency and the background of the detector, the sample amount, the counting time and the faction of the ray for the detection [12]. Higher detection efficiency, lower background, larger sample amount, and longer counting time allow one to get a lower MDC. Constrained by the sampling and monitoring conditions for each NPP, it is impractical to lower MDC to a significantly-lower level by the meth- ods such as increasing the sample amount and the detection efficiency, or reducing the background and extending the measuring time. Notice that the main beta particles with the maximum energy of 0.687 MeV has a large branching ratio (99.57%), and the liquid scintillation counting (LSC) method has a characteristic of high detection efficiency and low background, it reminded us of the assay method by LSC
[7].
Some literature reported the LSC method in monitoring the 85Kr in the atmosphere [13–15]. The MDC below several mBq m−3 could be achieved in the typical sampling and monitoring conditions [13]. Sampling volumes were sev- eral hundreds of liters. The detection efficiency was higher than 50%, and the background was generally about 10 cpm by using a low-level LSC. For a typical sampling volume (several liters) of the gaseous effluent for assay of the radio- active noble gas in the current NPPs in China, a preliminary study showed that the MDC of three orders of magnitude lower  could be  achieved  compared to  the HPGe method.
It reminded us that the low-volume of the sample could be assayed using LSC method for 85Kr after measurement on HPGe detector to determine 133Xe, 135Xe, et al. Another advantage is that one does not have to change the sampling or on-line monitoring system of gaseous effluent in NPPs. Although we cannot beforehand know the absolute concen- trations of 85Kr in the gaseous effluent, it was anticipated that the NPP operators could report the release amounts much
more accurately by using the LSC method.
The LSC method for 85Kr requires to separate the Kr from the gaseous effluent [7]. As air contains only 1.14 ppm Kr, for the low-volume of the sample (typically about 3 L), only 3 μL Kr would be obtained, which puts forward a high request for the separation process and the TCD (Thermal Conductivity Detector) detection. It was reported the mini- mum detectable amount of Kr by gas chromatography (with TCD) is only about 0.01 ml [13], which indicated that the separation of Kr from the air with low-volume air is impos- sible. However, some others literature reported that the detection of Kr with GC below 1 μL is suitable [16–18], which made us examine the availability of the separation of Kr from low volume air. Meanwhile, the tedious and time- consuming separation by the manual operation is inadvisable for the effluent monitoring of NPPs. An automatic separation apparatus of Kr from low volume gas sample is urgently required. The state-of-the-art technologies of high precision sensors and solenoid valves allow one to provide the auto- mated separation process in this situation.
So, in this paper, we introduce the design and the results of an analytical method for 85Kr in low-volume gaseous effluent. The highlights of this work includes the automatic design and the low volume separation process, which allow a separation within 4 h with the one-key operation, and the typical MDC below 10 Bq m−3 could be achieved for 3 L gaseous effluent samples. This method has been applied in the NPPs of China, and would also expect a further applica- tion to other nuclear facilities.
Experimental
Initial study of MDC with the LSC method
Effective experimental design requires an accurate insight into the detection capabilities of the measurement proce- dures, usually described with MDC that defined as an esti- mate of the actual concentration of an analyte required to give a specified high probability that the measured response will be greater than the critical values [12]. Determination of MDC could be expressed as the following equation for the low-level radioactivity measurements based on the Curie detection limit [19, 20]:
@1
where nb is the background count rate (cps), tb is the count- ing time for the sample and the background (s), ε is the detection efficiency for the detector related the gamma-ray  or particles, η is the total recovery rate from the separation  or concentration process, V is the sample amount (m3), ζ is the branching ratio for the gamma-ray or particles.
The previous HPGe method for the determination of 85Kr
in gaseous effluent in China could only provide tens of thou- sands of Bq m−3 based on the assumption that the detection for 3 L gaseous effluent sample efficiency is 1%, the count- ing time is 5000 s, the background is 0.01 cps, and the sam- ple volume is 3 L. For the LSC method, the fraction ratio of
the beta ray is 99.57%, and the detection efficiency could be
raised to above 60%, and the separation efficiencies of 60% could be presumed conservatively. At an assumed counting time of 10 h and background of 10 cpm for the separated Kr from 3 L gaseous samples, the MDC of 10 Bq m−3 could be achieved conservatively.
Principles of the separation apparatus
The automatic separation apparatus was integrative with the one-key operation. The purified Kr can be collected in a counting vial waiting for counting on LSC. The prin- ciple of separation is similar to that reported in previous literature [13, 21], which is illustrated in Fig. 1. The physi- cal mechanism is the adsorption and desorption of Kr in activated carbon particles (ACP), and as well as the gas chromatographic separation for the gaseous components. Flowing with the carrier gas helium (99.999%, Linde Indus- trial Gases), the sample gas in the container T1 (3 L, with plug-type joint) is loaded to a cryogenic trap T3 (− 190 °C, filled with ACP(12–32 mesh)) after the primary removal of CO2 and moisture in trap T2 (room temperature, filled with 13 × molecular sieves (MS 13 ×, Aladdin Corp.)). The Kr would be trapped, and the majority of the N2 and O2 would be released after heated and then retained in − 80 °C. Then the trap T3 is heated to 200 °C, and the Kr would be transferred to a cryogenic column T4 (− 190 °C, 160 mm long and 2 mm inner diameter) and retained (− 80 °C), and then was heated to 200 °C for further separation in the gas chromatography (GC). The GC column T5 (6 m long and 3 mm inner diameter, filled with MS 5A) was placed in a thermo-tank (60 °C), and the separation process could be monitored through a TCD, which allow one to collect the Kr
in the counting vial T6 (20 ml, quartz glass) in the interval time of Kr peak on the GC curve. The vial T6 with silicone gel particles (SGP, DG-1, Aladdin Corp.) was pre-cooled and flashed with carrier gas He. After the collection of the purified krypton, it was automatically filled with the cock- tail (Hisafe 3, Perkin-Elmer Corp.), and then, it could be screwed on a cap automatically. After returning to room tem- perature naturally, one can take the vial off for the following counting on the LSC.
In the overall system, the cryogenic trap (T3), columns (T4) and vials (T6) were cooled with liquid nitrogen (LN), and the reagent-adding, cooling, and the heating process could be controlled through monitoring software.
Overall hardware design
Hardware of the apparatus mainly includes five units.
(1)The primary separation unit, which is consisted of traps of T2–T4, the solenoid valves of LN and the line of stainless-steel (2 mm or 4 mm inner diameter). The trap T2 is an U-type tube filled with MS 13 × and is operated at room temperature, while T3 and T4 filled with ACP and with an U-type structure and a coil- based structure respectively. Both could be operated in the temperature range of − 190 to 200 °C through the automatic injection of LN and heating with resistance wire.
(2)The GC unit, which is consisted of a thermo-tank, a GC column (T5), and a TCD. The GC unit is employed to rectifying Kr and could be monitored through the GC curves obtained from the TCD.
Fig. 1 The schematic of the separation apparatus
(3)The collection unit, which is consisted of adsorption equipment with an LSC counting vial (T6), a stepper motor, a solenoid valve of LN. The purified Kr from the GC unit can be collected in the counting vial (filled with SGP) after driven to the fixed position of the step- per motor and precooled with LN.
(4)The LSC cocktail-adding unit, which is consisted of an injection pump and a check valve (V3). The unit is acted automatically to transfer the moderate LSC cock- tail into the counting vial after the adsorption of Kr.
(5)The cap screwing unit, which is consisted of a stepper motor, a vial salver, and an electric finger. The unit is used to screw the cap automatically after the Kr is col- lected in the vial. Gas tightness of the vial and a cap should be guaranteed through tightening-up enough.
The overall separation apparatus has an integrated size of 1000 mm (length) × 500 mm (width) × 600 mm (height) with a compact internal layout. The valves and temperature controllers are arranged in the top, the traps are arranged in the bottom, and the power supply and the sensors are arranged in the back. The locations of the cocktail jar and the counting vial salver are hollowed out and placed in the front of the apparatus along with the monitoring and controlling screen (10 inches).
For the loading of LN, a tank with self-pressurization was used, and the transfer line of LN with 6 mm external diameter and 4 mm internal diameter that wrapped with polyurethane material was used.
The appearance and the structures of the apparatus are illustrated in Fig. 2a, c, d.
Overall software design
The software of the apparatus was designed to monitor the status including the flow rate, temperature, and pressure, and to control the separation process including the cooling, retaining, and heating of the traps, and the action of the valves and stepper motors, and so on.
The upper computer of the apparatus was used based on a computer with a touch screen (10 inches, Fig. 2b), and the software was compiled to monitor the status and actions of each sensor or components. It had three serial ports. Port 1 is used for temperature control. Port 2 is used for the control panel of the valves and step motors. Port 3 is used for sam- pling pump of LSC cocktail. The lower computer was used based on a microcontroller board with the Modbus RTU communication mode to obtain the data from the sensors, the valves, and motors.
The procedures of the apparatus include four stages.
Fig. 2 The appearance (a), software interface (b), the top view structure (c) and the front view structure (d) of the separation apparatus
(1)Preparatory stage. After connecting of the sample container (T1) with the plug-type joint, the apparatus is powered on and then executed with the preheating process (T3, T4) and the initialization process (include pre-flushing with the carrier gas and self-inspection procedure). Then the trap T3 is pre-cooled with liquid nitrogen (LN).
(2)Vial loading stage. The vial salver is pushed out, and a vial filled with SGP is placed on the salver, and then is withdrawn inside and flushed with carrier gas He.
(3)Sample preparation stage. The sample gas is loaded through the carrier gas He to the precooled trap  T3 and the subsequent separation process and collection process including the GC separation is carried on.(4)Cap screwing stage. After collected, the cap of the counting vial is screwed automatically, and then the vial is pushed out with the salver and withdrawn after the vial is taken off. The design of the software allows one-key operation of the start on the touch screen after connecting with the sample container and placing the counting vial on the salver. The overall automatic sepa- ration consumes the time of fewer than 4 h without any intervention during the process.
Experimental
Examination of the gas tightness
Gas tightness is important for the system with positive pres- sure on the lines and circuits. The possible leaking is unac- ceptable for an automatic separation process. The examina- tion of the gas tightness was carried out for the relatively independent sections separately, i.e., the sample loading stage, the gas purifying stage, and the adsorption stage, which were monitored by three gas pressure gauge (P1–P3) respectively under a preset pressure for a certain period.
The monitoring of pressure, temperature and flow rate
Air pressure for container T1 (P1, absolute manometer), TCD (P3, differential manometer) and the line (P2, differ- ential manometer) could be monitored during the separation process with the gas pressure gauge. One can observe the variation of the pressure on the touch screen directly. For the adsorption stage, the gas flow rate could also be monitored with the meter F2.
Temperature controlling would be also given an impact on the separation process. The controlling accuracies could be determined through the temperature gauge (K1–K5).
The data of the temperature could also be viewed on the touch screen during the separation process.
Determination of loading efficiency
The loading efficiency was determined to obtain the time of the corresponding efficiency of transferring sample gas to the traps. Three sets of experiments were carried out with simulated gas of pure O2 and N2, and a mixture of He with a small amount of Kr. The loading flow rate was set at 500 ml min−1. After flushing for about every 3 min, the gas in the container was sampled with a quantitative loop (0.5 ml) and analyzed on an independent GC to obtain the concentrations of O2, N2, and Kr. The loading efficiency (k) could be calculated by the equation:
@2
where C0  is  the concentration of  the initial gas compo-
nent filled in the container, Ci is the concentration at the i
sampling.
Calibration of the TCD
The calibration of the TCD aimed to indicate an accurate concentration for Kr during the separation. Under the pre- determined flow rate of the carrier and the GC separation temperature (60 °C), the TCD was calibrated with various amounts of Kr (99.999%), and the linearity of the TCD sig- nals and the Kr amounts could be determined.
Determination of the retention time and the stability
For a GC separation of the Kr, some residue of O2, N2, and CH4 was expected and would interfere with the Kr peak on the curve. The simulated component of a mixture of O2, N2, Kr and CH4 (volume 10 μL) in carrier gas He was used to be transferred into the GC column. Typical GC curve was obtained through TCD monitoring, and the retention time for each component could be identified.
The stability of the Kr peak on the GC curve was studied with 8 sets of experiments, and the retention time was sta- tistically analyzed.
Determination of the separation efficiencies
The separation efficiency is a key parameter to assess the performance of the apparatus, and it would be used in the equation for the quantifying Kr concentration. It was determined through repeated experiments under the pre- determined conditions and the solidified program of the apparatus. Sixteen experiments were carried out to obtain the average separation efficiency or recovery rate and the relative standard deviation (RSD). An RSD with 10% was considered as acceptable as a development purpose of the apparatus.
Determination of the accuracy and MDC
Combined with the LSC measuring method, the MDC and the accuracy of the analyzing method with the automatic separation were studied. The measurements were car- ried out using an LSA 3000 LSC (Simmax Technology Corp., China). The samples were prepared by adding a certain amount of 85Kr (20 μL of commercial 85Kr in argon matrix) with air into the container T1. After the separa- tion, the counting vials with 85Kr and cocktail would be placed in the LSC and then start counting. Each counting time was 5 h. The background count rate was determined for the equivalent sample without 85Kr in counting vials, and the counting time was 2000 min. The radioactivity concentrations of 85Kr in the gas could be determined by the equation:
@3
where nc and nb is the counting rate (cps) for the sample and background respectively.
In the situation that the counting time for sample and background, the MDC can be determined by the equation:
@4
where tc and tb is the counting time (s) for the sample and background respectively.
Results and discussion
The gas tightness
From the tightness experiments for the three stages of the apparatus, the corresponding air pressure was observed with almost constant during the reservation period (3 h). It was shown a variation of 1% of the initial pressure for the three stages, which indicated that the gas tightness was acceptable for the separation process.
The controlling of the pressure, temperature and flow rate
For the integrated apparatus, the pressure data registered by P1–P3 could be collected and viewed on the touch screen (Fig. 2b) in real-time. Typical variation curves in a separa- tion procedure are illustrated in Fig. 3. The variations were highly corresponding to the valves switching and the tem- perature control.
Fig. 3 Typical variation curves of pressure (P1–P3)  and  flow  rate (F1) in a separation procedure
Fig. 4 Typical variation curves of temperature for K2–K5 in a separa- tion procedure
The registered data of the temperature for K2–K5 showed the responses for the controlling of cooling and heating for the traps (Fig. 4). Overall, the controlling of air temperature was considered acceptable.
For the temperature of K2, the controlling temperature of
− 190 °C is enough to adsorb Kr and would have no influ- ence on the trapping after loading the sample gas to the pre- cooled trap T3 because the melting point and the boiling point for Kr are − 157.4 °C and − 153.4 °C [22]. Heating processes aimed to − 80 °C and 200 °C consumed about 6 min and 4 min respectively.
For the temperature of K3, the cooling and heating pro- cess is similar to that of K2, the peaks at 200 °C due to the negative feedback of the temperature controlling have no impact on the desorption of Kr from the column owing the temperature is enough.
For the variation of K4, the monitoring of the tempera- ture provided the signals that indicate the stability of the TCD, which showed a good performance for the separation process.
For the variation of K5, there are two noticeable drops during the absorption of the krypton in the counting vial,
which is corresponding to two LN-adding with the tem- perature controlling (− 80 °C). The cocktail-adding process is also automatic through the program controlling, which would cause the temperature to rise rapidly. The thermocou- ple would be left up after the cocktail-adding process, and then the cap-screwing process would be carried out auto- matically. Due to the cocktail-adding process would bring out the problem of rapid temperature rise, it was expected that the adsorption of krypton would be affected.
The data from K1 and P1 were used to calculate the sam- ple volume in standard condition.
The flow rate monitoring would also provide some indica- tions of the separation status; the corresponding variation for a typical process was shown in Fig. 3. It can be observed the obvious drop and peaks during the adsorption and desorp- tion process for T3.
Loading efficiency
The loading efficiencies with the flow rate of 500 ml min−1 for the carrier gas showed similar curves for O2, N2 and Kr(He) (Fig. 5). Almost 100% of loading efficiency could be ascertained for the 3 L container after flushing for about 20 min.
The calibration factor of the TCD
The calibration curve for the TCD is illustrated in Fig. 6, which indicated good linearity for the quantification of the Kr using the TCD (the adjusted R2 is 0.99929, and Pearson’s r is 0.99969).
The retention time
The typical GC curves for the simulated samples are illus-trated in Fig. 7. It is shown that the O2, N2, Kr and CH4 order could be observed at 60 °C for the GC column.
Fig. 5 The variations of the loading efficiency for different gas with the flow rate about 500 ml min−1The Fig. 6 The calibration curve of TCD for Kr
distance of the peaks is acceptable and the retention inter- val between 26 and 31 min was selected for the collection of Kr. The results of eight sets of experiments showed that the average peaks occurred in 28.64 min, and the repeat- ability standard deviation was about 1.5%.
Separation efficiencies
The results of separation efficiencies from sixteen experi- ments showed that the average is about 90.4%, the RSD is about 4.6% (Fig. 8a), which indicated the recovery rate and its stabilities were acceptable for the separation apparatus with 3 L gas sample.
Fig. 7 The GC curves of the simulated gas sample, and the deter- mined retention interval of krypton are illustrated
Fig. 8 The separation efficiency and overall recovery rates from sets of separations experiments
Overall recovery and the detection limit
For the overall recovery determination of the apparatus, the standard samples of 85Kr in 20 μL argon matrices with the activity of about 35.62 Bq were used, and the measuring results were determined on a low-level LSC. The previous study showed that the detection efficiency of 85Kr from independent experiments on LSC with vari- ous activities of 85Kr was in the range of 82.1–83.9%, the average was about 83.1%, and the standard deviation was about 1.1%. Then eighteen experiments were carried out, and the sampling counting rates were recorded to obtain the overall recovery, which was statistically calculated with an average of about 24.3% and RSD of about 5.5% (Fig. 8b). The lower values than the separation efficiency were bound up with the automatic recovery of 85Kr in the counting vials. As mentioned above, the recovery of 85Kr in the counting vials would be affected during the cock- tail- adding to a cooled vial. Counting to the separation efficiency of 90.4%, the recoveries rate for the counting vials with the automatic adsorption process would be in the range of 23.8–29.7%, which indicated plenty room of improvement for the overall recoveries in the future.
The MDC for the method was calculated based above
mentioned conditions and Eq. (4). The background of the LSC was about 0.18 cps, the counting time of background and the sample were about 2000 min, the overall recovery was about 24.3%, and the detection efficiency was about 83.1%, which would give the MDC about 9.5 Bq m−3.
Typical measurements of the gaseous effluent and the uncertainties
Typical measurements of 85Kr were carried out in an NPP for the gaseous effluents released from the system of DVN (Nuclear auxiliary building ventilation) and ETY (Con- tainment atmosphere monitoring). The low-level LSC of LSA-3000(Simmax Technology Corp., China) was used. The background and sample counting time was 500 min and 120 min. The results were illustrated in Table 1. It was shown that the typical activity concentrations of 85Kr from DVN system were in the range of 142.1–277.2 Bq m−3, while from ETY system were in the range of 236–496.1 Bq m−3, which were significantly lower than the previous MDC of 60,000 Bq m−3 by HPGe method. It was indicated that the new method is suitable for the accuracy qualification of the 85Kr from the gaseous effluent.
The uncertainties for the separation and measurement were evaluated by propagation the relative uncertainties according to the Eq. (3). Providing an accurate quantification of the sample volume (V), the amount of standard activity for calibration of LSC, and the branch ratio of β decay (ζ), the relative uncertainty originates mainly from the factors of (1) the net count rate (nc-nb), u1; (2) the detection efficiency (ε), u2; (3) the overall recovery (η), u3. u1 could be determined from the following equation:
@5
Table 1 Typical measurement results of 85Kr from DVN system and ETY system
u2 and u3 could be determined from repeatability of cali- bration efficiency and the overall recoveries, as mentioned above of 1.1% and 5.5% respectively. The expanded uncer- tainties for each measurement could calculated from the fol- lowing equation with a coverage factor of 2:
@6
Evaluated uncertainties for each measurements were also listed in Table 1. It could be determined that the expanded relative uncertainties were in the range of 13–18%.
Conclusion
In this paper, we presented our design of an automatic sepa- ration apparatus for low volume gas sample. The apparatus was integrated and could be operated without intervention during the separation process by the software controlling. The procedure was solidified into a lower computer, and the status of the apparatus during the separation could be monitored. The main performance of the apparatus was introduced such as the controlling results of temperature and air pressure, loading efficiency, the stability of Kr peak in the GC curves, the separation efficiency of Kr. Also, the overall recovery rate of the method using the apparatus and a low-level LSC was studied, and all measurements showed acceptable results. The overall separation could be com- pleted within 4 h for the low volume gas sample, and the typical MDC was about 9.5 Bq m−3, which is three orders of magnitude lower than HPGe method that used in present NPP of China. It is indicated that the method is good enough for the monitoring of the gaseous effluent in NPP, and the uncertainties evaluation was described for the typical meas- urements of gaseous effluent.
