<title>Radiochemistry course in the undergraduate nuclear science program at Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia</title>
<Affiliation>S. B. Sarmani (&) R. B. Yahaya M. S. Yasir A. Ab. Majid K. S. Khoo  I.  A.  Rahman  F.  Mohamed Nuclear Science Program, Faculty of Science and Technology,Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, 43600 Bangi, Malaysia </Affiliation>
<author>S. B. Sarmani • R. B. Yahaya • M. S. Yasir •A. Ab. Majid • K. S. Khoo • I. A. Rahman •F. Mohamed</author>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>NUCLEAR ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10967-014-3470-x</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1007/s10967-014-3470-x</URL>
Abstract Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia offered an undergraduate degree program in Nuclear Science since 1980 and the programme has undergone several modifi- cations due to changes in national policy and priority. The programme covers nuclear sub-disciplines such as nuclear physic, radiobiology, radiochemistry, radiation chemistry and radiation safety. The radiochemistry component con- sists of radiochemistry, chemistry in nuclear industry, radiochemical analysis laboratory, radiopharmaceutical chemistry subjects and mini research project in radiochemistry.
Keywords Radiochemistry education · Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
Introduction
In the 1960s nuclear technology was seen by developing nations as an emerging technology and many undergradu- ate university courses offered radiochemistry, radiobiology and nuclear physics subjects. Being a new university established in 1970, Universiti Kebangsaan ‘Malaysia (National University of Malaysia) embarked on similar pathway especially so when Malaysia was just being admitted as a member of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Through IAEA Malaysia received sub- stantial technical assistance in term of experts and equip- ment to develop academic programme in the field of nuclear science meant for developing capacity to serve the newly established Atomic Research Center. The program has undergone several changes and adjustment due to demand, emphasis and government policies. When the government announced the National Nuclear Policy as a long term plan in the development of nuclear science and technology, the program was realigned with the policy to support the implementation of nuclear power program in Malaysia [1]. The university was accorded a research university status in 2006 with a total annual student enrolment of about 20,000 where 60 % of them are grad- uate students.
Graduates of the program found jobs in industry, research organisations or the national nuclear regulatory body. Because of the good employment opportunity the programme has been  running  successfully  for  the  last  35 years. This is in contrast with the situation in other countries where according to Meyer and Vivier [2] there is an alarming decrease in nuclear field domain as well as in other scientific disciplines in Europe and in the Latin American countries [3]. This paper presents the radio- chemistry courses offered in the academic programme leading to the degree of Bachelor of Science in Nuclear Science.
Curriculum
The undergraduate course in nuclear science consists of 46 credit-hours core courses, 33 credit-hours elective courses in physics and mathematics while another 43 credit-hours comprising liberal arts courses. To graduate students are required to accumulate at least 120 credits of the stipulated subjects. Distribution of core courses and the electives are shown in Table 1. First year students are required to enroll
Table 1 The nuclear science course structure
in introduction to nuclear science a subject that introduces
them to fundamental properties of the nucleus. The lecture starts with the study of atom and then narrow down to the properties of the nucleus where students will be able to appreciate the linkages between atomic physics and nuclear physics. Other topics covered are stability of nuclei and the radioactive decay, decay modes, decay energy and appli- cation of radioactive decay.
Radiochemistry subjects
chemistry major students may take radiochemistry course as an elective.
Radiochemistry
The course consists of about 20 h lectures on safe handling of radioisotopes, radiochemical separation, and radio- chemical analysis covering topics on neutron activation, applications of radioisotope tracers and others. The lectures are supplemented with practical work in radiochemical analysis laboratory. Neutron activation analysis plays a major role in this course as it is one of the sensitive and convenient analytical methods and it is a bridge that con- nects nuclear chemistry and radiochemistry. Students will get the idea that radiochemistry is the study of chemical properties of radioactive materials while nuclear chemistry involves the study of changes due to nuclear reaction [4].
Chemistry of nuclear industry
The course concerns with the study of chemical properties of elements in nuclear fuel cycle from mining, extraction, purification, fuel fabrication, irradiation, spent fuel repro- cessing and radioactive waste storage and management. Lectures on the chemistry of uranium, thorium, zirconium, hafnium, transuranium elements and fission products take about 50 % of the total hours. Understanding the chemical properties of these elements is important to appreciate the complexity of nuclear industry and thus proper manage- ment of the radioactive wastes. Solvent extraction methods for purification of uranium and thorium, extraction of transuranium from spent fuels and isotope separation for 235U enrichment are also parts of the lectures.
Radiopharmaceutical chemistry
Radiopharmaceutical chemistry deals with general intro- duction  of various  radionuclides  used in radiopharmaceu-
ticals.  The  emphasis  is  on  99Tcm,  133Xe,  51Cr  and  57Co labeled compounds and the labeling approach as well as quality control and quality assurance of the products. On the application aspects students are taught how to calculate patient doses arising from the use of labeled drugs.
Radiochemical analysis laboratory
Students are required to carry out at least ten experiments in radiochemical analysis laboratory class and some of the experiments are as follows;
1.Radioisotope production: activation of 3.0 g vanadium oxide samples in 241AmBe neutron source for a period of between 5 and 40 min. Students are required to plot
the activation curve and calculate specific activity of the radionuclide produced.
2.Radioactive decay: determination of half-life of 28Al and 52V activation products of vanadium and alumin- ium in an isotopic neutron source. Activity is measured by NaI(Tl) detector. By plotting the activity on a semi- log diagram as a function of time, the students calculate the experimental value of the half-life. To analyse a little more complex decay is done by activating silver which form  108Ag,  110Ag  and  110Agm. The half-lives are determined graphically by plotting activity against time on a semi-log graph paper.
3.Szilard-Chalmers reaction: this experiment will intro-
precipitate was washed with distilled water and then dried under IR lamp. About 0.02 g of the dried  precipitate was dissolved in 5 ml concentrated H2SO4 as a standard. The remaining silver oxalate precipitate was loaded into a column for solubility test. 5 ml of distilled water was passed through the column and the effluent was collected for counting, this step was repeated thrice. The column was then eluted with 5 ml 0.01, 0.02 and 0.04 M ammonium solution consecu- tively. The radioactive silver ion was then counted to determine the solubility of silver oxalate in water and ammonium solution. The chemical reaction involved is shown below.
mAg  C2O4 þ  4NH4 ! 2 m Ag½NH3]2þþ C2O—2
activity carrier free radioisotope through the hot atom chemistry reaction. Ethyl Iodide is irradiated in a neutron flux to produce 128I, and the iodide ion released is precipitated as silver iodide AgI labeled with 128I. Students will gain experience on radioiso- tope separation by extraction and precipitation and determination of specific activity.
4.Solvent extraction: radiochemical separation of aque- ous acidic iron chloride solution labeled with 59Fe with ethyl ether. 1 ml of FeCl3 (50 mg/ml) solution was added into a series of test tubes containing 10 ml HCl in various concentration of 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 M and extracted with 10 ml diethyl ether each. Students will plot 59Fe activity against acid concentration to deter- mine the highest extraction efficiency. Student will also learn the advantage of using radiotracer in chemical separation and the mechanism of iron extraction.
5.Isotope exchange reaction: this experiment illustrates the isotopic exchange reaction used in preparing a labeled compound n-butyl iodide using NaI labeled with 131I. Students will be able to determine the reaction rate, the rate constant and the activation energy. 10 ml of NaI solution in acetone containing 131I was added to 10 ml 0.06 M n-butyl iodide solution in acetone. The mixture is mixed thoroughly in a water bath at constant temperature. At every 10 min interval 5 ll aliquot is withdrawn and put into a tube contain- ing benzene. NaI remains in aqueous phase while n- butyl iodide goes to the benzene layer. The activity in the two phases are counted using NaI detector.
6.Isotope exchange analysis: student will understand the principles of isotope exchange and using the reaction to determine the solubility of silver oxalate in water. Tracer 110Agm was added into silver nitrate solution   (2 g/20 ml) and excess oxalic acid is added into the solution and placed in water bath at 90 °C for 10 min to obtain labeled silver oxalate. The silver oxalate
7.
Radiometric titration: To determine the equivalence point using radiotracer and to understand the principles of radiometric titration. Twelve centrifuge tubes were filled with 5 ml 0.1 M NaCl solution each. To the tube containing sodium iodide solution was titrated with
0.5 ml of 0.1 M silver nitrate solution labeled with 110Agm tracer. Centrifuge the tube to separate the AgCl precipitate. The precipitate and the supernatant from each tube were counted separately and the activity was plotted against the volume of silver nitrate titrant. Student will obtain two different plots to determine the equivalence point of the titration.
8.Neutron activation analysis: The student will gain some experience in carrying out a basic instrumental neutron activation analysis which include sample preparation, standard preparation, gamma spectrum analysis and calibration and determination of the elements in the samples. Students are required to analyse some plant and soil samples after irradiation in a 1 MW TRIGA Reactor at a neutron flux of 2.1 9 1012 n cm-1 s-1.
Mini research project
Final year students are required to carry out an eight credit- hour mini project based on their interest and inclination. Students who are interested to work on radiochemistry project may choose topic related to application of neutron activation analysis in environmental studies, mineral analysis, trace elements in food and drinking water. Some students do carry out radiochemical separation for certain elements in the activated samples. Other projects include radiochemical separation by solvent extraction and ion- exchange to study extraction parameters. Some are work- ing on the analysis of naturally occurring radioactive materials (NORM) in soil and plant samples to determine the base-line data.
Facilities
The laboratory is quite well equipped with several gamma spectroscopy systems with HPGe detectors, alpha spec- troscopy, scintillation detectors and survey meters. Gamma cell or 60Co gamma-irradiator, Am–Be radioisotope neu- tron source and well equipped radiochemistry and radio- biology laboratories. The 1 MW TRIGA Reactor operated by the Malaysia Nuclear Agency is available for the study of nuclear reaction, activation analysis and radioisotope production. Laboratory facilities at the Malaysia Nuclear Agency are available to our students to carry out certain work dealing with higher radioactivity or in handling short- lived radionuclides.
There is currently 12 academic staff with PhD qualifi- cation in various fields of expertise such as radiochemistry, radiation chemistry, radiobiology, food irradiation, nuclear physics, medical radiation physics, radiation processing and nuclear instrumentation. The academic and technical staff can serve satisfactorily for a total undergraduate enrolment of 90 students and 30 graduate students.
Challenges
Text book
One of the challenges in teaching nuclear science and radiochemistry is in getting good and recently published textbooks. IAEA publications have been used frequently but most of them are written on very specific on certain topic instead of general subject. The lectures notes from other universities that are posted in the web have also been used regularly by students and lecturers. One of the solu- tions is to use a web-based lecture delivery as what was done in the University of Texas A&M [5] and at the Oregon State University [6] where all lectures were in power point notes with many animations and a significant number of solved problems.
Control items
Chemicals such as solvents and some nuclear materials are restricted by exporter to certain country including Malay- sia. Tri-butyl phosphate (TBP) which is used in uranium separation and purification for example is quite difficult to obtain. Uranium oxides and thorium oxide are not available in the country. With such restriction enforced to our country laboratory experiments and students projects are quite restricted.
Moving forward
Review of curriculum
Curriculum review must be conducted every 3–5 years as required by the authority and to suit demand and trend in nuclear science education. A complete review for the program will be done in line with the National Nuclear Policy in training sufficient skilled manpower to support the nuclear power programme. Instrumental and radio- chemical neutron activation analysis is important to train students in sample preparation, activation, radiochemical separation, detector calibration, gamma spectroscopy, radioisotope identification and quantification. A curriculum development of new learning materials for practical classes in Western Kentucky University is an example of com- prehensive undergraduate experiments in radiation labora- tory [7].
Summer school for nuclear engineering
Summer school in nuclear engineering has been organised annually with Korean Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Korean Institute of Nuclear Science (KINS) and Tokyo Technical University. It is specifically designed for training of nuclear engineers and is open to both postgraduate and undergraduate students. This pro- vides deeper insight into nuclear engineering delivered by experts in the field and enhances student’s knowledge with bachelor degree in nuclear science to pursue postgraduate study in the field of nuclear engineering.
Conclusion
A sustainable undergraduate nuclear science degree pro- gramme can be achieved through a curriculum that is developed with the cooperation of relevant stakeholders. Generally the programme plays a role in the conservation of nuclear knowledge while radiochemistry course is a popular elective subject for students majoring in chemistry.
Undergraduate students majoring in nuclear science are required to enroll in the following courses while for
