<title>Effect of soil particle size and types on the crystallization behavior for nuclear waste disposal</title>
<Affiliation>1.State Key Laboratory of Environmental Friendly Energy Materials, Southwest University of Science and Technology, Mianyang 621010, Sichuan, People’s Republic of China
2.Key Laboratory of Radioactive and Rare Scattered Minerals, Ministry of Land and Resources, Shaoguan 512026, People’s Republic of China
3.Fundamental Science on Nuclear Wastes and Environmental Safety Laboratory, Southwest University of Science
and Technology, Mianyang 621010, Sichuan, People’s Republic of China
4.China Institute of Atomic Energy, Beijing 102413, People’s Republic of China
5.Key Laboratory of Radiation Physics and Technology, Ministry of Education, Institute of Nuclear Science and Technology, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610064, People’s Republic of China
6.University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, People’s Republic of China
7.CAS Key Laboratory of Photovoltaic and Energy Conservation Materials, Institute of Plasma Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, P.O. Box 1126, Hefei 230031, People’s Republic of China</Affiliation>
<author>Haojie Tan· Yaping Li · Yushan Yang · Bingsheng Li · Wenxiao Huang · Xiaoyan Shu · Hexi Tang· Yi Liu· Shunzhang Chen · Yi Xie · Xirui Lu</author>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>NUCLEAR ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10967-020-07342-y</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1007/s10967-020-07342-y</URL>
Abstract
To investigate the crystallization behavior in the field of radioactive contaminated soil immobilization, different particle size soils are heated at 1300 °C within 30 min by microwave sintering. The XRD results show that mullite phase appears in the yellow soil when the particle size is over 150 mesh. The behavior of crystallization is also related to the grain size and aluminum–silicon molar ratio. As the particle size increases, the crystallinity values generally decrease in all sintered soils. When the particle size is fixed, the crystallinity values are lowest in yellow sintered soil and highest in black sintered soil.
Keywords Particle size · Soil types · Microwave sintering · Al–Si molar ratio
Introduction
Uranium mining, nuclear testing and nuclear accidents will produce massive soil contaminated by radionuclides, whose radiation and  biological toxicity need the treatment  and  remediation to avoid causing greater harm to the environ-ment [1–6]. Different technologies have been applied in the treatment of radioactive contaminated soil. The traditional treatment and remediation of radioactive contaminated soil can be divided into three types: physical method (such as thermal treatment and physical absorption), chemical method (such as chemical extraction) and biological method (such as bio-mineralization, phytoremediation and bio-sorp- tion) [7–14]. However, several problems remain in regard to these methods in the process of disposing high-level nuclear waste [15]. Therefore, some researchers made attempts to dispose the radioactive contaminated soil with the method of solidification for curing radionuclides steadily, and the result was proved to be feasible [16]. In recent years, many researchers have been applied solidifying method to dispose of radioactive contaminated soil. [17–21]. The solidifica- tion is considered to be an efficient and faster method, and can reduce the migration and diffusion of the radionuclides [22]. The solidification is considered to be one of the most effective methods to deal with radioactive contaminated soil. There are various processes of solidification, but whose influencing factors are nearly identical, including the sin- tering method, the sintering temperature and time, and the
composition and particle size of material. In our previous work, the radioactive contaminated soils have been vitrified successfully [17–20]. The sintering method, sintering tem- perature and pollution concentration have also been studied. Our results show that the soil above 200 mesh is suitable for vitrification. However, the effect mechanism of soil particle size has not been explored in depth. In addition, in the pro- cess of preparation of other materials, researchers have also found that the particle size will affect the property of the samples, as Cu concentration in leachates of large sized par- ticles of air-cooled slag (ACS) and water cooled slag (WCS) samples are considerably less than those of fine particles [23]. The particle size of quartz will affect the form of glass additives on high-level waste melter feed volume expansion [24]. The particle size of components will affect parameters of translucent porcelain [25]. To effective disposal of the nuclear waste, it is indispensable to explore how the particle size of the soil affects the samples’ crystallization behavior. In this work, the effect of soil particle size on crystalliza- tion behavior has been systematically studied to providing basic information for disposal of radioactive contaminated soil. Five different soils, including purple soil, moisture soil, brown soil, black soil and yellow soil were selected as the research objects. On the basis of previous study, micro- wave sintering was chosen in this experiment for its high- efficiency and the excellent uniformity of sintered samples, whose temperature was chosen as 1300 °C and the sintering time was 30 min [19]. The soils were divided into differ- ent particle size (raw soils, 50–100 mesh, 100–150 mesh, 150–200 mesh and over 200 mesh) without simulation nuclides adding, to study how the particle size of the soil affects the crystallization result. The samples were analyzed
by XRD, FT-IR and SEM.
Experimental
Fabrication
These soils adopted were obtained by sampling in five loca- tions of surface soil ranged in 0 cm to 10 cm depth. All soils have been pretreated at 600 °C for 4 h to remove the water and organism. Then chemical composition of soil samples
was measured by X-ray Fluorescence (Axios, Netherlands), which is listed in Table 1. The particle size was divided into five gradients through different mesh sieves, including raw soils, 50–100 mesh, 100–150 mesh, 150–200 mesh and over 200 mesh. Each soil sample was weighed at 1.0000 g. Finally, these samples were held by a corundum cruci- ble (vol, 5 ml) and heated in a microwave muffle furnace (HAMiLab-M1500) at 1300 °C within 30 min. The sche- matic diagram of the brown soil samples sintering process is shown in Fig. 1.
Characterization
X-ray Fluorescence (XRF) (Axios, Netherlands) was used to identify the soil components. Moreover, X-ray diffrac- tion (XRD, X’Per PRO, Netherlands) was taken to confirm the phase structure of solidified soil with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Ǻ) whose scanning ranged 10°–80° and the scanning rate was 8°/min. In addition, Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FT-IR, PE, Spectrum One) was col- lected to obtain the detailed structure information. Field- Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FESEM-EDS, Ultra55.Germany) was used to characterize the micro-mor- phology. Meanwhile, attached with the SEM equipment, it would explain the XRD analysis results better.
Result and discussion
XRD analysis
Figure 2 shows XRD patterns of sintered soils. It can be seen from Fig. 2a–e that all of the sintered soil samples exhibit diffraction peaks related to quartz crystal phase at 26°–27°. Figure 2c, d show that steamed bread peaks exist during 20°–30°, which corresponding to amorphous state. As shown in Fig. 2a–d, the main crystal diffraction peaks of quartz appeared at 2θ = 26°, and some crystal diffraction peaks of quartz appeared at 2θ = 21°, 36°, 40°, 42°, 50°, 60° and 68o. With the particle size increases, the intensities of diffraction peaks related to quartz phase are weaker. Particu- larly, for the black soil and the purple soil, the number of diffraction peaks becomes fewer and amorphous peaks exist
Table 1 Composition of the selected soils in this experiment
Fig. 1 Schematic diagram of the brown soil samples with different particle size by microwave sintering
at 20°–30°. As shown in Fig. 2e, diffraction peaks related to quartz crystal phase appear when the particle size is less than 150 mesh. However, when the particle size of yellow soil is over 150 mesh, the peaks of quartz almost disap- pear, and the peaks of mullite phase appear. It indicates that the particle size will affect the phase formation. In addition, Fig. 2f shows that when the particle size is over 200 mesh, different types of soils’ peaks exist discrepancy.
Micro‑structure analysis
The FT-IR spectra of all sintered samples with different particle size are shown in Fig. 3. It can be seen that the main absorption peaks are situated in the range of 400 cm−1 to 2000 cm−1. The absorption peak near 462 cm−1 and 789 cm−1 are the symmetrical telescopic vibration peak of Si–O bonds [26]. In the range of 850 cm−1 to 1300 cm−1, the strong and wide absorption peaks appear, which is attributed to the anti-symmetric stretching vibration peak of Si–O–Si bond. In addition, all of the samples present weak peaks at 1384 cm−1, which is caused by the –CH3 bond [27]. Besides, nearly 1624 cm−1, there are flexural vibration peaks due to H–O bond [28]. Furthermore, from the FT-IR spectra results of Fig. 3a–d, it can be seen that with the particle size grow- ing, the absorption peaks decrease. As shown in Fig. 3e, for the sintered samples of the yellow soil over 150 mesh, it can be found that there are new absorption peaks about 760–740 cm−1 and 550–530 cm−1 appearing in contrast to
that of the other samples, which is related to Si–O–Al bond [29, 30]. The phenomenon conforms to the XRD results that the phase of mullite appears when the yellow soil’s particle size is over 150 mesh. Figure 3f shows that only the yellow soil singly appears new absorption peaks related to Si–O–Al bond.
Morphology characterization
Macro‑morphology
The raw soil samples and post-sintering samples are shown in Fig. 4. It can be seen that the sintered samples exist variation visibly with the change of soil particle size. From Fig. 4a–d, it can be seen that as the soil particle size increases, the sintered samples’ surface is more lustrous and compact. More glass-phase exists in the sintered soil matrix as the particle size increases, which suggests that the larger particle size could promote vitrification to a certain extent. Figure 4e reveals that ceramic morphology characteristics distinctly, and the soil samples become more pyknotic as particle size increases.
Micro‑morphology
In order to observe the micro morphology of the samples, the Scanning Electron Microscope was adopted. The SEM pictures of raw soil samples over 200 mesh are shown in
Fig. 2 XRD patterns of different soils with different particle size sintered at 1300 °C for 30 min: (a–e), f shows five selected soils over 200 mesh
Fig. 3 FT-IR spectra of five sintered soil matrix with different particle size (a–e), f shows soil samples over 200 mesh
Fig. 5. These samples show the large block is observed in the images, which may be formed by a pile of soil. The SEM image of sintered soil samples over 200 mesh are shown in Fig. 6. It can be seen from Fig. 6 that the crystals are dis- tributed on the surface of the sintered soil samples. From
Fig. 6a–d, it can be observed that the surface of the sam- ples are flat and compact, which indicates that the sintered samples’ grain size is smaller. Figure 6f shows that larger claviform crystal abounds and grows chaotically in sintered yellow soil samples.
Fig. 4 The samples before (the first row) and after (the second row) sintering, from left to right: raw soils, 50–100 mesh, 100–150 mesh, 150– 200 mesh, over 200 mesh
Fig. 5 SEM image of the raw soil samples over 200 mesh. a Brown soil, b moisture soil, c black soil, d purple soil, e yellow soil
Fig. 6 SEM image of the soil sintered samples over 200 mesh. a Brown soil, b moisture soil, c black soil, d purple soil, e yellow soil
Table 2 Grain size of five soils with different particle sizes in the experiment (nm)
Discussion
For further exploring the effect of the grain size on crystal- lization behavior, the grain size is calculated by Scherer formula, which is shown as follows:
@
where D is the average thickness of the crystal grains perpendicular to the crystal plane, K is the Scherrer con- stant (0.89), β represents the full width at half maximum (FWHM) value, θ is the Bragg’s diffraction angle in degree, and γ is the X-ray wavelength (0.15406 nm). The diffrac- tion peak (2θ = 26°–27°) is selected to calculate the grain size. Table 2 shows that the values of grain size ranges from
32.99 nm to 54.19 nm. The crystallinity values are also obtained by analyzing the diffraction peaks (2θ = 26°–27°) with Jade software, which are listed in Table 3. The crys- tallinity values of all sintered samples at different particle sizes are shown in Fig. 7. It can be seen that the crystallinity generally decreases with the increase of particle size. For the yellow soil, as the particle size increases, the crystallinity of decreases drastically.
To investigate the relation between crystallization behav- ior of all soils and the molar ratio of aluminum–silicon, the
Table 3 Crystallinity values of sintered samples at specific diffraction peaks (2θ = 26°–27°)
Fig. 7 The crystallinity of all sintered samples at different particle sizes
Table 4 Molar ratio of Al/Si in all soil samples
molar ratios of aluminum–silicon are calculated and listed in Table 4. The aluminum–silicon molar ratio of yellow soil is largest. For the same particle size, the crystallinity of sin- tered yellow soil is the lowest in all sintered soils. When the aluminum–silicon molar ratio is 0.34 (black soil), the crystallinity is the highest in all sintered soils with the same particle size. When the particle size is fixed, the molar ratio of Al–Si stays in the range of 0.24–0.27, and the molar ratio of Al–Si has slight influence on crystallinity.
Conclusions
In this study, five soils with different particle size were heated at 1300 °C within 30 min by microwave sintering. XRD results show that the peaks of quartz almost disappear and the peaks of mullite phase appear when the particle size of yellow soil is over 150 mesh. The FT-IR analysis results of brown soil, moisture soil and purple soil show that the absorption peaks reduce with the increase of particle size. SEM results show that the crystals are distributed on the surface of the sintered soil samples. The crystallinity values
of all sintered soils generally decrease with the increase of particle size. The aluminum–silicon molar ratio of yellow soil and black soil are 0.72 and 0.34, respectively. When the particle size is fixed, the crystallinity values are the lowest in yellow sintered soil and highest in black sintered soil.
Acknowledgements The authors appreciate the financial supports from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21677118), the Open Foundation of Key Laboratory of Radioactive and Rare Scattered Mineral, Ministry of Land and Resources (No. RRSM- KF2019-03), Longshan academic talent research supporting program of SWUST (No. 18LZX312, No. 18LZX520) and the Fundamental Science on Nuclear Wastes and Environmental Safety Laboratory (No. 16KFHK02), Project of State Key Laboratory of Environment-friendly Energy Materials, Southwest University of Science and Technology (No. 18FKSY0213).
Compliance with ethical standards
Conflict of interest I would like to declare on behalf of my co-authors that this work described is an original research which has not been published previously. No conflict of interest exits in the submission of this manuscript, and the publication of this manuscript is approved by all authors.
