<title>Nuclear fuel cycle modelling using MESSAGE</title>
<Affiliation>1.Beijing Institute of Occupational Medicine for Chemical Industry, No. 50 Yikesong Rd, Beijing, China;2.China Institute of Atomic Energy, Beijing, China;3.China Nuclear Power Design Co.Ltd, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China</Affiliation>
<author>Guiying  Zhang  • Dongsheng Niu • Yanming  Shi  •  Guoliang  Xu  • Gaoliang Li • Hui Zhang • Jue Li • Lei Cao • Zeqin Guo • Zhichao Wang • Yutong Qiu</author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>NUCLEAR ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10967-016-5081-1</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1007/s10967-016-5081-1</URL>
Abstract In order to demonstrate the possibilities of application of MESSAGE tool for the modelling of a Nuclear Energy System at the national level, one of the possible open nuclear fuel cycle options based on thermal reactors has been modelled using MESSAGE. The steps of the front-end and back-end of nuclear fuel cycle and nuclear reactor operation are described. The optimal structure for Nuclear Power Development and optimal schedule for introducing various reactor technologies and fuel cycle options; infrastructure facilities, nuclear material flows and waste, investments and other costs are demonstrated.
Keywords Open nuclear fuel cycle · MESSAGE tool ·
Modelling · Nuclear reactor
Introduction
Nuclear fuel cycle
It is well known that nuclear fuel chain differs from other ones because of the special properties of nuclear fuel, as the calorific value of nuclear fuel depends not only on the  quantity of ‘‘burning’’ substance but also on fuel residence time, reactor spectrum, fuel isotopic composition etc. The nuclear fuel cycle (NFC) consists of individual steps and refers to all the activities related to the use of fissile materials as the main fuel in fission reactors. The nuclear fuel activities begin with the extraction of uranium ore and ends with the disposal of radioactive wastes generated during a reactor operation. There are many possibilities of NFC organizing. The variants depend on the following options:
(a)Once-through (open) or closed NFC- depending on whether the spent fuel is reused or not;
(b)Once- or multi-recycled spent fuel;
(c)Fuel composition: UO2, PuO2, MOX, UC, PuN etc.;
(d)Reactor spectrum (thermal, fast);
(e)Fuel breeding;
(f)NFC fertile material (uranium, thorium).
All the options are interrelated when a NFC structure is defined.
MESSAGE
MESSAGE [1] (Model for Energy Supply Strategy Alter- natives and their General Environmental Impacts) is a software designed for setting up optimization models of energy supply systems which has been originally conceived by Professor Wolf Ha¨fele and Professor Alan S. Manne for the global energy project conducted at the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA) during the seventies (1970s).
These models can be built at national, sub-regional or regional levels to assess various strategies for energy sys- tem development in the medium to long-term considering their general environmental impacts.
Nuclear fuel cycle model
The model of a nuclear fuel cycle requires a detailed analysis, as it includes a set of processes to make nuclear fuel from natural uranium to generate electricity and manage spent fuel discharged from the reactor. In this model, a once-through nuclear fuel cycle based on pres- surized water reactor (PWR), advanced light water reactor (ALWR) and pressurized heavy water reactor (PHWR) is considered; therefore, the front end of Nuclear Power Plants(NPP) includes mining and milling, conversion, enrichment or fuel fabrication. In the back end, spent fuel may be stored temporarily for future use.
Theory
Modelling
Most of mainland China’s electricity is produced from fossil fuels (80 % from coal, 2 % from oil, 1 % from gas in 2006) and hydropower (15 %) [2]. Due to increasing concerns about air quality, climate change and fossil fuel shortages, nuclear power has been looked into as an alternative to coal power in China [3]. Total Electricity Production (including Nuclear) is 4940000.00 GW.h (Gross, 2012). Nuclear  Electricity  Production  is  98200.00 GW.h (Gross, 2012). The percentage of China’s electricity produced by nuclear power is 1.99 %. China’s National Development and Reform Commission has indi- cated the intention to raise the percentage of China’s electricity produced by nuclear power from the  current 2–6 % by 2020 (compared to 20 % in the USA and 74 % in France). Additional reactors are planned, including some of the world’s most advanced, to give a four-fold increase in nuclear capacity to at least 58 GWe by 2020, then possibly 200 GWe by 2030, and 400 GWe by 2050. In order to meet the projected nuclear electricity demands in medium to long term, a model of a simple nuclear energy supply system has been built. The time steps to be considered in the model are 2013, 2015, 2020, 2025, 2030, 2035, 2040,
2045, and 2050. The demand growths have been assumed for the time horizon between 2015–2020, 2020–2030 and 2030–2050 are linear interpolated.
Historical capacities
There are both reactor types, i.e. PHWR using UOX fuel and HWR using natural uranium fuel in Mainland China from 1991 to the base year 2012. Data on historical capacities come from PRIS [2] and are shown in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1 Historical capacities of NPP in Mainland China
Uranium source
Table 1 shows the uranium production during 2002–2012 in China [4].
Experimental
Model design
In this model, a once-through nuclear fuel cycle based on pressurized water reactor (PWR), advanced light water reactor (ALWR) and pressurized heavy water reactor (PHWR) is considered. For all these three kind of reactor, four energy forms including resource, front end, back end and secondary have been considered. The flow of front and back end fuel cycle steps to model the open fuel cycle nuclear energy system in MESSAGE has been shown in Fig. 2. As shown in Fig. 2, natural uranium (uNat) has been selected as nuclear fuel resource. Electricity genera- tion has been considered as an output and named as sec- ondary. The conversion(cn-), enrichment(en- and SW-) and fuel fabrication(fu-) steps of uNat are considered in the front end. Spent fuel may be stored temporarily for future use in the back end. The enrichment is modelled by two technologies ‘‘en-’’ and ‘‘SW-’’. The spent fuel storage is modelled by four technologies ‘‘fc-’’, ‘‘ts-’’, ‘‘SF-’’ and ‘‘ISF-’’. The meaning of the prefixes of technologies and storages used in this model has been  summarized  in  Table 2. The abbreviation of combination the prefix and reactor type represents one technology or storage used in the model. For example cnPWR represents the conversion of uranium in the form U3O8 to uranium hexafluoride UF6. Dep U stock is depleted uranium storage. PWRUOX, ALWRUOX and PHWR stand for Power Plants, PWR, ALWR and PHWR, respectively, using nuclear fuel.
Table 1 Uranium production during 2002–2012 in China
Fig. 2 Schematic energy chain for model
Table 2 Prefixes of used technology/storages for model
Model input data preparation
Special consideration was given to the description of nuclear data reduction to MESSAGE data format. For constructing the nuclear energy system as a MESSAGE model, we would like to use a common units system for convenience: MWyr for energy units, MW for power units and $/kWyr or $/kW for cost data.
Mathematical mass flow calculation
The average annual nuclear material flow for each step of nuclear fuel cycle option should be  estimated  based  on the technical reactor and fuel cycle data. Below are some well-known analytical equations for mass flow calculations:
Annual fresh fuel loading FF is expressed:
@1
where NC is nuclear capacity with the unit being GWe, Bu is discharge Burn-up with the unit being GWd/t HM. Lf and Eff are load factor and thermal efficiency with the unit being wt% respectively.
First loading Fuel InCore is expressed:
@2
where Tr is residence time with the unit being d.
Natural uranium consumption is denoted by NatU and is expressed:
@3
where Enr and Ta are is enrichment of Fresh Fuel and tails assay with the unit being wt% respectively.
Conversion Cn is expressed:
@4
Separative work units SWU:
SWU ¼ FF × VðEnrÞ þ VðTaÞ Enr — 0:007114
@5
Σ—where VðxÞ ¼ ð1 — 2xÞ·ln
Depleted uranium production DepU:
@6
Discharge fuel includes heavy metal (HM) and fission products (FP). SF Discharge SFD is expressed:
@7
Using the formulas (1)–(7), the annual fresh fuel  requirements, first fuel loading (fuel in core), annual enrichment     requirements,     annual     depleted  uranium
Table 3 MESSAGE input data and cost
amount, annual conversion requirements and annual natu- ral uranium requirements and annual spent fuel discharge amount have been calculated.
MESSAGE input data
Based on the calculation described in section III for the conversion technology ‘‘uNat/cn-’’, for obtaining one unit of UF6 as an output, one unit of natural uranium as an input is needed. Since 1 t HM natural uranium is converted to 1 t HM of UF6 (ignoring conversion losses). As such, the main input and main output for item Cn in the technology screen will be specified as 1 as shown in Table 3. Each of the following MESSAGE input data shown in Table 3 is cal- culated as described above. The cost for conversion for one unit of output is assumed $ 8000/ton.
Results and discussion
NPP special characteristics
One of the possible open nuclear power plant options based on thermal reactors has been modelled using MESSAGE. The referenced nuclear power plant includes 3 types of reactors: Pressurized water reactor (PWR), Pressurized heavy water reactor (PHWR) and advanced light water reactor (ALWR). The front end of the nuclear fuel cycle includes conversion, enrichment and fuel fabrication. In the back end, every year some of spent fuel is discharged to cooling pool. After five years of cooling, the spent fuel must go to the  interim  storage. The  lifetime of  NPP  is 40 years. The modelling year starts in 2015 and ends in 2050.
Fig. 3 a The calculation results of the electricity production.
b Calculation results of the new capacity
Electricity production and new capacity
The calculation results of the electricity production and new capacity have been shown in Fig. 3a, b. ALWRs will be commissioned since 2015. For PHWR in 2045 and 2050, the electricity contribution has been increased dra- matically after the two installed PHWR capacity shut down because the demand for PHWR is assumed as 6 % of total demand. Otherwise, PHWR will be replaced by ALWR as they reach the end of its lifetime.
Uranium resources demand
Comparing the model results of uranium resources demand shown in Fig. 4 with the uranium production during 2002–2012 in China shown in Table 1, Domestic uranium mining currently supplies of 1500 tU per year less than a quarter of nuclear fuel needs in 2015, even less in the later year. So the U resources supply for this scenario should be considered in advance.
Fig. 4 Uranium resources demand
Fig. 5 Nuclear waste production
Nuclear waste production
The waste production volume of PHWR is much higher than the other two reactors as shown in Fig. 5. So it meets the waste minimization policy that PHWR is replaced at the end of its lifetime if the demand for PHWR is not settled and the capacity of PHWR should be decreased if the cost is enough. So more attention should be paid on developing the spent fuel reprocessing in future.
Conclusions
The model results indicate that more attention should be paid on U resources supply and spent fuel reprocessing development in future to meet the requirement of raising the percentage of China’s electricity produced by nuclear power, which is in accordance with the current status of China. Exploration and plans for new mines  have increased significantly since 2000. State-owned enter- prises are also acquiring uranium resources internationally [5], the new reprocessing plant has been planned to build in Gansu province. The availability of application of MESSAGE tool for modelling of nuclear cycle has been demonstrated.
Acknowledgments
This work has been supported by IAEA under CRP Research Contract No.17556.
