<title>Moderating effect of regulatory focus on public acceptance of nuclear energy</title>
<Affiliation>a.Key Laboratory of Neutronics and Radiation Safety, Institute of Nuclear Energy Safety Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, Anhui, 230031,
China;b.University of Science and Technology, Hefei, Anhui, 230031, China;c.School of Management, University of Science and Technology, Hefei, Anhui, 230031, China</Affiliation>
<author>Yanling He , Yazhou Li , Dongqin Xia , Tingting Zhang , Yongliang Wang , Li Hu ,
Jibao Gu, Yican Wu </author>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Energy and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2019.06.002</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2019.06.002</URL>
a b s t r a c t
Public acceptance has become the most critical question for sustainable development of nuclear energy in recent decades. Many researches concentrated on risk and beneﬁt perception, which were deemed as the most inﬂuential factors of Public Acceptance of Nuclear Energy (PANE). But few researches focused on psychological factors including regulatory focus. Therefore, this paper aimed to explore the moderating effect of regulatory focus on PANE based on Regulatory Focus Theory in order to ﬁnd ways to increase/ decrease PANE. An Internet-based survey had been carried out in China nationwide. The results indicated that trust in government was positively related to PANE and this relationship was mediated by risk and beneﬁt perception. In addition, the strength of the associations between risk and beneﬁt perception and PANE were moderated by regulatory focus, consisting of prevention focus and promotion focus. Pre- vention focus strengthened the negative relationship between risk perception and PANE, while pro- motion focus weakened. Moreover, promotion focus weakened the positive relationship between beneﬁt perception and PANE, but no signiﬁcant moderating effect of prevention focus was founded on the relationship between beneﬁt perception and PANE. Some policy implications were also proposed on the basis of above-mentioned ﬁndings.
Keywords:
Public acceptance Nuclear energy Regulatory focus Moderating effect
1.Introduction
As Weinberg [1] noted “the public perception and acceptance of nuclear energy has emerged as the most critical question con- cerning the future of nuclear energy”, Public Acceptance of Nuclear Energy (PANE) had attracted widespread attention in recent years. Especially after the Fukushima Daiichi accident in 2011, PANE has dramatically impacted the policy and development of nuclear en- ergy. International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) pointed out that “public acceptance is a key factor for the future of nuclear power”
[2] and this case was especially distinct for China [3], who had an aggressive plan to develop nuclear energy [4,5]. Therefore re- searches on PANE is necessary to carry out in China to ensure the sustainable development of nuclear energy [6].
The previous studies demonstrated that risk perception and beneﬁt perception were the most inﬂuential factors to  PANE [4e13]. Besides risk perception and beneﬁt perception, there were also other inﬂuencing factors from social, cultural and historical perspectives, such as knowledge, trust in government, etc. [9]. Bryant et al. [14] suggested that the decision-making of a new risky technology could not simply be explained in terms of risks and beneﬁts, and had to take the public’s regulatory focus into consideration. So it was time for the study to move beyond just cost-beneﬁt analysis to the psychological process and motivation of
decision-making. This paper aimed at the psychological process of decision-making and analyzed the moderating effect of regulatory focus on PANE based on the well-accepted Regulatory Focus Theory (RFT).
RFT [15,16] was proposed by Higgins in 1997 to explain the ‘approach pleasure and avoid pain’ phenomenon. RFT distinguishes individuals’ regulation orientation into two categories: the pro- motion focus and the prevention focus. RFT proposes an explana- tion on individuals’ belief, behavioral tendency [17e20], and cognitive behavior [21e23]. Therefore, it has been widely accepted and applied in different ﬁelds, i.e., marketing [23], shopping behavior [24], ﬁnance [25], leadership effectiveness, etc. [26]. But up-to-now there was no application of RFT founded in PANE. Could RFT be applied in PANE? What is the difference of decision making between nuclear energy and other ﬁelds? Is PANE also affected by individuals’ regulatory focus? We were interested in investigating these problems in this paper.
As public goods, nuclear facilities’ beneﬁts are shared by the whole society (e.g., energy supply, reduction of carbon emission, and mitigation of climate change) [27], but nuclear facilities’ risks are endured only by the nearby residents (e.g., radioactive risk to the unknown and uncontrollable consequences) [28,29]. Therefore, the decision-making and the process of ‘approach pleasure and avoid pain’ in nuclear energy may be different from other tech- nologies, whose beneﬁts and risks are burdened by the same group. That makes the decision-making process much more complicated and this is why we investigate PANE based on RFT.
This study aimed to investigate the moderating effects of pro- motion focus and prevention focus on PANE in order to ﬁnd ways to increase/decrease PANE. This paper was organized as follows. Section 2 presented a literature review. Section 3 proposed a con- ceptual framework model and introduced the methodology. Sec- tion 4 presented the results and discussions. Section 5 concluded this paper with some policy implications.
2.Literature review
2.1.Trust, risk perception, beneﬁt perception and public acceptance
As mentioned above, the research of PANE attracted lots of attention from the research community. The previous study concentrated on the inﬂuencing factors on PANE and proposed that many factors, including risk perception, beneﬁt perception and trust in government, would impact PANE through a direct/indirect way. Michael Siegrist et al. [30] found trust had a positive inﬂuence on beneﬁt perception and a negative inﬂuence on risk perception. Siegrist et al. [31] concentrated on the distinction  between  trust and conﬁdence. Based on a survey in Switzerland, their study founded that both general trust and general conﬁdence negatively inﬂuenced risk perception, which notably impacted PANE. Vissch- ers et al. [32] investigated the inﬂuences of risk perception, beneﬁt perception and social trust on PANE, in which beneﬁt perception was divided into beneﬁt for climate change and beneﬁt for the energy supply. Their study found that PANE was mainly inﬂuenced by beneﬁt perception for security energy supply and to a lesser extent by beneﬁt perception for climate change. Visschers et al. [10] conducted a longitudinal study based on two surveys just before and after Fukushima Daiichi nuclear accident and investigated the relationship among risk perception, beneﬁt perception, trust and PANE. They suggested that trust had a strong effect on risk perception and beneﬁt perception, which determined PANE both before and after the accident. Xiao et al. [13] divided trust into goodwill trust and competence trust, and analyzed their different inﬂuences on PANE. The results demonstrated that goodwill trust improved PANE by decreasing risk perception while competence trust improved PANE by increasing beneﬁt perception. Guo et al. [7] compared the sensitivity of PANE according to the distances from the people’s residence to the nuclear facilities. Their study showed that both beneﬁt perception and risk perception signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced public acceptance through emotional identiﬁcation and social trust. Wang et al. [6] examined the role of beneﬁt perception, risk perception and trust on PANE and founded that both beneﬁt perception and risk perception had a signiﬁcant positive relation- ship with public acceptance. Ho et al. [33] explored the effects of
beneﬁt perception, risk perception and trust on PANE in Thailand and Vietnam, who had not nuclear energy nowadays but did plan to import. Their study showed that participants in both countries preferred economic beneﬁts to environmental  beneﬁts  and deemed nuclear accidents as the major risk.
From the literature mentioned-above, risk perception, beneﬁt perception and trust were the mostly concentrated factors affecting PANE.
2.2.Regulatory focus theory
RFT proposes two motivational orientations including: (a) as- pirations and accomplishments (promotion focus) and (b) re- sponsibilities and safety (prevention focus) [15]. Individuals with a promotion focus form their attitudes and regulate their behaviors to attain advancement, growth, and accomplishment. Meanwhile, individuals with a prevention focus form their attitudes and regu- late their behaviors to ensure safety and  responsibility  [16,17,34,35]. Generally, promotion focus concentrates on seizing opportunities, achieving gains and avoiding no-gain, whereas prevention focus concentrates on preventing errors, achieving no- loss and avoiding losses [36].
Since its being proposed in 1997 [15], RFT has been applied to explain the people’s behavioral intention, attitude and decision- making [14,25,37e41] in various ﬁelds such as organizational behavior [26,42,43], technology acceptance [19,44], online mar- keting, shopping behavior, etc. [23,41]. Recently, some pilot studies also tried to apply RFT to nuclear energy.  For example,  Mannetti et al. [45] investigated how the impact of persuasive messages in nuclear energy could be improved by regulatory focus  and  Beck  et al. [46] attempted to assess experts’ regulatory focus in nuclear
power plant control. However, to the best of our knowledge there has been no application of RFT to the empirical research of PANE.
Higgins [15] considered that regulatory focus represented a persistent personality trait. Baron et al. [47] suggested that per- sonality and contextual factors were often introduced as the moderators. Most of the previous studies had also deemed regu- latory focus as moderating variables [42,43,48,49]. Therefore, pre- vention focus and promotion focus were treated as the moderator variables in our study.
We also made the following hypotheses that both the positive association between beneﬁt perception and PANE and the negative association between risk perception and PANE were moderated by regulatory focus.
3.Methods
3.1.Model
A conceptual model was proposed based on the literature re- view, as shown in Fig. 1. PANE was the dependent variable and trust in government was the independent variable. Risk perception and beneﬁt perception were mediating variables. Prevention focus and promotion focus were moderating variables. This conceptual model would be veriﬁed by the empirical research.
3.2.Sample and data collection
An Internet-based survey was conducted in August 2017 following a pre-survey test to enhance the understandability and veracity of scales. 973 questionnaires were received but 2 of them were invalid. The demographic characteristics of the 971 valid participants were presented in Table 1. The data from the ques- tionnaires were analyzed using SPSS Statistics 21.0. The main sta- tistical analyses in this study included the descriptive analysis,
Fig. 1. Conceptual framework of the independent, mediating, moderating and dependent variables.
Table 1
Demographic characteristics of the respondents (N ¼ 971).
factor analysis, regression analysis, and the moderated mediation effect analysis.
3.3.Measurement
Most of measurement items were based on the previous liter- ature so as to enhance and ensure the validity of measurement. In order to avoid the semantic differences between Chinese and En- glish, all English measurements were ﬁrst translated into Chinese by the experts in nuclear safety and risk management. Then, the Chinese measurements were translated back to English. Finally, a pretest was carried out, and some terms were modiﬁed according to  the  speciﬁc  research  context.  5-point  Likert  scales  (i.e.,     5 ¼ strongly agree; 4 ¼ agree; 3 ¼ no opinion; 2 ¼ disagree;
1 strongly disagree) were used to measure all items  regarding  trust in government, risk perception, beneﬁt perception, preven- tion focus, promotion focus and PANE.
PANE was measured using a 3-item scale adapting from Tsuji- kawa et al. [50]. The items were as follows: “I am in favor of nuclear power generation”, “Nuclear power generation is an excellent way to generate electricity”, and “Nuclear power generating plants should be increased”.
Trust in government was measured using an 11-item scale adapting from McKnight et al. [51]. The example items were as follows: “I believe that Government would act in my best interest”, “Government is truthful in its dealings with me” and “Government is competent and effective in providing legal advice”.
Following Slovic [29], we measured risk perception by using a 9-
Table 2
Loadings, Cronbach’s a, composite reliability and AVE.
item scale divided into dread risk and unknown risk. Dread risk was measured as follows: “We still have a lack of control over the occurrence of a nuclear accident”, “The construction of nuclear power plant is dread for me”, “Nuclear power plant has cata- strophic potential threats”, “The disaster of the nuclear accident is fatal” and “Nuclear power plant brings risks more than beneﬁts”. Unknown risk was measured as follows: “The hazards of nuclear power plant are unobservable”, “The construction of a nuclear power plant will bring unknown risks”, “The nuclear power plant is a new risk”, and “The manifestation of harm of the nuclear power plant is delayed”.
Beneﬁt perception was measured using a 4-item scale adapting from Visschers et al. [52]. The beneﬁt perception of nuclear energy included security energy supply, climate change mitigation, reducing the price of electricity and sustainable energy supply.
Regulatory focus was measured using a 6-item scale adapting from Shin et al. [53], relating to prevention focus and promotion focus. Prevention focus was measured according to the following 3 items: “Security is an important factor for me”, “I focus my atten- tion on avoiding failure”, and “I am very careful to avoid exposing myself to potential losses.” Promotion focus was measured ac- cording to the following 3 items: “A chance to grow is an important factor for me”, “I focus on accomplishing job tasks that will further my advancement,” and “My action priorities are impacted by a clear goal”.
Five variables were selected as control variables in the model that might affect PANE, including gender, age, urban or rural resi- dent, educational level and yearly household income.
4.Results and discussions
4.1.Factor analysis
4.1.1.Validity and reliability
The results of loadings, Cronbach’s a, composite reliability, and Average Variance Extracted (AVE) were showed in Table 2. The values of loadings, Cronbach’s a and composite reliability were all
above the suggested threshold of 0.70, which conﬁrmed the mea- surement’s reliability. All the AVE scores were higher than the 0.50 criterion, indicating that the convergent validity of our measure- ment model was veriﬁed. As shown in Table 3, the comparison of correlations among constructs and the square root of the AVE scores were done to evaluate the discriminant validity of the items. The square root of the AVE scores for each construct was higher than the correlations among the constructs, thus conﬁrming the discriminant validity.
4.1.2.Descriptive statistics and intercorrelations
The means, standard deviations and correlations for all variables were summarized in Table 3. As shown in Table 3, trust in gov- ernment was positively related to PANE (r 0.492, p < 0.001) and beneﬁt perception (r 0.480, p < 0.001), where r was Pearson correlation coefﬁcient and p was signiﬁcant level. While trust in government was negatively related to risk perception (r    0.081, p < 0.05). Moreover, risk perception was negatively related to PANE (r ¼ —0.163, p < 0.001). Beneﬁt perception was positively related to PANE (r ¼ 0.515, p < 0.001).
4.2.Regression analysis
The results of hierarchical moderated regression analysis were shown in Table 4. Trust in government was signiﬁcantly negatively related to risk perception (b ¼ —0.073, p < 0.05, Model 2), where p was signiﬁcant level and b was regression coefﬁcient. But trust in government was signiﬁcantly positively related to beneﬁt percep- tion (b 0.468, p < 0.001, Model 4) and PANE (b 0.484, p < 0.001, Model 6). Risk perception was signiﬁcantly negatively associated with PANE (b ¼ —0.127, p < 0.001, Model 7). Beneﬁt perception was signiﬁcantly positively associated with PANE (b 0.363, p < 0.001, Model 7). Moreover, the effect of  trust in government on PANE    (b  0.305, p < 0.001,  Model 7) was smaller when risk perception  and beneﬁt perception were added in the regression equation, indicating that risk perception and beneﬁt perception had medi- ating effects on the relationship between trust in government and PANE.
The results in Table 4 revealed that, the interaction between prevention focus and risk perception was negatively related to PANE (b 0.124, p < 0.01, Model 9). The interaction between prevention focus and beneﬁt perception on PANE was not signiﬁ- cant (b 0.050, ns, Model 9). The interaction between risk perception and promotion focus was positively related to PANE (b 0.106, p < 0.05, Model 9). The interaction between beneﬁt perception and promotion focus was negatively related to PANE (b 0.086, p < 0.05, Model 9). Fig. 2, Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 showed plots for these interactions. Fig. 2 showed that risk perception was more negatively related to PANE when prevention focus was high rather than low. Fig. 3 showed that risk perception was more negatively to
Table 3
Means, standard deviations, correlations and square roots of AVE (N ¼ 971).
Table 4
Results of regression (N  ¼ 971).
Fig. 2.  Plot of interaction between risk perception and prevention focus on PANE.
PANE when promotion focus was low rather than high. Further- more, Fig. 4 showed that beneﬁt perception was more positively related to PANE when promotion focus was low rather than high. Hence, the results showed that promotion focus weakened the negative association between risk perception and PANE, while prevention focus strengthened the negative association between risk perception and PANE. Promotion focus weakened the positive association between beneﬁt perception and PANE, whereas pre- vention focus had no signiﬁcant moderating effect on the positive association between beneﬁt perception and PANE.
4.3.Moderated mediation effect
Moderated mediation effect was examined by bootstrapping. As shown in Table 5, an indirect effect of trust in government on PANE via risk perception was signiﬁcant when prevention focus was high (b ¼ 0.08, p < 0.001), whereas for low-prevention focus, the indirect relationship was not signiﬁcant (b 0.00, ns). In addition, the difference between the  above  two  coefﬁcients  was  signiﬁcant (Db ¼ 0.08, p < 0.001). Therefore, prevention focus moderated the
Fig. 3. Plot of interaction between risk perception and promotion focus on PANE.
mediation of risk perception between trust in government and PANE, in other words the mediating effect was stronger when prevention focus was high rather than low. On the contrary, the difference of the indirect effect of trust in government on PANE via beneﬁt perception was not signiﬁcant (Db 0.03, ns). Therefore, prevention focus had no signiﬁcant moderating effect on the mediation of beneﬁt perception between trust in government and PANE.
Table 5 also indicated that the indirect effect of trust in gov- ernment on PANE via risk perception was signiﬁcant when pro- motion focus was high (b 0.04, p < 0.01), whereas for low promotion  focus,  the  indirect  relationship  was  not  signiﬁcant  (b ¼ —0.02, ns). In addition, the difference between the above two coefﬁcients was signiﬁcant (Db 0.06, p < 0.001). Therefore, pro- motion focus moderated the mediation of risk perception between trust in government and PANE, in other words the mediating effect was stronger when promotion focus was high rather than low. On the contrary, the difference of the indirect effect of trust in gov- ernment on  PANE  via  beneﬁt  perception  was  not  signiﬁcant (Db ¼ —0.06, ns). Therefore, promotion focus had no signiﬁcant
Fig. 4. Plot of interaction between beneﬁt perception and promotion focus on PANE.
moderating effect on the mediation of beneﬁt perception between trust in government and PANE.
4.4.Discussions
This study summarized that risk perception and beneﬁt perception had a mediating effect on the relationship between trust in government and PANE, and trust in government inﬂuenced PANE indirectly through risk and beneﬁt perception. This was consistent with the previous research [7,9,11,13,50,54].
Furthermore, the relationship between risk perception and  PANE was moderated by regulatory focus. As we expected, the negative relationship between risk perception and PANE became stronger when individuals had high prevention focus. The negative relationship between risk perception and PANE became weaker when individuals had high promotion focus. Individuals with high prevention focus were vulnerable to the nuclear accidents (such as the Fukushima Daiichi accident) and tended to be cautious when faced with the risk of nuclear energy. In contrast, individuals with high promotion focus were encouraged by successful cases or ex- perts (such as nuclear scientists and engineers) who had a positive attitude towards change, and were willing to take risk. However, prevention focus had no signiﬁcant moderating effect on the rela- tionship between beneﬁt perception and PANE. That might be explained by that individuals with prevention focus only sought non-losses and tried to avoid losses rather than seek gains [55].
Beyond our expectation the results also demonstrated that
promotion focus could not strengthen the linkage between beneﬁt perception and PANE. This might be explained that beneﬁts of nuclear energy including mitigating climate change, reducing electricity prices, and providing safe and long-term energy, were shared by the whole society. Although individuals with high pro- motion focus were sensitive to attain beneﬁts, they did not deem these beneﬁts as belonging only to themselves. For individuals with high promotion focus, they only cared about how many beneﬁts they would get alone. Therefore, the beneﬁts of nuclear energy shared by the whole society would not be enough to stimulate the individuals with high promotion focus. Although promotion focus weakened the relationship between beneﬁt perception and PANE, it did not subvert the positive relationship between beneﬁt perception and PANE. As shown in Fig. 4, for individuals with high promotion focus, their acceptance was higher.
The study also demonstrated that regulatory focus could mod- erate the mediation of risk perception, such that mediated re- lationships would be greater under high levels of prevention/ promotion focus than under low levels. On the contrary, regulatory focus had no signiﬁcant moderating effect on the mediation of beneﬁt perception.
5.Conclusions and policy implications
The present study analyzed the moderating effect of regulatory focus with Regulatory Focus Theory on PANE, and it was proposed to explain the public’s motivation for making decision and a wide range of processes from motivation through to complex cognition and ensuing behavior. Since few researches had concentrated on the moderating effect in PANE, our study contributed to the liter- ature by extending and testing a moderated mediation model through the inclusion of regulatory focus as a moderator of the relationship between risk/beneﬁt perception and PANE. Our study also conﬁrmed that enhancing the public’s trust in government could further strengthened PANE. Beneﬁt perception and risk perception had signiﬁcant mediating effects between trust in government and PANE. Regulatory focus (representative of indi- vidual differences and personality traits) was conﬁrmed to mod- erate not only the relationships between risk/beneﬁt perception and PANE, but also the mediation of risk perception on the rela- tionship between trust in government and PANE. Therefore this research deepened our understanding of PANE and extended the application of RFT.
Based on the above-mentioned ﬁndings, following implications could be proposed:
1)Government should place more emphases on the public’s trust in government and increase public participation in the decision-
Table 5
Results of the moderated path analysis (N ¼ 971).
making. Trust in government signiﬁcantly affected PANE as concluded from this study. It was a challenge to make govern- ment more trustworthy in the public administration. Un- doubtedly making the decision-making more transparent could increase trust in government. Therefore, government should publish relevant information about nuclear safety periodically and timely on Internet or through other means. Government should increase public participation, for example public hear- ings and auditing, in the decision-making of nuclear facilities.
2)Government should promote the beneﬁts of nuclear energy and strengthen the science popularization of nuclear energy. Our result indicated beneﬁt perception was positively associated with PANE, whereas risk perception was negatively associated with PANE. It was important to increase the public’s beneﬁt perception and decrease the public’s risk perception in order to improve PANE. First, government should emphasize the key beneﬁts of nuclear energy to the public especially sustainable supply and climate change mitigation. China faced the issues of energy shortage and environmental pollution such as haze [56]. As one kind of clean and sustainable energy, nuclear energy was a necessary strategic option for China [57]. Secondly, govern- ment should strengthen the science popularization to decrease risk perception in order to avoid the public’s prejudice and misunderstanding about nuclear energy.
3)Government should adapt different allocation strategies of beneﬁt according to the different proximity to nuclear facilities. Government should promote the beneﬁts such as climate change mitigation and long-term sustainable energy to those people living far away from the nuclear facilities. But to those people living near the nuclear facilities, government should issue more speciﬁc beneﬁt allocation policy (e.g., offering job opportunities, local heating, extra subsidy to the inhabitants, etc.). It could make them clearly feel these beneﬁts were exclusive for themselves.
But some limitations should also be admitted and concerned on in our study. Firstly, longitudinal study could be carried out to explore the change of individual’s regulatory focus with time in ensuing work. Secondly, the sampling methods could also be diversiﬁed, for example combining the online survey and face-to face survey together in the future.
Conﬂicts of interest
The authors have no conﬂicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank other FDS Team members. The work was supported by National Magnetic Conﬁnement Fusion Science Program of China (Grant No. 2015GB116000), Informatization Project of Chinese Academy of Sciences (XXH13506-104), National Natural Science Foundation of China (71671179), Anhui Provincial Special Project for High Technology Industry, Special Project of Youth Innovation Promotion Association of Chinese Academy of Sciences and Project of Nuclear and Radiation Safety Supervision of National Nuclear Safety Administration (JD201842/JD201929).
