<title>Industrial exploitation of SiPM technology developed for basic research</title>
<Affiliation>a LFoundry, Via Pacinotti 7, 67051 Avezzano (AQ), Italy
b Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Via Sommarive 18, 38123 Povo (TN), Italy</Affiliation>
<author>Paolo Organtini a,∗, Alberto Gola b, Giovanni Paternoster b, Fabio Acerbi b, Giovanni Margutti a,
Roberto Bez a</author>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research A</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nima.2020.164410</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2020.164410 </URL>
ABSTRACT
The Silicon Photomultipliers (SiPM) have overcome the deficiencies of Photo-Multiplier Tubes (PMT) in terms     of compactness, low voltage operation and insensitivity to magnetic fields. Starting from the needs for large volume manufacturing, for large physics experiments, FBK and LFoundry started a collaboration in order to    allow large volume production of SiPMs based on FBK technology. The results of this technology transfer are promising. SiPM performance, which attracted the attention from industrial players in the fields of the medical and automotive market, are well in agreement between FBK and LFoundry productions.
Keywords: SiPM TOF-PET LiDAR
Automotive
1.Introduction
Silicon PhotoMultipliers (SiPM) have been showing a growing inter- est in many fields, from the fundamental physics and medical research to the industrial applications, where very few photons must be detected with high efficiency and photon-number resolution. They are a good alternative to the Photo Multiplier Tubes (PMT) due to their compact- ness, low operational voltage and insensitivity to magnetic fields [1]. The FBK NUV-HD SiPM Technology [2] has unique characteristics in terms of key parameters, like Photon Detection Efficiency (PDE) and Dark Count Rate (DCR) and their performances in the Near Ultra-Violet (NUV) spectrum, have attracted great interest from research institutes for large scientific experiments (e.g. DarkSide-20k [3]). In order to satisfy the large volume required for such application, a technology transfer was done to LFoundry that has required the optimization and the re-engineering of several process steps. As a result, all the main per- formance parameters have been confirmed, demonstrating the intrinsic robustness of the chosen SiPM architecture and structure. Moreover, some behaviors have also been improved thanks to the integration into a fab already dedicated to a large volume production of optical sensors, where the processes are already optimized for the reduction of the dark current into standard CMOS Image Sensors (CIS).
LFoundry site was founded in 1989 by Texas Instruments to pro- duce DRAM. Since then, the ownership of the factory has changed to Micron Technology first (1998) and then to LFoundry (2013). Since 2005 the site has become a center of development and production of CIS. Both Front Side Illuminated (FSI) and Back-Side Illuminated (BSI) technologies have been developed and they have been enriched with several new process modules that have been developed to optimize the performances of CIS in terms of image quality, quantum efficiency, dark current and hot pixels. This experience has been instrumental for the success of the SiPM technology transfer from FBK.
2.The NUV-HD technology transfer
The first technology transfer of FBK NUV-HD SiPM technology began in 2016. Basic physics research has been looking to SiPM as an alternative to PMT and the FBK technology has been proven to be the proper choice for some of these experiments. In view of probable large volume manufacturing requests, exceeding the production capacity of the FBK 6’’ clean-room capabilities, FBK started a technology transfer process, to have such high-performance technology available for large quantity orders and for possible future developments requiring ad- vanced manufacturing process steps, available in a 8-inches production line.
In 2018, the DarkSide-20k experiment required a large volume production of big-area SiPMs with basic characteristics very close to the NUV-HD technology transferred to LFoundry. Because the experiment will be run at liquid argon (LAr) temperatures, the technology had to  be tuned in order to get the desired breakdown voltage (BV), quenching resistance (Rq) and functional performance at such operating tempera- ture. Indeed, since the experiment is looking to very rare events, both primary and correlated noises had to be reduced as much as possible. Since the carrier generation at cryogenic temperatures is dominated by the band-to-band tunneling [4], while the thermal generation is domi- nant at higher temperatures [5,6], the electric field in the avalanche region  has  been  engineered  by  FBK  in  order  to  reduce  the  DCR to
less than 10−2  Hz/mm2. Fig. 1 shows the measured primary DCR as a
Fig. 1. DCR vs Temperature at different overvoltages (OV). Squares represent  the NUV-HD (standard field); circles represent the NUV-HD CRYO (low field) technology.
Table 1
NUV-HD characterization data at 20 o C.function of temperature for the ‘‘standard’’ and for the ‘‘low-field’’ NUV- HD SiPMs: below 150 K the two versions diverge and the ‘‘low-field’’ shows lower values of DCR.
Furthermore, considering afterpulsing, the  traps  release  lifetime is known to decrease exponentially with temperature, therefore the afterpulsing (AP) probability is expected to be higher at lower temper- atures [7], since much more carrier will be released when the SPAD is recharged and ready to be re-triggered. In order to limit this behavior, the internal structure and the quenching resistor have been modified. The changes to the NUV-HD technology leading to the desired char- acteristics for DarkSide-20k led to a new version of ‘‘NUV-HD-CRYO’’, developed at FBK first and then transferred to LFoundry.
Table 1 shows the results obtained from SiPM fabricated at LFoundry with both versions of NUV-HD:
Chip-to-chip uniformity is one of the most important performances that are required by the end users. When tiles of SiPM are assembled, one needs to make sure that the different channels of the tile behave almost the same in terms of variations of PDE and Gain. Quenching
resistance was measured on more than 4000 SiPM from 25 different wafers showing an interquartile range of 7% at both +25 oC and −40 oC temperatures. Also, the increase of Rq going from room T to −40 oC was
by a factor 1.75 (Fig. 2).
BV uniformity showed a standard deviation of 0.2% or 75 mV over an average value of 32.83 V (Fig. 3).
Several other parameters were characterized over different excess voltages  (over  the  breakdown)  and  temperatures  (from  −196  oC  to
+20 oC), such as DCR, Gain, Crosstalk, Afterpulse, Recharge Time  and
PDE. The PDE was also characterized over the wavelength. All the characteristics were very well matched between the two production lines, like for example the PDE and DCR, shown in Fig. 4.
Fig. 2. Quenching resistor values, measured at wafer level, for  SiPMs  with  different layout (cell pitch reported in horizontal axis). Each box  plot  is  based  on  data  from  many devices on many wafers, in total more than 4000 SiPMs.Fig. 3. Breakdown Voltage distribution of about 20,000 SiPM, on different wafers.
Fig.  4.  Comparison of LFoundry and FBK SiPM: Photon Detection Efficiency (top) as          a function of wavelength at different overvoltages; Dark Count Rate (bottom) as  a  function of overvoltage at different temperatures.
Another requirement for DarkSide-20k was the Through Silicon
Table 2
o
Via (TSV). This process allows the contact of both the anode and the cathode of the SiPM from the backside, achieving a more efficient tiling due to the reduced dead space between SiPM. TSV is also expected      to provide a higher resilience of the packaging with respect to wire bonding, during the assembly of the modules. The research of a TSV process suitable for DarkSide-20k took long time due to the constraints
in terms of radiopurity [8]. While the front-end processes meet the radiopurity specifications of <100 μBq/Kg, most of the TSV available  in the market make use of exotic materials that do not meet such limits.
3.Industrial exploitation
3.1.Medical imaging
Although the technology transfer was driven mainly by the needs of the large physics experiments, there is also a growing interest from the industry. In particular, the NUV-HD SiPMs are good candidates for the new Positron Emission Tomography (PET) machines. SiPM technology offers several advantages over PMT. First of all, their insensitivity to magnetic fields make them suitable for the hybrid PET-MRI systems. Furthermore, SiPM detectors are cheaper and could provide better time resolution, higher compactness and lower operating voltage. Also,thanks to their high PDE and gain over low noise, a lower dosage ofPET radiopharmaceuticals is required [9]. The global market of SiPMfor PET has been increasing from about 10M$ on 2010 to about 30M$ in 2019 and is supposed to continue to grow with a CAGR of 16% in  the next years (Compound Annual Growth Rate) [10].
3.2.Automotive
Automotive is another emerging market for sensors and, in partic- ular, for SiPM. The Advanced Driver Assistance System (ADAS) and the Automated Driving System (ADS) are driving the growth (CAGR is 19%) [10]. Here we can find cars equipped with interior and exterior cameras, long-range RADAR and Light Detection And Ranging (LiDAR) systems to provide a 3D imaging of the environment. The third dimen- sion is provided by the measure of the distances, through time-of-flight sensors. For example, direct time-of-flight, by means of pulsed LASER that scans the field in front of the car. The distance is measured by the delay of the backscattered light and the LASER pulse, which is typically in the Near Infra-Red (NIR) range of the spectrum (typical values are 850 nm and 905 nm). These wavelengths are a trade-off among eye- safety considerations, better transmission in the air (considering all the possible adverse weather conditions that cars can encounter on the road) and cost. At these wavelengths, silicon provides PDE values much lower with respect to the NUV light, as they get closer to the limit of about 1110 nm due to its energy gap of 1.12 eV.
For that purpose, FBK developed a NIR-HD technology which has been optimized to have higher PDE in the NIR region of the spec-   trum [11]. The challenge is the collection of the carriers that are generated by NIR photons at depths of several microns. Furthermore, the design of such SPAD cells, introduces an additional challenge due   a border effect (the effective fill factor is less than the nominal one) higher than the one observed in the NUV technology.
Table 2 shows the basic characteristics of the NIR-HD SiPM trans- ferred to LFoundry.
One can select the cell size based upon tradeoffs between signal     to noise ratio and dynamic range (the  maximum  number  of  pho-  tons the SiPM can detect). For example, large cells can achieve the same PDE with lower excess voltage than smaller cells, thus lower noise. On the other hand, smaller cells allow better angular resolution, higher dynamic range and better linearity which is better for filtering the background light. The challenge related to smaller cell sizes is a more pronounces border effect. Another important characteristic for LiDAR is the temperature sensitivity since cars experience temperature variations in a range of tens of Celsius degrees.
Table 2
NIR-HD  SiPMs  characterization  data  at  20 C.
Table 3
LF11IS SPAD characterization data at 20 o C.
3.3.Other applications
There are several more applications  that  require  the  integration of sensors and digital readout electronics on the same chip for better spatial resolution and lower power consumption. This can be achieved by designing SPAS arrays with CMOS technology, the rules of which represent a limitation to their performances with respect of customized processes like NUV-HD or NIR-HD. In particular, the CMOS SPAD arrays are expected to exhibit a lower PDE than analog SiPM with custom technology.
FBK has developed several SPAD cells on two different CMOS technology platforms available at LFoundry through Process Design Kits (PDK): (1) LF15A: a CMOS technology suitable for analog-mixed signal, RF and power applications, with a technology node of 150 nm;
(2) LF11IS: optimized for CIS and with a technology node of 110 nm.   As expected, the best performances were obtained with LF11IS which   is particularly optimized to reduce the dark current of photodiodes,    so we will focus on this platform. The development has been carried out through the Multi Project Wafer (MPW) shuttles that are period- ically run in LFoundry and it ended up with two main cells, whose performances are listed in Table 3.
Such SPAD cells are being used for industrial applications using Time of Flight (ToF) technology. Another interesting use was the project funded by the European union called SUPERTWIN [12], where the scope has been the development of a new generation microscope, exploiting the properties of entangled photons to acquire images at a resolution beyond the classical Rayleigh limit of about half the photon wavelength.
4.Conclusions
We described the successful FBK SiPM technology transfer to LFoundry. The experience of LFoundry in CIS sensors development was a key factor for such success.  Such  transfer  pushed  mainly  by the needs of large physics experiments led to industrial opportunities in the medical and automotive market which growth is promisingly increasing with CAGR between 15% and 20%. FBK technology in LFoundry showed best in class performances to overcome the medical and automotive challenges.
Further developments are ongoing with FBK to further expand opportunities for science and other applications. In particular, the work will be focused on the improvement of the spatial resolution and the reduction of the correlated noise on NUV-HD SiPM technology for the Cherenkov Telescope Array (CTA) experiment and the PET market. On the NIR-HD technology the improvements will be focused to increase the PDE.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal re- lationships which may be considered as potential competing inter-  ests: The authors Giovanni Margutti, Roberto Bez and Paolo Organtini (corresponding author) were employees of LFoundry at the time the manuscript was submitted. LFoundry sells SiPM using FBK technology to customers.
