<title>Diagnostics of nuclear reactor coolant pump in transition process on performance and vortex dynamics under station blackout accident</title>
<author>Daoxing Ye a, b, *, Xide Lai b, Yimin Luo b, Anlin Liu b</author>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Technology</Journal>
<Affiliation>a Key Laboratory of Fluid and Power Machinery, Ministry of Education, School of Energy and Power Engineering, Xihua University, Chengdu 610039, China
b School of Energy and Power Engineering, Xihua University, Chengdu 610039, China</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>ANS</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2020.03.015</DOI>
<URL> https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2020.03.015</URL>
a b s t r a c t
A mathematical model for the ﬂowrate and rotation speed of RCP during idling was established. The numerical calculation method and dimensionless method were used to analyze the ﬂow, head, torque and pressure and speed changes under idle conditions. Regularity, using the Q criterion vortex identi- ﬁcation judgment method combined with surface ﬂow spectrum morphology analysis to diagnose the vortex dynamic characteristics on RCP blade. On impeller blade, there is two oscillations in the pressure ratio on pressure surface in blade outlet region. The velocity on the suction surface is two times more oscillating than the inlet of blade, and there is an intersection with the velocity ratio curve on pressure surface. On blade of guide vane, the pressure ratio increases along the inlet to outlet direction, and the speed ratio decreases with the increase of idle time. There is a vortex that rotates counterclockwise on the suction surface, and the streamline on the suction surface of blade is subjected to the entrainment and blocking action of the vortex creates a large reverse ﬂow in the main ﬂow region. There are two vortices at the outlet of guide vane suction side and the vortices are in opposite directions.
Keywords:
Reactor coolant pump Power-off idling Transient performance Vortex dynamics1.Introduction
Nuclear energy is an efﬁcient and clean energy source that not only greatly improves the quality of the environment, but also protects the ecological environment on which humans depend [1]. The safe and stable operation of nuclear power plants is one of the global concerns. In the case of power outages in nuclear power plants, it is effective to ensure sufﬁcient time to cool the reactor to put forward higher requirements for the inertia performance of nuclear reactor coolant pump (RCP). The ﬂow is an unsteady vortex ﬂow that directly affects the vibration of the pump during idle process. Therefore, it is especially important to study the perfor- mance characteristics of the nuclear reactor coolant pump under the condition of power-off and the vortex dynamics in the ﬂow channel.
In 2019, Yonggang used the experimental method to measure the idle characteristics of the model RCP. The use of the split vane can improve the ﬂow state and reduce the ﬂow loss were found [2].In 2011, Xu Yiming used the momentum conservation equation to obtain three models of the idle speed of RCP. The variation law of the speed of the AP1000 and M310 nuclear main pumps was analyzed, and the inertia of the nuclear main pump reached half ﬂow when different moments of inertia were obtained. The varia- tion of the transit time, the model belongs to the semi-theoretical semi-empirical formula, and the friction torque coefﬁcient in the model needs to be obtained through experiments or experience [3]. In 2011, according to the conservation of energy, Hong [4] proposed a mathematical model of the ﬂow and rotation speed of the nuclear main pump under idle conditions, and compared the test data of the nuclear main pump of Qinshan and Daya Bay nuclear power plants. In 2008, Liu Xiajie and Wang Dezhong conducted an inertial and vibration displacement test on the main pump of the Ling'ao nuclear power plant in Guangdong, and ﬁtted it with a four-item multi-speed and ﬂow rate [5]. The measurement results were in compliance with safety standards and then numerical methods were used. Calculate and analyze the internal ﬂow characteristics of RCP [6].
At present, the identiﬁcation methods of ﬂow vortex include the Q criterion, D criterion, l2 criterion, and helicity [7~11]. In 2018, Li Wei used the helicity method to extract the transient ﬂow ﬁeld vortex core, and analyzed the vortex structure of internal ﬂow of
inlet section, the impeller and the vane section during the start-up process, and analyzed the start-up process of mixed-ﬂow pump by using the cross-section diagnostic method [12]. In 2016, based on the numerical calculation of Reynolds time-average model and the vortex-discriminating Q criterion, Cao Yu [13] obtained the topo- logical structure of suction surface of blade, capturing the standing foot stationed on blade and the low-pressure bubble freely up- stream of impeller, and analyzed its formation. mechanism. In 2011, Zhang Xiang [14] used the helicity method to analyze ﬂow char- acteristics of ﬂuid in stainless steel stamping pump by numerical simulation. In 2010, based on the numerical simulation of internal ﬂow of centrifugal pump during start-up process of centrifugal pump, Li Zhifeng [15] used the distribution of total pressure on ﬂow section and axial component distribution of the boundary vorticity ﬂow to characterize the change of ﬂuid energy and the effect of partial impeller on ﬂuid work.
The above research mainly measured and analyzed the external characteristics of nuclear reactor coolant pump during the inertia process, established a semi-theoretical and semi-empirical formula model, investigated the external characteristics of RCP. In the pro- cess of idling, there is a lack of research on the formation and
Table 1
Flow parameter [6].
4	Temporary power failure trip signal of RCP
On-off signal
development of internal vortices. Therefore, this paper ﬁrst estab- lished the mathematical model of ﬂow and rotational speed with idle time, and then used the numerical calculation method to verify the accuracy of numerical calculation through the dimensionless analysis of ﬂowrate, head and torque. Finally, the internal of per- formance and vortex dynamics were studied and analyzed.
Fig.2. Component of nuclear reactor coolant pump.
2.Experiment test and mathematical model
Typical pressurized-water reactor system is shown in Fig. 1. A pressurized-water reactor uses light water as the reactor  coolant and moderator in the state of high temperature and high pressure not boiling in the reactor core using RCP and sends the high-
Fig.1.  Typical pressurized-water reactor system  [16].
Table 2
Design parameters of nuclear reactor coolant pump.Table 3
Details of mesh.temperature and high-pressure water to steam generators to generate steam with heat exchangers for a turbine generator to generate electricity.
This test was based on the idle test carried out during the overhaul of a nuclear power plant [6]. The ﬂow signal parameters and motor trip signals of coolant loops required for this test were collected by the KDO data acquisition system, and stored, analyzed, and printed. The ﬂow parameters were shown in Table 1.
Adopt temporary wiring and protection short circuit method, use the corresponding switch to directly stop the three RCP, and use the KDO system(Test data acquisition system of nuclear power station) to record the 025MD, 040MD and 052MD idle ﬂow. The  idle characteristics of three pumps were similar. In this study, the ﬁrst RCP was analyzed.
In the event of a power outage in the nuclear power plant, the nuclear reactor coolant pump started to idle, and ﬂowrate and speed decreased with time. The more details of test data can be caught in Refs. [5,6,17]. In order to accurately describe the law of ﬂowrate and speed change of the RCP during idling, the ﬁfth-order polynomial is used for ﬁtting. The mathematical model of ﬂowrate and speed after ﬁtting is shown in formulas (1) and (2). The Adj.R- square is 0.99659 and 0.9957 respectively. The closer the Adj.R- square is to 1, the better the ﬁt. Which indicating that the ﬂow- rate and speed ﬁtting using the ﬁfth-order polynomial is more in line with the experimental test value.@1
@2
where, Q is the percentage of ﬂowrate of design of reactor coolant pump, %; n is speed, r/min; t is time, s.
3.Numerical calculation method
The domain of inlet and outlet section, guide vane and spherical volute was set as stationary system, and the impeller ﬂow ﬁeld was rotating system [18,19]. The numerical simulation used commercial ANSYS-CFX software platform to calculate the multi-coordinate grid in computational domain [20]. The data exchange between the rotor and stator was performed through interface, and frozen rotor was used between impeller and stationary domain. The time steps of transient were 2s, the initial time of idle rotation was 90s, and the total time of transient calculation was 220s. The inlet boundary was static pressure condition, the static pressure value was set to 15 MPa (RCP inlet pressure); formula (1) was used as the outlet boundary condition of pump, and formula (1) was used as the rotational speed condition of impeller. In the calculation pro- cess, all the walls adopted adiabatic and non-slip wall condition.
Fig. 4. Flowrate, Head and torque as a function of idle time ((a): Flowrate, (b): Head, (c): Torque).
Fig. 5. Variation and distribution of radial force of impeller.
The near wall area used the scalable wall functions. The wall surface roughness was 0.025 mm. The convergence condition residual was set to 1✕10—6. The RNG k-ε turbulence Model was used. Minimum
iteration 60 times was used in a single time step, and maximum
iteration was used 80 times.
The component of RCP is shown in Fig. 2. It consisted of impeller, guide vane and volute components. The ﬂuid entered from the inlet of impeller. Under the centrifugal force of rotating impeller, the
Fig. 6.  Schematic  diagram of impeller and guide vane.
ﬂuid ﬂows out of impeller into guide vane. The velocity of ﬂuid in guide vane decreases, the static pressure increases and then enters volute, and ﬁnally the ﬂuid ﬂows out from the outlet of volute. RCP operation is under the harsh environmental conditions. To ensure the strength and safety under high temperature and high pressure, the spherical volute is used. The design parameters of the nuclear main pump are shown in Table 2.
The ICEM was used to mesh the ﬂow ﬁeld of RCP. The highly adaptable tetrahedral mesh was produced, as shown in Fig. 3. The grid independence check was performed using grids of different densities in A, B, C, D, E, and F (as shown in Table 3 and Fig. 3(a)). The mesh details were shown in Fig. 3(b). It can be seen from Fig. 3 that as the number of grids increases, the head rises and then gradually stabilizes. The efﬁciency gradually decreases with the increase of number of grids, and ﬁnally that stabilizes at about 90.6%, and the relative error is 0.2%. The grid independence check is performed on grids of different densities, and the number of grids ﬁnally adopted was 4.109 million.
4.Data processing method
For convenience of analysis, the dimensional ﬂowrate, head, torque and pressure and velocity in the internal ﬂow ﬁeld under the inertia condition of RCP were deﬁned.
time are shown in Fig. 4. The performance characteristics of RCP from the 90se220s idle process were analyzed. From Fig. 4(a), the ﬂow rate ratio, the ﬁtting formula (1) of the reference ﬂow rate, decreases rapidly with the increase of idle time, and the ﬂow rate drops to 50% after the idle time of 100 s, then slowly decreases to 6.5% at 220s. The head ratio and torque ratio decrease sharply with the increase of the idle time, which is different from the ﬂow ratio change in that the head ratio and torque ratio tend to be horizontal level after 140s, and close to zero. From Fig. 4(b), calculation result of head ratio is in good agreement with the experimental mea- surement results, and the errors are caused by experimental error and conversion error of experimental prototype.
The variation and distribution of the radial force of RCP impeller are shown in Fig. 5. The variation of radial force with idle time was shown in Fig. 5(a), and the distribution of radial force was shown in Fig. 5(b). The radial force, the magnitude of the “bubble” indicating the magnitude of the radial force, decreases as the idle time in- creases. As can be seen from Fig. 5(a), after the RCP is powered off, the radial force rapidly decreases with the increase of idle time. After 140 s, it tends to be horizontal level, and the variation is similar to the head and torque. The radial force gradually decreases during the idle transition of RCP impeller shown in Fig. 5(b), and the ﬂowrate decreases after idling, so the differential pressure changes gradually to zero.
Qr ¼ Qt ; Hr ¼ Ht ; Tr ¼ Tt
@3
@4
where Qr, Hr, Tr, Pr and Vr were the dimensional ﬂow ratio, head ratio, torque ratio, and pressure ratio and velocity ratio, respec- tively; Qt, Ht, Tt, Pt and Vt were the RCP transients during idle pro- cess, respectively. The unit of ﬂowrate, head, torque and pressure and speed were m3/h, m, N$m, Pa, m/s; Qd, Hd, Td, r and U were RCP in design conditions. The unit of ﬂowrate, head, torque and ﬂuid
density and circumferential velocity of the outlet diameter of impeller were m3/h, m, N$m, kg/m3, m/s.
5.Results and analysis
The change of ﬂow ratio, head ratio and torque ratio with idle
time are shown in Fig. 4. The performance characteristics of RCP from the 90se220s idle process were analyzed. From Fig. 4(a), the ﬂow rate ratio, the ﬁtting formula (1) of the reference ﬂow rate, decreases rapidly with the increase of idle time, and the ﬂow rate drops to 50% after the idle time of 100 s, then slowly decreases to 6.5% at 220s. The head ratio and torque ratio decrease sharply with the increase of the idle time, which is different from the ﬂow ratio change in that the head ratio and torque ratio tend to be horizontal level after 140s, and close to zero. From Fig. 4(b), calculation result of head ratio is in good agreement with the experimental mea- surement results, and the errors are caused by experimental error and conversion error of experimental prototype.
The variation and distribution of the radial force of RCP impeller are shown in Fig. 5. The variation of radial force with idle time was shown in Fig. 5(a), and the distribution of radial force was shown in Fig. 5(b). The radial force, the magnitude of the “bubble” indicating the magnitude of the radial force, decreases as the idle time in- creases. As can be seen from Fig. 5(a), after the RCP is powered off, the radial force rapidly decreases with the increase of idle time. After 140 s, it tends to be horizontal level, and the variation is similar to the head and torque. The radial force gradually decreases during the idle transition of RCP impeller shown in Fig. 5(b), and the ﬂowrate decreases after idling, so the differential pressure changes gradually to zero.
5.1.Performance analysis of blade
The schematic of ﬂow direction in impeller and guide vane of RCP is shown in Fig. 6. The impeller rotates around the central shaft, wherein the distance from point on the blade to rear cover is the chord length of blade, and the maximum chord length is between front cover and rear cover, and the distance is 1. The distance be- tween leading edge and trailing edge of blade is deﬁned as span- wise. The ﬂuid ﬂows in from the inlet of impeller, and then energy was increased in guide vane, ﬂowing out of the outlet of impeller.
5.1.1.Load analysis of the blade system
The relationship between pressure ratio and velocity ratio dis- tribution on impeller blades at different idle times when the chord length of impeller is 0.5 is shown in Fig. 7. It can be seen that the pressure difference between the outlet and inlet of blade increases as the idle time increases as a whole. At 200s, it can be found that the pressure difference between the inlet and outlet of the blade
Fig. 7. Pressure ratio and velocity ratio distribution on impeller blade when span was 0.5 ((a): pressure ratio, (b): velocity ratio).
Fig. 8. Pressure ratio and velocity ratio distribution on guide vane blade when span was 0.5 ((a): pressure ratio, (b): velocity ratio).
Fig. 9. Pressure ratio and velocity ratio distribution from inlet to outlet of impeller.
Fig. 10. Pressure ratio and velocity ratio distribution on guide vane.
and the pressure surface and suction surface is small. It shows that the blade load is reduced and the impeller bears less torque. The velocity ratio gradually decreases with the increase of idle time. The pressure ratio on pressure surface as a whole is higher than the pressure ratio on suction surface. In the blade outlet area, as indi- cated by the dotted line in Fig. 7, there is two oscillations in the pressure ratio on blade pressure surface, as shown in Fig. 7(a). It can be seen from Fig. 7(b) that the velocity on the suction surface is two times oscillating (two peaks) near the inlet of the blade from the leading edge to trailing edge of blade, and then gradually decreasing, and there is an intersection point of velocity ratio curve on the suction surface. At the same time, the velocity is also oscillating near the trailing edge of the blade.
Fig. 8 shows changes in pressure ratio and velocity ratio distri- bution on the blade at different idle times when the chord length of the guide vane blade is 0.5. After the RCP is de-energized, the dis- tribution of pressure ratio from the leading edge to trailing edge of blade gradually changes from a rising trend to a horizontal trend with an increase in the idle time from Fig. 8(a). At 200s, The pres- sure ratio of the leading edge to trailing edge of the blade is almost equal, and the pressure ratio between pressure surface and suction
surface of blade is also at the same level, indicating that pressure inside RCP is in the direction of leading edge to trailing edge of blade as the idle time increases, and the gradient is lowered. As the idle time increases, the distribution of the speed ratio from the leading edge to trailing edge of blade gradually changes from a decreasing trend to a horizontal tendency shown in Fig. 8(b). The velocity of pressure surface and suction surface of guide vane blade tends to equal.
5.1.2.Pressure ratio and velocity ratio distribution of impeller and vane
The distribution of pressure ratio and the velocity ratio with the increase of idle time in ﬂow direction from inlet to the outlet of RCP impeller is shown in Fig. 9. Since there is a distance between the inlet of impeller and the leading edge of impeller blade, the pres- sure ratio changes little before 0.4, and the pressure ratio of ﬂuid increases under the motion of rotating blade. At the same time, the pressure ratio increases as idle time increases. The velocity ratio is gradually reduced, but pressure ratio at the outlet of impeller is substantially equal, as shown in Fig. 9(a). The velocity ratio de- creases as the idle time increases. The velocity ratio changes less
Fig.  11.  Limiting streamline and vortex distribution on pressure surface of impeller blade.Fig. 12.  Limiting streamline and vortex distribution on suction surface of  impeller blade.
before 0.6, then which begins to decrease and reaches a minimum near 0.8, and ﬁnally it increases gradually, reaching a maximum at outlet of impeller.
The curves of pressure ratio and velocity ratio along the inlet to outlet of guide vane blade at different idle times shows in Fig. 10. The pressure ratio gradually decreases with the increase of idle time from Fig. 10(a). The pressure ratio increases ﬁrst in the range of 1.0e1.2, and then decreases in the range of 1.2e1.4 on the inlet to outlet of blade of guide vane blade, and the ﬁnal value rises, but as the idle time increases overall increase tends to decrease. The velocity ratio decreases as the idle time increases as shown in Fig. 10(b).
5.2.Dynamics analysis of vortex structure
From the second-order tensor characteristics, the characteristic equation of the local velocity gradient tensor of the incompressible ﬂow can be written as,
@5
If l1, l2 and l3 are three roots, then there are three independent invariants between them, so
Fig. 13. Limiting streamline and vortex distribution on pressure surface of impeller blade.
Fig. 14. Limiting streamline and vortex distribution on suction surface of impeller blade.
@6
where, eij, Uij are strain rate tensor and vorticity tensor respecti- vely,and Uij	-Uji, ||E||2	eijeji,||U||2	UijUji	0.5|u|2.
In this paper, the Q criterion proposed by Hunt et al., in 1988 was used to identify the vortex region in ﬂow ﬁeld of RCP, so as to identify the vortex structure in impeller and guide vane to achieve the purpose of visualization. Q criterion was deﬁned as ||E|| and ||U|| represent the  deformation  and  rotation  of  a  point  in  the  ﬂow ﬁeld,
respectively, and the area of Q > 0 was deﬁned as a vortex, which means  ||U||2>||E||2,  the  rotation  of  ﬂuid,  the  magnitude  of  the vorticity,  in  the  region  of  the  vortex  played  a  dominant  role in
angular strain rate, and the vortex ﬂow ﬁeld of different sizes in the
ﬂow ﬁeld could be identiﬁed by different values of Q. In the rotating Fig. 15. Vortex structure in impeller ﬂow passage(Q-criterion).
core nuclear coolant pump, for ease of analysis the velocity of ﬂuid in impeller ﬂow channel was relative velocity, and the ﬂuid in guide vane used the absolute speed.
The streamline and vortex distribution on the pressure surface of impeller blade are shown in Fig. 11. The streamline is signiﬁcantly curved near the leading edge of blade and the front cover area, where the vortex is formed as shown in Fig. 11. The outer vortex intensity decreases with the idle time increases. The streamline distribution of blade pressure surface dose not change signiﬁcantly with the increase of idle time, and the streamline is concentrated near the leading blade and the rear cover.
The streamline and vortex distribution on pressure surface of impeller blade are shown in Fig. 12. There is a vortex that rotates counterclockwise near the blade root where is at inlet side and rear cover, and the streamline on the suction surface of blade is sucked and blocked by vortex. The entrainment and blocking action create a large reverse ﬂow in ﬂow ﬁeld. Before the idle time 200s, the vortex is mainly distributed in the vicinity of front cover region.
The streamline and vortex on pressure surface of guide vane blade is shown in Fig. 13. The surface streamline and vortex are analyzed. Before the idling, t 90s and t 130s, there are two obvious vortices on pressure surface of guide vane blade. One of which is located in the leading edge of blade and near the front cover as shown in Fig. 13(a), 13(b), and 13(e). The other larger vortex is located in the middle ﬂow area and effecting all the ﬂow ﬁeld. The streamline from leading edge of blade comes in, which deﬂects under the action of vortex and is squeezed into the main ﬂow ﬁeld, and there is reﬂow near the front cover. The ﬂow in Fig. 13(c), and 13(d) is relatively stable.
Fig. 14 shows the streamline and vortex distribution on suction surface of guide vane blades at different inertia moments of RCP. There are two vortexes at the trailing edge of guide vane blade. From the streamline distribution on suction surface, it can be clearly judged that the two vortexes are in opposite rotating
direction. A vortex is created on the inlet side of blade which was shown in the red area of blade on Qc chart in Fig. 14. Streamlines are crowded into the middle ﬂow area by the action of two vortexes so that the dissipation loss of ﬂow is increased.
As idle time increases, the vortex structure evolution in impeller ﬂow path are shown in Fig. 15. The vortex area is distributed on the inlet and outlet of blade and the pressure surface of trailing edge of blade, and the vortex on trailing edge of blade pressure surface gradually disappears as the idle time increases. At t 130s the ﬂowrate is 26%, the vortices on the trailing edge of blade pressure surface is almost disappeared shown in Fig. 15(e). At the idle time t 200s, the vortices on pressure surface of blade in not existed. Before idling, RCP is operating under design ﬂowrate condition, so the ﬂow in impeller is stable, and the ﬂuid in ﬂow ﬁeld is domi- nated by strain rate. As the idle time increasing the ﬂow rate de- creases and the impeller speed decreases, and the ﬂow characteristic is also strain rate ﬂow in ﬁeld, but the Qc value increases.
The vortex structure of guide vane evolution at different idle time is shown in Fig. 16. The ﬂuid ﬂows out of impeller after being subjected to work by centrifugal force and forms a strong vortex in the stationary guide vane ﬂow channel, and vortex is distributed periodically along the circumferential direction. As the idle time increases, the vortex area of ﬂuid in guide vane decreases. When the idle time is 200s and the ﬂowrate is 9%, the distribution of Qc value    in    Fig.     16(f)    that    the    cloud    map    in    range  of 333.33s—2~333.33s—2 increases, and the vorticity decreases, indicating that the vorticity is equivalent to strain rate of ﬂuid in guide vane.
6.Conclusions and discussions
In order to study the transient performance of reactor coolant pump during power failure and to analyze the vortex dynamic
Fig. 16. Vortex structure in guide vane passage(Q-criterion).
characteristics in impeller and guide vane ﬂow channel, a mathe- matical model of ﬂowrate and speed of reactor coolant pump during idling was ﬁrst established, and then the numerical calcu- lation method was used to calculate the characteristics of RCP, and the dimensionless method was used to analyze the ﬂow, head, torque, pressure and speed changes under the idle condition. Finally, the Q criterion vortex identiﬁcation method was used. The vorticity distribution on blade was analyzed by combining the surface ﬂow morphology. The conclusions are as follows.
(1). The ﬂow ratio decreases rapidly with the increase of idle time. The ﬂow rate drops to 50% after 100 s of idle time and decreases to 6.5% at 220 s. On the impeller blades, there is two oscillations in the pressure ratio on pressure surface in blade outlet region. The velocity on the suction surface is two times more oscillating than the inlet of blade, and there is an intersection with the velocity ratio curve on pressure surface. At the same time, the velocity is also oscillated near the outlet of blade. In the ﬂow direction from the inlet to the outlet of impeller, the pressure ratio gradually increases. As the idle time increases the rate of increase of the pressure ratio decreases gradually, and the speed ratio decreases ﬁrst and then increases, reaching a maximum at the impeller outlet.
(2).
On the blade of guide vane, the pressure ratio increases along the inlet to outlet direction, and the speed ratio decreases with the increase of idle time, and the distribution trend gradually changes from decrease to the level. In the upward ﬂow from the inlet to outlet of blade, the pressure ratio gradually decreases with the increase of idle time, and the pressure ratio ﬁrst increases ﬁrst, then decreases, and ﬁnally rises, but as the idle time increases, the overall increase trend weakened.
(3).The streamline is signiﬁcantly curved near the impeller blade inlet and the front cover region, and the vorticity is weak- ened as the idle time increases. There is a vortex that rotates counterclockwise on the suction surface, and the streamline on the suction surface of blade is subjected to the entrain- ment and blocking action of the vortex creates a large reverse ﬂow in the main ﬂow region. On the vane blade, a large vortex interferes with the all ﬂow ﬁeld. The streamline is deﬂected from the inlet of guide vane blade and is squeezed into the main ﬂow ﬁeld, with recirculation near the front cover. There are two vortices at the outlet of guide vane suction side and the vortices are in opposite directions. The vortex area in the ﬂow channel is mainly distributed on the inlet and outlet of impeller blades and the trailing edge of pressure surface, and the vortex on the trailing edge of blade
pressure surface gradually disappears with the increase of idle time. A strong vortex is formed in the guide vane channel. And periodically distributed along the circumfer- ential direction of the vane, and as the idle time increases, the swirl region of ﬂuid in guide vane decreases.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declared no potential conﬂicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Acknowledgment
The support of Sichuan Science and Technology Department Plan Project (Grant No2019YJ0451, 2017JY0047), Sichuan province department of education (Grant No 172467), the Key Project of Xihua University (Grant No Z1620408), Open Fund of Key Labora- tory of Water-Saving Agriculture of Henan Province (Grant No FIRI2018-03) and the Young scholar reserve personnel Project of Xihua University is gratefully acknowledged. Thanks to our group for giving me so many helps.
