<title>DEVELOPMENT OF A FIBER-OPTIC CHANNEL SYSTEM FOR MEASURING PHYSICAL PARAMETERS FOR NUCLEAR TECHNOLOGIES</title>
<Affiliation>1.State Science Center of the Russian Federation – Leipunskii Institute for Physics and Power Engineering (IPPE), Obninsk, Russia.
2.All-Russia Research Institute of Chemical Technology (VNIIKhT), Moscow, Russia.
3.Atomenergomash, Moscow, Russia.</Affiliation>
<author>P. A. Dvornikov,1V. A. Khryachkov, N. N. Titarenko,S. N. Kovtun,O. A. Plaksin, P. B. Baskov,
D. V.  Lapshin, and S. B. Chebyshov</author>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>ATOMIC ENERGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Springer</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10512-018-0443-0</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10512-018-0443-0</URL>
Abstract
The development of a new class of information and measurement systems with improved technical and metrological characteristics for prolonged operation during external perturbations (high temperature, pressure, radiation, seismic, electromagnetic, vibration, and other loads), which are characteristic for special-purpose power installations and units of NPP is discussed.
A problem of current importance is the development of a software-hardware system supporting continuous automatic monitoring and diagnostics of the technical state of the equipment in a potentially dangerous object (NPP, TPP, CHPP) under normal operating conditions and in complicated scenarios of the development of emergency situations where one or several of the basic operating parameters reach and exceed the maximum admissible values. The existing monitoring and diagnostics systems for nuclear power installations are based on active electronic devices requiring a continuous supply of electric power. In emergency situations with loss of power, higher loads due to radiation, temperature, pressure, vibrations, and corrosive external media as well as adverse factors, the reactor installation can remain without monitoring systems, which can result in a loss of control. In this connection, passive fiber optic sensors, not requiring electric power, for physical quantities show promise. Fiber-optic sensors are made of chemically inert quartz glass, possess minimum mass-to-size characteristics, and are capable of prolonged operation under extreme conditions of chemically corrosive media, intense radiation, and high tempera- ture. These properties make fiber-optic sensors and the information-measurement systems based on them long-lasting. Optical fibers are not susceptible to electromagnetic interference. They make possible galvanic decoupling between the components of control and diagnostics systems and also make possible remote-controlled monitoring, which is especially important for unattended, remote, dangerous objects.
The following operating particulars of the power-generating objects of NPP must be taken into account in the devel- opment of fiber-optic systems:
–monitoring systems must function reliably in an automatic regime during prolonged operation of equipment (up to 18 months) with no access for maintenance;
–monitoring apparatus can be exposed simultaneously to radiation, high temperatures, heightened pressures, vibra- tions, and other disturbances for a long time.
The monitoring and diagnostics systems of NPP must meet high standards in terms of functional stability in normal operating regimes of a power-generating object and under emergency conditions (these systems are important for safe opera- tion of power-generating blocks).
TABLE 1. Physical and Geometric Characteristics of Optical Fibers in Communication Systems, Instrument Engineering, and Scientific Research
The following are proposed on this basis:
–using fiber-optic technologies, develop new methods for measuring physical quantities;
–on the basis of breakthrough technologies, develop for nuclear technologies a system of information and measure- ment channels based on fiber-optic structures;
–create a new class of technical means (primary transducers, cable communication lines, sealed passages, and oth- ers) with improved technical and metrological characteristics for long-time operation during external perturbations character- istic for special power generation installations and units at NPP;
–create an elemental base for measuring systems in order to monitor the operational safety of potentially dangerous power-generating objects and considerably increase the accuracy, sensitivity, speed of operation, reliability, and cost-effec- tiveness of the most important components of nuclear instrument engineering.
Each measuring channel is supposed to consist of a fiber-optic sensor for a physical quantity, an optical communica- tion line, and the requisite hardware for processing optical signals. Optical sensors (primary transducers) and fiber-optic communication lines can be exposed to extreme operating conditions and the means for processing optical signals, as a rule, are located at a safe distance from the zone of adverse perturbations.
The measurement range for physical quantities based on fiber-optic structures for nuclear technologies is as follows: tem- perature 20–400°C, pressure to 25 MPa, vibrations 20–2000 Hz, moisture content 1–100%, dose rate 10–10–1 Gy/sec, and coolant flow to 8·104 m3/h. Hermetic cable inputs (sealed passages) make possible transmission of signals from the sealed zone and back
while maintaining at the same time the hermetic seal of the enclosures and the biological protection of the ambient environment.
Fig. 1. Classification of fiber-optic sensors.
Optical fibers and cable communication lines for operation in the hermetic zone of NPP. Fibers must remain serviceable in the normal operating regime as well as in regimes with disruption of heat outflow from the sealed zone, small and large leaks, and beyond-design-basis accidents. For this, an optical fiber must have a protective cladding which provides a hermetic seal in the presence of repeated laving by decontaminating solutions, withstand at least 120 heating and cooling cycles over the service time-interval, and be resistant to high temperatures to 250°C for at least 1 h (in a beyond-design basis accident regime). In addition, the fiber must be radiation resistant and remain serviceable in the entire range of seismic distur- bances for the maximum earthquake (magnitude 8 on the MSK-64 scale, inclusively).
It is known that the basic obstacle and mechanical characteristics of optical fiber are determined by the structure and quality of the material of the initial blank, while the protective coating intended for preserving the high initial strength of quartz fiber also can impact its optical properties (Table 1).
One of the main goals is the creation of domestic materials of shells and cores of optical fiber with fundamentally new technological properties and increased durability, production of optical fibers, cables, components of optical fiber sys- tems for special applications in extreme conditions.
Fiber-optic sensors. Interferometric sensors are widely used. The result of interference depends on the phase differ- ence between the electromagnetic waves, and sensitivity to a change of the phase difference of the waves in the interferometer is unattainable for any other methods. Sensors of this type are based on well-known interferometric schemes, for example, Michelson, Mach–Zehnder, and Fabry–Perot.
In the most widely used double-beam sensors, the interference of two coherent optical waves propagating along in- dependent fiber channels is recorded. In addition, one fiber is the reference and the other one is the signal fiber. In interference sensors, the signal fiber channel can be used simultaneously to transmit waves and as a sensitive element. When using an external sensitive element, the signal channel is used only for the transmission of waves (Fig. 1).
A Fabry–Perot interferometer can be implemented in a single fiber: the cavity of the interferometer is created by the two end surfaces of the fiber or a Bragg lattice pair in the fiber. As a rule, such sensors are used as point devices to record the temperature, pressure, and refractive index. A fiber Bragg lattice comprises a section of a lightguide in whose core the
refractive index is made to vary periodically along the fiber. Such a lattice is characterized by a resonance reflection spectrum
with relative width ~10–4 at Bragg wavelength λ = 2Λn, where Λ is the modulation period, and n is the average value of the refractive index. The sensitivity of the resonance wavelength to mechanical and temperature perturbations of the optical fiber
TABLE 2. Current Status of the Manufacture of Fiber-Optic Pressure, Temperature, and Vibration Sensors
determines their application in sensor systems. Most commercial fiber-optic monitoring systems based on Bragg lattices do not operate at high temperatures and under prolonged radiation loads.
The conceptual foundations of fiber-optic measurement systems have been studied theoretically and experimentally. For example, fiber-optic interferometric sensors are used to measure temperature, pressure, strain, moisture content, and mi- cro-displacements [1–5] (Table 2).
Most known fiber-optic systems for monitoring physical quantities are designed to operate under conditions with no radiation action on the optical fiber. As a rule, the existing systems are described by theoretical characteristics and are imple- mented as laboratory models, rarely reaching commercial development.
Complex of experimental methods of studying radiation phenomena in optical fibers. A complex of experimen- tal methods based on the use of optical fibers was developed at the Leipunskii Institute of Physics and Power Engineering and new experimental setups for monitoring radiation fields were developed. Experimental methods of studying optical phenom- ena in solids under irradiation have been established and developed [6–8]. Methods were developed for studying radiation-in- duced non-linearly optical phenomena in quartz fibers during pulsed irradiation in a reactor, a method was proposed for sup- pressing radiation-induced luminescence in fiber-optic systems, and a method was developed for studying experimentally the luminance of different media irradiated by γ-radiation from external sources. The results were used to develop diagnostics systems as part of the ITER project as well as to develop an experimental basis at the Leipunskii Institute for Physics and Power Engineering (IPPE) and the National Institute of Materials Science (Japan) [6].
It has been shown experimentally that fiber-optic cable can be used as a γ-ray detector [9]. A correlation method has been proposed for measuring coolant flow by means of new ring-shaped fiber-optic detectors that is based on measuring fluc- tuations of the γ-rays emitted by the flow [10].
A system for recording weak light fluxes arising in different media exposed to ionizing radiation has been developed and studied [11]. It was shown that the observed effects provide a basis for a new remote-sensing dosimetric-monitoring sys- tem. The experimental investigations performed using the developed model system showed that reliable detection of relative- ly small sources of γ-rays is possible.
Figure 2 shows diagrams of the relative arrangement of an optical cable and radiation source in experimental studies [9]. The following experimental studies were performed [9]:
–the detection efficiency of γ-rays versus their energy and the uniformity of the detection efficiency along the detec- tor were measured;
Fig. 2. Measurement schemes [9] using VOZh 85F-UV250/265/370AL optical-fiber bundle.
–data were obtained on the γ-ray detection efficiency versus the relative position of the source and detector;
–the linearity of the response of the detector versus the γ-ray dose rate was checked and the sensitivity of the detec- tion system with respect to temperature and moisture was studied;
–the degree to which intense fluxes of fast neutrons and γ-rays affect the detector was evaluated.
The presence of the neutron background at the location of the γ-ray detector makes it necessary to determine the sensi- tivity of detectors of this type to such radiation. Two series of experiments were conducted to study the degree to which neutrons affect the detector: on a PuBe neutron source and in the EG-1 accelerator at IPPE (the neutrons were generated in a solid deuteri- um target via the (d, d) reaction). The measurements showed that the radiation sensitivity of a detector based on fiber-optic cable is approximately 1000 times higher than the neutron sensitivity. Therefore, in order to decrease the detector background attention must be devoted to protection from the scattered γ -rays, since the background due to fast and thermal neutrons is not significant. Fiber-optic system for measuring the γ-ray dose rate. Computational and experimental studies were performed at
IPPE in order to develop new, promising, fiber-optic systems to monitor ionizing radiation fields, specifically, γ- and β-radiation as
well as neutrons. The fiber-optics system developed to measure the dose rate is characterized by the measurement range 10–10–1 Gy/sec, measurement accuracy not worse than 5% with measuring time ≤10 sec, and working temperature to 400°C (Fig. 3).
An extended dynamic range is achieved by varying the dose-rate measurement time, using neutral light filters in front of the photodetector and the possibility of detection in the pulse regime (counting of individual pulses) and in current regime (measuring the anodic current) at high dose rate.
The design of the detector makes it possible to arrange it in difficult to reach locations, specifically, in a narrow  channel ≥10 mm in diameter and >50 m long (distance from the sensitive part of the detector to the light receiving device). The channel is not sensitive to neutron radiation, vibrations, external electromagnetic interference, or corrosive media.
Fig. 3. Block diagram of γ-ray dose rate measurements based on the fiber-optic method.
Ring-shaped-detector based correlation flowmeter for VVER coolant. To increase the accuracy of the determi- nation of the thermal power of a reactor, the means for measuring coolant flow must be replaced by modern means with a higher accuracy class. A promising method is the correlation method, which is based on the detection of random activity fluctuations with the aid of two sensors separated by a certain distance along the coolant flow [10]. Specifically, the correlation method of measuring the flow of oxygen-containing liquids is based on the detection of γ-rays emitted as a result of 16N de- cay. These nuclei are formed as result of the react (n, p), which occurs when neutrons with energy >9 MeV interact with the oxygen nuclei present in the coolant (water). The decay of 16N is accompanied by the emission of a γ-ray (Eγ = 6.13 MeV). The half-life is equal to the 7.1 sec.
To make the process of monitoring the thermal power of VVER, more efficient it is proposed that the coolant flow be measured directly by the correlation method using ring-shaped fiber-optic detectors [12] (Fig. 4).
Computational and experimental studies show that the proposed fiber-optic correlation system can substantially re- duce the error in determining coolant flow in the secondary circuits of the first loop to 1.5%, which is significantly lower than the errors in the measurements (~6%) performed by currently existing methods.
We shall present the technical characteristics of two types of correlation systems for monitoring the thermal power of VVER, one of which uses ionization chambers to monitor the activity of 16N and the other uses fiber-optic ring-shaped detectors:
Fig. 4. Block diagram of correlation measurements of the flow of liquid by means of a fiber-optic ring-shaped
γ-ray detector (D – ring-shaped γ-ray detector with fiber-optic cable).
Specially developed ionization chambers are located inside protective lead collimators and possess significant di- mensions, which limits their use in difficult-to-reach locations of the reactor compartment.
The small mass and dimensions of the fiber-optic ring-shaped γ-ray detector make it possible to include in the mea- surement system three identical sensors simultaneously, which leads to the following advantages:
–the system becomes more reliable – it remains serviceable when one of the sensors malfunctions;
–the accuracy of flow measurement by the correlation method is higher, since up to three correlation signals will be used to determine the flow;
–together with the correlation method it is possible to measure the coolant flow my recording 16N activity reduction (the problem is solved correctly only with three sensors);
–metrological certification of the correlation flowmeter according to 16N activity reduction becomes possible.
In terms of three characteristics and the operational and functional possibilities, the proposed system surpasses the existing systems used to measure coolant flow. It meets the requirements of NPP resistance to external influential factors (earth- quake resistance, vibration resistance to ionizing radiation, temperature, and others) in normal operating regimes and during the maximum design-basis and beyond-design-basis accidents and is geared toward increasing the operational safety of VVER.
Conclusions. The basic qualities and advantages of using fiber-optic sensor systems to measure different physical quantities are immunity to electromagnetic interference, absence of electric power supply, small dimensions, flexibility and strength of fiber, corrosion resistance, and possibility of operating at high temperatures.
On the basis of experimental studies, it is proposed that a fiber-optic γ-ray detector be developed. Measurement systems for measuring the flow velocity of oxygen-containing liquids in a pipeline, secure reliable energy supply and energy security in the production of electricity at NPP with VVER, and measure the γ-ray dose rate at higher than usual temperatures and radiation intensity can be developed on the basis of the developed high-temperature, fiber-optic, γ-ray detector.
A key feature of the developed complex of measuring channels for physical parameters based on fiber-optic struc- tures is the use of digital methods of signal processing. Digital methods of signal processing have the following advantages over analog methods:
–independence of signal processing from the ambient environmental conditions (temperature, moisture content, vibrations, and others);
–possibility of attaching different types of sensors;
–possibility of building many complex signal processing systems (in the case of analog processing, this results in a larger number of electronic modules that are used, and the reliability of the entire system as a whole drops sharply);
–compactness of components;
–higher effect/background ratio.
The developed multi-channel, digital, fiber-optic system using novel approaches and sensors will make it possible to increase the reliability and accuracy of monitoring of primary equipment operation at existing and planned NPP.
