<title>Recent R&D Results on Fusion Nuclear Technology for ITER and DEMO Reactor in Japan</title>
<Affiliation>National Institutes for Quantum and Radiological Science and Technology；Osaka University；University of Toyama；National Institute for Fusion Science；Kyushu University</Affiliation>
<author>Toshihiko Yamanishi, Norikiyo Koizumi, Masatak Nakahira, Yoshihiko Nunoya,Satoshi Suzuki,Hiroyuki Tobari,Mieko Kashiwagi, Takaaki Isono, Takashi Inoue,Makoto Sugimoto,
Yoshinori Kusama,Yoshinori Kawamura,Hiroyasu Tanigawa, Masaru Nakamichi, Takashi Nozawa, Tsuyoshi Hoshino, Yoshio Ueda,b Yuji Hatano,c Takeo Muroga,d and Satoshi Fukadae</author>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>FUSION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/15361055.2017.1330625</DOI>
<URL> https://doi.org/10.1080/15361055.2017.1330625</URL>
Abstract
Several key components, such as superconducting coils, remote handling equipment, heating systems, have been designed and manufactured  by JADA (Japan Domestic Agency). These activities have  been carried out in accordance with the agreed schedule; in collaboration with the ITER organization and other domestic agencies. As a significant technical program using ITER, to design and to manufacture the TBS (Test blanket system), some R&D and design activities have also been conducted in Japan. Under the IFERC (the International Fusion Energy Research Center) projects of BA (Broader Approach) activities, design and R&D activities on fusion DEMO reactor have been carried out. For the DEMO R&D activity, five basic R&D subjects for a DEMO blanket system have been selected, and been studies under close collaborations between EU and JA: structure materials (RAFM steels and SiC/SiC composites), functional materials (tritium breeders and neutron multipliers), and tritium technology. From 2007, the above projects produced a set of fruitful results. A series of advanced technologies for the DEMO blanket system has also been carried out by Universities in Japan. Some significant basic R&D studies have also been carried out under US-JA collaborative program.
Keywords
ITER, Broader Approach, fusion nuclear technology, blanket.
Note
Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
In Japan, a series of R&D activities on fusion nuclear technologies for ITER and a DEMO reactor has been conducted under several frame works. The most signifi- cant activity is ITER program for Japan, and a set of design and manufacturing activities has been continued up to the present to construct ITER (Ref. 1) Several key components, such as superconducting coils, heating sys- tems, and divertor, have been designed and manufactured by JADA (Japan Domestic Agency). The QST (National Institutes for Quantum and Radiological Science and Technology) has been established at April 2016, and has been designated as JADA. One of the key fusion nuclear technologies for DEMO reactor is a blanket system. The blanket system must produces tritium and heat energy in  a DEMO reactor. For this purpose, a TBM and a system (TBS: Test Balnket System) are designed and  are installed to ITER for a series of the tritium production and heat recovery tests by EU, JA, CN, KO, IN. Various water cooled solid blanket system. A set of R&D and design activities has been conducted in Japan to realize the above TBS.
In parallel to ITER project, BA activities2,3 are car- ried out by EU and Japan, to obtain a series of basic data for the design of DEMO reactor. The BA activities con- sist of three major projects: the International Fusion Materials Irradiation Facility-Engineering Validation and Engineering Design Activities, the IFERC(International Fusion Energy Research Center), and the Satellite Tokamak Programme. The IFERC project is further com- posed of four sub-projects; a DEMO Design activity, DEMO R&D activities, a Computational Simulation Center, and an ITER Remote Experimentation Center. A series of R&D studies on nuclear fusion technology has thus been carried out in the IFERC project. According to the common interests of each party towards DEMO reac- tor, 5 basic R&D subjects have been chosen: structure materials (RAFM steels and SiC/SiC composites), func- tional materials (tritium breeders and neutron multi- pliers), and tritium technology. A series of R&D studies on the above subjects have been started from 2007. Some collaborative studies between EU and JA have also been carried out. An apparatus for SiC/SiC composites was made by ENEA Frascati by using EU knowledge, and  has been used for a series of corrosion experiments of LiPb by JA by using JA knowledge. Several samples of JET were sent to JA, and valuable data have been obtained by using unique JA facilities installed in a radi- ological controlled area. Several samples of functional materials have also been exchanged between  EU  and  JA. Valuable data have been obtained under a variety of conditions by using both the EU and JA facilities. These R&D activities have been recognized to produce a set of fruitful results; and recently, the activities were decided to extend until end of 2019. A set of advanced technologies for the blanket system has also been carried out by Universities in Japan. It is also a key technology to develop materials for DEMO reactor; and some signifi- cant basic R&D studies have been carried out under a US-JA collaborative program.4
Through the above R&D activities for ITER and
DEMO reactor, significant data is provided to a series    of DEMO design activities toward to DEMO reactor.  This paper summarizes  the status and recent  topics of  the above R&D activities.
II.RECENT PROGRESS OF ITER PROJECT IN JAPAN1
The main components of ITER procured by JADA are superconducting coils, divertor, the heating systems (NBI and gyrotron), and the remote handling equipment.5 The air detiriatiation system, which is a key component of ITER safety system, is also procured with ITER organiza- tion. JADA is responsible for supplying 100% of the con- ductors for the central solenoid coils. The number of the conductors manufactured is 30, and three additional con- ductors are also made to check the quality of the manufac- turing procedure (see Fig. 1). Among the 33 conductors, 24 conductors have already been shipped to US until June 2016. These conductors will be wound and be assembled to the central solenoid coils in US. The conductors of the toroidal field (TF) coils are shared by 6 parties, JA, Korea, China, US, RF, and EU (Sharing fraction is from 9% to 33%). JADA has already made 33 conductors. By using these conductors with those made by JA, Korea, and China, 9 winding packs (WPs) are assembled by Japan. In addition, 19 TF coil structures are also made by JADA. A series of production activities of the TF Structures is being success- fully carrying out. By using the 9 WPs and 9 TF coil structures among 19 TF coil structures, JADA will finally make 9 TF coils. For this purpose, 15 double pancakes (DP) have been made, and a set of heat treatment processes of 10DPs have already been finished. Figure 2 shows the double pancake (14 m length) and a one of the coil structures (16 m) of TF coil. Assembly of basic segments for   1st   in-board   structure   has   been    completed.  EU assembles 10 TF coils using 10 TF coil structures fabricated by Japan.
For the heating systems, JADA is responsible for the
followings Neutral Beam components: 100% of HV Bushing,  100%  of  1  MV  Power  Supply  HV   (see Fig. 3), and 33% of 1 MeV Accelerator. Figure 3 shows the specifications  of  1 MV Power Supply HV (1  MV, 60 A, 1 hour operation). The HV test power supply, after Fig. 1. Conductor of central solenoid coil.
Fig. 2. Double pancake (14 m length) and one of the coil structures (16 m) of TF coil.
Fig. 3. 1 MV Power Supply HV (MV, 60 A, 1 hour operation, and 100 m transmission line) and 1  MV Power Supply HV (8 m length and 2 m diameter).
1 MV withstand voltage testing, was shipped to the  NBTF (Neutral Beam Test Facility) in Padova, Italy, as scheduled. 80% of transmission line and all five DC generators were delivered to the NBTF site, and are  under installation. Recently, 80% of transmission line  and all five DC generators were delivered to the NBTF site, and are under installation. It will eventually be installed in ITER.
For the divertor activities of ITER, full-W plasma- facing unit prototypes were mounted on a test frame as a test assembly as seen in Fig. 4. A series of high heat flux tests on the prototypes was completed until December 2015. Four PFU (Plasma Facing Unit) prototypes suc- cessfully withstood against 1000 cycles of high heat load at 20 MW/m2, with no macro-cracking, no degradation of heat removal, and no water leak. The above results are sufficient to start manufacturing of the ITER full-W divertor components.
For other systems; the remote handling equipment, the diagnostics, the gyro Tron, and the air detiriatiation system, a series of design activities has been successfully carried out until 2016.
III.ITER-TBM ACTIVITY6–8
One of the most important R&D subjects for nuclear technology in ITER is the TBM program. A series of tests on the heat and tritium production will be carried out in ITER-DT operation. Before the above tests, the first TBM will be installed in ITER, and basic and safety functions should be demonstrated in ITER H-He operation.
A water cooled ceramic breeder (WCCB) is pro- posed by Japan as a primary option of TBM, and R&D and design studies have been carried out by JADA with close discussion with Japanese Universities and indus- trial companies. The TBM system (TBS) is composed    of TBM set (TBM+Shield), a water cooling system (WCS), and a tritium extraction  system  (TES)  to  satisfy the above purposes  of  TBM  program  as  seen  in Fig. 5. Some analysis systems for neutron  and  tri- tium are also needed. The structural materials of TBM
Fig. 4. Full-W plasma-facing unit  prototypes  mounted on a test frame.
Fig. 5. TBM system (TBM set, WCS and TES) of Japan.
is RAFM (Reduced Activated Ferric Martensite: F82H, Fe-8Cr-2W-V,Ta), and 1.67 m in height, 0.46 m in  width, and 0.6 m in depth. The surface heat flux and neutron wall load are expected to be 0.3 MW/m2 and
0.78 MW/m2, respectively. The coolant water condi-  tions are 15.5 MPa for pressure, 555–600 K for tem- perature, and 3.59 kg/s for flow rate.  The  tritium  breeder material is Li2TiO3 (37 kg), and neutron multi- plier is Be metal (200 kg). A part of TBM has  been made, and been tested to demonstrate manufacturing procedure by F82H. A series of pressure test has also been successfully completed. A long term corrosion experiments by high temperature water on F82H  has  also been conducted.
In 2015, the conceptual design of TBM of JA was reviewed by ITER. Several comments were made on the design, and modification of the design activities has been continued. In this paper, a typical comment on the design and modification of the design are described. By the neu- tron irradiation, coolant water is activated. The effect of activated water on measurement equipment in TBM set should be calculated. Some assumptions were applied for the calculation. The coolant pipe goes through the center of port cell (PC). It is also assumed that a spherical analysis tool made by Si (200 mm) is put at 1 m from the coolant pipe. It is further assumed that the tool is covered with a spherical lead. Absorbed dose rate of Si has been estimated by changing the thickness of the lead sphere. As seen in Fig. 6; the absorbed dose rate of Si was 34 Gy/h at 200 mm away from the insulator surface of the cooling pipe. In the case where the thickness of the lead sphere is 50 mm, the dose rate is decreased to about 1 Gy/h at 1000 mm from the insulator surface of the cooling pipe by covering the sphe- rical lead, where the analysis tool is put. The dose rate is increased to about 3 Gy/h at 1600 mm from the insulator surface of the cooling pipe, since that portion is outside of the spherical lead. As the result, 50-mm thick lead is necessary to reduce the absorbed dose rate by about one order of magnitude. To reduce the shielding thickness of the spherical lead, we plant to install some delay water tanks in TBM.
IV.BA-R&D ACTIVITIES ON NUCLEAR TECHNOLOGY FOR DEMO REACTOR
Under the BA program, basic studies on DEMO blanket have been carries out from 2007. Our, JA and
Fig. 6. Effect of activated water on measurement equipment.
EU, attention has been focused on the basic R&D studies for a DEMO blanket system. For this purpose, five R&D subjects have been selected, and been studied: structure materials (RAFM steels and SiC/SiC composites), func- tional materials (tritium breeders and neutron multi- pliers), and tritium technology:
1.SiC/SiC Composites9: One of the goals of this R&D subject is to obtain data for functional structure applications in the advanced blanket system, for instance, flow channel inserts of the dual-coolant breeding blanket. As one of the recent R&D results, it was found that the deuterium permeability of CVD-SiC was about 2 order smaller than that of stainless steel, even for high tem- perature range (1000–1200 K). It means that the SiC can be applies as a tritium barrier. The compatibility  of NITE SiC/SiC composite and CVD SiC at 900°C for Li-Pb has also been studied. It was identified that the corrosion of SiC materials with liquid Pb-Li formed a reactive layer under flow condition.
2.R&D on Tritium Technology10: There are three major R&D subjects: the tritium analysis method, the tritium durability tests, and the data on tritium-material interactions such as the analysis of JET dust and tile. To carry out these subjects, a RI facility in Rokkasho has successfully been constructed and been operated. Regarding the analysis of JET dust and tile, surface analysis and beryllium inventory tests of JET dust parti- cles has been started as jointly activities with EU and JA. For the studies on the tritium profile in JET with ITER like wall (ILW), a use of imaging plate analysis and thermal desorption analysis has been started. The imaging plate method has been studied as a R&D on the tritium analysis also. For the study on the tritium permeation barrier, a method of yttrium oxide and zirconium oxide coatings by a metal-organic decomposition method have been tested to obtain basic database for the tritium- material interactions. The tritium durability tests have also been continued by using some key material samples, such as organic compounds of electrolysis cell and F82H.
3.R&D on Ferritic Structural Materials for DEMO Blanket11: Our attention has been focused on the techni- cal issues related to the structural material of a breeding blanket which is used in-vessel fusion environments. One of the major objectives on this subject is to establish fabrication technologies of RAFM steel with the joining technology. As one of the fabrication technology, a real scale production activity of F82H was demonstrated again: 20 tons of F82H was produced by an electric arc furnace. The various properties of the present heats were proved to be equivalent or better compared to those of the past heats to qualify all parts form (tube, pipe). The solid joining technology corresponding to the blanket design, together with inspection technology, was also demon- strated. Over 100 m  weld length would be required per    a single blanket. The decent TIG and EB weldability along with good (low) crack sensitivity has been proven for the above subject. These tests have been carried out to assure the criteria of sound HIP joint. To select the best joining technology for the highly irradiated weldment is another purpose of these tests. Figure 7 shows the tensile and charpy impact properties of various heats of F82H plates plotted against the plate thickness. The irradiation effect of RAFM has also been continued. To design a DEMO blanket, we need a series of irradiation data up to 50 ~ 80 dpa of F82H. A set of fission irradiation data up to 50 ~ 80 dpa would be obtained; however, the fission irradiation data should carefully be examined to apply the fusion design activities. The simulation and modeling will be essential to predict the critical condition of design and to know the limit of application of fission data.
4.Advanced Neutron Multiplier for DEMO Blanket12: The neutron multiplier is essentially required for the DEMO blanket to produce tritium. We have developed a beryllium compounds such as Be12Ti (ber- ylide) as a feasible material. A new berylide granulation process that combined processes with a plasma sintering method and REM (Rotating Electrode Method) was developed. The plasma sintering method can reduce the
Fig. 7. Tensile and Charpy impact properties of various heats of F82H plates plotted against the plate thickness. Larger symbols stand for the data points of F82H fabri- cated in BA activities.
required time by 30% compared to conventional methods such as the hot pressing method. However, Be12Ti needs a series of heat treatment processes to obtain uniform Be12Ti phase, since several Be-Ti phases with Be phase are formed after the REM process. Hence, we developed Be-V berylide as another feasible material. The Be-V berylide was not required the heat treatment processes. The properties of the Be-V berylide by the plasma sinter- ing method were evaluated as seen in Fig. 8. It was demonstrated that the Be12V berylide had a single phase with no heat treatment process. The H2 generation ratio  of Be12V berylide was also measured, and was found that the value were two orders of magnitude less than those of Be metal.
5.R&D on Advanced Tritium Breeders for DEMO Blanket: It is a key issue to develop the fabrication technologies of tritium breeding materials. For this pur- pose, fabrication tests of advanced tritium breeder peb- bles, such as Li2TiO3 with excess Li (Li2+xTiO3+y) was carried out (x = −0.12 ~ 0.25, y = −0.06 ~ 0.125). By using a sol-gel method,13 1 mm Li2TiO3 was produced: a granulation setup consists of two syringes, a T-shaped flow path and an oil-filled container. The size of the gel particles was controlled by the flow speeds of oil and slurry. A series of tritium release experiments using Li2TiO3 with excess Li (Li2+xTiO3+y) at JAEA (Japan Atomic Energy Agency)-FNS (Fusion Neutron Source,   a rotating target can generate neutrons in the order of
Fig. 8.  Photograph of Be12V pebble and its cross section.
1011 n/s.) have been studied by a container with the above Li2TiO3 pebbles (1419 g) (Ref. 14). It was found that tritium was mainly released as the HT gas (larger than  90%), and a small amount of tritium was released as HTO.
6.Recovery of lithium (Li) from sea water15: The fusion DEMO reactor needs a large amount of lithium  as  the tritium breeding material. However, Li is also needed  for many batteries such as for cars and for cellphones. We should develop a Li production method.  If we can recover Li from sea water (A large amount of Li is in sea water), we can solve the above problem. We have studied on a direct recovery method of Li from sea water by a membrane, which is a Li ionic superconductor (see Fig. 9). The con- ductor permeates Li ion only from the negative electrode side to the positive side; and finally produces Li2CO3 pow- der with a CO2 bubbling method. In addition, an electrical power is also generated by permeating Li ion; and electric power needed for the above process can be reduced.
V.BASIC R&D STUDIES ON NUCLEAR TECHNOLOGY FOR DEMO REACTOR (UNIVERSITIES)
V.A.PHENIX Program4
The PHENIX program has been designed under the Japan-US joint project for the purpose of technological
Fig. 9. Lithium ionic superconductor membrane.
assessment of plasma facing component for DEMO reac- tors. The term of PHENIX is the abbreviation of PFC evaluation by tritium Plasma HE at and Neutron Irradiation experiment. This joint program started 2013 and will end 2018, and its goal is to evaluate the feasi-  bility of He-cooled divertor with neutron irradiated tung- sten armor materials for DEMO. The Japan-US collaboration research has been performed dividing into three tasks, task 1, task 2, and task 3, and has been performed by using specified facilities in the US research laboratories, Plasma Arc Lamps, High Flux Isotope Reactor (HFIR) in ORNL, Tritium Plasma Experiment   in INL and permeation device in SNL and so on (see Figs. 10 and 11):
1.to measure thermo-mechanical properties of tungsten based materials after neutron irradiation at elevated temperatures relevant to divertor con- ditions, (task 1)
2.to investigate heat transfer mechanism from neu- tron irradiated tungsten in He-cooled systems, and to improve cooling efficiency, system design, in addition, modeling of the heat transfer mechanism, (task 1)
3.to investigate thermal response of tungsten layered materials and to develop advanced tung- sten materials, (task 2)
4.to investigate effects of high flux plasma expo- sure on tritium behavior in neutron-irradiated tungsten, (task 2) and
5.whether or not the neutron irradiated W armor is feasible under around 10 MW/m2 heat load with simultaneous plasma and neutron irradiation and whether or not safety can be kept on tritium retention and permeation of He-cooled PFCs, which are the critical issues for a divertor design of DEMO (task 3).
V.B.Independent and Ingenious Researches on Blanket and Relating Materials in Universities and NIFS
Blanket researches are actively performed in Japanese universities and National Institute for Fusion Science. Solid breeder of Li2TiO3 and F82H structural material is the first proposal for the ITER-TBM of Japan. On the other hand, a promising liquid blanket of Li17Pb83 eutectic alloy or Flibe molten salt has been investigated in NIFS and several uni- versities such as Kyushu University and Tohoku University. Integrated tests and demonstrations of blanket functions have been performed using the Flinak/LiPb twin loop sys- tem called Oroshi-2 (Ref. 16). Effects of a high magnetic field have also been investigated by circulation of the Flinak loop at 500°C and LiPb coolant at 300°C in a metal tubes. The “challenging option” incorporates a liquid blanket sys- tem using molten-salt Flinabe with an addition of metal powders to increase the hydrogen or tritium solubility, which results in low tritium permeation through metal tubes. Based on the preliminary experiments using Flinak mixed with Ti powders (see Fig. 12), the effective hydrogen
Fig. 10. US facilities utilized in PHENIX program.
Fig. 11. Research subjects for three tasks in PHENIX program.
Fig. 12. H2 permeation flux of Flibe/Ni and Flibe/Ti and Ni wall.
solubility was enhanced by five orders in magnitude. A new test facility for circulating both Flinak and LiPb started its operation equipped with a 3-T, 745-mm-bore superconduct- ing split magnet. For material development, dissimilar- metal bonding technique has been examined between V-alloy and Ni-alloy with electron beam welding.
VI.SUMMARY
In Japan, R&D subjects on fusion nuclear technology have been carried out for ITER and DEMO Reactor by QST and Japanese Universities. Several key components of ITER have successfully been made and tested by QST as planned. The ITER-TBM program has also been suc- cessfully carried out in Japan for the design and R&D subjects. In the BA program, a set of R&D studies for DEMO reactor have been carried out by QST and JA universities. Some basic studies for DEMO reactor have also been carried out in JA Universities with the joint study program, PHENIX.
