<title>Design of the Horizontal Preload System for the Toroidal Field Coils of HL-2M Project</title>
<Affiliation>Center for Fusion Science of Southwestern Institute of Physics, Chengdu 610041, China</Affiliation>
<author>Tao Lin, Dequan Liu, Lijun Cai, Qiang Li, Laizhong Cai & Tao Qiao</author>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>FUSION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/15361055.2017.1372679</DOI>
<URL> https://doi.org/10.1080/15361055.2017.1372679</URL>
Abstract — The HL-2M tokamak, which is being built at the Southwestern Institute of Physics, is  considered one of the most important short-pulse devices for future fusion research in China. The design criterion of the HL-2M specifies the demountable joints for the toroidal field coils (TFCs) due to the assembly requirements. A horizontal preload is needed to keep a good electrical conductance for the joint of each coil. In order to assure the appropriate preload to be exerted on the TFCs under different operation conditions and to provide the preload at 40 locations simultaneously, the horizontal preload system of the HL-2M tokomak has been developed. In this technical note, the design of this system is presented in detail. Finite element analysis is applied to evaluate the design. To validate the assembly and the performance, a prototype of the actuator has been manufactured and tested to finalize the design for fabrication.
Keywords — HL-2M tokamak, preload system, toroidal field coils.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
The HL-2A tokamak at the Southwestern Institute of Physics is now being upgraded and the new device is known as HL-2M. For the installation requirements,1,2 demounta- ble joints that are designed to create a maximum magnetic field of 3T at R = 1.78 m (Refs. 3, 4, and 5) have been adopted for the toroidal field coils (TFCs). The outer section of the TFC is mechanically connected with the center sec- tion by joints. The TFC has the tendency to expand itself due to the magnetic force when it is energized.6 In order to reduce the local stress and keep good connection of the TFC joints and enhance the shear fatigue life of the adhesive of the center section,7 a hydraulic horizontal preload system was developed as shown in Fig. 1.
The hydraulic preload system is capable of providing a maximum preload of 700 kN under the 150 MPa
hydraulic pressure. Forming a toroidal tensile stress in the prestress ring, the 20 actuators must provide the pre- load simultaneously at all of the 40 locations of the total 20 TFCs as shown in Fig. 2. Only by applying the preload simultaneously and conformably will the TFCs clamp themselves like an arc bridge and then the preload can improve the shear fatigue life of the adhesive in the TFC center section.
II.DESIGN DESCRIPTION OF THE HORIZONTAL PRELOAD SYSTEM
The horizontal preload system includes actuators, an oil supply circuit, and a measuring system. The preloads are exerted on both the upper and lower parts of each D-shaped TFC as shown in Fig. 2. The actuators are mounted on the upper and lower antitorque structure.The preload can be adjusted for different operation conditions.8
Fig. 1. (a) Location of the actuator of TFC in HL-2M and (b) hydraulic actuator installed on the lower antitorque table between the push block and the prestress ring.
Fig. 2. (a) Application of the preloads simultaneously and (b) the preloads lead to the compressive stress for improving the shear fatigue life of the adhesive.
II.A.Design Description of the Actuator
The hydraulic actuator consists of a hydraulic nut, load sensor, and adjustable rod.  The  preload acts on the TFC through the push block, and the prestress ring forms a toroidal tensile stress to provide the preload.9 During the operation of the tokamak, the preload will be monitored by a  load  sensor  which transmits the load from the hydraulic nut to the prestress ring. The assembly drawing of the  actuator  is  shown  in Fig. 3.  Due  to  structure  strength and  permeability, the key components, including the adjustable rod, hydraulic nut, and load sensor, are made of A-286
alloy.
In order to ensure the preload horizontally, a curved connection is applied to the adjustable rod as  shown  in Fig. 4. After initial installation, there is a gap in the fillet connection. When the preload is applied, the bolt will detach from the push plate while the gap in the curved connection deceases simultaneously. The fluctuant face on the push Fig. 3. Assembly drawing of the actuator.
plate can make the preload more uniform with reduced stress concentration. The diameter of the push rod is 50 mm which was determined by the following formula10:
@1
and
Fig. 4. Details of the adjustable rod.
@2
where
F = preload (N) ½σ1] =  allowable stress (Pa)
σs = yield strength (Pa)
n = safety factor.
The hydraulic nut is the execution unit of the actuator as shown in Fig. 5. The parameters of the hydraulic nut cylinder are defined in terms of the 150-MPa pressure as follows. The thickness of cylinder wall is 16 mm which is determined by the following:
@3
Similarly, the thickness of cylinder bottom is 21.6 mm by
applying the formula in Eq. (4):@4
Fig. 5. Details of the hydraulic nut.
where
P = work pressure (Pa)
D = diameter of the piston (m)
½σ1] =  allowable stress (Pa).When the hydraulic nut boosts, the preload is applied to the TFC. After the preload is applied, the hydraulic nut will be locked mechanically, and then the high hydraulic pressure inside of the hydraulic nut will be released. This mechanism keeps the preload by screw thread to avoid working under a high pressure during plasma discharge and the seals in the actuator can survive longer. The pump which boosts the preload system will not work continu- ously due to the locking nut. However, in the process of
where
F = preload (N)
the hydraulic nut being locked mechanically, the preload is transferred from the hydraulic pressure to the mechan- ical stress of the locking nut, which leads to preload loss since the nut screw will get the preload by tightening. This preload loss depends on the roughness of the lock nut and the torque applied to the lock nut. A sealing cone is used to avoid oil leakage in the pipe junction. With the purpose of operations under both  a  high  pressure  of 150 MPa and a normal pressure of 0.1 MPa, a double  seal is adopted to prevent oil leakage where a U-shaped seal can endure the high pressure while the O-shaped seal is for the normal pressure.
As a measuring instrument, the load sensor is a standard product and has to be calibrated. The assembly plate bolted onto the load sensor can adjust the length of the actuator in the horizontal direction and fix the load sensor in the antitorque structure.
II.B.Oil Supply Circuit
Figure 6 shows the oil supply circuit layout of the horizontal preload system. The circuit consists of two
Fig. 6.  (a) Oil circuit arrangement of the horizontal preload system and (b) oil circuit flow chart of the system.
layers of 316 stainless steel piping on the upper and lower antitorque tables. In each layer, a break is needed to avoid a loop in the toroidal direction. The upper layer with two breaks is mounted on the upper antitorque table and the lower layer with one break is mounted on the lower antitorque table. Between the upper layer and  lower layer, the pipe is mounted on the diagonal rod which belongs to the antitorque support structure. When the pump boosts, the oil supply circuit will get the same pressure and then the same preload can be kept simulta- neously and conformably for all the 40 actuators.
The diameter of the 316 stainless steel pipe is 1/4 in. In order to load the 40 hydraulic nuts simultaneously, the available capacity of oil and the boost speed of the pump need to be considered. As the oil pressure increases, the pump speed will subsequently decrease. The speed of the boosting oil will reach 6.4 L/min under lower pressure  and 0.49 L/min under high pressure. Since the synchro- nization of all actuators depends on the boost speed, the inner diameter of the inlet pipe of the actuator was designed to be φ1.5 mm in order to reduce the boost speed. The minimal time to boost each hydraulic nut to full  stroke  in  this  oil   circuit   is   6   min.   Boosting 40 hydraulic nuts simultaneously takes about 10 min.
II.C.Measuring System
Between the hydraulic nut and the prestress ring, the load sensor is used to detect the load during the installa- tion and operation phases. The measuring principle of the load sensor is  shown  in  Fig.  7.  The  load  sensors  at 40 locations send the data with analog signals to a pro- grammable logic controller system which is used to con- vert the analog signals to digital signals and transfer the digital data to the control computer. The software
Fig. 7. Schematic of the measurement of the load sensor.
installed in the control computer will  display  all  the  data simultaneously.
The measuring accuracy of the load sensor is precise as a measuring instrument. Experimentation has been done to get the measuring accuracy in different ranges. Figure 8 shows the data of the load sensor, including the experimental values and theoretical values. According to the data, the accuracy of the load  sensor  can  reach  0.5% in the work range of 300 to 700 kN; in the low preload phase the precision is difficult to control.
Fig. 8. Accuracy of the load sensor under different pressures.
III.ANALYSIS OF THE HORIZONTAL PRELOAD SYSTEM
III.A.Finite Element Models and Boundary Conditions
The ANSYS14.0 statics structural analysis with lin- ear materials was used to evaluate the design of the actuator. The main conditions of the actuator are the pressure caused by preload application and press load after the mechanical lock and hydraulic pressure are released. Two types of boundary conditions have been applied to the model as shown in Fig. 9:
1.In the compression phase, the top and bottom of the actuator are constrained in all degrees of freedom because the push block is connected to the TFC at the plane and the prestress ring forms a toroidal tensile stress to sustain the assembly plate. The hydraulic pressure is applied on the hydraulic nut.
2.After the mechanical lock phase, the top of the actuator is applied 700 kN preload, and the bottom is
Fig. 9. The two types of boundary conditions.
fixed. The force is transmitted to the assembly plate by means of the locking nut.
III.B.Material Properties
The three materials selected as key components for the hydraulic actuator and the material property in the analysis are listed in Table I. The hydraulic actuator mode is meshed using solid186 element and the size of ele- ments is about 0.2 mm.
III.C.Simulation Results
Under the 700 kN preload, the maximum stresses of the hydraulic nut, load sensor, adjustable rod, and assem- bly plate in the two conditions are shown in Fig. 10.
The design criterion complies with ASME VIII. Based on stress linearization, the primary general mem- brane stress (Pm), primary membrane stress plus primary bending stress (Pm + Pb), and material properties are  listed in Table II.
IV.TEST PROGRAM OF THE HORIZONTAL PRELOAD SYSTEM
In order to ensure oil tightness in operation, enough mechanical strength, measuring accuracy, and assembling space, the prototype was manufactured and tested in the factory.
The pressure test was implemented on a press  machine which can apply the maximum 700 kN preload on two sides. The pressure test prototype is shown in   Fig. 11. A manual pump was used to apply the maximum pressure 150 MPa.
The tests were done under three different pressures. For the test under one specified pressure, there are three phases including the boosting of the pressure, the locking of the nuts, and after the pressure release for 10 min. Figure 12 shows the results during the three phases under
TABLE I
Material Properties of the Key  Components
Fig. 10.  Stress distributions of four different components under 700 kN preload.
TABLE II
Result of the Actuator After  Linearization
Fig. 11. Pressure test of actuator.
different pressures. According to the data, the  preload loss is found in the locking stage. After the high pressure test, the static pressure performance test was kept  for days to ensure oil tightness during plasma operation.
Fig. 12. Test data for three pressures and  three conditions.
V.SUMMARY
The development of the horizontal preload system was performed in order to determine the feasibility  for the demountable TFCs of HL-2M. The hydraulic actuator can keep the preload simultaneously and conformably for
all 40 positions. In the condition of plasma operation, the load sensor will monitor the preload in order to ensure  safety of the demountable TFCs. The prototype and the experimental results prove the feasibility of the horizontal preload system design. The manufacturing and assem- bling processes will be optimized which will give more confidence in further fabrication.
Acknowledgment
This work was funded by the National Magnetic Confinement Fusion Science Program of China (2015GB106000).
