<title>Above-ground antineutrino detection for nuclear reactor monitoring</title>
<Affiliation>Sandia National Laboratories, Livermore, CA 94550, USA</Affiliation>
<author>M. Sweany , J. Brennan, B. Cabrera-Palmer, S. Kiff, D. Reyna, D. Throckmorton</author>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research A</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nima.2014.09.073</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2014.09.073</URL>
a b s t r a c t
Antineutrino monitoring of nuclear reactors has been demonstrated many times (Klimov et al., 1994 [1]; Bowden et al., 2009 [2]; Oguri et al., 2014 [3]), however the technique has not as of yet been developed into a useful capability for treaty veriﬁcation purposes. The most notable drawback is the current requirement that detectors be deployed underground, with at least several meters-water-equivalent of shielding from cosmic radiation. In addition, the deployment of liquid-based detection media presents a challenge in reactor facilities. We are currently developing a detector system that has the potential to operate above ground and circumvent deployment problems associated with a liquid detection media: the system is composed of segments of plastic scintillator surrounded by 6LiF/ZnS:Ag. ZnS:Ag is a radio-luminescent phosphor used to detect the neutron capture products of 6Li. Because of its long decay time compared to standard plastic scintillators, pulse-shape discrimination can be used to distinguish positron and neutron interactions resulting from the inverse beta decay (IBD) of antineutrinos within the detector volume, reducing both accidental and correlated backgrounds. Segmentation further reduces backgrounds by identifying the positron's annihilation gammas, a signature that is absent for most correlated and uncorrelated backgrounds. This work explores different conﬁgurations in order to maximize the size of the detector segments without reducing the intrinsic neutron detection efﬁciency. We believe that this technology will ultimately be applicable to potential safeguards scenarios such as those recently described by Huber et al. (2014) [4,5].
1.Introduction
Antineutrino production in nuclear reactors is a direct result of the ﬁssion of uranium and plutonium atoms. The antineutrinos are produced by the beta decay of the neutron-rich fragments. On average, each ﬁssion produces approximately six antineutrinos: a typical nuclear power reactor will produce approximately 1022 antineutrinos per second. Monitoring of the antineutrino produc- tion rate provides a direct measurement of the number of atoms undergoing ﬁssion, and therefore the thermal power and opera- tional status of the reactor. Additional information is contained in the energy spectrum of the antineutrinos. Speciﬁcally, antineutri- nos arising from the 235U decay chain will tend to be higher in energy than those from the 239Pu decay chain. As the core evolves with the consumption of 235U and the production of 239Pu, the overall energy spectrum of antineutrinos will shift to lower energies. Although the interaction cross-section of antineutrinos is low, the copious amounts produced by a typical commercial reactor imply that a ~ 1 ton detector at 10–50 m standoff with a 10% antineutrino detection efﬁciency can expect on the order of hundreds of events per day (Klimov et al. [1]; Bowden et al. [2]).
The type of detector obviously has a profound effect on both the backgrounds to the antineutrino signal and the detection  efﬁciency.
1.1.Signal and backgrounds
Antineutrinos are typically detected through the inverse beta decay (IBD) interaction:
@1
The energy of the positron is linear with the antineutrino energy, Eeþ   ¼ Eνe  —ðMn — MpÞ [6], and due to the IBD threshold and reactor antineutron spectrum, typically ranges from 0 to 8 MeV. The positron subsequently  annihilates with an electron, producing  two
0.511 MeV gamma particles. In a scintillator-based detector, both the positron and annihilation gammas are detected simultaneously through ionization, with the gammas detected through the ioniza- tion of their Compton-scattered electrons. The neutron is frequently observed some time later, after thermalization and capture on a nucleus. The time between the detection of the positron and neutron, the neutron capture time, is governed by an exponential decay that depends on both the neutron capture cross-section and the concentration of the nucleus. In order to enhance the neutron detection efﬁciency, liquid scintillator is often doped with a capture agent such as gadolinium, which has a neutron capture cross- section 5 orders of magnitude higher than hydrogen. The capture time for typical loading concentrations of gadolinium is reduced to 10 μs, compared to 200 μs for captures on hydrogen in unloaded liquid scintillator. In either case, a very speciﬁc event signature arises: a prompt pulse with 1–8 MeV of energy, coincident within the neutron capture time of a second pulse with energy of either 2.2 MeV (hydrogen) or 8 MeV (gadolinium).
The dominant backgrounds to the antineutrino signal are from accidental coincidences within the neutron capture time window and correlated backgrounds from electromagnetic and hadronic showers initiated by cosmic muons within the detector or sur- rounding materials. For scintillator-based detectors, only one high- energy neutron from a cosmic shower can mimic an IBD event: a fast neutron recoil off of a proton can produce a prompt pulse with 1–8 MeV, followed by a second pulse as that same neutron is captured. A single fast neutron can also undergo neutron spallation, resulting in two correlated neutron captures. In addition, as they propagate through the detection medium, cosmic rays can produce long-lived isotopes which eventually undergo (β,n) decay. Finally, within the large detector volumes required for a reasonable anti- neutrino detection rate ( 1 ton), accidental coincidences between two high-energy gammas, or a high-energy gamma and a neutron,
can be a large background.
The strategy presented here in mitigating these backgrounds is to take full advantage of the unique event signature of IBD by
(1) uniquely identifying each interaction as gamma-like or neutron- like and (2) using detector segmentation in order to distinguish positrons from other more common charged particle interactions by the identiﬁcation of annihilation gammas.
Fig. 1. The plastic scintillator bar in its aluminum housing, and a 5-in. ADIT photomultiplier tube before coupling to the end of the bar.
2.
Detector description
Our basic detector unit is a plastic scintillator bar with a 5 5 in. cross-section. The bar is surrounded on four sides by 6LiF/ZnS:Ag sheets approximately 0.45 mm thick. The cross-sectional  area  of  the bar was chosen so that at least 50% of neutrons capture on 6Li rather than the hydrogen in the bulk scintillator. The bar has a 5-in. ADIT photomultiplier tube, model number B133D01W, on each end. The plastic scintillator bar in its aluminum housing is shown in Fig.  1, before the photomultipliers were coupled to the bar.
An interaction is determined to be gamma-like or neutron-like by discriminating against the different pulse shapes which arise from the distinct scintillation decay times of the bulk scintillator and ZnS:Ag. Positrons interacting in the bulk scintillator will have a scintillation decay time on the order of 10 ns, however neutrons, which are detected through their 6Li capture products (a triton and an alpha particle) scintillating in the ZnS:Ag, will have a scintillation decay time of ~ 200 ns. Fig. 2 shows two example pulses from gamma and neutron depositions. By using a standard pulse shape discrimination technique (PSD), signiﬁcant separation between neutron and gamma interactions is achieved (see Fig. 3). This PSD virtually eliminates accidental coincidences from high-energy gammas, while accidental coincidences from a high-energy gamma and neutron are reduced by half simply by requiring that the gamma is detected before the neutron rather than the neutron before the gamma. Correlated back- grounds from two neutron captures are also eliminated to the degree by which the interactions are correctly identiﬁed as neutron-like.
Segmentation allows for topology cuts to be made on the positron candidate: the back-to-back annihilation gammas will often deposit their energy in neighboring segments, an event signature not typically shared by gammas or fast neutrons. Fig. 4 illustrates an antineutrino event in which both annihilation gam- mas interact in neighboring segments as well as a fast neutron that recoils off of protons in two neighboring segments. Although the degree to which proton recoils from fast neutrons spill into nearby segments is not well quantiﬁed, a large percentage of fast neutrons are expected to be rejected by topology cuts. Finally, topology cuts largely eliminate backgrounds caused by cosmic-ray induced long- lived radioisotopes, so long as they decay  to  (β— ,n)  rather  than (βþ ,n). The most concerning of long-lived radioisotopes that are produced off of a carbon target are 9Li and 8He, neither of which have decay channels including a positron.
2.1.Test deployment at the San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station
A four-segment prototype detector using this technology was deployed at the San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station (SONGS)
Fig. 2. (a) A gamma-like pulse trace with tail and total windows indicated by red bars and the pulse time indicated with a red triangle. (b) A neutron-like pulse trace. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure caption, the reader is referred to the web version of this paper.)
from December 2010 to July 2011, and demonstrated impressive background reduction capabilities without a muon veto system both with and without external shielding [7]. For the shielded data run, the four segments were placed inside a cubic shield of polyethylene, with 50 cm of shielding on each side. To  quantify  the background reductions, a series of particle identiﬁcation cuts were applied to all data containing two coincident energy deposi- tions within the appropriate energy ranges:
cut 1: a pulse shape discrimination cut was applied to categor- ize pulses as gamma-like or neutron-like,
cut 2: topological constraints were applied to the gamma-like interaction in which one or two neighboring segments had an energy deposition consistent with a 511 keV gamma,
cut 3: topological constraints were applied to the gamma-like interaction in which exactly two neighboring segments have an energy deposition consistent with a 511 keV gamma.
Furthermore, for each cut deﬁnition the data was separated into “correlated” event samples in which the positron candidate pre- cedes the neutron candidate, and uncorrelated, or  “swapped”,  event samples in which the neutron candidate precedes the positron candidate.
The background rejection  capabilities  are  demonstrated  in  Fig. 5 where the inter-event time distribution is shown for both
Fig. 3. An example PSD parameter vs. energy for a single photomultiplier tube in the B2 conﬁguration. The neutron acceptance window is shown in red. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure caption, the reader is referred to the web version of this paper.)
un-shielded (a) and shielded (b) data runs for the particle identiﬁcation cuts listed above. The total correlatedþuncorrelated number of antineutrino candidates is determined by the integral of events in a correlated time window from 12 to 400 μs: the low end of the correlated time window is chosen to reject the 2:2 μs muon decay to Michel electron events, and the high end is chosen as several multiples of the  neutron  capture  time  for  6Li  in  this conﬁguration and concentration ( ~ 100 μs). Approximately 225,000 background events per day were present when no particle identiﬁcation cuts were applied in the un-shielded run; in the shielded run there were 734 events per day. Applying cut 1 reduced the correlated sample to 16; 100 events per day. The uncorrelated sample in the event window is quantiﬁed using the “swapped” event deﬁnitions in the manner described in [8]. The swapped event deﬁnitions yielded 14; 000 uncorrelated events per day in the correlated time window, resulting 2100 anti- neutrino candidates per day. Using this ﬁrst cut alone reduced the background levels by over two orders of magnitude for the un- shielded run. For the shielded case, the total number of antineu- trino candidates dropped to 350 per day, or a reduction of nearly half. The second cut reduced the antineutrino candidates in the un-shielded run to approximately 200 events per day, an addi- tional order of magnitude compared to no cuts. With shielding, the levels were on the order of tens per day.  Finally, applying cut    3 reduced the number of antineutrino candidates to a level within statistical uncertainty of the shielded background: 6.10 events per day compared to 2.13 events per day. These background reductions are compelling, and depending on the antineutrino detection efﬁciency, could enable a moderately sized detector to monitor a reactor above ground and with no external shielding. Previous work based on Monte Carlo estimates indicate that for this four segment prototype, the positron efﬁciencies for cuts 2 and 3 are expected to be ~ 33% and 3% respectively. If true, this would indicate an improvement in the signal to background ratio as each cut is applied.
2.2.Signal and background scaling
The antineutrino efﬁciency of the 4-segment prototype detector, combining positron and neutron selection cuts, is estimated to be between 0.4 and 4% depending on the positron selection cut used (i.e. cuts 2 and 3 above). As the number of segments increase, we expect both the signal and background rates to increase. The exact scaling is complicated, although a conservative assumption of mass scaling for both signal and backgrounds results in an increase in
Fig. 4. An illustration of an antineutrino interaction in a 25 segment array in which the annihilation gammas from the positron interact in the segments neighboring the positron deposition (a), and a fast neutron interaction in which two proton recoils are detected in neighboring segments, and the neutron thermalizes and interacts in a third segment (b).
Fig. 5. The inter-event time distributions of backgrounds at SONGS. Both un-shielded (a) and shielded (b) runs are shown for a series of cuts. For each distribution, the event cuts are swapped (positron-neutron to neutron-positron, shown in lighter colors) in order to determine the uncorrelated background level in the manner described by [8]. The total background level (un-correlated, or “swapped”, subtracted from the total) is in the upper right-hand corner for each cut. The un-cut distribution is not shown. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure caption, the reader is referred to the web version of this paper.)
signiﬁcance with detector size. In addition, the efﬁciency of neutron and positron selection cuts increases with the number of segments. For example, neutrons that would have spilled out of a lone segment have an increased likelihood of capture on nearby segments, increasing the intrinsic neutron detection efﬁciency. An increase  in the number of segments will also increase the efﬁciency of the topological positron selection cuts: annihilation gammas have a  lower probability of escaping detection with a larger array. A Monte Carlo simulation was previously performed to understand the scaling of the signal for a detector of this type [7]. The results indicate that, scaling up from the 4 segment array as deployed at SONGS to a 64 segment array, the efﬁciency of cut 1 would increase by a factor of 2.5, and that the efﬁciency of cut 3 would increase by a factor of 5. This would potentially provide an overall antineutrino efﬁciency of 2–10%, again depending on the positron selection cut chosen. While low, this compares favorably to  the  approximately 10% detection efﬁciency from the SONGS1 detector [2] for a comparable detector mass, while providing signiﬁcant background rejection. It is not obvious exactly how individual backgrounds will scale as the number of segments increases, underscoring the  need for additional experimental data with various numbers of segments in order to fully characterize the detector's performance.
3.Improvements to technology
As discussed above, previous work has identiﬁed 6LiF/ZnS:Ag sheets surrounding scintillator as a promising technology for the above-ground antineutrino detection [7,9]. However, the optical transmission for neutron events in the previous setup was determined to be poor: in order to achieve sufﬁcient light output for the previous deployment, the bar was coupled directly to the 6LiF/ZnS layer with optical grease. However, ZnS:Ag scintillation light from the center of the bar did not reach the photomultiplier tubes with the same efﬁciency as edge events. This is demon- strated in Fig. 6 in which the poor efﬁciency at the center of the bar is observed by a drop in the number of reconstructed positions of background neutrons. Leaving an air gap between the bar and the 6LiF/ZnS:Ag, or “air-coupling”, produces very little light, as photons that do manage to enter the index-mismatched bar will exit and “die” on the 6LiF/ZnS layer on the opposite side of the bar. In this work, we present a solution to this problem by using wavelength-shifting plastic scintillator that is air-coupled to the 6LiF/ZnS:Ag:  light  that  enters  the  bar  will  be  absorbed  and  re-
Fig. 6. The positions of background neutron events in the 60 cm grease coupled bar (B1). The dip in the center of the distribution indicates that there is not uniform detection efﬁciency across the bar.
emitted at a different angle, allowing much of it to be transmitted to the photomultiplier tubes through total  internal  reﬂection.  This effect is demonstrated in Fig. 7. A Geant4 [10]  simulation was  used as guidance in understanding the optical transmission for the two cases. The optical properties of both the standard plastic scintillator from Eljen Technologies (EJ-200) and the wavelength shifting  plas- tic scintillation (EJ-260), along with the emission of the ZnS:Ag (EJ-426), were input into two Geant4 simulations in which the standard  plastic  bar  was  grease-coupled  to  the  6LiF/ZnS:Ag  layer (Fig. 7(a)) and the wavelength-shifting bar was air-coupled to the ZnS:Ag layer (Fig. 7(b)). The visualization output of two scintillation events demonstrates that the air-coupled wavelength-shifting bar has superior optical transmission to the photomultiplier tubes. It is not obvious, however, whether the absorption and re-emission  due to the wavelength shifting negatively impacts the total light collec- tion efﬁciency.
We therefore constructed several different detectors in order to quantify both the improvement in optical transmission and the neutron detection efﬁciency. We used a 60 cm grease-coupled EJ- 200 plastic scintillator bar with the manufacturer Applied Scintil- lation Technology's (AST) 4:1 6LiF/ZnS:Ag sheets as a “standard candle” to compare with the different conﬁgurations described in Table 1. The ﬁrst test swapped only the bulk scintillator
(EJ   200-EJ   260)  and  the  coupling  (grease-air).  Next,  the  6LiF loading  from  AST  was  changed  from  4 : 1-2 : 1.  Finally,  three different couplings were tested with Eljen's 6LiF/ZnS:Ag (EJ-426) before increasing the length of the bar from 60 cm to 120 and 180 cm. The different couplings were tested due to the nature of Eljen's 6LiF:ZnS sheets: the  sheets were not solid,  but tacky  in texture, and it was difﬁcult to maintain an air gap between the sheet and the bulk scintillator. The ﬁrst test with the Eljen 6LiF/ZnS:Ag sheets (B4) demonstrated that an air layer could not be maintained alone, and that either coupling the bulk scintillator to the transparent back panel of the sheets, or using a thin acetate sheet between the sheets and bulk scintillator was necessary.
3.1.Data acquisition and analysis
For these studies, each photomultiplier was digitized by Struck SIS3320 eight-channel 250 MHz digitizers, however the  traces were acquired with 200 MHz digitization. We triggered the entire board on a single channel above threshold, acquiring a 1300 ns trace for all channels. After acquisition, the data was processed to search for pulses using the zero crossing of the ﬁrst derivative of the pulse. Only events in which both photomultipliers in a single bar had a response greater than 5 ADC counts above the pedestal were kept. After processing, the data were further reduced to ensure that the peak time was properly positioned in the trace for accurate pulse shape discrimination, that there were no other pulses within the trace, and that the desired energy range was selected. Finally, the pulse shape discrimination (PSD) parameter was calculated as the ratio of the pulse tail area, deﬁned as 100–  800 ns after the peak, to the total area, starting 100 ns before the
3.2.
Detector calibration
For each bar, a collimated 60Co source was used to calibrate the response of the individual tubes. The collimator is a 3.5 in. right tungsten cylinder with a 5 mm hole bored to the center which contained the source. The collimator was situated along the length of each bar at the center point, and the bias of the individual photomultipliers was adjusted to match their gains. The position- independent energy was then used to obtain an energy spectrum for each bar:
pﬃQﬃﬃﬃ1ﬃﬃQﬃﬃﬃﬃ2ﬃﬃ ~ pﬃNﬃﬃﬃeﬃﬃﬃ—ﬃﬃﬃxﬃ=ﬃﬃλﬃﬃNﬃﬃﬃeﬃﬃﬃ—ﬃﬃﬃðﬃLﬃﬃ—ﬃﬃﬃxﬃﬃÞﬃ=ﬃﬃλﬃ ~ Npﬃﬃﬃ—ﬃﬃﬃLﬃﬃ=ﬃﬃλﬃ;	ð2Þ
pliers 1 and 2 respectively, N is the total number of photons emitted at position x along the bar, L is the length of the bar, and λ is an effective optical attenuation length. The individual PMT response and position-independent energy from background gamma events was also used to calibrate the response. Fig.  8  shows the gamma background spectrum for both the 60 cm grease-coupled bar (B1) and air-coupled bar (B2). The Compton edge from the gamma decays of 208Tl (2.4 MeV) and  40K (1.2 MeV) is seen in both bars. It should be noted that the energy resolution  of the air-coupled wavelength shifting bar did not change sig- niﬁcantly compared to the grease-coupled bar, as indicated by the sharpness of the Compton edges.
To determine the optical interference in light transport within the bar, the collimated 60Co source was positioned  along  the  length of the bar at equal intervals. The log ratio of the  pulse charge is sensitive to the position of the scintillation interaction in the bar,
peak and ending 800 ns after the peak. Fig. 3 shows the PSD
lnQ 1
e — x=λ
L 2x
parameter vs. the energy from a single photomultiplier tube with the  neutron acceptance window, ranging from 500  to 10,000 keV  in energy and 0.45 to 0.75 in the PSD parameter, shown in red.
Fig. 7. The visualization output from the Geant4 simulation of a standard plastic (EJ-200) bar grease-coupled to the ZnS:Ag layer (a) and a wavelength-shifting bar (EJ-260) air-coupled to the ZnS:Ag layer (b). In the grease-coupled bar, the light that is able to enter the bar will exit at the same angle. In the air-coupled bar, the direction of the light is changed by the wavelength shifting compound, and then propagates to the edges of the bar through total internal reﬂection.
Table 1
The parameters of the bars tested.
and was used to measure the effective attenuation length of each detector conﬁguration. The photomultiplier response as a function of position was determined by a linear ﬁt to the data. Fig. 9 shows the position calibration for the grease-coupled bar. The data is ﬁt with a slope of 0.056 70.002 cm—1 using the data analysis toolkit ROOT [11], indicating an effective attenuation length of λ ¼ 2=m ¼ 35:6 70:1 cm. Considering that the quoted attenuation length of EJ-200 is ~ 2 m, this demonstrates severe degradation of the optical response in this conﬁguration. The position calibration and attenuation length results of all detector conﬁgurations are summarized in Table 2. As stated previously, the air gap was difﬁcult to maintain with the Eljen 6LiF/ZnS:Ag sheets: this was suggested by the decrease in the effective
Fig. 8. The gamma background spectrum from the 60 cm grease-coupled bar (B1) optical attenuation length of the B4 conﬁguration, and conﬁrmed visually after the bar was disassembled and it was observed that the sheets were bonding to the bulk scintillator. After using the transpar- ent back panel of the sheet (B5) or using a thin acetate layer  in- between the sheet and the bulk scintillator (B6), the effective attenuation length  recovered  to  over  100 cm.  The  measured  value for the 120 and 180 cm bars is presumed to be higher due to the reduced inﬂuence of straight line geometric acceptance effects.
4.Neutron detection performance
The neutron detection efﬁciency was determined by a relative measurement of neutron backgrounds compared to a 3He detector. However, such a comparison was not available for each measure- ment, so the grease-coupled bar was used as a standard candle. In our laboratory setup, the 3He detector exhibited an event rate of
0.204 Hz in 1 h. The manufacturer quotes a calibration of 69 cps/nv for the 3He tube: cps/nv is the measured rate for a given neutron ﬂux per second. The neutron ﬂux observed by the tube, , is calculated from the rate, R:and the 60 cm air-coupled bar (B2).
@4
assuming that the spectral shape is Maxwellian.
An absolute efﬁciency for the 3He tube can then be calculated from this observed ﬂux and the surface area of the tube, A:
@5
where the factor of two is included to account for only the neutron ﬂux entering the tube, not exiting. The measured ﬂux per second yields a 3He tube efﬁciency of 45.3%.
Fig. 9. The log ratio of the photomultiplier charges as a function of source position for B1, the grease-coupled standard plastic bar.
Table 2
The slope and the effective attenuation length for the bars: the designations are described in Table 1.
To calculate the neutron detection efﬁciency of our detector conﬁgurations, Eq. (5) was adjusted to account for the ratio of effective areas of the 3He tube and each conﬁguration. This ratio, denoted as ρi, was obtained with a simple Geant4 simulation in which uniformly distributed geantino particles with random directions were counted as they entered (not exited) each detector conﬁguration and  the  tube. The efﬁciency for each conﬁguration
@6
where we have made the assumption that the 3He and the 6Li neutron capture cross-sections that have the same functional form with respect to energy. While not technically correct over all energies due to distinct moderating environments, and the reso- nances   at       2 MeV   in   the   3He   capture   cross-section   and
~ 0:25 MeV in the   Li cross-section, it is approximately valid for
background neutrons. Note that the surface area A is the value for the 3He tube, not each detector conﬁguration, as ρi accounts for the difference in surface areas. For the runs in which the 3He tube rate was not available, the ratio of the grease coupled detection rates between  runs  with  and  without  the  3He was  used  to calculate .
After determining that Eljen's EJ-426  sheets with acetate used  to maintain an air gap (B6) performed the best in terms of raw neutron counts and optical attenuation, the detector length was increased from 60 cm to 120 and 180 cm. The results for conﬁg- urations B6–B8 are summarized in Table 3 along with the grease- coupled results for each run: the number of events in which a neutron-like pulse occurred in both PMTs in coincidence is shown in the second column. The percentage difference between the grease-coupled and each detector conﬁguration is shown in the third column. Finally, the neutron detection efﬁciency, ϵ, is included in the fourth column. Our method of calculating the detection efﬁciency accounts for the increase in surface area between conﬁgurations, so although B7 and B8  are  longer  than B6, the comparable efﬁciencies indicate that there were no losses due  to  poor  optical  response.  This  is  further   illustrated   in Figs. 6 and 10, which show the neutron deposition locations from the background measurements. The positions were determined by the linear ﬁt values of the log ratio as a function of source position. For the 60 cm grease-coupled bar (B1), there is a dip in the center  of the bar where there is poor efﬁciency for detection due to the optical properties of that conﬁguration (Fig. 6). However, both the 60 cm wavelength shifting bar (B6, Fig. 10(a)) and the 180 cm wavelength-shifting bar (B8, Fig. 10(b)) produce a nearly ﬂat distribution within statistical error, indicating no measurable efﬁciency losses at the center of  the bar (the slight bias towards   the left side of Fig. 10(b) is likely due to a mismatch in PMT efﬁ- ciencies).
Table 3
The number of double-ended neutron events for each detector conﬁguration, along with the % change from the grease-coupled bar and the neutron detection efﬁciencies. The errors quoted on the efﬁciencies are statistical only. The  designa-  tion of each detector is described in Table 1.
Fig. 10.  (a) The positions of background neutron events in the 60 cm air-coupled bar (B6), and (b) the 180 cm air-coupled bar (B8). The dip in the center of the distribution for the grease-coupled bar (Fig. 6) is absent for the air-coupled bars, which are ﬂat within error.
5.Discussion and conclusions
We have optimized and quantiﬁed the neutron detection efﬁ- ciency of a PSD-capable antineutrino detector segment, and have shown no loss of intrinsic neutron detection efﬁciency due to increasing the length of the segment from 60 cm to 180 cm. This result enables an increase in detector mass without the need for increased channel count. The background rejection capabilities of a system composed of these segments are excellent: with a 4 segment array, backgrounds on the surface have been shown to be reduced by more than ﬁve orders of magnitude with PSD and topology cuts. This gives conﬁdence that a system capable of both PSD and topology cuts would be able to operate above ground and with no external shielding if the signal rate can be increased to a reason- able value. Other detectors employing segmentation alone [3] or segmentation and PSD [12] have been deployed at reactor sites, both indicating possible sensitivity to reactor antineutrinos at the 2–2:5σ level. We believe that our detector has the potential for a measurement with increased signiﬁcance due to the improved neutron capture containment of lithium (compared to gadolinium as in [3]) and improved PSD compared to [12] due to better light
collection.
The variation in backgrounds among deployment sites, coupled with the desire to minimize detector mass, requires a better under- standing of detector performance as the number of segments is scaled up. We plan to conduct background measurements with at least a 16–25 segment detector to quantify the expected perfor- mance. Finally, deployment at a suitable reactor site will determine our antineutrino detection efﬁciency, and allow for extrapolations of the detection signiﬁcance at various reactors to be made. We believe that this technology addresses the background rejection capabilities required to be applicable to the scenarios recently described by [4,5], and plan to conduct a measurement campaign in order to develop a
quantiﬁable tool for reactor monitoring in terms of reactor power, distance from core, and background levels.
Acknowledgments
Sandia National Laboratories is a multi-program laboratory man- aged and operated by Sandia Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of Lockheed Martin Corporation, for the U.S. Department of Energy's National Nuclear Security Administration under contract DE-AC04- 94AL85000. Document release number SAND2014-17017 J.
We would like to thank the US National Nuclear Security Administration, Defense Nuclear Non-proliferation's funding of the San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station deployment and previous detector development, as well as the United States Department of State, Bureau of Arms Control, Veriﬁcation and Compliance (AVC) for funding detector neutron detection optimization studies.
