<title>Interrupting an Imminent Body Current Fault and Restoring Full Power in Milliseconds on a DIII-D National Fusion Facility Gyrotron</title>
<Affiliation>General Atomics, P.O. Box 85608, San Diego, California 92186-5608</Affiliation>
<author>D. Ponce, R. Brambila, M. Cengher, Y. Gorelov, W. Grosnickle, J. Lohr & A. Torrezan</author>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>FUSION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>0.1080/15361055.2017.1372680</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1080/15361055.2017.1372680</URL>
Abstract — In this work, polycrystalline tungsten prepared by powder sintering and naonocrystalline tungsten film deposited by magnetron sputtering were simultaneously exposed to deuterium plasma with energy of 78 eV and fluence of 3.9 × 1024 m−2 at 450 K. The morphologies of both samples before and after deuterium plasma exposure were measured by scanning electron microscopy. Then, the deuterium retention of both samples was determined by thermal desorption spectroscopy. After irradiation, a few blisters were observed on polycrystalline tungsten, but no sign of surface modification was detected on nanocrystalline tungsten film. In addition, the deuterium retention is higher in nanocrystalline tungsten film than in polycrystalline  tungsten. The fact that nanocrystalline tungsten film deposited by magnetron sputtering   has a larger density of grain boundaries and native defects are responsible for no blistering and high retention in comparison with the polycrystalline tungsten.
Keywords — Magnetron sputtering, nanocrystalline tungsten film, blister.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
Tungsten has been considered one of the most promis- ing candidates for plasma-facing materials (PFMs) in future fusion reactors because of its favorable physical and che- mical properties, such as high melting point, high thermal conductivity, high-temperature mechanics performance, low physical and chemical sputtering yields, and no chemi- cal reaction with hydrogen.1–4 In fusion reactors, such ITER, tungsten will be subjected to intense fluxes of ener- getic deuterium and tritium ions and other particles.2,5 This implantation process leads to blistering and exfoliation of
tungsten,6,7 which correlate with hydrogen isotope inven- tories after long-time deuterium or tritium irradiation.8 In addition, different microstructures of tungsten can lead to different effects on the deuterium irradiation due to their various internal defects and grain boundaries9–13 (GBs).
Recent research suggests that the most promising can- didates for PFMs will likely be nanocrystalline materials, of which the engineering of GB density offers the possi- bility of tailoring their radiation resistance properties because of the introduction of a high density of GBs and interfaces that are regarded as sinks for irradiation-induced defects.14–17 For pure tungsten material, nanocrystalline tungsten (100 nm < d < 1000 nm) have been fabricated by some common methods including severe plastic deformation,18 equal-channel angular pressing,19,20 and cold rolling.21 In addition, magnetron sputtering is a com- mon method to prepare a thin film with nanostructure.22–24 Gordillo et al.23 and Gonzalez-Arrabal et al.25 showed
that the tungsten films deposited by magnetron sputtering were characterized by nanostructure and columnar struc- ture; after irradiation of high-energetic hydrogen ions, no changes in the surface morphology were observed due to a considerable concentration of native defects inside the film. Our previous work26 on the irradiation effect of tungsten film by magnetron sputtering with high-energetic helium ions indicates that the different microstructures between polycrystalline tungsten and nanocrystalline tungsten film lead to differences in density and size of blisters; in other words, GBs and native defects in nanocrystalline tungsten play a dominant role in the blistering after high-energetic helium ion irradiation.
In this work, tungsten film with a thickness of 10 μm and grain size of less than 100 nm was deposited on a tungsten substrate by magnetron sputtering. In order to compare differences in polycrystalline and nanocrystal- line tungsten, both samples were exposed simultaneously to low-energy and high-flux deuterium plasma. Then, morphologies and deuterium retention of both samples were determined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and thermal desorption spectrometry (TDS), respectively. After exposure to deuterium plasma, a few blisters were observed on the surface of the polycrystalline tungsten, but no sign of surface modification was detected on the film; the deuterium retention was higher in the film than in the bulk. We will discuss in detail the effect of native defects and GBs on blistering behavior and deuterium retention.
II.EXPERIMENTS
II.A.Sample Preparation
The polycrystalline tungsten plate with a guaranteed purity of 99.95% and density of 99% purchased from Advanced Technology & Materials Company, Ltd., was prepared by powder sintering. The average grain size of polycrystalline tungsten was about 5 μm. This plate was cut into several smaller samples with size of 10 × 10 mm and thickness of 1.5 mm, and then these samples were heat treated at 1273 K for 1 h to stress relief and outgassing. Then, the samples were mechanically polished by SiC waterproof abrasive papers with grids from #400 to #2000 and electrochemically polished with 2.5 wt% NaOH
aqueous solution at 10 V for 1 min to obtain a mirrorlike surface. These samples were used as the substrate for deposition, with the sample of polycrystalline tungsten being used for deuterium irradiation. Before sputtering and irradiating, all samples were ultrasonic cleaned with acet- one, alcohol, and boiled water for 15 min, sequentially.
The tungsten film with a thickness of about 10 μm was prepared by a commercial magnetron sputtering device (KYKY MP 650-A) on the  above-mentioned  bulk tungsten. The system was pumped down to a base pressure of less than 5 × 10–4 Pa. Deposition took place  in argon atmosphere with a purity of 99.99% at the pressure of 1 Pa. During W deposition the direct-current power applied to the tungsten sputter target with a purity of 99.95% was kept constant at 100 W, and the distance between the target and the substrate was 8 cm. Prior to the deposition the target was bombarded by argon plasma for 5 min in order to avoid contamination by the possible target oxidation. In addition, at the beginning of each sputtering, to avoid the delamination phenomenon of tungsten film, the substrate was heated up to 500°C, which was kept constant for the first 2 h, and then the temperature was reduced to 250°C to finish the next 8 h. The thickness of the film was measured by a profilometer (Dektak 6 M, Veeco). At these settings the deposition rate of tungsten is about 1 μm/h.
II.B.Sample Analysis Before Exposure
The crystallographic texture of the polycrystalline tungsten and tungsten film before deuterium plasma exposure was determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) (Shimadzu XRD-6000 type), which adopts a Cu Kα source with the wavelength of 0.154 nm. A scanning electron microscope (HITACHI S-4800, at Beijing  Center for Physical and Chemical Analysis) was used to observe the morphologies of polycrystalline tungsten and tungsten film before deuterium plasma exposure. Moreover, for a cross section of the tungsten film before exposure, the other film was cut into two parts by a diamond knife because of the inherent brittleness of tung- sten under room temperature. The cross section was imaged with the beam tilted by 90 deg to the surface plane. In addition, in order to determine the density of the tungsten film, the mass change before and after deposi- tion was measured by a microbalance with an accuracy of
0.1  mg.  This  method  of  measurement  is  mentioned in
Refs. 8, 27, and 28. Based on this weight change and    the film thickness, the density of tungsten film is close to 90% of the bulk tungsten density.
II.C.Deuterium Plasma Exposure with High Fluence and Low Energy
Deuterium plasma exposure of polycrystalline tungsten and tungsten film was carried in the recently built linear plasma facility Simulator of Tokamak Edge Plasma (STEP) in Beihang University, which consists of vacuum chamber, plasma source, target station, and magnetic coils, with a peripheral system of a vacuum pumping station, power supplies, and gas  and  water  cooling  circulating  units. A single Langmuir probe was used to measure basic plasma parameters. In this device LaB6 was used as an electron- emitting cathode to ignite plasma. In order to obtain the high density of plasma, the deuterium pressure was kept at about
0.6 Pa. Then, the target was irradiated by a plasma beam with an arc-driving voltage of about 80 eV. A bias voltage of 80 V was applied to the samples, which leads to an incident energy of 78 eV for deuterium ions because of the plasma potential of about 2 V as measured by the Langmuir probe. In these conditions the incident flux of deuterium ions was fixed at 7.2 × 1020 D/m2·s−1, which was calculated with the Langmuir probe data, and the fluence was 3.9 × 1024 D/m2. During irradiation of deuterium ions, samples were passively heated by the plasma, and the temperature of the sample could be affected by the thermal transfer between the sample and the water-cooling sample holder. A K-type thermocouple tightly pressing the rear of the sample was used to determine the temperature of the irra- diated sample, which was kept at about 450 K. Moreover, the main ion composition at  STEP  in  this  work  is D+ (>85%), as measured by a differential pumped quadru- pole mass spectrometer in a separate experiment (con- ducted by L. Chen, J. Wang, W. G. Guo of Beihang Univerisity). Work by Manhard et al.29 was done with an electron cyclotron resonance–source device, which pos- sesses a different plasma feature such as plasma  composi-
tions compared with STEP.
II.D. Morphologies and Deuterium Retention After Deuterium Exposure
After deuterium exposure, the morphologies of both samples were observed by SEM. Then, the retention of deuterium in both samples was determined by TDS, which was performed in a dedicated experimental setup designed and manufactured in Beihang University. An OTF1200 vacuum tube was pumped down to a pressure of less than 5× 10–6 Pa, and each sample was heated up to 1373 K with a ramping rate of 1 K/s. The temperature of the sample, during the heating process, was measured by a K-type
thermocouple attached to the sample. The desorbed gases, including H2O (mass 18), O2 (mass 32), HDO (mass 19), HD (mass 3), and D2 (mass 4), were measured with a quadruple mass spectrometer (QMS-MKS Microvision Plus). Only the absolute sensitivity of the D2 (mass 4) and HD (mass 3) signal was determined by a calibrated leak. The release of HD is relatively low, which is below 4% of D2. The signal absolute value of HDO and D2O is very low, which is not considered. So, only the TDS spectra of D2 from both samples are shown in this paper. The total deuter- ium retention is estimated by integrating the desorption spectra of mass 4 (D2) and mass 3 (HD).
III.RESULTS
III.A.Morphologies and Microstructure Before Exposure
The morphologies of the polycrystalline tungsten and the as-deposited tungsten film before deuterium exposure were measured by SEM as shown in Fig. 1. The smooth surface of the mechanically and electrochemically polished sample of polycrystalline tungsten is shown in Fig. 1a, and the GBs clearly appear. The size of the grains is in accordance with the manufacturer’s product report. As seen in Fig. 1b, the surface of the as-deposited film shows a similar “nano-ridge” structure, which is the mor- phology feature of high-melting-point metal film depos- ited on the substrate with crystalline structure under relatively low temperatures.30,31 Figure 1c shows the cross section of the as-deposited film, which has the typical columnar structure perpendicular to the substrate. Furthermore, energy dispersive X-ray spectromety was applied to measuring the film composition, which shows that the oxygen content of the tungsten film is below  2%.
X-ray diffractograms of  the  polycrystalline tungsten
and the as-deposited film are depicted in Fig. 2, which  shows the body-centered-cubic structure and α-W phase without any β-W and oxides. The X-ray diffractograms of both samples clearly show three Bragg peaks located at 40.0, 58.0, and 73 deg corresponding to the (110), (200), and (211) crystal orientations, respectively. The sharp peaks indicate a high crystallinity of both samples. The polycrystalline tungsten has no obvious preferred orienta- tion, as shown in Fig. 2a, compared with the standard card (PDF#04-0806: tungsten), but the as-deposited film shows a strong (211) preferred orientation, as shown in Fig. 2b. In addition, the average crystal grain size of the as-deposited film is about 48 nm, which is determined by the method of the Debye-Scherrer formula according to
Fig. 1. Morphologies of (a) polycrystalline tungsten and (b) nanocrystalline tungsten film and (c) cross section of nanocrystalline tungsten film, which was obtained by cutting with a diamond knife, before deuterium exposure.
Fig. 3.  Surface morphologies of two different samples exposed to deuterium plasma: (a) polycrystalline tungsten and
(b) nanocrystalline tungsten film.
Fig. 4.  TDS spectrum of deuterium from (a) polycrystalline tungsten and (b) nanocrystalline tungsten film (sample heating     rate: 1 K/s).
which is referred to in Refs. 27 and 33. Furthermore,    the total retention of deuterium in the form of deuter-  ium molecules in the polycrystalline tungsten at this condition is 2.4 × 1020 D/m2.
For the spectrum of the nanocrystalline tungsten film in Fig. 4b, however, there is a main peak at 610 K, and the spectrum is characterized by a broad temperature range  from 500 to 1100 K and two shoulders in the vicinity  of  650 and 800 K, respectively. In addition, there is a high- temperature desorption tail after 820 K extending to about 1100 K. Furthermore, the spectra of the film appear to consist of several unresolved peaks due to peak broadening.34 In addition, the total  retention  of deuterium  in the nanocrystalline tungsten film is 6.9 × 1021 D/m2, which is increased by a factor of 30 in comparison  with  that in the polycrystalline tungsten. Consequently, it should be emphasized that the shapes of the spectra and deuterium
retention of both bulk and film are noticeably different, which is discussed in detail in Sec. IV.
IV.DISCUSSION
The presented comparative study of polycrystalline tungsten and nanocrystalline tungsten film deposited by magnetron sputtering exposed to low-energy and high- flux deuterium plasma reveals (1) significantly different morphologies between the polycrystalline tungsten and nanocrystalline tungsten film, (2) significantly different release peaks between both samples, and (3) significantly higher deuterium retention in the nanocrystalline tungsten film.
For the polycrystalline tungsten exposed to deuter- ium plasma with the energy well below the displacement
threshold, which is about 940 eV for deuterium ions,35  the blistering behavior characterized by a stepped struc- ture had been observed by the blister cross section with a dual-beam SEM/focused ion  beam  in  Refs.  32,  36,  and 37. It is assumed to be responsible for gliding along crystal gliding planes32 due to deuterium supersaturating resulting in subsequent stress release.36
With respect to the tungsten film deposited by mag- netron sputtering, which is characterized by a nanocrys- talline structure,23,25,26 the behavior of deuterium under irradiation is very much dominated by the large density of GBs (Refs. 14, 15, and 38). Furthermore, in view of the density of 90% of bulk tungsten, there are many native defects within the nanocrystalline tungsten film, such as dislocation, vacancy, and void, which can act as substan- tial trap sites for deuterium inside material. In addition, the as-deposited film shows a typical columnar structure perpendicular to the substrate as shown in Fig. 1c, which can be responsible for deep diffusion of deuterium into material.39 Since the distribution of native defects acting as trap sites inside the film is homogeneous,28 deuterium trapped in defects is evenly distributed within the mate- rial. Hence, for deep diffusion of deuterium, many native defects and large density of GBs can substantially increase the deuterium saturation threshold and deuterium retention in nanocrystalline tungsten film. In addition, compressive stresses within the tungsten film deposited by magnetron sputtering,23 which should be adverse to the formation of blisters induced by deuterium irradia- tion, can suppress blister formation to some extent.
After the deuterium exposure, the deuterium reten-
tion in the materials was measured by TDS. The shape of the TDS spectra is considered to relate to the trap energy and the diffusion of deuterium in the sample.40 Generally, release of deuterium at lower temperature is attributed to deuterium trapped in low-energy trap sites, while release of deuterium at higher temperature is attributed to deuter- ium in high-energy trap sites.41 Consequently, the present two peaks at 490 and 670 K for the polycrystalline tungsten in Fig. 4a are in accordance with previous research, which corresponds to trapping sites of GBs/dislocations and vacancies,40 respectively.
For the TDS spectra of the nanocrystalline tungsten film in Fig. 4b, on the other hand, one main peak locates at around 610 K; but there are still several unresolved peaks due to peak broadening. In addition, the two shoulders imply that two possible peaks exist in the vicinity of 650 and 800 K, respectively. The main peak   at 610 K and first shoulder at 650 K could be associated with deuterium trapped in GBs/dislocations and vacan- cies, respectively. Expecting the above-mentioned two
trapping sites, there are other trapping sites according to a higher-temperature peak, such as the inner wall of vacancy clusters or pores,10,36,40 which could be asso- ciated with the second shoulder at 800 K. Since the columnar structure perpendicular to the surface and a large number of GBs exist in the nanocrystalline tungsten film, broadening of the peak for TDS of film could be strongly influenced by diffusion effects. In Wang et al.’s work,8 peak broadening has increased with film thickness (from 1 to 10 μm). Hence, in this work, peak broadening can lead to the superposition of peaks due to a film thickness of 10 μm. In addition, the long desorption tail after 820 K extending to about 1100 K could be attributed to deuterium detrapping from the defects at different distances from the surface33,36  because  a  large number of GBs behave as preferential diffusion channels for deuterium.39
From the quantitative point of view, the deuterium
retention in the nanocrystalline tungsten film is 30 times higher than in the polycrystalline tungsten at the same exposure condition. These results show that deuterium retention strongly depends on microstructure. The fact that the deuterium retention is higher in the film than in the bulk confirms that the film by magnetron sputtering has a larger density of trapping sites than the bulk, which is discussed above. It is speculated that the deuterium retention in the nanocrystalline tungsten film by magne- tron sputtering is dominated by native defects and GBs.
V.SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, nanocrystalline tungsten film with a thick- ness of 10 μm was deposited by magnetron sputtering onto polycrystalline tungsten substrate. For comparison, the polycrystalline tungsten and the nanocrystalline tungsten film were exposed simultaneously to deuterium plasma with energy of 78 eV and fluence of 3.9 × 1024 D/m2 at temperature of about 450 K. Before irradiation, the morphologies and microstructure of both samples were determined by SEM and XRD, respectively. Significantly, the film deposited by magnetron sputtering is characterized by nanostructure and columnar structure perpendicular to the substrate. After deuterium exposure, the differences in surface topography and deuterium retention between the bulk and film were investigated, which were examined by SEM and TDS, respectively. The blisters resulting from gliding along crystal gliding planes were formed on the polycrystalline tungsten, and no changes in the surface morphology were observed on the nanocrystalline tungsten film. The shapes of TDS spectra of both samples are
noticeably different. The desorption spectra of the polycrys- talline tungsten shows two release peaks located at 490 and 670 K. However, the spectra of the nanocrystalline tungsten film are characterized by a broad temperature range from 500 to 1100 K. In addition, the deuterium retention in the nanocrystalline tungsten film is 30 times higher than in polycrystalline tungsten. These differences in morphology and retention between both samples are attributed to differ- ent microstructures. In other words, the fact that nanocrys- talline tungsten film deposited by magnetron sputtering has a larger density of GBs and native defects is responsible for no blistering and high retention in comparison with the polycrystalline tungsten.
Acknowledgments
This research is supported by National Magnetic Confinement Fusion Programs with  grants  2015GB109003 and 2013GB109003, and Natural Science Foundations  of  China with grants 51171006 and 51471015.
