<title>NEW TECHNOLOGY AND HARDWARE FOR REPROCESSING SPENT NUCLEAR FUEL FROM THERMAL REACTORS</title>
<Affiliation>1.Bochvar All-Russia Research Institute for Inorganic Materials (VNIINM), Moscow, Russia.
2.Mining and Chemical Combine, Zheleznogorsk, Krasnoyarskii Krai, Russia.
3.Federal Center for Nuclear and Radiation Safety, Zheleznogorsk, Krasnoyarskii Krai, Russia.</Affiliation>
<author>V. I. Volk,1 S. N. Veselov,K. N. Dvoeglazov, L. V. Arseenkov, P. M. Gavrilov,
S. I. Smirnov,and V. N. Alekseenko</author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>ATOMIC ENERGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Springer</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10512-016-0069-z</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10512-016-0069-z</URL>
Abstract
New and modified technological and hardware solutions for reprocessing spent nuclear fuel from thermal reactors are described. The solutions developed form the foundation for a new technological scheme for reprocessing, termed the EKSKhROM-process. Verification data on the reprocessing of spent VVER-1000 fuel are presented and the characteristics of the products of reprocessing are presented. It is shown that the uranium and plutonium products are suitable for recycling in a closed nuclear fuel cycle.
The block diagram of hydrometallurgical reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel includes fragmentation of the fuel-ele- ment bundle, voloxidation, dissolution of the spent fuel, clarification of the low-concentration suspension separated from the cladding fragments, and hydrometallurgical (extractive) reprocessing of the clarified solution. Voloxidation includes heat treatment of the spent fuel at 300–500°C in air or an oxygen-enriched medium. In such reprocessing at least 99% of the tritium is removed, but the residual content does not permit subsequent reprocessing without controlling migration, catching, and isolation of tritium.
A two-stage process with no movement of material has been developed as an alternative [1] that includes oxidative processing of spent fuel at the first stage with a mixture of air and carbon dioxide at 450–600°C and a steam–air mixture (the water vapor content corresponds to the dew point at 40°C) at 350–400°C. At the first stage, tritium is removed from the
tritium-containing hydroxides of alkali and alkaline-earth metals MeOT and Me(OT)2 via reactions of the type 2MeOT +
+ CO2 → Me2CO3 + T2O; at the second stage, tritium residues are removed via isotopic exchange reactions.
The conventional extraction reprocessing of spent fuel includes, as the head operation, counterflow extraction of extracted and co-extracted elements from the feed flow.
The scheme developed for the head operation (see Fig. 1) includes processing the feed flow in two successive stages by two flows of circulating extracting agent [2]. At the first stage, in a regime of maximum (~100%) saturation of the organic flow, 75–80% of the total amount of uranium and plutonium entering with the feed flow is extracted. At the second stage, in a regime of complete extraction, the uranium and plutonium are additionally extracted, the extracts at the first and second stages are combined, and the combined extract is reprocessed further. As a result the block operates stably with total saturation to 115–117 g/liter, which increases the purification by approximately a factor of 10 by removal of impurities and decreases the volume of the extracting agent circulating in the cycle by ~20%.
In the standard variant, during purification of the extract by removal of impurities, liquid radioactive wastes are formed at each washing operation in amounts ~1 m3 per 1 ton spent fuel. To eliminate the mismatch between the amount of Fig. 1. Schematic process diagram of the head extraction block in the standard (a) and new developed (b) variant: 1) feed stream; 1ʹ) intermediate raffinate; 2) recycled extracting agent; 2ʹ) first-step circulating extracting agent; 2ʺ) second-stage circulating extracting agent; 3) raffinate; 4) extract U Pu(Np, Tc).
Fig. 2. Diagram of the purification of the extract from liquid  chromatography: 1, 2) cleaned and purified extract, respectively;
3) washing solution; 4) regenerated material.
impurities removed and the flow consumption, subsequently requiring recovery, a purification method based on the principles of liquid chromatography and an apparatus for implementing the method have been developed [3]. The extract flow which is purified passes through a column filled with granular macroporous material whose pores contain the washing solution. During the purification process, the impurities are redistributed and become concentrated in the washing solution phase. The column is equipped with two phase-separation chambers which are used to feed and remove the organic flow and reload the water flow (Fig. 2). Liquid chromatography makes it possible to considerably improve the quality of the purification of the extracts with a 5–20-fold reduction of the volume of the regenerated material.
In the standard implementation, the problem of uranium and plutonium separation is resolved in the same manner as the washing operation. In a block of discrete extractors or an extraction column, the uranium-plutonium extract is processed with a solution of a reducing agent, transferring the well-extractable plutonium (IV) into slightly extractable plutonium (III) with the latter removed with the water flow. The water flow of the re-extracted plutonium, as a rule, is processed by a separate flow of the circulating extracting agent for complete or partial removal of uranium from the plutonium flow. The degree of plutonium concentration is limited by the flow ratio of the organic (O) and water (W) phases in the operation O:W ≤ 10;  the uranium product requires refining additional purification by means of plutonium removal.
The problem of obtaining a concentrated plutonium flow and reducing the content of plutonium in the uranium extract is solved by two-stage separation of uranium and plutonium [4]. In this process, the concentrative re-extraction of Fig. 3. Extraction of plutonium from uranium extract in a mass-exchange separator (a) and purification of extract by removal of plutonium residues (b):
1)U+Pu extract; 2) Pu re-extract; 3) Pu(U) re-extract, extracted from uranium extract; 4) plutonium-containing return stream; 5) U extract.
plutonium is accomplished in the mass-transfer separator [4, 5]; the additional uranium extract is accomplished either by      a block of discrete extractors which operates with a maximum flow ratio O:W or column liquid chromatography [3] using   a highly effective reducer of plutonium (IV) as the cleaning phase of the solution (Fig. 3). Re-extract with plutonium content to 30 g/liter with in-line removal of more than 95% was obtained in the course of checking the method. The additional puri- fication of the uranium extract was accomplished with minimal consumption of the cleaning solution with the flow returned into the operation, which preceded the separation of uranium and plutonium.
New efficient agents for reducing plutonium (IV) and the accompanying technetium (VII) were developed to sepa-
rate uranium and plutonium: carbohydrazide CO(N2H3)2, diformylhydrazine N2H2(COH)2, and glycine NH2CH2COOH [6–11]. A particularity of the reagents studied is their capacity to catalytically decompose to gaseous N2, CO2, and H2O, i.e., without the formation of ‘dirty’ salts in the flow, without disrupting the continuity of the technological process, which consid- erably simplifies their application and the organization of recycled flows. After the uranium extract is purified, the uranium is re-extracted into the water phase and then the extracting agent is regenerated in-cycle.
It has been shown [12] that the particularities of the motion of the two-phase flow in the granular layer of the separa- tor precludes the formation of emulsion removal in the purified flow. These particularities became the base conditions for using mass-exchange separators in in-cycle regeneration of the extracting agent [13]. This solution makes it possible to in- crease the quality of the regeneration by eliminating recycling of the products of destruction into the circulating flow of the extracting agent in the form of emulsion removal and to reduce the liquid medium-activity wastes by a factor of 3–3.5.
Conventional refining of uranium is done in a uranium extraction cycle with the same productivity as in the head cycle, which makes it a large generator of medium-level wastes. At the same time, the final product in the uranium line – ura- nyl nitrate hexahydrate – possesses unique properties, making it possible to use its crystallization as a refining limit in the uranium line. The most important of these properties are the low melting temperature ~60°C of the salt and the absence of isomorphic compounds among the separated impurities. The work on crystallization refining or uranium started about 10 years ago. During this period, the physicochemical basis of the process was worked out, the main technological parameters determined, and the basis technological solutions found [14, 15]. Subsequently, the research continued at the institute and in specially developed crystallization stands at the Siberian and Mining-Chemical Combines. As a result, the operational yield of the product was increased to >90% and the amount of recycled flows requiring recovery of material reduced more than four-fold, uranium refining became waste-free and, essentially, reagent-free – the mother nitric-acid solution is recycled during the dissolution of the spent fuel [16].
These technological and hardware solutions became the basis for the new process scheme which is essentially an alternative to the conventional purex process. The scheme is shown in Fig. 4 and is called the EKSKhROM process (ex- traction + separation + chromatography).
The EKSKhROM process and the accompanying technological operations were conducted on simulators and on real spent nuclear fuel from VVER-1000. The last check was performed in 2014 in hot chambers at the Mining and Chemical Fig. 4. Schematic hardware-process diagram of the EKSKhROM process: 1) extractor; 2) mass-exchange separator;
3) liquid chromatography column; 4) catalytic oxidation; ——, – – –) water and organic streams, respectively.
TABLE 1. Characteristic Uranium and Plutonium Products
Combine. The spent fuel from VVER-1000 at the Balakovo NPP with burnup 51.9 GW·days/ton after a 10-yr holding period was used as the initial material.
After fragmentation, voloxidation, dissolution of the fuel, and clarification, the solution was reprocessed using the
scheme shown in Fig. 4. The feed flow prepared for reprocessing had the following composition (g/liter): U 602, Pu 7.02, Np 0.45, Tc 0.237, and HNO3 126. The exposure dose rate of the flow, owing to the presence of 134,137Cs, 154,155Eu, and 241Am was 1.5·103 nA/(kg·liter), the tritium content in the feed flow was at the limit of detection and determined to be 3·105 Bq/liter or <0.44 μg/ton h.m. The computed content of tritium in the VVER-1000 fuel with close burnup 50 GW·days/ ton and holding time 7 yr equals 11.3 TBq/ton or 0.036 g/ton h.m.; therefore, voloxidation of the spent fuel removes more than 99.999% of the tritium.
The total coefficient of purification of uranium in the two-stage process of extraction and chromatographic purifica- tion of uranium-plutonium extract was 2·107, including purification by removal of cesium 1.6·108 and americium 5.7·105. It is not always possible to attain such indices in a complete cycle in variants of the purex process.
The characteristics of the uranium and plutonium products obtained in checking the EKSKhROM process are pre- sented in Table 1. The characteristics of the products make it possible to use the uranium product without any additional purification in sublimation-separation production and the plutonium product in the production of mixed fuel.
