<title>SAFETY VALIDATION OF THE TUK-109T LARGE-SIZE CONTAINER FOR TRANSPORTING SPENT NUCLEAR FUEL</title>
<Affiliation>Russian Federal Nuclear Center – All-Russia Research Institute of Experimental Physics (RFYaTs – VNIIEF), Sarov, Russia</Affiliation>
<author>V. P. Solov’ev, A. A. Ryabov, V. I. Romanov,S. S. Kukanov, and E. E. Maslov</author>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>ATOMIC ENERGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Springer</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10512-020-00607-5</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10512-020-00607-5</URL>
AbstractFig. 1. Structural diagram of TUK-109T.
Fig. 2. Fragments of finite element model of TUK-109T: a, b) the upper part of the container and lower part of the jacket, respectively.
A three-dimensional finite-element model of TUK-109T with more than 6 million computational cells was devel- oped for the strength calculation. All elements of the real structure (weld seams, bolts, packing, and others) are included in the model. Fragments of the finite element model are shown in Fig. 2. The dynamic deformation was calculated taking into ac- count the preliminary static stress-strain state from assembly forces, gravitational forces, elastoplastic deformation, contact interaction with rubbing, and large shape-changes of the structural elements. The numerical studies showed that under normal operating conditions (fall from a height of 0.3 m onto a rigid surface, stacking, testing for depth of damage) TUK-109T with- stands static and dynamic loads with a large margin of safety.
Ten variants of falls onto a rigid base from a height of 9 m (two axial, three corner, and five lateral) were examined to determine the most dangerous accidental dynamical actions on TUK-109T. A fall onto a stud from a height of 1 m was modeled for six variants of the initial structure as well as the deformed structure after lateral and angular falls from a height of 9 m. Static loading of a complete packaging set upon sinking to a depth of 15 m was also analyzed.
The computer calculations showed that as a result of dynamic deformation of TUK-109T significant plastic defor- mations develop in the dampers and their mounting hardware in the event of an accidental fall and in the shell of the body in the event of a lateral fall onto a stud. For all of the fall variants studied, the calculations predict body strength retention with possible local damage to the dampers and their mounting hardware. In the event of a lateral fall, the top parts of some ampules deform. The opening of the joints of the inner and outer lids in any fall does not exceed the admissible value, which guarantees preservation of tightness in accidents.
A full-scale sample TUK-109T was subjected to successive dynamical tests for the following accidental actions: axial and lateral falls from a height of 9 m and lateral fall onto a stud from a height of 1 m. The experiments confirmed strength and tightness of the structure. TUK-109T guarantees the required level of safety in the transport of RBMK-1000 spent nuclear fuel.
The design of the TUK-109T large-size container developed at the All-Russia Research Institute of Experimental Physics (VNIIEF) for transporting ampuls with bundles of spent fuel pins is described. The results of full- scale tests and three-dimensional simulation modeling for strength validation for mechanical actions occurring under normal operating conditions and during emergencies are presented. The computational validation of strength was performed in a three-dimensional formulation based on a finite-element model and a validated methodology of modeling dynamic deformation of structures, implemented in the highly parallelized LOGOS software. The validation of the methodology was performed by comparing numerical results with full-scale design tests. The computational prediction is shown to be highly accurate.
Special protective packaging, or transport packaging sets, are being developed for safe transport of spent nuclear fuel. Such structures must meet strict requirements: the packaging must provide nuclear and radiation safety security as well as preserve the integrity of the spent nuclear fuel during transport. The packaging must have a margin of strength and maintain the protective properties in regulated emergency situations, such as falling on a hard flat base from a height of 9 m and falling on a stud from a height of 1 m.
At the current level of development of computer technologies, an efficient method of developing designs is to use numerical modeling to search for optimal structural variants and to validate the characteristics of the article. Work on the development and perfection of LOGOS simulation software is being done at the All-Russia Research Institute of Experimental Physics (VNIIEF) [1, 2]. This software is being used successfully to perform calculations of the strength of packaging con- taining spent nuclear fuel under normal and emergency conditions of transport [3–5].
The next-generation transport packaging set TUK-109T intended for transporting 150 ampules with RBMK-1000 fuel-pin bundles has been developed using supercomputer technology and LOGOS software. The objective of the present work is to analyze the strength of TUK-109T on the basis of LOGOS software.
The TUK-109T packaging set is a cylindrical container. Its body consists of inner and outer shells between which radiation and neutron shielding is placed. The radiation shielding consists of a collection of steel rings. The neutron shielding consists of a collection of aluminum rings with polypropylene filled cavities. Massive rings (coamings) are welded to the cy- lindrical body at the top and bottom. A bottom is welded into the bottom coaming and two lids are arranged in the top coaming. The propylene blocks of the neutron shielding are provided in the bottom and in the inner lid. Vibration dampers are secured to the ends of the container on the outside. Heat removing fins on the lateral surface also perform the function of vibration damping in the case of corner or side falls. A jacket with the fuel-pin ampules is arranged inside the container. A diagram of the developed TUK-109T is shown in Fig. 1.
Five variants of the design, each of which was chosen by the computational method for its strength in an accidental fall from a height of 9 m, were studied systematically in the TUK-109T development process. The final variant of the design was checked experimentally.
Fig. 3. Computed (——) and experimental (——) time dependence of the vertical overload at the sensor locations in the event of an axial fall of TUK-109T onto the bottom from a height of 9 m.
The time dependences of the acceleration in the characteristic zones of the structure were recorded in experiments using a system of sensors. The possession of certain sensors is shown in Fig. 1: sensors 1–3 are arranged along the circumfer- ence of the upper coaming; 9, 15 – on the lower coaming; and 18, 26 – on the upper and lower parts of the jacket, respectively. As we can see from Figs. 3 and 4, the computed and experimental overloads are close, which confirms the reliability of the computer modeling.
The deformation of the main structural elements was measured after each fall. So, after an axial fall the height of the bottom damper was equal to 265–290 mm. The spread of the height is caused by the unevenness of the target surface and the small (about 3°) inclination of the axis of the container away from the vertical upon impact against a barrier. The indicated particulars were not taken into account in the calculations. In addition, the computed residual height of the damper was equal to 280 mm, which falls within the experimental range of the heights.
Plastic deformations of the upper coaming were recorded in the case of a lateral fall from a height of 9 m. The residual vertical and horizontal diameters were equal to 1567 and 1551 mm, respectively, which are close to the computed values 1564 and 1556 mm. A lateral fall of TUK-109T from a height of 1 m onto a stud confirmed the absence of through penetration of the body (Fig. 5). The computed and experimental sizes of the dent in the body turned out to be close: residual diameter 400– 480 mm in the experiment and 449–471 mm in the calculation, residual depth of dent 75 and 76 mm, respectively (Fig. 6).
In summary, the numerical studies performed using the LOGOS software made it possible to design and validate the
strength and tightness of the TUK-109T packaging set during normal operation and in emergency situations. The reliability of the numerical calculations based on a computer model of TUK-109T with >6·106 finite elements is confirmed by the closeness
Fig. 4. Computed (——) and experimental (——) time dependence of the vertical (sensors 1, 9) and horizontal (sensor 2) overloads in the event of a lateral fall of TUK-109T from a height of 9 m.
Fig. 5. Deformation of the outer surface of TUK-109T in the case of a fall onto a stud.
Fig. 6. Computed deformed configuration of TUK-109T in the event of a fall onto a stud: a, b) longitudinal and transverse section, respectively.
of the results obtained by modeling and by full-scale tests. The developed computer modeling technology makes it possible to find the optimal structural solutions at the design stage and to significantly reduce the development time and cost of new complex parts.