<title>Fault Propagation and Effects Analysis for Designing an Online Monitoring System for the Secondary Loop of the Nuclear Power Plant Portion of a Hybrid Energy System</title>
<author>Xiaoxu Diao, Yunfei Zhao, Mike Pietrykowski, Zhuoer Wang, Shannon Bragg- Sitton & Carol Smidts</author>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Technology</Journal>
<Affiliation>a.The Ohio State University, Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, 201 West 19th Avenue,
Columbus, Ohio 43210
b.The Ohio State University, Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 2015 Neil Avenue, Columbus, Ohio 43210
c.Idaho National Laboratory, P.O. Box 1625, MS 3860, Idaho Falls, Idaho 83415-3860</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>ANS</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00295450.2018.1426963</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1080/00295450.2018.1426963</URL>
Abstract — This paper studies the propagation and effects of faults in critical components that pertain to the secondary loop of a nuclear power plant found in nuclear hybrid energy systems (NHESs). This information is used to design an online monitoring (OLM) system that is capable of detecting and analyzing faults that are likely to occur during NHES operation. In this research, the causes, features, and effects of possible faults are investigated by simulating the propagation of faults in the secondary loop of a nuclear power plant. The simulation is conducted using Integrated System Failure Analysis (ISFA), a promising method analyzing hardware and software faults during the conceptual design phase. First, the models of system components required by ISFA are constructed. Then, fault propagation analysis is implemented, which is conducted under the bounds set by acceptance criteria derived for the design of an OLM system. The result of the fault simulation is utilized to evaluate the effectiveness of signals for fault detection and diagnosis and to propose an optimization plan for the OLM system. Finally, several experiments are designed and conducted using a hardware-in-the-loop system to verify the correctness and effectiveness of the proposed method.
Keywords — Fault propagation and effects analysis, online monitoring system, nuclear hybrid energy systems.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
Nuclear Hybrid Energy Systems (NHESs) are highly complex integrated hybrid energy systems that aim to provide reliable power generation and increase renewable energy penetration into the power grid as well as allow for the repurposing of excess electricity in times of low demand. The system dynamics that characterize NHESs involve frequent switching between different energy and control subsystems. Frequent switching between different subsystems may lead to faster aging of the mechanical components and sensors, thus leading to shutdown of an energy subsystem. Failure of the energy subsystems will add an unexpected load to the nuclear power plant, thereby increasing the risk of an accident. Nuclear power plants within NHESs are expected to be challenged in a manner that differs significantly from their conventional usage. In particular, it is expected that the secondary loop of the plant will need to adjust to highly fluctuating energy supplied by the renewables. Risk and reliability  aspects  of the secondary loop of a nuclear power plant within a NHES are tested in such configurations and should be studied systematically. An advanced online monitoring (OLM) system can minimize the risks of potential compo-nent failure, control failure, and human error. Developing such an OLM system is a complex problem since for
NHESs in their conceptual design phase, configurations and components are still being identified. Analysis and determination of failure modes of potential components comprise the first step of designing an OLM system for the secondary loop. The nuclear power plant follows a light water small modular reactor (LWSMR) design. The secondary loop is a power conversion circuit composed of steam lines, turbine/generator, steam dump, condensate/ feed system, turbine bypass systems, steam safety valves, and steam feed/isolation systems.
In order to detect faults effectively and precisely, various sensors or probes will be incorporated into the secondary loop system. Several significant issues will be studied for sensor application such as (a) how many sensors should be deployed into the secondary loop system; (b) what informa- tion should be gathered to effectively detect faults; and (c) how to identify the most efficient locations for the layout of sensors, considering the trade-off of cost and efficiency.
In this paper, these issues are solved by gathering and analyzing potential faults of critical components that constitute the secondary loop system. It is impractical to deploy sensors to observe all the system components and outputs. By investigating the causes, propagation paths, and impact of faults, the OLM system can be designed to detect as many critical faults as possible while minimizing cost for sensor deployment.
The remainder of the paper is divided into the following sections. Section II introduces related research. Section III defines the OLM system design methodology associated with fault propagation analysis. Section IV introduces the application of the Integrated System Failure  Analysis (ISFA) method for analyzing faults of critical components  in the secondary loop system. Section V concludes the study and introduces future research.
II.RELATED WORK
Online monitoring technology has been used in the context of nuclear power plants for the detection and diag- nosis of faults in components, such as coolant pump systems1 or induction motors.2 General data-driven methodologies have been applied to the design of such OLM systems.3,4 These methods utilize various types of models for sensor selection, validation, and signal processing.
Artificial Intelligence–based technologies have recently been introduced into the field of OLM. For example, Fantoni5 applied an artificial neural network to validate the signals of system components during system operation. Gomes and Canedo Medeiros6 proposed an application of a neural network of Gaussian radial basis
functions for building a diagnostic system to assist the operator in fault identification. Liu et al.7 utilized prob- abilistic support vector regression for predicting the conditions of the components in a nuclear power plant. Chen et al.8 integrated generalized regression neural network, mean impact value, and other analysis methods to perform the assessment process.
The effectiveness of these data-driven and signal- based methods largely depends on the historical (training) data sampled by the sensors.  Therefore, these methods are difficult to apply to new designs and systems, for which insufficient data are available to build the models.9 This paper uses the ISFA method,10 which is a rule- based method for fault simulation, to evaluate components’ signals and to assist system designers in establishing an OLM system for LWSMR, a new type of nuclear reactor. Although some methods11,12 for monitoring components in small modular nuclear reactors have been proposed, the method proposed in this paper has as the advantage of utilization of early system information during the design stage to perform fault simulation and analysis through qualitative physics.13 The results of this method can be used to evaluate the effectiveness of signals for fault identification and to assist
designers in selecting sensors for fault detection.
III.METHODOLOGY OF OLM SYSTEM DESIGN BASED ON FAULT ANALYSIS
Designing an OLM system includes several important steps, including determining the information required for fault detection, deciding how to deploy the sensors, con- structing a database for online fault diagnosis, and so on. Many of these steps depend on the detailed information related to potential faults, such as location [e.g., hardware (HW) or software (SW) components], triggering conditions (e.g., input signals), the propagation path (possibly from HW to SW), fault effects (functional failures), and specific features (e.g., period). This information can be acquired via a fault analysis applied to the secondary loop. The OLM system design methodology associated with the fault ana- lysis is defined in Fig. 1.
As depicted in Fig. 1, the iterative process for design- ing an OLM system can be divided into the following processes. The first step is to define acceptance criteria for the proposed OLM system design. The second step is to construct the ISFA models of the system under study. Then, the third step is to simulate fault propagation paths. Based on the propagation paths, the next step is to eval- uate the signals that will allow us to distinguish the faults. After that, we can test the detection and diagnosis
Fig. 1. OLM system design methodology associated with fault analysis.
capabilities of the OLM system design. If the acceptance criteria are met, the final result is an OLM system design configuration that includes a database of behaviors of the system. These steps will be detailed in Secs. III.A  through III.E.
III.A.Acceptance Criteria
Acceptance criteria are used to evaluate the fault detection capability of the OLM system. The satisfaction of acceptance criteria means that the OLM system is able to detect an adequate type and number of faults. If this is the case, the iterative design and optimization process of the OLM system can stop. A criterion for accepting an OLM system design can be defined as
@1
where
ΔF = number of elements in the set of all unidentified faults
ΔC = cost of deploying additional sensors for identify- ing the unidentified faults. In the early design stage, ΔC can be quantified by the number of required sensors.
α = threshold that can be defined for the specified system.
Generally, adding sensors is the primary method to enhance the capability of fault detection of the OLM system. Equation (1) indicates that the design of the  OLM system is acceptable when the cost of adding extra sensors outbalances the number of unidentifiable faults.
Another criterion is defined as a stopping condition for fault propagation simulation. In the iteration performed to refine the OLM system design, fault simulation is required to study the behaviors of the secondary loop system when some components are faulty. Therefore, faults will be injected into the model of the secondary loop system during simulation. The stopping condition acts as the indication of whether the number of injected faults is sufficient; therefore, it is unnecessary to inject additional faults during an execution of the simulation. The evalua- tion criterion Γn is based on the number of injected faults, which is defined as
@2
where n is the number of faults injected together (staged or simultaneous injection) in an iteration of the OLM system design and Ni is the number of new behaviors that occur due to i faults. This formula is able to reduce the number of fault combinations when two or more faults occur simulta- neously, which increases the difficulty and cost of fault detection. The formula implies that the combination of faults should not be considered in fault injection when new behaviors caused by these faults are not significant. The system behavior can be observed by sampling the out- put signals of system components. The parameter β is a threshold that can be defined for the specified system. In practice, the thresholds α and β are usually obtained from experts. Other acceptance criteria can be defined as well.
III.B.Model Construction
Ideally, the final OLM system design should be able to detect, identify, and diagnose the propagation of failures for all postulated faults (within the acceptance criteria). In practice, this means a trade-off between the number of identifiable faults and the cost of necessary sensors. Therefore, the most effective signal for fault identification should be determined and selected for the OLM system design. In this study, the ISFA (Ref. 10) is used to analyze the propagation of faults and determine the most effective signals.
The ISFA integrated approach performs the failure analysis of HW and SW systems during the design stages of that system. ISFA integrates the functional failure identification and propagation method14 for fault propaga- tion and effects analysis of the HW subsystems as well as the failure propagation and simulation approach method15 for the analysis of fault propagation in the SW subsystems. ISFA has been successfully applied to the water tank system.16
As shown in Fig. 2, ISFA analyzes the HW and SW subsystems based on a component view and a function view. A configuration flow graph (CFG) is constructed to depict the component structure of the physical system. A functional basis17 (e.g., a repository of functions) is used as a standard to define functions and flows of all physical components. By connecting predefined functions and flows based on mathe- matical models, a function model can be constructed to depict how to achieve the desired functionality of the system. Qualitative behavioral models are defined for each component and are depicted as behavioral rules (BRs), including discrete nominal and faulty behaviors that are derived using qualitative physics.13 A functional failure  logic (FFL) is defined for each component to connect the component behavior and the operating state of system functions. In the component view, HW is integrated with SW via interfaces, which are components that communicate send/receive information between HW and SW subsystems. A transaction signal is defined to depict the communication details of the HW-SW interaction. Based on the ISFA method, the process of analysis is depicted in Fig. 3.
As  illustrated   in  Fig.   3,  two   types   of  models are
required by the ISFA method. The static models that include component and functional models are defined to represent the structure and function of the secondary loop system. Meanwhile, based on the inputs and outputs of components, the dynamic models are established in order to formulate the behaviors and states of components in nominal and faulty states. Their behaviors are represented by the BRs, and the states of their functions (e.g., operational, degraded, or lost) are assessed by the FFLs. The fault propagation paths, fault
Fig. 2. ISFA method: system models.
affected components, and their abnormal behaviors are attained through the ISFA simulation process with fault injection. Signals that detect notable differences between nominal and faulty conditions can be selected for fault identification. ISFA records the simulation results by using  a number of tables that list the inputs/outputs and states of components and functions in accordance with time stamps.
III.C.Fault Propagation Simulation
The simulation is performed based on the ISFA method. Prior to the  simulation,  the  parameters  of  ISFA models need to be initialized. The attributes of inputs and outputs to the components, such as  name, type, range, and other key parameters, are defined. The BRs for each system component and the FFLs for possible states of functions are determined. The simula- tion then executes iteratively for different numbers of faults injected. Initially, ISFA simulates the case for which all components are in a nominal state in the  system under analysis. Then, single faults are injected that will produce new behaviors during the ISFA simu- lation. After that, two or more faults are  injected  together in order to observe new responses caused by these faults. This iterative process will end when  the fault injection stopping criterion in Eq. (2) is met. Therefore, Eq. (2) determines the maximum number of faults imax that will be injected simultaneously in the simulation. Finally, all possible fault propagation paths and corresponding system behaviors can be obtained. System behaviors are observed through the outputs and states of system components. The new behaviors can be defined as the new types or patterns of output signals or state transitions that have not occurred before.
In this paper,  fault injection and simulation are auto-
matically performed by an analytic tool provided by ISFA. This tool is capable of generating the propagation paths of fault effects in a structured system, deducing the states of functions of each component in every path, and calculating the input and output signals for each component (expressed by propositional logic18 and linear functions) in sequence. Supported  by  a  Satisfiability   Modulo  Theories  (SMT)
Fig. 3. Fault propagation analysis based on ISFA: steps.
solver,19 the analytic tool can read and parse the BRs represented by propositional logic expressions and conse- quently infer all the possibilities of system evolution.
III.D.Signal Evaluation
The outcomes of fault propagation simulation are a number of tables that contain the behaviors (input/output signals) of all components before and after fault injection, the states of the functions of each component, and the states of functions of the integrated system. This informa- tion is later utilized to diagnose the occurrence, location,
Similarly, Fig. 4b shows the outputs in a scenario when a leakage failure is injected in the TBV.
Signal evaluation is accomplished through the com- parison of scenario pairs, which evaluates different cases (e.g., nominal, single faults, or multiple faults) by con- trasting all unobservable fault-related signals derived from the fault simulation. In the comparison, the degree
of  contribution  is  a  vector ~Ih j ; j2 iðSÞ defined  to  estimate
whether the signal S can help discriminate between two distinct faults pertaining to a scenario pair j1; j2 . In a fault pair, there are two independent scenarios with dif- ferent types of injected faults. The values in the vector
and type of fault that may occur in an actual system. In
the design of the OLM system, these data are classified
~Ih j1; j2i
ðSÞ can be 0 or 1, where 0 means that the samples
into observable signals and unobservable signals. An observable signal is a signal that can be detected by the sensors  already  contained  in  an  OLM  system  design.
Conversely, an unobservable signal is a signal that cannot
of the observable signal S are identical if one injects either of the two faults. In contrast, the value 1 denotes that the samples of the observable signal ðSÞ are totally
different. The vector ~I      2   ðSÞ contains the said values at
be acquired yet by the current OLM system design
each time step.
h j ; j i
because the corresponding sensors are not  yet  part  of the design. All the unobservable signals will be evaluated to determine which one is the most efficient signal for detecting faults and consequently should be added first to the design of the OLM system.
As an example of signal evaluation, a simplified tur- bine bypass system containing two components, the turbine bypass valve (TBV) and the intermediate heat exchanger (IHX), is analyzed by the ISFA method. In Fig. 4a, all the components are set to be in a nominal state, and the outputs of each component are listed in accordance with time steps.
For example, as depicted in Fig. 4, the temperature of the output of TBV should be equal between Scenario 1 and Scenario 2 at time step 1 since the expressions of the temperature in the two scenarios are both “Normal_Steam_Temp.”  In  this  case,  the  value  of  the
vector ~Ih j1 ; j2 iðSÞ of the signal “TBV’s output temperature”
at time step 1 should be 0, where j1 is Scenario 1 and j2 is Scenario 2. On the contrary, the flow rate of the output of TBV is distinct if the leakage rate of TBV is larger than 0. In this case, the value of the signal “TBV’s output flow rate” at time step 1 should be 1. In practice, there are cases
Fig. 4. Example scenarios of signal evaluation. (a) Scenario 1: TBV and IHX were nominal. (b) Scenario 2: leakage of TBV was injected; IHX was nominal.
where  the  value  of a  signal  cannot  be confirmed. For  instance,  if  the  leakage rate of TBV in  Fig.  4  is defined  as
“TBV Leakage Flowrate	0,” whether the output flow rate of TBV in scenario 1 was equal to the one in scenario 2 would be uncertain. In this situation, we define an intermediate value (between 0 and 1) to represent this uncertainty. In
this paper, the values of ~I
h j1; j2i
ðSÞ ¼ nx ht j1 ; j2 ijt ¼ 1; 2; ... ; tno, where tn is the total number of time steps considered in
the analysis, are defined as follows:
hj j i
8< 0; the values of  S  are identical in the fault pair h j1; j2i	9=
x t 1; 2
1;  the values of  S  are totally different in the fault pair    j  ; j	:
: 0:01; the values of S are possibly different in the fault pair h j1; j2i ;
If Ih j1 ; j2 i  Sk 0,  where  M  is  the  number  of signals,  the  two  faults  in  the   fault  pair	j1; j2	are unidentifiable.	On	the	contrary,	the		situation
M
Ih j1 ; j2 i  Sk   > 0  means  that  the  fault  pair	j1;  j2    is
k¼1
distinguishable. In this case, the most efficient signal should be selected so as to effectively improve  the  fault detection capability of the OLM system. Signals can be evaluated by Eq. (3):
@3
where time weight θt is a parameter for revising the evaluation at each discrete time step. In practice, we usually give higher values to the signals that change immediately after faults are injected because these signals are better than the ones that detect the same faults a few time steps later. A decreasing  linear  function  θt   at   b;  a > 0;  b > 0; where θt > 0; can be used to determine the time weight.  For  a  real-time  system,  it  is  time-critical  to  detect faults
before further catastrophic events occur. In this case, an exponential function θt  e—at; a > 0 is used, which gives   the quick-responding signals higher weights than the slower ones. A higher number can be assigned to the parameter a when  a  more  critical  time  constraint  is  applied  to the
system under analysis, i.e., for which the OLM system is being developed. Table I provides an example of signal evaluation  where  we   use   the   time   weight θt e—at ; a 0:2.
Table I compares the signal “output flowrate  of  IHX” in two different scenarios shown in Fig.  4.  At  time step 1, a leakage failure was injected in the component TBV in Scenario 2. Because of the latency of flow transmission between components, at time step 5, the “output flowrate of IHX” changed from “alpha *Normal_Steam_Flowrate” to “alpha * (Normal_Steam_ Flowrate- TBV_Leakage_Rate).” From this time step,the  signal  “output  flowrate  of  IHX”  is  different   from
the scenario where all components are in nominal state due  to  the  leakage   rate  of  TBV  “TBV_Leakage_Rate
> 0.” The column “Time  Weight” shows  the  values  of θt at each time stamp. The  rightmost  column  records the evaluation. According to Eq. (3), the evaluation of  the signal “output flowrate of IHX” for distinguishing Scenario 1 and Scenario 2 should be
@4
where E f	is the evaluation of the signal Sf “output flowrate of IHX” and h j ; j i is the pair of scenarios Scenario 1 versus Scenario 2.
Similarly, the other signals pertaining to the exam- ple system can be evaluated. In Table II, all the signals are evaluated. The final evaluation of a signal Sk is defined as
TABLE I
Comparison of the Signal “Output Flowrate of IHX” in Two Different Scenarios*
TABLE II
The Evaluation of Signals in the Example System*
@3
where J is the set of all analyzed scenario pairs and SN is the number of elements contained by J.
Besides the two scenarios compared in Table I, two extra scenarios (S3, TBV was nominal and IHX was faulty; S4, TBV and IHX are both faulty) are added for evaluation. Table II shows the results of all possible pairs of scenarios.
According to Table II, we can infer that all the scenarios are identifiable because every column has at least one evaluation larger than zero. In Table II, important signals for fault identification are IHX. Out.Flowrate, IHX.Out.Pressure, TBV.Out.Flowrate, and TBV.Out.Pressure since their evaluations are lar- ger than zero. The signals IHX.Out.Flowrate and IHX.Out.Pressure are able to distinguish all the sce- narios because all the values in the row  of  these signals are greater than zero. Meanwhile, the signals taking values of zero (e.g., TBV.Out.Temperature, TBV.Out.Pressure, IHX.Out.Temperature, and IHX. Out.Pressure) do not need to be considered in design- ing the OLM system.
III.E.Enhancement and Optimization
Based on the evaluation of signals, new sensors can be selected and added to the OLM system design. The primary goal of this process is to increase the number of
identifiable faults while minimizing costs. This can be achieved by adding sensors that sample the highest evaluation signals that cannot be observed by the current OLM system design. The unobservable signals USk can be evaluated by Ek defined in Eq. (4), where the number of fault pairs SN is decided by the stopping criterion in Eq. (2).
In this example, according to Eq. (2), the value n is zero at the beginning of the simulation. In this case, the new behavior is the scenario in which all components are  nominal.  Therefore,  N0  1,  Γ0  1.  Then,  single faults are injected, where  n  1. The new behaviors are  the two scenarios S2 (TBV was faulty and IHX was nominal)  and  S3  (TBV  was  nominal  and  IHX  was
faulty).  In  Eq.  (2),  N1      2,  Γ1 0:66.  Next,  two  faults
are injected simultaneously so that n 2. The new  behavior is S4 (TBV and  IHX  were  both  faulty)  and N2   1, Γ2   0:25. In this case, the thresholds α and β    are set to 0.3 because the simultaneous occurrence of more than two faults is not considered in the example.  As a result, Γ2 < β 0:3; and SN  should be equal to 4.  The parameter T 0 < α  in  Eq.  (1)  because  all  the faults are identified.
The iterative process of adding sensors can be sum- marized by the following steps:
1.A number of scenarios that have not been iden- tified by the current OLM system design should initially be selected.
2.The fault simulation for the selected scenarios should be executed.
3.All the signals that have not been observed by the current OLM system design are evaluated based on the results of the simulation.
4.The signals with high evaluation values are added to the OLM system design.
5.The OLM system design should be evaluated by Eq. (2). If the criterion is not satisfied, then one should repeat from step 1.
IV.OLM SYSTEM DESIGN FOR THE SECONDARY LOOP SYSTEM
In this section, we apply the ISFA method to the critical components in the secondary loop of a nuclear power plant embedded in a NHES. We constructed the component and functional models and created the BRs and FFLs required by ISFA for fault simulation. Finally, we used a subsystem of the secondary loop system to verify our method. Figure 5 provides a system represen- tation of the secondary loop.
IV.A.Component and Functional Models
A secondary loop of a nuclear power plant comprises several crucial HW and SW components. The HW com- ponents include a steam generator, turbine, condenser, pump, and various pipes and sensors. The steam genera- tor transfers heat from the primary loop to the water of
the secondary loop; the steam turbine extracts thermal energy from a pressurized steam and uses thermal energy to produce electricity; the valves, such as turbine control valves, TBVs, etc., are used to control steam and liquid flows. Important SW components include a controller for performing valve control. Other components, while important, are not discussed in this analysis.
The corresponding component model for ISFA is displayed in Fig. 6, in which HW and SW components are described separately. Four types of flows are mod- eled in the CFG. These flows are identified by different colors. The interoperations between HW and SW com- ponents are represented by the concept of interface. In Fig. 6, five interfaces are declared to connect the valve control program to the actual valves in the physical world.
IV.B.Behavioral Rules and Functional Failure Logics
The BRs and FFLs of HW/SW components in the secondary loop are obtained through qualitative phy- sical models and component requirements. For exam- ple, the function of a heat exchanger is to exchange thermal energy between steam and water. The input of the heat exchanger is the dry saturated vapor that  should be measured by flow rate, temperature, and pressure. In  the nominal state,  the  mass of the input  to the exchanger should be equal to the mass of the output, and the temperature and pressure of the output liquid should be equal to their nominal (designed)
Fig. 5. System representation of the secondary loop.
Fig. 6.  Component model of the secondary loop system.
values. Otherwise, the heat exchanger would be in a faulty mode. As another example, a valve’s function is to control the flow of steam or liquid. The parameters  of its inputs and outputs should be the flow rate, temperature, and pressure.  Table  III  lists  the  BRs and FFLs defined for the TBV and the IHX components.
In Table III, the constraints and relations between inputs and outputs of critical components (TBV and IHX) are listed. For the TBV, the behaviors  under  three modes (nominal_on, nominal_off, and  inner leak) are detailed. In the inner leak mode, two con- stants “INNER_LEAKAGE_FLOWRATE” and “INNER_LEAKAGE_PRESSURE” are utilized to approximate the effects of the leakage rate and pres- sure. These constants can be assigned to a concrete number or range in fault simulation. Similar rules are applied to the expressions of BRs of IHX.
IV.C.Method Verification
In this section, we will use the turbine bypass subsystem, a thermal energy storage (TES) model in small modular reactors (SMRs), to verify the correct- ness and effectiveness of our method. In the process of verification, we will compare the  simulation  results  with results  obtained  from  an  experimental  facility that consists of a hardware-in-the-loop (HIL) system emulating the TES system and  the  implementation  of the OLM system. The turbine bypass steam flow,
which is the input  of  the  HIL  system,  is  obtained  from a TBV duty schedule. In the experiment, three  types of scenarios were designed and simulated, includ- ing nominal operation, single-fault occurrence, and double-fault occurrence. Meanwhile, these  scenarios were executed on the HIL system. Finally, the results from both environments were compared and analyzed. The structure of the turbine bypass subsystem is shown  in Fig. 7.
In Fig. 7, the auxiliary control valve (ACV) main- tains the IHX water level. This valve operates on a three-element controller based on the level of the IHX and the difference in mass flow rates into and  out  of the IHX  where  G1  and  G2  are  error  weighting gains.  The   control   signal    of    the    ACV SignalACV ¼ G1E1 þ G2E2, where  E1 ¼ Level — LevelRef  and  E2 ¼ m_ bypass — m_ ACV.  In  these  equations, Level is the water level in the IHX, and LevelRef is the setpoint of the water level controller. The parameters m_ bypass  and  m_ ACV  are  the  flow  rates  at  the  TBV  and ACV, respectively. The pressure relief valve (PRV) is installed to mitigate pressure increases. A detailed list of the critical components in the turbine bypass sys- tem is listed in Table IV.
Based on the structure of the TES system, three experiments are designed. In each experiment, the scenarios stemming from nominal conditions and the injection of single and double faults will be studied by both the simulation and the HIL system. The simula- tion process will output the evaluations of all the
TABLE III
Examples of BRs and FFLs for Critical Components*
Fig. 7. Structure of the turbine bypass subsystem.20
TABLE IV
Critical Components in the Turbine Bypass Subsystem*
signals in the TES system and the results that demon- strate which scenario pairs can be identified. These results will be compared with the outputs  sampled  from the HIL system. The experiments designed are detailed as follows:
1.experiment 1—initial state: TBV, fully opened; PRV, fully closed; ACV, fully closed; tank: water_level equals to the set_point
2.
experiment 2—initial state: TBV, fully closed; PRV, fully closed; ACV, fully closed; tank, water_level equals to the set_point
3.experiment 3—initial state: TBV, fully opened; PRV, fully opened; ACV, fully closed; tank, water_level equals to the set_point
Table V shows a portion of the evaluations  gath- ered from the simulation for experiment 1. According
TABLE V
A Portion of the Simulation and Evaluation Results of Experiment 1*
to Table V, the signals “ACV.in_liquid.flowrate” and “ACV.in_liquid.pressure” are more efficient at making the distinction between  the  scenarios  “single  fault: pipe3 leakage” and “all nominal.” Meanwhile, the  sig-  nal “TBV.in_liquid.pressure” is not able to distinguish between the scenarios “single fault: pipe3 leakage” and “all nominal.” The values between 0 and 1, such  as 0.0477 and 0.0182, denote that the simulation is unable  to confirm that the current signal  is  able  to  identify  said scenario pair. The data sampled from the HIL  system are shown in Fig. 8.
In the experiments executed on the HIL system, we waited 300 s for the system to become stable. Then, a  fault was injected at 301 s. As depicted in Fig. 8f, a “Pipe3 Leakage” fault was injected that  changed  the  valve position from 0 to 100% (an extra valve was installed at Pipe3 for injecting the leakage fault). The readings of the ACV’s input and output flowmeters dropped very quickly. Meanwhile, the pressure sampled from the input of the ACV decreased as  well.  By  contrast, the flow rate and pressure through  the  TBV were not impacted. This result is consistent with the evaluation in Table V.Table VI provides a portion of the results associated with determining whether scenario pairs are identifiable as assessed through ISFA simulation. In Table VI, the cells marked as  “D” indicate that there is a signal that  can distinguish the scenarios of the corresponding row and column titles. In contrast, the cells marked as “C” mean that there is not a signal that can identify the corresponding scenarios. Meanwhile, the mark “U” indi- cates that the identifiability of related scenarios cannot  be confirmed currently. In total, 83 scenarios with corresponding 3403 scenario pairs were analyzed for experiment 1. The summary  of  the  experiment  is shown in Table VIII.
Table VII provides a portion of the results asso-
ciated with the ability to distinguish scenarios in a scenario pair as assessed through HIL simulation. The marks in each cell have  the  same  meaning  as  in  Table VI. Because of the risk of HW damage, some analyzed scenarios are ignored in the experiments on the HIL system. In sum, there are 47 scenarios exe- cuted with  1081  available  scenario  pairs.   Again, the  summary  of   the   experiment   is   shown   in Table VIII.
Fig. 8. Signals sampled under the scenario of the single-fault “Pipe3 Leakage.” TBV FM 1: TBV input flow meter; TBV FM 2: TBV output flow meter; TBV PS 1: TBV input flow pressure; TBV PS 2: TBV output flow pressure; ACV FM 1: ACV input flow meter; ACV FM 2: ACV output flow meter; ACV PS 1: ACV input flow pressure; ACV PS 2: ACV output flow pressure; PRV FM 1: PRV input flow meter; PRV FM 2: PRV output flow meter; PRV PS 1: PRV input flow pressure; PRV PS 2: PRV output flow pressure.
As seen in Table VIII, the simulation analyzed 3403 scenario pairs, in which 1836 scenario pairs were labeled as identifiable “D,” 177 pairs were labeled as unidentifi- able “C,” and 1390 pairs were labeled as uncertain “U.” Meanwhile, the HIL system verified that there are 1052 identifiable scenario pairs and 29 unidentifiable. By com- paring the results from the simulation and the HIL sys- tem, we proved that all the confirmed predictions (identifiable and unidentifiable scenario pairs) were con- sistent with the results collected from the HIL system, except the ones we were not able to execute on the HIL system.
As a result, the experiments verified that the information provided by the fault analysis method is correct and valuable for designing the OLM system. This method is helpful for signal selection and evaluation of the OLM system design when develop- ing a new type of system, even without detailed information describing components and modules. In  the future, with the development of components and modules in the system under analysis, more informa- tion (such as the precise range and scale of input flow rate and pressure) can be added to analytical models that can consequently decrease the number of
uncertain results stemming from the fault simulation. Also, combining the proposed method with mathema- tical models can improve the accuracy of fault detec- tion and diagnosis of the OLM system.
V.CONCLUSION
In this paper, a methodology associated with fault analysis was introduced to design an OLM system. To improve the reliability of a secondary loop system embedded in a NHES, the methodology was defined including the acceptance  criteria  that  determine  whether the OLM system meets  requirements  set  by  the developer, the construction of models required to perform fault simulation, the simulation process asso- ciated with fault injection criteria, the method of signal evaluation, and the procedure of optimization for the OLM system design. In this research, the fault propa- gation analysis was accomplished by applying ISFA to the secondary loop of a nuclear power plant, which included the investigation of qualitative physical mod- els, the creation of ISFA models of system components and functions, the definition of the BRs and FFLs, and
TABLE VI
A Portion of the Results Associated with Determining Whether Scenario Pairs Are Distinguishable in Experiment 1 as Assessed Through ISFA Fault Simulation*
TABLE VII
A Portion of the Results Associated with Determining Whether Scenario Pairs Are Distinguishable in Experiment 1 as Assessed Through HIL Simulation*
TABLE VIII
Summary of the Comparison Between the Results of the Simulation and the HIL System
the execution of iterative fault simulations using a SMT-based solver.
In the future, a database of identifiable faults and corresponding signals will be established to include information for online fault diagnosis.  A  prototype  of the OLM system for the secondary loop will be imple- mented by applying the proposed method to the sys-  tem’s design.
Acknowledgment
This work was funded by the Idaho National Laboratory Directed Research and Development Program under U.S. Department of Energy Idaho Operations Office contract DE-AC07-05ID14517.
