<title>IRDFF-II: A New Neutron Metrology Library</title>
<Affiliation>1.NAPC–Nuclear Data Section, International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, Austria
2.Sandia National Laboratories (SNL), Radiation Eﬀects Science Center, Albuquerque, NM, USA
3.Karlsruhe Institute for Technology (KIT), Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany 4.Paciﬁc Northwest  National  Laboratory  (PNNL),  Richland,  WA,  USA 5.Institute of Physics and Power Engineering (IPPE), Obninsk, Russia 6.Agencia  de  Energ´ıa  Nuclear  y  Tecnolog´ıas  de  Avanzada,  La  Habana,  Cuba 7.V.G. Khlopin Radium Institute, Saint Petersburg, Russia
8.DER/CEA  –  Centre  d’e´tudes  nucle´aires  de  Cadarache,  St.  Paul  Lez  Durance,  France
9.Kahler Nuclear Data Services LLC, Indialantic, FL, USA
10.Japan Atomic Energy Agency, Tokai-mura, Naka-gun, Ibaraki-ken, Japan
11.Research  Centre  Rˇeˇz  Ltd,  Husinec-Rˇeˇz,  Czech  Republic
12.Nuclear  Physics  Institute,  Czech  Academy  of  Sciences,  Rˇeˇz,  Czech  Republic
13.SCK  CEN,  Mol, Belgium
14.National Institute for Quantum Radiological Science and Technology, Rokkasho-mura, Kamikita-gun, Aomori-ken, Japan
15.Contractor, NAPC–Nuclear Data Section, International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, Austria
16.Joˇzef  Stefan  Institute,  Ljubljana,  Slovenia
17.Nuclear  Physics  Institute,  Academy  of  Sciences  of  the  Czech  Republic,  Rˇeˇz,  Czech  Republic
18.Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory   (LANL),   Los   Alamos,   NM,   USA 19Institute for Integrated Radiation and Nuclear Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan </Affiliation>
<author>A. Trkov,1 P.J. Griﬃn,2 S.P. Simakov,3 L.R. Greenwood,4 K.I. Zolotarev,5 R. Capote,1, ∗ D.L. Aldama,6 V. Chechev ,7
C. Destouches,8 A.C. Kahler,9 C. Konno,10 M. Koˇsta´l,11 M. Majerle,12 E. Malambu,13 M. Ohta,14 V.G. Pronyaev,15
V. Radulovi´c,16 S. Sato,14 M. Schulc,11 E. Sˇimeˇckov´a,17 I. Vavtar,16 J. Wagemans,13 M. White,18 and H. Yashima19</author>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>NUCLEAR DATA SHEETS</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier Inc.</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nds.2019.12.001 </DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nds.2019.12.001 </URL>
High quality nuclear data is the most fundamental underpinning for all neutron metrology applica- tions. This paper describes the release of version II of the International Reactor Dosimetry and Fusion File (IRDFF-II) that contains a consistent set of nuclear data for ﬁssion and fusion neutron metrology applications up to 60 MeV neutron energy. The library is intended to support: a) applications in research reactors; b) safety and regulatory applications in the nuclear power generation in commer- cial ﬁssion reactors; and c) material damage studies in support of the research and development of advanced fusion concepts. The paper describes the contents of the library, documents the thorough veriﬁcation process used in its preparation, and provides an extensive set of validation data gathered from a wide range of neutron benchmark ﬁelds. The new IRDFF-II library includes 119 metrology reactions, four cover material reactions to support self-shielding corrections, ﬁve metrology metrics used by the dosimetry community, and cumulative ﬁssion products yields for seven ﬁssion products in three diﬀerent neutron energy regions. In support of characterizing the measurement of the residual nuclei from the dosimetry reactions and the ﬁssion product decay modes, the present document lists the recommended decay data, particle emission energies and probabilities for 68 activation products.  It also includes neutron spectral characterization data for 29 neutron benchmark ﬁelds for the validation of the library contents. Additional six reference ﬁelds were assessed (four from plutonium critical assemblies, two measured ﬁelds for thermal-neutron induced ﬁssion on 233U and 239Pu targets) but not used for validation due to systematic discrepancies in C/E reaction rate values or lack of reaction-rate experimental data. Another ten analytical functions are included that can be useful for calculating average cross sections, average energy, thermal spectrum average cross sections and resonance integrals. The IRDFF-II library and comprehensive documentation is available online at www-nds.iaea.org/IRDFF/. Evaluated cross sections can be compared with experimental data and other evaluations at www-nds.iaea.org/exfor/endf.htm. The new library is expected to become the international reference in neutron metrology for multiple applications.I.INTRODUCTION
High quality nuclear data are the most fundamental quantities underpinning all neutron metrology applica- tions. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Nuclear Data Section (NDS), through several research projects, sponsored an international collaboration to pro- vide a consensus for the recommended evaluated nuclear data for such purposes. This new library, called version II of the International Reactor Dosimetry and Fusion File (IRDFF-II), has undergone an exhaustive  veriﬁcation and validation process and is now being released to the metrology community. It supersedes the previous versions IRDF-2002 [1] and IRDFF-v1.05 [2, 3]. This paper de- scribes the content of the library and documents the thor- ough veriﬁcation process used in its preparation. It also provides an extensive set of validation data for the li- brary using data gathered from a wide range of neutron benchmark ﬁelds.
Well-validated nuclear data evaluation techniques are needed to produce a modern nuclear data evaluated li- brary like IRDFF-II. An overview of nuclear data evalua- tion methodology can be found in Ref. [4]; recent progress has been reviewed in Refs. [5–7]. Nowadays the gener- alized least-square method is the most common evalua-
tion method, e.g., see [8–12]. A similar least-squares ap- proach [13–15] that is based on Pad´e approximants [16–
18] has also been extensively employed by K.I. Zolotarev to produce many of the new dosimetry evaluations for the IRDFF-II library.
Stochastic (Monte Carlo) evaluation methods have been also investigated by several researchers in the nu-
clear data ﬁeld, e.g., see BFMC [19], UMC-B [20], UMC- G [21, 22], and BMC [23] methods. These Bayesian ap-
proaches enable simultaneous consideration of both ex- perimental data and model-calculated values  as  well as
corresponding experimental and modeling correlations, and have been applied to large amounts of data (e.g., see Refs. [24, 25]).
The development of the IRDFF-II dosimetry library has greatly beneﬁted from the availability of the compre- hensive TENDL libraries [25, 26]1, especially to extend the energy range of the existing evaluations for neutron- induced reactions on medium- and heavy-mass targets.
A general purpose neutron evaluated nuclear data ﬁle (ENDF) uses the evaluation techniques brieﬂy discussed
above to combine model calculations with experimental data to address the assembly of a complete and consis- tent set of neutron-induced reactions for a given target isotope. In this process an evaluator may need to make some compromises in the recommended nuclear data in order to  satisfy  consistency  constraints  on  the nuclear
data between diﬀerent reaction channels, e.g., the total cross  section  must be exactly equal to  the  sum  of  the
various reaction channel cross sections, while matching as much as possible the available experimental data.
In contrast to a general nuclear data evaluation, an entry in a metrology library is reaction-speciﬁc. The eval- uation can start from a nuclear model calculation, but relies more heavily on experimental data to obtain recom- mended energy-dependent cross sections, including full covariance information for that particular reaction chan- nel so that an accurate assessment of the uncertainty in reaction rates can be made for a given neutron spectrum ﬁeld. Whereas information on the consistency of the evalu- ated data with integral measurements gathered in various reference neutron ﬁelds is not directly taken into account in the actual nuclear data evaluation process, it does inﬂu- ence the decisions to declare a reaction as “recommended” for use in metrology applications.
The evaluation of single reaction channels (like for the dosimetry cross section evaluations) is simpler than eval- uation of all reaction channels for a general-purpose eval- uated ﬁle. It is often the case that general-purpose evalu- ations adopt cross sections from a dosimetry library as a starting point. The converse is true when a dosimetry re- action cross section needs to be extended for completeness into an energy  region,  where  measured  data  are  scarce or absent altogether. In IRDFF-II there are such cases, where cross sections were taken from the TENDL library, which were based purely on nuclear model calculations.
This paper presents a consistent set of nuclear data intended for neutron metrology that support: a) applica- tions in research reactors; b) safety and regulatory appli- cations in the nuclear power generation in commercial ﬁs- sion reactors; and c) material damage studies in research and development of advanced fusion concepts.
II.OVERVIEW OF THE IRDFF-II LIBRARY
The new IRDFF-II library addresses incident neutron energies from 0 to 60 MeV. The library entries, enumer- ated in Table 1, include 119 metrology reactions, four cover cross sections used to support shielding corrections, ﬁve metrology metrics used by the dosimetry community, seven cumulative ﬁssion products yields and correspond- ing decay data. In support of characterizing the measure- ment of the residual nuclei from the dosimetry reactions and the ﬁssion product decay modes, the library includes decay data, gamma and beta particle emission energies and probabilities for 68 residual nuclei. The library also includes neutron spectral characterization data for 45 neu- tron benchmark ﬁelds that were used to support the vali- dation of the library contents. The following Secs. discuss these entries of the dosimetry library in more detail.
A.
Neutron Metrology Reactions
There are several requirements for a given reaction to be accepted for use in metrology applications and included in the IRDFF-II library. These requirements include:
1.The existence of a high-ﬁdelity nuclear data evalu- ation for the reaction channel that is documented and stored in the library;
2.A residual particle from the reaction that is measur- able with a technique in use at multiple laboratories, e.g., gamma activation analysis, beta spectroscopy,
mass spectrometry;
3.The existence of uncertainty data for the cross sec- tion that must come directly from the cross section evaluation process, captured in the form of a covari- ance matrix, and stored in the library;
4.A reaction that is of interest to the commercial or research reactor community or to the fusion commu- nity (including metrology at high energy accelera- tors used to support fusion material damage studies,
e.g., IFMIF [27]);
5.Evidence that the nuclear data evaluation took into consideration the available body of experimental data.
Table 1 summarizes the 119  metrology  reactions  that meet these requirements and are included in the IRDFF-II library. The list includes all of the reactions that were present in the earlier IRDF-2002 [1] and IRDFF v1.05 [2, 3] libraries. The diﬀerences between library versions are indicated: column 8 indicates whether IRDFF-v1.05 was updated (new) or not (old) compared to IRDF-2002. Likewise, column 9 indicates whether IRDFF-II was updated compared to IRDFF-v1.05. As seen from the table, several of the  dosimetry  reactions in the IRDFF-II were  updated  and  many  reactions were added, such as 27Al(n,2n)26gAl, 28Si(n,p)28Al, 29Si(n,X)28Al, 113In(n,γ)114mIn, 238U(n,2n)237U, and
209Bi(n,xn)(210−x)Bi. The extensions were introduced to support specialized dosimetry applications.
High resolution atomic mass spectroscopy is often used to measure alpha production in  materials  such  as  10B  and 6Li. Measured alpha particles can originate from reactions other than the (n,α) channel, hence  the  up-  dated  IRDFF-II   library  also   includes   reactions   for the
total alpha production cross section, i.e., 10B(n,X)4He and  6Li(n,X)4He  reactions.   Since  boron   and lithium
are often used with a variety of enrichments in dosime- try applications, nuclear data for the 11B(n,X)4He and 7Li(n,X)4He reactions, as well as the composite elemental- based natB(n,X)4He and natLi(n,X)4He reactions, are in- cluded in the library. The availability of the separate 11B and 7Li alpha-production cross sections enables users to apply the IRDFF-II cross sections to variable enrichment dosimeters that might be employed at various metrology laboratories.
Previous input from users [28] of the IRDFF-1.05 li- brary [2, 3], which was extended to address the energy
range up to 60 MeV, indicated that natural elemental dosimeters, rather than isotopic ones, were usually used in dosimetry applications. Since, at the higher incident neutron energies on natural elemental dosimeters, sev- eral contributing reaction channels can produce the same
residual nucleus that is used as a dosimetry monitor, the IRDFF-II library has also been extended to explicitly address the composite reactions that produce commonly used residual nuclei.
TABLE 1: IRDFF-II nuclear data contents and evaluation sources. (r) denotes renormalization. Major sources of data are K.I. Zolotarev evaluations and EAF-2010 [29], JENDL-4 [30], TENDL [25, 26], ENDF/B-VIII.0 [31], and JEFF-3.3 [32] libraries.These composite reactions include: natMg(n,X)27Na, natSi(n,X)28Al, natS(n,X)32P, natTi(n,X)45Ti, natTi(n,X)46Sc,  natTi(n,X)47Sc,  natTi(n,X)48Sc, natCr(n,X)51Cr, natFe(n,X)53Fe, natFe(n,X)51Cr, natFe(n,X)54Mn, natFe(n,X)56Mn, natNi(n,X)57Ni, natNi(n,X)58Co, natNi(n,X)60Co, natCu(n,X)60Co, natCu(n,X)62Cu, natCu(n,X)64Cu, natZn(n,X)64Cu, natZn(n,X)67Cu, natZr(n,X)89Zr, natMo(n,X)92mNb, and natIn(n,X)114mIn.
In the new IRDFF-II library the energy range was ex-
tended to consistently address incident neutron energies up to 60 MeV, so most of the library cross sections are a composite of separate existing nuclear data evaluations. Columns 5, 6, and 7 of Table 1 provide information on the source of the recommended nuclear data evaluations in the applicable incident neutron energy ranges.
Since clear documentation of the consistency of nuclear data used in an evaluation is important in the use of
these data in metrology applications, Column 6 of Table 1 points to supplemental documentation for many of the entries in the IRDFF-II library.
B.Reactions on Cover Materials
Activation dosimeters can be used to characterize the neutron spectra through spectrum unfolding [45] or the least-squares-based spectrum adjustment approaches [46]. Frequently they are shielded with cover materials to change the eﬀective threshold energy and to move a dosimeters sensitivity from the thermal into the epither- mal neutron energy region. Some commonly used ap- proaches to model the eﬀective cover material ﬂux at- tenuation is to apply exponential attenuation, based on the energy-dependence of the total cross section of the cover material and the thickness of cover used [45]. Other approaches [47] to the cover corrections use a more rig- orous treatment based on radiation transport models of
the neutron scattering within the cover. In order to sup- port this variety of approaches to the treatment of the cover material, the IRDFF-II library provides the total, elastic and absorption cross sections for commonly used cover materials. Total, elastic, capture (and ﬁssion) cross sections are also provided for all monitor materials that exhibit resonance structure so that self-shielding correc- tions can be made, if needed. Table 1 lists the four cover materials that are addressed within the library.
C.Dosimetry Metrics
Various radiation dosimetry metrics are employed in the interpretation of radiation test results that supports various application areas. A dosimetry metric is the result of folding a calculated dosimetry-related energy- dependent response function with the incident neutron energy-dependent ﬂuence. These energy-dependent re- sponse functions are treated within the IRDFF-II library in a manner similar to reaction-dependent cross sections. The dosimetry metrics used by the radiation eﬀects com- munity  have  been  demonstrated  to  provide  a  correla-
tion between the calculated quantity and a speciﬁc dam- age/failure mode of interest to an application area, i.e., iron embrittlement, that can result in failure of a criti-
cal weld in a reactor pressure vessel or gain degradation in a silicon bipolar junction transistor (BJT). Monitor dosimetry measurements used during the radiation test- ing are frequently combined with knowledge of the neu- tron spectrum during the irradiation to directly report  the radiation dosimetry metrics of interest in the applica- tion. Since the IRDFF-II library is intended to support dosimetry applications for the ﬁssion and fusion commu- nities, we have elected to include, for reference purposes, the primary radiation dosimetry metrics of interest to this community – but to restrict this inclusion to just those dosimetry metrics that have been endorsed by a national nuclear regulator and/or by an international standards or- ganization. Table 1 lists the ﬁve dosimetry metrics, called Damage cross sections, that are included in the IRDFF-II library.
The primary dosimetry metric of interest to the com- mercial light water reactor (LWR) community is the displacement-per-atom (dpa) in iron. This metric is used to assess the embrittlement of structural materials near the critical structural areas, such  as  the  beltline  weld for the pressure vessel wall, where any loss of mechan- ical strength could result in safety concerns. The neu- tron energy-dependence of the  iron  dpa  metric  is  set by the appropriate regulatory body for the nuclear re- actor, thus, there are diﬀerent iron dpa dosimetry metrics used by the community. The IRDFF-II contains the iron dpa damage metric from ASTM E693-17 Standard Prac- tice for Characterizing Neutron Exposures in Iron and Low Alloy Steels in Terms of Displacement Per Atom (DPA) [44]. This damage metric was calculated by look- ing at the primary  Frenkel  pair  production  from  each of the four naturally occurring iron isotopes and apply- ing the Norgett-Robinson-Torrens (NRT) damage parti- tion function [48]. The IRDFF-II library also contains
the JEFF-3.3 library [32] NRT-based iron damage metric and the legacy iron damage metric from the IRDF-2002 library.
In addition to the iron dpa metric, the radiation dam- age to electronics community has silicon and GaAs dis- placement damage standards deﬁned in ASTM E722-14 Standard Practice for Characterizing Neutron Fluence Spectra in Terms of an Equivalent Monoenergetic Neu- tron Fluence for Radiation-Hardness Testing of Electron- ics [43]. The same E722 silicon response functions are also supported in ASTM E1855-15 Standard Test Method for use of 2N2222A Silicon Bipolar Transistors and Neu- tron Spectrum Sensors and Displacement Damage Moni- tors [49].
D.Nuclear Decay Data
The recommended source of nuclear decay data  for the dosimetry community is the series of monographs by the Bureau International des Poids et Mesures (BIPM). This eight volume BIPM-5 Table of Radionuclides rep- resents an international collaboration that captures pri- mary recommended nuclear data for most reactions of interest to the dosimetry community. Updates to the BIPM-5 are coordinated though the Decay Data Eval- uation Project (DDEP) [50] working group led by the Laboratoire National de Metrologie et d’Essais Labora- toire National Henri Becquerel (LNE-LNHB). The recom- mended nuclear data are periodically updated in separate volumes of the BIPM-5 and the ongoing recommended values are kept up to  date  at the  DDEP  website.  Not all nuclides are addressed within the DDEP library. For nuclides that are not present, the recommended values are taken from the ENSDF “ADOPTED” dataset [51]2. While the DDEP/BIPM-5 represents an international con- sensus on the current recommended decay data to be used for metrology applications, it is critical in dosimetry appli- cations that all nuclear data used in a given application be consistent. This means that it is critical that the nuclear decay data be consistent with the associated cross section data. An evaluator of nuclear reaction cross section data would normally use values that correspond to the BIPM- 5 data at the time of the  evaluation  but these  values may not necessarily correspond to the BIPM-5 recom- mended values seen by a reader at a later time when the cross sections are being used in a metrology application. There are also cases where the evaluator, after consulting with members of the DDEP community, elected to weigh underlying measurements for the DDEP evaluation in a diﬀerent way and ended up with slightly diﬀerent decay data. Thus, in order to assist the users of the IRDFF-II cross sections, the corresponding nuclear decay data that are consistent with the recommended cross sections are documented within the IRDFF-II library ﬁles. Details are given in Sec. IV C.
E.Atomic Mass Data
Metrology applications also require data on the elemen- tal and isotopic mass used for the target materials. The most common metrological application for these data is the determination of the number of target atoms in an activation foil of a given mass.
1.Elemental
The recommended elemental atomic weights are taken from the International Union of Pure and Applied Chem- istry (IUPAC) Commission on Isotopic Abundances and Atomic Weights (CIAAW) [54]. These data represents re- visions made by the CIAAW in 2017 and published in the Pure and Applied Chemistry.
2.Isotopic
The recommended atomic weights for individual iso- topes are taken from the recommendations of the Atomic Mass Data Center and are represented by the Atomic Mass evaluation 2016 (AME2016) [55]. It is noted that geological materials are known for which the element has an isotopic composition that is outside the uncertainties cited here for normal materials. We should also note that many dosimetry applications may use enriched or depleted materials that are the result of isotopic separation tech- niques, in which case the user has to resort to the isotopic data that are provided.
F.Natural Abundance Data
The natural isotopic abundance data are also required in order to convert the densities of target materials into the number densities of the constituting isotopes. The recommended natural abundance data come from the CIAAW recommendations that refer to the 2016 IUPAC Technical Report [56]. These values represent the best measurement of isotopic abundances from a single terres- trial source.
Some of the dosimetry reactions addressed in the IRDFF-II are for natural materials and include the pro- duction of a residual isotope from all contributing reac- tions. The abundance data used in the compilation of these multi-reaction combinations are given in Table 6 of Sec. IV A.
G.Fission Product Yields
Since many important dosimetry metrics are for ﬁs- sion reactions, it is also important the ﬁssion yields used to support the dosimetry measurements be clearly docu- mented. Thus, the recommended nuclear data contained in the IRDFF-II library include the cumulative ﬁssion
TABLE 2. IRDFF-II thermal-neutron-induced ﬁssion yields (neutron energy En = 0.0253 eV).yields for all the relevant ﬁssion products used for metrol- ogy applications which are listed in Tables 2, 3, and 4 in the three generic incident energy regions.
For the measurements of time-integrated ﬂuence rates with ﬁssion products up to periods of about six weeks, the most common measured ﬁssion product used for ﬁssion research reactor dosimetry applications is 140Ba (half-life of 12.7527 days). In order to avoid isotopic separation techniques, the 140Ba activity is often determined by di- rectly counting its daughter product, 140La (half-life of 1.6781 days). The independent ﬁssion yields are required to treat the transient equilibrium between the 140La and
140Ba.
Other ﬁssion products are commonly used to support reactor irradiations of diﬀerent periods [57]. The isotope 95Zr (half-life 64.032 days) is commonly used for shorter irradiation durations, up to 6 months while 103Ru (half-  life of 39.247 days) is used for irradiations up to 4 months. The isotope 144Ce (half-life 284.91 days) is also a com- monly measured ﬁssion product in  reactor  applications and can  be used for irradiations periods of 2 to 3 years. The isotope 137Cs (half-life of 30.08 years) is used to sup- port reactor irradiations of 30 to 40 years. The 137Cs activity is often measured by counting the activity in its 137mBa decay product [58] (half-life of 2.552  minutes). The 106Ru ﬁssion product (half-life 371.8 days) is also often counted [58]. The transient equilibrium of its 106Rh
TABLE 3. IRDFF-II fast-neutron-induced ﬁssion yields (neu- tron energy En ≈ 400 − 500 keV).
TABLE 4. IRDFF-II 14 MeV neutron-induced ﬁssion yields (neutron energy En ≈ 14 MeV, fusion applications).
decay product (half-life of 30.07 seconds) with the 106Rh independent yield can be ignored for most applications. In summary, the relevant ﬁssion products currently ad- dressed in dosimetry-related standards applications in- clude the nine isotopes: 95Zr, 99Mo, 103Ru, 106Ru, 137Cs, 137mBa, 140Ba, 140La, and 144Ce, but cumulative ﬁssion yields are needed only for seven of them. The cumulative yields are used because they are generally known with a higher precision than the independent yields. However, care must be taken to ensure that the cumulative yields
reach equilibrium.
The typical cooling times that are necessary are listed below:
95Zr	The longest lived member of the chain is 95Y at 10.3 minutes. All the others are less than 1 minute. If we wait for 6 half- lives that would be 1 hour.
99Mo	Longest half-life has 99mNb at 2.6 m, re- quiring cooling time of about 15 minutes.
evaluated data validated using data gathered from DT fusion neutron sources.
Pending results from ongoing international collabora- tion on updating the ﬁssion product yields, the IRDFF-II library has adopted a set of recommended ﬁssion yields. These recommended ﬁssion yields are taken from the JEFF-3.3 library, when available, because they represent the most recent thoroughly evaluated data set. In the
103
Ru -
103
Tc Half-life 54 s,
103
Mo half life 1.13 m, re-
case of the 14 MeV ﬁssion yields for 237Np, 239Pu and
241Am, the corresponding JEFF-3.3 data are not avail-
quiring cooling time of about 13 minutes.
106Ru - 106Tc Half-life 36 s, requiring cooling time of about 3.6 minutes.
137Cs - 137Xe Half-life 3.82 m, requiring cooling time of about 23 minutes.
140Ba - 140Cs Half-life 1.06 m, requiring cooling time of about 6 minutes.
144Ce - 144La Half-life 40.7 s, requiring cooling time of about 4.1 minutes.
It should also be noted that several radionuclides of these chains have Kr or Xe precursors. This means that part or all of the chain yield can be lost as Kr or Xe gas unless the ﬁssionable material is irradiated in a gas tight container. This is a very well-known eﬀect and actinides are commonly sealed in quartz to avoid losing any Kr or Xe, which would lead to a low reading of the cumulative ﬁssion product.
Some activities, such as nonproliferation monitoring [59, 60], have a wider range of application-speciﬁc ﬁssion yield products that are monitored. This application area has independently standardized the underlying ﬁssion prod- ucts yields to be used, hence this application area is not addressed by these IRDFF-II ﬁssion-yield recommended values.
Work continues in reﬁning the recommended yields and the treatment of their dependence on the energy of the incident neutron. There is an ongoing international col- laboration, sponsored through an IAEA coordinated re- search project (CRP) (project number F42007 approved 19 December 2018), to provide recommended ﬁssion yields and to address recommended approaches for handling the energy-dependence of the ﬁssion yields. The results of this CRP will not be ready in time for inclusion in the present release of IRDFF-II.
For present dosimetry applications, pending more in- vestigation and validation of the energy-dependent mod- eling, the recommendation is to map the application need into one of the three generic energy regions, traditionally used in the commonly available nuclear data libraries: thermal, fast, and 14 MeV. The ﬁssion yields are not ex- pected to have resonance structure and they cannot be resolved experimentally, so the proposed division seems reasonable. The thermal energy generally equates to eval- uated data for 0.0253 eV incident neutrons. The fast en- ergy equates to evaluated data gathered using a range of broad-spectrum fast ﬁssion spectra. Within the commonly available tabulated nuclear data ﬁles, the fast region is characterized with a reference energy of 500 keV in the ENDF/B-VIII.0 library and with an energy of 400 keV  in the JEFF-3.3 library. The 14 MeV energy equates to
able, so the recommended yields are adopted from the ENDF/B-VIII.0 library.
H.Neutron Benchmark Fields
As part of the library evaluation and acceptance process for reactions accepted for inclusion within the IRDFF-II library, data validation was addressed using experimen- tal measurements in integral neutron benchmark ﬁelds. Such measurements are independent of the diﬀerential data (measured as a function of incident energy), used by the evaluators in conjunction with nuclear data models  to generate the recommended nuclear reaction cross sec- tion data ﬁles. Since these neutron benchmark ﬁelds are tied to the validation evidence for the IRDFF-II library, the decision was made to include the neutron spectral characterizations for these integral benchmark ﬁelds as part of the IRDFF-II package. Table 5 summarizes the  45 neutron ﬁelds that were considered in the IRDFF-II validation and provides brief descriptions of the selected 29 neutron benchmark ﬁelds. These benchmark ﬁelds are addressed in further detail in Secs. VII and VIII on sensi- tivity, data validation and data consistency in this paper. The IRDFF-II library provides recommended spectra for these neutron ﬁelds as well as for several other spectra
not selected as benchmarks, but useful in making data comparisons, e.g., a constant spectrum, a linear spectrum, and a 1/E spectrum in the region 0.5 eV < E < 20 MeV.
Maxwellian spectra corresponding to diﬀerent tempera- tures are also included that cover a range of temperatures (in the laboratory coordinate system) from  25  keV  to 60 keV, which are of interest for astrophysics. The spec- tra are part of the IRDFF-II distribution. Note that the spectra calculated with detailed computational models of
the experiments by the Monte Carlo technique (e.g., reac- tor spectra) are used as prior spectra in the least-squares ﬁt. The uncertainty in the prior spectrum, in addition to being a subjective evaluation at this time, includes  large
uncertainty contributors which make direct comparison with measured data very diﬃcult due to the large associ- ated uncertainties. The total uncertainty of the calculated
prior obviously includes the statistical uncertainty of the calculations, which usually is  less than  10 %, except in
the tails, where the spectrum approaches zero. The full spectrum covariance matrices from computational models being subjective and not available for all cases, the covari- ances in IRDFF-II only include the statistical component for cross-checking the uncertainties in the calculated re- action rates of monitor reactions with median energies close to the tails of the spectrum.
TABLE 5. List of IRDFF-II benchmark neutron ﬁelds. Note that “adhoc” MAT numbers have been assigned (unrelated to the charge of the decaying nucleus).
III.IRDFF-II FORMAT AND DATA VERIFICATION
In order to support the user community, the cross sec- tions in the IRDFF-II library are distributed in several
diﬀerent formats, described in the sections below. The baseline library is in the ENDF-6 format, where the full library data ﬁle contains several logical ﬁles for diﬀerent nuclides, identiﬁed by the so-called MAT numbers. Each nuclide ﬁle is further subdivided into subﬁles identiﬁed by
the MF numbers that designate the type of data and the MT numbers that designate the reaction type. A brief extract is given below for convenience. Full details are given in the ENDF-6 manual [61].
MAT Material/nuclide identiﬁer is a four-digit number that uniquely identiﬁes the target nuclide.
MF Data type identiﬁer:
1 General information. The ﬁrst section in this subﬁle is identiﬁed by MT=451 and contains evaluation description in plain text, including eigenvalues of the covarince matrices.
3 Cross sections and other parameters as a function of incident particle energy.
10 Cross sections for the excitation of discrete states, or radionuclide production cross sections.
33 Covariance data of the quantities in MF=3.  40 Covariance data for the quantities in MF=10.
MT Reaction type number (e.g., 16 (n,2n), 102 (n,γ),
103 (n,p), etc.). For full details see Appendix B of  the ENDF-6 Manual [61].
The derived libraries in other formats are  generated by processing baseline libraries in point-wise cross sec- tion representation with codes such as NJOY-2016 [62] or PREPRO [63]. At the request of the users, the recom- mended cross sections are also available in three column format (energy, cross section and the total uncertainty)  to be used as reference activation cross sections for rel- ative activation measurements3. If a user requires the cross sections at a diﬀerent temperature, the threshold reactions would be practically unaﬀected. Reaction cross sections with resonance structure might need additional processing with codes like NJOY or PREPRO.
Note that residual-production covariance matrices in ENDF subﬁle MF=40 that contain more than one prod- uct cannot be processed with the current version of NJOY [62]. This is applicable to many of the natural element evaluations in IRDFF-II. A way around this prob- lem is to split the evaluated ﬁle in such a way that only one product is present at a time, and process the partial ﬁles separately. Hopefully, an update to the processing code will be available soon that will support legitimate ENDF-6 format covariance representation.
A.ENDF-6 Format Point Cross Sections
The baseline library contains point cross sections at
293.6 K in ENDF-6 format representation that is well- documented and has the ﬂexibility to capture the highest
3 Note that a full uncertainty propagation of these cross sections for a broad spectrum requires the use of the complete covariance matrix, which is only given in ENDF-6 format.
ﬁdelity characterization of neutron cross sections, includ- ing the resonance region, as well as the associated covari- ance ﬁles. This format can also be used to capture the nuclear decay data and the neutron spectral characteri- zation data. The ENDF-6 ﬁle structure places reaction cross sections in MF=3 and production cross sections in MF=10. Both of these ﬁle types are used to capture the cross sections within the IRDFF-II library. The covari- ance data that correspond to data found in these sections are stored in MF=33 and MF=40, respectively. Radioac- tive decay data are given in MF=8. The ﬁle structure per- mits the inclusion of in-line documentation using MF=1, MT=451 entries.
B.ENDF-6 Format Neutron Spectra
Whereas the ENDF-6 ﬁle structure permits the en- ergy distributions of secondary particles to be  pre- sented in MF=5 and MF=6, this ﬁeld does not ﬁt the IRDFF-II characterization for the benchmark neutron spectra. These data appear in a separate IRDFF-II li- brary ﬁle in pseudo-ENDF format as MF=3, MT=261 sub-ﬁles. The spectra are diﬀerentiated by the MAT num- ber. The covariance information is stored in the corre- sponding ENDF subﬁles MF=33, MT=261. This is a non- standard use of the ENDF format, which uses MT=261 that is formally undeﬁned in the ENDF-6 manual [61]. Storing the spectra in this format is convenient because for many operations on the data and for generating the comparison plots the same software can be used as for the cross sections.
C.ENDF-6 Format 640 and 725 Group Representation
Whereas a point cross section format is best for cap- turing the physics-based structure behind the cross sec- tion representation, this format does not readily support post-processing of the cross sections and the extraction of spectrum-averaged cross sections, reaction rates from integral neutron ﬁelds, or many other relevant material dosimetry metrics. For these applications, a multigroup representation is generally used. An important considera- tion with multigroup representations is the energy group structure. Whereas few-group representation may be suf- ﬁcient for some applications, other applications require a ﬁne-group representation.
A common ﬁne-group structure that was found to be suﬃcient for capturing the energy-dependent shape of most responses relevant to the ﬁssion reactor community is the extended SAND-II group structure [45]. The ex- tension here represented an increase from  the  original 18 MeV SAND-II maximum energy up to 20 MeV. Thus, this 640-group energy group structure starts at 10−4 eV and goes up to 20 MeV. Since the IRDFF-II library goes up to 60 MeV, in this representation the IRDFF-II data are essentially truncated at 20 MeV and collapsed into the 640-group structure.
The IRDFF-II application addresses the needs of the fusion and low temperature material science communities as well as the ﬁssion reactor community, hence a second 725-group representation that extends up to 60 MeV is also used to characterize the data. The energy group structure for this 725-group representation is formed by:
starting at 10−5 eV and adding 45 groups to cover the energy range from 10−5 eV up to the 10−4 eV, where the 640-group SAND-II structure starts;
using the same 640-groups  between  10−4 eV  and 20 MeV;
adding 20 groups of 0.5 MeV width in energy to extend the range up to 30 MeV;
adding 10 groups of 1 MeV width in energy to fur- ther extend the range up to 40 MeV;
adding 10 groups of 2 MeV width in energy to fur- ther extend the range up to 60-MeV.
In this collapsing of the point cross sections to the 640 or 725 group structure, an energy-dependent weighting function can be used. The two most common weighting functions are:
1.A thermal Maxwellian shape in the thermal region, a 1/E shape in the reactor neutron slowing down region, a ﬁssion spectrum shape in the fast ﬁssion reactor region, and a fusion peak at high energies of the fusion blanket region. The GROUPR module of the NJOY-2012 code with the IWT=8 weighting function using the default weighting function shape parameters (thermal breakpoint of 0.1 eV, thermal temperature of 0.025 eV, ﬁssion breakpoint of 0.1 MeV, ﬁssion temperature of 1.4 MeV) can be used to collapse the data that appears in the ﬁle. The disadvantage of this weighting function is that it might not be representative of reactor spectra at epithermal energies and could even have a wrong gradient.
2.A ﬂat weighting across the energy bin. Given the ﬁne group nature of the two energy bin structures, this ﬂat weighting is more general at high energies and mostly suﬃcient at lower energies as well.
In the preparation of the IRDFF-II multigroup data the second option, ﬂat weighting, was used. This collaps- ing was performed with the GROUPIE module of the PREPRO-2018 data processing package [63]. The same procedures are applicable also to the IRDFF-II ﬁle of neutron spectra in ENDF-6 format.
D.MCNP ACE Format
The ACE (A Compact ENDF) format is a common data format that is used in continuous-energy neutron- photon Monte Carlo codes like MCNP [64] and SER- PENT [65]. The virtue of this format is that it can cap- ture the continuous energy nature of the underlying cross section without resorting to a multi-group representation. Since many ﬁssion and fusion community applications
use the MCNP code to model the neutron spectrum at locations of interest for dosimetry measurements, the in- clusion of this format increases the ﬁdelity supported by the application and makes it easy for the user to interface with the recommended IRDFF-II library.
E.Data Veriftcation
A critical step in the veriﬁcation of the formal correct- ness of the IRDFF-II library ﬁles was to ensure that the ENDF-6 format rules were obeyed. For this purpose, the ENDF Utility Codes were employed [66], namely:
CHECKR checks the syntax;
FIZCON checks the internal consistency of the data; PSYCHE does an in-depth checking, particularly re-
garding the covariance data.
In addition, the COVEIG code [67] was used to check for symmetry, large correlation coeﬃcients and negative eigenvalues in the covariance matrices.
The ability to process the ﬁles in ENDF-6 format was checked by running the PREPRO codes [63]. The follow- ing modules are applicable:
LINEAR	makes all cross sections linearly interpo- lable;
GROUPIE generates group-averaged cross sections; COMPLOT makes graphical comparison with other eval-
uated data ﬁles.
Finally, the NJOY code [62] was employed to prepare plots of the covariance matrices and to generate the IRDFF-II library in ACE format. Quality assurance pro- cedure INDC(SEC)-0107 [68] was employed to minimize the possibility of data processing errors when generating the ﬁles in ACE format.
IV.RECOMMENDED NUCLEAR DATA FOR NEUTRON METROLOGY
This Sec. provides a more in-depth examination of the various nuclear data components within the IRDFF-II library and provides details on the process used to arrive at the recommendations.
A.Atomic Mass and Isotopic Natural Abundance Data
The atomic weights for the target elements are given in Table 6 in atomic mass units. The reported uncertainties correspond to those for isotopes in the normal terrestrial materials. Column 2 of Table 6 gives the recommended natural abundance value for all targets in the IRDFF-II library. Column 3 of Table 6 shows the isotopic weights represented as the mass excess in energy units and Col- umn 4 gives the corresponding values in micro-atomic mass units, as quoted in the original publication [55].
TABLE 6. IRDFF-II isotopic abundances, nuclear and elemental mass data. Numbers in parentheses indicate the absolute uncertainties, e.g., 92.411(24) ≡ 92.411 ± 0.024.
TABLE 7. IRDFF-II recommended (recomm.) nuclear decay  data  for  pure  beta  emitters. (DD eval.) refers to the latest Chechev compilation at https://www- nds.iaea.org/IRDFFtest/RCM3/Chechev-RCM3.pdf. New DDEP evaluations undertaken within this project are highlighted in blue. Numbers in parentheses indicate the absolute uncertainties, e.g., 12.312(25) ≡ 12.312 ± 0.025.
Beta DataB.Dosimetry Cross Sections
The IRDFF-II recommended cross sections are chosen from available ENDF-6 [61] formatted point cross sections from diﬀerent sources as discussed below. Whereas some applications, such as radiation transport calculations, re- quire the use of a complete nuclear data evaluation that includes all potential reaction channels, the IRDFF-II neu- tron metrology library only requires the speciﬁcation of  a cross section for the channels used within the metrol- ogy application. However, unlike many applications, it requires a consistent uncertainty characterization for the cross section in the form of an energy-dependent covari- ance matrix. Because of the demanding requirements on neutron metrology cross sections and corresponding uncer- tainties, the recommended evaluations, rather than being taken from existing nuclear data evaluations, are often the result of a speciﬁcally funded metrology-related activity. Table 1 provides a list of the cross sections addressed within the IRDFF-II library and identiﬁes the source evaluations. Columns 8 of Table 1 also shows how the
IRDFF-v1.05 library diﬀers from the previous IRDF-2002. Note that “old” means no change in the data, symbol ”new” means the data were newly evaluated. Otherwise, Column 9 indicates how the current IRDFF-II compares with IRDFF-v1.05. Sometimes the recommended evalu- ation represents a combination where diﬀerent energy regions are derived from diﬀerent evaluated data sources. Column 6 provides reference to auxiliary documentation that describes the derivation of some of the recommended evaluations.
C.Nuclear Decay Data
This Sec. addresses the IRDFF-II nuclear decay data used in reaction evaluations for activation and ﬁssion products. Tables 7 (beta emitters) and 8 (gamma emit- ters) give the recommended half-lives and emission prob- abilities associated with the residual nuclei (activation products) for all of the library radionuclides according to the detected decay radiation. Those recommended values (recomm.) were used in reaction evaluations. It also shows the most recently evaluated gamma and beta decay data, namely the emission energies and emission probabilities for all of the residual nuclei associated with the reactions addressed within IRDFF-II.
Note that recommended data usually agree within un- certainties with the latest decay data evaluations (labelled DD eval. in Table  headers).  The only discrepant data at the three sigma level is the half-life of 24Na, users should exercise special care when using this radionuclide for dosimetry. The latest decay data evaluations have been compiled into associated IRDFF-II decay data ﬁle that is released together with the IRDFF-II neutron metrology library.
TABLE 8: IRDFF-II recommended nuclear decay data content for gamma emitters. (DD eval.) refers to the latest Chechev compilation at https://www-nds.iaea.org/IRDFFtest/RCM3/Chechev-RCM3.pdf. (*) indicates data taken from ENSDF. New DDEP evaluations undertaken within this project are highlighted in blue. Numbers in parentheses indicate the absolute uncertainties, e.g., 109.734(14) ≡ 109.734 ± 0.014.
TABLE 8: (continued). IRDFF-II recommended nuclear decay data content for gamma emitters. (DD eval.) refers  to  the latest Chechev compilation at https://www-nds.iaea.org/IRDFFtest/RCM3/Chechev-RCM3.pdf. (*) indicates data taken from ENSDF. New DDEP evaluations undertaken within this project are highlighted in blue.
TABLE 8: (continued). IRDFF-II recommended nuclear decay data content for gamma emitters. (DD eval.) refers  to  the latest Chechev compilation at https://www-nds.iaea.org/IRDFFtest/RCM3/Chechev-RCM3.pdf. (*) indicates data taken from ENSDF. New DDEP evaluations undertaken within this project are highlighted in blue.TABLE 8: (continued). IRDFF-II recommended nuclear decay data content for gamma emitters. (DD eval.) refers  to  the latest Chechev compilation at https://www-nds.iaea.org/IRDFFtest/RCM3/Chechev-RCM3.pdf. (*) indicates data taken from ENSDF. New DDEP evaluations undertaken within this project are highlighted in blue.D.Fission Yield Data
We now proceed with the ﬁssion yield data. The ﬁssion cross sections of the actinides included in the IRDFF-II library diﬀer signiﬁcantly in the thermal and the epither- mal neutron energy range, which determines the relative importance of the ﬁssion yield data. Comparison of the ﬁssion cross sections is given in Fig. 1 for 232Th, 235,238U, 237Np, 239Pu, and 241Am targets.
The baseline recommended ﬁssion yields for dosimetry applications are taken from the JEFF-3.3 library. These data are modiﬁcations to the JEFF-3.1.1 library and are also identiﬁed as UKFY3.7 [69]. When the ﬁssion yields
do not appear in the JEFF-3.3 library, e.g., the 14 MeV ﬁssion yields for 239Pu and 237Np, the recommended val-
ues are taken from the ENDF/B-VIII.0 library.
While the dosimetry community looks forward to the future use of a more reﬁned energy-dependence to the recommended ﬁssion yields, the current IRDFF-II library recommendation is based on a selection of the appropri- ate yield from one of the three energy-dependent groups: thermal, fast (average energy in the range 400 keV to 500 keV), and 14 MeV.
E.Thermal Neutron Cross Sections and Resonance Integrals
Neutron dosimetry is the inverse of neutron activa- tion analysis (NAA). Independent data sets  exist  like the Kayzero library for NAA by the k0 standardization method [70], for example. There is a direct relation be- tween the constants in the Kayzero data-base and the diﬀerential cross sections [71]. Since the constants were measured independently of the diﬀerential cross sections, the k0 and Q0 constants contained in the Kayzero library can be used for the validation of the thermal capture cross sections and resonance integrals in the IRDFF-II library, in addition to the comparison with other compilations like the Atlas of Resonance Parameters [72]. The comparison is discussed and presented in Sec. VI G.
V.
CROSS SECTION COMPARISON BETWEEN AVAILABLE EVALUATIONS FOR SELECTED
REACTIONS
The following Secs. provide a commented review and details on some of the recommended cross sections that appear within the IRDFF-II library. The reactions ad- dressed below focus on the new and updated content of the library. Some of the reaction-speciﬁc veriﬁcation ev- idence is summarized below and comparisons are made with other evaluations. Note that all reaction evaluations present in the IRDFF-II library feature both the evalu- ated mean values and the corresponding covariance ma- trices.
The deﬁnition of the covariance matrix requires that   it be positive semi-deﬁnite. The eigenvalues of all covari- ance matrices have been checked to be non-negative in the evaluator’s energy grids; all calculated eigenvalues are listed in the IRDFF-II ﬁles  in  ENDF-6  format in the comment section (MT=451) for each dosimetry reac- tion. Users should be aware that numerical processing of covariance matrices may introduce very small negative eigenvalues due to round-oﬀ errors; processed covariance matrices require to be checked for negative eigenvalues, and regularized if needed by adding a very small number to the diagonal elements.
Whereas the ordering of the nuclear data reaction con- tent in Table 1 is with increasing atomic number of the target nuclei, the ordering of Secs. here is diﬀerent. This new library includes composite reactions and extends ear- lier evaluation up to 60 MeV.
The ordering of Secs. below is designed to most easily illustrate the veriﬁcation steps taken in  the preparation of the library. It starts with a simple high energy reac- tion, the 58Ni(n,p)58Co reaction, then proceeds to address
the related composite reaction, natNi(n,X)58Co, that is
now added to the library. The following Secs. then ad- dress more complicated high energy composite dosimetry reactions such as natFe(n,X)54Mn, resonance reactions
and new reactions that have a reaction threshold above 20 MeV. The survey of reactions then ends with a discus- sion of the very complex composite reactions, such as gas-
FIG. 2. (Color online) 58Ni(n,p)58Co cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library relative to other data. Comparison to selected experimental data from EXFOR [73].
FIG. 3. (Color online) The same as the previous ﬁgure. Ratio of cross section evaluations to IRDFF-II evaluation.
For most ﬁssion reactor applications, the relevant 10 %-90 % sensitivity region for this reaction is between 2 MeV and 7 MeV. In order to also illustrate the variations be- tween evaluations within this region, Fig. 3 shows the ratio of the various evaluations to the IRDFF-II recom- mended cross section, namely ENDF/B-VIII.0, JEFF-3.3, and JENDL/AD-2017. Variations on the order of 10 % are observed. The curve for the IRDFF-II ratio is unity by deﬁnition in this ﬁgure. The JEFF-3.3 evaluation shows signiﬁcant diﬀerences near threshold and above 15 MeV. The inclusion of uncertainty data, in the form of a co- variance matrix, is a required feature of dosimetry cross sections. Fig. 4(b) shows the energy-dependent 1-sigma uncertainty in the cross section using the energy group structure provided by the evaluator. The energy struc- ture used in the uncertainty characterization is seen to only have a single large-width bin in the 0.4 MeV to
1.5 MeV region, so, due to the correlation of the cross sec- tion within this region, the energy-grouped uncertainty in Fig. 4(b) does not exhibit the large uncertainty suggested by the variation between diﬀerent evaluations in Fig. 3. Fig. 4(a) shows the correlation matrix for the evaluation. The covariance matrix elements in the >20 MeV region  are seen to be uncorrelated with those at lower  energies - as expected based on the evaluation methodology, since the two regions originate from diﬀerent evaluations.FIG. 4. (Color online) Uncertainties and correlations of the
58Ni(n,p)58Co cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library.
As discussed above, the deﬁnition of the covariance matrix requires that it be positive semi-deﬁnite. In order to verify this mathematical property, the smallest and the largest eigenvalues of the covariance matrix are shown in Table 10 for this reaction; all eigenvalues are positive numbers.
Another  veriﬁcation  step  is   the   comparison   of the calculated-to-experimental ratio of the spectrum- averaged cross section (SACS) in the 252Cf spontaneous ﬁssion and 235U(nth,f) prompt ﬁssion neutron benchmark ﬁelds. We emphasize that this, within the context of the evaluation, is treated purely as a veriﬁcation step since the nuclear data evaluator also commonly examines this metric as part of their veriﬁcation process for the eval- uation. The treatment of validation in these benchmark ﬁelds is addressed later in Sec. VII. Table 11 compares the spectrum-averaged cross sections produced with the IRDFF-II library to that reported by the nuclear data evaluator in the evaluation documentation.
The residual nucleus produced in this reaction is 58Co
which, in addition to its 70.86 day half-life for the ground
TABLE 10. List of lowest eigenvalues in ascending order of  the 58Ni(n,p)58Co covariance matrix.
TABLE 11. C/E of SACS for 58Ni(n,p)58Co reaction and data used by the nuclear data evaluator.state, also has a 9.04 hour half-life isomer. It is critical  to note that, consistent with adopted notation, this eval- uation captures the complete 58Ni(n,p)58(m+g)Co cross section, that is, it represents the combined (n,p) reaction that populates the 58Co ground state and the meta-stable states. An important consideration in the use of this re- action for dosimetry in commercial ﬁssion reactors is the consideration of the thermal neutron burn-up correction that can be a factor in long irradiations in the presence  of a thermal neutron environment. The eﬀective burn-up cross section, via the 58Co(n,γ) reaction, is 1650 barns for 58g Co while that for the 58mCo residual nucleus is 1.4x105 barns. The caveats on the need to make thermal neutron burn-up corrections for applications in light water reac- tors are found in ASTM E264 [79]. The cross sections and the decay data of the metastable isotope 58mCo are not included in the present version of IRDFF-II.
@
Nickel is an element that has several naturally occurring isotopes and many reactions on diﬀerent isotopes may lead to the same residual. Monitor samples are usually made of natural elements, so it is advantageous to provide the data for the residual production from the element, since production paths may include a multitude of minor channels which a user would need to consider. The cross
sections and the covariance data for the natNi(n,X)58Co
reaction were assembled from the IRDFF-II evaluation for the 58Ni(n,p) reaction (described in the previous section), which is the dominant contribution at low energies. The contributing reactions at higher energies were taken from the TENDL-2015 library, as shown in Fig. 5.
FIG. 5. (Color online) Contributing reaction cross sections to the 58Co production from neutrons incident on a natNi target.
Note that the cross sections are not scaled by the isotopic abundance.
FIG. 6. Uncertainties in the natNi(n,X)58Co reaction cross sections.
The covariance plot and the uncertainty are practically the same as for the 58Ni(n,p)58Co reaction  except for the high energy part. The 1-sigma standard deviation is shown in Fig. 6.@
The cross sections and the covariance data for the 60Ni(n,p)60Co reaction in the energy range from thresh- old to 21 MeV were evaluated by Zolotarev [80] in 2008. Extension to 60 MeV was done at the IAEA based on TENDL-2011, renormalizing the cross sections at 21 MeV for continuity. Comparison of the cross sections with ex- perimental data is shown in Fig. 7. The ﬁgure also shows the comparison between IRDF-2002 and IRDFF-II, which remained unchanged from version IRDFF-v1.05.
Cross sections in diﬀerent evaluated libraries diﬀer sig- niﬁcantly near threshold as shown in Fig. 8, where the ratios of the various evaluations to the IRDFF-II recom-FIG. 7. (Color online) 60Ni(n,p)60Co cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library relative to other data. Comparison to selected experimental data from EXFOR [73].
FIG. 8. (Color online) The same as the previous ﬁgure. Ratio of cross section evaluations to IRDFF-II evaluation.
mended cross section are given. These diﬀerences may be important if this reaction monitor is used in reactor spec- tra. It is interesting that the cross section curves diﬀer also at the plateau of the cross section near 13 MeV. The plot of the 1-sigma uncertainty is shown in Fig. 9(b). The smallest uncertainty is about 1 % near 14 MeV and might suﬀer from the omission of some unrecognised sources of uncertainties (USU). The corresponding correlation ma- trix for the 60Ni(n,p)60Co reaction is shown in Fig. 9(a).
The 60Ni(n,p)60Co cross sections are traditionally in- cluded in dosimetry libraries, but the users should note that several neutron induced reactions from the  heav-  ier nickel isotopes lead to the same product, as shown   in Fig. 10. Although the abundance of 61Ni is about twenty times smaller than the abundance of 60Ni, the latter may start contributing to the 60Co production at energies above 12 MeV through the 61Ni(n,np)60Co reac-
tion. The user is advised to use the natNi(n,X)60Co cross
sections that are newly introduced into the IRDFF-II li- brary, noting that the cross sections are not validated for dosimetry purposes in neutron ﬁelds with a signiﬁcant contribution of the ﬂux above 12 MeV.
FIG. 9. (Color online) Uncertainties and correlations of the
60Ni(n,p)60Co cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library.FIG. 10. (Color online) Contributing reactions to the 60Co pro- duction from neutrons incident on a natNi target. Note that the cross sections are not scaled by the isotopic abundance.
@
The 54Fe(n,p)54Mn reaction cross sections and covari- ances below 20 MeV were evaluated by Zolotarev [82] in 2013. Extension to 60 MeV was done at the IAEA based on TENDL-2013, renormalizing the cross sections at 20 MeV for continuity. Comparison of the cross sections with experimental data is shown in Fig. 11. The ﬁgure also shows the comparison between IRDF-2002 and IRDFF- II, which remained unchanged from version IRDFF-v1.05. Cross sections in diﬀerent evaluated libraries diﬀer sig- niﬁcantly near threshold as shown in Fig. 12, where the ratios of the various evaluations to the IRDFF-II recom- mended cross section are given. These diﬀerences may be important if this reaction monitor is used in reactor spectra.
FIG. 11. (Color online) 54Fe(n,p)54Mn cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library relative to other data. Comparison to selected experimental data from EXFOR [73].
FIG. 12. (Color online) The same as the previous ﬁgure. Ratio of cross section evaluations to IRDFF-II evaluation.
The plot of the correlation matrix for the 54Fe(n,X)54Mn reaction is shown in Fig. 13(a). The plot of the 1-sigma uncertainty is shown in Fig. 13(b).
As in the case of nickel, the 54Fe(n,p)54Mn reaction cross sections are traditionally included in dosimetry li- braries, but the users should note that several neutron induced reactions from the other isotopes lead to the same product. The thresholds for the competing reac-
FIG. 13. (Color online) Uncertainties and correlations of the
54Fe(n,p)54Mn cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library.
tions are fairly high and they become signiﬁcant only well above 20 MeV. Nevertheless, the user is advised to use the natFe(n,X)54Mn cross sections that are newly
introduced into the IRDFF-II library and are described below, noting that the cross sections are not validated for dosimetry purposes in neutron ﬁelds with a signiﬁcant contribution of the ﬂux above 20 MeV.@
Elemental iron consists mainly of isotope 56Fe, but the minor isotopes are sometimes important as they may lead to reactions that produce the same residual. Monitor sam- ples are usually made of natural elements, so it is advan- tageous to provide the data for the residual production from the  element, since  production  paths  may include a multitude of minor channels which a user would need to consider. The cross sections and the covariance data
for the  natFe(n,X)54Mn  reaction  were assembled from
the IRDFF-II evaluation for the 54Fe(n,p) reaction (de-FIG. 14. Contributing reaction cross sections to the 54Mn pro- duction from neutrons incident on a natFe target. Note that the cross sections are not scaled by the isotopic abundance.
scribed in the previous section), which is the dominant contribution at low energies. The contributing reactions at higher energies were taken from the TENDL-2015 li- brary, as shown in Fig. 14. Note that above 20 MeV the 54Mn production cross section is dominated by the con- tributions from reactions on 56Fe. For neutron dosimetry at these energies the use of the elemental radionuclide production cross sections is essential.
The plot of the correlation matrix for the natFe(n,X)54Mn reaction is shown in Fig. 15(a). The plot of the 1-sigma uncertainty is shown in Fig. 15(b).@
The 58Fe(n,γ)59Fe reaction belongs to a minor isotope of iron, with abundance of less than 0.3 % and pronounced resonance structure, hence the measured cross section data are less precise. Through an IAEA-sponsored activ-
ity M. Moxon re-evaluated the resonance parameters of 58Fe in 2004 [83], which were adopted in the JEFF and ENDF/B libraries. The evaluation removed some of the discrepancies with the measured thermal capture cross section and the resonance integral.  The  cross  sections of 58Fe up to 60 MeV for IRDFF-II were  taken  from the JEFF-3.1 library. Comparison of the cross sections with experimental data in the fast energy range is shown in Fig. 16; big discrepancies are shown among diﬀerent evaluated libraries. The cross section comparison in the resonance range is not shown, since many libraries adopt the Moxon evaluation. The ﬁgure also shows the compar- ison between IRDF-2002 and IRDFF-II, which remained unchanged from version IRDFF-v1.05.
The plot of the correlation matrix for the 58Fe(n,γ)59Fe reaction is shown in Fig. 17(a). The plot of the 1-sigma uncertainty is shown in Fig. 17(b).
The 58Fe(n,γ)59Fe reaction is interesting for dosimetry
applications because it is “clean” in the sense that it does not have any contributions from other isotopes of the ele- mental iron. The drawback is its low abundance, which is inherently known with a lower relative precision and this makes precise diﬀerential measurements more diﬃcult,
corresponding cross section mean value.
FIG. 15. (Color online) Uncertainties and correlations of the natFe(n,X)54Mn cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library.
FIG. 16. (Color online) C omparison of 58Fe(n,γ)59Fe cross
FIG. 17. (Color online) Uncertainties and correlations of the
58Fe(n,γ)59Fe cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library.
because they require enriched samples. The drawbacks are reﬂected in the lower accuracy of the evaluated cross sections.
@
The residual nuclide from the 32S(n,p)32P reaction is 32P, which, as seen from Table 7, is a pure beta emitter. As with all beta dosimetry, care must be taken in the dosimetry measurement process to ensure that only the 32P, and no other activation products are being counted. Potential interfering reaction products may arise from
activation of any of the naturally occurring isotopes in the target material, e.g., 32S, 33S, or 35S. There are many ways to addressing the potential interferents [81]. For beta
measurements performed on samples irradiated in ﬁssion reactor environments, a common practice for eliminating interference from other beta emitters is to use a cadmium thermal neutron shield to reduce the generation of capture
FIG. 18. (Color online) 32S(n,p)32P cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library relative to other data. Comparison to selected experimental data from EXFOR [73].
FIG. 19. (Color online)The same as the previous ﬁgure. Ratio of cross section evaluations to IRDFF-II evaluation.
The plot of the correlation matrix for the 32S(n,p)32P reaction is shown in Fig. 20(a). The plot of the 1-sigma uncertainty is shown in Fig. 20(b).
FIG. 20. (Color online) Uncertainties and correlations of the
32S(n,p)32P cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library.
Reactions on the heavier isotopes of sulphur may lead to the same reaction product 32P. In particular, the cross sections for the 33S(n,np)32P reaction rises sharply above 12 MeV, but the natural abundance of 33S is only 0.75 %. However, at energies above 30 MeV the 34S(n,2np)32P may contribute to the 32P production, so the 32S(n,p)32P reaction monitor should not be used for high energy ap-
plications. The reaction natS(n,X)32P should be used
instead.
8.   90Zr(n,2n)89Zr
The 90Zr(n,2n)89Zr reaction cross sections and covari- ances below 20 MeV were evaluated by Zolotarev [84] in 2009. Extension to 60 MeV was done at the IAEA based on TENDL-2013, renormalizing the cross sections at 20 MeV for continuity. Comparison of the cross sections with experimental data is shown in Fig. 21. The ﬁgure also shows the comparison between IRDF-2002 and IRDFF-II, which remained unchanged from version IRDFF-v1.05.
FIG. 22. (Color online) The same as the previous ﬁgure. Ratio of cross section evaluations to IRDFF-II evaluation.
The plot of the correlation matrix for the 90Zr(n,2n)89Zr reaction is shown in  Fig.  23(a).  The plot of the 1-sigma uncertainty is shown in Fig. 23(b). Reactions on the heavier isotopes of  Zr  may  lead  to the same reaction product 89Zr. In particular, the cross sections for the 91Zr(n,3n)89Zr reaction rises sharply above 20 MeV. The use of the natZr(n,X)89Zr reaction
cross sections, which are present in the IRDFF-II library, is strongly recommended, even though the user should be aware that the minor contributing channels represent  a   correction   and  do   not  meet  the dosimetry  quality
standards, so  even  the  reaction  natZr(n,X)89Zr should
be used with caution in neutron ﬁelds with a signiﬁcant contribution of neutrons with energies above 20 MeV.
FIG. 23. (Color online) Uncertainties and correlations of the
90Zr(n,2n)89Zr cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library.
9.   23Na(n,2n)22Na
Sodium is a mono-isotopic naturally occurring element and is convenient for neutron dosimetry because it does not have competing reactions from diﬀerent isotopes pro- ducing the same residual. The 23Na(n,2n)22Na has a rel- atively high threshold and the plateau above 20 MeV; it can be used for probing the very high-energy tail of the ﬁssion spectrum.
The 23Na(n,2n)22Na reaction cross sections and covari-
ances in the entire energy range up to 60 MeV were eval- uated by Zolotarev [86] in 2017. In 2019 this reaction cross section was measured at Nuclear Physics Institute of the Czech Academy of Sciences employing the p-Li quasi-monoenergetic neutrons with energies between 17 and 33 MeV [87]. As seen in Fig. 24, these data conﬁrm the latest Zolotarev evaluation. The ﬁgure also shows the comparison between IRDF-2002 and IRDFF-II, which re- mained unchanged from version IRDFF-v1.05. Cross sec- tions in diﬀerent evaluated libraries diﬀer signiﬁcantly near threshold as shown in Fig. 25, where the ratios of
FIG. 25. (Color online) The same as the previous ﬁgure. Ratio of cross section evaluations to IRDFF-II evaluation.
the various evaluations to the IRDFF-II recommended cross section are given. The ENDF/B-VIII.0 evaluation followed a diﬀerent set of experimental data. Therefore, diﬀerences are observed between evaluations, but also be- tween measurements.
The covariance matrix of the 23Na(n,2n)22Na reaction
cross sections is shown in Fig. 26(a) and the correspond- ing 1-sigma uncertainty in Fig. 26(b). The smallest uncer- tainty is about less than 1 % over a narrow energy interval around the thermal point and might suﬀer from the omis- sion of some unrecognised sources of uncertainties (USU).
10. 23Na(n,γ)24Na
The  capture  reaction   has  a  strong  resonance   near
2.8keV and is highly sensitive to the epithermal ener- gies in reactor spectra. The 23Na(n,γ)24Na reaction res- onance parameters, cross sections and covariances up to 20 MeV were also evaluated by Zolotarev [86]. Compar- ison of the cross sections with experimental data in the
FIG. 26. (Color online) Uncertainties and correlations of  the
23Na(n,2n)22Na cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library.
fast energy range is shown in Fig. 27. The ﬁgure also shows the comparison between IRDF-2002 and IRDFF-II, which is diﬀerent from IRDFF-v1.05. Cross sections in dif- ferent evaluated libraries diﬀer signiﬁcantly as shown in Fig. 28, where the ratios of the various evaluations to the IRDFF-II recommended cross section are given.
The covariance matrix of the 23Na(n,γ)24Na reaction
cross sections is shown in Fig. 29(a) and the corresponding 1-sigma uncertainty in Fig. 29(b).
11. 24Mg(n,p)24Na
The 24Mg(n,p)24Na reaction cross sections and covari- ances below 21 MeV were evaluated by Zolotarev [80] in 2008. Extension to 60 MeV was done at the IAEA based on TENDL-2010, renormalizing the cross sections at 21 MeV for continuity. Comparison of the cross sections with experimental data is shown in Fig. 30. The ﬁgure also shows the comparison between IRDF-2002 and IRDFF-II,
which remained unchanged from version IRDFF-v1.05. Cross sections in diﬀerent evaluated libraries diﬀer sig- niﬁcantly near threshold as shown in Fig. 31, where the ratios of the various evaluations to the IRDFF-II recom- mended cross section are given. These diﬀerences may be important if this reaction monitor is used in reactor spectra.
The plot of the correlation matrix for the 24Mg(n,p)24Na reaction is shown in Fig. 32(a). The plot of the 1-sigma uncertainty is shown in Fig. 32(b). The smallest uncertainty is about 0.7 % near 14 MeV and
might suﬀer from the omission of some unrecognised sources of uncertainties (USU).
Reactions on  the heavier isotopes  of Mg may lead to the same reaction product 24Na. In particular, the cross sections for the 25Mg(n,np)24Na reaction rises sharply above 18 MeV. The use of the natMg(n,X)24Na reaction cross sections, which are present in the IRDFF-II library,
is strongly recommended, especially for neutron ﬁelds that have a signiﬁcant fraction of neutrons with energies above 18 MeV. However, the user should be aware that the minor contributing channels represent a correction and do not meet the same dosimetry quality standards.
FIG. 29. (Color online) Uncertainties and correlations of the
23Na(n,γ)24Na cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library.
FIG. 30. (Color online) 24Mg(n,p)24Na cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library relative to other data. Comparison to selected experimental data from EXFOR [73].
FIG. 31. (Color online) The same as the previous ﬁgure. Ratio of cross section evaluations to IRDFF-II evaluation.
FIG. 32. (Color online) Uncertainties and correlations of the
24Mg(n,p)24Na cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library.
12. natMg(n,X)24Na
The major contribution to the 24Na production comes from the 24Mg(n,p)24Na reaction, which is present in the IRDFF-II library. This is supplemented by the contribu- tions of other channels, including 25Mg(n,np), 25Mg(n,d), 26Mg(n,2np), 26Mg(n,nd) and 26Mg(n,t) that are taken from the TENDL-2015 library, as shown in Fig. 33.
The plot of the 1-sigma uncertainty for the natMg(n,X)
24Na reaction is shown in Fig. 34.
It is strongly recommended to use natMg(n,X)24Na
cross sections for dosimetry instead of the 24Mg(n,p)24Na cross sections in high-energy neutron ﬁelds with a signiﬁ- cant fraction of neutrons with energies above 15 MeV.
FIG. 33. (Color online) Contributing reactions to the 24Na production from neutrons incident on natMg target. Note that the cross sections are not scaled by the isotopic abundance.
FIG. 34. natMg(n,X)24Na cross section 1-sigma uncertainties.
13. 27Al(n,p)27Mg
The 27Al(n,p)27Mg reaction cross sections were evalu- ated by Zolotarev up to 22 MeV in 2004 [88]. Extension to 60 MeV was done at the IAEA based on TENDL-2010, renormalizing the cross sections at 22 MeV for continuity. Comparison of the cross sections with experimental data is shown in Fig. 35. The ﬁgure also shows the compari- son between IRDF-2002 and IRDFF-II, which remained unchanged from version IRDFF-v1.05.
Cross sections in diﬀerent evaluated libraries are shown in Fig. 36 as ratios of the various evaluations to the IRDFF-II recommended cross section.
FIG. 33. (Color online) Contributing reactions to the 24Na production from neutrons incident on natMg target. Note that the cross sections are not scaled by the isotopic abundance.
FIG. 34. natMg(n,X)24Na cross section 1-sigma uncertainties.
13. 27Al(n,p)27Mg
The 27Al(n,p)27Mg reaction cross sections were evalu- ated by Zolotarev up to 22 MeV in 2004 [88]. Extension to 60 MeV was done at the IAEA based on TENDL-2010, renormalizing the cross sections at 22 MeV for continuity. Comparison of the cross sections with experimental data is shown in Fig. 35. The ﬁgure also shows the compari- son between IRDF-2002 and IRDFF-II, which remained unchanged from version IRDFF-v1.05.
Cross sections in diﬀerent evaluated libraries are shown in Fig. 36 as ratios of the various evaluations to the IRDFF-II recommended cross section.
FIG. 35. (Color online) 27Al(n,p)27Mg cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library relative to other data. Comparison to selected experimental data from EXFOR [73].
FIG. 36. (Color online) The same as the previous ﬁgure. Ratio of cross section evaluations to IRDFF-II evaluation.
The plot of the correlation matrix for the 27Al(n,p)27Mg reaction is shown in Fig. 37(a). The plot of the 1-sigma uncertainty is shown in Fig. 37(b). The smallest uncertainty is about 0.4 % near 14 MeV and might suﬀer from the omission of some unrecognised sources of uncertainties (USU).
FIG. 37. (Color online) Uncertainties and correlations of the
27Al(n,p)27Mg cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library.
14. 27Al(n,α)24Na
In 2004 the 27Al(n,α)24Na reaction cross sections were evaluated by Zolotarev up to 40 MeV [84], but the cross sections had unphysical behaviour above 30 MeV. Exten- sion between 30 MeV and 60 MeV was done at the IAEA based on TENDL-2010, renormalizing the cross sections at 30 MeV for continuity. Comparison of the cross sections with experimental data is shown in Fig. 38. The ﬁgure also shows the comparison between IRDF-2002 and IRDFF-II, which remained unchanged from version IRDFF-v1.05. Cross sections in diﬀerent evaluated libraries are shown in Fig. 39 as ratios of the various evaluations to the IRDFF-II recommended cross section.
The plot of the correlation matrix for the 27Al(n,α)24Na
reaction is shown in Fig. 40(a). The plot of the 1-sigma uncertainty is shown in Fig. 40(b).
Aluminium is a convenient monitor for neutron dosime- try because it is a mono-isotopic element. However, at energies above 30 MeV there appear competing reactions that produce the same 24Na residual. It is strongly rec-FIG. 38. (Color online) 27Al(n,α)24Na cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library relative to other data. Comparison to selected experimental data from EXFOR [73].
FIG. 39. (Color online) The same as the previous ﬁgure. Ratio of cross section evaluations to IRDFF-II evaluation.
ommended to use 27Al(n,X)24Na reaction cross sections, which are provided in IRDFF-II, especially in neutron ﬁelds with a signiﬁcant fraction of neutrons with energies above 30 MeV.
15. 47Ti(n,p)47Sc
The 47Ti(n,p)47Sc reaction cross sections were evalu- ated by Zolotarev up to 20 MeV in 2002 for the  Rus- sian Dosimetry Library RRDF-2002 within the BROND- 2 project. Extension to 60 MeV was done at the IAEA based on TENDL-2011, renormalizing the cross sections at 22 MeV for continuity. Comparison of the cross sections with experimental data is shown in Fig. 41. The ﬁgure also shows the comparison between IRDF-2002 and IRDFF-II, which remained unchanged from version IRDFF-v1.05. Cross sections in diﬀerent evaluated libraries are shown in Fig. 42 as ratios of the various evaluations to the IRDFF-II recommended cross section.
The plot of the correlation matrix for the 47Ti(n,p)47Sc
reaction is shown in Fig. 43(a). The plot of the 1-sigma uncertainty is shown in Fig. 43(b).
Titanium is a monitor elemental material that has a
FIG. 40. (Color online) Uncertainties and correlations of the
27Al(n,α)24Na cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library.
FIG. 41. (Color online) 47Ti(n,p)47Sc cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library relative to other data. Comparison to selected experimental data from EXFOR [73].
FIG. 42. (Color online) The same as the previous ﬁgure. Ratio of cross section evaluations to IRDFF-II evaluation.
FIG. 43. (Color online) Uncertainties and correlations of the
47Ti(n,p)47Sc cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library.
large number of naturally  occuring  isotopes  that  lead to the same residual. The 47Ti(n,p)47Sc reaction is just one example, where the residual 47Sc can be produced from the heavier isotopes in reactions like 48Ti(n,np)47Sc, etc.  The  heavier  isotopes  begin  to  contribute  at ener-
gies  around  14  MeV.  For  this  reason,  Reactions  like
natTi(n,X)47Sc  were  introduced  into  the  IRDFF-II li-
brary, as illustrated in the section below.
FIG. 44. (Color online) Contributing reactions to the 47Sc production from neutrons incident on natTi target. Note that the cross sections are not scaled by the isotopic abundance.
16. natTi(n,X)47Sc
The major contribution to the 47Sc production comes from the 47Ti(n,p)47Sc reaction,  which  is  present  in the IRDFF-II library, supplemented by the contribu- tions of other channels, including 48Ti(n,np), 48Ti(n,d), 49Ti(n,2np), 49Ti(n,nd), 49Ti(n,t), 50Ti(n,2nd), 50Ti(n,nt)
and 50Ti(n,3np) that are taken from the TENDL-2015 library. Relevant cross sections are compared to the avail- able experimental data in Fig. 44. The contribution from the 48Ti(n,np) rises sharply above about 14 MeV. The uncertainty and the covariance matrix below this energy are practically the same as for the 47Ti(n,p)47Sc reac-
tion.  It is strongly recommended to use  natTi(n,X)47Sc
reaction cross section for neutron dosimetry applications, especially in neutron ﬁelds with a signiﬁcant fraction of neutrons with energies above 14 MeV.
17. 59Co(n,2n)58Co and 59Co(n,3n)57Co
The 59Co(n,2n)58Co reaction cross sections and covari- ances in energy range up to 20 MeV were evaluated by Zolotarev [84] in 2009. Extension to 60 MeV was done at the IAEA based on TENDL-2010, renormalizing the cross sections at 20 MeV for continuity.
The 59Co(n,3n)57Co reaction cross sections and covari-
ances in energy range up to 20 MeV were evaluated by Zolotarev [89] in 2010. Extension to 60 MeV was done at the IAEA based on TENDL-2010, renormalizing the cross sections at 20 MeV for continuity. Comparison of the
cross sections with experimental data for both reactions is shown in Fig. 45. The reaction cross sections were not present in IRDF-2002. In IRDFF-II they remained un- changed from version IRDFF-v1.05. The 59Co(n,2n)58Co cross sections in diﬀerent evaluated libraries diﬀer sig- niﬁcantly near threshold as shown in Fig. 46, where the ratios of the various evaluations to the IRDFF-II rec- ommended cross section are given.  The cross sections  in JENDL/AD-2017 are signiﬁcantly lower compared to other evaluations.
FIG. 45. (Color online) 59Co(n,2n)58Co and 59Co(n,3n)57Co cross section evaluations in IRDFF-II library relative to other data. Comparison to selected experimental data from EXFOR [73].
FIG. 46. (Color online) The same as the previous ﬁgure. Ratio of cross section evaluations to IRDFF-II evaluation.
The plot of the 1-sigma uncertainty for the
59Co(n,3n)57Co reaction is shown in Fig. 47.
The plot of the correlation matrix for the 59Co(n,2n)58Co reaction is shown in Fig. 48(a). The plot of the 1-sigma uncertainty is shown in Fig. 48(b). The smallest uncertainty is about 0.9 % near 14 MeV and might suﬀer from the omission of some unrecognised sources of uncertainties (USU).
The 59Co(n,2n)58Co and 59Co(n,3n)57Co reactions are examples of monitor reactions that can be used to probe neutron ﬁelds at higher energies.
FIG. 47. 59Co(n,3n)57Co cross section 1-sigma uncertainties.
FIG. 48. (Color online) Uncertainties and correlations of  the
59Co(n,2n)58Co cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library.
18. 55Mn(n,2n)54Mn
The 55Mn(n,2n)54Mn reaction cross sections and covari- ances in energy range up to 20 MeV were evaluated by Zolotarev [84] in 2009. Extension to 60 MeV was done at the IAEA based on TENDL-2010, renormalizing the cross sections at 20 MeV for continuity. The reaction cross sec- tions were not present in IRDF-2002. However, the exper- imental validation of the IRDFF-1.05 evaluation showed problems near the threshold [85], where practically no data are available. In that validation the ENDF/B-VII.1 evaluation performed much better. Zolotarev reevaluated this cross section for IRDFF-II in 2019. Comparison of the reevaluated cross sections with experimental data is shown in Fig. 49. The 55Mn(n,2n)54Mn cross sections in diﬀerent evaluated libraries diﬀer signiﬁcantly near thresh- old as shown in Fig. 50, where the ratios of the various evaluations to the IRDFF-II recommended cross section are given.  In  particular it can be seen that the IRDFF-  II evaluation is signiﬁcantly larger than the IRDFF-1.05 library near the threshold.FIG. 49. (Color online) 55Mn(n,2n)54Mn cross section evalua- tion in IRDFF-II library relative to other data. Comparison to selected experimental data from EXFOR [73].
FIG. 50. (Color online) The same as the previous ﬁgure. Ratio of cross section evaluations to IRDFF-II evaluation.
The plot of the correlation matrix for the 55Mn(n,2n)54Mn  reaction  is  shown  in  Fig.   51(a). The  plot  of  the  1-sigma  uncertainty  is  shown   in Fig. 51(b). The 55Mn(n,2n)54Mn reaction is also one that can be used to probe neutron ﬁelds at higher energies.
FIG. 51. (Color online) Uncertainties and correlations of  the
55Mn(n,2n)54Mn cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library.
19. 67Zn(n,p)67Cu
The 67Zn(n,p)67Cu reaction cross sections and covari- ances in energy range up to 20 MeV were evaluated by Zolotarev [80] in 2008. Extension to 60 MeV was done at the IAEA based on TENDL-2010, renormalizing the cross sections at 20 MeV  for continuity.  This  reaction is exothermic and has a positive Q-value, therefore  it has no real threshold. However, the diﬀerence is the rel- atively large thermal capture cross section. The capture cross sections from JENDL-4 were re-scaled to give a thermal value of 0.00123 barns and adjusted above 600
keV to join smoothly with the (n,p) cross section evalua- tion by Zolotarev. A fully correlated uncertainty of 25 % was assigned arbitrarily to the cross sections below the pseudo-threshold. The plot of the cross sections is shown in Fig. 52. The cross sections for this reaction were not present in IRDF-2002. In IRDFF-II they remained un- changed from version IRDFF-v1.05. The 67Zn(n,p)67Cu cross sections in diﬀerent evaluated libraries diﬀer signif- icantly, especially near the apparent threshold as shown in Fig. 53, where the ratios of the various evaluations to the IRDFF-II recommended cross section are given.
FIG. 52. (Color online) 67Zn(n,p)67Cu cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library relative to other data. Comparison to selected experimental data from EXFOR [73].
FIG. 53. (Color online) The same as the previous ﬁgure. Ratio of cross section evaluations to IRDFF-II evaluation.
The plot of the correlation matrix for the 67Zn(n,p)67Cu reaction is shown in Fig. 54(a). The plot of the 1-sigma uncertainty is shown in Fig. 54(b).
The 67Zn(n,p)67Cu reaction is an example of a reac- tion with a positive Q-value, where the cross sections were extended down to thermal energies and a resonance evaluation was included.
20. 199Hg(n,n’)199mHg
The 199Hg(n,n’)199mHg reaction cross sections and co- variances in energy range up to 20 MeV were evaluated
FIG. 54. (Color online) Uncertainties and correlations of the
67Zn(n,p)67Cu cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library.
by Zolotarev [80] in 2008. Extension to 60 MeV was done at the IAEA based on TENDL-2010, renormalizing the cross sections at 20 MeV for continuity. Comparison with experimental data is shown in Fig. 55. The ﬁgure also shows the comparison between IRDF-2002 and IRDFF-II, which remained unchanged from version IRDFF-v1.05. The 199Hg(n,n’)199mHg cross sections represent the exci- tation of a metastable state and are not present in other major libraries, hence only the comparison with IRDF- 2002 is shown in Fig. 56, where the ratios to the IRDFF-II recommended cross section are given.
The plot of the correlation matrix for the 199Hg(n,n’)199mHg reaction is shown  in  Fig.  57(a). The  plot  of  the  1-sigma  uncertainty  is  shown   in Fig. 57(b).FIG. 55. (Color online) 199Hg(n,n’)199mHg cross section evalu- ation in IRDFF-II library relative to other data. Comparison to selected experimental data from EXFOR [73].
FIG. 56. (Color online) The same as the previous ﬁgure. Ratio of cross section evaluations to IRDFF-II evaluation.
89Y(n,2n)88Y
The 89Y(n,2n)88Y reaction cross sections and covari- ances in energy range up to 20 MeV were evaluated by Zolotarev [84] in 2009. Extension to 60 MeV was done at the IAEA based on TENDL-2010, renormalizing the cross sections at 20 MeV for continuity. Comparison of the cross sections with experimental data is shown in Fig. 58. The ﬁgure also shows the comparison between IRDF-2002 and IRDFF-II, which remained unchanged from version IRDFF-v1.05.
The 89Y(n,2n)88Y cross sections in diﬀerent evaluated
libraries diﬀer signiﬁcantly near threshold as shown in Fig. 59, where the ratios of the various evaluations to the IRDFF-II recommended cross section are given.
The plot of the correlation matrix for the 89Y(n,2n)88Y
reaction is shown in Fig. 60(a). The plot of the 1-sigma uncertainty is shown in Fig. 60(b). The 89Y(n,2n)88Y reaction is another one that can be used to probe neutron ﬁelds at higher energies.
FIG. 57. (Color online) Uncertainties and correlations of the 199Hg(n,n’)199mHg cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II li- brary.FIG. 58. (Color online) 89Y(n,2n)88Y cross section evaluationin IRDFF-II library relative to other data. Comparison to
selected experimental data from EXFOR [73].
FIG. 59. (Color online) The same as the previous ﬁgure. Ratio of cross section evaluations to IRDFF-II evaluation.
FIG. 60. (Color online) Uncertainties and correlations of the
89Y(n,2n)88Y cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library.
169Tm(n,2n)168Tm and 169Tm(n,3n)167Tm
The 169Tm(n,2n)168Tm reaction cross sections and co- variances in energy range up to 40 MeV were evaluated  by Zolotarev [89]. Extension to 60 MeV was done at the IAEA based on TENDL-2010, renormalizing the cross sec- tions at 40 MeV for continuity. The 169Tm(n,3n)167Tm reaction cross sections and covariances in energy range up to 60 MeV were evaluated by Zolotarev [82] in 2003; no ex- tension in energy was necessary. Comparison of the cross sections with experimental data  for  169Tm(n,2n)168Tm and 169Tm(n,3n)167Tm reactions is  shown  in  Figs.  61 and 63, respectively. The diﬀerences in reaction cross sec- tions for 169Tm(n,2n)168Tm from IRDF-2002 are shown, which were unchanged in IRDFF-II. The  cross  sections for 169Tm(n,3n)167Tm were  not  present  in  IRDF-2002; in IRDFF-II they remained unchanged from version IRDFF-v1.05. The 169Tm(n,2n)168Tm cross sections in diﬀerent evaluated libraries diﬀer near threshold  are shown in Fig. 62, where the ratios of the various eval- uations to the IRDFF-II recommended cross section are given. Diﬀerences in the 169Tm(n,3n)167Tm cross sections are even larger. Fig. 64 includes experimental data, which tend to support the IRDFF-II evaluation.
FIG. 61. (Color online) 169Tm(n,2n)168Tm cross section eval- uation in IRDFF-II library relative to other data. Comparison to selected experimental data from EXFOR [73].
FIG. 62. (Color online) The same as the previous ﬁgure. Ratio of cross section evaluations to IRDFF-II evaluation.FIG. 63. (Color online) 169Tm(n,3n)167Tm cross section eval- uation in IRDFF-II library relative to other data. Comparison to selected experimental data from EXFOR [73].
FIG. 64. (Color online) The same as the previous ﬁgure. Ratio of cross section evaluations to IRDFF-II evaluation.
The plot of the correlation matrix for the 169Tm(n,2n)168Tm reaction is shown in  Fig.  65(a).  The  plot  of  the  1-sigma  uncertainty  is  shown   in Fig. 65(b). The plot of the correlation matrix for the 169Tm(n,3n)167Tm reaction is shown in Fig. 66(a). The plot of the 1-sigma uncertainty is shown in Fig. 66(b).
The  169Tm(n,2n)168Tm  and  169Tm(n,3n)167Tm reac-
tions are examples of monitor reactions that can be used to probe neutron ﬁelds at higher energies.
23. 209Bi(n,3n)207Bi, 209Bi(n,4n)206Bi, and 209Bi(n,5n)205Bi
The 209Bi reaction cross sections for multiple neutron emission with n=2–6 were evaluated up to 100 MeV by Pronyaev in 2013 using a GMA code and smoothed and extended up to 400 MeV by Pronyaev in 2019. Compari- son of the cross sections for 209Bi(n,3n), 209Bi(n,4n) and 209Bi(n,5n) reactions with experimental data is shown in Fig. 67. No comparison with other libraries is given, since the evaluated cross sections from other libraries do not extend to energies above 20 MeV which are supported by the new IRDFF-II library. The cross sections for these reactions were not present in IRDF-2002.
FIG. 65. (Color online) Uncertainties and correlations of the 169Tm(n,2n)168Tm cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II li- brary.
As an example for these reactions, the plot of the corre- lation matrix for the 209Bi(n,3n)207Bi reaction is shown in Fig. 68(a). The plot of the 1-sigma uncertainty is shown   in Fig. 68(b).
The 209Bi(n,xn) reactions in the IRDFF-II library are examples of monitor reactions that are intended for prob- ing high-energy neutron ﬁelds that extend well above 10 MeV up to the maximum energy of 60 MeV.
24.   237Np(n,f)
The cross sections for the 237Np(n,f) reaction below
0.5MeV were taken from the JEFF-3.3 evaluation. In the energy interval 0.5–20 MeV the data were taken from RRDF-2002. Above this energy the JENDL-4/HE evalu- ation was used, but it does not include the covariances. The diﬀerence in the cross sections from TENDL-2015 in 11 subintervals was calculated and the relative diﬀerence
corresponding cross section mean value.
FIG. 66. (Color online) Uncertainties and correlations of the 169Tm(n,3n)167Tm cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II li- brary.
was added to the diagonal term of the TENDL-2015 co- variance matrix in the 20 MeV to 60 MeV energy interval to account for the fact that the original covariances do not correspond to the same cross section evaluation. Compar- ison of the cross sections with experimental data is shown in Fig. 69. The 237Np(n,f) cross sections in diﬀerent evalu- ated libraries are shown in Fig. 70, where the ratios of the various evaluations to the IRDFF-II recommended cross section are given. Eigenvalues of covariances were checked to be positive, but it is worth noting that the quality of the evaluation above 20 MeV should be improved if this reaction will be used at those energies.
The plot of the correlation matrix for the 237Np(n,f) reaction is shown in Fig. 71(a). The plot of the 1-sigma uncertainty is shown in Fig. 71(b). The small uncertainty below the pseudo-threshold is too low and requires a re- evaluation.
FIG. 67. (Color online) C omparison of 209Bi(n,xn) cross sec- tion evaluations with experimental data from EXFOR.
FIG. 68. (Color online) Uncertainties and correlations of  the
209Bi(n,3n)207Bi cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library.
FIG. 69. (Color online) 237Np(n,f) cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library relative to other data. Comparison to selected experimental data from EXFOR [73].
FIG. 70. (Color online) The same as the previous ﬁgure. Ratio of cross section evaluations to IRDFF-II evaluation.
197Au(n,γ)198Au, 235U(n,f), 238U(n,f), 238U(n,γ)239U,
10B(n,α)7Li, and 6Li(n,t)4He
The reactions in this section are Neutron Standards (or reaction cross section evaluated together with the Stan- dards) in certain limited energy ranges and are described in detail in a previous publication [33]. What is shown here are examples, where the content of the IRDFF-II li- brary signiﬁcantly exceeds the energy range of the IAEA Standards 2017.
The 197Au(n,γ)198Au reaction cross sections are com-
pared to experimental data in Fig. 72. The capture cross sections of gold are probably the best known capture cross sections over a broad energy range; this is why they are declared a standard at thermal and in the energy range
MeV to 2.5 MeV [90]. The ENDF/B-VIII.0 evalua- 0.2tion is consistent with the IAEA Standards 2017 for this
reaction, hence it was adopted for IRDFF-II. Comparison with other evaluations is shown as ratio to IRDFF-II in
Fig. 73 for the fast energy range, since the comparison in the resonance range below ˜4 keV is not meaningful due to the resonances.
The correlation matrix is given in Fig. 74(a) and the corresponding uncertainty is shown in Fig. 74(b).
The tritium and 4He production reaction 6Li(n,t)4He
FIG. 71. (Color online) Uncertainties and correlations of the
237Np(n,f) cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library.FIG. 72. (Color online) 197Au(n,γ)198Au cross section evalua- tion in IRDFF-II library relative to other data. Comparison to selected experimental data from EXFOR [73].
has also been evaluated for the IAEA Neutron Stan- dards 2017 in the energy range from 0.0253 eV to 1.4 MeV, being the standard energy region from the thermal point
FIG. 73. (Color online) The same as the previous ﬁgure. Ratio of cross section evaluations to IRDFF-II evaluation.FIG. 74. (Color online) Uncertainties and correlations of  the
197Au(n,γ)198Au cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library.
up to 1 MeV. The ENDF/B-VIII.0 evaluation was per- formed over a broader energy range and is consistent with the IAEA Standards 2017. However, by a careful consider-
ation of available experimental evidence it was concluded that the structure in the cross section near 5 MeV that appears in the ENDF/B-VIII.0 is questionable. Note that this regions is outside the Neutron Standards range. From 8 MeV and 20 MeV the ENDF/B-VIII.0 cross sections for this reaction are equal to those in EAF-2010. To smooth out the structure in the ENDF/B-VIII.0 cross sections around 5 MeV the data from EAF-2010 were adopted above 2.75 MeV up to 60 MeV. In this respect IRDFF-II diﬀers from ENDF/B-VIII.0. Comparison of the cross sec- tions for the 6Li(n,X)3H reaction with experimental data and with ENDF/B-VIII.0 and IRDFF-II evaluations is shown in Fig. 75, from which the anomalous behaviour of the ENDF/B-VIII.0 cross sections can be seen at 5 MeV.
FIG. 75. (Color online) C omparison of 6Li(n,t)4He cross sec- tions with other evaluations and experimental data from EX- FOR.
The correlation matrix is given in Fig. 76(a) and the corresponding uncertainty is shown in Fig. 76(b).The 10B(n,α) reaction cross section was also evaluated as part of the IAEA Neutron Standards 2017 from ther- mal to 1 MeV [33]. Both (n,α) reactions on the ground and the ﬁrst excited state of the 10B target were evaluated and coded as MT=800 and MT=801 in ENDF-6 format. The ENDF/B-VIII.0 evaluation is consistent with these Standards.
26.6Li(n,X)3H and 6Li(n,X)4He
The gas-production reactions from neutrons incident on light targets were not evaluated separately. Direct tri- tium production in 6Li, with 4He as the residual was eval- uated within IAEA Standards 2017 [33] and is described in Sec. VB 25. Other gas-production cross sections were assembled by reviewing existing evaluated data libraries and choosing the most appropriate combination of data, as described below. In particular, the libraries that were considered include ENDF/B-VIII.0, EAF-2010 European Activation File and TENDL-2015 sublibrary ”s60”, which contains explicit cross section representation with covari- ances up to 60 MeV. The TENDL-2015.s60 library comes from TALYS nuclear model calculations, which are not best suited for light nuclei, but the library was considered because of its completeness in terms of reactions. How-
corresponding cross section mean value.
FIG. 76. (Color online) Uncertainties and correlations of the
6Li(n,t)4He cross section evaluation in IRDFF-II library.
ever, TENDL-2015 library was found inappropriate for neutron induced reactions on boron and lithium isotopes by extensive comparison with available experimental data and other available evaluations, and will not be discussed in this subsection.
Tritium production from 6Li in IRDFF-II corresponds uniquely to the 6Li(n,t)4He reaction (ENDF-6 MT 105),
which is a Neutron Standard up to 1 MeV and was dis- cussed in the previous section; a comparison of the cross section with experimental data and with ENDF/B-VIII.0 is shown in Fig. 75.
Cross sections for the 3He production are only available
in the TENDL-2015 library, and were neglected for the assembly of the IRDFF-II library.
Since the neutron metrology community also uses mass spectrometry methods to measure 4He production in ma- terials such as 6Li, the new IRDFF-II library also in- cludes this reaction. The  4He  nucleus  is  the  residual of the 6Li(n,t) reaction that is discussed in Sec. VB 26. There are other reaction channels that can produce 4He, as can be seen in Table 12. As a contributor to the 4He production, all libraries contain the reaction 6Li(n,2nα)
TABLE 12. Gas production reactions in IRDFF-II library from neutrons interacting with 6Li target. The MT numbers (reactions) used in IRDFF-II assembly following the ENDF-6 format, and the relevant reaction products are highlighted in bold. LR is the ENDF-6 break-up ﬂag.FIG. 77. (Color online) Comparison of the 4He gas-production cross sections for the n+6Li reaction in the IRDFF-II library. Comparison of data from selected evaluated libraries relative to the IRDFF-II evaluation.FIG. 78. (Color online) The same as the previous ﬁgure. Con- tribution of diﬀerent reaction channels to the total 4He gas- production cross sections in the IRDFF-II evaluation.
(MT 24). The ENDF/B-VIII.0 evaluation was  adopted up to 20 MeV, and the  EAF-2010  library from  20  up to 60 MeV, renormalized for continuity at 20 MeV. The EAF-2010 library contains reaction 6Li(n,nd) MT 32 ex- plicitly, while in the ENDF/B-VIII.0 library this reaction is represented by discrete level inelastic cross sections 6Li(n,n) of the MT 50 series, with a consecutive break- up of the residual. Note that not all discrete levels con- tribute to the 4He production, governed by the LR ﬂag  in the ENDF ﬁle. The MT 32 contribution reconstructedfrom the discrete inelastic levels in the ENDF/B-VIII.0 library was adopted for IRDFF-II, while renormalized EAF-2010 cross sections were adopted from  20  up to 60 MeV. The total 4He production in IRDFF-II is higher than in EAF-2010 library due to the larger cross section from the 6Li(n,n) channels. Fig. 77 compares the 4He gas production cross sections in IRDFF-II, ENDF/B-VIII.0 and EAF-2010 libraries. Fig. 78 shows the relative con- tribution to the 4He production cross section from the various reaction channels in IRDFF-II.27.7Li(n,X)3H and 7Li(n,X)4HeSince elemental Li is composed of both 6Li and 7Li, dif- ferent enrichments of Li are often used in neutron metrol- ogy measurements. Thus, the IRDFF-II library also pro- vides the tritium and 4He gas-production cross sections in 7Li. This enables users to combine the cross sections in a manner that represents the composition of their dosime- ters.
The list of reactions contributing to tritium production is shown in Table 13. In the EAF-2010 library the tritium production is represented by reaction 7Li(n,nα) MT 22, while in the ENDF/B-VIII.0 library this reaction is rep- resented by discrete level inelastic cross sections 7Li(n,n) of the MT 50 series, with a consecutive break-up of the residual from most of the discrete levels into 3H and 4He. Reaction MT 33 reconstructed from the discrete inelastic levels from ENDF/B-VIII.0 was adopted for IRDFF-II, extrapolated above 20 MeV with MT 22 from EAF-2010 since the two reactions produce the  same  set of emit- ted particles. The tritium production cross sections are plotted in Fig. 79. The bumps in the cross section near threshold come from the contributions of diﬀerent dis- crete levels. The ENDF/B-VIII.0 cross sections are equal to IRDFF-II and are not included in the plot.
Cross sections for the 3He production are only  avail- able in the TENDL-2015  library.  The  reaction  thresh- old is near 30 MeV. The  absolute  magnitude  of  the  cross sections is about 2 mb at the peak, according to TENDL-2015. Considering that the data from TALYS calculations for the gas production data in light elements   in TENDL-2015.s60 are not reliable and there is no al- ternative source for the 3He production reaction cross sections, these cross sections were not included in the IRDFF-II library.
The list of reactions contributing  to  4He production is also shown in Table 13. The libraries EAF-2010 and ENDF/B-VIII.0 contain reactions 7Li(n,2nα) MT 24 and
TABLE 13. Gas production reactions in IRDFF-II library from neutrons interacting with 7Li target. The MT numbers (reactions) used in IRDFF-II assembly following the ENDF-6 format, and the relevant reaction products are highlighted in bold. LR is the ENDF-6 break-up ﬂag.
FIG. 79. (Color online) Comparison of the tritium production cross sections for the n+7Li reaction for diﬀerent evaluated data libraries.FIG. 80. (Color online) Comparison of the 4He gas-production cross sections for the n+7Li reaction in the IRDFF-II library. Comparison of data from selected evaluated libraries relative to the IRDFF-II evaluation.
7Li(n,γ) MT 102; the latter is adopted for IRDFF-II. The ENDF/B-VIII.0 library contains discrete inelastic levels where the residual is ﬂagged to break up as 7Li(n,nt)
FIG. 81. (Color online) The same as the previous ﬁgure. Con- tribution of diﬀerent reaction channels to the total 4He gas- production cross sections in the IRDFF-II evaluation.
MT 33. The summed contributions from the respective levels are stored in IRDFF-II as MT 33. The EAF-2010 li- brary takes a diﬀerent approach, it contains the 7Li(n,nα) MT 22 reaction, which involves exactly the same outgo- ing particles. The ENDF/B-VIII.0 library also contains the MT 25  reaction, which has  a  higher threshold and is not present in EAF-2010. This reaction was adopted from ENDF/B-VIII.0 and extrapolated to 60 MeV with the shape of the 7Li(n,np) reaction, which is mostly equiv- alent. The contribution of this reaction is mainly respon- sible for the higher total alpha-production cross section in IRDFF-II compared to EAF-2010. The 4He produc- tion cross sections from diﬀerent libraries are plotted in Fig. 80 and the contribution of diﬀerent reaction chan- nels in IRDFF-II are shown in Fig. 81. Note the capture cross section as a contributor to the 4He production at low energies. Two alpha particles are produced after the disintegration of the capture product, hence the 4He pro- duction cross section is by a factor of two higher than the capture cross section itself.
There is an issue regarding the 7Li(n,γ) MT 102 reac- tion, which is found in all libraries and is also included in IRDFF-II. The residual nucleus is 8Li, and this nuclide decays into 8Be with a half-life of 0.9 s, which, in turn, breaks up almost instantaneously into two alpha particles. In general, the contribution of this reaction is small, but
it is the only contribution to alpha production at thermal energies - a region where the cross section is about 0.1 b
– and its multiplicity is two.
Beware that the contribution of this reaction is not included in the gas production cross sections generated from the ENDF/B-VIII.0 data with the current version of the NJOY-2016 code because the reaction is not ﬂagged for break-up. Due to the very short half-life involved, the radiative capture reaction was included as a contributor to alpha production in the present work for IRDFF-II by changing the corresponding break-up ﬂag.
28.natLi(n,X)4He
In order to support application of the IRDFF-II library to irradiations that use a lithium dosimeter having natu- rally occurring lithium with nominal abundances for 6Li and 7Li, the IRDFF-II library also provides an entry for the 4He gas production on elemental lithium. The cross sections for the gas production in natural element lithium were constructed from the isotopic data in IRDFF-II us- ing  the  recommended natural abundance  data.  Fig.  82
compares the 4He gas production on 6Li, 7Li, and natLi targets. The 4He gas production cross sections of natLi
are normalized per Li atom of the element with an average mass.
FIG. 82. (Color online) Comparison of the IRDFF-II 4He gas- production cross sections in neutron induced reactions on 6Li, 7Li, and natLi targets.
29. 10B(n,X)4He
Gas production in the boron isotopes is very complex because many reactions contribute and very often the residual nuclei undergo further break-up. The  complexity of the gas production cross sections in terms of contribut- ing reactions is captured in Table 14. As in the case of Li, the cross sections from the TENDL-2015 library are not considered in the analysis because boron is a light element and TALYS calculations underlying TENDL-2015.s60 are
not appropriate in such cases. The discussion in this sec- tion is limited to the 4He production from neutrons inci- dent on 10B, for tritium production relevant contributing reactions are listed in Table 14.
The 10B(n,α) reaction cross sections are part of the IAEA Neutron Standards 2017 from thermal to 1 MeV. The ENDF/B-VIII.0 evaluation is consistent with these Standards. The library also contains discrete level inelas- tic cross sections of the MT 50 series, which are ﬂagged for break-up of the residual, equivalent to the reactions under MT 22 and 35. In addition there are also discrete level cross sections for the 10B(n,t) MT 700 and 10B(n,α) MT 800 series, that can be summed into MT 105 and MT 107, respectively. For IRDFF-II the 10B(n,α) MT 107 cross sections are taken from the ENDF/B-VIII.0 library up to 1 MeV because these data agree with the IAEA Neu- tron Standards 2017. Extrapolation to 60 MeV is done using the shape of the 10B(n,α) MT 107 cross sections from the EAF-2010 library.
In the IRDFF-II library the 10B(n,nα) MT 22 cross sections are taken from the summed contributions of the discrete level inelastic cross sections in ENDF/B-VIII.0 up to 20 MeV. Extrapolation to 60 MeV is done using the shape of the 10B(n,nα) MT 22 cross sections from the EAF-2010 library, normalized for continuity at 20 MeV. The data from the ENDF/B-VIII.0 library do not have     a dip near 10 MeV, which is observed in the EAF-2010 data.
The plots of contributing reactions to tritium gas pro- duction are shown in Fig. 83.FIG. 83. (Color online) Comparison of tritium-gas production cross sections for the n+10B reaction for diﬀerent reaction channels in the IRDFF-II library.
The cross section curves from the various libraries are shown in Fig. 84; plots of selected contributing reactions to 4He gas production are shown in Fig. 85.
30. 11B(n,X)4He
Many reaction channels from neutrons incident on 11B result in 4He production and/or tritium production, as seen from Table 15. There are 7 such reactions in the EAF-2010 library. The ENDF/B-VIII.0 library contains only 11B(n,nα) MT 22 and 11B(n,α) MT 107 reactions; the ﬁrst one is much higher than the corresponding one
TABLE 14. Gas production reactions from neutrons interacting with 10B target. The MT numbers (reactions) used in IRDFF-II assembly following the ENDF-6 format, and the relevant reaction products are highlighted in bold. LR is the ENDF-6 break-up  ﬂag.
TABLE 15. Gas production reactions from neutrons interacting with 11B target. The MT numbers (reactions) used in IRDFF-II assembly following the ENDF-6 format, and the relevant reaction products are highlighted in bold. LR is the ENDF-6 break-up  ﬂag.FIG. 84. (Color online) Comparison of the 4He gas-production cross sections for the n+10B reaction in the IRDFF-II library. Comparison of data from evaluated libraries relative to Kneﬀ   et al. measurement [91].
in the EAF-2010 library because it was normalized to the measurement by Kneﬀ (EXFOR #10933019). It can be understood from the original article that the measured quantity was actually the total helium production, there- fore the normalisation in ENDF/B-VIII.0 is not correct. Reactions in the IRDFF-II library are adopted from
FIG. 85. (Color online) The same as the previous ﬁgure. Con- tribution of diﬀerent reaction channels to the total 4He gas- production cross sections in the IRDFF-II evaluation.
the EAF-2010 library, except for those that are also present in ENDF/B-VIII.0. The 11B(n,nα) MT 22 from ENDF/B-VIII.0 was scaled down by 30 % to agree with the total helium-production measurement by Kneﬀ. The cross sections above 20 MeV are taken from the EAF-2010 library, scaled for continuity at 20 MeV.
The cross section curves are shown in Fig. 86. Examples
FIG. 86. (Color online) Comparison of the 4He gas-production cross sections for the n+11B reaction in the IRDFF-II library. Comparison of data from evaluated libraries relative to Kneﬀ   et al. measurement [91].
FIG. 87. (Color online) The same as the previous ﬁgure. Con- tribution of diﬀerent reaction channels to the total 4He gas- production cross sections in the IRDFF-II evaluation.
FIG. 88. (Color online) Comparison of tritium gas-production cross sections for the n+11B reaction for diﬀerent reaction channels in the IRDFF-II library.
of contributing reactions to 4He and tritium gas produc- tion from neutrons interacting with 11B are shown in Figs. 87 and 88.
natB(n,X)4He
Since various 10B enrichments can be used for the dosimeter, users of the library can combine 4He gas gener- ation contributions from 10B and 11B to get the dosimeter response. Some dosimeters use the boron in its natural abundance. To serve as a check for how the individual isotopic contributions should be combined, the IRDFF-II library also includes the 4He gas generation cross section from elemental boron with the naturally occurring iso- topic abundances. Fig. 89 compares the 4He gas produc- tion from the separate isotopes and from the elemental boron ﬁle and experimental data at 14 MeV  measured by Kneﬀ in 1986 [91]. The IRDFF-II is in excellent agree- ment with measured data.FIG. 89. (Color online) Comparison of the IRDFF-II 4He gas-production cross sections in neutron induced reactions on natB target relative to Kneﬀ et al. measurement [91].
VI.NEUTRON BENCHMARK FIELDS
The following subsections describe the source for the neutron spectral data used to characterize the benchmark neutron ﬁelds.A.Standard Field
A standard benchmark neutron ﬁeld is deﬁned [92, 94] as a permanent and reproducible neutron ﬁeld that is characterized to state-of-the-art accuracy in terms of neu- tron ﬂuence rate and energy spectra, and one where the associated spatial and angular distributions, and other important ﬁeld quantities, have been veriﬁed by interlab- oratory measurements. A given neutron ﬁeld is considered to be a “standard” only over a speciﬁed neutron energy range and there is only one type of “standard neutron ﬁeld” for a given energy range. The recognized “stan- dard neutron ﬁeld” is the 252Cf spontaneous ﬁssion ﬁeld. Secs. VII A and  VIII A address how this ﬁeld is used   to provide supporting IRDFF-II validation evidence and how consistent are those evidences.
FIG. 90. (Color online) Standard 252Cf(s.f.) prompt ﬁssion neutron spectrum (PFNS) and its uncertainties [33] as a ratio to the Maxwellian distribution with kT =1.42 MeV (both spectra are normalised to unity). Spectrum extrapolation from 20 MeV to 30 MeV is shown by dash line. The recent new measurements [96] and [97] are plotted as symbols. Note that the scale changes from log to linear above 5 MeV.
1. 252Cf(s.f.)
The 252Cf spontaneous ﬁssion neutron ﬁeld is deﬁned to be a standard neutron ﬁeld over the energy range from
0.1 MeV to 20 MeV.The standard reference prompt ﬁssion neutron spec- trum from spontaneous ﬁssion of 252Cf(s.f.) [93] is char- acterized based on neutron time-of-ﬂight measurements and subsequent model-independent evaluation. This work provided the spectrum deﬁnition incorporated into the IRDFF-II library up to 20 MeV. The spectrum was then extrapolated up to 30 MeV of neutron outgoing energies by adding a point at 30 MeV, preserving the energy slope as below 20 MeV. All 252Cf(s.f.) spectrum evaluations are based on original Mannhart work [95]. There are some minor diﬀerences above 10 MeV outgoing neutron energy between IDRFF-II spectrum and the one included in the ENDF/B-VIII.0 library.
Figs. 91(a) 91(b) shows the correlation matrix and the energy-dependent standard deviation for the 252Cf(s.f.) spectrum, correspondingly.
The spectrum is shown in Fig. 90. In the ﬁgure the y-axis is shown as a ratio to the Maxwellian distribution with kT = 1.42 MeV to better capture the large variation in neutron population with increasing energy. Since the time-of-ﬂight (TOF) spectral characterization data only addressed the region up to 20 MeV, the higher energy portion of the spectrum is obtained from the extrapola- tion process described above. Signiﬁcant increases in the spectral uncertainties are seen above 10 MeV and con- tinuing up to the TOF cut-oﬀ energy at 20 MeV. Above this energy, the uncertainty in the extrapolated spectrum is assumed to be the same as that at the 20-MeV last measured value, which is 75 %.
Since the evaluation of the 252Cf(s.f.) prompt ﬁssion
spectrum performed by W. Mannhart in 1987 [95], several new measurements have been carried out by the time-
(b) One-sigma uncertainties in % (≡ 100 ×	μi	), being μi
the corresponding spectrum mean value.
FIG. 91. (Color online) Uncertainties and correlations of the 252Cf(s.f.) standard neutron benchmark spectrum in IRDFF-II library.
of-ﬂight technique. The two newest measurements are discussed below. In 2015, N. Kornilov has measured the PFNS in the neutron range 2 MeV to 20 MeV [96]. In 2017, E. Blain and co-workers have reported two data sets measured by diﬀerent detectors: from 0.05 to 2.8 MeV and from 0.75 to 7.3 MeV, however both - in arbitrary units [97]. Regrettably these new experiments, as  seen in Fig. 90, have rather large uncertainties or ﬂuctuations, thus contributing little to the improvement of the existing 252Cf(s.f.) standard.
B.Experimentally Measured Potential Reference Neutron Fields
Reference neutron benchmark ﬁelds are deﬁned [92, 94] as permanent and reproducible neutron ﬁelds, less-well- characterized than a standard ﬁeld, but acceptable as a measurement reference by a community of users. As part of the validation eﬀort, an IAEA-sponsored Coordinated Research Project has focused on addressing improving the ﬁdelity of the spectral characterization at candidate ref-
erence benchmark ﬁelds and using data gathered in these ﬁelds as part of the validation evidence for the IRDFF-II library. The following subsections address the spectral characterization data that have been used in the support- ing analysis reported here.FIG. 92. (Color online) Reference 235U(nth,f) prompt ﬁssion neutron spectrum (PFNS) [100–102]  and  its  uncertainties as a ratio to the Maxwellian distribution with kT  =  1.32 MeV (the spectra are normalised to unity). Red curve - from ENDF/B-VIII.0 [31], black curve – from ENDF/B-VII.1 [34]. Extrapolations beyond 20 MeV or 30 MeV are shown by dashed lines. Note that the scale changes from log to linear above 5 MeV.
1. 235U(nth,f)
A new 235U thermal ﬁssion spectrum evaluation was de-
veloped within an IAEA-sponsored project using a least- square code GMAP in conjunction with shape data rela- tive to the very-well-characterized 252Cf(s.f.) prompt ﬁs- sion neutron spectrum (PFNS). This new spectrum was the result of contributions from the IAEA CIELO collab- oration [40, 41, 98, 99], the IAEA Neutron Standard com- mittee [33], and the IAEA Prompt Fission Neutron Spec- tra project [100–102]. The spectrum incorporated into the IRDFF-II library was converted from the ENDF/B-VIII.0 MF5/MT18 entry [31]. The associated covariance matrix was taken from the MF35/MT18 entry. Fig. 92 shows this 235U thermal neutron ﬁssion spectrum – represented as  a ratio to a Maxwellian distribution at a temperature of kT=1.32 MeV.
Figs. 93(a) 93(b) shows the correlation matrix and the energy-dependent standard deviation for the 235U(nth,f) reference spectrum, correspondingly.2.233U(nth,f) and 239Pu(nth,f)
The PFNS of thermal-neutron induced ﬁssion on 233U and 239Pu targets were evaluated together with the PFNS of thermal-neutron induced ﬁssion on 235U target within the IAEA CRP on the Prompt Fission Neutron Spectra of Major Actinides [102]. A very few measured reaction rates
the corresponding spectrum mean value.
FIG. 93. (Color online) Uncertainties and  correlations  of the 235U(nth,f) standard neutron benchmark spectrum in IRDFF-II library.
are available, one set for the 233U(n,f) PFNS, none for 239Pu(n,f), but some measurements were reported as dou- ble ratios of spectral indices (SI) to the ratio in PFNS of Pu. Since the spectra are not readily available elsewhere, they are included in the IRDFF-II spectra ﬁle. The plot  of the 233U spectrum is shown in Fig. 94 as a ratio to      a Maxwellian spectrum with temperature kT =1.30 MeV. The plot of the  239Pu  spectrum  is  shown  in  Fig.  95 as a ratio to a Maxwellian spectrum with temperature   kT =1.35 MeV. These spectra were not modiﬁed above 10 MeV, but the proposed modiﬁcation of the high-energy tail was described in detail in Ref. [102].
3.9Be(d,n) Reaction Neutron Field
The development and qualiﬁcation of fusion reactor materials requires irradiation in a neutron spectrum that includes very high ﬂux at 14 MeV along with lower energy neutrons to simulate the ﬁrst wall spectrum at proposed fusion power reactors. Since fusion reactors do not exist for the testing and ﬁssion reactors lack any signiﬁcant ﬂux
FIG. 94. (Color online) The 233U(nth,f) prompt ﬁssion neutron spectrum (PFNS) ratios to the Maxwellian  distribution  with kT =1.30 MeV. Note that the scale changes from log to linear above 5 MeV.
FIG. 95. (Color online) The 239Pu prompt ﬁssion neutron spectra (PFNS) ratios to the Maxwellian distribution with kT =1.35 MeV. Note that the scale changes from log to linear above 5 MeV.
at 14 MeV, it has been proposed to produce suitable neu- tron ﬁelds by stopping intense deuteron beams produced by particle accelerators in thick Be or Li targets. This produces a very high ﬂux of neutrons over a continuous energy spectrum that can  be designed to  peak around  14 MeV. The IFMIF (International Fusion Materials Irra- diation Facility) [27] is being proposed to study radiation damage in candidate fusion reactor materials.
Extensive work was carried out at Argonne National Laboratory to characterize the 9Be(d,n) reaction at 2.6   to 7 MeV incident deuterons on thick Be targets [103– 105], but these spectral representations are not included in IRDFF-II. Additional  experiments  were  performed at deuteron energies of 16 MeV and 40 MeV  produc- ing neutron spectra as shown in Fig. 96. The neutron spectrum produced with deuteron energy of 16 MeV was measured at the Argonne National Laboratory tandem accelerator [106]. The neutron spectrum produced with
deuteron energy of 40 MeV was measured at the Oak Ridge Isochronous Cyclotron (ORIC) [107]. The data from this facility can be found  in  the  EXFOR  entry No. C1832.002. The neutron spectra were very well char- acterized by using neutron time-of-ﬂight technique. This method accurately determines the energy of neutrons in- teracting with a neutron detector at a ﬁxed distance from the beryllium target by  measuring the time required for a neutron to be created in the target and then travel to  the neutron detector. The deuteron beam is pulsed to provide the start time and the stop time is determined when a neutron is detected. The absolute accuracy of the neutron ﬂux is determined by the eﬃciency of the neu- tron detector, which is about 10 %. Dosimetry materials were then irradiated in prepared geometries resulting in accurately measured reaction rates in well-characterized neutron spectra.
FIG. 96. (Color online) Neutron time-of-ﬂight spectra are shown for thick Be targets at deuteron  energies  of 16  and 40 MeV at zero degrees. The red lines show neutron spectral adjustment in 725 groups using the new IRDFF-II natural element cross sections with STAYSL-PNNL.
C.Reference Neutron Fields from Detailed Computational Models
1.SPR-III Fast Burst Reactor Central Cavity
SPR-III is an advanced fast-burst Godiva-type reactor with a large 16.5-cm central cavity, commissioned in 1975 at Sandia National Laboratory, NM, U.S.A. [108]. This is an unmoderated cylindrical assembly of uranium enriched to 93 % 235U and alloyed with 10-wgt-% molybdenum to ensure phase stability. The core consists of eighteen fuel plates mechanically fastened into two halves of nine plates each.  The  mass  of  the  individual  plates  varies between
6.8 and 15.4 kg and the total mass of the core is about 258 kg. The nine upper plates are held stationary by the core support structure; the nine lower plates are attached to an electromechanical drive mechanism. Four reﬂector- type control devices are used; three for control and the fourth  is  the  burst  element.  The  control  elements are used to establish a critical conﬁguration of the core and to adjust the pulse yields. Although it was developed primarily for the radiation testing of electronic parts and systems, it has been used in a wide variety of research activities. It is positioned in the centre of an air-ﬁlled shield building called a Kiva. SPR-III has a 10B shroud that serves to decouple it from room return. The reactor can be operated in steady-state (up  to  10  kW  power) or pulsed mode (10 MJ in an 76 μs FWHM pulse that yields approximately 5x1014 n/cm2 in the reactor central cavity).
The reference SPR-III spectrum adopted within the IRDFF-II library characterizes the fuel centreline of the central cavity. High ﬁdelity calculations using the MCNP, version 6.2.0, point cross section Monte Carlo code with the ENDF/B-VIII.0 cross sections and a detailed 3D ge- ometry were performed to provide the best possible calcu- lated neutron spectrum. The reactor, support structures, Kiva, and dosimetry test ﬁxture were modelled in detail. The coupled neutron/photon calculation was performed using the MPI version of the code with 40 processors and using the L’Ecuyer 63-bit random number generator. The calculation used 5015 cycles with 2000000 source neutrons per cycle, of which 15 cycles were used to establish the normal ﬁssion distribution before beginning tally accumu- lation, for a total neutron source tally sample size of 100 billion neutrons. The neutron spectrum was scored in the 640-group SAND-II energy structure.
For this benchmark neutron ﬁeld to be used to sup- port the validation  of  the  IRDFF-II  cross  sections,  it is  important  that  there  be  an  uncertainty  estimate  of
the calculated “a priori ” spectrum, in the form of an energy-dependent covariance matrix, and that this uncer-
tainty estimate be derived independent of the activation measurements that are being used in the intended vali- dation activity. This derivation of an energy-dependent uncertainty for a ﬁne-group calculated spectrum is a very challenging task and a task where existing uncertainty quantiﬁcation (UQ) methodologies are deﬁcient and ac- tive work is still needed by the community. In addition  to consideration of the numerical uncertainty, great care must be taken to not only address the uncertainty in the underlying transport cross sections and material geom- etry  used  in  the  radiation  transport  calculation, but to
also investigate existing sources of “model defect”, i.e., potentially correlated sources of uncertainty in the calcu-
lational models not directly captured in the user input parameters. A covariance matrix for this calculated spec- trum was derived using the methods detailed in Refer- ence [109] and subject-matter expertise based on previ- ous modelling activities and subsequent comparison with
the results obtained through spectrum adjustment meth- ods. This “a priori ” covariance matrix for the reference neutron, derived independent of the reaction activities
addressed later in this paper as part of the IRDFF-II validation evidence, is included as part of the IRDFF-II ﬁle that was outlined in Sec. II.H. This  content from  the covariance matrix is seen in Figs. 97 and 98. Fig. 97 shows the energy-dependent uncertainty in the neutron spectrum. Fig. 98 shows the correlation matrix.
FIG. 97. Standard deviation for the calculated SPR-III fast burst reactor central cavity neutron spectrum.
FIG. 98. (Color online) Correlation matrix for the Calculated SPR-III fast burst reactor central cavity neutron spectrum.
2.ACRR Pool-type Reactor Central Cavity
ACRR is a pulse and steady-state, pool-type research reactor located at Sandia National Laboratory, Albu- querque, U.S.A. The ACRR maintains a large, dry irradi- ation cavity at the centre of its core. ACRR is typically used to perform irradiation testing where a high neutron ﬂuence is required for a short period of time. Historically, ACRR has been used for a wide variety of experiment campaigns including electronics damage testing, nuclear fuels testing, space nuclear thermal propulsion testing, and medical isotope production. ACRR is currently fully operational and is used to add validation evidence for new dosimetry-quality reactions with a response in the epithermal and fast ﬁssion energy regions. ACRR’s main attributes include a large, dry central irradiation cavity, epithermal neutron ﬂuence, and large pulsing capabilities
FIG. 99. (Color online) Neutron reference reactor spectra for ACRR ﬁssion ﬁelds with various “Bucket” modifying environ- ments.  Note that the scale changes from log to linear above  1 MeV.
that permit a high irradiation and rapid recovery of the dosimeter.
ACRR can operate in a steady-state, transient, or pulse mode. In the steady-state mode, the operating power level is limited to 4 MW. In the pulse mode, a maximum pulse size of 250 MJ with a full-width half-maximum (FWHM) of 6 ms. In the transient mode, the reactor power shape  can be tailored to the desired requirements for a total reac- tor energy deposition of 300 MJ. The transient mode can be used to increase the reactor power quickly; for example, a ramp increase in power level linear with time from low power to high power. ACRR is fueled by a 236 element array of UO2-BeO fuel elements. The fuel is uranium en- riched to 35 weight percent 235U, with 21.5 weight percent UO2 and 78.5 weight percent BeO. The ACRR fuel ele- ments are stainless steel clad, 3.747 cm in outer diameter and 52.25 cm in fuel length. Within the elements are niobium cups that hold the UO2BeO fuel pieces. ACRR   is controlled by two fuel-followed safety rods, three poi- son (void-followed) transient rods, and six fuel-followed control rods. The control rods make up part of the 236 elements for the normal core conﬁguration. Further infor- mation regarding the ACRR irradiation environment can be found in internal laboratory documents [110].
The ACRR reference spectrum  [111]  adopted within
the IRDFF-II library characterizes the core centreline of the central cavity with the 32-inch pedestal. High ﬁdelity calculations were performed to provide the best possi- ble calculated neutron spectrum. This is the spectrum that should be used as input to various spectrum adjust- ment codes, or as the trial spectrum in iterative unfolding codes. The radiation transport was performed with the continuous energy, three-dimensional Monte Carlo parti- cle transport code MCNP [64]. The MCNP model of the ACRR central cavity with the 32-inch pedestal is shown in Fig. 100. The coupled neutron/photon calculation was performed using the MPI version of the code with 40 pro- cessors and using the L’Ecuyer 63-bit random number generator. The calculation used 5015 cycles with 2000000 source neutrons per cycle, of which 15 cycles were used to
establish the normal ﬁssion distribution before beginning tally accumulation, for a total neutron source tally sample size of 100 billion neutrons. The neutron spectrum was scored in the 640-bin SAND-II energy group structure.
For this benchmark neutron ﬁeld to be used in sup- port of the validation of the IRDFF-II cross sections, a
calculated ”a priori ” spectrum, in the form of an energy- dependent covariance matrix, and one that has been de-
veloped independent of the activation measurements that are being used in the intended validation activity, is re- quired. The covariance matrix for this calculated spec- trum was derived using the methods detailed in Refer- ence [109] and subject-matter expertise based on previ- ous modelling activities and subsequent comparison with the results obtained through spectrum adjustment meth-
ods. This ”a priori ” covariance matrix for the reference neutron, derived independent of the reaction activities is
included as part of the IRDFF-II ﬁle that was outlined in Sec. II.H. This content from the covariance matrix is seen in Figs. 101 and 102. Fig. 101 shows the energy-dependent uncertainty in the neutron spectrum. Fig. 102 shows the correlation matrix.
FIG. 100. (Color online) Computational model for the ACRR pool-type reactor central neutron spectrum.
FIG. 101. Standard deviation for the calculated ACRR pool- type reactor central neutron spectrum.
FIG. 102. (Color online) Correlation matrix for the calculated ACRR pool-type reactor central neutron spectrum.
3.ACRR Pool-type Reactor Pb-B4C (LB44) Bucket
The ACRR maintains an epithermal neutron ﬂuence spectrum in the core and central cavity. This allows for the neutron energy ﬂuence spectrum to be tailored to the desired speciﬁcations of an experiment by introducing various spectrum modifying buckets. Moderators can be used within the cavity to thermalize the neutron spectrum. Boron and lead can be used to increase the fast neutron ﬂuence ratio and decrease the gamma-ray ﬂuence, respec- tively. The ACRR-LB44 neutron ﬁeld uses a 44-inch tall lead and B4C “bucket” to moderate  neutron  ﬁeld seen at a 5-inch inner diameter experiment location. The pri- mary purpose of this “bucket”, depicted in Fig. 103, is to reduce the thermal component of the neutron spectrum as well as the associated gamma exposure. This neutron spectrum is calculated using the MCNP code in a manner similar to that described in Sec. VI.B.3. The calculated neutron spectrum is shown in Fig. 99.
4.ACRR Pool-type Reactor Cd-Polyethylene Bucket
A cadmium-polyethylene insert is used to tailor the neutron spectrum for this ﬁeld. This Cd-poly “bucket” is designed to enhance the gamma ionization component  in the mixed neutron/gamma  reactor ﬁeld by  a  factor  of two. It also signiﬁcantly reduces the thermal neutron component while leaving the epithermal component of the cavity spectrum. The “bucket” provides an inner ex- periment diameter of about 7.5-inches and accommodates packages with a height of 30-inches. The outer portion of the bucket is fabricated from high density polyethylene with a thickness of 0.55-inches and the inner cadmium sheet is 0.02-inches. The purpose of the bucket, depicted in Fig. 104, is to provide variation in the neutron-to-gamma radiation ﬁeld when testing electronic components. The calculated neutron spectrum is shown in Fig. 99.
FIG. 103. “Bucket” used to tailor the ACRR-LB44 neutron spectrum.
FIG. 104. “Bucket” used to tailor the ACRR-Cd-poly neutron spectrum.
5.ACRR Pool-type Reactor Polyethylene-lead-graphite (PLG) Bucket
A polyethylene-lead-graphite (PLG) insert is used to tailor the neutron spectrum for this ﬁeld. This PLG bucket is designed to ﬁt within the 23.4-cm diameter ACRR central cavity. The purpose of the bucket, depicted
in Fig. 105, is to provide some neutron moderation, reduc- ing the fast neutron component relative to the total neu- tron ﬂuence. The calculated neutron spectrum is shown in Fig. 99.
FIG. 105. “Bucket” used to tailor the ACRR-PLG neutron spectrum.
FIG. 106. ACRR fueled external cavity neutron spectrum.
6.
ACRR Fueled Ring External Cavity (FREC-II)
FREC-II is an external cavity attached to the ACRR and it can be “coupled” or “de-coupled” to the ACRR core depending on the experimenter’s desires. In the “de- coupled” mode, FREC-II is tilted away from the core several degrees and the Ni plate is attached to the ACRR. In this conﬁguration, the FREC-II has minimal eﬀect on the neutronic behaviour of the reactor. With the FREC- II “coupled,” a signiﬁcant neutron and gamma-ray ﬂux exists in the 20-inch, dry, FREC-II cavity.
Fig. 106 depicts the FREC-II cavity as it is coupled   to the ACRR. The FREC-II uses uranium/zirconium- hydride (U-ZrH) TRIGA fuel. FREC-II is fueled with a 186-element array of UZrH1.625 fuel elements. The fuel is 12 weight percent uranium enriched to 20 weight per- cent U-235. The hydrogen atomic ratio is 1.625 hydrogen atoms per Zr atom. The FREC-II fuel elements are stain- less steel clad, 1.5 inches in diameter and 15 inches in fuel length. The UZrH fuel in each element is a single solid cylinder with a 0.25-inch diameter hole at its centre. The centre region maintains a Zr rod with the same diame- ter. FREC-II has four neutron poison elements that are fuel followed and can be positioned full-in (down position- poison in), full-out (up position-poison out), or any posi- tion in between. This feature allows for radial ﬂux tilting in the 20-inch cavity. The FREC-II cavity allows for some advantages compared to the ACRR central cavity for con- sideration by experimenters: 1) the FREC-II can accom- modate larger experiments, since its cavity is 20 inches in diameter compared to the 9-inch diameter central cav- ity; 2) the neutron and gamma-ray ﬂux can be radially tilted by using the FREC rods and positioning the exper- iment within the cavity; and 3) the smaller neutron ﬂux allows for a maximum pulse with a short pulse width ( 8 ms) and smaller total neutron ﬂuence. This same eﬀect could be achieved in the central cavity by positioning the experiment package higher in the cavity.
The calculated neutron spectrum is shown in Fig. 99.
7.Mol-BR1 Cavity 235U Fission Spectrum
A number of standard neutron ﬁelds were designed in the BR1 reactor at the Belgian Nuclear Research Centre SCK CEN in Mol. They are designated as Mark-I, Mark- II, Mark-IIA or Mark-III. Many measurements of cross sections in these standard ﬁelds were reported [112–114]. In particular, most of the measurements of the 235U(nth,f) PFNS spectrum-averaged cross sections were measured in the Mark-IIA neutron ﬁeld, which is very similar to the current Mark-III. The standard ﬁelds are diﬀerenced by enrichment, height and thickness of the 235U cylinder and by  the thickness of the Al claddings inside and outside  of the uranium cylinder. The Mark-III standard neutron ﬁeld was generated by means of a ﬂexible 235U source arrangement located at the centre  of a spherical cavity  in the graphite thermal column [112]. The large 100 cm diameter cavity has minimized the wall return corrections while permitting a large volume for active instruments. The access to the centre of the ﬁeld is enabled through
FIG. 107. (Color online) Computational model of the Mol-BR1 irradiation facility. The 1m diameter cavity within the thermal column is shown at the top of the ﬁgure.
FIG. 108. The calculated ﬁssion neutron spectrum inside Mark-III U-235 converter in the Mol BR1 reactor graphite cavity.  Note that the scale changes from log to linear above 1 MeV.
a long 1 mm thick Cd tube, which is loaded with the irradiation samples. The source of ﬁssion neutrons is a 235U cylinder wrapped around the cadmium tube. The Mark-III conﬁguration was re-analysed recently [115] and
the computational model of the core layout is shown in Fig. 107, with the irradiation facility at the top of the ﬁgure.
To refer the dosimetry reaction rates measured in the cavity centre to the ones in the 235U(nth,f) PFNS, the neutron ﬁeld perturbation corrections for the used facility conﬁgurations were calculated and applied by the authors of the measurements. The absolute neutron ﬂuence was established relative to the 252Cf source, or reactions of interest were measured as chosen ratios.
The neutron spectrum inside the MARK-III converter loaded in the BR1 cavity, computed by MCNP-6 with ENDF/B-VIII.0 neutron data, is depicted in Fig. 108. The standard ﬁssion neutron ﬁeld at the BR-1  reactor has been made available for international cooperative ef- forts for neutron metrology. Thus the large fraction of the existing cross sections averaged over the reference 235U(nth,f) prompt spectrum was measured there.
8.LR-0  Reactor  at  Rˇeˇz
The  LR-0  reactor  of  the  Research  Centre  Rˇeˇz  near Prague, Czech Republic is an experimental zero-power light-water-moderated reactor. The core is placed in a 6.5 m high Al tank with diameter of 3.5 m. The large reac- tor vessel is a legacy of the former heavy water reactor
project which was carried out back in the 60s. At the end of the 70s, the refurbishment was accomplished and the reactor core was converted to light-water-moderated to support research in this ﬁeld. The ﬁrst criticality of the light water version was reached in December 1982.
The main scope of the LR-0 research were some  lat-  tice studies of the VVER-440 and VVER-1000 reactor. Nominal thermal neutron ﬂux density is 109 n.cm−2.s−1, which corresponds to the thermal power of 1 kW. Thanks  to the low power, the fuel is considered to be physically fresh during all experiments. Later, the  full-scale  reﬂec- tor segment of the VVER-1000 reﬂector was installed to the LR-0 vessel. Thus, the so called ”VVER-1000 Mock- up” experiments were enabled. The only signiﬁcant dif- ference between a real VVER-1000 reactor core and the VVER-1000 Mock-up is the height, because the LR-0 does not need so much fuel as an energy-producing reactor. De- spite the shorter fuel assemblies, the LR-0 reactor can be used for VVER-1000 and VVER-440 reactor experiments focused  on criticality,  neutron  transport  and  dosimetry to support services for utilities. For reproducibility, the full-scale simulators of the VVER-1000 internals are per- manently installed in the LR-0 tank (see Fig. 109, left).
The large reactor vessel oﬀers space for the variety of experiments with cores physically and neutronically de- coupled from the VVER-1000 Mock-up. Based on this, smaller cores consisting of six hexagonal VVER-1000 fuel assemblies were designed to extend the experimental port- folio. The small core occupying only seven lattice posi- tions is the simplest assembly which can be formed in the LR-0 reactor and it was also benchmarked. This bench- mark core contains fuel assemblies with enrichment of
3.3 % surrounding one void hexagonal channel exactly ﬁtting to the fuel lattice. As mentioned, the LR-0 reaches only negligible burn-up, thus redistribution of the ﬁssion source does not occur due to this eﬀect and high repro- ducibility of experiments can be guaranteed.
In the past, neutron spectra [116] and ﬂux distribu- tion [117] in the centre of the dry assembly have been val- idated as well as the criticality [118] and neutron emission distribution [119] of the driver core. Therefore, the ﬁeld in the void assembly can be understood as the reference neutron ﬁeld. Low ﬂux experiments at 2 107 n.cm−2.s−1 in ﬂux over 1 MeV with some larger samples have been performed. Only low activities of threshold reactions can be induced in this ﬁeld, hence closer measuring geometry during gamma spectrometry was selected. This is possible thanks to a well-deﬁned eﬃciency curve in the used HPGe semiconductor measurement arrangement. More details concerning the core description can be found in the IR- PhE Project Handbook [120]. The spectrum in the centre
of the dry assembly of the Rˇeˇz-LR0 reactor is shown in Fig. 110.
9.TRIGA-JSI Pneumatic Tube Irradiation Channel
The  Joˇzef  Stefan  Institute  (JSI)  TRIGA  reactor  in Ljubljana, Slovenia is a 250 kW light-water pool-type TRIGA Mark II reactor with uranium zirconium hydride fuel elements and an annular graphite reﬂector, cooled by
natural convection. The reactor achieved ﬁrst criticality in 1966. Due to its very well characterized irradiation ﬁelds its main applications, at present, are Neutron Ac-
tivation Analysis (NAA), radiation hardness testing of detectors and electronic components (i.e., reference neu- tron radiation hardness irradiation facility for the CERN
LHC accelerator and other accelerators within the EC H2020 project AIDA-II - Advanced European Infrastruc- tures for Detectors at Accelerators), support for testing  of neutron instrumentation detectors (ﬁssion chambers, self-powered neutron detectors) support for development of radiation-hard products, code testing and validation.
The JSI TRIGA reactor facility is described in detail in the publications [121, 122]. The reactor core is located at the bottom of a 6.25 m high open tank, 2 m in diameter. The core has a cylindrical conﬁguration with 91 core loca- tions which can be ﬁlled either by fuel elements or other
components like control rods, a neutron source, irradia- tion channels, etc. The core lattice has an annular but not periodic structure. The fuel elements are arranged in six
concentric rings: A, B, C, D, E and F, with 1, 6, 12, 18, 24 and 30 fuel locations per ring, respectively. The graphite reﬂector surrounding the reactor core is enclosed in alu- minum casing and also houses a special irradiation facility, the rotary specimen rack, with 40 irradiation positions.
The reactor core is supported by a two 3/4-inch alu- minium grid plates, which provide accurate axial and lat- eral positioning of the core components. The fuel elements are cylindrical with stainless steel (SS-304) cladding. Their total length is approximately 28 inches, their di- ameter is 1.478 inches. The fuel material in each element is 15 inches in length. The fuel elements are equipped with cylindrical graphite inserts at the top and bottom ends,
2.6 inches and 3.7 inches in length, respectively, which act as axial reﬂectors.  In  the  centre of the fuel material there is a 0.25-inch-diameter hole which is ﬁlled by a zirconium rod. Between the fuel meat and the bottom graphite  in-  sert there is a 1/32-inch-thick molybdenum disc. The fuel itself is a homogeneous mixture of uranium and zirconium hydride with 12 wt.% uranium, enriched to 20 %.
Three control rods of the fueled-follower type are used in the reactor, i.e., the Regulating (R), Shim (C), and Safety (S) control rods, identical in geometry and com-
position. A fourth control rod, the Transient Rod (T), is equipped with a pneumatic ejection system and enables reactor pulse operation. It is similar to the fueled-follower control rods, but with a so-called air follower, which re- places the fuel part in the fueled-follower control rods. The purpose of the air-follower is to reduce power peak- ing that could appear when the transient rod is in its fully withdrawn position during steady state operation.
During normal operation the reactor core is equipped with 7 irradiation channels. Six of the irradiation chan- nels occupy one core position: the Central Channel (CC), located in the reactor core centre (A1), and ﬁve irradia- tion channels located in the outer F core ring (F15, F19, F22, F24 and F26). Two of these irradiation channels are
equipped with pneumatic sample transfer systems, i.e., the channel in position F22, also denoted as Fast Pneu-
matic Transfer System (FPTS), and in position F24, also denoted as Pneumatic Tube (PT). One channel, the Tri-
FIG. 109. (Color online) Core(left), special Al assembly (right) (from  Ann.   Nucl.   En.  112, pp. 759–768 (2018).).
a schematic diagram of the core conﬁguration.
TABLE 16. Dimensions of the Cd, BN, B4C and 10B4C neu- tron ﬁlters used in the experiments at the JSI TRIGA reactor.The measured quantities in the experiments were re- action rate ratios, either unﬁltered relative to ﬁltered, or one reaction rate relative to another, derived from acti- vation measurements with gamma spectrometry. Irradi- ations were performed in  two  experimental campaigns in the TRIGA-JSI reactor, both in the Pneumatic Tube (PT) irradiation channel. In the ﬁrst campaign, cadmium (Cd) and boron nitride (BN) ﬁlters were employed. The objectives of the campaign were two: ﬁrstly the charac- terization of the neutron spectrum in the PT irradiation channel, and secondly, to investigate the suitability of boron nitride ﬁlters to shift the energy sensitivity of ra- diative capture reactions to the epithermal energy range,
FIG. 111. (Color online) Left: Photograph of the JSI TRIGA reactor core at 250 kW (full power). Right: schematic diagram of the reactor core conﬁguration.
FIG. 112. (Color online) Neutron ﬁlters used in the experi- ments at the JSI TRIGA reactor. From left to right: Cd (1st campaign), BN (1st campaign), BN (2nd campaign), B4C (2nd campaign), 10B4C (2nd campaign).
FIG. 113. (Color online) Unﬁltered and ﬁltered neutron ﬁelds in the TRIGA-JSI reactor. Note that the scale changes from log to linear above 1 MeV.
for cross section validation [123]. In the second campaign, boron nitride (BN), boron carbide (B4C) and enriched boron carbide (10B4C) ﬁlters were employed. The objec- tive of the campaign was to investigate new candidate radiative capture reactions, which are sensitive to the epithermal energy range (broadly between 1 keV and 1 MeV) under boron ﬁlters [124], which could be applicable for epithermal neutron dosimetry. The ﬁlter dimensions are reported in Table 16. Fig. 112 displays the ﬁlters.  Fig. 113 shows the spectra with and without covers.
10.ISNF
The ISNF facility is set up in the spherical cavity inside the graphite column of the reactor. Eight enriched 235U ﬁssion discs, symmetrically mounted in the cavity, convert the thermal neutron ﬂux with an average energy <E> = 0.0253 eV to the fast ﬁssion spectrum. The summary ﬂux is transmitted by the enriched 10B shell and it produces the standard’ neutron ﬁeld at the centre of the cavity.
The eﬀective spectrum range E5% - E95 %, where the
fraction of spectrum equals 5 % and 95 % of the total neu- tron ﬂuence, lies between 8 keV and 4.1 MeV, an averaged energy <E> equals to 970 keV. The spectrum-averaged cross sections were measured at ISFN assembly operated at the research reactor of the U.S. National Bureau of Standards (Gaithersburg) [125–127].
The ISNF spectrum available in IRDF-2002, as seen in Figs. 114 and 115, has obviously unphysical irregularities in the vicinity of 0.4 MeV marked with question marks in Fig. 114. Failing to ﬁnd the original data, we went back to the available description of the facility [125]. The detailed information documented there gave us an opportunity to
FIG. 114. (Color online) The ISNF reference spectrum: origi- nal from IRDF-2002 (red curve, the question marks point to unphysical oscillations) and recalculated in this work (blue). Arrows with dashed lines indicate the resonance energies of the Al total cross sections. The bottom part shows the statisti- cal uncertainties obtained during the Monte Carlo simulation with variance reduction techniques.
FIG. 115. (Color online) Neutron reference reactor spectra available in the IRDF-2002 collection [136]. Note that the  scale changes from log to linear above 1 MeV.
conduct a re-analysis of the spectrum using the MCNP-  6 code with neutron transport cross sections including 235U(nth,f) PFNS from the ENDF/B-VIII.0 library. The calculated neutron energy distribution within the irradia- tion volume is shown in Fig. 114. This ﬁgure shows that the recalculated energy distribution is very close to the ISNF spectrum representation given in the IRDF-2002 li- brary. It indeed exhibits resonances caused by the Al cap of the boron shell, but no longer exhibits the oscillations in the vicinity of 0.4 MeV.
This re-simulated ISFN spectrum, calculated in the 725- groups presentation, is used to compute the SACS and   to support the validation of the IRDFF-II cross sections (see Sec. VII L for details). The indicated numerical un- certainties only capture the statistical uncertainty of the Monte Carlo simulation and do not represent the com-
plete spectrum uncertainty. To reach a similar numerical uncertainty over the whole neutron energy range, at the  1 % level, variance reduction techniques were used. The impact on statistical uncertainty of the variance reduction is shown in the bottom panel of Fig. 114.
11.Sigma–Sigma
Sigma-Sigma is a thermal-fast coupled spherical source assembly located within a conventional graphite thermal column of ﬁssion reactor. The column is a source of ther- mal neutrons that produce the fast ﬁssion spectrum  in the spherical natural uranium shell (thermal-fast conver- tor). The inner boron carbide shell shapes the neutron low-energy tail in such a way to increase the reaction rates within an appropriate energy range.
The eﬀective spectrum range, E5% - E95 % ﬂuence met-
ric, is 20 keV – 3.7 MeV, with an averaged energy <E>
= 730 keV. The Sigma-Sigma assemblies were operated at the Imperial College of Science and Technology (Lon- don) [128, 129], at the Belgian Nuclear Research Centre SCK CEN, in Mol (Belgium) [130, 131], and at the Insti- tute for Nuclear Technology (Bucharest) in cooperation with SCK CEN [132, 133].
The Sigma-Sigma reference spectrum available in IRDF-2002 exhibits a suspicious spectrum shape below 10 keV, as seen in Fig. 115. The paper of A. Fabry and co-workers in 1975 [130] provided a tabulated spectrum which was based on the measurement and discrete ordi- nate calculation with nuclear data available at that time. Comparison of these two spectra shown in Fig. 116 con- ﬁrms the unreliability of the IRDF-2002 data below 10 keV.
Fortunately, several papers [130, 134, 135] have doc- umented detailed speciﬁcations of the Sigma-Sigma as- semblies. Using this information, we have constructed an MCNP model and re-simulated the neutron spectrum for this facility while employing the modern neutron ﬁssion and transport data from the ENDF/B-VIII.0 library. The computed spectrum is close to the original one by Fabry and the IRDF-2002 spectrum over most of the energy range. However, substantial diﬀerences are observed below 1 keV, the region where the resonances of the 238U(n,tot) cross sections produce a ﬁne structure in the spectrum. The newly simulated Sigma-Sigma spectrum was used for the validation of IRDFF-II cross sections, as reported in Sec. VII L. The indicated uncertainties only represent the numerical statistical contributions and have been re- duced to a few percent by applying variance reduction techniques.
12.FNS–graphite Neutron Field with a D-T Source
An experiment was performed at the JAEA-FNS facil- ity in Tokai-mura, Ibaraki-ken, Japan to measure spectral indices in a graphite block irradiated with a D-T source. Reactor-grade graphite blocks were stacked to form a pseudo-cylindrical assembly of 31.4 cm in equivalent ra- dius and 61.0 cm in thickness. The average density of the
FIG. 116. (Color online) The Sigma-Sigma reference spectrum: original from IRDF-2002 (red curve), published by Fabry [130] (green) and recalculated in this work (blue). The bottom part shows the statistical uncertainties obtained in the Monte-Carlo simulations with variance reduction techniques.
graphite blocks was 1.64 g/cm3. The graphite assembly was placed at a distance of 20.3 cm from the DT neutron source. Several foils for the reaction rate measurement of forty dosimetry reactions were inserted into small spaces between the graphite blocks along the  central axis  of the assembly; the reaction rates of the 93Nb(n,2n)92mNb, 115In(n,n’)115mIn and 197Au(n,γ)198Au reactions were measured at four points (9.6, 19.3, 29.3 and 39.5 cm in depth) in the graphite assembly in order to check the reproducibility of the previous in situ experiment on graphite, while those of the other reactions were mea- sured at two points (9.6 and 29.3 cm in depth). The plot of the spectra corresponding to the two depths in graphite are shown in Fig. 117.
FIG. 117. (Color online) The FNS–Graphite reference spec- trum from a D-T neutron source at 96 mm and 293 mm depth in the graphite block. Note that the scale changes from log to linear above 1 MeV.
13.
Godiva Neutron Field from the ICSBEP Handbook
The Los Alamos National Laboratory HEU-MET- FAST-001 (i.e., Godiva) critical assembly [137] consists of a number of discrete highly-enriched uranium metal
pieces that produce a near spherical assembly when joined into a critical conﬁguration. This assembly is modelled as a bare sphere with a 8.7404 cm radius. Reaction rate mea- surements were made at the assembly centre using a com- bination of ﬁssion counters and foils. Flux and reaction rate tallies were extracted from a detailed MCNP 6.2 [64] calculation. The tally region consists of a 0.5 cm diame- ter sphere centered within the critical assembly and the calculated ﬂux and reaction rates result from a 10 billion neutron history job (50 warm-up cycles followed by 4 000 active cycles with 2 500 000 neutrons per cycle). Cross sections for the criticality transport calculation are from ENDF/B-VIII.0 [31] using 293.6 K ACE ﬁles generated by the MCNP Data Team [138]. Godiva’s calculated ﬂux spectrum for this central region is shown in Fig. 118.
FIG. 118. (Color online) Neutron spectra for several critical assemblies containing 235U from the ICSBEP Handbook [141]: Godiva, Flattop-25 and Big-Ten. The spectra are presented in the 725 energy groups and normalized to unity. Note that the scale changes from log to linear above 1 MeV.
14.Flattop-25 Neutron Field from the ICSBEP Handbook
The Los Alamos National Laboratory HEU-MET- FAST-028 (i.e., Flattop-25) critical assembly [139] con- sists of a highly-enriched uranium metal central core sur-
rounded by a large natural uranium metal reﬂector. When assembled in a critical conﬁguration the core and reﬂec-  tor are nearly spherical in shape. Hence this assembly is modelled as a bare sphere of highly-enriched uranium sur- rounded by a large, spherical natural  uranium  reﬂector. The central core radius is 6.1156 cm while the spherical re- ﬂector radius is 18.0086 cm. There is no gap between the central core and the reﬂector in the computer model. Reac- tion rate measurements were made using ﬁssion counters and  foils  at  or  near  the  core  centre  with  selected  mea-
surements performed at various radial distances from the core centre extending into the reﬂector. In this report we focus on the central core. The tally region consists of a 0.5 cm diameter sphere centered within the critical assembly and the calculated ﬂux and reaction rates result from a 5 billion neutron history MCNP 6.2 job (50 warm-up cycles followed by 2 000 active cycles with 2 500 000 neutrons per cycle). Cross sections for the kcode transport job are from ENDF/B-VIII.0 [31] using 293.6 K ACE ﬁles generated by the MCNP Data Team [138]. The Flattop-25 central region multigroup calculated ﬂux spectrum is shown in Fig. 118.
15.Big-Ten Neutron Field from the ICSBEP Handbook
The Los Alamos National Laboratory IEU-MET-FAST- 007 (i.e., Big-10) critical assembly [140] is a large cylin- drical assembly consisting of a heterogeneous mix of solid
and annular uranium metal plates with enrichments vary from “depleted” to highly-enriched. The assembly has a central region consisting of 10 % enriched uranium where reaction rate and ﬂux measurements were made. The cal- culational model incorporates the uranium metal plates so that the various “depleted””, normal uranium, 10 % enriched uranium and highly-enriched uranium regions are accurately portrayed. For calculated ﬂux and reaction rate tallies a small, 0.5 cm diameter sphere is situated within the 10 % enriched region where the ﬁssion coun- ters and foils were positioned. The MCNP 6.2 calculation was run for 5 billion active histories (50 warm-up cycles followed by 2 000 active cycles with 2 500 000 neutrons per cycle). Cross sections for the kcode transport job are from ENDF/B-VIII.0 [31] using 293.6 K ACE ﬁles gen- erated by the MCNP Data Team [138]. The calculated multigroup ﬂux spectrum within this tally sphere is shown in Fig. 118.
16.CFRMF
The Coupled Fast Reactivity Measurements Facility (CFRMF) is located at Idaho National Laboratory (INL) in Idaho Falls, Idaho, U.S.A. The CFRMF is a zoned core critical assembly with a fast-neutron spectrum zone in the centre of an enriched 235U and 10B annulus inside the uranium block [143–145]. The water moderated thermal driver zone are conventional plate-type fuel elements of fully enriched uranium clad in aluminum.
In the past there was a continuing eﬀort to improve the characterization of the CFRMF spectrum both through calculation and spectrometry measurements. Diﬀerent deterministic and Monte-Carlo radiation transport com- puter codes have been employed in the calculations. J.W. Rogers and co-workers [145] have published the results of a one-dimensional calculation with S6/P1 approximation and 71-group average cross sections from ENDF/B-IV covering the energy range 16 MeV to epithermal. This spectrum, as seen in Fig. 119, agrees with the spectrum assigned for CFRMF in the IRDF-2002 which is repre- sented there at 461 energy points. Exceptions include
three points that deviate from the smooth shape above  10 MeV as seen in Fig. 115.
FIG. 119. (Color online) The CFRMF reference spectrum: orig- inal from IRDF-2002 (red curve), published by Rogers [145] (green) and recalculated in this work using 2-D (pink) and R-Z (blue) models. The bottom part shows the statistical un- certainties obtained in the Monte-Carlo criticality simulations with variance reduction. Note that the scale changes from log to linear above 1 MeV.
The one-dimensional model of the CRFMF facility is documented in a published paper [143]. We used this model to re-calculate the CFRMF critical assembly by the MCNP-6 code and employing up-to-date data from ENDF/B-VIII.0. As seen in Fig. 119, the newly calcu- lated spectrum demonstrates more ﬁne structure result- ing from the strongest resonances in the neutron total cross section for 235U and 56Fe (component of stainless steel claddings). However, our calculation is lower than the IRDF-2002 and Roger [145] spectra for energies below 10 keV. Another and more realistic model in the R-Z geometry was published in [145]. It resulted in a repre- sentation of the CFRMF spectrum that is very similar to the cylindrical representation, shown in Fig. 119, but ad- ditionally brings in the thermal and epithermal neutrons, which penetrate through the bottom and top ends of the
access tube that accommodates the activation samples.
Since the reason for this systematic diﬀerence is not clear at this time, we are investigating reﬁnements in the model geometry and have continued to use use the IRDF- 2002 spectrum (after correction of values at energies 12.7,
16.3 and 17.9 MeV) for the calculation of the spectrum- averaged cross sections. Calculation of the spectrum with this model predicts that the 5 % and 95 % limits are between  15  keV  and 2.8  MeV  and its  average energy
<E> equals 741 keV.
17.IPPE–BR1 Neutron Field from the ICSBEP Handbook
The Institute of Physics and Power Engineering FUND- IPPE-FR-MULT-RRR-001 is a Pu metal fuelled critical assembly [142] located in Obninsk, Russia. The core con-
sists of (i) an empty centre tube where foils to be irra- diated are located, (ii) 77 Pu metal rods are set on a hexagonal pitch, (iii) 31 peripheral copper metal rods to ﬁll out the inner core region, (iv) annular uranium metal cylinders used for reactivity control and as radial reﬂec- tors, and (v) axial reﬂectors of uranium metal (lower) and copper metal (upper). The active fuel region is 13.1 cm tall. The MCNP 6.2 model includes a tally region at the core mid-plane in the voided centre rod position. This tally region is 1 cm tall. The MCNP 6.2 model was run for 5 billion active histories (50 warm-up cycles followed by 2 000 active cycles with 2 500 000 neutrons per cy- cle). Cross sections for the kcode transport job are from ENDF/B-VIII.0 [31] using 293.6 K ACE ﬁles generated by the MCNP Data Team [138]. The calculated multi- group ﬂux spectrum within this tally sphere is shown in Fig. 120.
D.Potential Reference Neutron Fields from Detailed Computational Models
The neutron ﬁelds for several well-known Pu-fuelled critical assemblies are shown in this section; namely the LANL “Jezebel” (a bare, mostly 239Pu, sphere), “Jezebel- 240” (a bare Pu sphere with higher 240Pu content), “Flattop-Pu” (a Jezebel-like Pu spherical core reﬂected by natural Uranium) and “Thor” (a Jezebel-like Pu sphere reﬂected by Thorium). Criticality calculations yield accu- rate keﬀ predictions but as will be shown in Sec. VII K
the reaction rate C/E results exhibit trends not seen
in the Uranium fuelled assemblies. This suggests that some aspect of these Pu-fuelled assemblies, perhaps the 239Pu PFNS, has unrecognized deﬁciencies. Hence while we present our calculations for these assemblies, the reader is cautioned that these neutron ﬁelds are not judged to  be of benchmark quality at this time.
1.Jezebel Neutron Field from the ICSBEP Handbook
The Los Alamos National Laboratory PU-MET-FAST- 001 (i.e., Jezebel) critical assembly [146] consists of a number of discrete Pu metal pieces that, when assembled
into a critical conﬁguration, is nearly spherical in shape. The Pu metal is greater than 95 % 239Pu with an approx- imate 1 % Ga alloy for phase stabilization. This bench- mark evaluation has undergone signiﬁcant revisions in recent years which allow for the development of complex computer models representing the individual Pu metal pieces. In addition, the simpler legacy model, a simple sphere with one material has been retained. This simple model, with its updated core  radius  and material data,  is used here. Although the core model is 6.39157 cm in radius and the ﬂux and reaction rate tallies are obtained for a 0.5 cm diameter spherical tally region  located at the core centre. The MCNP 6.2 calculation was run for 25 billion active histories (50 warm-up cycles followed by 10 000 active cycles with 2 500 000 neutrons per cy- cle). Cross sections for the kcode transport job are from ENDF/B-VIII.0 [31] using 293.6 K ACE ﬁles generated
by the MCNP Data Team [138]. The calculated multi- group ﬂux spectrum within this tally sphere is shown in Fig. 120.
2.Jezebel-240 Neutron Field from the ICSBEP Handbook
The Los Alamos National Laboratory PU-MET-FAST- 002 (i.e., Jezebel-240) critical assembly [147] is similar to the PMF001 assembly described above; the primary  dif-
ference being in the Pu metal isotopic content. Whereas Jezebel is >95 % 239Pu, the Jezebel-240 assembly is a little less than 80 % 239Pu, approximately 20 % 240Pu and includes smaller amounts of 241Pu and 242Pu. This assembly is modelled as a bare sphere 6.6595 cm in ra- dius.  Once again a small, 0.5 cm diameter, tally region  is deﬁned at the core centre where the various measure- ments were made. The MCNP 6.2 calculation was run for 10 billion active histories (50 warm-up cycles followed by 4 000 active cycles with 2 500 000 neutrons per cy- cle). Cross sections for the kcode transport job are from ENDF/B-VIII.0 [31] using 293.6 K ACE ﬁles generated by the MCNP Data Team [138]. The calculated multigroup ﬂux spectrum within this tally sphere is very similar to the one of Jezebel in Fig. 120 and is not shown explicitly.
FIG. 120. (Color online) Neutron spectra for several critical as- semblies containing 239Pu from the ICSBEP Handbook [141]: Jezebel, Flattop-Pu, Thor and IPPE-BR-1. The spectra are presented in the 725 energy groups and normalized to unity. Note that the scale changes from log to linear above 1 MeV.
3.Flattop-Pu Neutron Field from the ICSBEP Handbook
The Los Alamos National Laboratory PU-MET-FAST- 006 (i.e., Flattop-Pu) critical assembly [148] is similar to the  Flattop-25  assembly  described previously  with the
exception that the central core is Pu metal rather than highly enriched uranium. The spherical Pu core radius is 4.5332 cm and the outer reﬂector radius is 24.1420 cm. As with Flattop-25 there is no gap between the central
core and the reﬂector in the computer model. The cen- tral core ﬂux and reaction rate tallies are obtained for a
0.5 cm diameter sphere at the  located at the centre of  the core. An MCNP 6.2 calculation was run for 1 billion histories (50 warm-up cycles followed by 400 active cycles with 2 500 000 neutrons per cycle). Cross sections for the kcode transport job are from ENDF/B-VIII.0 [31] us- ing 293.6 K ACE ﬁles generated by the MCNP Data Team [138]. The calculated multigroup ﬂux spectrum within this tally sphere is shown in Fig. 120.
4.THOR Neutron Field from the ICSBEP Handbook
The Los Alamos National Laboratory PU-MET-FAST- 008 (i.e., THOR) critical assembly [149] is similar to the Flattop-Pu assembly described previously with the ex-
ception that the heavy metal reﬂector is a cylinder of Thorium metal. The spherical Pu core radius is 5.310 cm and centered in the Thorium cylinder whose diameter and height are both 53.34 cm. Once again there is no gap be- tween the core and reﬂector in the computer model. The MCNP 6.2 job includes a small, 0.5 cm diameter sphere in the centre of the core for ﬂux and reaction rate tallies and was run for 5 billion active histories (50 warm-up cycles followed by 2 000 active cycles with 2 500 000 neutrons per cycle). Cross sections for the kcode transport job are from ENDF/B-VIII.0 [31] using 293.6 K ACE ﬁles gen- erated by the MCNP Data Team [138]. The calculated multigroup ﬂux spectrum within this tally sphere is very similar to the one of Jezebel in Fig. 120.
E.Legacy Reference Neutron Fields
The reference spectra incorporated within the IRDFF-II library build upon the spectra collected in ear- lier dosimetry libraries. The reference neutrons ﬁelds gen- erated at the research reactors, and frequently used for measurement of the spectrum-averaged dosimetry cross sections, were collected and documented in the IRDF- 2002 database [136]. Some of these reference spectra were transferred over from the IRDF-90 [150]. The IRDF-2002 library included 9 spectra. The spectra, and associated references are:
two 235U thermal induced ﬁssion spectra, one from NBS (J. Grundl, private communication), second – from the ENDF/B-V evaluation;
Intermediate-energy Standard Neutron Field (ISNF) [125];
Coupled Fast Reactivity Measurement Facility (CFRMF) [125];
10 % enriched Uranium critical assembly (Big-Ten) [125];
Coupled thermal/fast uranium and boron carbide spherical assembly (Sigma-Sigma) [125];
Oak Ridge Research Reactor (ORR) [L. Greenwood, private communication];
YAYOI reactor [L. Greenwood, private communica- tion];
Central zone ﬂux of the NEACRP Benchmarks [B. Goal, private communication].
No uncertainties or associated correlation matrices for these spectra were provided in IRDF-2002. In 2005, the 252Cf spontaneous ﬁssion neutron spectrum and its co- variance matrix, evaluated by W. Mannhart [151], were added to IRDF-2002.
All compiled IRDF-2002 spectra were displayed in Fig. 115 above. It is worthwhile to stress that system- atic measurements of SACS were carried out and con- sequently the corresponding data were compiled in the EXFOR database only for the following reference spectra: ISNF, CFRMF, Sigma-Sigma.
Only a subset of these spectra was used for the veri- ﬁcation of the IRDFF-II cross sections. Big-Ten critical assembly, ISNF and Sigma–Sigma reactor facilities were re-simulated using the latest ENDF/B-VIII.0 evaluation as described in Sects. VI C 10, VI C 11, and VI C 15, respec- tively. The CFRMF spectrum could not be reproduced in full, but because of the large number of measurements in this ﬁeld the original spectrum provided by the authors for IRDF-2002 was adopted as described in Sec. VI C 16. Unexplained structures are observed in ORR and YAYOI spectra and the information describing the ir- radiation set-up is insuﬃcient to develop new models. Therefore those IRDF-2002 spectra were not considered for validation. The central zone ﬂux of the NEACRP benchmarks is not a real benchmark ﬁeld and was dis-
carded.
F.Analytical Reference Neutron Fields
1.Thermal Maxwellian
The thermal Maxwellian spectrum can be used to calculate spectrum-averaged cross sections σ in a well- thermalised spectrum. The spectrum corresponds to a temperature of 0.0253 eV and is normalised to 2/ π so that the averaged cross section can be compared to the  σ0 cross section value at 0.0253 eV, the ratio σ/σ0 being the Westcott g-factor.
2.1/E Spectrum in the Energy Range 0.55 eV to 2 MeV
From neutron slowing-down theory it can be shown that high-energy neutrons in an ideal non-absorbing mod- erator with a constant cross section follow a 1/E distri- bution down to thermal energies. This is a reasonable approximation for a reactor spectrum. Cadmium has a very strong resonance near 0.2 eV. A cadmium cover of thickness 1 mm eﬀectively ﬁlters thermal neutrons below
0.55 eV. At high energies the ﬁssion spectrum in a re- actor falls oﬀ rapidly above 2 MeV. The 1/E spectrum deﬁned in the energy range 0.55 eV to 2 MeV is a rea- sonable approximation for resonance integral calculations in a reactor spectrum under a cadmium cover, which can
be compared to measured values by the cadmium ratio method, for example.
3.1/E Spectrum in the Energy Range 0.5 eV to 20 MeV
Some authors prefer diﬀerent energy boundaries to de- ﬁne the resonance integral. In the Atlas of Resonance Parameters by Mughabghab [72], the integration bound- aries are from 0.5 eV to 20 MeV. For convenience, both forms of the 1/E neutron spectrum are included in the spectra ﬁle of IRDFF-II.
FIG. 121. (Color online) Maxwellian spectra with ELab rang- ing from 25 keV to 430 keV.
4.High Temperature Maxwellian
A set of high temperature quasi-Maxwellian neutron spectra, kT = E 25–60 keV, are frequently used for studying the neutron capture reactions along the astro- physical s-process path [152]. While the ideal spectra are deﬁned by the analytic form, these neutron spectra can be approximately realized using the thick target 7Li(p,n) reaction for incident proton energies near 2 MeV with modulation of the proton beam. The Maxwellian Aver-aged Cross Sections (MACS) for activation reactions are typically reported by the astrophysical community, butit must be remembered that the  spectrum  temperature  is expressed in the centre-of-mass (CM) coordinate sys- tem, while the incident particle energy is normally given in the Lab system. Fortunately, the conversion is fairly straightforward. It can be shown that@1
where A is the ratio of the target mass to that of a neutron. For example, for hydrogen,@2
A range of Maxwellian neutron spectra, with ELab ranging from thermal to 60 keV, are deﬁned within the
IRDFF-II library and can be used to support validation activities. Fig. 121 shows a representative sample of these spectra.5.Constant
The constant φ = 1 is a trivial ﬁeld that allows simple averages to be calculated with the  same  tool.  Namely, it allows the calculation of ﬂat-spectrum average cross sections or the spectrum integrals when applied to the IRDFF-II library of neutron spectrum ﬁelds.
6.Linear
The linear spectrum φ = E is a trivial ﬁeld that allows the calculation of the average spectrum energy when ap- plied to a spectrum in the library of spectrum ﬁelds in ENDF-6 format.
G.Thermal Cross Sections and Resonance Integrals
For all of the non-threshold reactions, the thermal cross sections and resonance integrals in the IRDFF-II library entries have been compared to the data from the 2016 Atlas of Thermal Neutron Capture Cross Sections Reso- nance Integrals and Thermal Cross Sections [72]. Since in many cases these data were considered in the develop- ment of the underlying nuclear data evaluations, this data comparison constitutes a veriﬁcation step in the library development.
An independent comparison can be made to the values derived from the Kayzero data-base for neutron activation analysis (NAA) by the k0 standardization method.
The Kayzero data-base is a library of nuclear constants that has been developed over many years and has been extensively tested in practical application for analytical work in certiﬁed laboratories. Most of the k0 and Q0 fac- tors in the library have been measured independently of any diﬀerential cross section, so they provide a convenient source of information for the validation of thermal cap- ture cross sections and resonance integrals. The k0 factors are related to the cross sections,
@3
where M is the molar mass, Θ is the isotopic abundance,
γ is the gamma-emission probability and σ is the cross section. Subscript a stands for the measured nuclide and s for the gold standard.
The Q0 factors are simply the ratios of the resonance integral I0 in a pure 1/E spectrum and the thermal cross section,
@4
Comparison of the cross sections and resonance inte- grals in the IRDFF-II library to the values derived from the Kayzero data-base [70] provides an alternative source of validation for the thermal constants and the resonance integrals and augments the comparison with informa- tion provided in the Atlas of Resonance Parameters by Mughabghab [72].
In this implementation of k0-based metrics, the k0 fac- tors from the Kayzero library, the natural abundances and the gamma emission probabilities from the IRDFF-II de- cay data library are combined and used to reconstruct the thermal cross sections and resonance integrals. In prin- ciple, the derived values correspond to idealized thermal reactor spectrum with a Maxwellian thermal component and a 1/E epithermal component. The deviation from a 1/v behaviour of the cross sections in the thermal range, deviation from the 1/E spectrum shape in the epither- mal range and the non-ideal cadmium ﬁlter are  taken into account (although not rigorously in all cases), but these are corrections that are usually smaller than the experimental uncertainties. The thermal cross sections and resonance integrals derived from the Kayzero library were taken as the reference for comparison with the Atlas values and the quantities as extracted from the IRDFF-II library. Results from this validation step are presented in Sec. VII M.
VII.VALIDATION DATA – COMPARISON OF INTEGRAL METRICS IN STANDARD AND
REFERENCE NEUTRON BENCHMARK FIELDS
One of the most powerful metrics employed in the vali- dation of the IRDFF-II cross sections is the comparison of calculated-to-experimental (C/E) spectrum-averaged cross sections in various standard and reference bench- mark neutron ﬁelds. Since an absolute determination of the neutron ﬂuence can be diﬃcult to assess for some of the reactor ﬁelds, a spectral index (SI), or the ratio of the activity for a given reaction to that for a common moni- tor reaction, is often used. The C/E ratio for the spectral indices is then the relevant metric used for validation. An- other metric that supports validation is a comparison of the consistency of the relative activity for a set of mea- surements gathered in a given well-characterized neutron ﬁeld. The following sections address the consideration of these integral metrics in the benchmark neutron ﬁelds.
The criteria that were adopted to characterize the qual- ity of the validation evidence based on the comparison  of the measured and calculated of the spectrum-averaged cross section are shown in Table 17. A “good” validation status requires, as a baseline criterion, that the calculated- to-experimental (C/E) ratio of the spectrum-averaged cross section be within two standard deviations of unity and, in addition, that it lies within the interval of [0.9: 1.1]. In addition to this characteristic, in order to ensure the experimental measurement had adequate ﬁdelity we required that the experimental uncertainty be less than  15 %. The total uncertainty in the C/E must reﬂect the root-mean-squared sum of the measurement uncertainty, the spectrum uncertainty, and the cross section uncer- tainty. To be sure that the benchmark neutron ﬁeld was adequately characterized, we also required that the total uncertainty be less than 25 %.
A “good” validation status is color-coded “light green”. An “acceptable” validation status is color-coded “light yellow” and reﬂects a C/E ratio within three standard deviations of unity, a value within the interval [0.8, 1.25], a measurement uncertainty less than 30 %, and a total
uncertainty less than 40 %.  A “poor” validation status   is color-coded as “light red” (pink) and corresponds to a C/E that is more than three standard deviations from unity, or a value  that is outside the interval  [0.8, 1.25].  A measurement uncertainty greater than 30 % or a total uncertainty greater than 40 % does not necessarily reﬂect a “poor” validation state, but it does reﬂect an absence of a meaningful validation. These ﬁelds are left uncolored to reﬂect unknown status due to the poor quality of available information – either the measurement uncertainty or the neutron ﬁeld characterization.
A.252Cf SFNS
The standard 252Cf SFNS spectrum was evaluated purely from diﬀerential time-of-ﬂight data and is inde- pendent of SACS. Therefore, the spectrum can be used to validate SACS (and vice versa). The SACS in the standard 252Cf SFNS spectrum were evaluated mostly by Mannhart [154]. It is assumed that all acceptable SACS measurements available at the time were included in the evaluation. The measured values and the C/E  values  as a function of representative neutron energy E50% (energy at which the reaction rate integral reaches 50 % of the integral over the full energy range) are shown in Table 18 and Fig. 122.
FIG. 122. (Color online) C/E relative to median energy E50% for the IRDFF-II cross sections averaged in the 252Cf(s.f.) neutron ﬁeld. Plotted values are listed in Table 18.
More recently, new measurements were performed at Rˇeˇz near Prague to validate Manhhart SACS evaluations. The  intense  252Cf  source  (about  109  n/cm2/s)  at  Rˇeˇz is well characterized, and the activation measurements achieved low uncertainties [85]. The results are  shown in Table 19 and Fig. 123. The C/E uncertainties are colour-coded as deﬁned in Table 17. The SACS in the standard 252Cf SFNS spectrum have practically no out- liers and no trend in energy is observed. A special case  is the 169Tm(n,3n) reaction (Tm1693) , which has a very high threshold, with median energy >18 MeV, where the assigned uncertainty of the 252Cf(s.f.) spectrum is very large due to the lack of measured data, and represents
TABLE 17. Criteria used to evaluate consistency validation evidence based on a least-square adjustment analysis for various reactions.FIG. 123. (Color online) C/E relative to median energy E50%
for the  IRDFF-II  cross  sections  averaged in  the 252Cf(s.f.)
FIG. 124. (Color online) C/E as a function of median en-
neutron ﬁeld measured at Rˇeˇz near Prague. Plotted values are listed in Table 19.
ergy E
235
50%
for the IRDFF-II cross sections averaged in the
the dominant contribution to the large SACS uncertainty. Still, the C/E for that very special reaction is excellent.
U(nth,f) PFNS ﬁeld are shown as circles. Uncertainty bars
reﬂect a r.m.s. combination of uncertainty contributions from the measurement (black), IRDFF-II cross sections (blue) and spectra (pink). Plotted values are listed in Table 20. Only out- lying C/E values are labelled with reaction IDs from Table 20.
B.235U(nth
,f) PFNS
C.
Ratio of 252Cf SFNS to 235U(nth,f) PFNS Spectrum-averaged Cross Sections
The reference prompt ﬁssion neutron spectrum (PFNS) for 235U(n ,f) [100–102] was shown in Fig. 92 as ratio
The activation cross sections in the 252Cf SFNS and
th
to the Maxwellian distribution with kT = 1.32 MeV.
235U(nth
,f) PFNS benchmark neutron ﬁelds discussed
The uncertainties in that evaluated spectrum were con- strained at high energy by the use of 90Zr(n,2n) SACS point. Recommended SACS in the 235U(nth,f) PFNS are listed in Table 20. The C/E ratios of SACS in the refer- ence 235U(nth,f) PFNS as a function of representative neutron energy E50% are shown in Fig. 124. For the 235U(nth,f) PFNS ﬁeld no trend in energy is observed. An outlier is the tritium production reaction on 10B (B10H3) measured by Wyman in 1958.Measurements of the cap- ture SACS are usually subject to large corrections for room-return and multiple scattering, which might be the cause of some discrepancy in the U238g reaction. Poorer (but acceptable) agreement is also noted for 63Cu(n,2n), 238U(n,2n) and 204Pb(n,n’) reactions. New extensive mea- surements of SACS in the reference 235U(nth,f) neutron ﬁeld are on-going.
in Secs. VII A and VII B form the foundation for the
IRDFF-II validation. In addition to these two separate sets of validation data for a ﬁssion neutron spectrum, the smooth behaviour, i.e., the  systematics, of the  ratios of
these spectrum-averaged cross sections, as a function  of
the E50 response energy for a given reaction, provides another good indicator of the ﬁdelity of the cross sections. This ratio is independent of the gamma emission probabil- ity, which is a signiﬁcant source of measured SACS uncer- tainties. The application of this metric and a systematic of this ratio is addressed in Ref. [191]. The systematic can be used also to assess the quality of experimental data in one of the reference ﬁelds [191]. The actual sta- tus of C/E ratios  computed with IRDFF-II  is  depicted in Fig. 125. The ratio for the reaction 63Cu(n,2n) is an outlier indicating that one or both of the SACS measure- ments used to calculate the ratio are likely wrong. Indeed, it can be seen that the corresponding C/E of this par- ticular reaction in the 235U(nth,f) PFNS neutron ﬁeld is 0.859(9.8%) pointing out to a possible experimental issue. A similar situation is found for the 238U(n,2n) reaction,TABLE 18. Measured and calculated spectrum averaged cross sections (SACS) for 252Cf(s.f.) neutron standard ﬁeld.where the C/E in the 235U(nth,f) PFNS neutron ﬁeld is 0.913(7.3%), which also points to a potential experimen- tal problem. Corresponding C/E in the 252Cf SFNS ﬁeld show good agreement for these two reactions.
D.Measurements in the SPR-III Fast Burst Reactor Central Cavity
The baseline measured quantities in this reference benchmark ﬁeld are end-of-irradiation (EOI) spectrum- averaged cross sections measured in operation #13127, which was a 16-minute steady-state operation that took place on 1/27/2006 and represented a total facility- reported reactor integrated power of 125 MJ.
Although a baseline set of activation foils were used in this reactor operation #13127, it was desirable to add
more reactions to the set of measured data, so additional reactor exposures of activation foils were conducted. In order to eliminate the eﬀect of variations in  the  reac-  tor power during the other exposures, a 58Ni(n,p)58Co monitor activity was used to facilitate a renormalization of data gathered in the other operations to the baseline exposure. When required, corrections were made in the measured activities of other foils to convert them to rep- resent the end-of-irradiation from the baseline 16-minute uniform power operation. The other reactor operations are detailed in Table 21.
In some of the cases covers were used to shield the activation foil and shift the sensitivity of the measured response to higher energies. These measurements used the following cover geometries:
1.“bare” indicating a bare foil with a thickness be-
TABLE 19. New SACS for 252Cf-252(s.f.) neutron benchmark ﬁeld measured at Rˇeˇz.tween 5 and 10 mils;
2.“Cd” indicating a cylindrical cadmium cover with thickness of 2.587x10−3 atoms/barn;
3.“Cdtk” indicating a cylindrical cadmium cover with thickness of 4.705x10−3 atoms/barn;
4.“Cdtk/B4C” indicates an inner  thick  cadmium cover with an areal thickness of 4.705x10−3 atoms/barn and an outer spherical boron ball. The boron ball is a spherical shell with an outer diameter of 4.76 cm and thickness of 1.03 cm. The B4C has a density of 2.5 g/cm2 and used isotopically enriched Boron (91.67 % 10B and 8.33 % 11B).
A detailed description of the covers and of how self- shielding eﬀects are rigorously addressed in their use in the activation measurements can be found in Reference [47]. Data were gathered for a total of 40 combinations of reactions and covers in this reference ﬁeld.
The ﬁssion foils were in the form of a sintered oxide (uranium oxide-to-metal ratio of 1.995; plutonium ratio of 1.886) measuring approximately 0.5 inch by 0.03-inch thick, and having an approximate mass of 1 gram. The isotopic mixtures of the various ﬁssion foils are given in Table 22.
The baseline set of end-of-irradiation activity measure- ments, normalized using the 58Ni(n,p)58Co monitor re- action used in the  same  reactor  operation, are  shown in Table 23. We cannot compare these measured activi- ties to the corresponding calculated dosimetry metrics, spectrum-averaged cross sections, in the absence of a known neutron ﬂuence level for the reference operation. Since a spectral index (SI) is deﬁned to be the ratio of
the spectrum-averaged cross sections for two speciﬁed reactions – where one is generally considered to be a ref- erence monitor reaction – this quantity is independent   of the neutron ﬂuence. Thus, we have adopted the C/E  for spectral indices, using the 58Ni(n,p)58Co reaction as the reference reaction, as the relevant comparison metric. The C/E spectral index metric, for the reaction “α” and the monitor “Ni58p”, is notated as the CoESIα/Ni58p.
Table 23 documents the data in this ﬁeld for the 40 measured reactions. The entries in the table start with  the 58Ni(n,p) normalizing reaction but are then ordered with respect to the increasing E50 mean response energy for the reactions. The table includes:
1.Reaction identiﬁers (ID);
2.Median response energy in this neutron ﬁeld for the indicated dosimeter/cover combination;
3.measured end-of-irradiation (EOI) activities with measurement uncertainty;
4.uncertainty contribution in the calculated spectrum- averaged cross sections due to the a priori spec- trum;
5.calculated spectral index and associated uncertainty, including the contributions from the cross section and spectrum;
6.calculated-over-experimental (C/E) ratio of the spectral index (SI) and associated uncertainty.
Column 5 of Table 23 shows the contribution from the a priori spectrum to the uncertainty in the spectrum- averaged cross sections. The a priori spectrum is based
TABLE 20. Measured and calculated SACS for the IRDFF-II cross sections in the 235U(nth,f) neutron benchmark ﬁeld.solely on a calculation and, while the statistical uncer- tainty in this Monte Carlo calculation was typically less than 1 % in a given energy bin, the uncertainty in the modeling and in the transport cross sections result is a very large overall spectrum uncertainty - as was seen in Fig. 126. Since the uncertainty in the calculated spectral index has the spectrum appearing in both the numerator
and the denominator of the metric, a Monte Carlo ap- proach was used to propagate the spectrum uncertainty through this ratio of integrals. This methodology is de- scribed in reference [192]. The use of spectral indices to make the C/E comparison means that the spectrum con- tribution to the SI uncertainty can be much smaller for reactions that have the dominant response in the same
FIG. 125. (Color online) Ratio of SACS for the 252Cf SFNS and 235U(nth,f) PFNS ﬁelds as a function of median energy E50% : empty circles - measurements, ﬁlled circles and lines - computed with the IRDFF-II  cross sections.  Plotted values are  calculated  as ratios of SACS from Tables  18 and 19 to SACS listed in Table  20. Uncertainty bands associated with spectrum uncertainties    are shown for ENDF/B-VII.1 and ENDF/B-VIII.0 235U(nth,f) PFNS ﬁelds.
TABLE 21. Reactor operations used to support the SPR-III fast burst reactor central cavity spectral characterization.TABLE 22. Isotopic composition of ﬁssion foilsspectral region as the reference 58Ni(n,p)58Co reaction. This is clearly seen in the column 7 spectrum contribution to the SI uncertainty. Here the spectrum-contribution to the SI uncertainty becomes zero for the reference reaction, and is much reduced for reactions where the dominant sensor response is similar to that from the reference reac- tion. For regions where the dosimeter dominant energy-
Atom fraction sum of the number of atoms of the prime sensor element is unity. Due to contaminants, the total sum may be greater than 1.0.
dependent response diﬀers from that of the reference reac- tion, the spectrum contribution to the SI uncertainty can
TABLE 23. Measured EOI activities and calculated quantities supporting the SI C/E for SPR-III central cavity neutron benchmark ﬁeld.be more than twice as large as that seen in the calculated SACS.
Columns 8 and 9 show the overall calculated-to- experimental (C/E) ratios, CoESI α/Ni58p, and associated uncertainties. The CoESIα/Ni58p value is the primary metric reported in this benchmark ﬁeld. The uncertainty shown for this C/E metric is taken to be the root-mean- square of the measurement uncertainty and the spec- trum and cross section contributions to the calculated spectrum-averaged cross section uncertainty. The color- coding in the CoESIα/Ni58p columns corresponds to the criteria appearing in Table 17. Good or acceptable valida- tion evidence was seen for 39 of the 40 measured activities in this reference ﬁeld. The only discrepant reaction among this set of data were for the 23Na(n,γ)24Na reaction and, even in this case, the CoESIα/Ni58p was within one stan- dard deviation of unity – but the ratio fell outside the criteria adopted in Table 17 and there was a large spec-
trum contribution to the CoESIα/Ni58p uncertainty.
Fig. 126 shows the resulting CoESIα/Ni58p ratios for this benchmark neutron ﬁeld. The x-axis represents the E50 mean response energy for the foil/cover combination in that calculated reference ﬁeld spectrum. The large un-
certainties, due to the a priori spectrum uncertainty, are clearly seen here. A small positive bias in the C/E  is also seen. The usefulness of this CoESIα/Ni58p metric in
the validation process is limited by the large uncertainty due to the spectrum in this neutron ﬁeld. Sec. VIII will address another metric that can more rigorously address the uncertainty in the spectrum and thus provide more powerful validation evidence.
FIG. 126. (Color online) CoESI α/Ni58p Ratios for the calcu- lated spectrum in the SPR-III fast burst reactor central cavity reference benchmark ﬁeld.
E.ACRR Pool-type Reactor Central Cavity
The baseline measured quantities in this reference benchmark ﬁeld are end-of-irradiation (EOI) spectrum-averaged cross sections measured in operation #10639, which was a 153.2 MJ pulsed operation that took place on 9/19/2013. In order to eliminate the eﬀect of varia- tions in the reactor power during the other exposures, a 58Ni(n,p)58Co monitor activity was used to facilitate a renormalization of data gathered in the other operations to the baseline exposure. When required, corrections were made in the measured activities of other foils to convert them to represent the end-of-irradiation from the base- line 16-minute uniform power operation. The other re- actor operations are detailed in Table 24.  As discussed  in Sec. VII D, in some of the cases covers were used to shield the activation foil and shift the sensitivity of the measured response to higher energies.
Data were gathered for a total of 33 combinations of reactions and covers in this reference ﬁeld. The baseline set of end-of-irradiation activity measurements, normal- ized using the 58Ni(n,p)58Co monitor reaction used in the same reactor operation, are shown in Table 25.  As  in Sec. VII D, a spectral index is deﬁned to be the ratio of the spectrum-averaged cross sections for two speciﬁed reactions, where one is generally considered to be a ref- erence monitor reaction. This  quantity  is  independent of the neutron ﬂuence. Table 25 provides the calculated spectrum-averaged cross sections for the measured reac- tions, with covers, and reports both the spectrum and cross section uncertainty contributions to the calculated spectrum-averaged cross sections. The entries in the table are ordered with respect to the increasing E50 mean re- sponse energy for the reactions. The overall calculated-to- experimental (C/E) ratios, CoESIα/Ni58p, are also shown in the table. The uncertainty shown for this C/E metric  is taken to be the root-mean-square of the measurement uncertainty and the spectrum and cross section contribu- tions to the calculated spectrum-averaged cross section uncertainty. Several of the table entries have such a large uncertainty that they do not qualify as acceptable vali-
≈150 MJ    and B4C ball
dation cases, but they have a good C/E value, so they  are also not designated as discrepant. These table entries correspond to measurements that are not of validation quality, typically due to the spectrum  uncertainty, and are left uncoloured.
Fig. 127 shows the resulting C/E ratios for this bench- mark neutron ﬁeld. The reactions with a dominant high energy response, similar to that of the 58Ni(n,p)58Co ref- erence reaction, show smaller uncertainty bounds and gen- eral good agreement. The low energy dominant response reactions show much larger uncertainty bounds and con- siderable scatter in their central values.
FIG. 127. (Color online) CoESI α/Ni58p Ratios for the Calcu- lated Spectrum in the ACRR Central Cavity Reference Bench- mark Field.
TABLE 25. Measured EOI activities and calculated quantities supporting the SI C/E for ACRR central cavity neutron benchmark ﬁeld.F.Other “Bucket”-Modifying Environments in the ACRR Reference Reactor Fields
C/E ratios for the spectral indices in several other ref- erence reactor ﬁelds have been considered. These neutron ﬁelds and activity measurements include:
1.ACRR LB44; 35 measured activities
2.ACRR PLG; 35 measured activities
3.ACRR Cd-poly; 31 measured activities
4.FREC-II; 33 measured activities
The utility of these data is best addressed in the context of the consistency of the measured activities in Sec. VIII F rather than as isolated spectral indices.
G.Mol-BR1 Mark-III Irradiation Facility
New measurements from the BR1 reactor at the Bel- gian Nuclear Research Centre SCK•CEN in Mol were
published recently [115]. The aim of the work was to make an update of the Mark-III spectrum and ﬂux, using state of the art computing tools and certiﬁed neutron ac- tivation measurements. The IRDFF-v1.02 library, which was available at the time, was used. The measured ﬂux calibration factors were scaled by the corresponding cal- culated cross sections listed in the same publication to recover the measured reaction rates, which in turn were normalized by the 58Ni(n,p) reaction rate to remove the absolute ﬂux dependence. The ratios were compared to the calculated values using the IRDFF-II cross sections, as shown in Table 26 and Fig. 128. The ﬁgure undoubt- edly displays excellent agreement between measurements and calculations.
H.LR-0  Reactor  at  Rˇeˇz
The measured quantities in the experiments are reac- tion rate ratios and neutron spectra. Irradiations were carried out at an atmospheric pressure and room tempera- ture, using fairly large samples due to the low neutron ﬂux. It was shown that the neutron energy spectrum above
TABLE 26. Measured and calculated SI in the Mark-III facility of the BR1 reactor in Mol.
FIG. 128. (Color online) C/E Spectral Index Ratios Relative to 58Ni(n,p) for the Calculated Spectrum in the Mol-BR1- Mark-III Reference Benchmark Field.
6 MeV is indistinguishable from the 235U PFNS [120]. Therefore, when corrected, the cross sections of reactions with the threshold over 6 MeV averaged in the LR-0 spec- trum correspond to spectrum-averaged cross sections in 235U PFNS [116]. Corrections are based on the ratio be- tween the share of neutrons over 6 MeV in LR-0 spectrum and in the 235U PFNS. Another correction, taking into account the diﬀerence between LR-0 and PFNS, which is deﬁned as a ratio between cross section averaged in reac- tor ﬁeld and the 235U PFNS ﬁeld, is applied as well [194]. The neutron transport in large samples for correct eval- uation of signiﬁcant ﬂux loss eﬀect, as well as correction to ﬂux level, are determined using well validated mathe-
matical model of the irradiation assembly.
The eﬃciencies of the semiconductor detector were de- termined using a precise mathematical model of the used HPGe [194], which has been compiled using experimen- tally determined HPGe crystal parameters and its dead layer [195]. The same arrangement of the gamma spec- trum measurement was used in case of 252Cf irradiation experiments as well (see Table 19, [160]). Thanks to the usage of the same arrangement in case of 235U as well as 252Cf experiments, reaction rate ratiow obtained in the235U and 252Cf irradiations feature low uncertainties. Re-sults are presented in the sections on the	U PFNS and
252Cf SFNS spectrum-averaged cross sections.I.TRIGA-JSI Pneumatic Tube Irradiation Channel
The measured quantities in the two measurement cam- paigns were the induced activities after irradiation of bare samples and samples with covers of cadmium, boron ni- tride, boron carbide and enriched boron carbide. The reported unﬁltered relative to ﬁltered reaction rate ratios were derived from gamma spectrometry measurements of samples with the same geometry and material com- position, performed with the same detector at the same geometry, and of the same gamma line. Therefore, the uncertainties in the derived unﬁltered relative to ﬁltered reaction rate ratios are unaﬀected by uncertainties in the sample material composition, detection eﬃciency, coinci- dence correction factors, or gamma emission probabilities. The uncertainties in the unﬁltered relative to ﬁltered reac- tion rate ratios reﬂect the uncertainties in the measured peak areas, sample mass and the irradiation, cooling and measurement timing. The uncertainties in the ratios of one reaction rate relative to another, on the other hand, are aﬀected by all the above mentioned sources of uncer- tainty and indeed are reﬂected in the magnitude of the uncertainties.
For the JSI TRIGA case, a neutron spectrum adjust-
ment procedure was carried out using the GRUPINT code, developed at the JSI [196]. The code enables the parametrization of the spectrum with a 19-parameter ana- lytical function, and subsequent ﬁtting of selected function parameters to measured reaction-rate ratios. Fine struc- ture present in the  spectra  due  to  neutron  resonances is taken into account through a form function, which is deﬁned as the ratio of the calculated and the ﬁtted an- alytical function. Measured reaction rate ratios can be labelled as active in the spectrum parameter ﬁtting, or ex- cluded. The active reaction rate ratios in the JSI TRIGA case were cadmium ratios RCd (deﬁned as the ratios of the bare relative to cadmium ﬁltered reaction rates), for the 197Au(n, γ) and 238U(n, γ) reactions, and the ratios of the 27Al(n, p) and 27Al(n, α) reaction rates relative to the 197Au(n, γ) reaction rate. Neutron spectrum adjustment is required in order to improve the thermal to ﬁssion peak strength in the spectra resulting from the Monte Carlo calculations. In the present case the adjustment proce- dure resulted in an increase of the thermal spectrum by about 10 %.
In addition to cadmium ﬁlters, ﬁlters made from boron nitride (BN), boron carbide (B4C) and enriched boron carbide (10B4C) were employed as well. The ﬁlter eﬀect on the neutron spectrum, i.e., the transmission function t(E) is modelled in the GRUPINT code as a exponential
attenuation function governed by two parameters,
@5
where n is the atom density in the ﬁlter material and deff is the eﬀective ﬁlter thickness, the ﬁrst parameter, and σtr(E) is the ﬁlter transport cross section, deﬁned as
@6
where σa(E) is the ﬁlter absorption cross section, σs(E) is the ﬁlter scattering cross section and ξ is the eﬀec-  tive scattering fraction, the second parameter. Filtered reaction rates are calculated as
@7
where σ(E) is the reaction cross section, t(E) is the ﬁlter transmission function and ϕ(E) is the neutron spectrum, in the present case the adjusted neutron spectrum, result- ing from the adjustment procedure described above.
TABLE 27. Comparison between experimental and calcu- lated reaction rate ratios. The experimental results for the 27Al(n,p)/197Au(n,γ), 27Al(n,α)/197Au(n,γ) and the Cd ra- tios for the 197Au(n,γ) and 238U(n,γ) reactions were used for neutron spectrum adjustment. Experimental BN ratios  for the 197Au(n,γ) and 238U(n,γ) reactions were used for the ad- justment of the BN transmission function parameters. The reported experimental results are averages of several measure- ments, either of diﬀerent gamma lines or diﬀerent gamma spec- trometry detectors.
FIG. 129. (Color online) Comparison between the ﬁlter trans- mission functions t(E) for the BN, B4C and 10B4C ﬁlters calculated with MCNP and as modelled in the GRUPINT code,  with  the  function  parameters  deff   and  ξ  adjusted  us- ing Eqs. (5) and (6) to measured 197Au(n, γ) and 238U(n, γ) reaction rate ratios.
other measured nuclear reactions in the experimental cam- paigns, which are included in the IRDFF-II library. Addi- tional measurements of a speciﬁc selection of (n, γ) reac- tions of potential interest for epithermal neutron dosime- try were made [124], but they are outside the scope of the present analysis. Table 27 reports the experimental and calculated Cd and BN ﬁltered reaction rate ratios from the ﬁrst measurement campaign. Table 28 reports the experimental and calculated BN, B C and 10B C ﬁl-
4	4
tered reaction rate ratios from the second measurement
campaign.
The BN, B4C and 10B4C ﬁlter cross sections were gen- erated on the basis of ENDF/B-VIII.0 nuclear data, the ﬁlter chemical compositions and the measured ﬁlter den- sities, using the PREPRO-2018 nuclear data processing code package. The eﬀective ﬁlter thicknesses deff were ﬁrst adjusted so that the transmission function shapes ap- proximately matched the shapes calculated using MCNP, and second, ﬁnely adjusted on the basis of the experimen- tal BN, B4C and 10B4C ratios for the 197Au(n, γ) and 238U(n, γ) reactions. The eﬀective scattering fractions ξ, were adjusted on the basis of the ﬁlter transmission func- tions calculated with MCNP; however, the fractions ξ were seen to be very close to zero, implying that neutron scattering has a low impact on the overall ﬁlter trans- mission function. Fig. 129 displays the ﬁlter transmission functions calculated using MCNP and adjusted on the basis of experimental data.
It is very important to note, that since in the TRIGA- JSI case a subset of the experimental data is used for neutron spectrum adjustment or the adjustment of the parameters of the ﬁlter transmission functions, these data cannot be part of the TRIGA-JSI data validation case. The relevance of the TRIGA-JSI case is in the compar- ison of calculated and measured reaction rate ratios for
J. Uranium Fueled ICSBEP Assemblies from the ICSBEP Handbook
In this section the C/E results for the spectral indices for the uranium-fueled ICSBEP assemblies (HMF001, HMF028 and IMF007) are summarized. As indicated ear- lier the simulation models are derived from the speci- ﬁcations provided in the ICSBEP Handbook. However the Handbook does not provide a summary of experi- mental reaction rate data. The reaction rate data cited
here are derived from a variety of sources (e.g., Refer- ences [31, 40, 197–199]).
Table 29 provides results for HMF001, with the corre- sponding SI C/E values shown in Fig. 130. Aside from some scatter in the low energy activation foil capture re- actions, where C/E values oscillate between 0.80 and 1.30, the calculated SI C/E are generally in good agreement with experiment, with all values within 10 %  of unity  for E50% values up to 8 MeV. Even SI C/E for the high energy 63Cu(n,2n) reaction is in good agreement with experiment, given the large measurement and stochastic uncertainties for this reaction.
Table 30 provides results for HMF028, with the corre- sponding SI C/E values shown in Fig. 131. Aside from
TABLE 28. Comparison between experimental and calculated BN, B4C and 10B4C reaction rate ratios. The experimental results for the 197Au(n,γ) and 238U(n,γ) reactions were used for adjustment of the BN, B4C and 10B4C transmission function parameters.
TABLE 29. Measured and calculated SI in the central region of HMF001 (Godiva).FIG. 130. (Color online) Ratio of Calculated and Measured SI in the central region of HMF001 (Godiva).
the 169Tm(n,2n) result (at E50% 10 MeV), which seems anomalous given the excellent 197Au(n,2n) result at nearly the same E50% energy, these C/E results are excellent.
Table 31 provides results for IMF007, with the cor- responding SI C/E values shown in Fig. 132. As with HMF001 there is a large scatter in the low energy activa- tion foil capture reaction C/E values. This large variation, both below and above unity, suggests a deﬁciency in the
FIG. 131. (Color online) Ratio of Calculated and Measured SI in the central region of HMF028 (Flattop-25).
underlying measurements rather than in the source spec- trum. Unfortunately many of these measurements were made decades ago making it diﬃcult to know whether details such as gamma transition intensity, decay half-
life, possible capture branch to isomers, etc. were prop- erly accounted for. Once again the 169Tm(n,2n) SI C/E,
near 10.3 MeV, stands out for its marked deviation from unity.Also once again the 197Au(n,2n) result is near unity
TABLE 30. Measured and calculated SI in the central region of HMF028 (Flattop-25).suggesting the issue is with the measured 169Tm SACS (or a decay data deﬁciency) rather than problems in the IMF007 spectrum. In general we observe good C/E results with most values being consistent with unity to within their respective uncertainties.
FIG. 132. (Color online) Ratio of Calculated and Measured SI in the central region of IMF007 (Big-Ten).
K. Plutonium Fueled ICSBEP Assemblies from the ICSBEP Handbook
In contrast to the good SI C/E results for the uranium fueled ICSBEP assemblies that were noted in Sec. VII J the results for plutonium fueled ICSBEP assemblies are poor. Measured reaction rates,  our  calculated  values and the corresponding SI C/E results for the PMF001 (Jezebel), PMF006 (Flattop-Pu) and PMF008 (Thor) crit- ical assemblies are given in Table 32.
The SI C/E values, plotted against E50% as has been
done with all other results, are shown in Figs. 133, 134 and 135. These ﬁgures display a clear trend of increasing C/E with increasing energy. With a similar trend seen
for multiple assemblies it seems likely that the source for this trend is in the high energy tail of the 239Pu prompt ﬁssion spectrum. However, we have also calculated the ICSBEP FMR001 assembly (more formally designated FUND-IPPE-FR-MULT-RRR-001 in the ICSBEP Hand-
book), a Pu metal rodded critical assembly with copper and uranium reﬂectors. The SI measured data, our cal- culations and the corresponding C/E values are given in Table 33 and the C/E values are shown in Fig. 136. In contrast to the other Pu fueled assemblies these results are quite good, with minimal variation in C/E out to the highest available energy. The large C/E  variation  seen at low energies is for a variety of capture reactions and mimics the pattern seen in the results for uranium fueled assemblies.
FIG. 133. (Color online) Ratio of Calculated and Measured SI in the central region of PMF001 (Jezebel) assembly.
In view of these generally poorer, and certainly conﬂict- ing, Pu fueled system results the reader is cautioned that SI results for plutonium fueled systems obtained with cur- rent evaluated nuclear data ﬁles is subject to larger than expected biases.
TABLE 31. Measured and calculated SI in the central region of IMF007 (Big-Ten).L. Legacy Reference Reactor Fields
We have revisited the older reference SACS data ob- tained at the following reactor facilities: coupled ther- mal/fast uranium and boron carbide spherical assembly (Sigma-Sigma), Coupled Fast Reactivity Measurement Fa- cility (CFRMF), Intermediate-energy Standard Neutron Fields (ISNF) and Glory hole of the Tokyo University re- search reactor (YAYOI) [200]. Their neutron spectra are
available in the IRDF-2002 database [136] which in turn were adopted from the IRDF-90 library [150]; the latter was assembled in 1993. It is important to notice that the measurements in these neutron ﬁelds were not previously incorporated into the evidence package supporting vali- dation of the IRDFF cross section library.
For the present analysis, we selected the facilities and spectra for ISNF and Sigma-Sigma after their spectra were re-calculated based on the transport cross sections from the ENDF/B-VIII.0 library and represented in 725 groups
TABLE 32. Measured and calculated SI in the central region of PMF001 (Jezebel), PMF006 (Flattop-Pu) and PMF008 (Thor) assemblies.TABLE 33. Measured and calculated SI in the central region of FMR001 assembly (formally designated FUND-IPPE-FR-MULT- RRR-001 in ICSBEP).
FIG. 134. (Color online) Ratio of Calculated and Measured SI in the central region of PMF006 (Flattop-Pu) assembly.
FIG. 135. (Color online) Ratio of Calculated and Measured SI in the central region of PMF008 (Thor) assembly.
FIG. 136. (Color online) Ratio of Calculated and Measured SI in the central region of FMR001 assembly (formally designated FUND-IPPE-FR-MULT-RRR-001 in ICSBEP).
FIG. 137. (Color online) C/E ratios for SACS and spectral indices (SI) measured in the reference reactor ﬁelds:  ISNF (blue symbols), CFRMF (green symbols), Sigma-Sigma (red symbols). Plotted C/E values are listed in Table 34. Outlying C/E values are labelled using reaction IDs from Table 34.
up to 60 MeV, as described in Secs. VI C 10 and VI C 11. The CFRMF spectrum in 460 energy groups was adopted directly from IRDF-2002 as we were not able to reproduce it, only the material number was changed from MAT=5 into MAT=9006.
We have examined the use of the YAYOI spectrum from IRDF-2002 (MAT=  9, in 100 energy groups)  with
the SACS measured by K. Kobayashi et al.[188, 201] for validation with this neutron environment. However prac-
tically all C/E ratios turned out to be below unity by 20-50 %. The diﬀerence is too large to be attributed to the rather coarse 100-groups representation of the energy spectrum. Most likely there are some unidentiﬁed diﬀer- ences in the interpretation of the published measured spectrum-averaged cross section values and the neutron ﬁeld characterization data. Attempts to use an alterna- tive YAYOI spectrum received through private commu- nications did not improve the agreement, so work in this benchmark ﬁeld remains for a future study. The exper- imental spectrum-averaged reaction cross sections were taken  from  EXFOR and were also checked  against  the
original publications. Some experimental data are in the form of spectral indices, i.e., the reaction rate ratios mea- sured relative to 235U(n,f), 238U(n,f) or 197Au(n,γ) – and
these data were used in this form. The calculated energy- averaged cross sections were obtained from the IRDFF-II cross sections and facility spectra with the help of the RR UNC code.
The C/E ratios for SACS or spectral indices are pre- sented in Table 34 and Fig. 137 as a function of the  mean response energy E50%. The  error bars  displayed in Fig. 137 correspond to the sum of the experimental, IRDFF-II cross sections and the spectra uncertainties when the latter were available. It is seen that deviation of C/E from unity lies within two to three-sigma for most reactions and facilities, however with several exceptions which are explicitly labelled in the ﬁgure. The agreement
seems to be worse for E50% < 0.1 MeV, i.e., for evaluated IRDFF-II cross sections in the epithermal region. It is
worth noting that the research reactor benchmarks have notably softer spectra than the ﬁssion sources 252Cf SFNS or 235U(nth,f) PFNS. Because of this, they are capable  of delivering validation data for reactions that augment those obtained in the ﬁssion source neutron ﬁelds. This is particularly true for the (n,γ) reaction on targets, such as 45Sc, 55Mn, 58Fe, and 109Ag, where the observed C/E
agreement is seen to be within 2–3 standard deviations of unity.
In the case of reactions sensitive to neutron energies above 10 MeV, we see agreement between the C/E val- ues in the Sigma-Sigma and 235U(nth,f) PFNS bench- mark neutron ﬁelds for the 59Co(n,2n) reaction (E50% = 12.7 MeV): C/E = 0.900 0.049 and C/E = 0.995 0.044,
respectively.
TABLE 34: Measured and calculated SACS or SI ratio in the reference reactor-neutron-benchmark ﬁelds ISNF, Sigma-Sigma, and CFRMF. For the calculated SACS uncertainties the contributions from the dosimetry cross sections (Sigma Unc.) and neutron spectra (Spect. Unc.) are given separately. The C/E uncertainty is the sum of experimental and calculated ones.TABLE 34: continuedTABLE 35. Comparison of the thermal cross sections σ0 by Mughabghab [72] and IRDFF-II to the values derived from the Kayzero library [70]. Relative uncertainties and σ0 diﬀerences to the Kayzero are given in %.There is a direct relation between average cross sections with 1/v shape and the 2200 m/s value in a Maxwellian thermal reactor spectrum. The resonance integral also rep- resents an idealized epithermal reactor spectrum. These quantities  can  be compared to compilations such as the Atlas of Resonance Parameters [72]. The values of the thermal capture cross sections reported in the Atlas are based on decades of experience with the interpretation of diﬀerent kinds of experimental data, resonance theory and systematics. There could also be an element of subjective judgement involved, in the case of inconsistent or lacking data. Since the values in the Atlas were often used in the evaluation process, such comparison should be considered as data veriﬁcation, rather than validation.
The k0 and Q0 constants for neutron activation analysis
by the k0 standardization method in the Kayzero library were measured independently over the years. The thermal cross sections and the resonance integrals derived from them are representative of an integral measurement in an idealized  thermal reactor system. They can be used  for data validation purposes.
The k0 factors can be measured quite accurately in irra-
diation facilities with strongly enhanced thermal spectra. They provide the ratio to the gold standard of the product of the cross section and the gamma-emission probability. In some cases the uncertainty in the gamma-emission probabilities introduces a dominant contribution to the
TABLE 36. Comparison of the resonance integrals I0 from IRDFF-II to the values derived from the Kayzero library [70] and the values by Mughabghab [72]. I0 is calculated by Eq. (8) using E1 = 0.55 eV and E2 = 2 MeV for the Kayzero comparison, and E1 = 0.5 eV and E2 = 20 MeV for the Mughabghab comparison. Relative uncertainties (Unc.) and I0 diﬀerences (Diﬀ.) from the Kayzero values are given in %.uncertainty in the derived cross  section.  Other sources of uncertainty originate from detector calibration, mea- sured masses and other details related to the analysis of
the measured gamma spectra. The methodology was in- tended mainly for use with 1/v absorbers. The Westcott  g -factors and the corrections for the non-ideal cadmium ﬁlter were seldom used in the interpretation of the mea-
sured data, but for the nuclides relevant for dosimetry these corrections are generally smaller than the overall experimental uncertainties.
In Table 35 the thermal cross sections from the com- pilation by Mughabghab and in the  IRDFF-II  library are compared to the reference values derived from theKayzero library. Generally, the values from IRDFF-II lie close to the reference values, except for the 186W capture cross section, which diﬀers by nearly 10 %. However, ac-cording to the consistency criteria  deﬁned  in  Table  17, the thermal capture cross sections of 23Na and 59Co also show poor agreement, mainly because the uncertainties assigned to the cross sections are small.  Comparison  of the cross sections in the Atlas by  Mughabghab  shows  poor agreement for 45Sc, 59Co and 115In and marginally acceptable agreement for 23Na and 63Cu for the same rea- son, even though the values are comparably close to the reference. It must be mentioned that the  main  contribu- tion to the uncertainties of the thermal cross sections of 93Nb come from the gamma-emission probabilities.
The case of 186W is an interesting one, where we be- lieve the gamma-emission probabilities are mainly respon- sible for the diﬀerence. In the recent re-evaluation of
the gamma-emission probabilities the values changed by about  20  %, but  the  resulting  derived  thermal capture cross section could not be ﬁtted in a rigorous resonance analysis performed at JRC in Geel [90]. The case of the thermal capture cross section of 186W remains an open issue.
Resonance integrals can be derived from the Q0 fac- tors, which are usually measured by the cadmium ratio method. The method is convenient because it practically eliminates the dependence on the detector eﬃciency and other features related to gamma-spectrum analysis. Its drawback is that it requires two sample irradiations, bare and under Cd cover, where the presence of Cd may dis- tort the local spectrum in  the  irradiation  facility close to the Cd-covered sample. The other source of ambiguity is the deﬁnition of the resonance integral. The common deﬁnition,
@8
where E1 = 0.5 eV and E2 goes to inﬁnity is not what
is measured. Mughaghab used E1 = 0.5 eV and E2 =  20 MeV. The eﬀective Cd cutoﬀ energy for a 1 mm thick Cd cover is around 0.55 eV and it is not sharp. Secondly, measurements are made in thermal-reactor spectra, which fall oﬀ rapidly above 2 MeV. A better approximation to compare with measured data is to use E1 = 0.55 eV and E2 = 2 MeV. An additional reﬁnement is to deﬁne the  Cd transmission correction factor Fcd to correct for the diﬀerence between the idealized sharp cutoﬀ at 0.55 eV and the actual cutoﬀ by the rising Cd cross section with decreasing neutron energy. The Cd factor is deﬁned as
@9
From the deﬁnition it follows that measured values by the Cd ratio method must be divided by Fcd for compari- son with the idealized values. A compilation of cadmium
factors is available in the IAEA document INDC(NDS)- 0693 for all nuclides of interest for NAA.
The Fcd factors were seldom used in the determination of the Q0 factors for the Kayzero library. In the current Kayzero library an attempt was made  to  measure  the Fcd factor of 186W by making measurements in three irradiation channels with diﬀerent spectral characteristics, but no uncertainty was speciﬁed. We believe that the value 0.908 adopted by DeCorte [209] is unrealistic and that good agreement of the resonance integral with Atlas and with IRDFF-II in Table 36 is a coincidence, stemming from error compensation between Fcd and the gamma- emission probabilities in deriving the thermal capture cross section.
Another possible source of discrepancy in the measured resonance integrals stems from the fast-ﬁssion spectrum contribution. This depends on the irradiation facility. It may become signiﬁcant in the Cd-ratio measurements, since these have to be made in conditions, where the ep- ithermal contribution to the reaction rate is not so small. By a minor extension to the governing equations the fast ﬁssion eﬀect can be treated explicitly [71]. The eﬀect is usually small, but it has been demonstrated that in some cases it can amount to a few percent in the measured Q0 [210]. However, this methodology is not generally used by the NAA community.
The Atlas value of the resonance integrals of 45Sc and 55Mn are within two-sigma uncertainty compared to the values derived from the Q0 factors in the Kayzero library, but the resonance integrals of 50Cr, 63Cu and 113In dis- agree with the values derived from the Kayzero library, as seen from Table 36. The value for 113In was derived from the total capture resonance integral, assuming the same branching ratio as for the thermal cross section, which might be inappropriate. The values calculated from the IRDFF-II library generally agree to within two-sigma with Kayzero, except 50Cr. The neutron-induced reso- nance data of these nuclides and particularly for n+50Cr remain an open issue that requires further investigation.
N.High Temperature Maxwellian (kT ≈ 25–430 keV)
Most of the experimental Maxwellian spectrum- averaged cross sections, MACS, were taken from the latest version 1.0 of KADoNiS [211] based on the gold standard 197Au(n,γ) = 611.6    6.0 mb. This database presents   the so-called stellar SACS which were derived from the experimental by applying the factor 2/ π and convert-  ing them in the centre-of-mass system to the temperature
kTcm = 30 keV [212]. For comparison with these data we have computed the IRDFF-II SACS for the corresponding kTlab = kTcm * (1 + A)/A, where A is the ratio of the mass of the target nucleus to that of a neutron.  Addition-
ally, all KADoNiS cross sections and their uncertainties were renormalized to the newly introduced SACS gold standard 197Au(n,γ) = 620  11 mb [33] which adds a
+1.4% correction.
Several other measurements [213–215] were carried out, but were  not included in  KADoNiS  yet.  In   particular,
A.  Wallner  and  co-workers  [215]  have  measured SACS,
FIG. 138. (Color online) C/E ratios for SACS measured and calculated in the (25–426) keV Maxwellian spectra as a func- tion of the median energy  E50%.  Plotted values  are  listed in Table 37. Experimental data: - KADoNiS-1.0 [211], red triangle – P. Jimenez-Bonilla et al. [214], green triangle – G. Feinberg et al. [213], blue squares – A. Wallner et al. [215]. Un- certainties resulting from measurements and IRDFF-II cross sections are shown by black and red bars. Only the outlying C/E values are labelled with reaction IDs from Table 37.
not by the traditional activation technique, but by the highly-accurate Accelerator Mass Spectroscopy technique (AMS). In addition to the measurement at typical neutron spectrum average energy of 25 keV they have measured SACS at higher kT = 426 keV. These experiments deliv- ered their results in the laboratory system corresponding to diﬀerent kT values, so the IRDFF-II SACS were cal- culated at those temperatures.
The resulting C/E ratios with IRDFF-II for the 17 dosimetry reactions addressed within the KADoNiS database and several new experiments, along with the associated experimental and IRDFF-II cross section un- certainties, are listed in Table 37. The trends in the C/E ratios are displayed in Fig. 138. There the uncertainties of measurements and of the IRDFF-II cross sections are dis- played separately allowing to observe their contributions to the total C/E uncertainty.
As one can see, most of the IRDFF-II Maxwellian aver- aged cross sections agree with measurements to within 1–2 sigma. However we do not observe a good agreement for (n,γ) reactions on 59Co, 186W and 109Ag targets. Whether this is a problem in IRDFF-II evaluations or it is an exper- imental problem remains an open question. The reaction
232Th(n,γ) is a rare case among the IRDFF-II (n,γ) re- actions that is not validated in the Maxwellian-30 keV benchmark ﬁeld yet.
VIII.CONSISTENCY OF CROSS SECTIONS IN STANDARD AND REFERENCE FIELDS
Because of the uncertainty in the neutron ﬂuence for a given reactor operation, a better metric than a spectral index for a ﬁssion reactor ﬁeld is the consistency of the set of measured activities in a given reactor ﬁeld. The consistency is best captured by the overall chi-squared
TABLE  37. Measured and calculated SACS for the IRDFF-II cross sections in High Temperature Maxwellian Neutron Fields        as a function of the median energy E50%. Data from KADoNiS 1.0 [211] are the stellar Maxwellian averaged cross sections (MACS) deﬁned in the centre-of-mass system.per degree of freedom (χ2/dof ) metric as obtained from a least-squares-based spectrum adjustment in neutron benchmark ﬁelds. The relevant reaction-speciﬁc metric is then the resulting least-squares-based activity adjustment and the C/E for the adjusted activity.
The following subsections address this least-squares metric for speciﬁc neutron benchmark ﬁelds.
A.   252Cf(s.f.)
Sec. VII A reports on the validation evidence using in- dividual measured values for the spectrum-averaged cross section in this standard neutron benchmark ﬁeld. A more exacting validation metric, based on the consistency of the set of validation data gathered within this neutron ﬁeld, is depicted in Table 38.
The LSL-M2 code was used to perform the least- squares analysis. The inputs included the measurements, with uncertainties, the IRDFF-II cross sections, with co-
variance matrices, and the a priori spectrum, in this case as provided by  time-of-ﬂight measurements, along  with
the corresponding covariance matrix. This approach per- mitted all of the input data to be  adjusted, consistent with the input uncertainties, but the major result was to adjust the spectrum and to provide  a  high-ﬁdelity  test of the consistency of the data for the neutron ﬁeld. A chi-squared per degree of freedom, χ2/dof , is reported and provides a metric on the consistency of the data.
The least-squares calculation in this standard neutron benchmark ﬁeld used 48 measured reactions. As expected from the consideration of the separate spectrum-averaged cross sections addressed in Sect. VI A, the measured data were very consistent with calculations and the over- all least-squares spectrum adjustment had a very small
χ2/dof of 0.7042. A least-squares process using data for which there was an accurate identiﬁcation of the a pri- ori uncertainties should have a χ2/dof metric of 1.00. This χ2/dof less than unity suggests that some of the
input data (spectrum, cross sections, or measured activ- ities) actually may have had smaller uncertainties than were assigned to the input quantities.
The resulting adjustment in the spectrum-averaged ac- tivity, the reduced spectrum uncertainty contributions to the C/E, and the C/E values are tabulated in Table 38.  The C/E column is color-coded in a manner consistent with the discussion in Sec. VI A. The discrepant reac- tions are shown in “red”, the “acceptable” reactions in “yellow”, and the “good” reactions in “green”. While a least-squares analysis can adjust all of  the  input  data that have identiﬁed associated uncertainties, changing their contribution to the uncertainty in the resulting C/E value, this table does not provide the details of the re- sulting cross section and measurement uncertainty con- tributions since these uncertainties are not changed sig- niﬁcantly from those presented in the spectrum-averaged cross section comparison in Table 38. While the spectrum contribution to the overall C/E uncertainty is  reduced here relative to that seen in the spectrum-averaged cross section comparison, the diﬀerence is not large because
of the very-well-characterized a priori 252Cf(s.f.) spec- trum, which was measured using time-of-ﬂight techniques,
used in the analysis. In less-well-characterized neutron ﬁelds, the least-squares analysis will signiﬁcantly reduce the spectrum contribution to the resulting uncertainty in the C/E value.
Fig. 139 shows the C/E values in this 252Cf(s.f.) neu-
tron benchmark ﬁeld plotted versus the median response energy for the 48 reactions used in the least-squares ad- justment. There is no signiﬁcant trend seen in the C/E
TABLE 38. Least-squares-based consistency of data for the
252Cf(s.f.) neutron benchmark ﬁeld
ratios versus the median response energy. The C/E un- certainties are clearly much larger in the low and high energy portion of the spectrum. The adjustment produced a 1.0% adjusted scale factor. The scale factor adjustment is taken out of the C/E values in this ﬁgure.
The  largest contributor to  the  overall χ2/dof came
from the Al27p reaction, which had an individual χ2 con- tribution of 4.02, but, based on the acceptance criteria presented in Table 17, the  Al27p  reaction, with a  C/E of 0.950 2.51%, still showed a “good” validation status in this neutron ﬁeld. The next largest contributor to the
ties bars reﬂect the combined rms uncertainty contributions from the measurement, cross sections, and spectrum. Plotted values are listed in Table 38.
overall χ2/dof came from the In115n reaction, which had an individual χ2 contribution of 3.23, with a C/E of 0.964 1.57%. The color coding in Table 38 shows that this reaction, because of its small overall C/E uncertainty, was just outside of the required two standard deviations and has a status of “acceptable” rather than “good” as valida- tion evidence. The only “poor” validation status seen in the data available in this benchmark ﬁeld came from the Tm1693 reaction. This reaction, which had an individual χ2 contribution of 2.37, had a C/E of 0.795	16.24%, which, even though its large uncertainty gave it a C/E that was well within even the two standard deviations of unity required by Table 17 criterion #1 for a “good” sta- tus, it failed to meet the Table 17 C/E interval criterion
#2 for even an “acceptable” status.
Note that the uncertainty of the TOF measured a pri- ori spectrum is larger than 15% at the reaction threshold of 16 MeV and quickly rises up to 75% at 20 MeV, there-
fore the least-squares ﬁt is not well constrained in the energy region where this particular dosimeter is sensitive. The least-squares analysis showed a very strong upward adjustment (+19.3%) in the high energy (> 17 MeV) portion of the spectrum and a downward shift in the reac- tion rate (-4.5%), that is, the least-squares process made adjustments in both the reaction probability and the spec- trum in order to minimize the resulting disagreement in this high energy region.
B. 235U(nth,f)
Sect. VII B reports on the validation evidence using in- dividual measured values for the spectrum-averaged cross sections in this reference neutron benchmark ﬁeld. The more exacting validation metric, based on the consistency of the set of validation data gathered within this neutron ﬁeld as assessed by the LSL-M2 least square code, is de- picted in Table 39. The least square inputs included the
measurements, with uncertainties, the IRDFF-II cross sec- tions, with covariance matrices, and the a priori spectrum,in this case as provided from the GMA analysis and incor-
porated into the ENDF/B-VIII.0 evaluation as addressed in Sec. VII B, along with the corresponding covariance ma- trix. The chi-squared per degree of freedom, χ2/dof , is reported from the analysis and provides a metric on the consistency of the input data.FIG. 140. (Color online) Least-squares-based C/E as a func- tion of median energy E50% for the activity measurements in the 235U(nth,f) reference neutron benchmark Field. Uncertain- ties bars reﬂect the combined rms uncertainty contributions from the measurement, cross sections, and spectrum. Plotted values are listed in Table 39.
The least-squares calculation used 52 measured reac- tions. Two reactions that were included in the SACS anal- ysis were not included in this least-squares analysis: the B10t reaction was not addressed in the analysis because it was correlated with the B10a reaction that was used and the LSL-M2 code implementation used here did not han- dle strongly correlated cross sections; the Zr902 reaction was not addressed in the analysis because it was used in
235
Reaction Act. Adj. Spectrum Unc.
ID	[%]	[%]	C/E
support of the determination of the a priori	U(nth,f)
spectrum and this would have introduced a strong correla-
tion that the LSL-M2 code could not address. As expected from the consideration of the separate spectrum-averaged cross sections addressed in Sect. VI B 1, most of the re- actions included in the least-squares adjustment proved to provide good or acceptable validation evidence, and the least-squares analysis yielded a very good χ2/dof of 0.943.
There were no “poor” or discrepant reactions. Four re- actions (Au197g with an individual χ2 contribution of6.14 and a C/E of 0.889 ± 4.58%; Th232f with a χ con-tribution of 4.84 and a C/E of 0.918 3.83%; U238g with
a χ2 contribution of 3.33 and a C/E of 0.825  9.66%;  and B10a with an χ2 contribution of 2.48 and a C/E of 0.848 9.72%) were labelled as “acceptable” validation evidence, and the remaining reactions met the criteria for “good” validation evidence. The U238g reaction was seen to be labelled as “acceptable” in both the SACS  analy- sis shown in Table 20 and in this least-squares analysis. The Cu632 and Pb204n reactions were only labelled asTABLE 39. Least-squares-based consistency of data for the
235U(nth,f) neutron reference benchmark ﬁeld.
“acceptable” in the SACS analysis but were both “good” in this least squares analysis. The B10a, Au197g, and Th232f reactions are only labelled as “acceptable” in this least square analysis but met the criteria for “good” vali- dation evidence in the SACS analysis. The fact that these three reactions also corresponded to the reactions with the lowest median response energy might indicate that
it is the low energy portion of the a priori 235U(nth,f) spectrum, and not the cross sections or measurements, that has an issue.
The resulting adjustment in the spectrum-averaged ac- tivities, the reduced spectrum uncertainty contributions to the C/E, and C/E values are tabulated in Table  39.  The C/E column is again color-coded in a manner consis- tent with the discussion in Sec. VI B 1. Overall good or acceptable validation evidence, using these least-squares validation criteria, is found for all 52 IRDFF-II reactions
TABLE 40. Least-squares-based consistency of data for the SPR-III central cavity neutron reference benchmark ﬁeld.
in the 235U(nth,f) reference neutron benchmark ﬁeld. It
252
should be noted that, while the a priori	Cf(s.f.) neu-
tron spectrum showed a high uncertainty and a large
least-squares adjustment in the high energy (15–20 MeV) region, neither this large uncertainty nor the large least- squares adjustment were seen for the a priori 235U(nth,f)
spectrum.  This  observation  is  related  to  the  role that
the Zr902 reaction played in the determination of the a priori 235U(nth,f) spectrum by signiﬁcantly reducing the uncertainty of the evaluated spectra due to the low uncer-
tainty of the employed Zr902 SACS ( 7%) . Al272 was the reaction in this 235U(nthdian response energy. While this reaction, with a median response energy of 15.18 MeV, had a signiﬁcant measure- ment uncertainty (13.3 %), a very small individual χ2 component, 0.58, and a good C/E  of 0.902  13.72  %, the least-squares analysis resulted in only a 0.3 % ad-  justment in the neutron spectrum above 15 MeV. This least-squares analysis is a very strong indication of the ﬁ-
delity of the > 10 MeV portion of the a priori 235U(nth,f) spectrum  as  deﬁned  in  original  PFNS  evaluations [100–
102] adopted for the ENDF/B-VIII.0 library [31, 41, 42].
,f) ﬁeld that had the highest me-Fig. 140 shows the C/E values in this 235U(nth
,f) neu-tron benchmark ﬁeld plotted versus the median response energy for the 52 reactions used in the ﬁnal least-squares adjustment. The adjustment produced a 0.3 % adjusted scale factor. The scale factor adjustment is taken out of the C/E values in this ﬁgure. There is no signiﬁcant trend seen in the C/E ratios versus the median response energy. The C/E uncertainties are larger for several of the reac-
tions in the low and high energy portion of the spectrum that reﬂects uncertainties of the a priori spectrum in those energy regions.
C.SPR-III Fast Burst Reactor Central Cavity
The least-squares analysis used 40 reaction/cover com- binations and had a χ2/dof  of 2.409. Although this chi- squares is high, none of the resulting dosimeters are
found to be discrepant when we use the acceptance cri- teria adopted in Table 17. Table 40 shows the resulting C/E along with the consistent least-squares spectrum un- certainty and adjustment in the activity measurement. Fig. 141 shows the C/E values in the SPR-III reference neutron benchmark ﬁeld plotted versus the median re- sponse energy for the 40 reactions used in the ﬁnal least- squares adjustment.
TABLE 40. Least-squares-based consistency of data for the SPR-III central cavity neutron reference benchmark ﬁeld.
FIG. 141. (Color online) Least-squares-based C/E as a func- tion of median energy E50% for the activity measurements in the SPR-III fast-burst reactor central cavity reference neutron benchmark ﬁeld. Uncertainties bars reﬂect the combined rms uncertainty contributions from the measurement, cross sec- tions, and spectrum (remove bias). Plotted values are listed in Table 40.
D.ACRR Pool-type Reactor Central Cavity
The least-squares analysis for this neutron ﬁeld used 33 reaction/cover combinations and had a χ2/dof  of 0.8984. This reﬂects an excellent consistency of the data (and
associated input uncertainties). Table 41 shows the result- ing C/E along with the consistent least-squares spectrum uncertainty and adjustment in the activity measurement. Two of the 33 reactions, Ag109g-bare and Co59g-Cd, were labelled as discrepant based on the criteria in Table 17 – due to the large C/E value even if this value was within two standard deviations of unity.
The table reﬂects a large spectrum contribution to the uncertainty, and there is also seen to be a correlation in the C/E between the two  conﬁgurations, bare and cover,
– both conﬁgurations showing a positive C/E value. It is very possible that the discrepancy reﬂects an issue with the a priori  neutron  spectrum, or the associated uncer-FIG. 142. (Color online) Least-squares-based C/E as a func- tion of median energy E50% for the activity  measurements in the ACRR pool-type reactor central cavity reference neu- tron benchmark ﬁeld. Uncertainties bars reﬂect the combined rms uncertainty contributions from the measurement, cross sections, and spectrum. Plotted values are listed in Table 41.tainty, rather than with the dosimetry cross section. It should also be noted that both of these basic reactions appear in the set of sensors in both, a bare conﬁgura- tion, and with a cadmium cover; only one of the sensor conﬁgurations was labelled as discrepant. It is important that we also note a limitation in our current least-squares treatment. While a least-squares analysis should capture any correlation between input quantities, the LSL code used here did not include any correlation between the dosimetry responses. While this is not an issue for most dosimetry reactions, it could be an issue when for the re- sponse functions that address two diﬀerent conﬁgurations for the same basic reaction. This is an area for later toolTABLE 41. Least-squares-based consistency of data for the ACRR central cavity neutron reference benchmark ﬁeld.development. Fig. 142 shows the C/E values in the ACRR central cavity reference neutron benchmark ﬁeld plotted versus the median response energy for the 33 reactions used in the ﬁnal least-squares adjustment.
E.Other “Bucket”-Modifying Environments in Reference Reactor Fields
The least-squares analysis for the SPR-III fast burst reactor central cavity and the pool-type ACRR central cavity reactor were good validation cases for the range of activities that are easily measured in research reactors, as shown in the previous section. The consistency of activity measurements for other reactor spectra produced using spectrum modifying buckets has also been considered in our validation. Tables 42, 43, 44 and 45 present the mea- sured activities and the C/E ratios obtained from the least-squares adjustment. The C/E ratios are color-coded to indicate the status of the consistency.
Inspection of these tables shows that, while providing a larger quantity of validation evidence, the consideration of these other Bucket-Modifying Environments did not sig- niﬁcantly increase the scope of reactions for which we have validation evidence over what is seen in the SPR-III Cen-
TABLE 42. Least-squares-based consistency of data for the ACRR LB44 neutron reference benchmark ﬁeld.tral Cavity and ACRR Central Cavity least-squares anal- yses. Consideration of the consistency of dosimeters in the least-squares analysis for these other research reactor con- ﬁgurations, addressing the following neutron benchmark ﬁelds, produced the following results:
1.ACRR LB44 with 29 sensors, a χ2/dof = 1.279, and 2 discrepant dosimeter/cover conﬁgurations (Co59g- bare, Mo98g-Cdtk-B4C);
2.ACRR  PLG  with  35  sensors,  a  χ2/dof  =  1.025, and 1 discrepant dosimeter/cover conﬁgurations (Mn552-bare);
3.ACRR Cd-poly with 31 sensors, a χ2/dof  = 1.183, and 1 discrepant dosimeter/cover conﬁguration (Np237f-Cdtkj-B4C);
4.FREC-II with 33 sensors, a χ2/dof  = 1.711, and 0 discrepant dosimeter/cover conﬁgurations.
There are also several reaction/cover combinations that are newly addressed in these neutron ﬁelds, such as:
1.Fe58g-Cdtk-B4C (conﬁguration not used in ACRR- FF or SPR-III)
2.Co59g-Cdtk-B4C (conﬁguration not used in ACRR- FF or SPR-III)
3.Co59g-Cd (which was discrepant in ACRR-FF)
4.Cu63g-bare (Cd cover was good in SPR-III)
5.Ag109g-bare (which was discrepant in ACRR-FF)
6.W186g-Cd
TABLE 43. Least-squares-based consistency of data for the ACRR PLG neutron reference benchmark ﬁeld.TABLE 44. Least-squares-based consistency of data for the ACRR CdPoly neutron reference benchmark ﬁeld.TABLE 45. Least-squares-based consistency of data for the ACRR FREC-II neutron reference benchmark ﬁeld.F.9Be(d,n) Reaction Neutron Fields
The IRDFF-II library contains cross  sections  up  to 60 MeV for neutron dosimetry at accelerator-based neu- tron sources which require measurements for validation in high-energy neutron ﬁelds. Above 20 MeV there are many additional reaction channels that must be included to calculate the production of an activation product from elements that contain multiple isotopes. For example, the production of 54Mn from Fe must include 56Fe(n,X)54Mn that contains reactions from other Fe isotopes that create more 54Mn than the traditional 54Fe(n,p)54Mn reaction cross section used below 20 MeV. The impact of this ef- fect on high energy neutron dosimetry was discussed in Ref. [216]. The IAEA Nuclear Data Section addressed this issue in the newly released IRDFF-II library.
TABLE 46. Be(d,n) Integral Testing of Natural Element Cross Sections in IRDFF-II (725 group calculations), Ed = 16 MeVTABLE 47. Be(d,n) Integral Testing of Natural Element Cross Sections in IRDFF-II (725 group calculations), Ed = 40 MeVNew evaluated cross section ﬁles for natural Al, Ti, Fe, Ni,and Zr activation to various activation products were especially developed for IRDFF-II. While this ﬁle could be processed with the PREPRO codes, the format of the new ﬁle was not compatible with processing by the current version of NJOY. While interim steps have been taken to support processing this ﬁle with the NJOY code, we expect that NJOY compatibility with a legitimate ENDF-6 format in IRDFF-II will soon be addressed.
The new natural element cross sections and covariances were processed into multi-group cross section libraries used by the STAYSL-PNNL computer code [217]. Inte- gral testing was then performed using activation data mea- sured in several 9Be(d,n) neutron ﬁelds that have been characterized by neutron time-of-ﬂight (TOF) measure- ments at deuteron energies of 16 and 40 MeV [106, 218, 219]. Measurements at Ed = 30 MeV and Ed = 40 MeV were presented in INDC(NDS)-0731 [28], prior to the cre- ation of the new Fe activation ﬁle. The plot of the spectra is shown in Fig. 96.
Eleven of the new natural element activation cross sec- tions were tested in this report using previously published TOF neutron spectra to  calculate  the  activation  rates for direct comparison with the measured activation rates. These integral tests are independent of prior work since the new cross sections and covariances were not used in any spectral adjustments of the TOF neutron spectra us- ing STAYSL-PNNL. The calculations were performed us- ing 725-group cross section and covariance libraries. The measured activation rates were updated using the recom- mended gamma branching ratios listed in Table 8. Inte- gral testing results are presented in Table 46 - Table 47 be- low. The neutron spectrum for 9Be(d,n) at Ed = 16 MeV does not exceed 20 MeV so it is a good check on the lower
energy range. The spectra at Ed = 40 MeV provides a good test of the cross sections at progressively higher ener- gies up to about 50 MeV. Tables 46 and 47 show generally good agreement between the measured activation rates and the calculated activation rates using the IRDFF-II natural element cross sections within the uncertainties of the neutron time-of-ﬂight spectra as well as the activation rate measurements.
The new cross section and cross section libraries were also tested by performing neutron spectral adjustments with the STAYSL-PNNL computer code using the 725- group cross section and covariance libraries. At 16 MeV, we used 24 reactions for the small spectral adjustment and 25 reactions at 40 MeV. Both the TOF and adjusted
spectral activation rate calculations are shown in Fig. 96. In both cases we achieved acceptable χ2 values and over- all standard deviations less than 10 % attesting to the high quality of the new IRDFF-II ﬁle for neutron spectral adjustment up to 50 MeV using the new natural element cross sections.
IX.OTHER VALIDATION EVIDENCE
A large volume of additional data exists that supports the validation of the IRDFF-II library, as has been re- ported at other venues [28]. This additional data includes measurements such as:
JAEA/FNS benchmark testing with Li2O assembly and a DT source;
ENEA Frascati copper block assembly with 14-MeV neutrons;
CEA reactor data measured at MINERVE, EOLE, MASURCA, and CALIBAN reactor facilities;
ASPIS-IRON88 benchmark described in the SIN- BAD package NEA-1517/75;
activation experiments at iThemba Laboratory for Accelerator Based Sciences using 90 and 140 MeV quasi-monoenergetic neutron beams;
Kyoto University Research Reactor 80 and 140 MeV p-Li quasi-monoenergetic neutron beams;
This evidence is not explicitly captured in this paper because the results, typically, exhibited a strong inﬂuence from other uncertainty contributors or they did not sig- niﬁcantly expand the strength of the validation evidence for the IRDFF-II library.
X.VALIDATION STATUS
Secs. VII, VIII, and IX detail the validation evidence that has been assembled to support the IRDFF-II recom- mended cross sections in integral neutron ﬁelds. It is not suﬃcient for users of the library to just ask if a reaction
cross section has been validated, users must also consider if the reaction cross section has been  validated within the relevant energy response region addressed by their application. Table 48 summarizes the validation data in a format where users can more readily assess the validation status for a given reaction for a given class of neutron ﬁeld. Results are presented for selected integral bench- marks that cover the complete range of average spectrum energies. For a more detailed information the reader is referred to Secs. VII, VIII, and IX.
Whereas all of the IRDFF-II metrology reactions have nuclear data evaluations that are based on some experi- mental data and trends informed by nuclear model calcu- lations, some of the metrology reactions within the library are seen in Table 48 to lack any additional validation ev- idence in integral benchmark neutron ﬁelds. Many of the validation deﬁciencies are for high threshold energy re- actions where measurements are not easily acquired in ﬁssion neutron ﬁelds.
TABLE 48: Validation evidence for IRDFF-II metrology reactions from integral benchmark neutron ﬁelds in order of increasing neutron energy.XI.LIBRARY DISTRIBUTIONS
The development of the IRDFF-II library was the re- sult of an international collaboration, organized through a series of Research Projects at the International Atomic Energy Agency Nuclear Data Section (NDS). The library can be obtained from www-nds.iaea.org/IRDFF/. It has been incorporated into the IAEA nuclear data viewers, www-nds.iaea.org/exfor/endf.htm. Using that online sys- tem, comparisons can be readily made between diﬀerent nuclear data libraries, measured data available in EX- FOR [73], and the IRDFF-II recommended cross section with uncertainties.
XII.CONCLUSIONS
This paper reports on the assembly of a new neutron metrology library - the IRDFF-II - that represents the recommendations of an international collaboration and supports neutron metrology application in ﬁssion and fu- sion neutron ﬁelds. The elements of the IRDFF-II library are described and the basis for the recommended nuclear data values is provided. The IRDFF-II library, which now extends up to incident neutron energies of 60 MeV, con- tains a comprehensive, complete and consistent set of nuclear data that can  be  used  for the  characterization of neutron radiation ﬁelds and to support the neutron metrology used with experiments conducted in these neu- tron ﬁelds.
In addition to providing the recommended nuclear data, this document summarizes the set of validation evidence gathered from integral neutron benchmark ﬁelds that con- ﬁrms the consistency of the recommended nuclear data.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Our sincere thanks to all colleagues who have con- tributed to and worked on this project during the last thirteen years since the release of the IRDF-2002 library. The preparation of this paper would not have been possi- ble without the support, hard work and endless eﬀorts of a large number of individuals and institutions.
The authors would also like to acknowledge the signiﬁ- cant contributions by V. Chechev, V. G. Khlopin Radium Institute, St. Petersburg, Russia, in the area of the nu- clear decay data that have been incorporated into the IRDFF-II library. V. Chechev, who collaborated closely with the IAEA Nuclear Data Section and the Decay Data Evaluation Project (DDEP), passed away on March 5, 2018.
The IAEA is grateful to all participating laboratories for their assistance in the work and for support of the research meetings and activities. The work described in this paper would not have been possible without IAEA Member State contributions. Work at SNL was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy’s National Nuclear Security Administration under contract DE-NA0003525. We acknowledge many fruitful exchanges of informa- tion with our colleagues A.J. Koning, D. Rochman and J.-C. Sublet on details of TENDL libraries. Without their eﬀorts in producing TENDL we could not achieve a suc-
cessful extension of the IRDFF up to 60 MeV.
The IAEA staﬀ acknowledges very valuable contribu- tion to the preparation of this paper made by our col-  league V. Zerkin by customizing and improving his online plotting package, and uploading the preliminary β-version of the IRDFF-II to the servers allowing for a comprehen- sive visual checking of the evaluated cross sections.
The IAEA appreciate the valuable contributions made by A.J. Plompen, P.F. Mastinu, I. Kodeli, R. Nchodu, M. Stefanik, F. Wissmann, P. Maleka, N.B. Ndlovu and N. Kornilov during the various project meetings.
Last but not least we are deeply indebted to W. Mannhart, who passed away on November 11, 2018. Mannhart contributions to many aspects of the ﬁeld of
neutron metrology over a period of several decades were very signiﬁcant and are acknowledged as a source of in- spiration.
