<title>Radiation chemistry for modern nuclear energy development</title>
<Affiliation>Institute of Nuclear Chemistry and Technology, 16 Dorodna Street, Warsaw 03-195, Poland</Affiliation>
<author>Andrzej G. Chmielewski n, Monika M. Szołucha </author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>Radiation Physics and Chemistry</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier Ltd</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.radphyschem.2016.01.002 </DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2016.01.002 </URL>
H I G H L I G H T S
●Radiation effects on materials are crucial in nuclear reactor operation procedures.
●The radiolysis of extractants and solvents are fundamental in the development of fuel reprocessing.
●Water radiation chemistry are important issues in many aspects of NPP operation.
●Radiation effects on materials, enhanced corrosion are crucial in nuclear reactor operation procedures.
a b s t r a c t
Radiation chemistry plays a signiﬁcant role in modern nuclear energy development. Pioneering research in nuclear science, for example the development of generation IV nuclear reactors, cannot be pursued without chemical solutions. Present issues related to light water reactors concern radiolysis of water in the primary circuit; long-term storage of spent nuclear fuel; radiation effects on cables and wire in- sulation, and on ion exchangers used for water puriﬁcation; as well as the procedures of radioactive waste reprocessing and storage. Radiation effects on materials and enhanced corrosion are crucial in current (II/III/IIIþ) and future (IV) generation reactors, and in waste management, deep geological dis- posal and spent fuel reprocessing. The new generation of reactors (IIIþ and IV) impose new challenges for radiation chemists due to their new conditions of operation and the usage of new types of coolant. In the case of the supercritical water-cooled reactor (SCWR), water chemistry control may be the key factor in preventing corrosion of reactor structural materials. This paper mainly focuses on radiation effects on long-term performance and safety in the development of nuclear power plants.
Keywords:
Radiation chemistry Radiolysis
Radiation effects Nuclear energy
1.Introduction
Generation II reactors have been in operation for many years. These are light water-cooled reactors of the BWR (Boiling Water Reactor) and PWR (Pressurised Water Reactor) type, and CANDU (Canadian Deuterium Uranium) heavy water-cooled  reactors. Some reactors with graphite moderators were and are in operation as well. Generation III and IIIþ reactors develop the technology from phase II, with improvements related to reactor safety and economy.
Current policy regarding the fuel cycle is aiming towards a closed cycle, although some experts are questioning the economy of the process. However, fuel reprocessing is a future issue con- cerning the optimal utilization of ﬁssion elements, and radioactive waste volume reduction is a fundamental feature of generation IV implementation and future nuclear energy development. The  generation IV fast reactors will also have further improvements in fuel economy and better techniques for  radioactive  waste handling.
Radiation chemistry plays a signiﬁcant role in the ﬁeld of nu- clear safety, especially regarding water radiolysis in the primary circuit and spent fuel storage pools, radiation effects on the in- sulation of cables and wires, and in ion exchangers used for water puriﬁcation. The other processes that fall under this ﬁeld of sci- ence are radioactive waste reprocessing and storage. In the PUREX (Plutonium Uranium Reduction Extraction) process the radiolysis of extractants and solvents has been studied. In this technology an aqueous  nitric  acid  phase  is  in  contact  with  an  organic   phase.
Consequently,  the  intense  radiation  ﬁeld  i.e.  α  –  particles,  β –
particles, γ – rays generates large amounts of degradation products
affecting the production of the PUREX solvent, with effects on its redox and physicochemical properties, as well as its extraction afﬁnities and kinetics.
The accidents in Chernobyl (1986), and especially Fukushima (2011), have led to the opinion that this ﬁeld has to be revisited. In many countries including Poland, where nuclear programmes are in the development phase (Chmielewski, 2013), new research programs on the subject are being carried out. Additionally, new fuel reprocessing technologies are being developed and geological high waste/spent fuel storage is an increasingly important issue for future nuclear power applications.
Generation IV reactors are in different phases of research and development. Some solutions have been demonstrated at rea- sonable scale. These reactors use alternative coolants and most of the related problems are in the ﬁeld of materials science. However there are still some issues related to the ageing of insulation  in  new types of radiation ﬁelds and we may expect other problems that are interesting from the point of view of radiation chemistry. This area has not been explored in depth, at this moment devel- opment is in the hands of nuclear physicists and energy experts. Even the chemistry of the fuel preparation for this new generation is still in the early stages of development (Chmielewski et al.,  2012). An overview of the work on going in the ﬁeld and some forecasts regarding future research and development are pre- sented in this paper.
2.Radiation chemistry in nuclear energy
2.1.Light water reactors and spent fuel storage pools
It is well known that coolant water in nuclear reactors receives high absorbed doses under a mixed radiation ﬁeld of gamma rays and fast neutrons at high temperature and pressure. Radiation controls the chemical condition of the coolant and precise pre- diction of radiolysis effects is essential to avoid detrimental ra- diation-induced corrosion processes such as stress corrosion cracking (SCC). A chemistry program is fundamental for the safe operation of a nuclear power plant. Few data are available in the literature on the role of the water radiolysis on the corrosion of stainless steel core components under PWR operating conditions (300 °C, 155 bar). The effect of water radiolysis on the electro- chemical potential of stainless steel has been observed. Irradiation of the interfaces with protons induces a change in the potential. Moreover, the higher the ﬂux, the higher the electrochemical po- tential shift due to irradiation. The ageing effect has been observed at the irradiated stainless steel/water interfaces. The electro- chemical response to irradiation decreases and even disappears with time spent at 300 °C/90 bar and/or after several irradiations (Muzeau et al., 2011). Radiation chemistry plays a very important role in nuclear engineering, covering all aspects of water radiolysis in boiling water reactor (BWR) and pressurized water reactor (PWR) units, including the effects of radiolytic phenomena on corrosion (Takagi et al., 2010). Boiling Water Reactors (BWR) use high purity water as the neutron moderator and the primary coolant, producing steam. As a result of water radiolysis, gas stripping in the core, and recirculation, reactor recirculation water contains from 100 to 300 ppb of hydrogen peroxide. This con- centration of hydrogen peroxide under normal water chemistry operation increases the susceptibility of  austenitic  stainless  steel to intergranular stress corrosion cracking (IGSCC). Each section of the various modelled regions of the reactor ﬂow is treated as one- dimensional, representing mass ﬂux and dose rates as radial averages. The concentration of hydrogen peroxide, H2O2, is an important parameter in BWR reactor water. This molecule is too unstable to get its concentration in situ by sampling methods. Measurements of this parameter have only been made in the la- boratory by applying radiolysis models (Lister and Uchida, 2015). Reducing the peroxide level to 1–10 ppb results in a decrease in   the electrochemical potential to less than 230 mV, which can ef- fectively eliminate IGSCC in austenitic stainless steels. Experi- mental work has shown that the oxidant concentration can be
effectively reduced by adding hydrogen, eliminating IGSCC. The addition of hydrogen suppresses radiolytic production of oxidising species, such as O2, H2O2 and a number of other transient species in the region of the reactor core where boiling does not occur. Such modiﬁcations of the reactor water have created an environment not previously experienced by Zircaloy fuel and structure com- ponents. The presence of zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) greatly in- creases H2 yields in water radiolysis, an inevitable process in nu- clear power plants (Skotnicki and Bobrowski, 2015). Studies (Shi- mada et al., 2006) have shown that hydrogen uptake and pickup fractions of the water rod and spacer materials were similar to those of water rods and spacer materials under normal water chemistry (NWC) conditions. The addition of alcohol into the primary coolant of pressurized water reactors (PWRs) has been proposed as an alternative to hydrogen addition. At low doses, the addition of 1.0 ppm methanol considerably suppresses radiolysis of the coolant. At high doses, the addition of at least 10 ppm methanol is necessary to lower the concentrations of radiolytic oxidising products. In the presence of fast neutron radiation, me- thanol acts to decompose the radiolytic oxidising products (Su- nayro and Domae, 2008).
Prolonging the lifetime of old and new nuclear reactors is a challenge for materials engineering and related industries. This subject concerns all areas of materials science, especially with respect to construction metals, concrete and, most importantly, polymeric materials which easily undergo degradation in radiation ﬁelds. The formation of volatile alkyl iodides other than methyl iodide during a serious nuclear reactor accident may have radi- ological signiﬁcance. The hypothesis that radioactive alkyl iodides, other than methyl iodide, could form from paint solvents under  the conditions of a serious nuclear accident in light water reactors (under boiling water reactor (BWR) and pressurised water reactor (PWR) conditions) has been tested using stable elemental iodine, a gamma irradiator and gas chromatography equipment. It was found that methyl and isopropyl iodides were formed from the texanol ester, which is used in many modern water-based paints. Also, methyl, ethyl, propyl and butyl iodides were formed from a hydrocarbon solvent (white spirit) commonly used in paint pro- ducts in the past. Detailed studies of the paints present inside the reactor buildings of nuclear power plants would enable an esti- mation of the inﬂuence of different paint solvents on the volatile (organic) iodine source term during severe accidents such as Fu- kushima Daiichi in 2011 (Tietze et al., 2013). Organic iodides are difﬁcult to remove using ﬁltration systems (Klein-Heßling et al., 2014). A variety of physicochemical processes can change the state of the volatiles, with partitioning taking place between the gas- eous, aerosol, aqueous and condensed phases (Konings et  al., 2015). Research regarding the radiolysis of iodine species in con- centrated solutions is sparse but it is possible that such droplets would, under  irradiation,  re-release  volatile  iodine  (Dickinson  et al., 2014). In spent fuel pools at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant, hydrazine was added to salt-containing water in or- der to reduce dissolved oxygen. Hydrazine is known to reduce dissolved oxygen in high temperature pure water, but its deox- ygenation behaviour in salt-containing water at ambient tem- perature in the presence of radiation is unknown. Deoxygenation using hydrazine in salt-containing water was therefore in- vestigated using a 60Co gamma-ray source and artiﬁcial  seawater  at room temperature. Water samples containing a small amount of hydrazine were irradiated at dose rates of 100–10,000 Gy/h. The concentration of dissolved oxygen in the water samples was measured before and after irradiation. Notably, a decrease in the dissolved oxygen was only observed after irradiation, and the dissolved oxygen concentration decreased with increasing dose rate and irradiation time. The rate of decrease in the amount of dissolved oxygen using hydrazine was slow in the presence of salts. Kinetic considerations suggested that deoxygenation of the salt-containing water exposed to gamma-ray irradiation using hydrazine was suppressed by chloride ions (Motooka et al., 2013). CANDU reactors using heavy water as moderator are less common. Diffusion-kinetic modelling of the effect of temperature on the radiation chemistry of heavy water has been studied by Swiatla– Wojcik and Buxton (2000).
2.2.Generation IV reactors
One of the generation IV solutions under development is a supercritical water-cooled reactor (SCWR). When temperature T 4374 °C and pressure P 422.1 MPa, water enters a special phase called the supercritical state, and the characteristics of super- critical water are quite different from those of solid, liquid and gaseous water. Supercritical water has signiﬁcant differences in its physical and chemical properties (density, diffusion coefﬁcient, viscosity etc.). Lin et al. (2010) performed a computer simulation of water decomposition phenomena in supercritical conditions, re- quiring knowledge of the temperature dependent G values. In supercritical water, the high temperature and solubility of corro- sive ingredients (O2, O, HO, and e-aq) have extreme effects on the corrosion behaviour of metallic materials. Oxidation is the main corrosion mechanism in a supercritical water environment. High temperature provides the activation energy (Zhang et al., 2009). Since most reactions are accelerated with increasing temperature, it is essential to develop a measurement system to study them at
temperatures above 230 °C (Arkhipov et al., 2007). Control of the water chemistry may be the key factor in preventing corrosion of materials in the reactor.
Other generation IV developments include gas (GFR), and so- dium and lead cooled (LFR) fast reactors and molten salt reactors (MSR).  Various  subjects  related  to  their  radiation  chemistry and
material damage by radiation are being studied e.g. material cor-rosion and development of a lead chemistry management system; actinide management (fuel reprocessing and manufacturing); and liquid salt physical chemistry and technology (NEA OECD, 2014).
2.3.Fuel reprocessing
The future of nuclear power engineering is oriented on a closed nuclear fuel cycle, which requires the development of new, en- vironmentally safe, economically feasible, and low-waste tech- nologies for the reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel (SNF) both from operating reactors and from fast reactors of the third and fourth generations, which operate on mixed oxide uranium–plutonium fuel. Reused nuclear materials from light water reactors (LWRs) can be used as ﬁssile and fertile fuels needed for fast reactors. Use of these materials also reduces the potential radiotoxic inventory of high-level waste (HLW) for disposal while reusing used MOX fuels. Partitioning of long-lived α-emitters and high-yield ﬁssion products from dissolved nuclear fuel is a key component of the processes envisioned for the safe recycling of nuclear fuel and the disposal of high-level waste. These future processes will likely be based on aqueous solvent-extraction technologies for light-water
reactor fuel and consist of four main components for the separa- tion of uranium, ﬁssion products, group trivalent actinides and lanthanides, and separation of trivalent actinides from lantha- nides. Since the solvent systems will be in contact with highly radioactive solutions, they must be robust toward radiolytic de- gradation in an irradiated, mixed organic and aqueous acidic en- vironment. Therefore, an understanding of their radiation chem- istry is important for the design of a practical system (Mincher      et al., 2009a).
The PUREX process has been the basis of commercial UNF re- cycling worldwide for over 30 years. Radiolysis of solvents in the liquid–liquid extraction fuel reprocessing stage is one of the main factors inﬂuencing the operation of the process (Berthon and Charbonnel, 2009). In the classical PUREX process for reprocessing spent nuclear fuel, tributyl phosphate (TBP) mixed with inert hy- drocarbon diluent is used as the extractant for separating uranium and plutonium from a large number of ﬁssion products (FP) that remain in the aqueous nitric acid phase. Indirect radiation effects  of the nitric acid phase are the following reactions:
@1
@2
@3
Direct radiation effects of the nitric acid phase are the following reactions:
@4
@5
A schematic description of the standard PUREX Process is presented in Fig. 1.
During the extraction stage, the TBP-based solvent suffers radia- tion and chemical degradation, resulting in the formation of a series  of degradation products. These degradation products can be grouped into temporary degradation products originating from TBP and per- manent degradation products originating from hydrocarbon diluent.
Fig. 1. Schematic description of the standard PUREX process.
Through alkali washing, the former can be removed but the latter are difﬁcult to remove from the organic phase. These degradation pro- ducts cause the solvent to deteriorate leading to impairment of phase separation, decrease of the mass transfer coefﬁcients of uranium and plutonium, and retention of ﬁssion products in the uranium and plutonium product streams. The main degradation products  of TBP are dibutyl phosphoric acid (HDBP), monobutyl phosphoric acid (H2MBP), and additional phosphorus compounds. The principal im- purities originating from the diluents comprise aliphatic nitro com- pounds, aliphatic carboxylic acids, aliphatic nitroso compounds, aromatic compounds, and ketones and aldehydes. Reviews on the radiation chemistry of irradiated aqueous nitric acid and the tributyl phosphate ligand used for uranium extraction in the ﬁrst of the series of four extractions; and on the radiation chemistry of the ligands proposed for use in the second extraction of caesium and strontium ﬁssion products are presented by Mincher et al. (2009b, 2009c). The ligand and solvent formulation adopted needs to be robust in a high radiation environment. This series of reviews concludes with a summary of the important radiation chemical reactions related to the fuel cycle, and recommendations  for  stable  ligand  design  (Mincher et al., 2010). Radiolysis and degradation of a 30% volume mixture of TBP in n-dodecane has been studied by means of  alpha  radiation from 238Pu. Radiolysis effects were quantitatively estimated by the percentage of 238Pu retained in the irradiated organic phase after the washing procedure. The effects of absorbed dose, nitric acid con- centration, and the presence of UO2+ and Zr4þ, have been in- vestigated by Gao et al. (2015). The results indicate that Zr4þ accel- erates alpha-particle degradation of the organic phase, and that both UO2+ and Pu4þ complex with degradation products formed by the absorbed radiation. The effects of the absorbed dose, the TBP volume fraction, the cumulative absorbed dose and the presence of UO2+ and Zr4þ on the radiolysis of the solvents have been investigated. The results indicate that Pu retention increases with the increase of the absorbed dose after alpha or gamma irradiation, and is greater for solvent containing lower amounts of TBP (Gao et al., 2014). The early focus has primarily been on a separation following a conventional PUREX process. One concept is to separate both the actinides and lanthanides from the PUREX rafﬁnate and then in a second step se- parate them from each other. Much research has been performed on this concept but the two processes that have been given the greatest interest are the Trivalent Actinide — Lanthanide Separation by Phosphorous reagent Extraction from Aqueous Komplexes (TAL- SPEAK) type processes and the DIAMide EXtraction (DIAMEX) (Fig.  2)/Selective  ActiNide  Extraction  (SANEX)  type  processes.  A
schematic description of the SANEX Process is presented in Fig.  3. The  radiolysis  of TODGA  in n-dodecane  is caused  by a direct io-
nisation reaction and a charge transfer reaction between the solvent (n-dodecane) and the solute (TODGA) (Fig. 4) (Sugo et al., 2007). The bonds: A, B, C (Fig. 4) tend to be broken by irradiation of TODGA or its solution in n-dodecane with γ-rays. In the presence of nitric acid, cleavage of the amide-bond (A) is most common.
However, the recent focus in Europe has shifted towards a process that replaces PUREX by simultaneously removing all of the actinides from the dissolved spent fuel. This concept is called the Grouped ActiNide EXtraction (GANEX) process. This uses a single process for separation of the actinides from both the lanthanides as well as the rest of the ﬁssion and corrosion/ activation products. In a GANEX process all the actinides are separated from the rest of the fuel as one group, in most cases using a pre-extraction of the bulk uranium, leaving all of the ﬁssion, corrosion and activation products in the aqueous stream. Different solvents have been tested and their stability plays an important role in the process. Stability experiments have been performed on a phenyl tri- ﬂuoromethyl sulphone based solvent containing 6,60-bis(5,6-dia- lkyl-[1,2,4-]triazin-3-yl)-2,20-bipyridine and tri-butyl phosphate by Hallerod et al. (2015). This solvent is intended for use in a grouped actinide extraction process for partitioning and trans- mutation purposes. The solvent maintained good distribution ra- tios  and  separation  factors  during  both  gamma irradiation  of
6.6 kGy h—1 for up to 24 h and acid contact for up to 6 weeks at room temperature. These results indicate that the solvent is stable
under irradiation in contact with the water phase  up to a total  dose of approximately 160 kGy. The G-values for α-radiolysis are much lower due to the lower yield of radical reactive species in  the
high LET system (Mincher et al., 2014).
Although liquid–liquid extraction process applications have a long history in nuclear technology, new processing methods are still being developed. Room-temperature ionic liquids (IL) are composed of ions and are liquid at ambient temperature. Their properties — negligible vapour pressure and non-ﬂammability — make them very attractive alternatives to classical organic sol- vents. IL are very effective media for chemical catalysis and synthesis and they have found numerous other applications and there are proposals for their use in some procedures in the nuclear industry (Grodkowski et al., 2005). It is necessary to control the reaction pathways to reduce net radiation damage and to control FS and TRU metal ion oxidation states for optimal separations. Reactions deﬁning radiation damage pathways are as follows:
Recombination  of hole (always  has positive  charge)  and  electron
@6
@7
Scavenging by solutes (or ionic liquid cations)
@8
@9
2.4.Low and medium activity waste processing and solidiﬁcation
Some of the techniques applied for liquid waste (LLW/MLW) preconcentration are membrane processes that were developed many years ago. The application of these technologies is growing
Fig. 2.  Schematic description of  the DIAMEX Process.
Fig. 3.  Schematic description of  the SANEX Process.
worldwide and mostly polymeric membranes are used for UF/RO membrane manufacturing. Therefore the resistance of polymers to radiation and possible changes in process efﬁciency have been studied  since  the  1990s  (Chmielewski  and  Harasimowicz, 1992).
The   results   of  gamma   irradiation  experiments   show  that   RO
embedded within dense grains. They can only be released into the grain boundaries via diffusion or if there is dissolution of the matrix itself. Therefore, fuel oxidation/corrosion and dissolution are  the  main processes  in the  release of  radionuclides. Oxidising
and reducing radicals (HO●, O•−, HO•, ea—q,  H●) and molecules  such
2	2
membranes are radiation resistant until at least a dose  level  around 0.1 MGy under gamma rays and a dose rate of 0.5 kGy/h (Combernoux et al., 2015).
Ion exchange resins are employed extensively in the nuclear industry to remove radioactive contaminants such as neutron ac- tivation products and ﬁssion products, which may have leaked from fuel elements. Spent radioactive ion exchange resins have been produced during the operation of facilities in the nuclear industry. These resins loaded with radioactive nuclides could not be regenerated and reused. It is very important to develop  a  proper technology for the treatment and disposal of such spent radioactive resins. Among inert immobilisation materials, cement is widely used for its low cost and perfect irradiation stability (Wang and Wan, 2015). Radiation degradation of resins plays an important role during their operation time and storage. Especially in storage,  evolution  of  gaseous  degradation  products  (Rébufa et al., 2015) may lead to cracking of ceramic matrix structures.
2.5.Vitriﬁed radwaste and geological storage of spent fuel
The modern concept of safe management of high-level liquid radioactive wastes (HLRW) requires fractional separation of highly active components of the wastes including 235U and 239Pu, minor actinides (241Am, 244Cm, 237Np), and ﬁssion products  (137Cs  and  90Sr) followed by their immobilisation or transmutation into short-lived or stable isotopes prior to disposal. The disposal of radioactive wastes deep within the Earth's crust is considered the most promising amongst the various proposed disposal techni- ques. Long-term performance of the waste disposal needs to be addressed since the situation becomes more  complicated  over  time due to the complex interactions between ﬁssion products of radioactive waste and the surrounding ground water. In spent nuclear fuel, most of the radionuclides remain in the matrix,
as H2O2 are produced from the alpha radiolysis of water. These reactive species create oxidising conditions at the interface of the UO2-matrix and water and thus enhance dissolution under re- pository conditions. Possible water penetration and dissolution of the stored radioactive waste casks depends on the phenomena induced by radiation at the solid–liquid interfaces. Consideration of the geometrical dose distribution, radiolysis of the aqueous phase and diffusion of radiolysis products is of great importance for the assessment of storage safety (Jonsson, 2010). Some im- portant processes involved in the corrosion of spent nuclear fuel if water penetrates the storage site are shown in Fig. 5.
3.Conclusions
As demonstrated above, the current role of chemistry  in the safe and effective operation of nuclear power plants is signiﬁcant. Water chemistry and radiation chemistry are important in light water reactors, spent fuel storage pools, generation IV  reactors, fuel reprocessing, low and medium activity waste processing and solidiﬁcation, vitriﬁed radwaste, and spent fuel geological storage. The Fukushima Daiichi NPP accident has highlighted the im- portance of designing nuclear systems with the highest levels of safety. Lessons learnt from this accident will be an asset to the modern operating ﬂeet and future nuclear technology.
Acknowledgements
This paper was prepared under the iiA-INCT contract and Ministry of Science and Higher Education co-ﬁnancing grant.
Fig. 4. Reaction mechanisms and the main reaction of TODGA radiolysis in n-dodecane (based on Sugo et al., 2007).
Fig. 5. Schematic diagram of important processes involved in radiation-induced oxidative dissolution of spent nuclear fuel (sketch based on Jonsson, 2010).
