<title>Personal radiation detector at a high technology  readiness  level that satisﬁes DARPA’s SN-13-47 and SIGMA program requirements</title>
<Affiliation>a.Radiation Detection Department, Rotem Industries Ltd., Israel
b.Electronics & Control Laboratories, Nuclear Research Center, Negev, Beersheba, Israel</Affiliation>
<author>D. Ginzburg , Y. Knafo, A. Manor, R. Seif, M. Ghelman, M. Ellenbogen,V. Pushkarsky, Y. Ifergan, N. Semyonov, U. Wengrowicz, T. Mazor,Y. Kadmon, Y. Cohen , A. Osovizky </author>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research A</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nima.2014.12.117</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2014.12.117</URL>
a b s t r a c t
There is a need to develop new personal radiation detector (PRD) technologies that can be mass produced. On August 2013, DARPA released a request for information (RFI) seeking innovative radiation detection technologies. In addition, on December 2013, a Broad Agency Announcement (BAA) for the SIGMA program was released. The RFI requirements focused on a sensor that should possess three main properties: low cost, high compactness and radioisotope identiﬁcation capabilities. The identiﬁcation performances should facilitate the detection of a hidden threat, ranging from special nuclear materials (SNM) to commonly used radiological sources. Subsequently, the BAA presented the speciﬁc require- ments at an instrument level and provided a comparison between the current market status (state-of- the-art) and the SIGMA program objectives.
This work presents an optional alternative for both the detection technology (sensor with communication output and without user interface) for DARPA’s initial RFI and for the PRD required by the SIGMA program. A broad discussion is dedicated to the method proposed to fulﬁll the program objectives and to the selected alternative that is based on the PDS-GO design and technology. The PDS-GO is the ﬁrst commercially available PRD that is based on a scintillation crystal optically coupled with a silicon photomultiplier (SiPM), a solid-state light sensor. This work  presents the  current performance of the instrument and possible future upgrades based on recent technological improve- ments in the SiPM design.
The approach of utilizing the SiPM with a commonly available CsI(Tl) crystal is the key for achieving the program objectives. This approach provides the appropriate performance, low cost, mass production and small dimensions; however, it requires a creative approach to overcome the obstacles of the solid- state detector dark current (noise) and gain stabilization over a wide temperature range.
Based on the presented results, we presume that the proposed approach of SiPM, with pixel size of 35 μm, coupled to a scintillation material (for gamma and neutron detection) ensures the availability
and low cost of the key components. Furthermore, automated manufacturing process enables mass production, thereby fulﬁlling the SIGMA program requirements, both as a sensor (assimilated with mobile device) and as a full detection device.
Keywords:
Silicon photomultiplier Personal radiation detector Scintillator
Dose rate DARPA
1.Introduction
A request for information (RFI) released by DARPA [1], followed by a Broad Agency Announcement (BAA) [2] for the SIGMA program emphasizes the need for innovative radiation detection techno- logies. The RFI seeks a new sensor technology that meets three main requirements: low cost (~$100 level for large volume orders),highly compact (pager-size) and  device  performance  that  enab- les identiﬁcation of hidden threats, ranging  from  special  nucl- ear materials (SNM) to radiological sources. The sensor should also be belt mounted and interface with existing cell phone devices. Subsequently, a BAA presented the speciﬁc requirements at an instrument level and provided a comparison between the current market status (state-of-the-art) and the SIGMA program objectives. In this work, we present an  optional  alternative  for  both the detection technology required by DARPA’s initial RFI and the Personal Radiation Detector (PRD) required by the SIGMA pro- gram. While the minimum technology level involves a sensing
module with any kind of signal or communication output, the PRD is already at the instrument level, with consideration to the user interface and even to the shape design. The project objectives are highly challenging. A technology that can comply with the requ- irements must have the following characteristics:
A scintillation-based gamma and neutron detector for provid- ing high sensitivity, isotope identiﬁcation capability and market availability.
The light sensor should be based on a solid state device to support the compact design and the ability of mass production (~ 10,000) at low cost.
The design should include an automated manufacturing pro- cess and an algorithm that enables computerized calibration and testing to reduce the expense of professional labor during the manufacturing stage.
The instrument should have a very low cost. This requirement leads to optimal utilization of the connection to a smart phone, thereby addressing any part of the PRD that can be provided by a smart phone, e.g., adopting the user interface (display, touch panel) and power source that inherently exist in the mobile device.
The baseline of the current state-of-the-art  PRD  was  established by a recently publicized DARPA BAA for the SIGMA program. The PDS-GO, is the ﬁrst commercially available PRD [3], which consists of a scintillation crystal optically coupled to a novel solid-state light sensor: a silicon photomultiplier SiPM [4]. The device was developed based on an intensive research for optimizing the utilization of the SiPM in applications of radiation detection that involve scintillation crystals [5]. Utilizing the SiPM is the key for achieving the program objectives: it provides the appropriate response for low cost, mass production and small dimensions; however, as will be discussed, it  has the drawbacks of dark current (noise) and the need for gain sta- bilization over a wide temperature range.
Table 1 compares the speciﬁcations that were indicated as the objectives for the R&D outcomes of the SIGMA program and the benchmarking of the current status of the PDS-GO compared to these objectives.
As described in the block diagram (Fig. 1), we estimate that the technology developed for the PDS-GO provides the basic features for the SIGMA program, both as a detector that can be assimilated with a mobile device (cellular phone) and as a complete detection device. In the case of a detector, a software application for the  cellular  phone can be developed and downloaded online to support the wire (e.g., USB) connection and to provide the required user interface with automatic transfer of the radiation data to the main control center, similar to the interface provided by other vendors [6].
Our knowledge and experience indicate that fulﬁlling the hig- hly challenging objectives of the program requires the selection of
scintillation compounds as the gamma and neutron detection material, a solid state detector as the light sensor and automated manufacturing processes for reducing the cost of the manufactur- ing stage. The Methods section discusses our current conﬁgura- tion, including broadening of the different aspects of the impro- vements and modiﬁcations based on the new SiPM devices that should be applied to the PDS-GO to achieve the desired objectives.
2.Methods
2.1.Scintillation crystal
When small size is a constraint, utilizing a scintillator material  is the proper approach for the detection device because their efﬁciency per unit of volume is much higher than those of gas detectors (GM tube for gamma detection or 3He tube for neutron detector). Alternatively, semiconductor detectors (CZT, CT etc.) also can be made very small and have excellent energy resolution, however are quite expensive.
A very common, inexpensive and readily available gamma scintillator is the CsI(Tl) crystal. A small CsI(Tl) crystal of approxi- mately 3 cm3 in volume has a sensitivity of 1 cps per mR/h (137Cs), which is more than 100 times higher than the sensitivity of a GM tube of similar size. The crystal volume of 3 cm3 (14 mm in dia- meter and 20 mm in height) was selected based on calculation of the intrinsic sensitive volume that is required to comply with the ANSI N42.32 standard of Performance Criteria for Alarming Personal
Fig. 1. Block diagram describing the main functionality required for a sensor unit that relies on another platform, such as a smart phone, for the user interface and power supply (option 1) and an autonomous instrument (option 2).
Table 1
Comparison of the SIGMA program objectives with the PDS-GO performance.
Radiation Detectors for Homeland Security [7]. Recent studies have indicated the potential of this crystal for use in spectroscopic app- lications, with energy resolution of 4.5% for a 137Cs source [8]. The small dimensions of the highly sensitive crystal enables a proper algorithmic approach for the fast detection of a small radiation source (25 mR/h over the standard background in only 2 s) and pro- vides a highly accurate (715%) measurement of the radiation level (averaging period shorter than one minute for background level and
only 10 s at 50 μR/h). Note  that the detector  volume is the basic
parameter for evaluating the performances; however, these can be improved by proper electronic design and the algorithms. There- fore, the intrinsic sensitivity of the crystal is not the only parameter for deﬁning the detection performance.
The use of a CsI(Tl) crystal is the proper choice because the cry- stal is commonly used, is well known (reliability) and is provided by several manufactures (no patent privileges) [9–11]. The crystal can be easily fabricated into a wide variety of shapes and geo- metries (cut and polish), has high resistance to mechanical and thermal shocks and is only slightly hygroscopic, which makes it an advantageous alternative to other common crystals, such as the NaI(Tl). The low cost and performance objectives can be achieved using a CsI(Tl) crystal. The light output from gamma interaction with the crystal is proportional (within 10% in the energy range of interest) to the energy absorbed in the crystal. The light output only slightly decreases (up to 5%) when the temperature is higher than the room temperature (50 1C) [12], a property which makes the crystal very stable over the operational temperature range. The shape of the crystal allows for preservation of the low angular dep- endence, and the material density (4.51 g/cm3) provides almost 100% intrinsic efﬁciency for 100 keV photons. However, the efﬁ- ciency decreases for higher gamma-ray energies, e.g., for 662 keV (137Cs) gamma rays, the efﬁciency of the 3 cm3 crystal is only 15%; therefore, whenever a scintillator-based device is used for detec- tion and dose rate measurements, an internal logic based on the measured photon energy is required. Fig. 2 shows the PDS-GO ﬂat energy response, as was measured in the National Institute of Radiological Sciences (NIRS) in Japan. Although some new scintil- lation crystals (e.g., LaBr:Ce [13] or CLYC [14]) offer superior pro- perties, a proper solution for all of the program objectives must rely on a crystal that has free market competition.
For the measurement and detection of thermal neutrons, 6Li based material is the proper selection for the current application. Although the cross section of 6Li is smaller than that of 3He detector, 940b vs. 5330b, the atom density is hundreds of times higher than the one of gas tube, thereby providing a very high neutron capture probability. A LiF:ZnS(Ag)-based scintillator, e.g., EJ426 [15], is an example of such a scintillation material. The scintillator provides an efﬁciency of 35% at a scintillator thickness
Fig. 2.  Energy response of two PDS-GO instruments as tested in NIRS in Japan.
of only 0.3 mm (thin foil). The high Q value (4.78 MeV) of the neutron  reaction  6Liþ1n-3Heþ4He  in  the  scintillator  provides a high light output (~ 170,000 light photons per neutron capture) compared to only ~ 55,000 light photons per 1 MeV gamma interaction [16] received when utilizing the CsI(Tl) crystal. The major difference in the light yield enables the use of a simple pulse height discrimination for distinguishing between a gamma and a neutron event. The gamma–neutron discrimination can be further enhanced by using pulse shape discrimination; however, this app- roach requires sampling the event using an ADC and therefore increases both the electronic cost and the device power consump- tion. The neutron-sensitive thin-foil ﬂexible scintillator can wrap the gamma-sensitive scintillator; the result is a detector with high equivalent active detection surface of 280 mm2 (14 mm by 20 mm) with greater than 50% efﬁciency (twice the thickness). When covering the CsI(Tl) crystal with the neutron detector, it will serve as the light reﬂector and will not affect the gamma sensitivity.
2.2.Light sensor
The light emitted from the crystal  following  the  gamma/neu- tron interaction must be measured by a sensitive  light  detector,  such as  photodiode,  μPMT  [17],  photomultiplier  tube  (PMT),  or a silicon
multiplier SiPM [18]. SiPMs are silicon single photon sensitive devices built from multiple avalanche photodiodes (pixel); it achieves high gain with a low bias voltage (~ 30 to 70 V). The technology of SiPM offers the suitable solution for both performance and cost. Over the past few years, SiPM devices have become highly available and are offered by many manufacturers [19–23]; this fact promises low cost and constantly improvements of the properties. The selection of a small solid-state based light sensor (detector size) will ensure low cost for mass production, which is a major advantage over the traditional photomultiplier technology. Furthermore, the high gain of the SiPM provides an advantage over the traditional photodiode, which exhibits lower gain and therefore requires costly electronics and higher capacitance that leads to high microphonic noise. The number of pixels determines  the SIPM dynamic  range,  e.g., for a   3 ~ 3 mm diode, the number of pixels varies from ~ 3000 (50-mm pixel) to ~ 10,000 (20-mm pixel). The requirement for a dynamic energy range of up to 3000 keV requires the selection of a SiPM with a smaller pixel size than the one used in the PDS-GO. When selecting a smaller pixel size, the effective area of the diode surface decreases because the increase in the “dead” surface is related to the conducting metal surround the pixel, therefore the photon detection efﬁciency (PDE) decreases and the ﬁnal achievable performances are reduced [24]. Due to the prior selection of the CsI(Tl) crystal, a larger pixel size can be used (smaller number of pixels). This selection is possible because the crystal’s decay time of the light emission is approximately 1 ms, while the pixel’s recovery time is less than 350 ns; therefore, the same pixel can be ﬁred by a light photon more than once during one interaction event. The CsI(Tl) crystal decay time is, on one hand, long in comparison to the light sensor pixel decay time (up to four times longer), enabling a better PDE, however on the other hand short enough to enable a linear reading up to a count rate of 25 kcps. The advantages of the SiPM enable the production of a small, robust and cost effective PRD that is highly sensitive and exhibits low power consumption; however, the use of a SiPM requires coping with the challenges of noise level and the use of gain stabilization over a wide temperature range. Currently, the device noise level at room tem- perature is approximately 20 keV; this noise level is higher than the project objective (10 keV). However, this noise level is measured using a 9 mm2 light sensor, while the crystal surface is 154 mm2, i.e., the light sensor covers only 6% of the crystal surface, thereby leading to a rather poor light collection. Our development experiments indicated that by increasing the diode size by a factor of four (6 6 mm) the measured noise level can be reduced to 10 keV; therefore, fulﬁlling the noise level requirement is actually a cost-beneﬁt discussion  and not a physical barrier, which is the case with a photodiode based solution. The developed electronics described below overcome the challenges of gain stabilization over a wide temperature range by adjusting the bias voltage and maintaining a constant over-voltage.
SiPMs have demonstrated continuous performance improve- ments, and a new generation of SiPMs that offer a dramatic red- uction of the dark count rate (by a factor of six compared to pre- vious series), thus presents a potential for major improvement in both the low energy threshold and energy resolution.
2.3.Electronic design and algorithm
The electronic design supports both the sensor conﬁguration and the PRD device level. A dedicated pre-ampliﬁer was designed to offer the low power ampliﬁcation required by the SiPM technology [25]. Low power ampliﬁcation was achieved by understanding the essential requirements and designing a simpler ampliﬁer that avoids unnecessary requirements, such as DC performance, gain stability beyond the SiPM stability, and inﬁnite input and low out- put impedances. Furthermore, because the SiPM pulses are of the same shape and polarity, and we are only interested in the total pulse energy, the ampliﬁer must not provide a very low total har- monic distortion performance. Basically, the main requirement is to provide AC ampliﬁcation with the required bandwidth and slew rate at the lowest power. The electronic design also included the development of a main board for providing the required regulated bias voltage to the diode, shaping the signal and dividing the signal into several energy windows for improving the detection level and achieving ﬂat energy response (see Fig. 3).
The electronic design supports several energy windows, which dramatically enhances the detection performances by dividing the energy spectrum into several regions, enabling recognition of small reading deviation at a speciﬁc energy region. Furthermore, an algo- rithm for detecting stabilization and fast response was implemented. This algorithm deﬁnes the averaging period based on the sensor
Fig. 3.  Block diagram of  the electronic design.
current rate reading and the previous readings. The parameters for setting the time constants can be adjusted based on the user requ- irements for detection reliability and reading accuracy.
In modern instrumentation, a microcontroller unit (MCU), imp- lements the ﬂat energy response algorithm for the measured light output pulses. The optimal way to achieve a ﬂat energy response is by sampling the output signal and taking it across the digital convertor (ADC); however, this approach consumes a large amount of power, which can become an obstacle in portable instruments. As a result, another approach that is based on energy windows and counters was implemented. The designed main board consists of the latest 32-bit MCU ARM based cortex-M3 architecture, see Fig. 4, which provides at least four hardware counters. Additional counters were added by conﬁguring some general-purpose input/output ports (GPIO) of the MCU to an interrupt port and the accumulation achieved by software for every measured pulse. The energy response that was obtained is shown in Fig. 5. The curve indicates high accuracy, with an energy dependence of below 30%. This accuracy was achieved for isotopes with single energy emission as well as for isotopes with multiple emission energies (e.g., 152Eu).
Although this accuracy was achieved with only ﬁve energy bins, it still meets the requirements of different standards for homeland security applications (e.g., ANSI 42-32). This approach has a draw- back for applications that requires a high count rate (not speciﬁed
Fig. 4. Electronic board that supports the directional detector.
Fig. 5. Energy response of the PDS-GO as measured for the following isotopes: 241Am, 152Eu, 99mTc, 133Ba, 22Na, 137Cs, 54Mn, and 60Co. The results are normalized to 137Cs as the absolute calibration point.
by the SIGMA program) because the processing time limits the available resources required for other algorithms and real-time tasks. For coping with the requirements for health physics standards, (not required by the program), an accuracy of  715% is required (can be implemented by a higher number of energy bins). Other features that this type of MCU provides include 3 ~ USART (universal synchrony/ asynchrony receive transmit), 2 ~ SPI, 2 ~ I2C, 10 timers, 128 KB Flash memory for the application code, and an internal 4 KB EEprom for calibration parameters storage and event log accumulation. All of these features are achievable without external components, thereby reducing energy consumption and the instrument dimensions. The measurement utilizes the hardware counters; therefore, essential processing time and resources are released from the MCU to focus on real-time algorithms. This new board was also designed to support directional reading from four different diodes coupled to the crystal, as previously discussed. This conﬁguration can enhance the det- ector performances by combining the reading from the light sensors when the energy resolution and low noise level  are  requ- ired and automatically (or by user request) switch to search mode by performing a comparison between the single light sensor read- ings that deﬁne the direction of the radiation source. The algorithm supports the option of toggling between combining the four light sensors into one signal or directional measurement. The signal is divided  by the energy windows to the appropriate  conv- ersion to dose rate units or dedicates a separate counter to each light sensor and compares between the count rates of the diodes in order to deﬁne the origin (direction) of the radiation source.
The SiPMs are available in a ceramic package and an SMD pac- kage. The SMD package is less expensive and therefore has become the preferred solution; however, the SMD device required a ded- icated design to enable coupling of the diode to the crystal, to seal against light and to provide a connection to the ampliﬁcation board. Fig. 6 shows the board mechanical design aimed to cope with the requirement of utilizing the SMD conﬁguration.
2.4.Computerized calibration
The prime goal in mass production is to reduce the manufacturing cost. The production cost of radiation detectors typically consist of many  working  hours for calibrating and testing the per-  formances of the devices (QC) prior to the delivery. The calibration process includes setting the device gain, deﬁning the conversion parameters between the output signal (mV) and the radiation energy (keV) by at least two calibration energies. Further, the process includes setting the device noise threshold and the thresholds for
Fig. 6. Implementation of the SMD SiPM on a dedicated board.
the energy windows and the weight factor of the windows for converting the reading in cps into dose rate units and a temperature coefﬁcient. The QC process includes a linearity test, detection performance, false alarm rate and other parameters related to the device birth certiﬁcate. The process requires skilled personnel and is therefore costly; in addition, the production rate might be limited. The developed solution was based on converting the manual process into an automatic and computerized process with a predeﬁned algorithm and a protocol between the computer soft- ware and a batch of detectors. During that process, the software communicates with each one of the calibrated detectors and utilizes the electronic windows to locate the photo-peak location and adjust the gain and the threshold accordingly. This process can be easily scaled up according to the required production rate with a negli- gible effect on the labor required. Fig. 7 shows the ﬁnal software screen calibration results documented for evaluation by the skilled personnel and the ﬁnal calibration certiﬁcate. Similar software screens include the linearity results, temperature and energy cali- bration and the other main steps of the production process.
3.Results
3.1.Current design
The current design of the PDS-GO was fully type-tested acc- ording to various international standards in different accredited laboratories. The standards for which the PDS-GO meets the requ- irements are:
Fig. 7. GoManager software screen and calibration results documentation.
Fig. 8. PDS-GO response to a 137Cs source when exposed to a temperature range from — 20 1C to þ50 1C (Recording of readouts, readout every 1 s).
(i)ANSI N42.32-2006—American National Standard Performance Criteria for Alarming Personal Radiation Detectors for Home- land Security;
(ii)ANSI N42.33-2006—American National  Standard  for  Portable Radiation Detection Instrumentation for Homeland Security;
(iii)IEC 62401 ed1.0 – Radiation protection instrumentation – Alarming personal radiation devices (PRD) for detection of illicit trafﬁcking of radioactive material;
(iv)JIS Z 4333 (2006) (Japanese): Portable photon ambient dose equivalent rate meters for radiation protection.
The listed standards refer to different radiological, environ- mental, mechanical and electrical requirements. All of the test results meet and sometimes exceed the requirements. Some tests are of special interest to the SIGMA program objectives, e.g., the temperature stability, which is not obvious for a solid-state based instrument. The temperature stability is presented in Figs. 8 and 9. In addition, the early prototype of the PDS-GO successfully passed the radiological tests of the ITRAP 10 [26] program that was conducted by the Department of Homeland Security.
In addition, the PDS-GO resolution for 1.17 MeV photo-peak of
60Co was measured to be 5.7% and is shown on Fig. 10.Fig. 9. PDS-GO response to a 137Cs source when exposed to a temperature change from 22 1C to — 10 1C, — 10 1C to 22 1C, 22 1C to 50 1C, and 50 1C back to 22 1C.
Fig. 10. Measured 60Co spectrum with the PDS-GO detector, FWHM 5.7% at 1.17 MeV.
Fig. 11. Noise threshold of 7.4 keV was measured using SensL 60035 type C series (6 mm 6 mm, 35 μm) and CsI(Tl) scintillator (Ø14 mm 20 mm). The green curve corresponds to background measurement. The blue curve corresponds to 109Cd measurement. The spectra are in logarithmic scale.
3.2.Future design
The future design of the product will incorporate a larger optical sensor, which will lead to improved light collection efﬁciency with a lower noise threshold and better resolution, in order to cope with the program’s severe requirements (see Fig. 11). Such improved performance will enhance the capability of the instrument to be ready for isotope identiﬁcation tasks as performed by several CsI(Tl) based identiﬁcation hand held devices [27].
Neutron capabilities, based on the concept that was described  in section I of the Methods part, will be added to the instrument. The use of SiPM with LiF:ZnS for neutron detection has been presented in several publications [28,29].
The feasibility of directional detection and its  performance were already tested (Fig. 12) and will be included in the future design of the instrument as well.
4.Conclusion
A PRD based on a scintillation crystal optically coupled with SiPM serving as a light sensor was proposed as an optional sol- ution for the SIGMA program.
The performance characteristics of the proposed solution, as opposed to the SIGMA program requirements, were described, and aspects of its characteristics are discussed. A broad overview of the alternatives and the benchmarking of the current status of the PDS-GO compared to the SIGMA program objectives were pre- sented. The work described the potential and the required effort to be undertaken for overcoming the apparent gaps (e.g., 6Li based neutron detector).
It can be concluded that to fulﬁll the  highly challenging objectives  of the program, it is inevitable to use scintillation compounds, such as
the gamma and neutron detection material, a solid-state light sensor and automated manufacturing processes for reducing the cost of the manufacturing stage. A design that divides the detection device into two parts, the ﬁrst part being the detector and the second part being the interface platform (e.g., smart phone), can reduce the product cost dramatically. Supporting applications, e.g., for the android platform, can convert the current smart phone to an interface and transfer the radiation data to a central control station without any additional cost. We anticipate that a sensor based on SiPM and commonly used CsI(Tl) scintillator and 6Li based scintillator supported by electronic design and algorithms can provide an affordable alternative. The improvement in the design of the SiPM light sensor that has been shown over the past few years will allow enhancing detector perf- ormance, reducing instrument size and decreasing production costs, all of which eventually will lead to the combination of gamma and neutron detection in small and affordable handheld device. Our exp- ectation is supported by the PDS-GO performance, which was tested by different international accredited laboratories. These results indicated that this alternative meets the scope of speciﬁcations deﬁ- ned by various homeland security standards. Our assessment is that the sensor novel detection technology is at high technology readiness level and provides the basic functionality for the SIGMA program requirements as a detector that can be assimilated within a mobile device or as an independent lightweight, small and sensitive portable detection device. A docking station can  further  enhance the device for optional application as stationary survey monitor station  (see Fig. 13). In case that the SIGMA program would focus on the new generation of scintillation crystal that offers gamma and neutron detection with the same crystal, the recovery time of the SiPM’s pixel is short enough to enable the pulse shape discrimination that is
required when utilizing this type of crystal.
We claim that low-cost device can be achieved only if all of the detector components are available from several manufactures and Fig. 12. The readings of the directional detector are obtained and graphically displayed via the dedicated software.
Fig. 13. PDS-GO PRD and docking station for stationary survey monitoring.
are not protected by patents. The proposed conﬁguration utilized components which meet this goal. Although some new scintilla- tion crystals offer superior properties, a proper solution for the program objectives must rely on a crystal that is produced by manufacturers under real free market competition. The cost of the scintillator can be 100 times higher when one of the new crystals    is selected over the common ones.
The use of adequate electronics and algorithms  can  enhance the product performance to a high performance level. The results
measured by the new 6 mm ~ 6 mm diode meet the resolution requirements of below 5% and the threshold level of below 10 keV. It strengthens our estimations that with a larger diode and with the constant improvements of the silicon photomultiplier, these goals can be reached in the near future. Furthermore, the product must consist of elements where production of a large quantity becomes an advantage and not a drawback (e.g., PMT).
As an upgrade to the current device, the paper presented a new electronic board designed for directional measurement (locate the source origin), improved energy resolution and a ﬂat energy response that can enhance the device performances without major change in the overall cost. Furthermore, a new PC-based software with implementation of an algorithm that enables automatic setup of the device parameters (e.g., gain, energy window thresholds) and calibration was presented.
