<title>Thermal Energy Storage Configurations for Small Modular Reactor Load Shedding</title>
<author>Konor Frick, Corey T. Misenheimer, J. Michael Doster, Stephen D. Terry & Shannon Bragg-Sitton</author>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Technology</Journal>
<Affiliation>a.North Carolina State University, Department of Nuclear Engineering, 2500 Stinson Drive, 3105 Burlington Engineering Labs, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695-7909
b.North Carolina State University, Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, 911 Oval Drive, NCSU
Campus Box 7910, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695
c.Idaho National Laboratory, Systems Integration Department, Idaho Falls, Idaho 83415</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>ANS</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00295450.2017.1420945</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1080/00295450.2017.1420945</URL>
Abstract — The increased penetration of intermittent renewable energy technologies such as wind and solar power can strain electric grids, forcing carbon-based and nuclear sources of energy to operate in a load-follow mode. For nuclear reactors, load-follow operation can be undesirable due to the associated thermal and mechanical stresses placed on the fuel and other reactor components. Various methods of thermal energy storage (TES) can be coupled to nuclear (or renewable) power sources to help absorb grid variability caused by daily load demand changes and renewable intermittency. Two TES techniques are investigated as candidate thermal reservoirs to be used in conjunction with a small modular reactor (SMR): a two-tank sensible heat storage system and a stratified chilled-water storage system. The goal when coupling the two systems to the SMR is to match turbine output and demand and bypass steam to the TES systems to maintain reactor power at approximately 100%. Simulations of integral pressurized water reactor dynamics are run in a high-fidelity FORTRAN model developed at North Carolina State University. Both TES systems are developed as callable FORTRAN subroutines to model the time-varying behavior associated with different configurations of these systems when connected to the SMR simulator. Simulation results reveal the sensible heat storage system is capable of meeting turbine demand and maintaining reactor power constant while providing enough steam to power four absorption chillers for chilled-water production and storage. The stored chilled water is used to supplement cooling loads of an adjacent facility.
Keywords — Thermal energy storage, small modular reactor, integral pressurized water reactor.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
Approximately 19% of the electricity produced in the United States comes from nuclear power plants.1 Traditionally, nuclear power plants, as well as larger coal- fired plants, operate in a baseload manner at or near steady state for prolonged periods of time. Smaller, more maneu- verable plants, such as gas-fired plants, are dispatched to match electricity supply and demand above the capacity of the baseload plants. However, air quality concerns and mounting evidence of climate change have made the burn- ing of fossil fuels less desirable, despite the current low costs of natural gas. Wind and solar photovoltaic power generation are attractive options due to their lack of carbon footprint and continued drop in cost. Yet, these renewable energy sources suffer from inherent intermittency. Solar photovoltaic cannot produce power at night and experiences plant capacity reductions during times of cloud cover, while wind farms are reliant on fluctuating airstreams. As a result, sudden changes in weather conditions can make it difficult for electrical utilities to match electricity supply and demand. This problem becomes more pronounced with increased renewable energy penetration into electric grids.
These problems with renewable power generation com- bined with environmental concerns have led to a renewed interest in power generation via nuclear energy. Specifically, various nuclear vendors have proposed and begun develop- ment of innovative small modular reactor (SMR) designs that can be manufactured at a single facility and transported to diverse sites. SMRs offer increased site compatibility, advanced passive safety systems for the removal of decay heat, lower capital costs for construction, and reduced primary- and secondary-side inventory.2 With a nominal electrical output of 300 MW(electric) or less,  SMRs  can be clustered in a single location to form a more traditional baseload nuclear power plant or deployed to remote loca- tions, such as military bases with limited grid access, to provide reliable emissions-free energy.3 Furthermore, SMRs could replace traditional fossil fuel boilers in manufacturing plants that require combined heat and power.
The deployment of SMRs at off-grid locations or on
grids with high levels of intermittent renewable resources presents challenges to the system. Under these conditions, the reactor can be subjected to significant time-varying electric loads. Options for accommodating these loads have included operating nuclear reactors in a load-follow mode or operating the reactor at or near steady state and bypassing steam directly to the condenser.4 Both of these strategies result in lost energy potential. Load-follow operation can also result in additional  stresses  on  the fuel and other mechanical components.
A more attractive approach is to operate the reactor at or near steady state and bypass excess steam to a thermal energy storage (TES) system. The thermal energy can then be recovered, either as a supplement to the power plant during peak demand times or used for other ancil- lary applications such as chilled-water production.5 Sensible heat TES systems have been demonstrated in solar energy systems.6 This paper examines issues that occur when deploying SMRs subject to significant time- varying electric loads and proposes two energy storage systems that help mitigate these issues.
II.SYSTEM DESIGNS, CONNECTIONS, AND CONTROL
Integrated nuclear hybrid energy systems (NHESs) involve the design and connection of several complex, stand-alone systems. The control algorithms involved are unique to each application and the particular design of the components. The hybrid energy systems described in this paper include an mPower-style SMR (Ref. 7), a sensible heat TES system, and a bank of absorption chillers coupled to a chilled-water storage tank.
II.A.Reactor Simulator
The target SMR in this work is an integral pressur- ized water reactor (IPWR) with operating parameters similar to those of the mPower reactor proposed by Babcock & Wilcox7 (B&W). Operating parameters are given in Table I. IPWRs are characterized by having all major primary system components (core, steam genera- tors, pressurizer, etc.) contained within the reactor vessel. A diagram of a typical IPWR is given in Fig. 1.
For the IPWR considered in this work, the steam gen- erators are a typical once-through design, with steam gen- erator pressure control via the turbine control valves (TCVs) located between the pressure equalization header and the high-pressure turbine (HPT). Feed control valves (FDCVs) modulate such that the feed flow rate matches a feed demand signal that is proportional to the turbine load plus  a shim that ensures that turbine output matches load. The steam generator level (boiling length) is allowed to float.
In order to simulate the dynamics of an IPWR sys- tem, North Carolina State University has developed high- fidelity simulation tools for predicting the dynamic response of IPWR systems under normal and off-normal conditions.8–11 The reactor simulator is capable of simu- lating IPWRs operating under forced- and natural- circulation conditions. A loop momentum balance approach is employed to compute the time-dependent flow rates on the primary side. The time-dependent energy equation is then discretized and solved to yield
TABLE I
SMR Operating Parameters
Fig. 1. Representative IPWR.
the fluid temperature distribution around the loop. Fuel temperatures are determined by discretizing and solving the one-dimensional time-dependent heat conduction equation within the fuel rods. A three-equation drift flux model is used to describe the secondary side of the steam generators.8 Nodalization is up to the user but is typical  of spatial discretizations used in reactor systems codes.
Additional features include (a) a 6-group point-kinetics model with overlapping control rod banks, xenon, and fuel and moderator temperature feedback for computing reactor power; (b) an 11-group decay heat model; (c) hot-channel models including critical heat flux and peak fuel centerline temperatures; (d) pressurizer with heaters and sprays; (e) balance of plant (BOP); and (f) associated control func- tions. Since the nodalization is general, both conventional
once-through and helical coil steam generators can be simulated. The ordinary differential equations governing production and loss of xenon and iodine are solved in conjunction with the reactor kinetics model such that the power history dictates the xenon concentration. Equilibrium xenon worth is a user input.
Typical light water reactor values were used in this work. As with other reactor system codes, nodalization and geo- metric information are user specified such that models have been developed for IPWR concepts spanning a range of thermal outputs, including designs similar to the Westinghouse IRIS, B&W, mPower, and NuScale reactor concepts.7
II.B.Sensible Heat Storage
Sensible heat storage involves the heating of a solid or liquid without phase change and can be deconstructed into two operating modes: charging and discharging. A two-tank TES system is a common configuration for liquid sensible heat systems. In the charging mode cold fluid is pumped from a cold tank through an intermediate heat exchanger (IHX), heated, and stored in a hot tank while the opposite occurs in the discharge mode. Such  systems have been successfully demonstrated in the solar energy field as a load management strategy.6
II.B.1.Connection Point
The performance of a TES system is a strong function of the connection point to the secondary side of the IPWR. For plants incorporating once-through steam generators (OTSGs), the TCVs act as a pressure control valve (PCV) to maintain steam generator pressure at a given setpoint. Shown in Fig. 2, turbine bypass valves (TBVs) can be configured such that bypass steam can be taken off the steam line either at the pressure equalization header upstream of the TCVs [auxiliary (Aux) 1], downstream of the TCVs prior to entering the HPT (Aux 2), or at some low-pressure turbine (LPT) tap (Aux 3). For the sensible heat TES system assumed here, it is desired to have roughly constant steam conditions since the shell-side pressure in the IHX directly affects the TES fluid temperature leaving the IHX and ultimately stored in the hot tank. This makes taking bypass steam from the pressure equalization header upstream of the TCVs the preferred operating mode. Steam conditions downstream of the TCVs are a strong function of the load profile. Taking bypass steam downstream of the TCVs can result in highly varying steam pressures and temperatures and unacceptably low IHX pressures.
Fig. 2. Bypass steam options.
II.B.2.Design
The charging mode configuration of the proposed TES system is shown in the boxed region of Fig. 3. An outer loop interfaces with the reactor’s BOP directly through four parallel auxiliary TBVs connected at the pressure
Fig. 3. Schematic of an IPWR connected to a two-tank sensible heat TES system, charging mode. (FBV = feed bypass valve.)
equalization header, each staged to open at a certain percent of the maximum auxiliary flow demand. Bypass steam is directed through an IHX and discharged to the main con- denser. An inner loop containing a TES fluid consists of two large storage tanks along with several pumps to transport the TES fluid between the tanks, the IHX, and a steam gen- erator. Flow bypass valves are included in the discharge lines of both the hot and cold tanks to prevent deadheading the pumps when the flow control valves (FCVs) are closed. Common TES fluid properties are given in Table II. Therminol®-66 is chosen as the TES fluid in this work as it is readily available, can be pumped at low temperatures, and offers thermal stability over the range −3°C to 343°C, which covers the anticipated operating range of the TES system (203°C to 260°C). Therminol®-68 and Therminol®-75 could also have been used. Molten salts, e.g., 48% NaNO3–52% KNO3, were not considered as the anticipated operating temperatures fall below their 222°C freezing temperature.12
The TES system is designed to allow the reactor to run
continuously at ~100% power over a wide range of operat- ing conditions. System parameters for an mPower7 size system are given in Table III. During periods of excess capacity, bypass steam is directed to the TES unit through the auxiliary bypass valves where it condenses on the shell side of the IHX. TES fluid is pumped from the cold tank to the hot tank through the tube side of the IHX at a rate sufficient to raise the temperature of the TES fluid to some setpoint. The TES fluid is then stored in the hot tank
TABLE II
Properties of Possible TES Fluids at ~260°C (500°F)
TABLE III
TES Design Parameters for Connection with an mPower Size IPWR
at constant temperature. Condensate is collected in a hot well below the IHX and drains back to the main condenser or can be used for some other low-pressure application such as chilled-water production or desalination. Applications to chilled-water production are considered in this paper. The system is discharged during periods of peak demand, or when process steam is desired, by pumping the TES fluid from the hot tank through a boiler (steam generator) to the cold tank. This process steam can then be reintroduced into the power conversion cycle for electricity production or directed to some other application through the PCV at the exit of the steam dome. While the boiler in Fig. 3 implies a OTSG design, a U-tube design could just as easily be sub- stituted. Pressure relief lines connect the shell side of the IHX with the condenser to prevent overpressurization of the heat exchanger during periods of low condensation rate. A nitrogen cover gas dictates the tank pressures during
charging and discharging operation. For the purposes of this paper, we will focus on the charging mode when deployed in conjunction with an IPWR system. In previous work, details on the equation sets and solution strategy used for solving the charging system have been provided.16
II.B.3.Control
The TES system has four sets of valves used to control system parameters: auxiliary bypass valves, the TES FCV, the auxiliary control valve (ACV), and pres- sure relief valves (PRVs).
The goal of the bypass flow controller is to provide bypass steam to the TES system at a rate sufficient to maintain the reactor at or near its nominal steady-state value. The bypass valve controller generates an error signal based on the difference between measured bypass flow and a bypass flow demand signal. The bypass demand signal assumes the required bypass flow is proportional to the relative difference between the nominal full-power turbine output and the instantaneous electric load plus a correction term (shim). The shim term modifies the demand signal such that reactor power is kept approximately constant.
Flow from the cold tank to the hot tank is via a TES FCV. The TES FCV operates off a three-element controller where the first error signal is designed to maintain the TES fluid temperature leaving the IHX at some reference value. The second error signal is designed to roughly match the heat input into the TES fluid with the heat bypassed to the IHX.
The ACV maintains the IHX hot-well level. This valve operates on a three-element controller based on the level of the IHX and the difference in mass flows into and out of the IHX. PRVs have been installed in the IHX to mitigate pressure increases. Should pressure reach an upper setpoint, the valves will open and will not close until the pressure falls below a lower setpoint. The only parameters directly controlled during charging mode operation of the TES system are the IHX exit temperature on the inner loop and the level in the IHX. All other variables including IHX
pressure, tank levels, inner loop mass flow rate, and heat transfer across the IHX are determined from the mass, energy, and momentum balances on the system.
A stop valve (not shown) is placed in the flow line between the cold tank and hot tank to ensure that the tank pressure and level stay below the designated setpoints. Should either the pressure or level setpoints be exceeded,  the stop valve will close, and TES fluid flow between the tanks will cease. A redundant control on level is that the volume of Therminol-66 in the system is less than the total volume of either tank.
II.C.Chilled-Water Storage
Chilled-water storage is often overlooked as an effec- tive TES method. Chilled water is regularly used in large manufacturing facilities, college campuses, and district heating and cooling systems to satisfy cooling demands. Traditionally, electric chillers make chilled water via the vapor-compression cycle. The chilled water is pumped to air handlers throughout a facility to satisfy comfort cooling needs. During warmer months of the year, a large portion of a facility’s electricity demand is generated from associated heating ventilation and air-conditioning (HVAC) equip- ment. Because building cooling loads regularly peak during the early to late afternoon hours, the HVAC equipment is sized to accommodate these peak loads. At night or during early morning hours when cooling loads are low, excess chiller capacity exists. Moreover, these peak facility cooling loads often coincide with peak electricity demands, thereby putting further strain on utilities. In the form of chilled- water storage, TES is a way to combat peak cooling loads by shifting them from on-peak to off-peak hours.17
Stratified chilled-water storage tanks have emerged as an
effective option for storing chilled water.18 In a stratified chilled-water storage tank, warm water and cold water are stored in the same vessel with no solid component between the warm and cold volumes of water. Differences in density between cold and warm water cause a thin thermocline, or sharp temperature gradient, to form. Excess chilled water, produced when facility cooling demands are low, is deposited in the bottom of the tank via diffusers. Because the tank is a constant volume device, charging the tank with cold water means simultaneously removing warm water from the top of the tank to be sent to the chillers. Conversely, discharging the cold water to be used during times of peak facility cooling loads results in warm water being deposited in the top of the tank. Therefore, a fully charged tank implies the tank is full of chilled water while a fully discharged tank implies the tank is full of warm water.
A previous case study examined using stratified chilled- water storage in conjunction with centrifugal electric chillers to offset cooling loads representative of a large office space or college campus in a NHES (Ref. 19). Results demonstrated that chilled-water storage can shift cooling loads to off-peak hours and help promote more steady-state reactor operation.19 Another option for cooling water involves the use of single- effect, lithium bromide absorption chillers, which use steam less than 205 kPa (15 psig) or hot water and the affinity between an absorbent and a refrigerant to create a chilling effect. Absorption chillers become particularly attractive when a source of waste heat that would normally be rejected to the environment or some other low-temperature sink is available. As illustrated in Fig. 2, low-pressure steam can be diverted from a LPT tap to absorption chillers to make chilled water for storage when excess reactor capacity exists.
II.C.1.Mathematical Model Development
Absorption chiller performance is highly dependent on the flow rates and temperatures associated with sup- plied steam, chilled water, and cooling tower water. Additionally, the substantial thermal mass in large absorption chillers results in long transients on the order of tens of minutes. In order to determine how an absorp- tion chiller might interact with an SMR in a NHES, a dynamic absorption chiller model is required.
Although single-effect, lithium bromide absorption chillers are complex machines, their numerous components can be reduced to four shell-and-tube heat exchangers, an IHX, valves, and pumps.20 The generator and condenser are housed in the upper shell, while the evaporator and the absorber are located in the lower shell. A dynamic absorp- tion chiller model capable of accurately capturing heat transfer phenomena inside the chiller has been developed based on models available in literature.21,22 The transient thermodynamic model is grounded on mass, energy, and species conservation equations in each of the four main heat exchangers. Appropriate heat transfer coefficients for various modes of heat transfer are included in the model.23,24
Dobson and Chato’s25 model for heat transfer via con- densation inside horizontal tubes that divides the condensa- tion flow into annular, stratified-wavy, and stratified flow regimes is used to determine local heat transfer coefficients inside generator tubes. An applicable two-phase-flow multi- plier correlation for pressure drop calculations enables steam temperature, quality, and pressure to be established along the generator tube bundle.26
The inclusion of the in-tube condensation heat transfer model and two-phase-flow pressure drop correlations to
describe heat addition in the generator combined with the solving of the time-dependent mass, species, and temperature transport equations in each chiller component sets the absorp- tion chiller model described in this paper apart from every other absorption chiller model found throughout literature. In addition, the added fidelity in the generator of the absorption chiller model ensures accurate part-load chiller behavior as well as precise condensate conditions returning to reactor subsystems. Further information regarding the dynamic absorption chiller model’s governing equations, heat transfer coefficient correlations, solution strategy, and validation is available in Refs. 27 and 28. Cooling tower and stratified chilled-water storage tank models from previous studies are used to complete the comprehensive TES system.28
II.C.2.SMR Integration
The transient absorption chiller model, along with time-dependent models of the cooling towers and strati- fied chilled-water storage tank, is converted to a callable FORTRAN subroutine. This allows the dynamic SMR model described earlier in this paper to call the chilled- water storage subroutine at each time step during a simu- lation. Three absorption chillers are used in conjunction with an 18 927-m3 (5 000 000-gal) stratified chilled- water storage tank in order to offset HVAC loads of an
adjacent 92 903-m2 (1 000 000-ft2) office space. The goal of the control strategy when coupling the chillers to the SMR is to keep reactor thermal power output roughly constant and bypass low-pressure steam from the LPT to absorption chillers during times of excess reactor capa- city. Chilled water produced during periods of excess reactor capacity is sent to the stratified chilled-water storage tank. Under nominal turbine loads, the extracted steam at the LPT tap has a pressure of 297 kPa (43 psia) and a quality of 85%. One 4843-kW (1377-nominal ton) absorption chiller requires 3.14 kg/s (25 000 lbm/h) of 165 kPa (24 psia) steam to achieve full load. A TES TBV and accompanying steam line are sized to accommodate approximately 9.45 kg/s (75 000 lbm/h) of steam at nominal full loads. Condensed steam returning from the absorption chillers is sent back to the reactor condenser.  A small condensate drain at the generator tube bundle exit and steam traps in the condensate lines leaving the absorption chiller necessitate that all steam sent to the absorption chillers is condensed. A maximum chilled- water temperature threshold for storage and satisfying facility cooling loads is established at a temperature of 7.2°C (45°F). In industry, chiller plants generally guaran- tee chilled water below 7.2°C to be sent to air handlers. Absorption chiller integration into the secondary side of the reactor is depicted in Fig. 4.
Fig. 4.  Absorption chiller SMR integration. (VFD = variable frequency drive.)
II.D.Flash Vessel Model
An alternative to using steam from a LPT tap is to couple the chilled-water storage system to the two-tank TES system discussed earlier. Once the  bypass  steam has been condensed in the  IHX, it  is no longer useful    to the TES system and would  normally be directed to  the condenser. However, for the system operating para- meters assumed here, this condensate is sitting at a pressure of approximately 4.82 MPa (700 psia), making  it high-grade waste heat for other  applications.  To  utilize this waste heat for  low-pressure  applications  such as chilled-water production, the condensate  from the IHX is dropped across a let-down orifice  to  pro- duce a low-pressure steam-water mixture. This two- phase mixture is sent to a flash vessel where the liquid and vapor phases are separated. The saturated steam is then sent to an ancillary application to utilize the high- grade waste heat by-product produced in the TES  system. A potential configuration for chilled-water pro- duction is illustrated in Fig. 5.
The  flash  vessel  has  six  sets  of  valves  used  to
control system parameters: the ACV, the level control valve (LCV), three sets  of PCVs, and a chiller valve.  The ACV modulates to maintain level in  the  IHX.  Thus, during times of high bypass steam  flow,  there  will be a corresponding high  condensate  flow  exiting the IHX. The goal of the first bank of PCVs is to  maintain    the    flash    vessel    at    some  user-specified
pressure. The second PCV is located at the exit of the chiller line. This PCV modulates to maintain a user- specified pressure downstream of the chiller valve. The chiller valve operates on a binary signal such that if the thermocline level in the chiller is below some lower setpoint, the valve goes to its full open position. Conversely, when the  thermocline  level  hits  some upper setpoint, the valve shuts. The third PCV located   on the bypass line around the chiller modulates to maintain a user-defined pressure downstream of  the  main  PCV  bank;  this  point  is  called   Pimpulse2   in   Fig. 5. The LCV, located at the bottom of the flash  vessel, maintains the flash vessel level. This valve operates on a controller  based  on  the  level  of  the  flash vessel  and difference in mass  flows into and out   of the flash vessel. Parameters directly controlled in the flash vessel model are the flash vessel  level,  flash  vessel pressure, pressure downstream of the first pres- sure control bank, and pressure downstream  of  the chiller valve.
III.RESULTS
To compare several different modes of operation, a 24-h simulation was run for an electric load profile representative of a typical summer day in an area with mixed commercial and residential characteristics.29 A 24-h cycle was chosen because it is the minimum
Fig. 5. Flash vessel configuration.
amount of time required to show a full daily cycle for a region during a season. Week- or month-long runs will show the same general trends as the daily cycle with the only distinction being in tank level. The load profile has been scaled such that the minimum load is approxi- mately 60% of nominal full power. Time zero corre- sponds to midnight.
III.A.Load-Follow Operation
As a basis for comparison, the SMR is operated in load-follow mode, where the reactor power is modulated to match the electric demand. As shown in Figs. 6 and 7, the system is able to maneuver such that the turbine output is effectively identical to the  electric  demand,  and the reactor power follows the load.
For this simulation, a constant Tave program was assumed with the corresponding control rod positions given in Fig. 8.  Four control banks are  modeled. At  the beginning of the maneuver, banks A, B, and C are fully withdrawn, with bank D approximately 50% inserted. Over the course of the maneuver, bank D moves to its full out position and by the end of the transient has returned to its  approximate  starting point. The average primary coolant temperature varies by 4°C (7.2°F) over the course of the run as illu-  strated in Fig. 9. The changes in core coolant tem- peratures along with the changes in core power distribution and associated fuel temperatures add addi- tional thermal stresses to the system, especially if repeated for multiple cycles.
Fig. 6. Turbine output and demand.
Fig. 7. Reactor power.
Fig. 8. Control rod position.
Figure 10 gives the variation in steam generator dryout location over the 24-h run. Over the course of the run, the dryout location varies by 15% of the tube length. The dryout location represents a sharp temperature gradient. Repeated cycling of this location can induce stresses that decrease the lifetime of the steam generator tubes. Of additional interest is the steam pressure downstream of the TCV (turbine impulse pressure) (Fig. 11). As stated previously, steam conditions at this location are a strong function of the load profile and create additional challenges if connections to the TES system are made downstream of this point.
Fig. 10. Steam generator dryout location.
III.B.Reactor Coupled with TES System Operation
A 24-h charging run was simulated with the TES system active. The same electric load profile as in the load-follow  case  was  assumed.  As  illustrated   in   Figs. 12 and 13, the plant is  able  to  maneuver  such  that the electric demand is satisfied while  keeping  reactor power effectively constant. As  reactor  power  and reactor coolant temperatures were essentially con- stant (Figs. 13 and 14), this maneuver could be
Fig. 11 Steam pressure.
Fig. 12. Turbine output and demand.
executed without control rod movement, and thermal stresses associated with changes in temperatures and power distributions have been effectively eliminated.  The corresponding bypass flow to the TES system is shown in Fig. 15. As would be expected,  the  bypass flow rate is essentially the inverse of the load profile.  The steam generator dryout location varies by only 2%  of the steam  generator tube  length for this  simulation  as compared with the 15% variation present during straight load follow  (Fig.  16).  The  TES  fluid  flow  rate is shown in Fig. 17 and closely follows the bypass flow rate. Steam generator and turbine impulse
Fig. 13. Reactor power.
Fig. 14. Primary temperatures.
pressure are essentially unchanged from  the  load-  follow simulations.
Figure 18 demonstrates that the flow controller for the TES FCV is effective in keeping the IHX exit fluid tem- perature at its target value. The hot and cold storage tank levels are given in Fig. 19. For the load profile considered here, the tanks have more than enough capacity to accom- modate the excess thermal energy in the system. These results show that through the addition of a sensible heat TES system, the reactor can be maintained at ~100% power, thus keeping primary-side oscillations at a minimum.
Fig. 15. Bypass flow into TES system.
Fig. 16. Steam generator dryout location.
III.C.Reactor Coupled with TES System and Intermittent Renewables
A further advantage of the TES system is the ability to accommodate the presence of intermittent energy sources on the grid, particularly solar energy generation that can vary depending on time of day or cloud cover. To illustrate these effects, the load profile was modified to reflect upward of   40 MW(electric) installed solar capacity as shown in Figs. 20 and 21. Over the course of the simulation, turbine load is met while thermal power stays approximately constant as
Fig. 17.  Flow of TES fluid from cold tank to hot tank.
Fig. 18. TES temperatures.
illustrated in Figs. 22 and 23. Bypass flow, shown in Fig. 24, is an x-axis reflection of load. The response of other system parameters is similar to that shown previously for the typical summer day. The TES system has the capacity to charge for the full 24-h run as tank levels go from 30% to 57%, shown in Fig. 25. Similar results have been obtained for a variety of load profiles with varying levels of renewable resources.16
III.D.Reactor Coupled with Absorption Chillers and Chilled-Water Storage
When connected to the grid, the electric demand governs the plant turbine output. The control strategy employed by the SMR uses the TCVs to maintain constant pressure in the
Fig. 19. Hot and cold tank levels.
Fig. 20. Typical solar output for a summer day.
steam generators, and the control rods move to satisfy some programmed average primary coolant temperature. Ultimately, the control scheme seeks to match turbine output with demand. As the demand drops during off-peak hours, the FDCVs close to match turbine output and demand, and the TCVs close to maintain constant steam generator pres- sure. The TCVs in a more closed position cause the turbine impulse pressure and pressure at all subsequent turbine taps to drop. Lower steam pressure corresponds to a lower steam saturation temperature available to the chillers. Likewise, a smaller pressure difference between the reactor condenser pressure and turbine tap pressure gives rise to less of a driving force for inducing steam flow. Finally, lower steam pressures
Fig. 21. Demand profiles of a typical summer day with and without solar.
Fig. 22. Turbine load and output.
result in large steam specific volumes, which further lessens steam mass flow rates to the absorption chillers. These three factors combined with steam qualities around 85% down- stream of the TES TBV contribute to the absorption chillers running at reduced capacities at lower turbine loads, as illu- strated in Figs. 26 and 27 (Ref. 30).
For a constant chilled-water flow rate and con- stant ambient conditions, the absorption chillers are capable of producing chilled water below the 7.2°C (45°F) temperature threshold for small bands of tur- bine load. High turbine loads cause the TES TBV to remain closed or partially open. Slightly lower turbine loads cause the TES TBV to fully open. A further
Fig. 23. Reactor power.
Fig. 24. Auxiliary bypass flow.
reduction in turbine load causes the absorption chiller capacity to reduce more as tap pressure drops. This is counter to the desired effect whereby a reduced tur- bine (electric) output would result in more chilled  water produced. Slower chilled-water flow rates can increase the size of these bands in which the chillers  are capable of producing chilled water that is cold enough. However, slower chilled-water flow rates result in long storage tank charging times. Increased tank charging times decrease stratification as there is more time for mass diffusion and  conduction  across the thermocline. Moreover, slower chilled-water flow
Fig. 25. Hot and cold tank levels.
Fig. 26. Chilled-water temperature versus turbine output.
rates further reduce chiller capacity. Finally, excep- tionally slow chilled-water flow rates decrease heat transfer coefficients and make the shell-side refriger- ant in the evaporator (water) more susceptible to freezing.
III.E.Absorption Chillers Coupled to Flash Vessel Model
Simulation results30 reveal that bypassing steam  from the LPT to three single-effect, lithium bromide absorption chillers during periods of excess reactor
Fig. 27. Absorption chiller capacity versus turbine output.
capacity is not an  ideal  configuration  for  shedding  load and meeting HVAC requirements given the  rela- tive size of the mPower reactor and the load profiles considered here. An alternative configuration involves using the low-grade waste heat coming from the two- tank TES system. The TES system maintains reactor power, meets demand, and stores the excess capacity as shown in Figs. 12 through 25. These dynamics remain unchanged with the addition of the absorption chillers. However, the large amount of waste  condensate  com- ing from the sensible heat storage system is perfect for absorption chillers.
In response to these findings, this section explores coupling the chilled-water storage system to the flash vessel model. This configuration has several benefits  over the LPT tap absorption chiller configuration described above. Specifically, the flash vessel system enables use of condensate that would normally be dumped to the condenser. In addition, the various PCVs in Fig. 5 modulate to maintain steam pressure sent to the chillers roughly constant, thereby ensuring more ideal absorption chiller operation. Like before, absorption chil- lers are used in conjunction with a stratified chilled-water storage tank to offset cooling loads appropriate for an office space. Typical meteorological year data are included in the model for cooling tower  calculations.  The electric demand is the same as the load profile depicted in Fig. 12 for a typical summer day. Further simulation details are available in Table IV.
Dynamic simulation results are depicted in Figs. 28
through 33. The simulations begin at midnight. The amount
TABLE IV
Simulation Parameters
Fig. 28. Facility cooling demand.
of mass flow into the flash vessel is governed by the opera- tion of the ACV in the condensate line between the IHX and the flash vessel. The ACV modulates to maintain the con- densate level in the IHX hot well constant. Therefore, the condensate mass flow rate to the flash vessel, shown in Fig. 29, is roughly the x-axis inverse of the electric demand curve illustrated in Fig. 12, and a maximum during periods
Fig. 29. Mass flow rates.
of low electric demand. The bank of four PCVs moves based on their specific pressure setpoints in order to keep pressure in the flash vessel approximately constant. Each PCV in the bank of four leaving the flash vessel is equipped with a unique setpoint, provided in Table IV. This control strategy enables the pressure in the flash vessel to stay roughly constant over the course of the simulation, as depicted in Fig. 30. Meanwhile, Fig. 33 shows that the LCV successfully modulates to maintain a fixed level of condensate in the flash vessel.
Fig. 29. Mass flow rates.
of low electric demand. The bank of four PCVs moves based on their specific pressure setpoints in order to keep pressure in the flash vessel approximately constant. Each PCV in the bank of four leaving the flash vessel is equipped with a unique setpoint, provided in Table IV. This control strategy enables the pressure in the flash vessel to stay roughly constant over the course of the simulation, as depicted in Fig. 30. Meanwhile, Fig. 33 shows that the LCV successfully modulates to maintain a fixed level of condensate in the flash vessel.
Fig. 30. Flash vessel system pressures.
Fig. 31. Stratified chilled-water storage tank level.
The success of the control strategies surrounding the flash vessel model enables near constant pressure steam to be delivered to the absorption chillers. As a result, the absorption chillers are able to achieve capacities in excess of 100%, as shown in Fig. 32. High absorption chiller capacities mean that reduced chilled-water flow rates are not necessary in order to chill the water below the 7.2°C (45°F) temperature threshold for storage and satisfying local facility cooling loads. The use of nominal chilled- water flow rates is twofold: The stratified chilled-water
Fig. 32. Absorption chiller capacity.
Fig. 33. Condensate level in flash vessel.
storage tank can be charged faster, and tank losses from mass and temperature diffusion across the thermocline are reduced at higher inlet and outlet storage tank flow rates. Last, four absorption chillers can consume a significant portion of the steam produced from flashing the high- pressure condensate in the flash vessel. Once the storage tank becomes full, the absorption chillers are ramped down, and chilled water in the tank is sent to the facility to satisfy HVAC loads. When the level in the tank falls below its lower setpoint, the chiller valve opens, the absorption chil- lers warm up, and chilled water is sent to the tank for storage. Unlike the LPT tap configuration, the absorption chillers achieve nominal capacities during times of excess reactor capacity. Results depicted in the above figures demonstrate the ability to maintain the reactor thermal out- put at 100% and match turbine output with an electric demand profile characteristic of a typical summer day down to 60% load while simultaneously using four large absorption chillers to charge an 18 927-m3 stratified chilled- water storage tank to offset HVAC loads of an adjacent office space.
IV.CONCLUSIONS
The results presented demonstrate the feasibility of using TES systems coupled to SMRs  to  minimize  power swings during periods of variable electric load.     If SMRs are to be deployed in conjunction with inter- mittent power sources such as wind and  solar,  these  load variations can be significant. Current SMR designs allow for bypass off the pressure equalization header prior to the PCVs thus providing approximately constant steam conditions perfect for sensible heating TES systems. Using a two-tank sensible heat storage system, it has been shown thermal energy can be stored during periods of low demand, to be recovered in the future for either electric generation or process heat applications.
Furthermore, it has been shown that the addition of a
sensible heat storage system provides a source of high- pressure, low-grade heat that can be utilized for other process steam applications such as chilled-water produc- tion and storage. The additional ancillary applications increase the overall efficiency of the system making the system more beneficial from an economic standpoint.
With the implementation of these TES systems, decreases in capacity factor and increased stresses on plant components associated with load-follow operation can be minimized, improving economic return over the lifespan of the reactor.
