<title>Characterization of Laser Megajoule Targets by X- Ray Tomography</title>
<Affiliation>CEA, Centre de Valduc, F–21120 Is Sur Tille, France</Affiliation>
<author>Alexandre Choux, Lise Barnouin, Ludovic Reverdy & Marc Theobald</author>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>FUSION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/15361055.2017.1406247</DOI>
<URL> https://doi.org/10.1080/15361055.2017.1406247</URL>
Abstract — Targets experimented on the Laser Megajoule (LMJ) facility are composed of amorphous hydrogenated carbon capsules. Some of them present rippled surface features like sinusoidal functions. Other experimented targets are hohlraum-containing capsules. The main difficulty when analyzing the machined capsules is to characterize the feature’s orientation and the sinusoidal shape featured in the capsule thickness by laser machining. For the capsule enclosed by the hohlraum, the main challenge is to characterize the capsule centering inside the assembled hohlraum. X-ray tomography is used to realize measurement, and obtained results are presented in this paper.
Keywords — Laser Megajoule, targets, hohlraum.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
As part of the Laser Megajoule1 (LMJ) program, the French Commissariat à l’Energie Atomique et aux Energies Alternatives designs, develops, and fabricates targets or com- ponents of targets with drastic specifications in order to study high-energy-density physics. To match and to control these specifications, process and characterization devices have to be continuously improved.
Some components of targets are composed of amor- phous hydrogenated carbon capsules. Their outer dia- meters vary between 500 and 2000 µm with a thickness ranging from 10 to 200 µm. Some of them present rippled surface features like sinusoidal functions.2 The main dif- ficulty when analyzing the machined capsules is to char- acterize the feature’s orientation and the sinusoidal shape featured in the capsule thickness by laser machining.3
Other targets experimented on the OMEGA or on the LMJ facilities are hohlraum-containing capsules. One of the main parameters to be characterized is the capsule centering in the assembled target.
This paper presents the measures obtained on the capsule’s feature characterizations and on the capsule location with an X-ray microtomography.
First, the X-ray microtomograph is described by a brief overview of the system and the data-processing software. The optimization of the X-ray microtomogra- phy parameters then lead to the characterization of the feature’s orientation and the sinusoidal shape featured in the capsule thickness by laser machining and to the capsule location inside the gold hohlraum.
II.X-RAY MICROTOMOGRAPHY AND METHODS
Targets and components of targets are characterized along the fabrication process and at the final stage when assembled. Dust has to be limited; therefore, some target characterization systems are located in a clean room with an International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 6 level (class 1000). Since metrology is realized on targets, the room temperature is controlled precisely. The commercial X-ray microtomography system is also implemented in a clean room (ISO 6). The room temperature is controlled at 21°C ± 1°C. The system is self-protecting from X-ray emissions. It contains lead shields in the walls to reduce the dose rate outside the system less than 0.5 µSv/h at 160 kV. When the microtomograph door is open, the X-ray source cannot produce X-rays because the source is stopped electrically. The operator can stay and work around the micro- tomograph safely.
The hardware characteristics of the X-ray microto- mography system are presented in Table I.
The application of dimensional metrology to X-ray computed tomography (CT) data is an area of active research. An important number of papers explain the pertinent factors influencing tomography results. These pertinent factors are so-called key factors. Tomography key factors such as beam hardening can significantly impact the characterization of the plastic capsule. Among these key factors, data filtering is the main factor that influences the measurement.
Data filtering means the removal of unwanted infor- mation (noise) added to the signal of interest. Data filter- ing used on CT system for noise removal can be applied at many stages of the CT dimensional characterization, e.g., on the projections or during the reconstruction.
Applying factors or parameters when correcting artifacts could numerically, but not physically, change the measure- ments. This is why it is important to understand the following phenomena and not to consider them a black box when using them.
The main perturbations for the reconstruction of a low- absorption sample are the ring artifact and phase contrast imaging. These perturbations when reconstructing heavy absorption samples are mainly reduced to the beam hardening.
Ring artifacts are CT phenomena that occur when there is a miscalibration or a failure of one or more detector elements in the CT system. They are usually observable close to the scan isocenter and at the same location on each slice. They represent a common pro- blem in the low absorption sample tomography acquisition.
Phase contrast imaging is based on phase effects and occurs due to light element being in the sample. It occurs close to the internal and external surfaces.
Beam hardening is based on the mass attenuation of the sample. For a homogenous material, the mass attenuation has to be constant. The beam hardening correction allows setting the mass attenuation constant inside the sample.
All the microtomography data-processing operations required  to  obtain  the  final  reconstructed  volume  (e.g., beam hardening correction, phase contrast correc- tion, ring artifact, reconstruction) are performed with the microtomography operating software (see Ref. 4).
Each subvolume of interest is defined by its surface. These are fitted by using geometrical predefined shapes (e.g., sphere, cylinder) implemented in the microtomo- graphy data-processing software quoted in Ref. 5 Each surface then can be localized in the global volume and the associated repere of the last one.
III.CAPSULE FEATURE CHARACTERIZATION
Capsules with a sinusoidal shape are experimented on to study hydrodynamic perturbations during the capsule implo- sion. The sinusoidal shape models the designed perturbation. The capsule is an amorphous hydrogenated carbon sphere (654 µm diameter, 47 µm thick). The feature2 is machined as a sinusoidal shape with a 4-µm peak-to-peak
amplitude and a 100-µm modulation period.
The X-ray acquisition parameters for the  capsule  CT scan are presented in Table II. The measurements were taken on the previously described microshell with    a 0.6-µm voxel size.
The final reconstruction allows observing the sinusoidal shape on the outer surface of the capsule. A global representa- tion illustrates the thickness variation (see Fig. 1).
The data-processing software does not allow charac- terizing a sinusoidal shape. An approach is developed to estimate the feature machining as explained in Ref. 3. Points are picked on the outer surface of the microshell,
TABLE I
Hardware Characteristics
TABLE II
Capsule  CT Acquisition Parameters
Fig. 1. CT reconstruction of a capsule with a sinusoidal shape emphasizing thickness variation.
such that they define peaks and valleys on the sinusoidal shape.
Since the feature machining is not perfect, there is depth deviation. To model the sinusoidal shape, the depth has to be taken into account. The model P θ that was empirically determined is
@
where
θ = angular position (deg) along a capsule longitude
b = amplitude (µm) of the sinu- soidal shape
c =  pulse of the sinusoidal shape
d (µm) and a (µm.deg−2) =  parameters of the depth  devia-
tion function.
The last two parameters are not constant. They vary slowly depending on the depth deviation machined on the capsule. These parameters are used only to estimate locally the sinusoidal shape machined on the  capsule. The sinusoidal shape can be then characterized.
The characterized feature has a 2.5-µm amplitude and a 102.2-µm modulation period with respect to the theoretical feature with a 2-µm amplitude and a 100-µm modulation period. The standard deviation for the ampli- tude measurement is 0.2 µm. The modulation period uncertainty is estimated to 0.3 µm.
To conclude this section, a  capsule  with  a  machined feature was characterized. A mathematical model was developed, taking into account physical  defect creating when laser machining as a depth devia- tion to measure the feature’s orientation and engraving depth. No data-processing software allows doing this characterization.
IV.CHARACTERIZATION OF CAPSULE LOCATION IN A HOHLRAUM
The classical implosion target consists of a hohlraum, laser entrance hole, tents, and capsule. The hohlraum is a 50-µm-thick gold cavity. The CH capsule with a 600-µm outer diameter and a 30-µm thickness is located at the center of the hohlraum. This capsule has to be positioned in the target center within ± 50 µm axially and ± 50 µm radially. The main difficulty in micro X-ray CT is the char- acterization of an X-ray low-absorption material located inside an X-ray heavy-absorption material. An issue is then the characterization of the plastic capsule centering
in the gold hohlraum.
The X-ray acquisition parameters for CT scan of a hohlraum with a CH capsule inside are presented  in  Table III. The measurements were taken on this sample with a 4-µm voxel size.
After artifact corrections, a surface determination is done by thresholding on computed linear attenuation level. This discrimination allows separating the empty space from the material surfaces. Thus, only the hohl-  raum surfaces are detected. The voxels representing the capsule have a computed linear attenuation level below the threshold. The capsule voxels are then considered as noise or artifacts. By analyzing the reconstructed volume close to the capsule, a region of interest is set to separate the capsule from the whole reconstructed volume of the
TABLE III
CT Acquisition Parameters of the Gold Cavity with a CHx Capsule
target (see Fig. 2). This region stays at its original loca- tion in the global volume.
Then, the data-processing software allows character- izing location in three dimensions by using numeric geo- metrical shapes such as cylinder, sphere, plane, or cone. The equatorial plane of the hohlraum is interpo- lated by a plane on the detected surfaces. The cylind- rical axis (symmetry axis) of the cavity is determined from a cylinder, fitting  the  surfaces  corresponding  to the laser entrance holes. The inner and the outer sur- faces of the capsule are defined manually by picking points inside the region of interest. From these points, these surfaces are fitted by spheres. Even if streaking artifact can hide a part of the capsule, there is enough signal to detect the inner and the outer surfaces of the
capsule.
Using these defined mathematical objects, dimen- sional metrology can be done (Fig. 3). The outer and inner diameters of the capsule are estimated to 592 µm and 534 µm, respectively.
The distance (d1) between the center of the capsule inner surface and the equatorial plane and the distance (d2) between the center of the capsule inner surface and the cylindrical axis are computed. The final axial distance (d1) is 29 µm, and the radial distance (d2) is 20 µm.
The final reconstruction allows observing the capsule inside the hohlraum. A global representation illustrates the reconstructed OMEGA target (see Fig. 4).
Finally, the characterization of the location of the capsule made of X-ray low-absorption material with the hohlraum realized with an X-ray heavy absorption mate- rial is realized successfully.
Fig. 2.  Region of interest around the capsule inside the gold cavity.
Fig. 3.  Mathematical objects for the OMEGA target characterization.
Fig. 4. CT reconstruction of an OMEGA target.
V.CONCLUSION
An amorphous hydrogenated carbon capsule with its machined orientated feature and the capsule location in a gold assembled target are characterized using an X-ray microtomography with a fine resolution of 0.6 µm per voxel for the capsule and 4 µm per voxel for the hohlraum. Methodologies were developed for these characterizations.
A main issue in X-ray CT is the characterization of an X-ray low-absorption material located inside an X-ray heavy-absorption material. This issue was solved success- fully as the capsule was located by X-ray microtomogra- phy using two kinds for the capsule of characterization: one for the whole target and one for the capsule charac- terized through a selected region of interest.
As CT metrology is a new way to characterize the targets experimented on the LMJ, the determination of  the associated measurement uncertainty6 is still a work in progress.
