<title>A Novel Technique Applying Spectral Estimation to Johnson Noise Thermometry</title>
<author>N. Dianne Bull Ezell, Chuck Britton, Nance Ericson, David Holcomb, M. J. Roberts, Seddik Djouadi & Richard Wood</author>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Technology</Journal>
<Affiliation>a.Oak Ridge National Laboratories, Electrical Engineering Systems Research Division, 1 Bethel Valley Road, Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37830
b.University of Tennessee, Electrical Engineering Department, 1520 Middle Drive, Knoxville, Tennessee 37996
c.University of Tennessee, Nuclear Engineering Department, 308 Pasqua Engineering Building, Knoxville, Tennessee 37996</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>ANS</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00295450.2018.1452498</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1080/00295450.2018.1452498</URL>
Abstract — Johnson noise thermometry is one of many important measurement techniques used to monitor the safety levels and stability in a nuclear reactor. However, this measurement is very dependent on the minimal electromagnetic environment. Properly removing unwanted electromagnetic interference (EMI) is critical for accurate drift-free temperature measurements. The two techniques developed by Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) to remove transient and periodic EMI are briefly discussed in this paper. Spectral estimation is a key component in the signal processing algorithm used for EMI removal and temperature calculation. The cross-power spectral density is a key component in the Johnson noise temperature computation. Applying either technique requires the simple addition of electronics and signal processing to existing resistive thermometers. With minimal installation changes, the system discussed here can be installed on existing nuclear power plants. The Johnson noise system developed is tested at three locations: ORNL, Sandia National Laboratory, and the Tennessee Valley Authority’s Kingston Fossil Plant. Each of these locations enabled improvement on the EMI removal algorithm. The conclusions made from the results at each of these locations is discussed, as well as possible future work.
Keywords — Electromagnetic interference, Johnson noise thermometry, spectral estimation, cross-power spectral density.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION: JOHNSON NOISE THERMOMETRY RESEARCH AT OAK RIDGE NATIONAL LABORATORY
Johnson noise thermometry (JNT) is an important measurement technique for general stability and safety assessment of a nuclear reactor. This technique was initially applied to general temperature measurements previously and was demonstrated for in-core reactor temperature measure- ment more than 45 years ago.1 The harsh environmental conditions associated with a nuclear reactor make stable sensor measurements over time extremely challenging.
Johnson noise is a fundamental expression of temperature and is inherently immune to drift due to the sensors’ physical condition. In and near the core, only JNT and radiation pyrometry offer the possibility for long-term, high-accuracy temperature measurement. However, JNT has not been widely used to date for temperature monitoring in nuclear reactor cores due to electromagnetic interference (EMI) concerns. Removing unwanted EMI is critical for accurate, drift-free temperature measurements. Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) has recently developed a JNT-based system that removes EMI and reliably and repeatably reports the environmental temperature in reactor cores, enabling commercialization and broader application of this tempera-ture measurement technique.2 There are several sources of EMI in and around nuclear reactor facilities that may corrupt temperature measurements. Mechanical vibrations, pumps, and other equipment are EMI contributors.3 For this reason, the front-end electronics must be very low noise and shielding is required. ORNL studied two types of EMI: transient and periodic. Spectral estimation is a key component in the signal processing algorithm used for EMI removal and temperature calculation. Applying spectral estimation requires the addition of specialized electronics and signal processing to existing resistive thermometers. The electronics are composed of a dual-mode resistance and Johnson noise thermometer in a rugged, integrated prototype form.3 The resistance measurement serves the dual purpose of providing a real-time fast temperature measurement and providing an independent measurement for Nyquist equation computation. The Nyquist equation describes the voltage produced by the motion of electrons within a resistor at a given temperature. The most valuable contribution of the research is the addition of the signal processing using spectral estimation techniques. Because thermal noise in any conduc- tive material is Brownian motion of electrons due to ambient temperature, the measurement is simply the observation of random motion.2 Therefore, any nonrandom or periodic EMI can be detected in the frequency domain as a spike and removed leaving only the random transient EMI. Transient EMI is removed by detecting outliers in the time-domain signals.
Two EMI removal methods, for both transient and
periodic EMI, were developed and demonstrated through experiments at ORNL and other facilities: the rejection method and the subtraction method. The results from these experiments are discussed in this paper. This research enables a cost decrease and a safety increase in nuclear reactor monitoring systems. Under normal opera- tion, the resistive thermometers degrade and are replaced every few years, sending technicians into unsafe zones to calibrate or replace the thermometers during a shutdown period. With the addition of this technology, the main- tenance required by these thermometers would decrease which in turn would shorten shutdown time. A utility loses about $1 million a day during a  nuclear  power plant (NPP) shutdown. In this paper, the techniques developed for EMI removal are described, demonstrating a path forward for practical and reliable monitoring of nuclear reactor core temperatures.
II.EMI AND SPECTRAL ESTIMATION
Various sources of EMI such as power lines, computer power supplies, cathode-ray tubes, cell phones, motors,
pumps, and data lines are found in industrial environments such as nuclear reactors.4 These sources can contribute different types of EMI; therefore, ORNL focused on tran- sient and periodic EMI. Transient EMI is a signal that begins, persists for some time period, and then  stops. This type of EMI is a substantially different signal from the expected noise voltage of the thermal noise (sensor noise). The sensor noise voltage has a Gaussian distribu- tion within a known limit and a mean value of zero; any variation twice the standard deviation of the mean value is considered transient EMI (Ref. 4). Periodic EMI is a signal that is always present and repeats in a pattern indefinitely. Fourier transforming the signal to the frequency domain causes periodic EMI to become very evident as spikes in the spectrum. Because these two types of EMI have to be removed differently, a two-step process was developed where transient EMI is removed in the time domain and periodic EMI is removed in the frequency domain.
II.A.EMI Removal Techniques: Rejection Versus Subtraction Method
In initial research, the Johnson noise thermometer electronics measured a ratio of two noise voltages to avoid the difficulties of measuring the resistance temperature detector (RTD) independently and accurately. Also the elec- tronics measured the amplifier gain, passband, and filtering effects of the cable connections.5 However, this measurement is still susceptible to EMI. ORNL started researching EMI removal techniques in 2013 to improve JNT as an option on advanced reactors.5 The first technique developed “rejected” EMI using spectral estimation. The frequency band of the measurement is very important due to the parasitics of the system. An RTD is connected in parallel to the input of two high input–impedance amplifier electronics channels. The outputs of the amplifiers are partially correlated  because each channel consists of the sum of a correlated noise voltage and the uncorrelated amplifier noise voltage. The two output signals from the amplifiers are combined and time averaged causing the uncorrelated noise to approach zero, leaving only the correlated noise. Figure 1 illustrates the concept of cross correlation: The measured voltage from each amplifier channel voltage is Fourier transformed and correlated to form a cross-power spectral density (CPSD) measurement, effectively eliminating the noise contribution from the ampli- fier electronics.
The Johnson noise signal consists only of a flat white
spectral energy distribution. The shape of the Johnson noise power spectral density (PSD) is a result of the effects of filtering out low and high frequencies from the noise, as  well   as  the   frequency-dependent   gain   of  the  amplifier
Fig. 1. PSD function of each amplifier channel and  CPSD function from both channels.
channel. The high-band frequency filtering reduces the impact of sensor-to-amplifier cable capacitance. The low frequency filtering eliminates the nonthermal noise generated by mechanical vibrations. These low frequency microphonic signals are typically less than a few tens of a kilohertz. Then the CPSD is calculated and expressed in units of volts squared per hertz (V2/Hz). The CPSD conveys the power content per unit frequency of the measured noise signal and is derived from the individual channel voltages. The channel voltages  are sampled in time domain blocks composed of  16 subblocks, where each subblock is assessed for noise spikes. If a spike appears in a subblock that is twice the standard deviation of the baseline of the overall data block, the subblock containing the spike and the subblocks before and after are all rejected and replaced with the baseline value. Then the signal is windowed and Fourier transformed and runs through a “despiking”/rejection algorithm. Due to the averaging nature of this algorithm, the measurement takes a while to remove all periodic EMI. As the temperature computation is heavily dependent on a low noise measure- ment of the RTD, a second EMI removal technique, the subtraction method, which is faster than the rejection method, was developed.
The subtraction method also depends on the PSD of the
two channels and the CPSD between them. However, the subtraction method does not solely rely on cross correlation and averaging over time to remove the EMI noise. An antenna voltage is measured alongside the JNT channel voltages. The antenna signal is sampled at a high speed and is used to model the EMI environment surrounding the system. The EMI is then subtracted from each of the two JNT channels before the CPSD is calculated. This ensures the CPSD between channel 1 and channel 2 of the JNT system is not biased by the EMI environment, resulting in a more accurate and reliable temperature computation.
II.B.Applying EMI Removal Methods to Existing Resistive Thermometers
The front-end electronics are composed of two channels with a low noise amplifier and bandpass filtering. A noise model of the simplified electronics is displayed in Fig. 2, where RS is the resistance of the RTD sensor, VRS is the noise voltage due to the sensor, VE is the noise voltage of  the EMI, RC is the cable resistance, and VRC is the cable noise voltage. V1 and V2 are the output voltages from channel 1 and channel 2, respectively.
The subtraction method requires only that an antenna and associated electronics be added to the Johnson noise front-end electronics system. To keep the noise channels as similar as physically possible, an identical front-end amplifier board is used for the antenna electronics. The EMI noise voltage VE is subtracted from V1 and V2 before the CPSD between channel 1 and channel 2 is computed. The JNT system is installed with existing RTDs (see Fig. 3). The system is portable  and  can  drive very long RTD cables; therefore, it can be installed in
an existing NPP without much reconfiguration.
III.VALIDATION THROUGH TESTING
To validate the theory that the hardware using the algorithm can survive in industrial EMI environments, ORNL tested the system at several locations with the goal of measuring temperature to within 1%. Initial testing was conducted in a very clean lab environment at ORNL. This environment exposed the system to little external EMI and allowed for a baseline measurement of the internal EMI due to the physical electronics. Next, the system was installed on a Brayton loop at Sandia National Laboratories (Sandia). Based on the testing at Sandia, the subtraction method is superior to the rejection method. Testing at ORNLFig. 3. JNT system illustration.
continued with generated EMI added to the clean lab environment. Finally, the  improved  system  was  installed at a Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) facility, the Kingston Fossil Plant (KFP), for final  experimentation.  The experimental results from all these sites are discussed  in Secs. III.A through III.D.
Fig. 2. Simple electrical representation of JNT amplifier/ filter channels, RTDs, and associated noise sources.
III.A.ORNL Experiment
The initial testing at ORNL allowed for a baseline measurement and model of the physical system noise.
Overall, the system is fairly clean with consistent noise sources at 42 kHz due to an internal signal generator and 64 kHz due to the power supply of the system. Also, even though the environment is a fairly low EMI lab environment, the light ballast generates EMI at 27 kHz (see Fig. 4) (Ref. 6). The CPSD has a large impact on the temperature calculation [Eq. 1], and therefore, removing this EMI ensures an accurate computation of JNT temperature Ts:
@1
where
G12ð f Þ = the CPSD between channel 1 and channel 2
H12  f  = cross  frequency  response  between  channel 1 and channel 2
Fig. 4. Screenshot from graphical user interface: Spectral data from channel 1 (green) and channel 2 (red). The white is the CPSD between channel 1 and channel 2. (a) Figure with lights off and (b) figure with lights on.
GRCð f Þ = the PSD of the cable resistance
k = Boltzmann’s constant
Rs = sensor resistance.
The sensor resistance is measured in real time and is not frequency dependent. It is inversely proportional to tempera- ture and monitored for fast temperature changes. The system is able to achieve less than 1% relative error in temperature computation, which is the goal for RTD sensors in NPPs. The error is the error between the estimate produced by the JNT measurements and the estimate produced by the RTD calibration. An RTD is calibrated by the manufacturer before installation in a NPP. In other words, the error in kelvins divided by the actual temperature in kelvins.
III.B.Sandia Brayton Loop Experiment
The testing at Sandia provided a lot of information  about the limitations of the hardware and software algorithm. The hardware can become saturated with EMI due to the limitations of the amplifiers in the front-end electronics. If the EMI magnitude is greater than the peak-to-peak range of the amplifiers, the system becomes saturated and is unable to provide any reasonable data. The software algorithm can recover from this state but only after the EMI is no longer present. While this measurement proved to be difficult, the system was able to measure temperature within a few per- cent of accuracy. This was discovered as the Brayton loop generated progressively more EMI as it went through a start- up process. However, before the electronics were saturated, several measurements were obtained (see Fig. 5) (Ref. 4).
Fig. 5. Screenshot from graphical user interface: Sandia spectral data from channel 1 (green) and channel 2 (red). The white is the CPSD between channel 1 and channel 2.
From these measurements, it was concluded that while the system could obtain temperatures accurately even under a large amount of EMI, it still had its limitations. Having a good model of the EMI environment proved to be very useful as it motivated further development of the subtraction method.
III.C.ORNL-Generated EMI Experiment
Because the subtraction method proved to be superior to the rejection method at Sandia, more development was put into the subtraction method algorithm. Multiple experiments continued at ORNL in the same clean lab environment, with added EMI generated using a signal generator and antenna (see Fig. 6) (Ref. 2). Controlling the additional EMI simplifies the validation of the opera- tion of the EMI removal algorithm. The results from this experiment are displayed in Fig. 7 (Ref. 4).
Several other EMI conditions were tested, including broadband EMI, which is known to be difficult for ORNL’s developed rejection method to properly remove. The antenna with the subtraction method in addition to the spectral estimation used by the rejection method increased the robust- ness of the JNT system and software. The subtraction method improved the temperature computation error rate, and the system was again able to measure temperature with  less than 1% error.
III.D.TVA KFP Experiment
The last measurement location was an actual industrial environment. The JNT system was installed on the discharge and suction of a boiler feed pump at the TVA KFP. The EMI in this environment consists of broadband EMI, transient EMI, and periodic EMI (see Fig. 8) (Ref. 7). Because KFP was operational during these experiments, the temperature varied somewhat over time. The boiler feed pump under test was turned on and off several times during the experiment. At first, it was unclear whether the JNT system would survive quick temperature changes because it is designed to operate in NPPs where temperatures change at slow rates. However, the sys- tem proved capable of keeping up with the temperature changes and tracked the real-time temperature (see Fig. 9) (Ref. 7).
The JNT temperature consistently stayed within a few percent of the real-time temperature measurement. These measurements were made over a very short period of time, so the results could have converged if the measurements continued for a longer period of time. However, the goal of the experiment was just to determine whether the system would survive such a harsh EMI environment, and it did.
Fig. 6. EMI generation system.
Fig. 7. ORNL-generated Sandia EMI spectral data with EMI (blue) and with EMI removed (red).
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
JNT is an important measurement tool for monitoring safety levels and stability in a nuclear reactor. Guaranteeing a reliable and accurate temperature measurement previously depended heavily on a low EMI noise environment. However, ORNL has proven that properly removing unwanted EMI is possible  and enables  the development  of a drift-free temperature measurement. The two techniques developed, rejection and subtraction algorithms, and the required additional electronics were discussed in this paper. Installation of this JNT system at an existing NPP requires only minimal reconfiguration but provides a more robust measurement than current systems. This research is a plat- form that can be used for self-calibrating RTD systems. Integrating a self-calibrating system would reduce mainte- nance and costs in NPPs in the future.
Fig. 8. Screenshot from graphical user interface: KFP spectral data from channel 1 (green) and channel 2 (red). The blue is the CPSD between channel 1 and channel 2.
Fig. 9. Screenshot from graphical user interface: KFP temperature measurement: real-time temperature of sensor (white) and JNT temperature (green).
Acknowledgments
ORNL would like to acknowledge the Advanced Reactor Technologies Program for the funding support for this research. We would also like to acknowledge Bruce Warmack with ORNL who was heavily involved in the  system  integration and build and was instrumental in the portable  JNT system. This manuscript has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC, under Contract DE-AC05-00OR22725 with the US Department of Energy (DOE). The United States government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowl- edges that the United States government retains a nonexclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, worldwide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for United States government purposes. DOE will provide public access to these results of federally sponsored research   in accordance with the DOE Public Access Plan (http://energy. gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan).
