<title>Effects of Surface Roughness, Oxidation, and Temperature on the Emissivity of Reactor Pressure Vessel Alloys</title>
<Affiliation>aUniversity of Wisconsin–Madison, Department of Engineering Physics, Madison, Wisconsin
bNational Renewable Energy Laboratory, Concentrating Solar Power Group, Golden, Colorado</Affiliation>
<author>J. L. King , H. Jo, R. Tirawat, K. Blomstrand & K. Sridharan</author>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>FUSION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00295450.2017.1353869</DOI>
<URL> https://doi.org/10.1080/00295450.2017.1353869</URL>
Abstract — Thermal radiation will be an important mode of heat transfer in future high-temperature reactors and in off-normal high-temperature scenarios in present reactors. In this work, spectral directional emissivities of two reactor pressure vessel (RPV) candidate materials were measured at room temperature after exposure to high-temperature air. In the case of SA508 steel, significant increases in emissivity were observed due to oxidation. In the case of Grade 91 steel, only very small increases were observed under the tested conditions. Effects of roughness were also investigated. To study the effects of roughening, unexposed samples of SA508 and Grade 91 steel were roughened via one of either grinding or shot-peening before being measured. Significant increases were observed only in samples having roughness exceeding the roughness expected of RPV surfaces. While the emissivity increases for SA508 from oxidation were indeed significant, the measured emissivity coefficients were below that of values commonly used in heat transfer models. Based on the observed experimental data, recommendations for emissivity inputs for heat transfer simulations are provided.
Keywords — Spectral emissivity, low-alloy steels, reactor pressure vessel.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
To achieve higher efficiencies, future nuclear reactor concepts are aimed at operating temperatures signifi- cantly higher than those of current light water reactors  (LWRs). At these high operating temperatures or during accidental high-temperature excursions in LWRs, the dependence on thermal radiation for the expulsion  of  heat from the system becomes critically important because of the fourth-power temperature dependence of radiated heat according to the Stefan-Boltzmann relation- ship. The material property that dictates the extent of radiant heat is emissivity, which is defined as the ratio    of radiant heat from a material’s surface to that of a blackbody under the same conditions. While rough approximations of emissivity have sufficed  for  LWR heat transfer analysis for normal operating conditions, a
stronger understanding is necessary for heat transfer pre- dictions of Generation IV (Gen IV) high-temperature reactors or in the case of high-temperature excursions in LWRs. As a result, experimental studies of emissivities for various relevant nuclear reactor alloys have been performed in recent years. A summary of many of the recent studies is provided in Table I.
The emissivities of nickel-based alloys  have received recent attention since nickel-based alloys  are the leading candidate materials for many of the highest- temperature metal components within Gen IV reactor designs (core internals, core structure, heat exchanger, etc.). Greene and Finfrock studied the total hemispheri- cal emissivity of oxidized Inconel 718 up to  1000°C (Ref. 1). Keller et al. also studied the total hemispherical emissivity of Inconel 718, with the addition of graphite  powder coating in anticipation of its application in veryhigh-temperature reactors2 (VHTRs). The total hemi-
spherical emissivities of several nickel-based alloys
TABLE I
Summary of Previous Emissivity Measurements of Various Nuclear Alloysincluding Hastelloy X, Haynes 230, and Alloy 617 were studied by Maynard3 and Maynard and Mokgalap4 in a series of papers in Nuclear Technology3,4 and  by Maynard in his dissertation.5 Gordon et al. studied the emissivity of Hastelloy N through air oxidation and sandblasting.6 To gain a better understanding  of  the  total hemispherical emissivity, it is important to under- stand spectral directional emissivity, which comprises  the total hemispherical emissivity. Spectral directional measurements were conducted by del Campo et al. for Inconel 718 along with several other alloys used in aeronautical application.7 While recent attention  has  been given to nickel-based alloys, iron-based stainless steels have also been studied,8–13 often outside the con- text of nuclear applications.
Less attention has been given to the emissivities of low-alloy steels, which are the leading candidate mate- rials for reactor pressure  vessels  (RPVs).  Because  RPVs operate at  several  hundred  degrees  Celsius  lower than hotter internal components, it may  be tempting to assume a lesser significance of emissivity
in this case. However, unlike core internal components, the RPV may be surrounded by stagnant air, such as in the case of a reactor cavity cooling system (RCCS), where conduction and convection are relatively limited. Here, thermal radiation plays a relatively pronounced role. For pebble bed modular reactors and modular high-temperature gas reactors (HTGRs) during an acci- dent scenario where the RPV reaches 300°C, it is expected that 80% of heat transfer in proposed RCCS designs will be radiative.14 Low-alloy steel SA508 and other similar steels such as SA533 are currently the industry standard for RPVs, and they remain as valid material candidates for the RPV of many of the Gen IV designs. With that being said, there is a potential tem- perature limitation to their application in future designs such as the prismatic VHTR (Ref. 15). In this case,  alloys with increased chromium content such as Grade  91 or SA336 are desirable candidates. It is important to understand the evolution of the thermal emissivity of these materials under conditions representative of their intended environment.
There exists limited prior work on the emissivity of low-alloy steels in the context of nuclear application. Spectral normal emissivity studies were conducted by Cao et al. under defined high-temperature, oxidizing conditions for SA508 as well as for other alloys such as nickel-based Inconel 617, Type 304 stainless steel (SS-304), and Type 316 stainless steel (SS-316) (Refs. 16 and 17). Other infor- mative references for iron and iron-based alloy emissivities are found outside of nuclear engineering–focused studies. Spectral emissivity measurements were acquired by del Campo et al. for high-purity iron through oxidation to see whether such measurements could be used for in situ oxida- tion monitoring.18 Fu et al. studied oxidation and roughness effects on the total hemispherical emissivity of iron-based alloys using a calorimetric method showing noticeable dependencies.19 Although Fu et al. studied alloys having compositions more closely resembling stainless steel than low-alloy steel, the study emphasized a generalized scope. For RPV applications, effects of roughness and oxide thin film interference are of particular interest.
Small-scale modeling of aluminum and steel emissivity
has focused on isolating these two individual contributing effects.20,21 In high-temperature reactor conditions, oxida- tion or some form of surface corrosion will inevitably occur on bare low-alloy steels. An oxide layer on a metal substrate has different optical constants compared to the metal sub- strate due to the dielectric nature of the oxide. In addition to affecting the overall emission of the surface, the oxide layer can act as a thin film and induce significant oscillations of spectral emissivity from thin film interference effects.18
Surface roughness effects must also be considered since commercial metal alloy surfaces have small physical surface features such as discontinuities and roughness. Surface features induce more surface contact interaction with propagated light, which generally increases emissiv- ity. It is well established that roughness has a distinct impact on the emissivity of metals. However, the exact description of this interaction across different materials and conditions is still an open question. In this study, systematically designed emissivity experiments were con- ducted with actual RPV candidate materials to gain insight into the effects of oxidation and surface roughness. The
effect of temperature on emissivity was also evaluated since the change of temperature can influence optical con- stants and the wavelength-dependent response.
The influence of temperature is twofold. First, and most significantly, temperature influences the Planck distribution, which determines the relative contribution of any given spec- tral range to total emission. Temperature-induced shifts of the Planck distribution are referred to as Planck shifts in this study (for convenience). While Planck shifts do not affect spectral emissivity, they do influence total emissivity when spectral emissivity is nonuniform across wavelength. Second, spectral emissivity can experience minor changes associated with the temperature dependency in the optical constants. In this regard, spectral emissivity is a weak function of tempera- ture. As shorthand, temperature-induced changes in the opti- cal constants of a material are referred to as optical shifts.
II.EXPERIMENTAL
II.A.Test Materials
Grade 91 and SA508 steel samples were cut using wire electric discharge machining and were mirror-polished before being subjected to one of either air oxidation or roughening. The compositions of the materials used are given in Table II. The oxidation temperatures were selected based on code standards, postulated transient scenarios, and expected reac- tion thresholds. All reference samples are unoxidized, unroughened, and mirror-finished. The preparation of each roughened or exposed sample, prior to roughening or expo- sure, was identical to the preparation of the reference samples. SA508 steel is allowed in the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code22 for indefinite nuclear service up to 371°C. However, most operating temperatures of pressurized water reactor and LWR pressure vessels are roughly 290 ± 30°C (Ref. 23). It is unrealistic to try to expose samples to operat- ing temperatures at durations typical of pressure vessel life- time. For this reason, an elevated temperature of 350°C was chosen to accelerate oxide growth for durations up to 200 h. To generate an upper bound on oxidation, another sample was exposed to a much higher temperature of 600°C for 5 h.
TABLE II
Nominal Compositions of the Alloys Tested in This StudyShould the allowable temperature ranges of SA508 be extended in future code standards, this environment still easily surpasses the upper bound of relevant  temperatures. In 2004, Ball analyzed several transient scenarios for two modular HTGR designs.24 Of the transients evaluated, the maximum RPV temperature cited in this study was 555°C. The 600°C sample relates to an excessively oxidized RPV.
Because of the increased chromium content in Grade 91, it was expected that only very thin oxide layers would form during high-temperature air exposure and that the change in emissivity would be relatively limited. Oxidation experiments started at 600°C for 3 h, but initial scanning electron microscopy cross-section analysis showed a negligible change in surface  condition  after this exposure. An extreme temperature of 750°C was chosen to promote measurable emissivity changes from surface oxidation. A General Signal Lindberg Box fur- nace was used for the air oxidation experiments (Fig. 1). Samples that were not oxidized were roughened to investigate	potential	effects	of	surface	roughness (Table III). Standard SiC grinding disks  were used for this purpose. Shot-peened samples were prepared by impacting high-velocity stainless steel particles at approximately 40 psi until the sample surface appeared
uniformly roughened upon visual inspection.
II.B.Surface Roughness Characteristics
A ZYGO white light interferometer was used to measure surface profiles for each sample used in the roughness sections of the study (Table IV). For each
Fig. 1. Lindberg furnace used to oxidize samples in high-temperature air.
sample, three profiles were measured, and each  value was averaged between the three profile quantities: max- imum peak-to-valley value (PV), root-mean-squared (rms) roughness value, and arithmetic average (Ra). Values given in parentheses in Table IV are the standard deviation within the averaged set.
II.C.Emissivity Measurement System
A Surface Optics SOC-100 hemispherical directional reflectometer (HDR) system was used to characterize the infrared reflectance of samples that could then be con- verted into emittance. The optical characterization work was performed in conjunction with the Concentrated Solar Power group at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory. Since lower angles of incidence produced a better signal, hemispherical-directional reflectance was measured at 10-deg incidence from 1.7 to 25 µm.  Spectral directional emissivity, having an emission angle equal to the measurement incidence angle, could readily be determined using Kirchhoff’s Law [Eq. (1)]:@1
where R is the reflection coefficient.
Reflectance data were used to calculate emissivity as discussed in Sec. IV. All measurements were performed with a nitrogen purge. Initially, measurements were first taken at room temperature before a few select samples were measured at elevated temperature to investigate the effects of temperature. Following elevated temperature measurement, samples were remeasured at lower tem- peratures to identify any possible influence of additional in situ oxidation.
III.RESULTS
III.A.Spectral Directional Measurements of SA508
One SA508 sample was oxidized at 300°C for 100 h and another at 600°C for 5 h to provide lower and upper boundaries, respectively, for the study. Results are provided in Fig. 2. Exposure temperatures are marked as Te in this study while temperatures during measurement are marked as Tm. The SA508 samples oxidized at 600°C showed mark- edly more oxidation, as observed by visual inspection, than all other samples in this study. These samples provide a good reference for an excessively oxidized material. The 600°C results match well to the work of Cao et al.17 at 500°C and 700°C where both studies share the same wavelength range
TABLE III
Applications, Test Materials, and Test ConditionsTABLE IV
Profilometry Measurements of Unoxidized Samplesof measurement, 2 µm < λ < 9 µm . However, while  Cao et al. focus on a spectral range of 2 to 9 µm, this work focuses on a larger range of 1.7 to 25 µm.
At higher temperatures, a greater percentage of emitted energy occurs at shorter wavelengths while at lower tem- peratures energy emitted at higher wavelengths becomes more significant. The measurements of Cao et al.17 showed that very high emissivity values (roughly 0.8 to 0.9) occur up to a wavelength of 9 µm for heavily oxidized SA508. This study agrees with the findings but shows that spectral emissivity drops off sharply at higher wavelengths. This
drop-off should have minor consequences for very high- temperature environments where the Planck distribution favors shorter wavelengths but greater consequences at lower temperatures.
III.A.1.Roughened SA508 Measured at Room Temperature
Unoxidized samples were also subjected to various roughening conditions. Measurements were taken at room temperature, and results are given in Fig. 3. Only the
Fig. 2. Emissivity measurements of SA508 air-oxidized at Te = 300°C for 100 h (dot-dash) and Te = 600°C for 5 h (dash). Measurements were taken at room temperature. Reference sample is mirror-polished, unoxidized SA508.
Fig. 3. Emissivity measurements of roughened SA508 (unoxidized). Reference is mirror-polished, unoxidized SA508.
shot-peened sample exhibited a significantly different spectral emissivity. While this may be a real effect of   the surface roughening, it may also be an artifact of the measurement method. Further analysis would be required to verify. Profilometry measurements showed that the PV roughness of the shot-peened surface was 6 to 21 times greater than samples with other surface treatments. Assuming the roughness of an SA508 RPV stays within the roughness scale of the samples roughened via the grinding papers, roughness should not have a significant role in the surface emissivity.
III.A.2.
Thermally Exposed SA508 Measured at Room Temperature
Samples were subjected to oxidizing air at 350°C before being measured at room temperature. Results are given in Fig. 4. The progression of the emissivity agrees well with the experimental measurements obtained by del Campo et al.18 for 99.8% pure iron. In particular, the curve at 350°C, 200 h matches well with del Campo et al.’s curves between 316ʹ and 37ʺ at 480°C. Exactly how SA508’s progression might relate to that of bare iron would require further study, most likely from a kinetics approach. Both substrates should form similar oxide phases. Overall, sur- face oxidation has a significant influence on the emissivity of SA508 subjected to RPV conditions.
III.A.3.Unexposed SA508 Measured at Elevated Temperatures
Additionally, some measurements of unoxidized, mirror-finished samples were taken at elevated tempera- tures to investigate any temperature dependencies in SA508 spectral emissivity (Fig. 5). Although the sample was under a nitrogen purge during the measurement, oxidation still appears to have occurred at the higher temperatures. After measurements were sequentially taken at 100°C, 200°C, and 300°C, an additional mea- surement was taken at 100°C to check for changes that may have occurred during measurements at increased temperature. Some change was observed between  the  two 100°C measurements, implying that additional oxi- dation effects occurred during measurement due to
Fig. 4. Emissivity measurements  of SA508 air-oxidized at Te = 350°C. Reference is mirror-polished, unoxidized SA508.
Fig. 5. Mirror-polished, unexposed SA508 measured at elevated temperatures. Tm* indicates the second 100°C measurement. The first 100°C measurement was taken before measurements at 200°C and 300°C while the second 100°C measurement was taken after. The large increase between the two 100°C measurements indicates oxidation occurred during measurement.
residual oxygen or water vapor. The effect of optical shifts (or lack thereof) could not be isolated.
Generally, metals exhibit spectral emissivity having some temperature dependence.25 This has been observed experimentally in the case of SS-304 (Ref. 13) and is observed for the case of Grade 91 in this study  (discussed  in Sec. III.B.3). In both cases, a slight increase is observed across all measured wavelengths. It is expected thata similar effect should occur for SA508. However, the influence of temperature will be very small compared to the influence of oxidation on the spectral emissivity of SA508 in RPV conditions.
III.B.Spectral Directional Measurements of Grade 91
Similar roughening conditions yield similar increases in emissivity between SA508 and Grade 91. Because of increased chromium content, Grade 91 exhibits much greater oxidation resistance than SA508.
III.B.1.Roughened Grade 91 Measured at Room Temperature
As with SA508, a few Grade 91 samples were sub- jected to a few roughening conditions. Only three condi- tions were evaluated this time since trends from roughening were expected to be the same between the  two alloys. Results are given in Fig. 6. Once again, the shot-peened sample features a significantly different spectral   emissivity   profile;   however,   the   roughness
Fig. 6. Emissivity measurements of roughened Grade 91 (unoxidized). Reference is mirror-polished.
features of this sample exceed that of a typical RPV surface. Roughness is not expected to be a significant factor for the emissivity of a Grade 91 RPV surface.
III.B.2.Thermally Exposed Grade 91 Measured at Room Temperature
Grade 91 was subjected to temperatures exceeding the RPV design-basis conditions for a short duration. Nonetheless, the oxidation observed in the Grade 91 sample was relatively limited, and the difference in spec- tral emissivity between the exposed and reference sam- ples is relatively small for wavelengths above 5 µm. Results are shown in Fig. 7. The resultant spectral
Fig. 7. Emissivity measurements of Grade 91 air- oxidized at Te = 750°C for 5 h. Reference is mirror- polished, unoxidized Grade 91.
emissivity curve appears to resemble that of the SA508 exposed to 350°C for 10 h and the curve of high-purity iron exposed to air at 480°C for 8 s given by del Campo et al.18 Although the temperatures and durations are very different, the progression of the emissivity appears to behave similarly to SA508 and high-purity iron.
Based on the data from Figs. 2 and 7, Grade 91 will experience less oxidation than SA508 and will have  much smaller emissivity. If a conservatively bounded value for the spectral coefficient is needed for the pur- poses of heat transfer simulation, it would be safer to simply assume that a Grade 91 RPV maintains initial spectral emissivity throughout operation. The real values are likely to be higher, but more work (using long-term- exposure durations) would be required to achieve a clearer picture.
III.B.3.Unexposed Grade 91 Measured at Elevated Temperatures
Grade 91 has much greater  oxidation  resistance  than SA508, and so, elevated temperature measure-  ments could be pursued successfully. In Fig. 8, the second measurement at 100°C shows little deviation  from the first measurement taken at 100°C. This indi- cates that no major lasting changes occurred to the sample during high-temperature reflectance measure- ments. The variations in  the  spectra  can  be  attributed to slight temperature-dependent variations in the optical constants of the bare substrate material. This is
Fig. 8. Mirror-polished, unexposed Grade 91 measured  at elevated temperatures. Tm* indicates the second 100°C measurement. The first 100°C measurement was taken before measurements at 200°C and 300°C while the second 100°C measurement was taken after.
consistent with Rolling and Funai’s observations for  AISI 304 stainless steel.13
The absolute difference between the first measurement taken at Tm =  100°C  to  the  second  measurement  at  Tm* = 100°C is calculated for both the Grade 91 and SA508 samples that underwent elevated temperature mea- surement. The results are plotted in Fig. 9. The uncertainty in ε(λ,θ = 10°,T) measurement is assumed to be ±0.03, as discussed in Sec. IV.A. In the case of Grade 91, the difference between the first and second measurements is entirely within the measurement uncertainty across all measured wavelengths. However, in the case of SA508, the difference between the first and second measurements is outside the measurement uncertainty for λ < 5 µm.
IV.DISCUSSION
IV.A.Uncertainty and Sources of Error
Uncertainty of the SOC-100 HDR measurements taken at near-normal incidence is estimated by the manufacturer at ±0.03 reflectance units for diffuse materials and at ±0.01 reflectance units for specular materials. A new gold reference coupon was acquired from Surface Optics Corporation shortly before the experiment and was used to calibrate the system. An
Fig. 9. Difference of first ε(λ,θ = 10 deg, Tm = 100°C) measurement (taken before elevated temperature mea- surements at Tm = 200°C and Tm = 300°C) to second  ε(λ,θ = 10 deg, Tm* = 100°C) measurement (taken after elevated temperature measurements) for SA508 and Grade 91 mirror-polished samples. The difference between the SA508 measurements is outside of measure- ment uncertainty from λ < 5 µm.
uncertainty of ±0.03 is assumed for the spectral emis- sivities presented in this study.
An Omega CN 8502TC-R1-R2-C2 temperature control- ler was used with an Aerorod BXX06B21-4T heater during elevated temperature measurements. The thermal resistance between the stage and the sample surface is neglected since the sensitivity of the sample emissivity to temperature should be quite low according to the small differences visible in Fig. 8. In previous work, for a few measured samples, output from this facility is directly compared to output from other facilities under similar measurement conditions.26
Good agreement is observed.
IV.B.Calculation of SA508 Total Directional Emissivity
Total directional emissivity is calculated from the directional spectral emissivity data. Total directional emissivity is defined from the spectral directional emis- sivity according to Eq. (2):@2
@It is not possible to measure individual spectral values across  all  wavelengths  of  light,  and  so, ε(θ,T) cannot be perfectly calculated using experimen- tal data and Eq. (2). The potential discrepancy in ε(θ,T) based on the incompleteness of any experimental measurement in spectral emissivity ε(λ,θ,T) can be found by integrating the Planck distribution over the unmeasured spectral ranges. The total directional emis- sivity values of samples are calculated through numer- ical integration of the directional measurements within the wavelength bounds of measurement. This gives an approximation at the actual value:@3
Eλ λ; T dλ
λ1
Next, the lower theoretical bound is determined. The minimum that the value could possibly be would be if the rest of
the unmeasured spectral emissivity equaled 0, according to Eq. (4):@4The upper theoretical bound is determined. The maximum that the value could possibly be would be if the rest of the unmeasured spectral emissivity equaled 1, which is expressed in Eq. (5):@5
Using the acquired experimental data, this evaluation is performed from 260°C to 350°C. Optical shifts are neglected, and Planck shifts are accounted. The center line values are based on Eq. (3) while the lower and upper bounds of the shaded regions are determined by Eqs. (4) and (5), respectively. Figure 10 uses the data from the samples oxidized at
Fig. 10. Calculated total directional emissivity of SA508 for various oxidation durations (θ = 10 deg). Values are calculated using Eqs. (3), (4), and (5) on data from samples oxidized at Te = 350°C for various exposure times. Reference is mirror-polished, unoxidized SA508.
Te = 350°C and measured at room temperature. Practically, Fig. 10 answers the question: Neglecting optical shifts, what would ε(θ = 10°,T) of the experimen- tally oxidized surfaces be at different temperatures?
The progression of the calculated total directional emis- sivity from T = 350°C across exposure time is given  in  Fig. 11. Large increases occur initially before approaching a limit that likely lies around 0.8 (based on the 600°C expo- sure data). Upper and lower bounds are represented by bars. Here, the T used in Eqs. (3), (4), and (5) is equal to Te.
The evaluation is also performed using the 5-h 600°C results and then on the data gathered by Cao et al. at 500°C
Fig. 11. Calculated ε(θ = 10 deg, T = 350°C) of SA508 samples through various points of air exposure. Values are calculated using Eqs. (3), (4), and (5) on data from samples oxidized at Te = 350°C for various exposure times. Points and bars are calculated using Eqs. (3), (4), and (5).
for 4 h and 700°C for 5 h. Figures 12 and 13 represent a heavily oxidized SA508 surface whose emissivity has likely reached a steady state. The data gathered in this study are used in Fig. 12 while the data gathered by Cao et al. are used in Fig. 13.
There are two possible reasons for the minor difference between our results and those of Cao et al. The first immediate reason would be a difference in the spectral range between the two experiments. Our study includes longer wavelengths (λ > 10 µm) where emissivity coeffi- cients are significantly smaller (see Fig. 2). Second, emis- sivity was measured at temperatures of 500°C and 700°C in the work of Cao et al. while our measurements were taken at room temperature. Minor temperature dependencies in the optical constants of the metal and oxide can influence
Fig. 12. Estimated total directional emissivity of heavily oxidized SA508 (θ = 10 deg). Values are calculated using Eqs. (3), (4), and (5) from reflectance data of the sample oxidized at 600°C for 5 h. Experimental data were acquired at room temperature.
Fig. 13. Estimated total normal emissivity of heavily oxidized SA508. Values are calculated using Eqs. (3), (4), and (5) on the  data collected by Cao et al. for (a) the sample oxidized at 500°C for 4 h and (b) the sample oxidized at 700°C for 5 h. Experimental data were acquired in situ at 500°C and in situ at 700°C, respectively.
emissivity. Although this study could not isolate the tem- perature dependency in SA508, some dependency was observed in Grade 91 in Sec. III.B.3 and may occur in SA508 at high temperature. In both studies,  the range of  2 to 9 μm was included. Within this range, our data are slightly below the results of Cao et al., on average. Although the work of Cao et al. was measured at normal incidence while this study was measured at 10-deg inci- dence, this should have little to no significance. Either way, the total emissivity values calculated from this study lie well within the lower bounds from the values calculated using Cao et al.’s results according to Eqs. (3), (4), and (5).
IV.C.Calculation of Grade 91 Total Directional Emissivity
Three different criteria were evaluated for Grade 91. In the case of roughness, significant differences in emis- sivity coefficients were observed only after samples attained a roughness value greater than  that  which  would be expected of an operating RPV. In the case of oxidation, Grade 91 was exposed to conditions exceeding that of design-basis transient scenarios for Gen IV RPVs, and an increase in coefficients was observed at lower wavelengths. In the case of temperature, a small increase in emissivity across wavelengths was observed.
Based on the data, only small increases in calculated total directional emissivity were observed in Grade 91 after 750°C exposure. We speculate that the emissivity coeffi- cients for a RPV composed of Grade 91 will not experience the large increases observed with SA508 through steady- state operation. The integrated exposed and unexposed results, neglecting optical shifts, are presented in Fig. 14.
As temperatures vary, the Planck distribution will also adjust, and so, the relative contribution of emission within a given spectral range to total emission will also vary. At
Fig. 14. Estimated total directional emissivity of Grade 91 (θ = 10 deg). Values are calculated using Eqs. (3), (4), and (5) on the data collected for each sample used. The exposed sample was subjected to Te = 750°C air for 5 h before measured at room temperature. The reference samples were unexposed and mirror-finished.
higher temperatures, spectral coefficients at shorter wave- lengths carry greater relative significance than what they would at lower temperatures due to the Planck shifts. Based on the work of del Campo et al.,18 as well as the work shown in this study, minor oxidation in iron or iron-based alloys greatly increases spectral emissivity at short wave- lengths while leaving spectral emissivity at larger wave- lengths relatively unchanged. This pattern is visible in Fig. 7, where initial oxidation yields a dramatic increase in emissivity at wavelengths below 5 µm but emissivity at longer wavelengths remains largely unchanged.
The preferential shape of spectral emissivity results in a total emissivity that varies across temperature. In the case of unoxidized steels, the tendency of the spectral emissivity to be greater at shorter wavelengths results in a total emissivity that increases with temperature. As
temperatures rise, the Planck distribution will shift to favor shorter wavelengths, where higher spectral emissiv- ity coefficients are located. The preferential profiles in Fig. 7 lead to the temperature-dependent trends demon- strated in Fig. 14. Unoxidized steel maintains a somewhat preferential spectral profile while lowly oxidized low- alloy steel or lowly oxidized iron maintains a very pre- ferential spectral profile. We expect Grade 91 to maintain a preferential spectral emissivity profile in reactor envir- onments and that the temperature dependence arising from Planck shifts will be noticeable, as is the case in  Fig. 14.
Optical shifts have a small impact on the total emis- sivity coefficient of Grade 91. This impact can be neglected for shorthand approximation, but if a greater sense of accuracy is desired, two potential options could be pursued. Optical shift accounting can be accomplished through further measurement in situ at elevated tempera- tures or potentially through the application of physical models. Drude Theory has found some success predicting values for SS-304 (Ref. 27). Other methods of deriving optical constants for metals exist, and a pertinent review of some can be found in the thesis of Teordorescu.28
IV.D.Approximation of Total Hemispherical Emissivity
It is common practice to input a single total hemi-  spherical emissivity coefficient into heat transfer calcula- tions. While the experimental data were obtained at a fixed angle near normal incidence, normal  emissivity  can roughly represent hemispherical emissivity under certain circumstances. The relationship between normal emissivity and hemispherical emissivity is discussed in Sec. 3.2.1.3 of Ref. 25. In the case of dielectrics, hemi- spherical emissivity tends to behave similarly to normal emissivity (0.94 < ε/εN <1.03 while 1 > ň > 6) (Ref. 25), while in the case of metals, hemispherical emissivity tends to exceed normal emissivity  for  polished  metals as long as normal emissivity  is less than  0.5, as  would be the case for steels.
For conservative heat transfer simulations where near-infrared and mid-infrared optical constants are valued roughly within the aforementioned ranges, we suggest that a total hemispherical emissivity could potentially be conservatively estimated by the total directional emissivity at 10-deg incidence. To reiterate, several conditions must be satisfied for this estimation   to be valid. First, the directional emissivity at 10-deg incidence must behave similarly to normal emissivity (0-deg incidence). Second, if the surface behaves as a dielectric, the refractive index should lie roughly
between 1 > ň > 6 through a large portion of the near- infrared and mid-infrared for εN(T) ~ ε(T). Otherwise, if the surface behaves as a metal or a lossy material, the normal emissivity should be less than 0.5 for the hemi- spherical emissivity to be greater than the normal emis- sivity. If the hemispherical emissivity is greater than the normal emissivity, then the normal emissivity can be  used as a conservatively low value in place of total hemispherical emissivity in heat transfer calculations in the case of metals. We suspect that for the samples measured, that total directional emissivity can represent total hemispherical emissivity, but to thoroughly con- firm, either more work must be performed on optical constant behavior, or direct measurements comparing directional and hemispherical values must be taken.
V.CONCLUSION
Spectral directional emissivities of two RPV candi- date materials were evaluated against multiple dependen- cies of interest. Oxidation and roughness were evaluated for SA508 steel while oxidation, roughness, and tempera- ture were evaluated for Grade 91 steel.
Two different criteria were successfully evaluated for SA508. In the case of roughness, significant differences in emissivity coefficients were observed only after sam- ples attained a roughness value greater than that which would be expected of an operating RPV. In the case of oxidation, SA508 was exposed to temperatures exceeding steady-state LWRs but for a shorter duration than long- term operation. Samples readily oxidized, and spectral emissivity profiles resembled the  progression  reported in previous literature for iron. An attempt was made at isolating the effects of temperature, however, the surface experienced additional oxidation during measurement. It is expected that the temperature effects should be similar to the effects seen in other steels. In the case of SA508, it is expected that roughness and temperature should have little relative influence in SA508’s emissivity in operating conditions while oxidation should have a significant role. Using the data gathered in this study as well as data from recent literature, total directional emissivities were calculated  with  upper   and   lower theoretical  bounds. A total hemispherical emissivity above 0.8 for an untreated SA508 RPV may be too generous for conser- vative heat transfer simulations; many of the emissivities measured in this study were much less. For long-term operation, total hemispherical emissivity likely lies between 0.6 and 0.85 if it can be assumed that hemisphe- rical values behave similarly to normal and near-normal
values. These values will be strongly influenced by oxi- dation, and so, higher operation temperatures that pro- mote oxidation will mean higher emissivities. Temperature-dependent shifts in the Planck distribution, or Planck shifts, never affect spectral emissivity but do directly affect total emissivity. These will have some significance as long as there is variation in emissivity across wavelengths, as would be the case for the 350°C SA508 data before 100 h of exposure (and for Grade 91 in general). However, in the case of a heavily oxidized surface, the effects of Planck shifts will be negligible, as indicated in Figs. 12 and 13. Temperature-dependent shifts of the optical constants of the material, or optical shifts, may indeed occur and could possibly explain the differences between our data and the data of Cao et al. within the range of 2 to 9 µm. However, this difference is relatively small (~10%) compared to the overall effect of oxidation.
In the case of Grade 91, it is expected that roughness
should also have little influence on emissivity during oper- ating conditions and that oxidation will have far less of a role than in the case of SA508. Optical shifts have been observed, but these also appear to be relatively minor. For a convenient conservatively low approximation of the spec- tral emissivities of the RPV surface, it is reasonable to assume values equal to that of an unoxidized, as-received surface at room temperature since the reviewed factors of roughness, oxidation, and temperature did not have drastic impacts in this study. In the case of SA508, the increase in spectral emissivity values is quite dramatic due to oxida- tion; however, this is clearly not the case for Grade 91. If more-precise values are desired for Grade 91, optical shifts should be accounted for followed by long-term oxidation and finally roughness.
Planck shifts are reasonably significant for total emissivity of a Grade 91 surface. Neglecting optical shifts, the total emissivity of an unoxidized Grade 91 surface at 600°C should be about 20% greater than the total emissivity for the same surface at 300°C. Any sur- face oxidation of Grade 91 that occurs within the realm of relevant RPV conditions should also increase the signifi- cance of Planck shifts. Optical shifts between 25°C and 300°C result in noticeable but minor effects on total emissivity of Grade 91.
Acknowledgments
This research is supported by the U.S. Department of Energy Nuclear Energy University Program contract DE-NE0000743.
ORCID
J. L. King  http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3679-5488
