<title>A practical challenge-response authentication mechanism for a Programmable Logic Controller control system with one-time password in nuclear power plants</title>
<Affiliation>a.Korea Atomic Energy Institute, ICT Department, Republic of Korea
b.FairApp, Republic of Korea
c.Department of Graduate School of Information Security, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea</Affiliation>
<author>JunYoung Son , Sangkyun Noh , JongGyun Choi , Hyunsoo Yoon </author>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Energy and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>ELSEVIER </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2019.05.012</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2019.05.012</URL>
a b s t r a c t
Instrumentation and Control (I&C) systems of nuclear power plants (NPPs) have been continuously digitalized. These systems have a critical role in the operation of nuclear facilities by functioning as the brain of NPPs. In recent years, as cyber security threats to NPP systems have increased, regulatory and policy-related organizations around the world, including the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) and Korea Institute of Nuclear Nonproliferation and Control (KINAC), have emphasized the importance of nuclear cyber security by publishing cyber security guidelines and recommending cyber security requirements for NPP facilities. As described in NRC Reg- ulatory Guide (Reg) 5.71 and KINAC RS015, challenge response authentication should be applied to the critical digital I&C system of NPPs to satisfy the cyber security requirements. There have been no cases in which the most robust response authentication technology like challenge response has been developed and applied to nuclear I&C systems. This paper presents a challenge response authentication mechanism for a Programmable Logic Controller (PLC) system used as a control system in the safety system of the Advanced Power Reactor (APR) 1400 NPP.
Keywords:
Nuclear power plant I&C
Regulatory guide PLC
Cyber security requirements Challenge response
One time password Authentication
1.Introduction
As cyber security attacks on national infrastructure facilities are gradually increasing, preparation for cyber security attacks is becoming more important. As the number of cyber security attacks increases and the technology of the attacks continuously develops and changes becoming more sophisticated, authorities fear that advanced cyber security attacks will have more inﬂuence on na- tional infrastructure facilities. In fact, cyber-attacks such as Stuxnet have succeeded in attacking Nuclear Power Plants (NPPs), and these cyber-attacks have been quite diverse. For example, in 2014, a malicious code-based attack threatened the Monju nuclear power plant in Japan; in 2014, the computer system of a Korean NPP was threatened by hacking; and in 2015, there was a cyber-attack on the Ukrainian power grid. German NPPs were attacked by a computer virus. Hackers ‘likely’ compromised the UK energy control system. And recently, the US government has warned of possible cyber- attacks on the energy sector including nuclear facilities. NPPs are among the most important facilities in the national infrastructure; thus, countermeasures against cyber security attacks are becoming even more important. Recently, instrument control (I&C) systems, which act as a brain in NPPs, have continuously been digitalized, increasing the possibility of an attack on the cyber security. Reﬂecting these recent changes, regulatory and policy-related in- stitutions around the world, such as the International Atomic En- ergy Agency (IAEA), the Nuclear Energy Agency (IAEA) [3], the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) [1,2], and the Korean Nu- clear Nonproliferation Control Institute (KINAC) [4,5], have emphasized the importance of nuclear cyber security guidelines and have recommended cyber security requirements for NPP fa- cilities. NRC Regulatory Guide (Reg) 5.71 [2] and KINAC 015 [4] require that challenge-response authentication technology is used as a cyber security requirement at NPPs. The challenge- response authentication method is an essential protocol that en- hances the safety of security authentication. There are many methods that can perform challenge-response authentication. In this paper, a one-time password authentication method was developed for nuclear control systems and tested in a simulation. No strongest response authentication technologies, such as chal- lenge response, have been developed and applied to a NPP I&C system. This paper describes a method for developing a challenge response authentication mechanism and then using it in the POSAFE-Q Programmable Logic Controller (PLC) system used in the Advanced Power Reactor (APR) 1400 NPP [7e9]. The proposed approach is going to be a reference model for the development and application of the challenge-response authentication mechanism, and it is expected that suppliers, designers and operators of NPPS can satisfy the challenge-response authentication technology requirement with this method proposed in this paper.
2.Related works
2.1.Nuclear cyber security regulatory process concept
The overall summary scheme for nuclear cyber security regu- lations including Secure Development Operational Environment (SDOE) [1] and Cyber Security Plan (CSP) [2] regulatory inspections are shown in Fig. 1. The CSP should be planned and made to conform Reg. 5.71 [2]. The SDOE regulates the impact of inadvertent access and undesirable behavior from the point of view of impact on the safety system of NPPs. The main requirements relating to the technical and operational aspects of cybersecurity are regulated by Reg. 5.71. The nuclear licensee should submit the CSP prior to applying for an Operational License (OL) and conﬁrm the cyber security requirements for operation. Reg. 5.71, “CYBER SECURITY PROGRAMS FOR NUCLEAR FACILITIES,” issued by the NRC describes challenge-response authentication as explained in section B.4.2 User Identiﬁcation and Authentication, “implementing the stron- gest possible challenge-response authentication mechanism within a scenario, as supported by the application.” RS015 issued by KINAC also requires the challenge-response authentication as described in section 1.4.1. E. 3) Use the strongest application program based challenge-response authentication. Cyber security regulatory re- quirements are essential conditions that must be satisﬁed by the operator of a nuclear power plant. Operators and related organi- zations of the NPPs should pass a review and regulation process by complying with regulatory requirements to obtain an operational
license and should meet the requirements through ongoing regu- latory and periodic audits on operations after receiving approval for operation. There have been no cases of technological applications, development, and research for the challenge-response authenti- cation mechanism in NPPs. In the general IT environment, challenge-response technology is an essential mechanism to enhance the certiﬁcation of important systems. For nuclear sys- tems, the most important improvement among the critical in- frastructures of NPPS, recently, has been enhancing cyber security, which is essential to improve the level of security, by applying the technology required by regulatory agencies. Because there is no experience with developing and using challenge response tech- nology in NPPS in the past, presenting how to apply it in a given system could be valuable research for improving nuclear cyber security.
2.2.Challenge-response authentication
An attack potential for the use of the authentication feature is that the password is used repeatedly. When repeatedly used authentication passwords are eavesdropped, the authentication system cannot determine whether the actual user is entering the password or an attacker is providing the password. In general, password authentication could be hacked by various attack types including dictionary attack, brute force attack, phishing, social en- gineering, malware or virus, guess, ofﬂine cracking, or rainbow table attack. A technique to prevent these vulnerabilities is a challenge-response authentication mechanism [12]. The technique is a protocol that requires one party to present a question (“chal- lenge”) and the other party to provide a valid response (“response”) for authentication shown in Fig. 2. There are several types of challenge-response systems. One of the algorithms implemented by the mechanism is typically a one-time password (OTP) authentication method. The method is a mechanism in which a server generates an arbitrary number through a random number generation and sends the value to a client, and the client generates the OTP with the value and authenticates with the value that it replies to.
2.3.Targeting system
Korea's nuclear power plants have been developed as the APR 1400. The basic design of the APR 1400 consists of a Man Machine Interface System which includes a control room and digital I&C system for improving operational reliability shown in Fig. 3 [10,11]. Because the nuclear systems have been digitalized, one can operate the advanced power plant, and the efﬁciency and reliability are increased. It is also important to apply cyber security to technology control that uses digitalized equipment. In this paper, the target system is POSAFE-Q PLC, and it is used in safety systems such as the Engineered Safety Features Component Control System (ESF-CCS)
Fig. 1. NPP's cyber security regulatory framework.	Fig. 2. Otp challenge-response.
Fig. 3.  POSAFE-Q PLC in APR1400.
of NPP facilities such as Shinhanul 1,2 and Shingori 5,6 which are planned to be operated as APR 1400 [7e9]. The target PLC can simulate, download, and develop the application programs through the pSET-II program on Engineering Working Station (EWS).
2.4.Targeting functions
In this paper, a challenge-response enhancement tool was developed to satisfy the cyber security requirements for password authentication, which was used for the target PLC operation. Two password authentication processes are used for the pSET-II pro- gram and PLC interworking, 1) pSET-II program start point and 2) PLC connection point from EWS as shown in Fig. 4. This paper proposes a developed tool that applies a method satisfying the challenge-response requirement speciﬁed in the regulatory docu- ments for two password authentication processes.
2.5.Possible password attacks
The attack methods for password authentication is as follows [ [13,15]]: Brute Force Attack, Dictionary Attack, Shoulder Surﬁng, Replay Attack, Phishing Attacks, Key Loggers, Video Recording
Attack. The targeted password authentication 1) Password authentication for pSET-II program start 2) Password authentica- tion for pSET-II to PLC connection. Currently, the two password authentication functions use a 6-digit password, and the functions are not protected against above attacks. Therefore, it is necessary to apply the enhanced authentication scheme such as the challenge- response scheme.
3.Proposed methodology
System designers and operators of NPPs develop the applica- tions needed for the plant if the program source for the PLC and pSET-II is not released. In this case, this paper proposes the method to apply the OTP mechanism through application programming development. In order to implement challenge-response authen- tication using the OTP mechanism for two password authentication cases described in 2.3, the following contents should be analyzed. For the password authentication of the pSET-II, the program start and close services should be analyzed on the OS in the EWS envi- ronment where the pSET-II program is used. Additionally, the authenticated password should be authenticated before imple- menting the OTP authentication. Password authentication between
Fig. 4. Targeted functions: Password authentications.
pSET-II and PLC should manage the authentication service of the pSET-II program and analyze the packet information of the serial communication between pSET-II and PLC so that the OTP algorithm can operate. An overview for the overall process of the proposed method is shown in Fig. 5. To demonstrate the OTP challenge- response mechanism, the following four programs were devel- oped: 1) Serial Communication Test 2) Certify 3) pCERT 4) pKey.
3.1.
EWS to PLC communication
Most of the critical infrastructure systems, including the PLC described in this paper, are not released or are unknown such as imported or legacy system. In such a case, it is possible to accom- plish the objective of analyzing the vulnerability or implementing the desired function by revering the currently using interface. The
Fig. 5.  Overview of the proposed method.
Fig. 6.  pSET-II Execute Authentication Process.
Connection between the EWS and PLC uses RS232C communica- tion. After the RS232C is physically established between the EWS and the PLC, if the password authentication is successful after setting the COM in the pSET-II program, the pSET-II and the PLC are connected, and the pSET-II can perform various functions such as monitoring and downloading. A Serial Communication Test tool was used to collect and analyze packets when monitoring and downloading, and password authentication used the pSET-II pro- gram and PLC serial communication. We analyzed the communi- cation data between PLC and the pSET-II by analyzing RS-232C drive function in EWS OS environment. Through these analyzes, the desired challenge-response information could be transmitted and received between the pSET-II and the PLC to implement desired functions.
3.2.pSET-II start and login authentication
The pSET-II program is a program for application program development, debugging and monitoring functions for POSAFE-Q PLC operation [16e18]. The pSET-II is a tool for generating executing programs to be executed on the POSAFE-Q PLC. The application program is created, compiled, transformed to the executable program in pSET-II. The created executable program is downloaded to the POSAFE-Q PLC through RS232C serial
Fig. 7.  OTP  programing  with C# language.
Fig. 8. pSET-II to PLC connection authentication process.
communication and implemented. It is a program with the same function as the TIA portal used in Siemens PLC [14]. To develop the pCERT program, OTP authentication should be performed to com- plete the login after password authentication. The pSET-II program is generally run in the Windows OS environment, and all program services could be checked by the Microsoft spy tool [20]. If API service function's speciﬁc name is realized by the tool, when the function of the pSET-II program is executed, we could control the service with Windows OS API. The found speciﬁc name of the
service is “POSAFE-Q Software Engineering Tool II”. The pSET-II program password authentication function is controlled by customizing method in the pCERT program. The pCERT program manages all the password authentication services of the pSET-II program and completes the authentication only through the OTP  of the pCERT program shown in Fig. 6. It prevents deletion and manipulation of the pCERT program from unauthorized commands, so as not to bypass the pCERT program, and provides the log messages and the multitasking function and authentication status
Fig. 9.  Certify module development & download.
message regarding the authentication services. Multitasking func- tion is required to provide individual authentication function for each pSET-II even when multiple pSET-II programs are executed simultaneously, but to simultaneously log all other pSET-II pro- grams when authenticated logins are present. OTP has many methodologies. Of them, the OTP technology should be possible to be applied to the targeted authentication functions:1) pSET pro- gram start 2) pSET-II to PLC connection. Therefore, the pCERT program performs OTP 2-step authentication for the service attempting to log in with the original password authentication, and the OTP is applied according to the Request for Comments (RFC) 4426 standard algorithm [6]. The OTP process can provide the generated key value through the pKEY program. The key value is updated every 30 s using the OS time information, and the gener- ated key value is operated as a one-time password which is not regenerated shown in Fig. 7.
OTP's key value generation algorithm implemented in pKey generates 6 digits. This algorithm refers to the contents of Section
5.4 described on page 7 of the RFC 4226 standard [6]. Although this algorithm is speciﬁed in the standard document, the method and communication mechanism to implement should be coded ﬁt to  the targeting device and development environment. The source code of the pCERT, which veriﬁes the key value of pKey, is shown in Fig. 7.
3.3.Authentication for connection between pSET-II and PLC
If the POSAFE-Q button is clicked in pSET-II and then, a login is started, it tries to connect to the PLC. When the connection with the PLC is tried, the authentication value and the veriﬁed output value are transmitted and received using the RS232C communication. If the ﬁrmware code of the PLC is not disclosed, the RS232C communication drive function and the intermediate value of the communication are analyzed to realize the protocol between the pSET-II and the PLC for ﬁnding control command to receive and transmit the wanted data packets. The pCERT program manages the service which tries to connect from pSET-II to PLC, and after the OTP authentication is completed with the Certify Module of the PLC, it is successfully connected with the PLC. The OTP key value used here is the value of pKEY shown in Fig. 8.
When the OTP authentication value is transmitted to the PLC, the authentication value is veriﬁed by the Certify Module which is downloaded to the PLC prior to the OTP authentication process, and the veriﬁcation result is transmitted to the PSET-II, and the connection is established or not according to the result. The application program in the PLC is named Task. The ﬁrmware is operated on the PLC, and the pSET-II program can be linked to develop the task application program. In addition, the pSET-II program provides a debugging tool by monitoring and obtaining status information from application programs running on the PLC. The developed application could be download to the PLC with pSET-II. As shown in Fig. 9, the Certify Module with two inputs and one output is activated when the user completes the downloading process to the PLC as the initializing authentication environment.
An important issue here is that the PLC must authenticate the OTP value. In order to verify the value of the OTP, the Certify Module should be executed in the PLC. User tasks that operate as PLC application programs can be developed on the PSET-II program. It provides various development environments, and it is possible to develop with the C language [19] shown in Fig. 10. Due to the features of the Certify Module algorithm, the C language could be used to effectively develop algorithms using its libraries.
The developed Certify Module must be downloaded to the PLC system as a user task before OTP authentication is performed shown in Fig. 10. There are two values that should be transmitted
Fig. 10. Certify user task source code.
when the pSET-II program tries to authenticate with the OTP: 1) system time information and 2) input code which is the authenti- cation key value inserted into the pSET-II program. The key gen- eration algorithm of the OTP generates the key value by using the system time of the EWS as the seed input. The PLC should be able to generate the OTP authentication value by sending the system time
Fig. 11. Certify process modeling.
of the EWS due to the lack of its own timer function. The authen- tication values are generated by the current seed, and both forward and backward from the time step of the seed are compared with the input code, and if it is the same, the authentication is successful, and if not, the authentication fails shown in Fig. 11.
4.Conclusion
As the importance of nuclear cyber security has recently emerged, nuclear regulatory agencies such as the NRC and KINAC have released cyber security regulatory requirements and are recommending the implementation of cyber security re- quirements. These regulatory requirements require the use of challenge-response to enhance authentication. Until now,  there  has been no application or development of a Challenge-Response mechanism, which is recommended by the cyber security regu- latory requirements for the critical digital assets of NPPs. It is very difﬁcult to actually apply nuclear cyber security requirements to critical systems in nuclear power plants. Because it is necessary to research knowledge of cyber security and knowledge of nuclear system. Infrastructure systems such as nuclear power plants are more difﬁcult to research because they use unreleased protocols and contents. Thus, nuclear-related organizations have not  found  a way to apply the challenge-response technology to the critical control system like this paper's PLC by nuclear cyber re- quirements. On the other hand, in order to solve these technical limitations and problems, the research in this paper  developed new mechanisms and tools that could actually be used as Challenge-Response technology for existing authentication for POSAFE-Q PLC. Through this development, this paper introduced a technology that could satisfy practical cyber security re- quirements. Challenge-Response authentication technology is a mechanism required to enhance authentication process  in  the  ﬁeld of cybersecurity and is a technology that has to be applied to important information and equipment. For the most important of the national infrastructure facilities, such as NPPs, this authenti- cation technology must be implemented to strengthen the cybersecurity's access control. By analyzing and using the tech- niques introduced in this paper, it is expected that the process to strengthen nuclear cybersecurity will gradually be expanded. In addition, this paper's proposed mechanism could be developed and applied to a large number of nuclear digital assets. Based on the contents of this research, this paper is expected to provide guidance on how to apply the challenge-response mechanism to nuclear-related organizations worldwide.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a grant from the Korea Ministry of Science and ICT, under the establishment and operation of cyber security attack response system at national nuclear facilities (Project Number: 524330-19).
