<title>Evaluation of Sudan Nuclear and Radiological Regulatory control act (2017) in light of IAEA safety standards</title>
<author>Husam Eldin H.I. Gibreel, Mustafa M.O. Ahmed, Adam K. Sam, I.I. Suliman</author>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Affiliation>a.Sudan  Atomic  Energy  Commission,  P.O.  Box  3001,  Khartoum,  Sudan
b.IAEA  Environment  Laboratories,  Radiometrics  Section,  Monaco
c.Imam  Mohammad  Ibn-Saud  Islamic  University  (IMSIU),  Physics  Department,  College  of  Science,  Committee  on  Radiation  and  Environmental  Pollution  Protection, Riyadh,  11642,  Saudi  Arabia</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2019.03.018</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2019.03.018</URL>
ABSTRACT
The objective of this study is to review Sudan's Nuclear and Radiological Regulatory Control Act (NRRCA) passed by the National Assembly on 12th January 2017. Diﬀerent elements of the Act were evaluated against the IAEA safety standards and relevant international best practices. History of national nuclear and radiological safety programs is presented. The Act covers radiation safety, nuclear security, safe guards and liability, and estab- lished the Sudanese Nuclear & Radiological Regulatory Authority (SNRRA) as an independent national regulator. It has reﬂected the obligations assumed or may be assumed by Sudan under relevant international legal in- struments. This Act as stands is intended to represent a comprehensive legal framework that will guarantee  future development of the national radiation safety and nuclear security policy for safe operation and healthy establishment of all subsequent nuclear activities. The study highlighted deﬁciencies and gabs in the legal and regulatory framework suggest amendments in areas that need improvements.
Keywords:
Nuclear law and nuclear liability     Nuclear power program in Sudan     Nuclear safety infrastructure   Nuclear science and technology     Radiation protection     Regulatory control
1.Introduction
The use of nuclear energy and technology becomes an essential part of our daily life, from disease diagnosis and cancer treatment to equipment and tools sterilization in medical ﬁeld, food and agriculture to industrial quality assurance and process control, oil explorations, electricity generation and water desalination and many other useful applications. These constitute a remarkable contribution to the welfare and prosperity of the mankind.
The World Nuclear Association in its latest report (2019), estimated that currently there are: 450 reactors (400 GWe net capacity) in op- eration worldwide, 57 reactors (62 GWe) under construction, 147 re- actors (149 GWe) in their planned stage while 337 reactors (376 GWe) are proposed (WNA, 2018). The report demonstrated clear evidence in the expansion in nuclear power programs for electricity generation. The reactor safety study prepared by the Massachusetts Institute of Tech- nology demonstrated that the risk from nuclear power plant accidents is substantially lower than the risk presented by many other industrial sources (NRC, 1975). Undesirable public perception of nuclear tech- nology is greatly aﬀected by the destructions caused by the nuclear weapons used in Hiroshima and Nagasaki. This is in addition to the
radiological impact that witnessed during Chernobyl (1986 USSR) and Fukushima Daiichi civilian nuclear power plants accidents.
Operational experiences of nuclear reactors have conﬁrmed the feasibility and reliability and safety operability of the nuclear power plants. However, investigations onto the cause of the Fukushima nu- clear accident have revealed that the failure of nuclear regulatory system in Japan was blameable for the accident (Wang and Chen, 2012a).
Although, the prime responsibility for safety rests with the oper- ating organization, the government should express its strong commit- ment by establishing and maintaining suitable framework for safety of nuclear installations (IAEA, 2011).
The Government of Sudan expressed its interest to embark on nu- clear power program with objective to meet in a timely manner the increasing demand for electricity in the country by 2030. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), necessitate establishment of nuclear regulatory framework with capabilities to thoroughly assess the risks associated with the nuclear technology and enforce deploying eﬀective control measures without unduly limiting the progress in the peaceful uses of nuclear technology (INSAG, 2008).
The development of nuclear safety infrastructure and knowledge
base, including issuance of the nuclear law and the establishment of an independent regulatory authority, is very crucial for the success of nuclear projects (INSAG, 2012). The aim of the current review is to determine the applicability, suitability and adequacy of the current legal framework for safe operation of the existing and proposed nuclear facilities and activities in Sudan.
The objective of this review is to benchmark the Sudan's 2017 nu- clear Act (Ministry of Justice Sudan, 2017) as a case study to determine its adequacy as a legal framework for safe operation of the proposed nuclear facilities and associated activities against the international standards represented by the IAEA safety standards; namely the smart eﬀorts resulted in the IAEA Handbook on Nuclear Act of 2010 (Carlton Stoiber … [et al.], 2010) supplemented by vast IAEA standards in the ﬁeld of nuclear safety (IAEA, 2006a) (IAEA, 2014) (IAEA, 2010), in addition to some international good practices (NEA/OECD, 2009) (Walker and Wellock, 2010).
1.1.National position
The Government of Sudan expressed its interest in developing a peaceful nuclear power program based on study of energy forecasting conducted with expert assistance from the IAEA under Technical Cooperation Project SUD/0/008 to support Sudan determining the optimal energy generation mix up to the year 2030, including the op- tion for electricity generation from nuclear power.
1.2.Country status with reference to relative international agreements
It is worth mentioning that Sudan issued an act on ratiﬁcation of the Statute of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA Statute) on 15th October 1957 (Ministry of Justice Sudan, 1957), and formally became IAEA member state on 17th July 1958 (IAEA, 2018), and since then, it has accepted several international legal instruments related to atomic energy business.
Sudan is either party or signatory state to many international legal instruments related to nuclear safety (Table 1), security and safeguards; the Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (signature: 09/08/1963, ratiﬁca- tion: 04/03/1966) (IAEA, 1970), Non-Proliferation of nuclear weapons (signature: 24/12/1968, ratiﬁcation: 31/10/1973) (UNODA, 2018), Sea-Bed Treaty (signature 11/02/1971) (US-Department of State,  2018), Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (signature: 10/06/ 2004, ratiﬁcation: 10/06/2004) (CTBTO, 2018), African Nuclear- Weapon-Free-Zone – Pelindaba Treaty (signature: 11/04/1996) (AU,
Table 1
Relevant international instruments to which Sudan is party.
2017), Application of safeguards in connection with the Treaty on Non- Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (with Protocol, Signature: 26/02/ 1975 In Force: 07/01/1977), Convention on Early Notiﬁcation of a Nuclear Accident (signature: 26/09/1986), Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency (signature: 26/09/1986), Convention on Nuclear Safety (signature: 20/09/1994 during the 38th IAEA General Conference), Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities (accession, 18/ 05/2000, into force 17/06/2000), and the African Regional Co-opera- tive Agreement for Research, Development and Training (acceptance, deposit: 03/09/2015, into force: 03/09/2015) (IAEA/OLA, 2018).
The government expressed its commitment to joint other relative instruments considered important for the implementation of its national nuclear projects.
1.3.Nature of the state
The Republic of the Sudan is an independent sovereign state in Africa located at 12.8628° N, 30.2176° E (GPS Coordinates) (Fig. 1). It   is a decentralized Federal country with three levels of government authorities; the national level, state level and local government level (Fig. 2).
1.4.Interim National Constitution of the republic of Sudan (2005
The Interim National Constitution of the Republic of Sudan (2005) (National Assembly, 2005) is the supreme law of the land, it deﬁnes the nature of the state, set rights, determines organizational structure of the state and encompasses the national legal system.
The constitution deﬁnes the independent national institutions and commissions and clearly delineates their exclusive legislative and ex- ecutive powers. Among these are: defence, security, borders protection, customs, civil aviation and meteorology standardization. Surprisingly, regulating nuclear safety was not among those with exclusive legisla- tive and executive powers. To promote peaceful use of nuclear tech- nology without unduly jeopardizing human and environmental safety, a strong legal backing of the nuclear regulatory control is essential. Thus it is of paramount important integrating the authority of regulating nuclear safety as part of the powers at national level whenever future amendment is announced.
1.5.National strategy for quarter of a century 2007–2031
This national strategy (Council of Ministers Sudan, 2011) empha- sized on adoption of institutional laws and regulations with the tigh- tening of control measures and auditing to ensure transparency. Also, the strategy addressed the need for development of legal and regulatory infrastructures as one of the most important challenges facing the strategy implementation.
Sudan government's desire to pursue nuclear power program was oﬃcially announced in 2007 followed by the strategy report on the preparations for the program in 2009, which was updated in 2012 (Ministry of Energy and Mining Sudan, 2009). Approving the national policy on nuclear energy developments was a signiﬁcant milestone in the country's nuclear power program.
2.The history of nuclear and radiation safety in Sudan
The School of Radiography, the predecessor of the College of Medical Radiologic Sciences at Sudan University for Sciences and Technology, was established in 1932 to meet the national needs for human resources in radiology and radiotherapy departments.
In 1971, the Ministry of Health issued the Regulation  for  the  Use  of Ionizing Radiations Act (1971) (Ministry of Justice Sudan, 1971). The act established  the  Radiation  Protection  Technical  Committee  as  a  reg-ulating body. In 1972, the Atomic Energy Committee Act 1972 was
Fig. 1. Map of Sudan  from wikimedia.org.
Fig. 2. Levels of national authorities.
issued, which established the National Atomic Energy Committee with authorities  to  promote  peaceful  uses  of  ionizing  radiation  and  under- take  suitable  measures  to  protect  human  and  the  environment  from unintended  radiation  hazards.  In  1996,  the  National  Assembly  passed the Sudan Atomic Energy Commission Act 1996, which created the Sudan Atomic Energy Commission (SAEC) (Ministry of Justice Sudan, 1996). In  response  to  the  request  of  the  Government  of  Sudan,  the  IAEA organized    and    conducted    an    appraisal    of    Sudan's    regulatory
infrastructure for radiation safety in 2005 (IAEA, 2006b). The expert mission concluded with existence of two conﬂicting Acts (the 1971 and the 1996 Acts) controlling radiation safety with two diﬀerent reg- ulatory bodies. The existence of two Acts regulating nuclear activities within the same country that are conﬂicting and often overlapping was inconsistent with the international safety standards (IAEA, 2006b). NRRCA 2017 act supersedes both 1971 & 1996 acts. The article (3) stated that the provisions of NRRCA 2017 act shall prevail upon conﬂict with any other national law.
In 2007, Sudan Atomic Energy Commission (SAEC) formed a tech- nical committee mandated to respond to the IAEA mission re- commendations and draft new comprehensive nuclear Act with the aim to establish an independent regulatory authority to control the peaceful uses of the atomic energy.
In 2010, the Minister of Science & Technology issued three decrees (13, 14, 15/2010) separated the regulatory functions from SAEC and created SNRRA as a transitional institution. At the same time the Minister formed a National Committee for Nuclear Act representing diﬀerent stakeholders, with the objective of reviewing and ﬁnalizing the drafted Nuclear Act taking into account the recommendations of the IAEA appraisal mission, the relevant IAEA standards and international legal instruments in the ﬁeld of nuclear power development.
3.National nuclear safety policy
In the preamble of the convention on nuclear safety, the contracting parties  expressed  their  recognition  that  “the  Convention  entails  a  com- mitment  to  the  application  of  fundamental  safety  principles  for  nuclear installations”1(IAEA, 1994). It worth mentioning that Sudan is a signa- tory  state,  nevertheless,  it  is  yet  to  develop  the  nuclear  safety  policy, however, the issuance of the nuclear law comes among the government eﬀorts to establish national safety policy (IAEA, 2010).
The adoption of the IAEA Fundamental Safety Principles will facil- itate the application of international safety standards and ensure greater harmony and consistency between the safety arrangements in diﬀerent States. It is, therefore, desirable that all States adhere to and advocate these principles (IAEA, 2006a). The commitment for exclusive peaceful use of nuclear energy is declared at diﬀerent levels of the government.
4.National nuclear power program
Article IV of the treaty on the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons required  parties  to  cooperate  in  the  development  of  peaceful  nuclear energy applications with special considerations to developing countries “the  fullest  possible  exchange  of  equipment,  materials  and  scientiﬁc  and technological information for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy … with due consideration  for  the  needs  of  the  developing  areas  of  the  world”2  (IAEA, 1970).  Sudan  as  developing  country  party  to  the  treaty  is  highly  re- cognizing  the  importance  of  international  cooperation  in  the  ﬁeld  of nuclear energy.
On 24th November 2017, the Government of the Republic of Sudan and the Government of the Russian Federation signed a Cooperation Agreement on Use of Atomic Energy for Peaceful Purposes.
On 14th November 2013, the government of the Republic of Sudan and the People's Republic of China signed bilateral agreement for co- operation in the ﬁeld of peaceful uses of nuclear energy (Goverment of Sudan and China, 2013).
Sudan Atomic Energy Commission signed Memoranda of Understanding with the China Atomic Energy Institute (CAEI) (SAEC/ CAEI, 2010) in 17/09/2010 for cooperation in establishing nuclear research reactors, and with the Research & Development Center for Innovations (RDCI) (SAEC/RDCI, 2013) of Russia in 19/12/2013 for cooperation in establishing a nuclear research center in Sudan, all these eﬀorts are exclusive to peaceful applications.
In line with the IAEA milestones for new comer countries to develop and sustain suitable nuclear power program infrastructure, and to create nuclear energy program implementing organization3 (NEPIO) (IAEA, 2009), The Ministry of Electricity & Dams (MED), the pre- decessor of the Ministry of Water Resources Irrigation and Electricity (MWRIE), has established the Nuclear Energy Generation Directorate (NEGD) under direct supervision of the MWRE's Undersecretary to undertake the functions of the NEPIO (Ministry of Energy and Mining Sudan, 2009). The NEGD with the assistance of national and interna- tional experts has prepared tender documents for conducting the fea- sibility study, selection of suitable technology for Sudan's ﬁrst NPP, siting and preparation of the bid invitation speciﬁcations (BIS) besides its active involvement in drafting the national nuclear Act. NEGD has no separate budget and is totally relying on the regular budget of the MWRE, so the provision of funds to ﬁnance some of its activities that fall outside the umbrella of MWRE is not possible. Moreover, the cur- rent position of the NEGD within the Ministry will not enable it to exert authority over other governmental institutions to conduct its mission. Knowingly that the success of the NEPIO will depend on the strength of the government's commitment (IAEA, 2009), therefore, it is highly re- commended that the designation of the NEPIO should come from a high level in the government to reﬂect strong commitment.
Although, there is no formal national policy on nuclear power in place or under development process, however there are many frag- mented eﬀorts suitable enough to be organized in a formal policy subject to the government approval.
5.National nuclear legislative process
The national legislature composed of two chambers; The National Assembly and the Council of States. Each chamber executes its mission separately as deﬁned by the Constitution (National Assembly, 2005).
5.1.Process for new act presentation
According to the national system, any Bill initiated by any entity in the country shall be reviewed by the Ministry of Justice to make sure that its provisions are not contradicting the provisions of existing na- tional laws. The Minister of the initiating entity will present the ade- quate Bill to the Council of Ministers for deliberation upon and oﬃ- cially tabled before the National Legislature for further deliberation and passing the Bill. The National Assembly will enroll the passed Bill for the president's assenting and signature into an Act.
Pursuant to this process, the National Committee on Nuclear Act has submitted the draft to the Minister of Science and Communications after conﬁrming its adequacy by the Minister of Justice who in turn presented it to the Council of Ministers in November 2014, where it was extensively and critically deliberated upon by a committee assigned thereof. Eventually the Bill was tabled before the National Assembly and has been approved on 12th January 2017 and assented by the President on 26th February 2017 and issued in the oﬃcial Gazette, issue number 1863 on 15th April 2017.
5.2.Stakeholder's involvement
Although, there is no a single deﬁnition for stakeholders that is globally accepted but, it may include all those somehow might be af- fected; the regulated industry; scientiﬁc bodies, the government, the media, the public, and other States (Carlton Stoiber … [et al.], 2003). It holds important, for the developers of the nuclear law in order to complete their mission successfully, to understand how stakeholders believe they will be aﬀected by the proposed nuclear law.
At the time the world witnessing the so-called nuclear renaissance as nuclear industry was about to resume its momentum that lost due to Chernobyl Accident, the Fukushima Nuclear Accident has taken place and recalled the public concerns all over the world about risk associated with nuclear power.
It is widely recognized that knowledge dispel fears while the in- volvement encourages risk acceptance, so as far as public members are kept informed and involved in decision making process their perception will move towards acceptance of the nuclear technology. Therefore, it is great importance for the legal framework to emphasize on the public communication and involvement.
In this regard, the drafters of the nuclear Act relied on the compo- sition of the national committee as it includes a wide spectrum of na- tional stakeholders, to stand as a valid forum for stakeholder involve- ment. Accordingly, their contributions during the drafting process assumed to be reﬂecting the concern of their respective institutions. However, it would have been of great value if the national committee has shared the draft Act with each stakeholder institution through conducting workshops or seminars, compiled the outcomes and in- tegrated them into the Act. Such initiative will ensure the compre- hensiveness of the Act. The public members’ expectations can also be considered via social media or a website managed by the national committee on nuclear Act. Unfortunately, such mechanisms were not taken into consideration as they were not part of the Acts drafting process norms in the country.
5.3.The initial draft
The initial draft of the nuclear Act was prepared in 2007 by a committee formed by the Director General of Sudan Atomic Energy Commission and sent to the IAEA Legal Oﬃce for review and returned with a number of comments and recommendations, but it was not moved further. In 2010, the Minister of Science and Technology, issued a ministerial decree that formed a national committee for nuclear Act from members representing diﬀerent nuclear power program stake- holders and tasked to ﬁnalize the draft Act taking into consideration the comments and recommendations raised by the IAEA Legal Oﬃce. For the purpose of expediting the process, the national committee has as- signed a subcommittee to come up with a more comprehensive draft reﬂecting all the comments and recommendations of the IAEA as well as making sure that the meaning of the technical terms used are in line with the relevant IAEA safety glossary (IAEA, 2007).
The committee has thoroughly studied the relevant international legal instruments (treaties, conventions and agreements) with the aim of including the relevant provisions in the Act and reﬂecting the ob- ligations that Sudan has assumed under ratiﬁed ones or those that it would be assuming upon acceding the instruments as recommended by the Committee. It worth mentioning that the committee has re- commended a number of international legal instruments governing the safe and peaceful use of nuclear energy (Table 2).
The consolidated draft was reviewed by a joint committee re- presenting members from the national nuclear Act committee and others from the Legislation Directorate of the Ministry of Justice for streamlining the legal drafting and removing any contradiction with the existing laws. The updated draft sent to the IAEA Oﬃce of Legal Aﬀairs in 2012 for review. The remarks and recommendations therein were reﬂected in the current ﬁnal version.
6.General attributes of the draft nuclear act
6.1.Legal hierarchy of the nuclear act
The national legal hierarchy (Fig. 3) consists of the following levels:
-The constitutional level: Interim National Constitution of the Republic of Sudan (2005
-The statutory level: Nuclear and Radiological Regulatory Control AU, 2017
-The regulations level: technical rules (safety, security, safeguards, emergency etc.)
Fig. 3. The national legal hierarchy.
6.2.The structure of the nuclear act
It is a comprehensive law containing 46 provisions sub-headed into 10 chapters addressing subject areas related to nuclear and radiation safety, nuclear security, safeguards and liability in addition to the as- sociated general provisions.
Chapter one contains the preliminary provisions: Citation and commencement of the Act, objective and scope of applications, rule of the law, repeal and exclusion, and interpretation of key terms.
Chapter two: covers the establishment of the regulatory authority, its composition (the Board and the General Secretariat), powers and functions. The notiﬁcation, authorizations, inspection and enforcement are addressed in chapter three, while the prohibited and restricted ac- tivities, safeguards, import, export and transit controls are covered in chapter four. Chapter ﬁve is dedicated for the safety of nuclear facilities and decommissioning. Chapter six covers mining and processing of radioactive material, radioactive waste and spent fuel, and the emer- gency preparedness and response. Chapter seven detailed the operator responsibilities and nuclear liability. Then chapter eight include pro- visions about the control of radiation sources and radioactive materials, transport of radioactive material, radiation protection, nuclear security and physical protection. The ﬁnancial provisions included in Chapter nine and ﬁnally Chapter ten provided for some general provisions; status regularization, appeals, oﬀences and penalties and power of the Authority Board to issue regulations.
6.3.The name of the act
The Act in its ﬁrst chapter; article one, clearly deﬁned its title as the Nuclear  and  Radiological  Regulatory  Control  AU,  2017,  which  is  con- sistently reﬂecting the main purpose of the Act.
Table 2
Related international legal instruments recommended by the national committee on drafting nuclear Act to be accessed by the Government of Sudan.
6.4.Objective of the nuclear act
The objective of the Nuclear Act as stated in draft version of 2012 was typical of that recommended in the IAEA Handbook on nuclear law version 2010 (Carlton Stoiber … [et al.], 2010); to establish a legisla-  tive framework for conduction of nuclear and radiological activities in adequate manner to protect individuals, property and the environment, and to support the Republic of Sudan in meeting the relative interna- tional obligations it holds part of. However, during the promulgation process the legislature removed this statement on the ground that stating the objective of the law within its provisions is inconsistent with law drafting practice in Sudan.
6.5.Creation of the regulatory authority
The Convention on Nuclear Safety4 obliged its contracting parties on articles 7&8 to establish and maintain a legislative and regulatory framework for safety and to designate competent authority for over- sighting. Pursuantly, the act created the SNRRA as an independent regulator that integrating all regulatory functions in a single coherent regulatory system (Fig. 4). The authority is composed of a Board and General Secretariat; the Cabinet will appoint the chairperson of the board and the Secretary General upon recommendation of the con- cerned Minister. The term of oﬃce of the Secretary General is set as four years, and the appointee to the position should be a competent person with expertise in the ﬁeld of nuclear and radiological safety and security.
The Board membership composed of 25 members including the Chairperson, the Secretary General as Board rapporteur, eight members of relevant experience in nuclear or radiological sciences and applica- tions, in addition to representatives from the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Internal Aﬀairs, Ministry of External Aﬀairs, Ministry of Defense, Ministry of Environment, Forestry and Physical Development, Ministry of Transport Roads and Bridges, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Communication and Information Technology, Ministry of Higher Education and Scientiﬁc Research, Ministry of Water Resources Irrigation and Electricity, Ministry of Oil & Gas, Ministry of Minerals, General Administration of Civil Defense, and the National Intelligence and Security Service. However, the competency requirements of the representative Board members are not mentioned.
It worth mentioning that the council of ministers is frequently re- formed by merging or separation. Recently the government has re- formed and decreased the number of federal ministries accordingly; the number of ministries representatives at SNRRA Board has changed.
To assure the consistency of the regulatory functions it is assumed that the two parts of the authority (the General Secretariat and the Board) will function in a coherent manner, the General Secretariat conduct the ordinary regulatory functions, while the Board oversighting its performance, however, according to the powers and functions en- trusted to the Board by the Act, it holds a part of the regulatory pro- cesses without requesting speciﬁc competency level on its members. In reality, the Board is a committee composed of part-time members with the exception of the Chairperson and the Rapporteur (the S.G). Such large body might not be suitable for a regulatory body, because it will increase the possibility of regulatory body to be dominated by the in- dustry (regulatory capture5) and it might fail to control corruption.
Fig. 4. The scope of the national regulatory system.
Although at present such nuclear business interest is yet to take shape in Sudan, but as the nuclear developments proceeding such interest will grow up to the extend that the Board may be totally dominated by the nuclear industry, which eventually could result in a regulatory failure6 (Wang and Chen, 2012a).
With these 25 members, the Board seems to be slouchy enough to encounter diﬃculties in decision making process which is expected to result in considerable delays in the approval of regulations submitted to it by the Secretary General. To be mentioned here that the organization of SNRRA during its transitional phase (2010–2017) was also including a Board that involved 14 members representing diﬀerent stakeholders. The Board only convened for very limited times during 2010 and un- expectedly disappeared from the scene for the next years, although at the time the authority was rapidly growing and witnessed very ex- tensive eﬀorts exerted by the General Secretariat, successfully resulted in approval of the nuclear law and establishment of the authority.
In this regard, it worth mentioning the experience of Pakistan Nuclear Regulatory Authority (PNRA) in involving its stakeholders within the Authority as it includes some users and promoters (e.g. Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission and Ministry of Health) and jus- tiﬁed their involvement with their contribution to ease the regulatory process and improve the communication. However, PNRA was ac- counted for the negative impact of such involvement and immune its system by requiring speciﬁc competency and relative experience of no less than 15 years and more. Moreover the PNRA Authority include only 10 members, including the chairperson, two full time members, and 7 part-timers representing stakeholders (Rahman, 2014). With such limited number of representatives supplemented with suitable compe- tency, PNRA was performing satisfactorily.
6.6.Safety prioritization
The Act has clearly delineated the framework for safety manage- ment that balancing social risks against beneﬁts and promoting safety as a priority. It prohibited unjustiﬁed activities and conditionally per- mitting activities accruing to the beneﬁt of society. Authorized entities are required to exercise high level of caution preventing damage to community or the environment. The created authority is required to review and assess the safety assessment reports provided by the li- censees and to verify adequacy of safety in all licensed practices and activities. The Act also required the authority and licensees to prevent accidents and to be prepared to mitigate their consequences should they occur.
The provisions of the Act in chapter 9 article 36 (2) on subject matter about radiation protection, included a statement on necessity for justiﬁcation of practices and activities with due consideration on eco- nomic and social factors. However, such consideration is not a part of justiﬁcation process while it holds correct for optimization of justiﬁed practices or activities.
6.7.Security measures
Security of nuclear materials and radioactive sources is important to safeguard them against possible diversion to illegal activities that might pose signiﬁcant security risk to individuals or community. Pursuant to the provisions of the Act, the newly established Regulatory Authority is mandated to act as a central competent national authority responsible for physical protection of nuclear materials and radioactive sources in the country. To this eﬀect, it is empowered to issue the necessary reg- ulations that ensure the eﬀective regulatory control including classiﬁ- cation and accountancy for the nuclear materials.
6.8.Assignment of responsibility
The Act in chapter eight clearly stated the Operator as being the holder of prime responsibility7 for safety and security of his facility or activity as well as the consequence responsibility for promotion of safety culture. It has elaborated on some aspects of licensee's respon- sibilities and obligations related to diﬀerent safety matters.
6.9.Control by authorization
The Act requires the authority to access activities and facilities that associated with risk of ionizing radiation, with objective to ensure that the public health and the environment are adequately protected. It prohibits the operation of facilities or conduction of activities without prior authorization from regulatory authority. And it authorized the regulatory authority to grant, amend, suspend and revoke authoriza- tions and to set conditions for granting them.
The licensing process that is mandated to SNRRA is practically limited to issues related to nuclear safety and security. Nuclear power industry included non-safety related issues (e. g. assessment of the ﬁ- nancial capability of the applicant, determining liability insurance, etc.) are beyond the competency and experience of the authority. This ne- cessitate the need for establishment of a complementary process for licensing non-safety related aspects.
6.10.The continuity of control
The Act obliged operators to provide access to the inspectors of the
regulatory authority to any location at their premises necessary for the performance of their duties, and to establish an eﬀective documentation system and make available all necessary information at the request of the regulatory authority. It authorizes the regulator to conduct planned or unplanned inspections to review safety documents and conduct in- terviews with persons, private and public organizations on matters re- lated to public health, safety and the environment as may be necessary and appropriate to verify compliance with the provisions of the Act and the subsequent regulations and license conditions imposed accordingly. The Act does not exonerate the licensee from following its provisions even in case of the license expiry, suspension or revocation.
6.11.The civil liability
The civil liability for nuclear damage will be determined in ac- cordance with the provisions of the Act and the related international legal instruments to which the government of Sudan is party.
The regulatory authority is mandated to ensure that the operator has a valid insurance or any other acceptable ﬁnancial security covering the liability for nuclear damage prior to granting authorization certi- ﬁcate. The civil liability regime proposed by this Act holds operator liable for any loss of life, injury to persons or damage to property re- sulting from the malfunctioning of nuclear facility such as negligence of the operator or unsatisfactory application of regulatory requirements, standards or relative international instruments, whereas be exonerated if the nuclear incident was directly due to an armed conﬂict, hostilities, civil war or insurrection,8 or from natural disaster. It is noticed that the operator's responsibility for liability of environmental damage is not covered in the Act. This system of liability equally applied to all victims without discrimination based on nationality, domicile or residence (non-discrimination principle) (IAEA, 1996).
Regarding the liability for nuclear damage during transport of radioactive material, the consignor holds responsible until the con- signee has taken charge of the material involved.
The amount of civil liability that the operator shall pay is not lim- ited in the Act, but it is left to be determined by the national regulations issued pursuant to its provisions taking into account the provisions of the relevant international legal instruments in which Sudan is party. The concept of unlimited liability of the operator for the nuclear da- mage is applied in few countries like Germany, Japan and Switzerland (NEA/OECD, 2016). From practical point of view, such system of un- limited liability is not feasible as some accidents might incur liability beyond the operator capabilities. For instance, as of 21 August 2015, the operator of the Fukushima Daiichi NPP, Tokyo Electric Power Company (TEPCO), has had to manage some 2 452 000 applications for compensation and has paid out approximately 43 Billion USD, an amount which is expected to increase over time (NEA/OECD, 2016).
6.12.Promotion of sustainable development
The Constitution has clearly stated that the State shall promote, through legislation, sustainable utilization of natural resources and application of best practices with respect to their management, which is suitable to encompass all socioeconomic developmental activities na- tionwide (National Assembly, 2005).
The National Act on Environment Protection 2001 (Ministry of Justice Sudan, 2001), chapter 3, policy and general directives for en- vironment protection, article 17 (1), requires any project expected to negatively aﬀecting the environment or natural resources, to conduct a thorough environmental impact assessment subject to approval of the responsible environmental authority. This spirit has been enshrined in the Nuclear Act which requires the nuclear and radiological activities to be conducted in a manner to ensure adequate protection of the en- vironment from the present and future hazards associated with such activities.
6.13.International commitment
It is widely recognized that the risk of ionizing radiation does not respect territorial boundaries, therefore, the national facilities or ac- tivities may impose risk to the neighboring countries and vise-versa. This necessitates international cooperation and coordination of joint eﬀorts in responding to nuclear accidents or taking collective measures to prevent the likelihood of their occurrences or to enhance the mutual capabilities to mitigate the consequences should they occur. The Act did not ignore the importance of such international cooperation in this respect when making one of the objectives of establishing the national regulatory authority is to act as a focal point for the related interna- tional legal instruments (conventions, treaties and agreements) and to enable the Government of Sudan to meet its respective obligations.
6.14.The regulatory independency
The Act stipulated that SNRRA to have ﬁnancial and administrative independency from other national institutions using nuclear technology to discharge its responsibilities without any inﬂuence.9
However, on 2018, the Presidential Decree No. 42 was issued that deﬁned the respective presidential and national executive bodies. In This decree, article 18 (a) deﬁned the mandate of the Ministry of Higher Education and Scientiﬁc Research. Article 18 (b) set the functions and competencies of the ministry which does not include any regulatory function, while article 18 (c) determined the units and bodies aﬃliated to the ministry, including SAEC and SNRRA. This clearly conﬂicting with provisions of the NRRCA 2017 article 4 & 5. As SAEC is the main promoter of peaceful use of atomic energy in Sudan. Therefore, the regulatory function is not separated from promotion of nuclear tech- nology (Fig. 6).
SNRRA has a mandate to issue regulations, adopt national and in- ternational standards, develop guides and codes of practices, and set- ting any license conditions as may be deemed necessary. It is required to communicate its regulatory requirements, decisions and opinions and their basis to the public and stakeholders including during acci- dents.
SNRRA has been empowered to liaise with the government high level oﬃcials to achieve its objectives; however, in practice this power seems diﬃcult to be materialized since the reporting line dictated by the proposed administrative structure leaves the Secretary General with no direct access to the higher levels of the government as he/she reports to the Board (Fig. 5).
If we were made to believe on existence of some bright aspects on nuclear accidents undoubtedly it would be the opportunity to learn the lessons. Prior to Fukushima accident the issue of regulatory in- dependency was highly vague as the IAEA is promoting the concept of eﬀective independency (IAEA, 2010) that is understood in a very wide scale by diﬀerent member states. However, many countries including South Korea, United Kingdom and Japan has reformed the in- dependency aspects of their regulatory regimes in response to the les- sons learned from Fukushima nuclear accident (Bacon-Dussault, 2013). In Japan, immediately after Fukushima Daichii Nuclear Accident,  the Regulatory independency of the Japanese Nuclear Regulator was
Fig. 5. Encapsulation of the Secretary General, SNRRA and his reporting line.
Fig. 6. Nuclear Energy Main Institutes and their organizational levels.
blamed and considered as the major contributor to the accident (The National Diet of Japan, 2012). Therefore, immediately, the Japanese government reformed the national system for nuclear regulatory con- trol, as it was fragmented over diﬀerent institutions involving users and promoters of nuclear technology, and uniﬁed and integrated into a single regulatory agency named Nuclear Regulation Authority (NRA) based on the “Act for Establishment of the Nuclear Regulation Au- thority” promulgated on 27 June 2012 (Fukasawa and Okusaki, 2012). NRA will consist of a chairman and four commissioners appointed by the prime minister with the consent of the Diet (the Parliament), the Act decided their competency and experience and excluded nuclear op- erators to stand the position in order to avoid corruption and regulatory capture; the lesson learnt from Fukushima.
In this context, the United States of America took the lead and re- formed its regulatory system since 1974, when it has separated the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (US-NRC) from the Atomic Energy Commission the predecessor of the US Department of Energy (DOE) as an independent regulatory agency. The commission is led by ﬁve commissioners appointed by the US President for ﬁxed terms, one of them designated by the President as a Chairperson, and like other US independent regulatory agencies the head can only be removed for cause (Copeland, 2013).
During drafting this Act, it was proposed that the regulatory au- thority being led by six commissioners, the proposal was rejected by a miss leading fact that it is inconsistent with the national tradition of creating such commissions, however, the experience of the Sudan Audit Chamber is standing as a good example. According to the National
Audit Chambers Act 2015 (Ministry of Justice Sudan, 2015), the chamber composed of the Auditor General and his deputies, all are appointed by the President of the Republic upon approval by two-third majority of the National Assembly members, and their removal fol- lowing the same process. Similarly, the Act of the National Commission of Transparency, Probity and Combating of Corruption (2016) (Ministry of Justice Sudan, 2016), created commission consists of the chairperson and six members appointed by the President and approved by the Na- tional Assembly. These two national examples strongly support the viability of the rejected proposal to keep up with international experi- ence and strengthen the national regulatory system. Of course, to lead the authority by ﬁve or six dedicated competent commissioners is ex- tremely eﬀective and eﬃcient than forming a ﬂaccid Board from 25 part-timers of limited or no relative competency.
Grasping the international experience and the lesson learned from Fukushima accident, the government is highly recommended to en- hance the political independence of the regulatory authority. The Chairman and SG should be appointed by the President upon approval of two-third majority of the National Assembly members and their re- moval follows the same process similar process to the way used to appoint the Auditor General (National Audit Chambers).
6.15.The transparency and openness
The Fukushima accident has demonstrated that transparency and public participation is an absolute condition for any country that uses nuclear energy (Wang and Chen, 2012b). In line with the Constitution and the provisions of Right to Access Information Act 2015 and the Act of the National Commission of Transparency, Probity and Combating of Corruption (2016), the Act has given the Regulatory Authority powers to independently communicate its regulatory requirements, decisions and opinions and their basis to the public in consistent with the higher national interests, as well as issuing scientiﬁc publications and peri- odicals pertaining to the conduction of its activities. This power can be exercised through establishing appropriate mechanisms and procedures for informing and consulting the public and other stakeholders about regulatory processes, and environmental aspects of regulated activities and practices, including incidents, accidents and abnormal occurrences. In addition, it has mandate to liaise with regulatory bodies of other countries and international organizations to promote co-operation and the exchange of regulatory information.
6.16.International cooperation
The international dimension of the nuclear Act is well recognized and demonstrated throughout the Act and reﬂected in many provisions related to safety, security, safeguards and liability issues. In manifes- tation of this international dimension, the regulatory authority has been designated as a sole national focal point as regards implementation of international legal instruments related to nuclear and radiation safety and security, safeguards and nuclear accidents or radiological emer- gencies. The authority is required to communicate and cooperate with the international community10 in case of an accident of transboundary impacts, lessons learned from, security risks (terrorist acts, illicit traf- ﬁcking or proliferation), negotiation of international legal instruments and fostering knowledge and information exchange to enhance safe operation.6.17.Safety culture and management
The Act has rested the prime responsibility for safety and promotion of safety culture with the operator in consistent with the IAEA safety standards and the CNS.11 The operator is required to establish, imple- ment and sustain an eﬀective management system providing conﬁdence that speciﬁed requirements for all activities important to nuclear safety are satisﬁed throughout the life-time of a nuclear installation;
The lack of safety culture has been identiﬁed as a main contributor to almost all nuclear and radiological accidents since the early days of the technology invention and up to date. Therefore, regulator must monitor the licensee's performance and takes appropriate action if safety management system is manifested deterioration and ever making sure that the licensee properly discharges the prime responsibility for safety (IAEA, 2013).
Relying on the provisions of the nuclear Act alone will not bring about the desired level of safety culture, however, if some aspects of the nuclear Act such as the clear assignment of prime responsibility, allo- cation of suﬃcient funds for the regulatory authority to conduct its mission eﬀectively and eﬃciently, emphasizing the importance of human resources development and competency of regulators, operators and technical support organizations, are carefully and adequately ad- dressed by the legal framework would result in great enhancement of safety culture and eventually safe operation of nuclear facilities and activities.
6.18.Nuclear emergency
The Act placed the prime responsibility for emergency preparedness and response to any radiological accident resulted from the authorized activity or facility on the operator. It is clearly stated that no activity or facility shall be granted an authorization unless suitable emergency plans prepared by the operator and approved by SNRRA. Only the ex- ecution of approved plans is acceptable should the related emergency has occurred and the operator is required to notify immediately the authority about the accident occurrence and shall keep the authority informed about any progress.
The act mandated the authority to prepare a national nuclear and radiological emergency plan in cooperation with relevant competent authorities. Also, the act has deﬁned SNRRA as a national point of contact with regards to nuclear emergency preparedness and response and emphasized on cooperation with the international community.
Also, learning the lesson from Japan, as it established a relatively comprehensive nuclear emergency response system including the Nuclear Emergency Preparedness Act which outlines the organizational structure and responsibilities of government agencies and nuclear op- erators (Qiang et al., 2013). Despite all legal and organizational infra- structures available, the Government of Japan failed to respond eﬀec- tively to mitigate the Fukushima accident, and that was mainly due to the lack of eﬀective coordination in executing national plans (The National Diet of Japan, 2012).
Article (13–1) authorized SNRRA Board to work with stakeholders to integrate the nuclear and radiological emergency plan into the overall national emergency system. The Supreme Council for Civil Defense (SCCD) aﬃliated to the Federal Minister of Interior is a na- tional body in charge of the emergency at national level. In 2018, the SCCD and SNRRA have signed a memorandum of understanding with aim to enhance the coordination of eﬀorts between the two organiza- tions. Also, SCCD in consultation with SNRRA has formed the national committee on nuclear and radiological emergency that comprise dif- ferent stakeholders. This committee is standing as a permanent
platform for coordinating the emergency preparedness and response.
6.19.Funding regulatory activities
The government funding of the regulatory authority is one of the most important aspects of the regulatory independency and reﬂecting the magnitude of the government commitment towards nuclear safety. The Act stated that the authority shall have adequate ﬁnancial re- sources to establish its organization and to develop the technical competency that commensurate with the nuclear and radiological ap- plications in Sudan, in such way that maintain its independency. It is mainly composed of regular annual budget approved by the govern- ment, in addition to amount incurred from the regulatory services (may be licensing fees is meant) as the regulatory authority is prohibited according to the Act from providing any services. Also, it is accepted to receive grants from national institutes not subject to its regulatory oversight, and international grants or other funding sources subject to
approval by the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning.
Organizations gain independency if they exercise maximum control on the input of their resources. So provision of stable source of funding, authorization of the regulatory authority to control appointment, allo- cation, promotion and dismissal of the regulatory staﬀ is highly im- portant (Johannsen Sander, 2003). All these functions were secured by the law for SNRRA.
6.20.Radioactive waste and spent fuel management
Sudan is not a party to the joint convention on the safety of spent fuel management and on the safety of radioactive waste management, and yet to establish a national policy and strategy for radioactive waste management or to designate national competent organization re- sponsible for radioactive waste management spent fuel and decom- missioning. Nevertheless, the national committee on drafting nuclear law was recommended the government to join the convention, and already the committee has integrated the assumed government com- mitments within the provisions of the issued act (par. 5.3). Also, the 2017 act mandated SNRRA with consultation of the stakeholders to prepare the national policy and strategy for radioactive waste man- agement subject to the approval by the Council of Ministers, and to establish the necessary regulatory requirements on radioactive waste management, spent fuel and decommissioning.
6.21.Nuclear safety and regulatory infrastructure
The commitment and establishment of proper legal and regulatory framework and the related radiation protection and safety infra- structures is important for peaceful use of nuclear technology. Surprisingly, the provisions of NRRCA 2017 only established the reg- ulatory body but fall short in establishing infrastructures that provide technical, ﬁnancial and other needed supports for the NRRC to fulﬁl it is national duties and obligations. Moreover, the authority needs to en- hance the technical independence of NRRC perhaps through estab- lishment of a Technical Support Organization. This organization shall provide the necessary technical services that enable NRRC to carry out it's the regulatory functions either internally or externally.
7.Nuclear safety economics and feasibility of regulatory control
From the economical point of view all safety measures either pri- mary or additional are seen as major sources of increasing cost. Accordingly, developing new regulatory regime, adopting new stan- dards, issuing more stringent safety requirements, adding conditions to the license or even ordering plant shutdown are ﬁnancial risks that put a lot of burden on the nuclear industry. Nonetheless, it is aﬀordable compared to the cost that will be incurred by any single nuclear acci- dent regardless of its scale.
The cost incurred from Chernobyl accident exceeded 700 Billion USD, and recently, the cost of Fukushima accident estimated at 250 Billion USD subject to increase, while US estimating the cost of a po- tential severe accident to exceed 400 Billion USD. The World Health Organization estimated total cost of 100 Billion USD per year for da- mage caused by 350 natural disasters per year in the ﬁrst decade of the 21st century, if to use this as a benchmark, then a severe nuclear ac- cident would impose cost larger than the costs of thousands of natural disasters. Such massive consequences of a major accident shaped the reality about nuclear power as an uninsurable industry in normal ﬁ- nancial markets (COOPER, 2011).
It is worth mentioning that the designers and suppliers of nuclear power systems assume no responsibility towards the liability of nuclear damage even in cases of design shortcomings. The beneﬁciary State plays the major role apart from other players in challenging the emergency situation and the liability issues as well as waste manage- ment and decommissioning. Therefore, decision makers should account for the fact that the actual cost of safety is not the cost payed to deploy eﬀective safety measures, but the cost that incurred should a nuclear accident has taken place as a result of deﬁciency in safety systems.
Responding to the “1970s oil shocks” Japan accelerated the nuclear power development to secure sustainable energy supply. Accordingly, it has removed all the obstacles that might aﬀect the pace of nuclear energy development including the risk of regulatory control (The National Diet of Japan, 2012). The function of regulatory control was assigned to the same government authority that is responsible for nu- clear power promotion and operation. This situation of conﬂict in in- terests has led to overlooking safety issue and consequently the like- lihood of occurrence of nuclear accidents cannot be ruled out in such nuclear industry. Lessons learned from Fukushima accident in 2011 has put an end to this precarious situation by creating an independent Nuclear Regulatory Authority (Fukasawa and Okusaki, 2012).
8.Conclusions and recommendations
The Act is comprehensive covered all aspects of nuclear and radi- ological safety and security, safe guards and liability in line with the related IAEA safety standards. It has created a single independent regulatory authority, as a sole regulator oversighting radiological and nuclear safety as well as national focal point for the related interna- tional legal instruments.
However, there are some deﬁciencies that may possibly impede eﬀorts of putting in place regulatory authority capable of performing its functions eﬀectively and eﬃciently. These include:
a.The establishment of the authority does not follow strictly the pro- visions of the creating act as independent authority (SAEC and SNRRA under MHESR).
b.The board of the authority involves large number of members without relative technical competency.
c.The elements of the regulatory independency are questionable; po- litical independency (inappropriate reporting line of the authority and inadequate mechanism of appointing key regulatory decision makers); technical independency (regulators competency, TSO); ﬁ- nancial independency (budget approved by the concerned minister).
d.Provision of regulatory functions against fees as one of the budget components will jeopardize the independency element of the au- thority and lead to overlooking and comprising of safety,
e.No designated technical support organization dedicated to serve the regulatory functions.
f.No provisions on importance of deploying the relative infra- structures.
g.The operator's responsibility for liability of environmental damage is not covered in the Act as well as the amount of civil liability.
For the sake of the safe operation, eﬃcient development of Sudan
nuclear power projects, the government is recommended to:
a.Issue a Presidential decree to determine the concerned minister in conformance with the provisions of the NRRCA 2017 (non-user or promoting).
b.Amend article (7–1) of the NRRCA 2017 to change approach from board of a large number of representatives to a commission with limited qualiﬁed members (3–5 commissioners) and to follow the General Auditor appointment and removal approach.
c.Adopt band of measures to enhance the regulatory independency (political, technical, ﬁnancial).
d.Designate or establish a TSO (national/external) dedicated to sup- port the regulatory authority in its decision making.
e.Provide legal provision on the necessity of establishing the neces- sary safety and regulatory infrastructures.
f.Determine the operator's responsibility for liability of environmental damage and deﬁne the amount of civil liability.
g.Establish a coordinating body at level of the Council of Ministers with objective to oversighting the performance and insure con- sistency of all nuclear developmental projects.
Finally, the new comer countries including Sudan should use the lessons learned from the previous nuclear accidents and the accumu- lated operational experience to better protect their people and en- vironment from the risk associated with nuclear power by developing a robust legal and regulatory framework translated in an integrated system for regulatory control capable to regulate safety eﬀectively and eﬃciently without exerting undue burdens on nuclear developments.
