<title>Metrology Feasibility Study in Support of the
National Direct-Drive Program</title>
<Affiliation>a.Beihang University, Department of Physics, Beijing 100191, China
b.Beihang University, Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Nuclear Energy Materials and Physics, Beijing 100191, China cMinistry of Education Beihang University, Key Laboratory of Micro-nano Measurement-Manipulation and Physics, Beijing 100191, China</Affiliation>
<author>H. Huang, K. Engelhorn, K. Sequoia, A. Greenwood, W. Sweet, L. Carlson, F.
Elsner & M. Farrell</author>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>FUSION SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>American Nuclear Society </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/15361055.2017.1387460</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1080/15361055.2017.1387460</URL>
Abstract — The 100-Gbar Laser Direct Drive program calls for ablator capsules with no defects larger than 0.5 μm in lateral dimension and fewer than ten defects with lateral dimensions between 0.1 and
0.5 μm. Compared to laser indirect drive capsules, this represents > 10× reduction of defect length scale and >500× reduction in defect number density. This presents major challenges to both fabrication and metrology. In this paper, we will discuss the proof-of-principle work conducted at General Atomics to identify metrology techniques suitable for 100-Gbar target characterization. We present a detailed study of dark-field imaging, laser scatterometry, and environmental scanning electron microscopey. We identify dark-field imaging as the best approach for meeting the 100-Gbar metrology needs.
Keywords — laser direct drive, inertial confinement fusion, magnetized liner inertial fusion.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
Controlled nuclear fusion offers tremendous promise for an inexhaustible and clean energy supply, but it is also tremendously difficult to achieve. The inertial confinement fusion (ICF) program has evolved into three complementary research thrusts: laser indirect drive (LID), laser direct drive (LDD), and magnetized liner inertial fusion (MagLIF). Regardless of the approach, imperfections on the ablator capsule grow exponentially during the implosion to poten- tially quench the ignition. Accordingly, strict specifications have been placed on the allowable target defects.1 In LID (Ref. 2), the optical laser beams heat up the interior of a hohlraum to generate an X-ray blackbody–radiation “baking oven” that uniformly heats the ablator. This method has the benefit of mitigating the effects of imperfections in the laser beams and the target, but this comes at the expense of lower overall energy coupling efficiency. Historically, the LID approach has accumulated the largest database  to  guide the design of major experimental facilities, yet Rayleigh-
Taylor instability remains  a  major  concern.1  In  LDD (Ref. 3), laser beams in spherically symmetrical geometry ablate the capsule directly to drive the implosion. This process is much more sensitive to imperfections in  the laser illumination and capsule but returns higher coupling efficiency. In MagLIF, a strong axial magnetic field from  10 to 50 T enhances the confinement of fusion fuel, which is expected to produce more relaxed specification.4,5
II.CONCEPTUAL APPROACHES TO DEFECT INSPECTIONS
In order to validate direct drive as a viable path toward ignition, the national LDD program aims to achieve pressures up to 100 Gbar  on the OMEGA  laser at the Laboratory for Laser Energetics (LLE) To meet this goal, stringent specifications have been set for the laser illumination, fuel layer, and ablator. The specifications for pointlike target defects have been set at no more than ten defects with lateral dimensions of 0.1 to 0.5 μm and no defects above 0.5 μm. Compared to the LID program’s NIF specifications, this represents a >10× tightening of defect linear dimensions and >500× tightening of defect number density. Such extraordinarily tight specifications present severe challenges in both metrology and fabrica- tion. This paper will focus on metrology.
To date, most production-level defect inspection methods for ICF targets utilize optical imaging techni- ques. Diffraction poses a fundamental resolution limit via the Rayleigh Criterion:
@
where λ is the wavelength of the probe and N.A. is the numerical aperture of the objective lens. In modern optical microscopes, the N.A. can approach unity but the resolu- tion is still limited by the wavelength to 0.3 to 0.4 μm. This resolution is ~4× larger than the smallest defects defined in the 100-Gbar specifications. It is possible to detect, but not resolve, features smaller than the Rayleigh limit. For instance, the semiconductor industry has long used laser scattering to scan silicon wafers, where defects as small as
0.01 μm can be detected with optical sources. In addition, if sufficient knowledge about the defect material is treated as known, an approximate size of the feature can be inferred. In an effort to address the 100-Gbar metrology needs,
we studied two variations of this approach: dark-field micro- scopy and laser scatterometry. For reasons detailed in this paper, dark-field microscopy was identified as the best approach. General Atomics (GA) has proven the measure- ment sensitivity, developed a processing algorithm, and deployed an engineering prototype to assist the polystyrene shell fabrication. When fully automated by early 2018, we expect the instrument will be capable of making highly precise measurements with a ~4-h per shell throughput. On the other hand, a laser scatterometer can be as fast as 5 min per shell but produces less detailed metrology data. The equipment design and the relative merit of these two approaches will be discussed in this paper.
There is yet another method if we wish to solve the problem within the confines of the Rayleigh Criterion. An environmental scanning electron microscope (SEM) can be used to do directly image surface defects because the accelerated electron beam has effective DeBroglie wave- length, and corresponding resolution, much smaller than
0.1 um. How this method complements the other two will also be discussed in this paper.
III.DARK-FIELD IMAGING
The two primary classical models for understanding light scattering from isolated particles are Mie scattering andRayleigh scattering. The regimes of validity for these models are determined by the ratio of the particle size to the wave- length of light (Fig. 1). Mie scattering occurs when the particle size is comparable to or larger than the wavelength, and Rayleigh scattering occurs if the particle size is much smaller than the wavelength. For spherical particles, the boundary between the two regimes is where the ratio of the particle radius to the wavelength is 0.2. The important physi- cal difference between these two regimes is the dependence of scattering cross section on the particle size and light wave- length. In the case of Mie scattering, the cross section scales with the diameter squared and has no dependence on wave- length, whereas in the Rayleigh regime, scattering cross sec- tion scales with the diameter to the sixth power and the wavelength to the inverse fourth power. This has important physical consequences for the scattering phenomena. For instance, when light scatters off large water droplets in clouds, Mie scattering dominates, and there is weak dependence on wavelength. This makes the clouds appear white. In contrast, when the water particles are small (e.g., water molecules in the sky), Rayleigh scattering dominates and is strongly depen- dent on wavelength. This makes the sky appear blue.
The  100-Gbar  relevant  defect  size,  when  plotted
against the white light inspection wavelength, is weakly in the Mie scattering region but fairly close to boundary (Fig. 1). Numerical simulation suggests the scattering cross section approximately scales with the diameter cubed and inversely scales with the wavelength squared.
Fig. 1. Scattering regimes as a function of particle size and light wavelength for discrete particles  in  media.  The dashed lines represent constant ratios of particle radius to wavelength, and the red ellipse represents the 100-Gbar defect sizes for optical wavelengths. Adapted from Ref. 8.
This finding will be verified by empirical measurement in the future; however, it is not inconsistent of the exact solution of Bobbert-Vlieger model for particles sitting on a flat surface6,7 (Fig. 2).
The accuracy of the scattering model can be empiri- cally tested. The semiconductor industry has established SEMI M53-1103 standard procedure to use polystyrene latex (PSL) spheres to check the correlation between measured light scattering intensity and  the particle  size to an accuracy better than 5%. PSL spheres are available commercially as particle-in-solution with National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)-certified average diameters and diameter spreads. The diluted
Fig. 2. (a) Light scattering by spherical particle on flat surface.5 (b) Calculated scattering intensity versus particle diameter for a spherical PSL bead on a silicon substrate with 488-nm source at 70-deg angle of incidence. The scattering is polarization dependent. (The black curves are for s-polarization, and the blue for p-polarization. Solid lines are from Bobbert-Vlieger exact solution, and dotted lines are from double-interaction approximate solu- tion. The agreement is outstanding, suggesting relative maturity of these theories.) The region inside the  red lines indicates the 100-Gbar defect size range, which is  in between the Rayleigh and Mie scattering regions. Adapted from Ref. 5.
solutions are applied to silicon wafer surface to qualify new metrology tools such as laser scatterometers. Following this approach, we conducted initial proof-of- principle testing on a Nikon L200 microscope equipped with a 100 × 0.90 N.A. dark-field objective lens.
Four types of PSL particles were purchased (with 500-, 262-, 173-, and 90-nm average diameters, respec- tively) and applied to the surface of a microscope slide. Other than the 500-nm particles (Fig. 3a), which  is  above the diffraction limit, the other three show diffrac- tion-limited lateral visual size of 0.4 um (Figs. 3b, 3c,  and 3d) but show major differences in the scattered intensity. This experiment demonstrates that such a dark-field microscope has adequate sensitivity to detect 100-nm defects and that the scattering intensity corre- lates to defect size. In order to quantify the size of an unknown defect, an empirically determined scaling law will have to be established. It is important to point out that multiple defect characteristics (i.e., size, shape, material, etc.) can effect its scattering intensity;  thus,  any correlation of an unknown defect to a defect of known properties leads to ambiguity over the unknown defect’s exact size and composition. To address this, defects will be reported in terms  of  their  equivalent  size as established by the integrated scattering intensity (the standard method used in the semiconductor indus- try). Multiple defect types (i.e., domes, pits, debris) for multiple defect materials will need to be studied to produce comprehensive calibration data.  One  useful  tool for performing this work could be the environmen- tal SEM as discussed below.
The next step is to develop a process for transparent
shells. A dark-field image of an OMEGA-scale polyalpha- methylstyrene (PAMS) shell taken by 100× objective lens is shown in Fig. 4a, in which the medallion field of view (FOV) is approximately 1% of the entire shell surface area. For this type of image to be useful for defect quantifica- tion, four analysis problems needed to be solved:
1.The image contains many artifacts of the micro- scope imaging system, such as out-of-focus dust particles on the lens elements and on the CCD chip.
2.The shell has a curved surface, the defects are embedded throughout the wall, and very limited FOV of the 100× lens renders most defects out of focus or invisible. (In the case of Fig. 4a, the sharply focused defects near the center are located on the shell’s inner surface, whereas the sharply focused defects near the edge are located on the shell’s outer surface. They happen to be at the same optical Z height away from the CCD sensor and therefore rendered in sharp focus.)
Fig. 3. Light scattering by PSL particles inspected by a Nikon L200 microscope with a 100× dark-field objective lens. Average particle sizes (a) 500 nm, (b) 262 nm, (c) 173 nm, and (d) 90 nm.
Fig. 4. (a) Dark-field image of a PAMS shell, (b) “starry night” representation of Z-stitched image stack with all defects in the same FOV, (c) three-dimensionally rendered representation of the same FOV, and (d) state-of-the-art production PSL shell. Each medallion represents 1% of OMEGA shell surface.
3.The background is not flat, getting gradually darker toward the edge, and not entirely radially symmetric.
4.Defects come in different forms and sizes, inte- grated intensity must be calculated to render quantitative
evaluation, yet uneven background prevents effective integration.
General Atomics has developed proprietary solutions to address each metrology challenge, such that a quanti- tative “starry night” representation can be shown in Fig. 4b. All imaging artifacts have been removed based on their unique behavior under image translation, and all real defects are retained and in sharp focus through Z-stitching. Not only the x-y position of each defect is retained, but also the total scattered intensity can be integrated to correlate to the particle size. The Z position of each defect is also retained, such that the depth inside the ablator wall can be determined and radial distribution computed to support process optimization. To improve the visual display, the defect map is shown in a three- dimensionally rendered representation, which scales the defect intensity as a three-dimensional volume and helps make the smallest defects visible (Fig. 4c). Using the same methodology, we determined that a state-of-the-art PSL shell contains only ~7 defects above 0.1 μm size within each medallion (Fig. 4d). However, the limited FOV is only ~1% of the shell surface, so such a shell   still contains ~700 defects. This represents 70× more than the 100-Gbar specifications dictate. A prototype system that measures one medallion at a time is currently  in place to support production activities in PSL shell fabri- cation. A fully automated measurement system is under construction (Fig. 5).
Fig. 5. New 4Pi station with multiple instruments mounted: 1. A phi rotation stage allowing for 360-deg longitudinal traces at different latitudes. 2. A theta rota- tion stage allowing for 90-deg latitude to be accessed.
3.A shell flipper to access the second hemisphere.
4.A linear translation stage to access multiple metrology tools. 5. Three metrology tools: dark-field and wall map- per (left side), interferometer (middle), and a confocal microscope (right side, not shown).
IV.LASER SCATTEROMETRY
In Sec. III, we demonstrated dark-field inspection capable of measuring defects meeting the 100-Gbar specifications, but it is a relatively slow method. When    a 150×, 0.90 N.A. lens is used to get the maximum  defect information, it is estimated that  a  single  shell  will take 4 h to measure. In contrast, the semiconductor industry uses laser scatterometers capable of scanning 8-in. wafers in fewer than 20 s. In this section, we will conduct a survey of commercial scatterometers and per- form a conceptual design exercise for a laser scatterom- eter suitable for measuring shells. This will illuminate  the major trade-offs between scatterometry and the dark- field microscopy approach.
Most commercial laser scatterometers are bimodally distributed and are tools designed to measure surface tex- tures only. These tools focus on measuring the bidirectional scatter distribution function and the differential scattering cross section of a mostly planar surface and assume surface homogeneity.9,10 A good example is the Albatross-TT table-top Scatterometer from Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Optics and Precision Engineering,11 with applica- tions such as studying the surface texture of radar-evading composites. The instrument performs the incident angle scan and theta-phi of the detector angle scans, taking min- utes for one-dimensional scans, hours for two-dimensional scans, all at one location of the sample surface. Other scatterometers in a similar category include ScatterScope4 by The Scatter Works, Inc.12; Surface Optics by Surface Optics Corporation13; CASI by Schmitt Measurement Systems (SMS)14; and GOSI-II by NIST (Ref. 15). This pretty much rounds out the world’s research and develop- ment scatterometer manufacturers, none of which do lateral mapping on the samples and therefore are unsuitable to our defect-scanning application. On the other end of the spec- trum are the major semiconductor equipment makers, which produce high-volume wafer-scanning tools. The best example of this class is Surfscan SP5 by KLA Tencor.16 Despite the high cost, around $30 million per tool, such a tool could be adapted for shell scanning.
Silicon wafer surfaces are pristine, with very sparely populated defects. High-power lasers on the order of 100-MW output with large beam spot on the order of 100-um size are used to scan across fast-spinning wafers at a typical 70-deg incident angle without creating a heat-load problem. For shell scanning, we would need spatial resolu- tion of ~5 × 10 um for defect locating (considering the whole shell is only ~850 um in diameter), which also roughly matches the shell wall thickness on the order of 10 um. If only 1% of the laser energy is absorbed, for a shell spinning at blazing 600 rpm, a 100-MW laser would cause a 300°C temperature rise upon a single pass, which is unacceptable. Therefore, we would have to use a low-power laser around 1 MW for scanning; assuming 20% overlap between traces, the shell surface can be covered in 320 latitude lines and a shell can be scan in 32 s (plus any shell-flipping time to access the second hemisphere). Assuming the laser wave- length is 500 nm, one part in a million of the photons are scattered, and the detector collection angle is 5 deg, it is calculated that the detector would collect ~6000 photos from
~10-um-wide area per pass, which should be adequate to detect a defect above the diffusive background due to sample texture. Including data-processing time, 5 min per shell may be possible. If the heat load is still a concern, an even weaker laser could be used, in trade for longer measurement. In addition, multiple passes can be used to build up the photon count for better statistics, similar to the approach taken with the GA Precision Radiography system.17
Laser scatterometers usually use oblique incident angles such as a 70-deg tilt (from the surface normal) so that the information carried by different polarization states can be harvested to inform the defect character (Fig. 6). It was reported that surface debris and surface pits can poten- tially be distinguished by measuring intensity as a function of scattering angles.18 This would naturally lead to a geo- metry where multiple detectors collect light intensity at various scattering angles (Fig. 7a). This approach is risky for the shell geometry, compared to the case of using a single microscope objective lens to collect the scattered light in the surface normal orientation (Fig. 7b). On the one hand, multiple lenses necessitate a much larger work- ing distance and much smaller light collection angle. If each lens has a 5-deg collection angle, the data acquisition
would be more than 100× slower compared to the collec- tion efficiency by a single microscope objective lens (e.g., Nikon 0.80 N.A., 4.5 mm W.D. CFI-ELWD 100× lens), as
shown in Fig. 7b. On the other hand, a potential back- ground noise issue related to the scattering from the laser beam that propagates within the shell wall or the scattering from the vacuum chuck that holds the shell (Fig. 7). The much larger working distance in Fig. 7a is not compatible with the confocal design of Fig. 7b, which restricts the scatter collection volume to a region much smaller than the shell, thereby removing the background noise. We con- sider Fig. 7b to be the preferred and lower-risk approach. In addition, when a polarizing beamsplitter is used, a single microscope lens could enable the concurrent collection of both linear polarizations so that the intensity ratio can be used to discriminate defect types (pits versus dust). Considering the need to collect light from a large solid angle, a lens-coupled photomultiplier tube would be the most suitable detector.
Compared to dark-field microscopy, laser scatterom-
eter is two orders of magnitude faster, with the trade-offs of not being able to locate the defect to better than 10 um in the x-y plane, potentially merging multiple defects into one, and no ability to differentiate the defect radial place- ment within the shell wall. The approaches attempt not to resolve each defect optically but rather to obtain the defect size information through scattered intensity.
V.ENVIRONMENTAL SEM
The constraint of Rayleigh diffraction limit can be addressed by an e-beam source, where the DeBroglie
Fig. 6. Polarization-dependent light scattering of 70-deg tilted incident laser beam by submicron GDP surface defects. The disks indicate stereographic projection of the angles with the circle center being surface normal and the color scale being scattered intensity (a) p-mode and (b) s-mode.
Fig. 7. Conceptual approach to laser scatterometer:
(a)multiple magnifying lenses coupling photons to the detectors and (b) single microscope objective with con- focal aperture.
wavelength is much shorter than optical wavelengths. However, traditional SEMs operate under high vacuum, and a conductive coating such as carbon or gold is needed for nonconductive samples. In addition, the entire sample must be electrically grounded by either carbon tape or silver paste to avoid electrical charging. Such handling makes a tradi- tional SEM measurement destructive to shells.
In the last decade, a new class of environmental (also known as low-vac) SEMs has become available, and
these enable imaging of nonconductive surfaces without static charging. Furthermore, the presence of finite gas pressure could enable the use of a vacuum chuck to hold the shell during measurement, allowing for a nondestruc- tive way of mounting the capsules. We investigated a JEOL JSM-IT300LV Low-Vac SEM to determine whether such an approach is practical for glow discharge polymer (GDP) shells. Surface charge is well under con- trol with 5-keV e-beam at 50-Pa air pressure, and 1-μm shallow surface domes and 100-nm surface particulates can be clearly resolved (Fig. 8). Furthermore, this parti- cular system has a five-axis Eucentric stage to rotate and center the sample. The horizontal theta axis can tilt from
−10 to +90 deg, and the vertical axis can rotate continu- ously to scan phi angles. In combination, one hemisphere of the shell can be mapped. A custom vacuum chuck and a shell flipper could allow for measurement of the shell’s entire surface. However, this would be an incredibly slow method for full-surface inspection: A 6000× magnifica- tion is needed to comfortably resolve 0.1-um defects, which leads to a tiny 21 × 16-um FOV. Assuming 850- um shell diameter and 10% image overlaps, a whopping 7500 images would be needed to cover a full shell. With 20 s per image plus some rotation overhead, the estimated throughput would be a prohibitive 50 h per shell. This method is not suited for production characterization but eminently suitable as a failure analysis tool. Perhaps most importantly, it can generate a look-up table connecting the   common   defects   types   (size/composition)   to the
Fig. 8. SEM inspection of uncoated GDP shell surface with 5-keV electron beam at 50 Pa. Surface defects of 100 nm are easily resolved. The scale bars shown are (a) 10 μm, (b) 2 μm, and (c) and (d) 1 μm.
scattered light intensity. This would allow dark-field microscopy and laser scatterometry to be calibrated against the actual defects types, as opposed to an equiva- lent diameter PSL beads. A limitation of environmental SEM is that it would not be able to detect subsurface or inner-surface defects.
VI.CONCLUSIONS
In this study, we have identified three complemen- tary characterization techniques to meet the needs of the National Direct-Drive Campaign’s 100-GBar program. Dark-field microscopy can provide detailed defect char- acterization at a production-worthy 4 h per shells and is particularly valuable in the defect reduction efforts lead- ing to the year 2020 decision on the ICF program direc- tion. Conceptually similar, a laser scatterometry can be  as fast as 5 min per shell but without the ability to locate defects as precisely as the dark-field technique. Environmental SEM can directly resolve the surface defects and measure the elemental composition, a per- fect failure analysis tool despite the prohibitively slow speed. We consider the 100-Gbar metrology  challenge for 0.1-um defects on ablator capsule resolved from a scientific proof-of-principle point of view. An auto- mated dark-field inspection station is in the procurement and construction stage, and we expect a fully function- ing production tool to be ready in about 1 year.
Acknowledgments
This work was performed by GA under the auspices of the
U.S. Department of Energy contract DE-NA0001808 and GA internal research and development funding, and by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under contract DE- NA0001808. The authors would like to thank Richard Solarz   of KLA Tencor for his generous support in providing a general overview of the laser-scatterometer industry, and Regina Campbell of JEOL USA for providing SEM imaging demon- stration on nonconductive samples. This document is the prop- erty of GA. Any transmittal of this document outside GA will be in confidence. Except with the written consent of GA, (1) this document may not be copied in whole or in part and will be returned upon request or when no longer needed by recipient and (2) information contained herein may not be communicated to others and may be used by recipient only for the purpose for which it was transmitted. The government may disclose infor- mation contained herein as necessary for authorized purposes if the disclosure bears the appropriate restrictive legend and pro- prietary information notice permitted by the applicable govern- ment   regulations   related   to   the   protection   of  proprietary
information. This document is prepared for the contracting agency. The results and data may be preliminary or tentative and therefore are subject to revision and correction. This docu- ment may contain patentable material on which patent applica- tions have not yet been filed and further distribution of this report should not be made without prior approval of the con- tracting agency or the contractor.
