<title>Utilizing PUNITA experiments to evaluate fundamental delayed gamma-ray spectroscopy interrogation requirements for nuclear safeguards</title>
<author>Douglas Chase Rodriguez, Mitsuo Koizumi, Fabiana Rossi, Michio Seya, Tohn Takahashi, Tatjana Bogucarska, Jean-Michel Crochemore, Bent Pedersen & Jun Takamine</author>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Affiliation>a.Integrated Support Center for Nuclear Nonproliferation and Nuclear Security, Japan Atomic Energy Agency, Ibaraki, Japan; b.Nuclear Security and Safeguards Department, European Commission Joint Research Centre, Varese, Italy; c.Nuclear Material Management Division, Japan Atomic Energy Agency, Ibaraki, Japan</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2020.1742812</DOI>
<URL> https://doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2020.1742812</URL>
ABSTRACT
Present safeguards veriﬁcation methods for small samples of high-radioactivity nuclear mate- rial (e.g. spent nuclear fuel solution) in reprocessing facilities use destructive analysis techni- ques since passive non-destructive techniques are incapable of directly determining the nuclear material content. To supplement these methods, the Japan Atomic Energy Agency  and European Commission Joint Research Centre (JRC) are collaborating to develop delayed gamma-ray spectroscopy non-destructive assay technology for composition analysis of the ﬁssion nuclides. Multiple experiments were performed in the JRC-Ispra site using the Pulsed Neutron Interrogation Test Assembly (PUNITA) to study the signature from short-lived ﬁssion products from low-radioactivity U and Pu standard samples. From these spectra, we identify many gamma rays useful to determine the composition of a mixed nuclear material sample. Here we present the results of these experiments along with correlations to the interrogation, mass, volume, and sample homogeneity.
KEYWORDS
Delayed gamma rays; PUNITA; active interrogation; deuterium-tritium generator; neutrons; gamma rays; nuclear safeguards; non- destructive assay; ﬁssile nuclides
1.Introduction
Nuclear safeguards for bulk-handling facilities require all U and Pu to be quantiﬁed in order to verify nuclear material has not been diverted toward the production of nuclear weapons. In PUREX reprocessing plants, this is primarily performed by taking samples of the nuclear material solution from the various tanks. The most challenging solution is dissolved spent nuclear fuel since it produces high-intensity passive neutron and gamma-ray emissions. The emissions from this high- radioactivity nuclear material are not only unsafe but they also mask the direct U and Pu signatures measured by current passive non-destructive assay (NDA) tech- niques applied to low-radioactivity nuclear material (e.g. Pu-nitrate and mixed oxide powder). Eﬀectively, the neutrons from Cm complicate the eﬀective 240Pu mass measurement provided by neutron coincidence counting [1,2] while the gamma rays used to determine the composition are overwhelmed mostly by 137Cs [1]. Inspectors instead turn to destructive analysis meth- ods to verify high-radioactivity nuclear material. Hybrid K-Edge Densitometry (HKED) [3,4] is used to evaluate the U and Pu elemental mass for partial-defect veriﬁca- tion with the composition and bias-defect veriﬁcation determined   by   Isotope   Dilution   Mass   Spectrometry
(IDMS) [4]. Both  of these  provide  ≲ 1% uncertainty  to
their  respective  values  [5];  however,  the  IDMS sample
preparation process requires many days within a hot cell. This limits the number of samples to only 20% of those evaluated by HKED and extends the reporting time to  10 days [6]. Further, the IDMS method uses many large dry spikes for calibration and produces waste in the laboratory. Consequently, methods capable of reducing the time for reporting on partial defect sample veriﬁca- tion, reducing waste, and consuming fewer additional resources should be found to supplement IDMS.
Toward this goal, the Japan Atomic Energy Agency (JAEA) is collaborating with the European Commission Joint Research Centre (JRC) to develop multiple active- interrogation NDA techniques [7]. Of these, delayed gamma-ray spectroscopy (DGS) has the potential to quickly and eﬃciently evaluate the ﬁssile nuclide com- position (i.e. 235U, 239Pu, and 241Pu) within mixed nuclear material. The composition is evaluated by deter- mining their fractional contribution to the gamma-ray spectrum, which is proportional to the unique ﬁssion- product yield and content within the sample.
The focus of this work is to describe the delayed gamma-ray spectral diﬀerences from multiple mea- surements performed by this JAEA-JRC collabora- tion using the Pulsed Neutron Interrogation Test Assembly (PUNITA)  [8]  located  in  JRC-Ispra (Italy) in the scope of safeguards applications. Standard U and Pu samples were used for safety and to evaluate individual spectra that would com- bine in relative proportions based on the composi- tion   of    the    spent    fuel    solution    samples    in   a reprocessing plant. Speciﬁcally, this work provides foundational information related to developing com- ponent, instrumentation, and procedure require- ments for developing practical DGS  NDA  that  can be used for eﬃcient and timely veriﬁcation. First will be a brief description of the DGS technique followed by a description of PUNITA, the samples, and the measurements performed. Next is a description  of  the analyzed data as applicable toward NDA veriﬁca- tion and a discussion on the lessons learned for eﬀective DGS interrogations. Finally,  a  discussion  on how this information will be used by this JAEA- JRC collaboration toward future development will be presented.
2.Delayed gamma-ray spectroscopy technique
Similar to passive high-rate gamma-ray  spectro- scopy [4], DGS is used to evaluate the composition of a nuclear material sample with a primary nuclide (p) atomic density of
@1
where ρ is the density of the sample, NA  is  Avogadro’s constant, and fp and mp are the weight fraction and atomic mass of p in the sample. Speciﬁcally,  the  composition  is  the  relative  fp  in the sample. However, compared to passive gamma- ray  spectroscopy  that  directly  evaluates  fp  from the
< 1-MeV gamma rays emitted by the nuclear mate- rial  of  interest,  high-radioactivity  nuclear  material
must be evaluated from active interrogation of the sample. Speciﬁcally, a  DGS  interrogation  requires  an  Irradiation  period  (t  )  and  a  Measurement per- iod (with possible Delay and Reset periods (tand tR) in between. This pattern is  performed  for  one or more Cycles (C) to reach statistically sig-During the Irradiation period, neutrons interact with the sample described through an energy- dependent (E) total (tot) reaction rate deﬁned as
@2
where ϕ is the external source neutron ﬂux entering the sample volume V after being ﬁltered (F) by the sample container before interacting with the sample primary nuclei, Np from Equation (1), that have individual total cross-sections, σtot. The fp term within Np  scales Rp  to a fractional contribution of the reactions. Though the absolute R scales linearly with V and ρ, 1-mL quantities of spent fuel solution are used for HKED [5] for opera- tor and inspector safety, thus minimum requirements must also be considered for DGS. While low- radioactivity nuclear material is similarly restricted to safe  quantities,  these  can  be  signiﬁcantly  larger  for a greater Rtot;p and easier interrogations. However, measurements are still limited by physics and the ability for the neutrons to penetrate the sample and gamma rays to escape must be optimized.
While Rtot;p is a general term, the prompt signature emitted during the Irradiation period is largely over- whelmed by the background from activation of the matrix material and environment. Consequently, the gamma-ray signature required to evaluate fp must be observed during the delayed period (≳10—9 s), domi- nated by the ﬁssion products produced by the ﬁssion (fiss) reaction mode, rfiss. Hence, the total number of ﬁssion products, F, generated in a nuclear material sample is described by
@3
where i is the individual ﬁssion product generated with energy-dependent (E) ﬁssion yield probability  Y
by sample primary ﬁssionable nuclide p at total reac-tion  rate  R  of  Equation  (2)  and  energy-dependent
ﬁssion-reaction  fraction  r.  The  ﬁssion  products are integrated over all E for a single p before being summed over all nuclides within a mixed nuclear material sample. For the DGS evaluation, the ﬁssion product contribution from p is determined by the
composition fp in Rp and modulated by Yfiss (see Figure 1).
As soon as they are produced, the ﬁssion products
subsequently decay according to the decay probability equation that integrates to
@4
to indicate the number of atoms at the end of the particular time period, tp, proportional to decay con- stant λ ¼ lnð2Þ=τ1=2 while concurrently being pro- duced by the decaying ði — 1Þth parent nuclide with branching ratio β. During the irradiation period (tI),
the nuclide is also produced  by the ﬁssion  process,  Fi
through  Yfiss  from  Equation  (3).  It  must  be  noted,though, that the decay of these ﬁssion products
increases the   i	1 th daughter also produced during the Irradiation period.
During their decay, the ﬁssion products emit gamma rays at unique energies (E) observed as the spectrum
Figure 1. The mean fractional ﬁssion product yield mass dis- tribution of 235U, 239Pu, and 241Pu for the declared thermal- neutron energy from the ENDF/B-VII.1 database [15]. See online version for color.
@5
where εdet, Ødet, , and γ are the detector eﬃciency, detector resolution broadening, shield attenuation, and measurement eﬀects at the j gamma-ray energies produced with intensity I for the    number of decays of nuclide  i  derived  from  Equation  (4).  Again,  for a DGS interrogation, only the  Measurement  period (tp ¼ tM) is of concern in order to escape the prompt gamma-ray background. Variables contributing to the measurement eﬀects (γ) term include Compton scatter in the environment and detector shielding, the sam- ple-to-detector distance, x-ray production from shielding materials, etc.
Compared to that for low-radioactivity nuclear mate- rial, thick gamma-ray ﬁltering ( ) must be applied to suppress the low-energy passive gamma rays (and fast neutrons) of high-radioactivity nuclear material, restrict- ing the observable gamma rays to those with energy greater than ,3 MeV. Fortunately, many of the short- lived  ﬁssion  products  with  τ1=2 ,<  20  minutes  produce gamma  rays  with  E ,>  2:7  MeV,  which  also  enables quicker evaluation of the samples for safeguards veriﬁca- tion. However, the peaks must still be suﬃciently resol- vable in both energy and intensity (signiﬁcance) to determine the composition signature. Having the best energy  resolution  (,0.2%  at  1.33  MeV),  a  high-purity germanium (HPGe) detector is usually utilized to provide high peak distinction. However, HPGe also suﬀers from neutron damage [9,10] and must be placed suﬃciently far from the neutron source, introducing Delay (tD) and Reset (tR) periods between the Irradiation and Measurement periods. Lanthanum-bromide (LaBr3) has been evaluated for DGS due to it having a higher count- rate capability as a scintillator [11], but even these relatively high resolution (,3% at 0.6 MeV) scintillators have challenges resolving individual peaks.
For Equation (5), the shielding intensity suppres- sion (S) is dominantly oﬀset by increasing the decay rate, N , through the production, F, in Equation (3).
The most eﬃcient way F can increase is through rfiss since σfiss of the ﬁssile nuclides (e.g. 235U, 239Pu, and 241Pu)  is  ,500       greater  for  thermal  energies  (e.g.
E < 1 eV) than for fast energies (E	1  MeV)  of all
ﬁssionable nuclides (see Figure 2). However, the neu-
tron sources available for use within a reprocessing plant are restricted on size and therefore limited to deuterium-tritium and deuterium-deuterium neutron generators or radioactive isotopes (e.g. 252Cf). The challenge is that each of these produce neutrons with fast energy, requiring moderation into the thermal range [12,13]. Again, to protect an HPGe detector, suﬃcient neutron ﬁltering and distance must be uti- lized for a DGS interrogation, further demanding the Delay and Reset periods.
While the absolute ﬁssion rate is dependent on the neutron source intensity, the individual peaks observed are more signiﬁcantly aﬀected by the inter- rogation itself since Equations (4) and (5) are both highly dependent on time. Speciﬁcally, the ﬁssion pro- ducts are created during the Irradiation period through the last term of Equation (4), which is diﬀer- ent for each ﬁssion product due to the unique τ1=2 and Yp;i. While all short-lived ﬁssion products are created, the gamma-ray spectrum is only observed during the Measurement period with a Delay period removing the shortest lived short-lived ﬁssion products ( ,<  5 s) and a Reset period allowing more ﬁssion product nuclei to decay but not contribute to the spectrum.  Finally, additional Cycles allow the longer lived short- lived ﬁssion products to build up from the decay of their ﬁssion product parents, changing the observed spectrum over the full interrogation.
The work presented here evaluates ﬁssion product delayed gamma-ray spectra (Γ) above 2.7 MeV from samples irradiated with the PUNITA system. The peaks (Ii;j) are determined using the Evaluated Nuclear Structure Data Files (ENSDF) database [14] with the ﬁssion yield values from ENDF/B-VII.1 [15]. The data were processed and analyzed using the CERN ROOT analysis framework [16].
3.Experimental conditions and procedures
PUNITA was developed for diﬀerential die-away ana- lysis (DDA) [17] using a deuterium-tritium neutron generator with a maximum output of 2 108 n/s emission rate. This neutron generator is encased in a set of tungsten rings and run at a lower intensity to produce  a  ,2 × 103   n/s/cm2   ﬂux  in  the  center  of  a 50 × 50 × 80-cm3 cavity within graphite and high-
Figure 2. The ﬁssion cross section of 235U, 239Pu, 241Pu, and 238U vs. log-energy from the ENDF/B-VII.1 database [15] as described in the legend. The vertical lines, with various shades of cyan and dash-dot patterns according to the legend, mark energies indicated as the ﬁssion yield production energy in the ENDF database. See online version for color.
density polyethylene (HDPE) walls [8]. Earlier work showed that PUNITA could be used as a DGS irradia- tion system [18] by opening one of the doors to place an HPGe detector outside of the neutron ﬁeld. The normal DDA interrogation was modiﬁed by adding an external pulse generator to control the neutron gen- erator and send TTL control signals to both transfer the sample and start the data acquisition. However, the pulse generator still required a manual reset for safety. For this work, extra graphite and HDPE was added inside the cavity in various amounts to boost the ﬂux within the sample (see Figure 3), the details of which will be described in a separate publication.
Figure 3. The graphite and high-density polyethylene inﬁll for
the PUNITA cavity (black outline) around the neutron genera-tor and sample shuttle for the later experiments. See online version for color.
The interrogated samples were combinations of standard,    low-radioactivity    reference    materials: U from the Central Bureau for Nuclear  Measurements (CBNM) [19] and PuGa alloy disks. Table 1 indicates the run reference number; associated
235U, 239Pu, and 241Pu masses; and interrogation where
tI, tD, tM, tR represent the irradiation, delay, measure- ment, and reset times in real-time seconds and C indicates the number of cycles. All interrogations  were  performed  with  an  Irradiation  time  of  tI    50
s. The number of cycles for the 2018XX runs is the
8	maximum  number  in  the  interrogation  with indivi-dual spectra for each period integrated up through that cycle. The runs with a combination cycle time indicate there was a problem in the interrogation after the ﬁrst number of cycles with the second number of cycles added onto the end.The  CBNM  samples  have  a  ,7-cm  diameter  and are  ,2  cm  thick;  the  PuGa  are  either  0.2  or  0.6  cm thick and between 0.2- and 3.7-cm diameters depend- ing on the declared mass. For the 2018XX runs, the PuGa samples were attached to an Al plate to ensure they were in the same position for each interrogation cycle; the CBNM Al dummy sample was added start- ing with Run 201814. This became important since, as observed in Run 2015Al, the fast neutrons from the deuterium-tritium neutron generator also produce 27Mg and 24Na from (n,p) and (n,α) reactions in addition to the (n,γ) reaction  with  24Na producing an interference gamma ray at 2754 keV (see Figure 4). For the 2015 measurements, a 25% Canberra GR- 2520 detector was placed 10 cm above the sample with
Table 1. The list of campaign runs for the associated samples and interrogation as noted in the text used in this study with the ‘0.00’ indicating there was no U and/or Pu, but with additional Al material.
Figure 4. The gamma rays produced by the PUNITA deuter-
ium-tritium neutrons from 28Al, 27Mg, and 28Na from the (n,γ), (n,p), and (n,α) reaction modes on the 27Al in the dummy sample.
1 mm of Cd between them and the sample was shuttled horizontally out of an open door, as in the earlier JRC work [18]. For the 2016 measurements, the same transfer occurred, but instead a 50% ITECH nstruments NIGC 50220 was placed 6 cm  to  the  side of the sample with a 5-mm Pb ﬁlter. For the 2018 measurements, a fast transfer system was installed to vertically move the sample to an 80% ORTEC GMX 80P4-95-A detector placed below the PUNITA system (see Figure 3). While the detector was placed 4 cm in front of the sample with only 1.4 cm of Pb and 1 mm of Cd between them, the side of the detector was facing the sample due to space limitations.
Due to the diﬀerent interrogations aﬀecting the absolute rates, only counts are compared in this study. Following previous work [20], these are deter- mined by ﬁrst ﬁnding the statistically measured peak count for the particular interrogation (inter) and sam- ple (samp)
@6
Figure 5. The relative positions of the PUNITA deuterium-tritium neutron generator and detector compared to the vertically trans- ferred CBNM U and PuGa samples. See online version for color.
where and are the bin-wise integrated measured counts of the background and total under the peak. To smooth out the random counts and to ﬁnd doublets, the peaks are then ﬁt to a Gaussian-on-line curve with the ﬁt peak counts calculated according to
@7
where Ø and A are the Gaussian ﬁt peak half-width and
amplitude for the peak found at the mean energy E.
HPGe detectors were used to obtain high-resolution peaks, Ødet in Equation (5), with the gamma rays collected in integrated pulse-height spectra over the entire interroga- tion (2015XX and 2016XX) or as cyclic pulse-height spectra that were composites of the present and all previous cycles. While the PUNITA neutron ﬂux was suﬃcient to produce observable gamma-ray peaks with the chosen binning, the histograms were re-binned to smooth out the random background  and to  increase   the   statistical   counts   for a given peak that would otherwise have larger Ø and smaller A by being distributed over more bins. This reduces the systematic uncertainty on the Gaussian counts:
@8
where Ø and A are the ﬁt values used in Equation (7). However, all measurements are scaled to the keV-bin width to ensure better spectral comparison.
4.Qualitative analysis of measured data
Using the observable peaks, DGS is expected to deter- mine the composition of a mixed sample to reasonable accuracy and precision. Measuring pure 235U, 239Pu, or 241Pu provides a foundation to determine the primary gamma rays and associated ﬁssion products that would contribute to the composition of a mixed nuclear material sample. While the 2015XX and 2016XX runs use single samples dominated by a single ﬁssile nuclide, most of the 2018XX runs combine various U and Pu samples (see Table 1). Consequently, the fundamental diﬀerences will be noted from the 2015XX and 2016XX runs and con- trasted to the combined samples of the 2018XX runs. For improved   determination   of   the   spectral    signature, a reﬁned quality cut was applied for the relative peak intensity:
@9
where A and δA are the amplitude and uncertainty of the Gaussian peak ﬁt at energy E.
The two spectra in Figure 6 show the diﬀerence between the 235U and (dominantly) 239Pu (Runs 201610 and 201614) scaled to the ﬁssile mass using      a 150-s Measurement period and 5-s Delay period. Of signiﬁcant note is that the slightly larger mass, smaller
Table 2. Gamma-ray peaks ﬁt mean energy and Gaussian counts from the noted short-lived ﬁssion  products that pass the relative peak signiﬁcance cut and compared for composi- tion and measurement time (tM) diﬀerences as indicated for the Run listed in Table 1. The values are rounded to the uncertainty.
volume Pu sample resulted in less intense peaks com- pared to those from the U sample, indicating that DGS is very sensitive to the volume of the sample (see Table 2). Regardless, as expected from Figure 1, the smaller nuclides of the lower mass yield (e.g.  90)  appear more prominently in the 235U spectrum while the larger nuclides (e.g. 106Tc) appear more prominently in the 239Pu spectra.
Comparatively, the 2018XX runs had a shorter Delay period, the Measurement period was concur- rently reduced (see Table 1), and the closer detector had a higher eﬃciency. While not iteratively evaluated, these combined changes for the same samples show signiﬁcant increases in many of the peak counts (see Figure 7). Though there was a small quantity of Pu with the 201817 U run, it does not produce a signiﬁ- cant contribution to the spectrum since the 106Tc peaks do not pass the relative peak signiﬁcance quality
cut  of  Equation  (9);  σrelð3185Þ¼ 2:33σ  and  is not visible above the background. Of signiﬁcant note is that the visible 136I 2868-keV peak in the Pu 201814 spectrum failed the stronger relative peak intensity quality cut at only 3.3σ. It should also be noted that the 2933-keV peak from 95Sr is actually a doublet with the  2925.7-keV  peak  from  91Rb.  Consequently,   the
peak  intensity  I2933     ¼ 4:1%  does   not  appear   with a proper ratio to the  ISr   95	4:6% peak.
While the absolute counts of the gamma-ray peaks can provide a measure of the number of ﬁssion- product nuclei produced by their decay, the ratio of the peaks provides a more accurate composition deter-mination since most ﬁssion products are produced by multiple ﬁssile nuclides. The peaks are best scaled to the  3575-keV  peak  from  95Y  since  it  has  a  ,10-min half-life and is the daughter of 95Sr that is the primary isobar for all three major ﬁssile nuclides (see Table 3). The peak-ratio ( ) of the Gaussian-ﬁt peaks from Equation (7) is calculated by
@
where E is the peak ﬁt mean to compare and C is the cycle number. While it can be seen that the 91Rb 3600- keV peak increases by ,51% in absolute counts between
Figure 6. A comparison of Runs 201614 and 201610 between 2700- and 3650-keV. Note, the visible peaks not listed in Table 2 fail at least one quality cut.
Figure 7. A comparison of Runs 201814 and 201817 between 2700- and 3650-keV.
the two interrogation patterns for 235U (see Table 2), Table  4  shows  that	3600    increases  by  only  ,11% since  the  95Y  peak  also  increases  by  ,37%.  Of  major importance for composition analysis, though, is that 3600 for 235U is inverted for 239Pu under both inter- rogation patterns due to the ﬁssion yields and half-lives
listed in Table 3.
Compared to the 2016XX runs, more gamma-ray peaks become signiﬁcant in the 2018XX runs by redu- cing tM and tD. This is not attributable to the higher eﬃciency or shorter source-to-detector distance since the peak ratios would otherwise remain constant. The only peak that can be associated with the detection  diﬀerence itself is the 2803-keV peak, the single escape peak from the 90mRb 3316-keV gamma ray.
For composition evaluation, the diﬀerences in the peak ratios indicate that the spectrum is sensitive to the interrogation itself. Thus, the primary DGS focuses are to determine the optimum interrogation (pattern and num- ber of cycles) and to develop an instrument that can perform this interrogation within an analytical labora- tory. For instance, the 2716-keV peak from 95Sr appears with the same relative intensity in both the U and Pu 50- Cycle, 50-s Measurement interrogation spectra, contrary to the relative U and Pu ﬁssion yields for this parent– daughter pair. Additionally, the 106Tc peaks are more observable in Run 201814 while the Rb isotopes’ peaks are more signiﬁcant in Run 201817 but in diﬀerent ratios compared to the 2016XX runs.
To determine the optimum interrogation for compo- sition analysis, the build-up of the gamma rays over each cycle should be evaluated. Though the 2015XX and 2016XX runs were single integrated pulse-height analysis (PHA) spectra, the 2018XX runs were collected with PHA integrated up through the end of the particular cycle (e.g. Cycle 23 was integrated from Cycle 1 through 23). Figure 8 shows a few of the PC counts from Equation
(7) of primary U peaks as a function of time (Run 201817); the last points are derived from Figure 7. The linearity of the 91Rb peak indicates that it was produced at roughly constant rates per cycle and mostly decayed away before each following cycle. The 95Y peak was insigniﬁcant until the sixth cycle after which there were suﬃcient decays for the longer τ1=2 from an increase in the total number of nuclei built in from 95Sr parent; surpassing it after ,2500 s. Similarly, 90Kr (the primary
90     isobar)     decays     as     βKr—90;Rb—90  ¼ 87%    and
Table 3. A list of many important ﬁssion products emitting at least one gamma ray with energy > 2.7 MeV useful for peak- ratio comparison of delayed gamma-ray spectroscopy or higher-yield parent ﬁssion products from the ENDF/B-VII.1 database [15]. Also listed are their associated half-life and ﬁssion yields with the numbersin parentheses indicating the uncertainty on the last digit of the value.
Table 4. Gamma-ray peaks ﬁt mean energy and relative Gaussian counts from Table 2 compared to the  3575-keV peak from 95Y. The number in parentheses is the uncertainty on the last digit of the value based on the smallest overall digit in  the uncertainties.
βKr—90;Rb—90m ¼ 13% [14] with the shorter τ1=2 90Rb peak becoming signiﬁcant earlier than 90mRb.
Additionally,    both    the    95Sr    and    90mRb have a discontinuity around 3400-s. Estimating that these energies (Eout) are aﬀected by a Compton edge, the
@11
where mec2 is the rest mass-energy of an electron. Evaluating the observed concurrent discontinuity, both of these PC counts are likely aﬀected by the Compton continuum of the higher 3575-keV peak from 95Y.
The same peaks can be analyzed from the Pu sam- ple (Run 201814) but the lower ﬁssion rate delays the visible onset for many of the peaks and introduces large relative uncertainties (see Figure 9). However, scaling Pinter;samp E to the relative ﬁssion yield (Yp;i), ﬁssion cross-section (σtot;p), ﬁssion fraction mode
(rfiss ), and the ﬁssile mass (M ) can give an indication
tot;p	p
of the expected diﬀerence. Applying this to the counts in the 95Sr peak results in
@12
using the values and errors of the 50 cycles in Table 2 and estimating the ﬁssion cross-section at 0.0253 eV (thermal energy). Eﬀectively, these two measurements are within error using this scaling method.
However, this fails for a direct calculation of the
95Y peak
@13
which is 2:7  the measured value. Using a Welch’s t-test to compare the ﬁssion yield contributions results in a t-value of
Figure 8. A comparison of some of the major 235U ﬁssion product peaks in Run 201817 integrated through the cycle time. See online version for color.
Figure 9. A comparison of some of the major 239Pu ﬁssion product peaks in Run 201814 integrated through the cycle time. See online version for color.
@14
where δ is the associated uncertainty of the value in the numerator. Using the number of degrees of freedom
@15
the ROOT calculated cumulative distribution function
(CDF)  is  ,0.957,  indicating  that  there  is  a    ,<  5% chance of this being the same as the measured value. However, this peak is driven more by the 95Sr parent, which results in
@16
using Yp;95 Sr  and a CDF of ,0.54, indicating that these are within 5% of each other.
Figures 10 and 11 show the peak ratios for each cycle using Equation (10). Other than the reduction of the peak-ratio uncertainties during subsequent cycles, the most prominent feature is that the mean of the ratios also change over time. As noted from Table 4, the 95Sr-95Y peak ratio is ,73% for both the U and Pu samples by the end of the 50 cycles with the U trend more precise due to the higher ﬁssion rate. Compared to   the   95Sr   and    90mRb    peak    trends    in    the   U interrogation, the Pu interrogation shows the 95Sr peak generally remains ,50% greater than the 90mRb peak for all cycles, correlating to the 95Sr-to-90Kr ﬁs- sion yield ratio of 239Pu (see Table 3).
Finally, other than the high-yield 91Rb peaks, the 201610 U ratios are < 1  for  all  peaks,  indicating  that the longer Measurement period  focuses  more  on the longer-lived short-lived ﬁssion products (increased 95Y denominator) (see Table 4). This is additionally  supported  by   the   90Rb   peak   having a  lower  ratio  than  the  longer  lived  90mRb  peak  in longer 150-s Measurement period being less than the associated peaks from the 201817 run.
Comparatively,  the  Pu  sample  only  has  the high
yield, high-intensity 106Tc peaks with  > 1, since, otherwise, these are all from lower-mass ﬁssion pro- ducts where the ﬁssion yield is less than that for U (see Figure 1). While Table 4 values indicate those asso- ciated with a  more 239Pu  composition compared  to a 235U composition, these results indicate that the inter rogation itself must be optimized to better distinguish
the composition of a mixed sample.
5.Mixed Composition Study
Fundamentally, a changing composition involves each nuclide increasing or decreasing for a constant ﬁssile mass. The ﬁrst step of our mixed-composition analysis study compares Runs 201502 and 201503 and sepa- rately Runs 201616 and 201610 that have the same ﬁssile composition (235U) with diﬀerent masses under- going the same interrogation  for  each  pair  (see Table 1). Tables 5 and 6 compare the  qualifying  peaks of these four runs; Figure 6 shows the spectrum of 201610. The ﬁrst study is to ensure that these two
Figure 10. A comparison of peak-ratios of the major 235U ﬁssion product peak counts in Figure 8 proportional to the 3575-keV peak. Additionally, the same peak ratios from Run 201610 are shown for comparison. See online version for color.
Figure 11. A comparison of peak-ratios of the major 239Pu ﬁssion product peak counts in Figure 9 proportional to the 3575-keV peak. Additionally, the same peak ratios from Run 201614 are shown for comparison. See online version for color.
campaigns have the same result for the same sample by scaling to the diﬀerent eﬃciency of the detectors (ε), the diﬀerent gamma-ray ﬁlters ( ), the diﬀerent distances between the sample and the detector (D), and the diﬀerent number of cycles (C). Presuming that the 91Rb is minimally aﬀected by the build-up of shorter-lived parents, the 3600-keV peak  from  201503 can be scaled to that of 201610 as
@17
compared to the 421 counts of from run 201610. Equations (14) and (15) result in T201610ð3600Þ ¼
—0:139  and  νT201610 ð3600Þ  ¼ 1:868  for  a  CDF  of  0.451.
Consequently, even with diﬀerent shielding, these are statistically within ,5% of each other and appropriate comparisons can be made.
From Equations (4) and (3), the number of gamma rays observed must be proportional to the ﬁssion rate that is in turn proportional to the ﬁssile mass for the same interrogation conditions. For these two pairs of single-sample measurements, it is expected that the rate for each observable gamma ray should be propor-ional to the 235U in the sample (see Table 1). Scaling
Table 5. Gamma-ray peaks ﬁt mean energy, Gaussian counts, and t-test CDF results from diﬀerent 235U content and interrogated as Runs 201502 and 201503 (see Table 1). Also listed are the 201502 mass values scaled (201502’) to the 201503 mass and mass with self-shielding correction. The CDF is noted to the ﬁrst diﬀerent digit in the integrated values.
Table 6. Gamma-ray peaks ﬁt mean energy, Gaussian counts, and t-test CDF results from diﬀerent 235U content and interrogated as Runs 201616 and 201610 (see Table 1). Also listed are the 201616 mass values scaled (201616') to the 201610 mass and mass with self-shielding correction. The CDF is noted to the ﬁrst diﬀerent digit in the integrated values.the low-mass peaks of each pair in Tables 5 and 6 to the associated higher mass of the same interrogation using
@!8
shows that there are always too few gamma rays observed in the higher mass spectrum. This appears consistent with Rennhofer [18] that also shows a nonlinear mass correla- tion that appears to be from self-shielding [21], as indi- cated by the corrected values that are closer to the measured value. However, while  Rennhofer  integrated  all gamma rays observed above 3.3-MeV and only reached a few hundred counts, these experiments measured hun- dreds of counts in the individual peaks, with ,100      the counts integrating above 3.3-MeV.Reducing the minimum energy to include addi- tional  relevant  peaks,  integrating  above  E   2700 keV shows similar results, though these are slightly biased by the 24Na decay from 27Al activation.
However, most of the integrated counts are from scat- tered and Compton background gamma rays and dis- sociated from the ﬁssion products (see Figures 6 and 7). Consequently, any mass correlation studies should be evaluated from speciﬁc gamma-ray peaks with the self-shielding correction fully understood.
In our attempt to study a mixed composition, there is only one  set  of a  consistently increasing  mass  of a single nuclide that systematically changes the com- position. All other runs used multiple PuGa samples to attempt to span diﬀerent mixed compositions. Runs 201814, 201818, and 201822 gradually have increasing
235U masses for a ﬁxed Pu sample (see Table 1). While there is not a corresponding reduction in the Pu mass in this set of consistent runs, Table 7 shows the peak counts in each run scaled to the total ﬁssile mass to approximate this adjustment. The 2753-keV peak sys- tematically increases due to the larger 86Br/90mRb con- tributions from the 235U with similar results for the 3600-keV peak from 91Rb.
The 3575-keV peak from 97Y that is signiﬁcant for both the U and Pu samples ﬁrst decreases when the 0.53-g 235U sample is inserted before increasing with 30% 235U increase (see Table 7). This happens simi- larly for the 3316- and 4136-keV peaks. However, while there is no decrease in the  amount  of  239Pu, the 2702-keV peak from 99mNb and the 2851- and 3186-keV peaks from 106Tc dominant in 239Pu decrease dissociatively with a larger 235U mass. From the conﬁguration described in Figure 5, and the fact that the U sample is signiﬁcantly larger and contains
,200 g of 238U3O8, it appears that neutrons scattered back from the PUNITA walls and inﬁll moderator are signiﬁcantly ﬁltered by the CBNM before entering the PuGa. Essentially, the neutron ﬂux entering the PuGa sample is not the same as that entering the CBNM samples since the 238U and 16O suﬃciently scatter or absorb the neutrons initially reaching the Pu when the CBNM is not present. Consequently, it can be under- stood that a mixed nuclear material sample must be homogeneous in order to properly evaluate the com- position by allowing each nuclide to have the same probability to interact under the same neutron ﬂux conditions.
Compared to the increasing U mass for a ﬁxed Pu mass, Runs 201810, 201809, 201814, and 201811 com- pare variable quantities of Pu isotopes combining two
PuGa samples. However, during Run 201809 there was a mistimed irradiation that caused an abnormal delay in the interrogation pattern and Runs 201810 and 201811 stopped after 35 and 33 cycles. Consequently, Table 8 shows the counts per ﬁssile mass and the associated volume for increasing masses only through Cycle 33 for each run. Unlike the total integrated counts above 2700- and 3300-keV that are consistent with the single-nuclide runs (see Figure 12), the individual peak counts have no clear correlation to the total ﬁssile mass, volume, or 241Pu fraction since some peaks systematically increase while others jump discontinuously. There is a slight correlation of the peaks to an increasing mass-volume (see Figure 13), though more studies must be performed to see if there is a ﬁltering eﬀect for these thin, dense samples.
6.Discussion of lessons learned and future development
The most important lessons learned from these studies is that DGS is highly sensitive to homogeneity, volume, timing, and neutron source  energy.  From the perspective of safeguards veriﬁcation, our primary goal of spent nuclear fuel solutions is highly applicable for homogeneity since a single HKED sample will contain all of the ﬁssile nuclides in one volume.  While self-shielding may  play a role in the number   of nuclei undergoing ﬁssion, there is a probability for all nuclides to observe the same neutron ﬂux. However, from the observed dependence on the volume (and mass), the desired HKED sample will aﬀect the minimum neutron source intensity required for eﬃcient interrogations. Additionally, while our
Table 7. Gamma-ray peaks ﬁt mean energy and Gaussian counts from increasing U mass with the same Pu sample base and interrogated with the same periodic time pattern and scaled to the total ﬁssile mass (see Table 1). Also shown are the relative increase of those peaks appearing in multiple spectra for sequentially greater U.
Table 8. Gamma-ray peaks ﬁt mean energy and Gaussian counts from increasing Pu mass interrogated with the same interrogation pattern (see Table 1). These values are inte- grated through the maximum of Run 201811 that stopped at 33 cycles
Figure 12. A comparison of total counts above the indicated energy in Table 8 compared to the total ﬁssile mass of the combined samples.
Figure 13. A comparison of peak-ratios of the ﬁssion product
peak counts in Table 8 compared to the mass-volume of the combined samples for those peaks that are in all four spectra. See online version for color.
goal is to develop DGS for high-radioactivity nuclear material, homogeneous samples of low-radioactivity nuclear material (e.g. MOX powder) can also be eval- uated using this technique.
More importantly, though, is that changing the interrogation pattern greatly aﬀects the ratio of the gamma-ray peak intensities. As such, an optimum interrogation must be determined to evaluate the composition from those ﬁssion products best asso- ciated to the ﬁssionable nuclides of interest. Additionally, due to the limitations with the samples of these studies, more experiments are required to determine those ﬁssion products useful for distin-guishing	Pu, for which the evaluated nuclear data has large uncertainties (see Table 3).
Finally, as observed throughout this work, 86Br and 90mRb both produce a gamma ray at ,2753-keV that should be extremely useful for distinguishing  a 235U contribution from a Pu contribution. However, due to the observed 24Na decay peak from 27Al(n,α)
activation, this presents challenges to the analysis. Since  this  is  caused  by  the  ,14-MeV  neutrons  from the deuterium-tritium neutron generator, using deu- terium-deuterium or 252Cf neutrons that are produced at   ,2.5   MeV   will   minimally   aﬀect   an   Al   casing. However, the sample containers used for HKED do not contain Al and the ﬁnal instrument design can address this challenge.
Conclusions
Over the course of three years, multiple experiments were performed using PUNITA to interrogate U and Pu samples in order to observe their delayed gamma- ray signature from short-lived ﬁssion products. From these spectra, we were able to distinguish many gamma rays that can help determine the composition of a mixed nuclear material sample wherein the low- energy signature is hidden. Toward optimizing the composition analysis, our present results  indicate  that DGS is highly dependent on the timing  pattern as well as the absolute volume and the homogeneity of the sample. Simple correlations were made to the composition and mass of the samples with lessons learned on the best practices for evaluating the composition for safeguards veriﬁcation of high- radioactivity nuclear material samples.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the Japanese Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science, and Technology (MEXT) under the subsidiary for the “promotion for strengthening nuclear security and the like”.  This  work  was done under the agreement between JAEA and EURATOM in the ﬁeld of nuclear materials safeguards research and development.
