<title>Rapid vitrification of simulated Sr2+ radioactive contaminated soil for nuclear emergencies</title>
<Affiliation>1.State Key Laboratory of Environmental-Friendly Energy Materials, Southwest University of Science and Technology, Mianyang 621010, Sichuan, People’s Republic of China
2.Fundamental Science on Nuclear Wastes and Environmental Safety Laboratory, Southwest University of Science and Technology, Mianyang 621010, Sichuan,
People’s Republic of China
3.Institute of Materials, China Academy of Engineering Physics, Mianyang 621700, Sichuan,
People’s Republic of China
4.Institute of Modern Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou 730000, Gansu, People’s Republic of China
5.Institute of Plasma Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei 230031, Anhui, People’s Republic of China</Affiliation>
<author>Shunzhang Chen • Xiaoyan Shu • Fen Luo • Hao Dong • Chen Xu • Bingsheng Li •
Dadong Shao • Xirui Lu</author>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>NUCLEAR ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10967-018-6313-3</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1007/s10967-018-6313-3</URL>
Abstract
To efficiently inhibit the diffusion of radioactive nuclides in soil that were left by nuclear emergency accidents, microwave sintering technology was used in this work to vitrify the simulated strontium contaminated soil. Four kinds of simulated strontium-contaminated soil could be successfully vitrified almost completely within 30 min without any additional components. Sr2? cations are immobilized into aluminosilicate glass network structure. In addition, the solubility of SrSO4 in different soil is related to the element contents of aluminum and silicon. This work reveals a demonstration that beta- radioactive contaminated soil could be treated by microwave vitrifying.
Keywords Beta-radioactive contaminated soil · Rapid vitrification · Immobilization · Solid solubility · Microwave sintering
Introduction
During the entire nuclear fuel cycle of nuclear energy production and use, some component elements might cause nuclear emergency accidents [1]. The occurrence of nuclear emergency accidents will inevitably produce radioactive contamination to the soil [2, 3]. Nuclides need to be immediately controlled to prevent diffusion into the surrounding environment and water table. Otherwise, the nuclides will migrate into water or air through the soil and bring health threats to the human body. Among the treat- ment methods for radioactive contamination, traditional ones such as chemical washing cannot dispose radioactive nuclides efficiently, and it is easy to cause secondary contamination. Therefore, some other techniques should be used to develop rapid methods for inhibiting the migration of radioactive nuclides.
In-situ vitrification (ISV) is an effectual technology which can immobilize contamination or wastes at the job site, and glass is a kind of widely used matrix that could hold a series of radioactive nuclides [4, 5]. The radioactive contaminated soil can transform into glass phase under the thermal treatment [ 1000 °C, and different kinds of radioactive nuclides can be immobilized into glass matrix which has a certain resistance to leaching [6–8]. However, due to joule heating method as generally used, the soil vitrification time is relatively long and the uniformity of sintered soil matrix is hard to achieve [9, 10]. As a nuclear emergency accident might occur anywhere, conditions required for different radioactive contaminated soils to be vitrified are also different [11–14]. Therefore, an efficient and uniform sintering method needs to be identified to dispose of any type of soil contaminated in a nuclear emergency accident.
Microwave technology heats materials by coupling the special band of microwave and microstructure in materials [15]. Comparing with the Joule heating method, micro- wave technology has the advantages of improving the microstructural homogeneity and macroscopic properties of the final product [16, 17]. Particularly, its fast heating process is essential for soil vitrification, which is well suited for a case of nuclear emergency. In our previous work, microwave sintering was shown to be more efficient than conventional Joule heating on the vitrification of soil, and the simulated An3? was successfully immobilized via this method [18]. However, few publications report about the immobilization of other kinds of radioactive nuclides. Sr is indeed a very common beta-emitter found in nuclear installations [19]. Due to its water solubility, it easily migrates from the soil into groundwater and therefore needs to be immobilized immediately. In addition, Sr2? presents a different valence state and ionic radii from actinides, which might have a different effect on immobi- lization from actinides [20]. In view of these factors, it is necessary to study the phase transition of sintered soil matrix and solubility of Sr2? in different kinds of soil.
In this work, microwave sintering technology was used in vitrification of beta-radioactive contaminated soil. Moisture soil, regosol, brown earth and chernozem soil were chosen as study objects to enhance the applicability for the emergency accidents at most areas. Natural stron- tium (Sr) was used to simulate the beta-contamination caused by 90Sr. Different concentrations of SrSO4 was added into soil to simulate surrounding environments of nuclear emergency accidents. These simulated beta-con- taminated soil samples were sintered via microwave to form amorphous matrices under the same conditions. Considering the effects of differences in soil type on the immobilization of strontium during the actual treatment, the ultimate solubility of SrSO4 and the form of Sr in sintered soil matrix were investigated roughly.
Experimental
Sintered soil samples preparation
Moisture soil and brown earth were collected in Shandong Province, China. The regosol was collected in Chongqing City, China. The chernozem soil was collected in Table 1 XRF patterns of pretreated soil sample (with standard deviation) Neimenggu, China. These soils were made by sampling in five locations of surface soil ranged in 0 cm to 10 cm depth. After pretreatment at 600 °C for 6 h to remove the water and volatile matter, these soils were ground in agate mortar respectively to produce powders through 200 mesh sieve. The chemical composition of pretreated soil sample was measured by XRF (Axios, Netherlands). X-ray Fluo- rescence (XRF) results of pretreated soil are listed  in  Table 1.
To simulate the contamination of a nuclear emergency, different amounts of Analytical Reagent (AR) grade SrSO4 powder (Aladdin Bio-Chem Technology Co., LTD. Shanghai) was doped into four kinds of soil samples and ground with alcohol (AR grade) to mix sufficiently. Each sample was weighted for 3.0000 g. The detail ingredients for each soil sample are listed in Table 2. Simulated beta- contaminated soil samples were sintered in a microwave muffle furnace (HAMiLab-M1500) at 1400 °C for 30 min. The temperature was controlled by heating program, which was  set  to  a  heating  rate  of  30 °C min-1  while  the  tem-
perature was below 1200 °C. After 1200 °C, the tempera-
ture reached 1400 °C with the heating rate of 10 °C min-1. To simulate the scene actual treatment, the sintered sam- ples were naturally cooled down to room temperature after keeping at 1400 °C for 30 min.
Characterization
X-ray diffraction (XRD) was employed to study the phase evolution of samples (X’Per PRO, Netherlands). Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FT-IR, PE, Spectrum One) was used to further investigate the chemical change in
Table 2 Compositions of each type of soil samples (with standard deviation)
Fig. 1 XRD patterns of pure soil before sintering
this phase transition. Field emission scanning electron microscope technique (FESEM, Ultra 55. Germany) was used to characterize the micro-appearance.
Results and discussion
Exploration of SrSO4 solubility in different kinds of soil
The phase composition of pure pretreated soil is shown in Fig. 1. It can be observed in Fig. 1 that moisture soil, regosol, brown earth and chernozem soil samples mainly exhibit two-phases that are constituted by quartz and feldspar. This indicated that these pretreated soil samples might transform into aluminosilicate glass after sintering.
Figure 2 presents XRD patterns of different sintered soil samples. It shows that each type of soil was vitrified almost completely under the microwave sintering. For moisture soil and regosol, there was no obvious crystal diffraction peak that could be observed when the addition of SrSO4 was  below  20%.  As  the  addition  of  SrSO4  reached   25 ± 0.0075 wt%, a slight diffraction peak of feldspar
Fig. 2 XRD patterns of four types of sintered soil matrix with different addition of SrSO4: a moisture soil, b regosol, c brown earth, d chernozem soil
Table 3 Compositions of each supplementary sample (with standard deviation)
appeared at 2h = 27.4°. This suggested that crystal phase was generated with the enhanced addition of SrSO4. For brown earth and chernozem soil, soil samples were vitrified completely even when  the  addition  of  SrSO4  reached  25 ± 0.0075 wt%. In addition, no Sr2? related diffraction peaks were observed, which suggested that Sr2? cations were involved into glass phase. This indicates that micro- wave sintering could vitrify the simulated radioactive contaminated soil efficiently.
Taking the homogeneity of the sintered soil matrix as a starting point to consider the solubility of SrSO4 in soil, the crystal degree of sintered soil samples with different SrSO4 addition was studied further. According with the XRD results   in   Fig. 2,   SrSO4   with   mass   fraction    from 21 ± 0.0083 to 24 ± 0.0087 wt% was doped to moisture soil and regosol samples; brown earth and chernozem soil samples with 26 ± 0.0073–29 ± 0.0066 wt% were pre- pared under the same condition to further explore the sol- ubility of SrSO4. Table 3 lists compositions of each sample. The sintered process was the same as before.
XRD results of above samples are shown in Fig. 3. It can be seen that in Fig. 3a, b, feldspar and quartz crystal phase related diffraction peaks appeared as the addition of SrSO4 was beyond 23 ± 0.0075 wt%; soil samples were vitrified completely when the SrSO4 addition was below  23 ± 0.0075 wt%. Results in Fig. 3c, d show that brown earth and chernozem soil could be vitrified completely as the addition of SrSO4 reached 27 ± 0.0052 wt%; feldspar and quartz phase were generated with additional increases
in SrSO4. Figure 4 shows the micrographs of four kinds of SrSO4-doped sintered soil samples at their maximum sol- ubility. It can be observed that all samples’ surface kept almost flat and smooth due to their high homogeneity.
FT-IR analysis
FT-IR was used to further explore the immobilization mode of Sr2? in sintered matrix. Figure 5 shows the FT-IR patterns about pure sintered soil samples and SrSO4-doped sintered soil samples beyond ultimate solubility. Generally, the  absorption  peak  near  462 cm-1  is  attributed  to  the symmetrical linear vibration peak of Si–O bonds [21], and the band located at 789 cm-1 is due to the O–Si–O bonds [22]. The wide absorption bands near 1020 cm-1 were due to the antisymmetric stretching vibration peak of Si–O–Si bonds [21]. The presence of these bands is an important proof of the existence of a glass network structure. Weak absorption peak at 1380 cm-1 was due to the –CH3 pres- ence and the absorption peak near 1628 cm-1 to hydroxyl groups. These peaks of –CH3 and –OH were probably induced by alcohol and water absorption in preparing process before FT-IR test. No Sr2? related absorption bands were observed, which suggested that SrSO4 cations were immobilized into glass network structure.
In Fig. 5b, a series of obvious peaks relate to [AlO6] groups  near  559 cm-1  could  be  observed  in  chernozem sintered soil sample [21]. This might be due to the gener- ation of Al3? crystal phase. Comparing with the weak
Fig. 3 XRD patterns of four types of sintered soil matrix with addition of SrSO4 in a certain range: a moisture soil, b regosol, c brown earth,
d chernozem soil
absorption peaks of [AlO6] in brown earth, the chernozem sintered soil sample with ultimate solubility of SrSO4 presented a higher crystal degree. This was consistent with the XRD results in Fig. 3c, d.
Discussion
In vitrification process of aluminosilicate glass, Al3? could replace Si4? in an ordered or disordered way as the ionic radius of Al3? is similar with Si4?. Al3? cations that dis- play as [AlO4] groups connect with [SiO4] groups that are
involved by Si4? to form the glass network structure [23]. Therefore, the solubility of SrSO4 might be affected by the mole ratio of Al2O3 and SiO2 (nAl2 O3 =nSiO2 ) in pure pre- treated soil. For brown earth and chernozem soil, the value of nAl2 O3 =nSiO2 is greater than moisture soil and regosol, which is in keeping with the rough ultimate solubility. It might be due to the fact that the volume of [AlO4] group is greater than [SiO4] group that is caused the lacuna in glass network structure. Thus, the network structure with more [AlO4] groups can contain more Sr2? cations in this sys- tem. The schematic process is presented in Fig. 6.
Fig. 3 XRD patterns of four types of sintered soil matrix with addition of SrSO4 in a certain range: a moisture soil, b regosol, c brown earth,
d chernozem soil
absorption peaks of [AlO6] in brown earth, the chernozem sintered soil sample with ultimate solubility of SrSO4 presented a higher crystal degree. This was consistent with the XRD results in Fig. 3c, d.
Discussion
In vitrification process of aluminosilicate glass, Al3? could replace Si4? in an ordered or disordered way as the ionic radius of Al3? is similar with Si4?. Al3? cations that dis- play as [AlO4] groups connect with [SiO4] groups that are
involved by Si4? to form the glass network structure [23]. Therefore, the solubility of SrSO4 might be affected by the mole ratio of Al2O3 and SiO2 (nAl2 O3 =nSiO2 ) in pure pre- treated soil. For brown earth and chernozem soil, the value of nAl2 O3 =nSiO2 is greater than moisture soil and regosol, which is in keeping with the rough ultimate solubility. It might be due to the fact that the volume of [AlO4] group is greater than [SiO4] group that is caused the lacuna in glass network structure. Thus, the network structure with more [AlO4] groups can contain more Sr2? cations in this sys- tem. The schematic process is presented in Fig. 6.
Fig. 3 XRD patterns of four types of sintered soil matrix with addition of SrSO4 in a certain range: a moisture soil, b regosol, c brown earth,
d chernozem soil
absorption peaks of [AlO6] in brown earth, the chernozem sintered soil sample with ultimate solubility of SrSO4 presented a higher crystal degree. This was consistent with the XRD results in Fig. 3c, d.
Discussion
In vitrification process of aluminosilicate glass, Al3? could replace Si4? in an ordered or disordered way as the ionic radius of Al3? is similar with Si4?. Al3? cations that dis- play as [AlO4] groups connect with [SiO4] groups that are
involved by Si4? to form the glass network structure [23]. Therefore, the solubility of SrSO4 might be affected by the mole ratio of Al2O3 and SiO2 (nAl2 O3 =nSiO2 ) in pure pre- treated soil. For brown earth and chernozem soil, the value of nAl2 O3 =nSiO2 is greater than moisture soil and regosol, which is in keeping with the rough ultimate solubility. It might be due to the fact that the volume of [AlO4] group is greater than [SiO4] group that is caused the lacuna in glass network structure. Thus, the network structure with more [AlO4] groups can contain more Sr2? cations in this sys- tem. The schematic process is presented in Fig. 6.
Fig. 4 Microscopy of four kinds of sintered soil matrix with ultimate solubility of SrSO4: a moisture soil sample with 23 ± 0.0075 wt% SrSO4, b regosol sample with 23 ± 0.0075 wt% SrSO4, c brown earth sample with 27 ± 0.0052 wt% SrSO4, d chernozem soil sample with 27 ± 0.0052 wt% SrSO4
On the other hand, Sr2? cations with positive charge could compensate the charge difference that is caused by the substitution of Al3? into the backbone of glass network structure. More Sr2? could be accommodated into glass phase to keep the electronic balance as the molecular
3?
Fig. 5 FT-IR patterns of four kinds of sintered soil matrix: a pure soil sample, b beyond ultimate solubility of SrSO4: moisture soil sample is 24 ± 0.0087 wt%, regosol sample is 24 ± 0.0087 wt%, brown
Fig. 6   Schematic   immobilization   process   of   Sr2?   in   localized network structure: a for moisture soil and regosol, b for brown earth and chernozem soil
Conclusions
Four kinds of strontium-contaminated soil for nuclear emergency accidents were vitrified by microwave sintering technology successfully at 1400 °C within 30 min. For moisture soil and regosol, the ultimate solubility of SrSO4 is about 23 ± 0.0075 wt%; for brown earth and chernozem soil,   the   ultimate   solubility   of    SrSO4    is    about   27 ± 0.0052 wt%. The solubility in different kind of soil is related to the mole ratio of aluminum and silicon. The larger value of nAl2 O3 =nSiO2 leads to a greater amount of
solubility in sintered soil matrix. In addition, Sr2? cations
percentage of Al	is reduced in the sintered matrix. This might be the reason why the ultimate solubility is almost maintained when the nAl O =nSiO of regosol is larger than are immobilized into glass network structure that is formed by aluminosilicate. These basic results indicate the poten-moisture soil.tial application of the microwave sintering technology in vitrifying  beta-radioactive  contaminated  soil  for  nuclear  earth sample is 28 ± 0.0061 wt% SrSO4, chernozem soil sample is 28 ± 0.0061 wt%
emergency accidents, which is efficient and uniform. Because the immobilization form is a glass, microwave sintering technology might also be applicable to multi-ra- dioactive-nuclide contaminated soil.
Acknowledgements
All authors would thanks for the financial funded by National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21677118), Longshan academic talent research supporting program of SWUST (18LZX312) and Longshan academic talent research supporting program of SWUST (18LZX520). This work was also supported by Postgraduate Innovation Fund Project by Southwest University of Science and Technology (17ycx036).
