<title>ON A STRATEGY FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF NUCLEAR POWER IN RUSSIA</title>
<Affiliation>1.National Research Center Kurchatov Institute, Moscow, Russia; e-mail: agagarin@kiae.ru.
2.State Corporation Rosatom, Moscow, Russia.</Affiliation>
<author>P. N. Alekseev,A. Yu. Gagarinskii, M. A. Kalugin,N. E. Kukharkin, Yu. M Semchenkov, V. A. Sidorenko, S. A. Subbotin, P. S. Teplov,P. A. Fomichenko,and V. G. Asmolov</author>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>ATOMIC ENERGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Springer</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1007/s10512-019-00538-w</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10512-019-00538-w</URL>
Abstarct
The objectives of the development of reactor technologies for transitioning to two-component nuclear power with thermal and fast reactors as well as the issues arising in the analysis of development scenarios, including the uncertainty of the resource base and technical-economic performance, are discussed. It is shown that attempts to detail the structure of the nuclear power system in the second half of the 21st century do not yield unambiguous results, giving compelling reasons for strategic decisions. It is suggested that future work on strategic development be focused on the horizon periods of key decisions concerning the adoption of new reactor technologies.
A fundamental change in the strategic variants of the development of nuclear power in the country in recent years was an adjustment in the direction of substantial reduction of the need for electricity production and, correspondingly, capac- ity during the forecast period [1–3]. If previously installed electric capacity of NPP (GW) was considered as a benchmark – 55–62 in 2030 [1, 2], 150–230 [1] and 180–200 [2] in 2050, and 350–400 at the end of the 21st century [2], then now it is estimated to be 40–45 GW by 2050 and 70–90 GW by 2100. The heightened expectations for the advancement of nuclear power are not a new trend. The difference of the plans and their realization still persist from the Soviet period of the formation of nuclear power (Fig. 1).
An accomplishment of the past period of development of strategic studies is the establishment of an agreement in the scientific community as well as among industry leaders concerning the basic tenets of a strategy for the development of nu- clear power up to the mid-2000s:
–the key direction is a transition to a two-component structure based on thermal and fast reactors with fuel-cycle closure; the synergistic principle of development of both components will make it possible in the future to attain strong sys- tems and economic effects;
–the technological basis of a two-component nuclear power system consists of operating and in-design VVER and industrially assimilated fast reactors; it should be added that among experts there is a generally accepted ‘list of expectations’ for promising reactor technologies:
–fast reactors with heavy liquid-metal coolant;
–high-temperature gas-cooled reactors for the production of energy and hydrogen and the replacement of fossil fuels in energy-intensive industries;
–incorporation of thorium into the nuclear fuel cycle;
–use of molten salts as reactor fuel and the basic medium for reprocessing nuclear fuel; and
–thermonuclear source of neutrons for the production of nuclear fuel.
The assessments made in 2018 were focused on clarifying the objectives in the creation of innovative VVER and the advancement of NPP with fast reactors as well as on computational and analytic validation of variants of a development strat- egy and complex comparative analysis of scenarios based on promising reactor technologies. Technical task in these studies and the initial data for them were prepared by a working group consisting of experts from the State Corporation Rosatom, the Concern Rosenergoatom, the State Science Center of the Russian Federation – Leipunskii Institute for Physics and Power Engineering (IPPE), OKBM Afrikantov, Gidropress Experimental Design Bureau (OKB Gidropress), the All-Russia Research Institute for Operation of Nuclear Power Plants (VNIIAES), the Russian Federal Nuclear Center – Zababakhin All-Russia Research Institute of Technical Physics (VNIITF), Dollezhal Research and Development Institute of Power Engineering (NIKIET), and the National Research Center Kurchatov Institute.
Objectives of the development of reactor technologies. The VVER development program relies on operating expe- rience and is aimed at solving key systems problems of nuclear power, improving competitiveness, reducing the risks associated with the development of alternative technologies, and the possibility of efficient operation in a two-component nuclear-power system with a closed NFC. The considered technical designs are based on evolutionary and innovational technological solu- tions enabling a smooth transition to the formation of two-component nuclear power with thermal and fast reactors.
In terms of basic reactors, VVER-TOI, improved VVER with spectral regulation, and innovative VVER with super- critical coolants are under consideration as promising light-water reactor technologies. The nearest milestone is the adoption of the 1255 MW(e) VVER-TOI unit, improved for purposes of marketing attractiveness, in 2021–2025. The design stipulates modernization of NPP-2006 units based on experience gained in operating serial VVER; VVER-TOI is to be built on the main site of Kursk NPP-2. The intent is to develop large VVER with a new arrangement of the reactor facility in order to improve the economic performance (two- and three-loop facilities). This is followed by the realization of spectral regulation in the reactor, which should secure an accumulation factor (ratio of the number of fissile nuclei in the unloaded and loaded fuel) equal to 0.7–0.8 in a closed fuel cycle and consumption of native uranium <130 tons U/1 GW(e)/yr in an open fuel cycle.
Spectral regulation during fuel burnup is to be implemented by changing the water-uranium ratio. In this case, molten boron regulation in normal operating regimes can be completely rejected, which will make it possible to reduce the amount of liquid wastes by 50% and tritium discharges into the environment by 10-fold. The fuel use optimization is optimized by means of a complex effect associated with the reduction of parasitic neutrons in the core and changes of the spectral conditions in the course of reactor operation at power. Spectral regulation for uranium loads will make it possible to reduce by 30% the consumption of native uranium and the volume of separation work as compared with the 18-month fuel cycle of VVER-TOI and it will also make it possible to operate the reactor with a 100% mixed uranium-plutonium fuel load.
VVER with spectral regulation is an evolutionary water moderated and cooled vessel power reactor relying on the developed and reliably operating base. In circumstances with limited reserves of native uranium, and taking into consideration the expected volume of spent fuel from Russian as well as foreign NPP, and the accessible quantity of plutonium, it can be immediately loaded with mixed fuel. The missing elements of the closed NFC must be developed in parallel with this design, including the production of fresh and reprocessing of spent pelleted mixed fuel. VVER with spectrum regulation is to be used at the transition to a closed NFC for timely startup of its infrastructure.
The next step in the development of VVER in the long-term future is the transition to supercritical-pressure cool- ant (VVER-SKD). It is proposed that this direction be developed within the framework of international collaboration in the Gen-IV project (post-2045 horizon period).
Sodium-cooled reactors are an industrially assimilated technology. Its confirmation must be reliable operation of BN-800 with a total core load of mixed uranium-plutonium fuel and construction of the head power unit based on BN-1200 after additional work on the design. The main goal of the additional work on the BN-1200 is to ensure high competitiveness of the technology capable of operating efficiently at the initial stage of formation of a multi-component nuclear-power system with thermal and fast reactors as well as in the long-term future. A design has now been developed for a BN-1200 power-gen- erating unit with electricity production efficiency >43%, aiming at a maneuvering regime with 50% unloading, using as the loaded fuel the accumulated depleted uranium without the need for native uranium and fuel supply schemes directed at reduc- ing the volume of spent fuel in the nuclear power system, as well as efficient use of the power potential of plutonium with any isotopic composition and actinides. The use of new technical solutions in the BN-1200 design together with the solutions
Fig. 1. Installed capacity of NPP in the USSR and CIS.
Fig. 2.
Fig. 3.
implemented in operating BN-600, -800 reactors has made it possible to substantially improve the basic technical character- istics of the power unit and improve safety considerably. The new technical solutions must be validated in subsequent calcu- lations and experimental R&D.
At the present stage of development, the conclusion remains that as a result of 50 years of development work sodi- um-cooled fast reactors are ready to be adopted in practice [3, 4]. The alternative direction is the development of a lead-cooled
TABLE 1. Uranium Resources in Russia, 103 tons
TABLE 2. Specific Reduced Cost of Electricity for Different Power-Generating Units, rubles/(MW·h)
fast reactor. The stages of its adoption provide for completion of R&D, construction of a prototype unit, gaining operating experience, and obtaining the technical performance figures.
Analysis of scenarios of the development of nuclear power. The computational and analytical validation complet- ed in 2018 for the concept of a two-component nuclear power system with a closed fuel cycle relied on the initial data on the electricity demand in accordance with the general scheme of the arrangement of electric power plants up to 2035. The base scenario started from the assumptions incorporated in the formation of the general scheme for the arrangement of electric power plants up to 2035, approved in 2017. A second scenario, termed base-type, was adjusted taking account of the current forecasts of electricity demand and coordinated changes in the commissioning-decommissioning of NPP power units up to 2035. In the base scenario, the installed capacity (GW) reached 33 by 2035, 44 by 2050, and 92 by 2100. In the adjusted base- type scenario, the installed capacity is 30, 39, and 71 GW, respectively. Computational studies were based on the previous validation of the basic characteristics proposed by the developers for the considered designs, R&D plans, and assessments by experts of the periods and prospects for adoption of the new technologies.
It should be noted that the results in the form of a schematic diagram of the development of nuclear power in Russia in the first half of the 21st century show the possibility of realizing the stated strategy on the basis of the created technological basis with structural uncertainty, in terms of the types of reactors, that is acceptable for such a horizon period (Fig. 2). However, in the case of a forecast over 80 years the structural uncertainty of nuclear power reveals such a strong dependence on the initial data that additional analysis of the formulation of the problem is required (Fig. 3). At the same time, an exam- ination of a wider prediction interval taking account of the second half of the 21st century could be helpful for evaluating the risks of long-term development of nuclear power, R&D planning in the field of technologies, and ways to reduce risk.
It is obvious that the decision to adopt new reactor technologies must be made on the basis of an analysis of the current level of their readiness, correspondence of the predicted characteristics to systems requirements, and confirmation of the reliability of the stated technical and economic performance figures, which is of fundamental importance.
Uncertainty of the resource base. It is customary to use as its source the OECD/NEA data on native uranium re- sources. These data are based on information provided by the participating countries [5].
As we can see in Table 1, the reliable reserves with some fluctuations, sometimes significant and probably temporary, fluctuations in the stated resources are equal to (500–650)·103 tons depending on the cost and completeness of extraction, and their inclusion in the analysis of the predicted resources increases the total reserves to approximately (750–800)·103 tons.
At the same time, the computational assessments of variants of long-term development of nuclear power in Russia contain the conservative assumption of internal reserves of native uranium at the level ~500·103 tons, apparently associated with the attempt to separate internal and external circumstances concerning fuel deliveries. It decreases the admissible VVER fraction in a two-component nuclear power system by 2100. At the same time, adding the predicted resources of natural uranium and including the possibilities of optimizing VVER characteristics for efficient operation in a closed NFC permits keeping a sig- nificant VVER fraction in the nuclear power system by the end of the 21st century.
As noted above, even in the 2008 assessment by experts [6] the risks associated with the possible reduction of predict- ed commissioning of fast reactors can be compensated by increasing the uranium resource base by means of internal actions or purchases in the external market. The resource base cannot remain fixed over a period of many decades. This factor must be regarded as a variable quantity on par with the development of reactor technologies and closure of the nuclear fuel cycle.
Uncertainty of technical and economic performance figures. Comparing an optimal integral parameter – the specific reduced cost of electricity – proposed as a criterion for evaluating reactor technologies shows the competitiveness of nuclear compared with alternative methods of production (Table 2). The specific reduced cost 2100–2500 rubles/(MW·h) for a steam-gas facility is used for comparison. This is not a key index in making decisions; it is proposed as a criterion of accept- ability for choosing new technological directions.
Obviously, it makes sense to compare only the technologies that are at the same technological level of readiness. In this connection, we call attention to H. Rickover’s historical announcement in the US congress in 1953: “An academic (in cur- rent terminology – ‘paper’ (present authors) reactor practically always has the following characteristics: (1) it is simple; (2) it is small; (3) it is cheap ...” [7].
It is obvious that one of the key risks of long-term development of nuclear power is failing to reach the stated param- eters in terms of the cost of construction for new units. An assessment of a variant of development of a fast-reactor technology with the cost of construction of NPP with BN-1200 20% higher than the stated cost for VVER performance figures with a transition to VVER-S shows the possibility for growth in the fraction of thermal reactors in the system from 1 to 80% by the end of the 21st century.
Attempts to compare the economic characteristics of reactor technologies which are at the operating NPP stage on the one hand and at the unrealized design stage on the other hand represent essentially only a demonstration of the developers’ limits of optimism and so must have the corresponding weight in making decisions.
In summary, the investigations performed in 2018 confirm once again that at present no attempt to detail the structure of the nuclear-power system in the second half of the 21st century can provide unambiguous and compelling reasons for stra- tegic decisions. It appears that future strategic development should focus on technological horizon periods in making key decisions concerning the adoption of new reactor technologies. In this connection, innovative ideas for which at present there are not enough objective data for determining their development should not be excluded in the long-term strategy. These in- clude, first and foremost, molten-salt reactors for transmuting long-lived radioactive wastes and thermonuclear sources of neutrons for the production of nuclear fuel.
