<title>The new vertical neutron beam line at the CERN n_TOF facility design and outlook on the performance</title>
<Affiliation>a.European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN), Geneva, Switzerland
b.Instituto Tecnológico e Nuclear, Instituto Superior Técnico, Universidade Técnica de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal
c.Commissariat à l’Énergie Atomique (CEA) Saclay – Irfu, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
d.Universidad de Sevilla, Spain
e.National Technical University of Athens (NTUA), Greece
f.Uniwersytet Łódzki, Lodz, Poland
g.Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque/IN2P3 – IPN, Orsay, France
h.Atominstitut, Technische Universität Wien, Austria
i.Centro de Investigaciones Energeticas Medioambientales y Tecnológicas (CIEMAT), Madrid, Spain
j.Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Bari, Italy
k.Johann-Wolfgang-Goethe Universität, Frankfurt, Germany
l.Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic
m.University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester, UK
n.Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, Croatia
o.Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Spain
p.Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain
q.Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Laboratori Nazionali del Sud, Catania, Italy
r.Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC), Mumbai, India
s.Instituto de Física Corpuscular, CSIC-Universidad de Valencia, Spain
t.Paul Scherrer Institut, Villigen PSI, Switzerland
u.Joint Institute for Nuclear Research (JINR), Dubna, Russia
v.Horia Hulubei National Institute of Physics and Nuclear Engineering – IFIN HH, Bucharest – Magurele, Romania
w.Institute of Physics and Power Engineering (IPPE), Obninsk, Russia
x.Japan Atomic Energy Agency (JAEA), Tokyo, Japan
y.European Commission JRC, Institute for Reference Materials and Measurements, Retieseweg 111, B-2440 Geel, Belgium
z.University of York, Heslington, York, UK
aa.Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Campus Nord, Institut für Kernphysik, Karlsruhe, Germany
ab.Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan
ac.School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
ad.Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia, Università di Bologna, Italy
ae.Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Bologna, Italy
af.Agenzia nazionale per le nuove tecnologie, l'energia e lo sviluppo economico sostenibile (ENEA), Bologna, Italy
ag.Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Laboratori Nazionali di Legnaro, Italy
ah.Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Trieste, Italy
ai.Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia, Università di Catania, Italy
aj.Physikalisch Technische Bundesanstalt (PTB), Braunschweig, Germany
ak.University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece
al.University of Vienna, Faculty of Physics, Austria
am.University of Granada, Spain
an.University of Hertfordshire, Hertfordshire, UK
ao.Australian National University, Canberra, Australia</Affiliation>
<author>C. Weiß , E. Chiaveri , S. Girod , V. Vlachoudis, O. Aberle, S. Barros, I. Bergström,E. Berthoumieux , M. Calviani , C. Guerrero , M. Sabaté-Gilarte , A. Tsinganis ,J. Andrzejewski , L. Audouin, M. Bacak , J. Balibrea-Correa i, M. Barbagallo , V. Bécares ,C. Beinrucker, F. Belloni, F. Bečvář, J. Billowes, D. Bosnar, M. Brugger, M. Caamaño ,
F. Calviño, D. Cano-Ott , F. Cerutti , N. Colonna , G. Cortés , M.A. Cortés-Giraldo ,
L. Cosentino , L. Damone, K. Deo, M. Diakaki , C. Domingo-Pardo, E. Dupont, I. Durán ,R. Dressler, B. Fernández-Domínguez, A. Ferrari, P. Ferreira, P. Finocchiaro, R. Frost,
V. Furman, S. Ganesan, A. Gheorghe, T. Glodariu, K. Göbel, I.F. Gonçalves,
E. González-Romero, A. Goverdovski, E. Griesmayer, F. Gunsing, H. Harada,
T. Heftrich, S. Heinitz, A. Hernández-Prieto a,p, J. Heyse y, D.G. Jenkins z, E. Jericha h,
Y. Kadi , F. Käppeler , T. Katabuchi , P. Kavrigin , V. Ketlerov , V. Khryachkov ,
A. Kimura, N. Kivel, M. Kokkoris, M. Krtička l, E. Leal-Cidoncha, C. Lederer , H. Leeb,
J. Lerendegui , M. Licata , S. Lo Meo , D. López , R. Losito , D. Macina , J. Marganiec ,
T. Martínez, C. Massimi , P.F. Mastinu , M. Mastromarco , F. Matteucci , E. Mendoza ,
A. Mengoni , P.M. Milazzo , F. Mingrone , M. Mirea , S. Montesano ,
A. Musumarra,ai, R. Nolte , R. Palomo Pinto, C. Paradela , N. Patronis , A. Pavlik ,
J. Perkowski, I. Porras , J. Praena , J.M. Quesada , T. Rauscher , R. Reifarth ,
A. Riego-Perez , M.S. Robles, C. Rubbia , J. Ryan, A. Saxena , P. Schillebeeck,
S. Schmidt , D. Schuman, P. Sedyshev, G. Smith, A. Stamatopoulos, P. Steinegger,
S.V. Suryanarayana, G. Tagliente, J.L. Tain, A. Tarifeño-Saldivia, L. Tassan-Got,
S. Valenta, G. Vannini , V. Variale, P. Vaz, A. Ventura, R. Vlastou, A. Wallner,
S. Warren, M. Weigan, T. Wright , P. Žugec</author>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research A</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier </Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.nima.2015.07.027</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2015.07.027</URL>
a b s t r a c t
At the neutron time-of-ﬂight facility n_TOF at CERN a new vertical beam line was constructed in 2014, in order to extend the experimental possibilities at this facility to an even wider range of challenging cross- section measurements of interest in astrophysics, nuclear technology and medical physics. The design of the beam line and the experimental hall was based on FLUKA Monte Carlo simulations, aiming at maximizing the neutron ﬂux, reducing the beam halo and minimizing the background from neutrons interacting with the collimator or back-scattered in the beam dump.
The present paper gives an overview on the design of the beam line and the relevant elements and provides an outlook on the expected performance regarding the neutron beam intensity, shape and energy resolution, as well as the neutron and photon backgrounds.
& 2015 CERN for the beneﬁt of the Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under
Keywords:
n_TOF facility
Neutron time-of-ﬂight FLUKA
Neutron cross-section measurement
1.Introduction
a b s t r a c t
At the neutron time-of-ﬂight facility n_TOF at CERN a new vertical beam line was constructed in 2014, in order to extend the experimental possibilities at this facility to an even wider range of challenging cross- section measurements of interest in astrophysics, nuclear technology and medical physics. The design of the beam line and the experimental hall was based on FLUKA Monte Carlo simulations, aiming at maximizing the neutron ﬂux, reducing the beam halo and minimizing the background from neutrons interacting with the collimator or back-scattered in the beam dump.
The present paper gives an overview on the design of the beam line and the relevant elements and provides an outlook on the expected performance regarding the neutron beam intensity, shape and energy resolution, as well as the neutron and photon backgrounds.
& 2015 CERN for the beneﬁt of the Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. This is an open access article under
the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
an outlook on  the expected performance  are the subject  of  this
The neutron time-of-ﬂight facility n_TOF at CERN [1,2] is a pulsed white neutron source for high-accuracy neutron cross- section measurements over a wide neutron energy range. The neutrons are produced in a monolithic Pb-spallation target, where  a pulsed 20 GeV/c proton beam provided by the CERN Proton Synchrotron (PS) [3] impinges with a maximum repetition rate of
0.8 Hz. The primary proton beam has a width of rms 7 ns. The Pb-target is surrounded by an additional moderator layer to generate a neutron beam with energies ranging from thermal up to several GeV. At the facility in operation since 2000 the measurements take place in an experimental area placed at the end of a horizontal beam line, 200 m in length. The experimental conditions and neutron beam characteristics at this horizontal ﬂight path are presented in full detail in Ref. [4].
The horizontal 200 m ﬂight path, with its record instantaneous neutron beam intensity, has allowed very important cross-sections to be measured, getting unprecedented energy resolution in both neutron capture [5,6] and ﬁssion [7] as well as extending the measurement range to previously unreachable neutron energies [8]. However, there are more challenging experiments that require an even more intense neutron beam.
In order to extend the experimental possibilities at the n_TOF facility for cross-section measurements of very low mass samples ( o1 mg), reactions with small cross-sections or highly radioactive samples [9], an additional vertical ﬂight path of 20 m with a signiﬁcantly higher neutron ﬂux was designed and constructed in 2014. The design and implementation of this new beam line, with an outlook on  the expected performance  are the subject  of  this paper. In Section 2 the ﬁnal beam line conﬁguration, as in operation at CERN since July 2014, is presented with a description of the different elements. The expected characteristics of the neutron beam and the background conditions, determined by means of FLUKA Monte Carlo simulations, are discussed in Section 3.
2.General layout and technical description
The n_TOF spallation target is installed in the TT2A tunnel at CERN. The spallation target was lowered to its current position through an existing vertical shaft via a service gallery. This shaft was now used to install the bottom part of the vertical beam line which is presented here. From the roof of the service gallery, at
12.6 m from the target center, to the ground, a new concrete shaft with an inner diameter of 800 mm was built during 2013. At ground level, 18.16 m above the spallation target, a new building was constructed, hosting the bunker with the experimental area, an electronics room and two preparatory rooms. The beam dump for this new vertical ﬂight path is installed on the roof of the bunker. The existing service gallery is used to house the magnet and the ﬁlter box of the beam line, as well as to allow the access to the 1st collimator.
The general layout with the different beam line elements is shown in Fig. 1. The distance to the spallation target center for the different beam line elements, which are described in further detail below, are listed in Table 1.
2.1.The beam line at the level of the spallation target
The n_TOF spallation target consists of a Pb cylinder 400 mm in length and 600 mm in diameter, surrounded by a layer of demi- neralized water acting as coolant and, only in the forward
Fig. 1. General layout of the vertical ﬂight path, from the spallation target to the beam dump. The different beam line elements with the position of their entrance are indicated on the left.
Table 1 Beam line elements and their position with respect to the center of
the n_TOF spallation target.direction, an additional moderator layer, usually ﬁlled  with borated water in saturation. The target is surrounded by an Al container and supported by an Al alloy structure. The support structure has a polygonal opening on the top, to allow the  lowering of a vacuum chamber for  the  vertical beam  line  down  to the level of the target.
The vacuum line of the vertical beam line has therefore a polygonal section for the ﬁrst 0.9 m, after which it opens to a circular beam pipe with 317 mm inner diameter. The neutron window at the bottom of the polygonal section is concave,  to  match the shape of the spallation target. The neutron window at this level is 1.5 mm in thickness and made of Al, leaving a gap of  10 mm air between the window and the Al-housing of the target. Due to technical constraints, the window is installed  off-center with  respect  to  the  center  of  the  spallation  target,  as  shown   in Fig. 2. The reference point, marking the center of the circular beam pipe above, is 49 mm downstream and 100 mm to the right with respect to the target center and the direction of the imping- ing proton beam.
2.2.Collimation system
The neutron beam is shaped by two collimators:
The 1st collimator is installed at 7.4 m above the target inside  the ﬁrst vacuum pipe of the beam line. It consists of a 1 m long Fe cylinder with 200 mm inner diameter. It is suspended from
Fig. 2. Model of the n_TOF spallation target seen from the top. The proton beam is impinging from the lower edge on the picture. The neutron beam towards the horizontal beam line leaves the target in the forward direction. The neutron window and the polygonal section of the vertical beam line are indicated on the right. The reference point in red (cross) marks the center of the vertical beam line. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure caption, the reader is referred to the web version of this paper.)
Table 2
Inner diameters (d) and material of the different sections of the 2nd collimator. The position is given in distance to the spallation target center.
the service gallery on 1.1 m long rods, attached to a ring at the top of the corresponding vacuum chamber.
The 2nd collimator is installed at 15.04 m above the target, inside a large vacuum vessel with 680 mm outer diameter. The vacuum vessel is suspended just below the ﬂoor of the experi- mental hall. The different sections of the collimator are resting on 4 steps inside this vacuum vessel. These steps serve as chicanes, avoiding the streaming of neutrons to the experi- mental hall outside the beam. The collimator consists of 2 m Fe and 1 m borated polyethylene (B-PE), where the last 0.4 m have a core of boron-carbide (B4C) cylinders. The inner dimensions of the collimator follow a step geometry, to approximate a conical design. The inner diameters of the different steps are listed in Table 2. The last section of this collimator is shown in Fig. 3, where the inner and outer step designs are noticeable.
The exit of the second collimator is situated 120 mm below the ﬂoor of the experimental area. Due to the geometry of the collimation system and the close distance to the target, the neutron beam  halo is diverging by 1 mm  over 100 mm distance Fig. 3. Last meter of the second collimator installed inside the big vacuum vessel which is supported 120 mm below the EAR2 ﬂoor. The B-PE part is shown in green with the B4C core in the last 400 mm in light blue. The stainless steel spheres, installed around the vacuum vessel for shielding purposes, are indicated in light red. The ﬁrst two steps inside the vacuum vessel, on which the collimator rests, are visible at the sides of the collimator. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure caption, the reader is referred to the web version of this paper.)
Fig. 4. Pb shielding after the second collimator as installed by default inside the ﬁrst vacuum chambers in the experimental area. The section which contains the vacuum valve is left without additional shielding.
to the 2nd collimator exit, inside the experimental area. The focal point, which is theoretically the position of the narrowest spatial beam proﬁle, is positioned at 1.08 m from the ﬂoor of the experimental area (EAR2).
2.3.Shielding
Various shielding elements are installed along the beam line. In their design, special care was taken to allow the dismantling of the beam line, in order to leave the spallation target accessible for future upgrades and consolidation activities. The gaps between the vacuum pipes and the shielding elements are minimized as much as mechanically possible. The beam line shielding up to the experimental area consists of the following elements:
Shielding around the bottom part of the beam line: From 0.9 m above the spallation target, up to the ﬂoor of the service gallery at 9.8 m, concrete shielding elements are placed. Up to 7 m above the target the ducts for the cooling system of the spallation target are installed in the same shaft as the beam line. The concrete shielding elements at this level have recesses to let these ducts pass. Above the position of the ﬁrst collima- tor, at about 9 m from the target, an additional Fe collar was installed around the beam pipe in addition to the concrete shielding, to enhance the shielding at this level and reduce the radiation level on the permanent magnet, which is installed just above in the service gallery.
Shielding around the middle part of the beam line: From the roof of the service gallery at 12.6 m to the exit of the second collimator at 18.4 m, the beam line shielding mainly consist of     4 tons of stainless steel spheres, 4.8 mm in diameter, ﬁlling the volume between the vacuum vessel containing the second collimator and the shaft walls.  The  spheres  can  be  removed by a special retaining system at the roof of the service gallery. An additional concrete ring 1.5 m in length and with an inner diameter of 480 mm is installed in the shaft below the big vacuum vessel.
At the ﬂoor of the experimental area, 0.1 m thick plates of lithium-polyethylene (Li-PE) are installed around the beam pipe, covering the area of the shaft below, to absorb therma- lized neutrons.
In addition to the beam line shielding, additional elements are installed inside the experimental area to reduce the background contributions to the measurements.
Right after the exit of the second collimator, Pb disks are installed inside the vacuum chambers  to  reduce  γ-  background coming from the last section of the collimator.
The inner diameters of the Pb disks are matched to the diverging beam and can hence be understood as an extension  of the collimation system. The length of this  Pb-shielding  can be adjusted to the needs. In Fig. 4 the default conﬁguration of this shielding 0.57 m in effective height are indicated.
In the last vacuum pipe of the beam line, which is ﬁxed to the roof of the bunker just before the beam dump, a removable shielding of 1 m length is installed, indicated in Fig. 5 in green. These shielding elements are designed to reduce photons and neutrons streaming back from the beam dump to the experi- mental setup. Their dimensions match the beam optics at the entrance of the beam dump, within 5 mm.
○A 50 mm Pb disk is positioned just below the last window
before the beam dump.
○B-PE cylinders with an inner diameter of 200 mm are inserted in the vacuum chamber below the Pb disk, over a length of 0.95 m.
○B4C cylinders with an inner diameter of  150 mm  are  inserted additionally into the B-PE cylinders.
2.4.Beam dump
The beam dump is installed on the roof of the building. It consists of three layers to fully absorb the neutron beam and to respect the dose rate for low-occupancy areas, 2.5 μSv/h, outside
the building. The beam dump was designed to respect these limits for radiation protection even for a large diameter beam produced with a 2nd collimator having an exit diameter of 200 mm instead  of the current 21.8 mm.
Fig. 5. Beam dump and last part of the EAR2 beam line. The last vacuum chamber contains additional shielding material (green) to reduce the background to the experiment from backscattered neutrons and photons. This chamber is installed in the roof of the building and penetrates the core of the beam dump. The beam dump, which is installed on the roof of the building contains three layers, as explained in the text. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure caption, the reader is referred to the web version of this paper.)
The core of the beam dump consists of a block of B-PE to slow down and to capture neutrons, both from the primary imping- ing beam and neutrons which are backscattered from the consecutive beam dump layers. The outer dimensions of the core are 400 400 400 mm3. The B-PE block has a cylindrical hole at the entrance, 250 mm in height and 340 mm in diameter, where the last vacuum chamber of the beam line is inserted.
The B-PE core is surrounded by Fe blocks to absorb the fast neutrons and photons of the beam. The outer dimensions of the Fe part is 1600 ~ 1600 ~ 1600 mm3.
●The beam dump is ﬁnally shielded by concrete with outer
dimensions of 3200 ~ 3200 ~ 2400 mm3.
Fig. 5 shows a cut through the 3D model of the last part of the EAR2 beam line. The removable shielding elements inserted in the last vacuum pipe, which extends inside the ﬁrst part of the beam dump, are indicated in green.
2.5.Permanent magnet
To deﬂect all charged particles which originate from the spallation process in the Pb-target before the experimental hall, a permanent dipole magnet is installed 10.4 m above the spalla- tion target [10]. The magnet poles consist of an assembly of 168 Sm2Co17 radiation resistant permanent magnet blocks, with addi- tional iron poles to smooth possible deviations of the magnetiza- tion direction of the permanent magnet blocks. The installation of additional Sm2Co17 blocks on each side of the gap compensates radial stray ﬁeld losses and improves the integrated ﬁeld homo- geneity. The assembly is installed inside a steel return yoke.
The dipole magnet has an inner gap of 340 mm, where the vacuum pipe of the beam line is installed. The magnetic ﬁeld in the center of the magnet is 0.253(4) T, over the total dipole length of
1.134 m. The integrated ﬁeld of the magnet is 0.287 Tm.
The design constraints for the dipole magnet were based on the expected charged particle spectra from FLUKA simulations in the experimental hall. The results of  these simulations are shown  in Fig. 6. To deﬂect all charged particles from the beam, a minimum integrated ﬁeld of 0.2 Tm was calculated for the nom- inal magnet position, given the maximum momentum of
1.205 GeV/c for protons.
Fig. 6. Resulting charged particle spectra in the experimental hall from FLUKA simulations if no magnet is installed in the beam line. The results are normalized to a nominal proton beam intensity at n_TOF of 7 ~ 1012 protons per pulse (7e12 ppp). The maximum momentum for protons is 1.205 GeV/c.
Table 3
Neutron ﬁlters installed in the ﬁlter box. The thickness of the materials is given in brackets after the chemical element. All ﬁlters are 215 ~ 215 mm2 in area and mechanically supported only on the edges.
2.6.Neutron ﬁlters
A neutron ﬁlter station is installed 11.4 m above the spallation target. It contains 8 ﬁlters which can be individually inserted into the neutron beam to blank out different neutron energies from the beam or attenuate the in-beam photons. The ﬁlter station is remotely controlled from the n_TOF control room.
The available ﬁlters and the neutron energy of the correspond- ing black resonances are listed in Table 3.
2.7.Experimental area (EAR2)
The bunker housing the experimental area, where the mea- surements take place, has the ﬂoor located at a distance of 18.16 m with respect to the center of the target, while the ceiling is at
23.66 m. The beam line elements from 0.2 to 3 m above the ﬂoor of the area are easily exchangeable to meet the requirements of the different experiments. By default, the ﬁrst meter is reserved for the Pb shielding and a neutron ﬂux monitor, which is installed inside the vacuum pipes in the lowest section of the experimental station. Removable vacuum pipes can be mounted along the beam line, with sizes matching the dimension of the beam in order to allow a close geometry during capture measurements, as illu- strated in Fig. 7 where the experimental setup during background measurements is shown.
A set of versatile support structures is available for the different detection systems in use, which are mounted on a pillar system in the area. For capture measurements a remotely controlled sample
Fig. 7. The experimental station during background measurements with scintillators.
Fig. 8. Simulated neutron ﬂux at a nominal sample position in the experimental area. The dips in the spectrum are due to a signiﬁcant amount of Al with traces of Mn at the spallation target. The spectrum is normalized to the nominal proton beam intensity at n_TOF, 7 ~ 1012 protons per pulse.
changer is mounted, to allow the change of the samples during beam time.
The bunker is equipped with all necessary systems to be operated as Class A laboratory [11]. A dedicated ventilation system keeps an under-pressure of 150 Pa with respect to atmospheric pressure inside the experimental area, whereas the changing room and the electronics room are held at  50 Pa  and  100 Pa respectively, ensuring an appropriate dynamic conﬁnement.
3.Simulations and expected performance
The beam line design of the vertical ﬂight path was based on extensive Monte Carlo simulation studies [12,13], which were performed with the FLUKA code [14,15], using the graphical interface FLAIR [16]. The simulations focused especially on:
1.
Studying the beam characteristics inside the experimental area for different collimation systems.
2.Investigating experimental conditions for cross-section mea- surements with various shielding compositions, in particular background simulations for capture experiments with scintillators.
3.Evaluating radiation levels in areas neighboring the beam line and the bunker, which have to comply with the ofﬁcial CERN dose rate limits [17] for accessible zones.
In order to reduce the computing time for the various different conﬁgurations, a two step approach was adopted in the simula- tions. The spallation target with the impinging proton beam was simulated in a ﬁrst step to retrieve the information about particles exiting the target in the vertical direction. These particles  were used as source in the following simulations of different beam line conﬁgurations.
The expected beam characteristics and experimental conditions with the above presented beam line are discussed in the following.
3.1.Neutron ﬂux spectrum
The neutron ﬂux spectrum, which represents the number of neutrons per impinging proton pulse on the spallation target as a function of neutron energy En, was simulated in the nominal sample position 1.6 m from the ﬂoor of the experimental area. As discussed in the next section, at this position the neutron beam proﬁle has a full width at half maximum (FWHM) of 21 mm. In order to cover the full spatial beam proﬁle, the simulated neutron ﬂux was integrated over a surface 100 mm in diameter to obtain the total number of neutrons. The results were normalized to the nominal proton beam intensity of 7 1012 protons per pulse (ppp) at n_TOF.
The total ﬂux energy distribution is illustrated in Fig. 8. The neutron  evaporation  peak  is  visible  in   the   spectrum   around En  1 MeV.  The  strong   dips   in   the   spectrum   in   the   region 20 keVo En o200 keV are due to the signiﬁcant amount  of  Al  at the target level in the upwards direction. Additional dips are observed at 300 eV and 2 keV due to Mn traces in the aluminum- alloy used for the structural elements at the target. The peak  at  low neutron energies results from the thermalization of the neutrons in the water surrounding the spallation target.
The integrated ﬂux for different neutron energy decades is  listed in Table 4. The total number of neutrons per proton pulse is
1.1 107 neutrons per 7 1012 protons impinging on target. For comparison, the evaluated neutron ﬂuence at the horizontal ﬂight path at n_TOF (EAR1) [4], for a 2nd collimator exit of d ¼ 18 mm for capture measurements and pure water as moderator, is listed as well in Table 4. The highest neutron gain at the vertical ﬂight path is a factor 26 in the energy interval 1o En o10 keV.
In Fig. 9 the neutron ﬂux is shown as a function of time-of-  ﬂight (TOF), together with the in-beam photon background. The corresponding En are indicated with arrows for some TOF values. The in-beam photon spectrum is discussed in further detail in Section 3.3, together with the photon energy spectra for  the  prompt and delayed photons.
3.2.Neutron beam proﬁle
The neutron beam proﬁle is dictated by the geometry and distance of the 1st and 2nd collimator in the beam line. The focussing lines deﬁne the focal point, which is 1.08 m above the ﬂoor of the experimental area. The defocussing lines of the geometry deﬁne the size of the  beam  halo  along  the  height  of the experimental area. For the presented conﬁguration, the halo is diverging by 1 mm over 0.1 m increasing distance to the target.
Table 4
Integrated neutron ﬂux for different neutron energy decades, normalized to 7×1012 protons per pulse, for both experimental areas at n_TOF. The evaluated neutron ﬂuence at the horizontal ﬂight path (EAR1) corresponds to the capture measure- ment setup with pure water as moderator from reference [4]. For neutron energies in the keV range the expected neutron ﬂux is up to a factor 26 higher at the vertical ﬂight path.
Fig. 9. Neutron and photon ﬂuence as function of TOF at the nominal sample position in the experimental area. The corresponding En is indicated for different energies with arrows. The in-beam photon spectrum can be divided in prompt and delayed γ.
The nominal sample position for capture measurements is located at 1.6 m from the ﬂoor of the bunker, as the best compromise between beam proﬁle and background conditions was found for this height. At this position the neutron beam width is 21 mm FWHM. In Fig. 10 the projected neutron beam proﬁle for thermal neutron energies at different heights in the experimental room is shown, with the proﬁle at the nominal sample position drawn in ochre. The proﬁle of the neutron beam at 6.6 m from the ﬂoor of the experimental area corresponds to the beam proﬁle at the entrance to the beam dump.
The neutron beam proﬁle for different TOF decades is illu- strated in Fig. 11, for the nominal sample position. The beam halo  at this position is 50 mm in diameter, which is slightly less than   the 55 mm expected from the optical considerations. The neutron background outside the beam is 4–5 orders of magnitude lower than at the peak of the beam proﬁle.
Due to the small opening of the 2nd collimator, exact simula- tions of the beam proﬁle are difﬁcult to retrieve from Monte Carlo simulations for this geometry. Additional simulations of a large 2nd collimator, having a diameter of 50 mm at the exit, have  shown that the neutron beam for En 41 MeV is asymmetric. A mirrored projection of the polygonal window above the neutron target can be observed in the beam proﬁle at these high neutron Fig. 10. Neutron beam proﬁle projections at different heights in the experimental area, for thermal neutron energies. The heights are given as distance to the ﬂoor of the experimental hall. The beam proﬁle at the nominal capture sample position,
1.6 m from the ﬂoor, has FWHM¼ 21 mm. The neutron beam enters the beam dump at 6.6 m from the ﬂoor.
Fig. 11. Neutron beam proﬁle projections for different TOF ranges at 1.6 m from the ﬂoor of the experimental area. With all shielding elements installed, the neutron background is 4–5 orders of magnitude smaller than the peak of the proﬁle.
energies. This is expected to be visible as well with the currently presented collimator geometry.
3.3.Background conditions
To estimate the background conditions, the in-beam photon background was studied as well as the contributions coming from different beam line elements and the bunker.
3.3.1.In-beam photon background
The in-beam photon background, i.e. the gamma-rays traveling with the neutron beam can be divided in two parts:
Prompt γ, originating from the spallation process in the target, arrive at the experimental area in the ﬁrst 200 ns, as indicated in Fig. 9. These photons are the main contributors to the so-
called ‘γ-ﬂash’, the ﬁrst signal detected by most of the detectors
in the experimental area. As shown in Fig. 12, the photon energies Eγ are ranging up to a few hundred MeV, where the dominant part is below 10 MeV.
Delayed   γ,  originating   from  the   moderation  process   at the
target, are arriving at the experimental station up to 5 ms after the γ-ﬂash. The dominant Eγ is 2.2 MeV, from photons gener- ated by neutron capture reactions on the 1H isotopes present in
the cooling water of the target. Additional peaks are observed
Fig. 12. Photon energy spectra of the in-beam γ in the experimental area. The spectrum for prompt γ corresponds to photons arriving in the ﬁrst 200 ns at the experimental station, the main contribution to the so-called ‘γ-ﬂash’ in the detectors.
Fig. 13. TOF to En relation at 1.5 m above the n_TOF spallation target, when the proton beam width is not considered. The number of simulated counts is encoded in color. Projections of the distributions at different En give the resolution functions of the vertical ﬂight path. (For interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure caption, the reader is referred to the web version of this paper.)
in the Eγ-spectrum  at  511 keV,  from e—  eþ annihilation,  and in the range of 7–7.5 MeV, from capture reactions in the target and surrounding materials (Pb, Fe and Al).
The detailed Eγ spectra of the in-beam photon background are displayed in Fig. 12.
3.3.2.Background contribution from beam line elements
Extensive studies have been performed to estimate the differ- ent background contributions coming from the beam line ele- ments and the experimental hall. A volume containing C6D6 liquid, a standard detector type for capture measurements at n_TOF, was included in the FLUKA geometry around the beam pipe at 1.5 m above the ﬂoor of the experimental area, corresponding to the nominal position of the detectors, which are usually placed upstream of the capture sample. The energy deposition  by different particles in this volume was studied  with various  shield-
ing conﬁgurations to estimate the expected background condi-tions. A detailed discussion on the simulation results is published in Ref. [18]. These background simulations have led to the design of the various shielding elements and the choice for the materials  in use in the 2nd collimator.
The results show that, in absence of shielding elements along the beam line in the bunker, about 30% of the background originates from backscattered particles from the beam dump. The remaining part of the background is caused by particle interactions at the exit of the collimator. About 35% of the back- ground is caused directly from particles streaming to the detector from the exit of the collimator and the remaining 35% are contributed indirectly from backscattered radiation from the walls of the bunker. The shielding elements discussed in Section 2.3 were introduced in order to reduce the background originating from the beam dump and directly from the 2nd collimator.
The inﬂuence of mylar windows and air around the sample position on the energy deposition in the C6D6 detectors was studied as well and it was conﬁrmed that the air gap contributes more with increasing distance between the mylar windows at the vacuum–air interface.
The energy deposition in the C6D6 volume in the ﬁnal beam line conﬁguration and with a realistic experimental setup, includ- ing two Mylar windows and an air gap of 50 mm at the sample position,   for   10 μso TOFo100 μs,   is   expected   to    be  Edep 53:9 keV=cm3 75% in total, where 22.5 keV/cm3 is due to the neutron background.
3.4. Neutron energy resolution
At a neutron time-of-ﬂight facility the kinetic energy of the neutron is determined by measuring the time from the primary beam  impinging  on  the  target  to  the  detection  of  the signals
coming from neutron-induced reactions at the measuring station and  converting  the  resulting  TOF  to  En.  Because  of  the neutron creation and moderation processes at the target and the width of the impinging primary proton beam on the target, the relation between TOF and En  is represented by distributions of a  particular shape, rather than constant values.
This  relation  of  TOF  and  En   for  the  vertical  direction  at then_TOF spallation target is illustrated in Fig. 13, where the  inﬂuence of the proton beam time spread (7 ns rms) is not included. Neutrons of a given energy En arrive at the measurement position with a speciﬁc time distribution, with the shape of the distribution changing with En. These distributions represent the resolution function of the facility. The resolution function has to be well known for the high accuracy determination of cross-sections. It can only be determined by extensive Monte Carlo simulations, which are consecutively validated via experiments.
The time distributions can equivalently be expressed in length, where the effective ﬂight path of the neutron is the sum of the geometrical ﬂight path L and an equivalent moderation length λ
[19].   The   distributions   of   λ  for  three  different   En   decades  is
illustrated in Fig. 14. It is apparent that the distributions widen with   increasing   En.   For   the   distribution   corresponding   to   En ¼ 1–10 eV, a shoulder is appreciable on the distribution, which is still observable for the range En 0:1–1 keV. This is caused by moderation processes in the different material layers at the target (Al, H2O, and air).
Extensive simulations are yet to come for the ﬁnal determina- tion of the resolution functions for the vertical ﬂight path, where the shape of the tails will have to be studied in detail for small En- ranges. The neutron energy resolution can be deﬁned via the relation
@1
Fig. 14. Moderation length distributions for three different En-decades at the vertical ﬂight path. The shoulder on the distributions at lower En is due to moderation processes in the materials surrounding the spallation target.
where Δλ is deﬁned as the FWHM of the distributions in the different neutron energy ranges. ΔT represents the time spread of the impinging primary proton beam, which dominates the neu- tron energy resolution for En 410 MeV. The currently available simulation results are still too limited in statistics and hence only allow to give a ﬁrst estimation of the neutron energy resolution at the experimental area of the vertical ﬂight path. If the inﬂuence of the proton beam width is disregarded the neutron energy resolu- tion is expected to be
●ΔEn=En = 4 ~ 10— 3 at En ¼ 1 eV.
●ΔEn=En = 4 ~ 10— 2 at En ¼ 1 MeV.
The corresponding values for the neutron energy resolution at the horizontal  ﬂight  path  are 3.2    10—4 and  5.3     10—3 for 1 eV and   1 MeV respectively [4]. The difference in neutron energy resolu- tion of about one order of magnitude between the two ﬂight paths is coherent with the difference in ﬂight path length between the two areas, 20 m versus 200 m.
4.Summary and conclusions
The new vertical ﬂight path at the n_TOF facility at CERN was constructed in order to extend the experimental capabilities at this facility to very challenging cross-section measurements, i.e. for small mass or for high-activity radioactive samples. It is in operation and under commissioning since summer 2014. In this paper the technical design of the beam line and the expected performance in the new experimental station were presented.
The experimental area at this new vertical beam line is located 18 m above the Pb-spallation target. The neutron beam is shaped  by two collimators in the beam line, where the exit diameter of the 2nd collimator is 21.8 mm. Charged particles coming from spalla- tion processes in the target, are deﬂected from the beam by a permanent dipole magnet with 0.287 Tm, located 10 m above the spallation target. A neutron ﬁlter station is as well available in this beam line to blank out certain neutron energies from the neutron spectrum. To achieve optimal background conditions, a sophisti- cated shielding system was implemented around the beam  line and inside the experimental room.
The beam line design was based on extensive FLUKA Monte Carlo simulations. The new ﬂight path offers a neutron spectrum
section measurements from in-beam γ and the contributions of the different beam line elements have been estimated by means of
FLUKA simulations. The in-beam photon energy spectra is domi- nated by the Eγ ¼ 2:2 MeV energy in the delayed γ-spectrum. The expected  neutron  energy   resolution   is   ΔEn=En = 4 ~ 10— 3   at En ¼ 1 eV.  Consistent  with  the  difference  in  ﬂight   path   length,
the neutron energy resolution is approximately one order of magnitude better in the horizontal ﬂight path of 200 m at n_TOF.
Acknowledgments
The authors greatly acknowledge the  contribution  of  the following CERN groups: EN-STI, EN-MEF, EN-HE, EN-HDO, EN-CV, EN-EL, DGS-RP, DGS-SEE, GS-SE, GS-ASE, BE-ASR, TE-VSC, TE-MSC,
and PH-DI.
