<title>Investigation of an Online Reactor Neutron Spectrum Measurement Method with Ionization Chambers</title>
<author>Houhua Xiong, Taosheng Li, Size Chen, Bing Hong, Chao Liu & FDS Team</author>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Nuclear Technology</Journal>
<Affiliation>a.Chinese Academy of Sciences, Institute of Nuclear Energy Safety Technology, Key Laboratory of Neutronics and Radiation Safety, Hefei, Anhui 230031, China
b.University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230027, China</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>ANS</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00295450.2017.1419780</DOI>
<URL> https://doi.org/10.1080/00295450.2017.1419780</URL>
Abstract — In this paper, an online reactor neutron spectrum measurement method is presented. The basic theory of this method is based on the unfolding of few-channel data, in which three miniature ionization chambers are applied. The neutron spectrum can be unfolded with the count rates and response functions of the three detectors through an unfolding program. In order to investigate the feasibility of this method, simulation tests have been performed with the reference neutron spectra and neutron spectra from the China LEAd-based Reactor (CLEAR). The research results show that this method can provide an alternative means for an online neutron spectrum measurement in the reactors. This method is suitable to be applied in fast neutron reactors due to the miniature size of ionization chambers and fission threshold of 238U.
Keywords — Neutron, spectrum unfolding, ionization chambers.
Note — Some figures may be in color only in the electronic version.
I.INTRODUCTION
Neutron spectrum is critical in research of neutronics physics and application of nuclear technology. Many neutro- nics parameters are related not only to neutron flux but also to neutron spectrum; for example, the transmutation rate for nuclear waste in the accelerator-driven subcritical system and the breeding rate of nuclear fuel in a fast reactor are mainly determined by the neutron spectrum.1,2 However, online neutron spectrum measurement methods are not well developed. The main difficulties are the harsh online core conditions for measurement and the need to miniaturize the detectors to be used in reactor core measurement.3–5 The development of accurate online measurement for the neutron spectrum in a reactor is of extreme vital significance.6,7
Until now, several traditional neutron spectrum measure- ment methods have been developed, such as the multifoil activation method, recoil proton method, time-of-flight method, Bonner multisphere spectrometers method,8 and so
on. Among these methods, the multifoil activation method is a kind of off-line neutron spectrum measurement. The recoil proton method can be used as an online measurement, but the detection limit is high and a neutron/gamma discriminator is needed for this method. The time-of-flight method needs complex equipment and is usually not used for a nuclear reactor application. The Bonner multisphere spectrometers method is widely used to measure spectra or dose in various neutron fields such as outside the shielding of nuclear reactors and particle accelerators or in the environment due to the interaction of cosmic radiation with the constituents of the atmosphere.9,10 The Bonner multisphere sphere spectro- meters method is not suitable for in-core measurement because the probes of Bonner sphere spectrometers take up too much space.
In this paper, an online measurement method for the reactor neutron spectrum is proposed, in which three ioniza- tion chambers have been selected as online detectors. The response functions of these detectors have been calculated with a Monte Carlo code (SuperMC); developed by the FDS Team.11,12 Neutron spectra were unfolded withdetector count rates and response functions, using MAXED (version 3.1) code, developed by Marcel Reginatto and Paul Goldhagen at the Environmental Measurements Laboratory.13,14 In order to verify the feasibility of this measurement method, simulation tests were performed dur- ing this work.
II.PRINCIPLE OF UNFOLDING NEUTRON SPECTRUM
This neutron spectrum measurement method is based on the theory of the unfolding of few-channel data, which has been well developed and widely used in spectra unfolding, such as Bonner spheres measurement and activation foils measurement.15,16 Neutron spectrum can be unfolded with count rates and response functions of detectors. If detector i with response function RiðEÞ is exposed  in  a  neutron  ﬁeld  with  neutron  spectrum  [ðEÞ, the detector count rate Ci can be obtained by folding RiðEÞ with [ðEÞ:
@1
where
Rij = response function Ri E averaged over neutron energy group j
n = neutron energy groups number
ϕj = ﬂuence in group j extending from neutron energy Ej to Ej+1 (Ref. 15).
Extraction of the neutron spectrum from Eq. (2) is termed deconvolution or unfolding. Equation (2) is underdetermined and does not have a unique solution because a limited number of count rates are not enough  to estimate the quasi-continuous function of the neutron spectrum [ E (187 fluence groups, i.e., energy bins in this study). For this reason, some physical a priori knowl- edge about the measured spectrum (i.e., default spectrum) is required, which may include assumptions on the degree of smoothness, nonnegative value, or the shape of the neutron spectrum to be measured. The default spectrum is then iteratively adjusted by the code to be consistent with the detector count rates.16 In order to unfold the neutron spectrum, three input files are required, i.e., data file, response functions file, and default spectrum file. The data file is written with information from the detector count rates, the response functions file is written with information from the neutron response functions of detec- tors, and the default spectrum file is written with the priori neutron spectrum information. According to this theory, measurements with detectors set in an unknown neutron field will allow information on [ E to be extracted.
III.STRUCTURE AND RESPONSE FUNCTIONS OF THE DETECTORS
Three miniature ionization chambers—235U fission chamber, 238U fission chamber, and NatB (nature-boron) ionization chamber—were chosen as probes in this neutron spectrum measurement method. The main rea- sons for these choices are as follows: (1) There is a lot of application experience for in-core measurements using ionization chambers; (2) ionization chambers have good irradiation resistance, good neutron/gamma discrimina- tion ability, and compact size; and (3) the reactor neutron spectrum can be viewed as being composed of thermal, epithermal, and fast component neutrons. These three ionization chambers are sensitive to thermal neutrons, epithermal   neutrons,   and   fast   neutrons,  respectively,
which  together  make the unfolding of  the neutron  spec-trum complete. The structure and response functions of the ionization chambers are described in more detail in Secs. III.A and III.B.
III.A.Structure of the Detectors
The three ionization chambers applied in this measure- ment were assumed with the same dimension but different coating material. As show in Fig. 1, the ionization chamber is modeled with a thin-walled aluminum cylindrical detector housing, with the outer dimensions of  130  mm  (length) and 10 mm (diameter). The active length is 65 mm. The anode is a nickel cylinder with a diameter of 0.8 mm and length of 100 mm. The insulator consists of two ceramic cylinders with diameters of 4.5 mm each. The ionized gas is composed of 96% argon and 4% nitrogen. Moreover, the NatB ionization chamber is covered by a 1-mm-thick cadmium sleeve as a thermal neutron filter. The initial
Fig. 1. Configuration of the NatB ionization chamber.
isotopic composition and isotopic deposit mass of the detectors are listed in Table I.
III.B.Response Functions of the Detectors
The response of each detector was calculated using SuperMC coupled with the ENDF/B-VI library. The fluence energy from the range of 1.0 × 10–8 to 20 MeV was divided into 187 energy groups, and each group of neutrons was regarded as a mono-energetic neutron spectrum. Then the response functions of each detector were obtained by assum- ing that they were exposed to the mono-energetic neutron spectrum. As shown in Fig. 2, the 235U chamber, NatB chamber, and 238U chamber have  their dominant  response  at the thermal, epithermal, and fast energy region, respec- tively. The response function for the 235U fission chamber follows the “1/E” law, except within the resonance energy region, where the response change is sensitive to neutron energy. However, the response curve for 235U and 238U shows similar distributions when the neutron energy is below 1 MeV, and the response curve for the 238U fission chamber is about five orders of magnitude lower than that of the 235U fission chamber. However, when the neutron energy increases above 1 MeV, the response function for the 238U fission chamber increases sharply. The sharp increase results from the fact that the fission threshold for 238U is just about  1 MeV (which results in increased neutron response). On the other hand, the response for NatB chamber was very small
(about 10–10) within the thermal energy region because of  the covered cadmium sleeve, which filters the thermal neu- trons. But, within 10–6 to 20 MeV, the response function for NatB chamber follows the 1/E law.
IV.SIMULATION TESTS
IV.A.Simulation with the Reference Neutron Spectrum
In order to investigate the feasibility of this online neu- tron spectrum measurement method, simulation tests of spec- trum unfolding have been performed with the reference neutron spectra, which were chosen from International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) technical report  number 318 (Ref. 17), including the pure fission neutron spectrum and the neutron spectrum of lead fast reactor. The normalized count rates of the detectors were calculated by assuming that the chambers are bundled together and exposed to each reference neutron spectrum. The results are listed in Table II. Using the response functions, the three detectors’ count rates, and the default neutron spectrum, neutron spectra were unfolded by the few-channel data unfolding program MAXED. As shown in Figs. 3 and 4, unfolded neutron spectra were in good agreement with reference neutron spectra in most of the neutron energy regions, except the maximum deviation of 15% found around
1 MeV (as indicated in Fig. 3).
IV.B.Simulation Test in the CLEAR
In addition, a different neutron spectrum with a dif- ferent fast neutrons component of the China LEAd-based Reactor (CLEAR) was simulated in this work. The CLEAR, which was initiated  by the FDS Team  China,   is a typical lead-cooled fast neutron spectrum subcritical reactor for the Accelerator Driven System research facility.18–21 The core of the CLEAR consists of 59 metallic uranium assemblies with 19.75% enriched 235U as fuel, 84 lead assemblies as reflector, 48 lead-boron
TABLE I
Isotopic Composition of Three Ionization Chambers
Fig. 2. Response functions of 235U fission chamber, 238U fission chamber, and NatB ionization chamber covered by a cadmium sleeve.
TABLE II
Normalized Count Rates of Detectors Exposed to Pure Fission Neutron Spectrum and Lead Fast Reactor Neutron Spectrum
Fig. 3. Unfolding of pure fission neutron spectrum.
assemblies shielding, and 8 steel-boron-cadmium assem- blies as control rods. The core configuration is shown in Fig. 5.
Fig. 4. Unfolding of lead fast reactor neutron spectrum.
In order to investigate the ability of this method to unfold different neutron spectra in reactors, a simulation test at three different positions in the CLEAR core was performed. The three positions were located along the radial direction: 50, 70, and 90 cm from the core center (position 1, position 2, and position 3) as shown in Fig. 5. The neutron characteristics of these three chosen positions are such that the neutron spectrum for position 1 is “harder” than that of position 2, and position 2 is harder than that of position 3. The three detectors (235U and 238U fission chambers, NatB ionization chamber) were bundled together as one unit and fixed in each designated position. The neutron spectra of these three different positions were calculated with the SuperMC code. The simulations were done by assuming a real operating condition for the CLEAR reactor, then the detector count rates were extracted from the (n, f) reaction rates from 238U and 235U, and the (n, α) reaction rate from NatB (as coating material in the three detectors).
Fig. 5. Sketch map of the CLEAR core.
The respective results are listed in Table III. Using the count rates and the response functions of the detectors, the neutron spectra were unfolded with the MAXED code. The comparison of the unfolded neutron spectrum and the calculated neutron spectrum of different posi- tions are shown in Figs. 6, 7, and 8. The unfolded neutron spectrum was in good agreement with the cal- culated neutron spectrum of the CLEAR in most of the neutron energy regions, except a maximum deviation of 20% around 0.3 MeV in position 3. Also, maximum deviations of  16% and 14% were respectively found for positions 2 and 3.
In order to further evaluate the ability of the detectors
for  the  unfolding  neutron  spectrum,  both  average  energy (E	)  and  fast-to-total  ratio  .ϕ =ϕ   Σ  of  each  neutron
spectrum  were  analyzed  (i.e.,  fast  neutron  energy  above
0.1 MeV). The two parameters roughly indicated the char- acteristics of the neutron spectrum, as described in Table IV. It can been seen that the  maximum  deviations of Eavg and  ϕf =ϕtot were 13% and 15%, respectively. Furthermore, deviations  were  found  to  be  decreasing  with  the increase
TABLE III
Normalized Count Rates of Ionization Chambers at Different Positions  in CLEAR
Fig. 6. Unfolded neutron spectrum at position 1 in the CLEAR.
Fig. 7. Unfolded neutron spectrum at position 2 in the
Fig. 8. Unfolded neutron spectrum at position 3 in the CLEAR.
of Eavg and ϕf =ϕtot , which means that the measurement method would have better measured results for hard neutron spectrum as compared with the soft one.
V.CONCLUSIONS
A new online reactor neutron spectrum measurement method was proposed in which three ionization  chambers are applied: one 235U fission chamber, one 238U fission chamber, and one NatB ionization chamber covered with a cadmium sleeve. The method is based on unfolding of few-
channel data. The feasibility of this method has been studied.Results of simulation tests compared with the reference neu- tron spectra show that the maximum deviation betweenunfolded neutron  spectra and the reference neutron  spectra is less than 15%, and results for the simulation test with the
TABLE IV
Average Energy and Fast-to-Total Ratio of Neutron Spectrum
CLEAR core show that the maximum deviation between unfolded neutron spectra and calculated neutron spectra is less than 20%. Furthermore,  the two parameters Eavg and    ϕf =ϕtot for unfolded neutron spectra at different positions in CLEAR were analyzed; the maximum deviations were 13% for Eavg and 15% for ϕf =ϕtot. The simulation results show that this measurement method can provide an alternative means of online neutron spectrum measurement in a reactor. In addition, the miniature size of ionization chambers and the fission threshold of 238U present a convenient in-core probe suitable for fast spectrum measurement, with specific appli- cations in fast reactors.
In the future, more research work needs to be done, such as experiments with detectors arranged in a fast reactor.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China grant 11705231 and IAEA Coordinated Research Project grant T33002. We thank the other members of the FDS Team in this research. Special thanks to MAXED code and the correspond- ing researchers Marcel Reginatto and Paul Goldhagen.
