<title>Particle swarm evolutionary computation-based framework for optimizing the risk and cost of lowdemand systems of nuclear power plants</title>
<author>Daochuan Ge, Shanqi Chen, Zhen Wang & Yanhua Yang</author>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>JOURNAL OF NUCLEAR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Affiliation>a.Key Laboratory of Neutronics and Radiation Safety, Institute of Nuclear Energy Safety Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, Anhui, China; b.School of Nuclear Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai , China</Affiliation>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2017.1383208</DOI>
<URL>  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2017.1383208</URL>
In this paper, an adapted multi-objective multi-swarm co-evolutionary particle swarm optimization (PSO) framework is developed to simultaneously optimize the risk and cost of low-demand
systems of nuclear power plants (NPPs). In the built framework, multi-swarm co-evolutionary
strategy is introduced to handle the fitness assignment puzzle of multi-objective optimization
problems. Besides, to deal with the mixed-integer problem of the decision variables vector, a
sub-interval covering-based nearest boundary method is also adopted. To illustrate the effectiveness and efficiencies of the proposed method, a typical high-pressurized injection system (HPIS)
is analyzed. The results indicate that, compared with the classic non-dominated sorting genetic
algorithm (NSGA)-II approach, the proposed method is more simple and easier to be convergent,
besides, of which the Pareto front is better distributed.
KEYWORDS
Nuclear power plant;
surveillance test;
multi-objective optimization;
particle swarm optimization;
mixed integers; multi-swarm
co-evolutionary
1.Introduction
Safety-critical systems are designed to mitigate the pro- cess of severe accidents and take the nuclear power plant back into a safe state when an undesirable severe acci- dent happens. However, if safety-critical systems can- not act successfully, it would cause some terrible con- sequences that means not only huge financial damages but also great harms to human beings and environ- ments. Hence, improving the reliability performance of the safety-critical systems is of great concern for both regulatory bodies and nuclear power utilities. In nor- mal conditions, these systems are typically kept at a standby state, and hence they must be available once on demand. It is highly desirable that these low-demand systems can be always maintained at a high level of  availability. To reach this aim, nuclear power utilities frequently take some test and maintenance activities obeying regular frequencies and durations defined by technique specifications and maintenance programs. An effective test and maintenance strategy can improve the reliability performance of the safety-critical sys- tems at a low expenditure. However, a bad strategy not only weakens the system’s reliability performance, but also costs too much. Therefore, simultaneously mini- mizing the risk of low-demand safety systems and the cost of test and maintenance activities has drawn much attention in nuclear power communities [1–6]. As to low-demand systems, better uniformity performance of obtained non-dominated solutions means more choices for designers to choose a better  strategy  balancing the risk and cost specifically. Hence, it is desirable to
develop a multi-objective optimization algorithm with notable merits on uniformity performance.
In the nuclear power community, researchers have successfully applied genetic algorithm (GA) to opti- mize the risk and cost of low-demand safety-critical systems. Martorell et al. put forward using constrained multi-objective genetic algorithm to optimize the test- ing and maintenance activities of nuclear power plants (NPPs) [7,8]. Tong et al. first present using PRA (prob- abilistic risk assessment)-based techniques to model the risk–cost of testing and maintenance activities, and then applying GA to solve them [9]. Rao et al. adopt fuzzy-genetic approach to optimize the test interval of safety systems of NPPs [10]. Mishra et al. take a multi- objective strategy to regulate an NPP [11]. Khalaquzza- man et al. optimize the periodic test frequency of a reac- tor protection system based on a risk–cost model and public risk perception [12]. Gjorgiev et al. make an effi- ciency comparison among different genetic techniques that are used for risk-informed decision-making in the nuclear industry [13]. In addition, Wu et al. have devel- oped a large reliability and probabilistic safety assess- ment program RiskA that can be used to efficiently ana- lyze the reliability of NPP systems [14].
Although GAs have shown much efficiency and effectiveness in solving multi-objective optimization problems, they still have two disadvantages: (1) easy to be premature. Considering the size of the population is very finite, GAs sometimes can quickly lose diversity after several times of iteration, and hence the selection, mutation operators would lose efficacy which would make the GAs hard to jump out of the local optimum
once trapped; (2) slow convergence. Unguided selection and mutation operators of GAs can cause a very slow convergence of genetic algorithms.
Compared with GAs, particle swarm optimization (PSO) methods are much more convergent and dis- tributed (at the Pareto front). PSO is an evolutionary method which is first developed by Dr Kennedy [15]. These methods have attracted much attention for both engineers and academic researchers once appeared. PSO methods have rapidly developed during the past several years and been applied to solve optimization models of many practical industrial systems in nuclear utilities. Pereira et al. have used PSO method to deal with non-periodic preventive maintenance scheduling optimization problem [16]. Carlos et al. have taken the method of PSO of safety components and systems con- sidering uncertain maintenance planning [17]. Besides, Chou et al. use PSO techniques to optimize test and maintenance cost in NPPs [18]. Actually, in [16,17], PSO is just used to handle single-objective optimiza- tion problems, and in [18], PSO is first applied to solve multi-objective optimization problems by ran- domly selecting the global optimum which sometimes can lead to a low convergence and much computational time.
In this paper, we are focused on solving multi-
... Risk model of an equipment
As to equipment, the risk caused by regular test and maintenance activities consists of four parts: risk caused by random failure (ur); risk caused by test (ut); risk  caused by preventive maintenance (um) and risk caused by corrective maintenance (uc). As to the random risk ur [8,20,21], its mathematical expression can be mod- eled by
μr (X, T) ≈ ρ + λ · T,	(1-a)
μr (X) ≈ ρ +  2 · λ · T,	(1-b)
where μr (X, T) is the time-dependent (τ ) unavail- ability evaluated at a given time (τ = T ), such like the surveillance test interval (STI) of an equipment; X represents a considered equipment or system, μr (X) represents the average time-dependent unavailability at a given period T, and ρ is the failure probability  per-demand, λ is the failure rate in a standby state. Equations (1-a) and (1-b) are two crude unavailability models that do not take into account the effects of age, working conditions, and preventive maintenance on the
considered equipment. To reflect these effects, two aver- age standby failure rates (λ¯ ) introduced in [22,23] are expressed, respectively, by
objective optimization problems that are heavily con- cerned in low-demand safety systems of NPPs. An
λ¯ =  λ0 +
1 · α · M · (W (Z))2
1
·ε ·
(2 − ε) , (2-a)
adapted coevolutionary multiswarm PSO  (ACMPSO)
framework is developed accordingly, also taking mixed
λ¯ =  λ0 +
1
2 · α ·
M · (W (Z))2
integers into account to solve real industrial prob- lems. To  validate the effectiveness and reasonability  of the proposed methods, the typical high-pressurized injection system (HPIS) of an NPP is analyzed, and the results indicate, compared with the classic non- dominated sorting genetic algorithm (NSGA-II) [19], the proposed method is much more convergent, and better distributed at the Pareto front when dealing with multi-objective optimization problems. In addition, the computing time for both methods is also comparable.
2.Problems formulation
To optimize the risk (i.e. unavailability) and cost of low- demand systems in NPPs, it is necessary to formulate the risk and cost models correctly. In this part, com- monly used risk and cost models of low-demand sys- tems incurred by regular test and maintenance activities are reviewed and summarized.
2.1.Risk function
Risk functions in low-demand safety-critical systems actually refer to two levels: one is the equipment level of risk model, and the other is the system level. In this section, we would review these risk models elaborately.
Risk model of an equipment
As to equipment, the risk caused by regular test and maintenance activities consists of four parts: risk caused by random failure (ur); risk caused by test (ut); risk  caused by preventive maintenance (um) and risk caused by corrective maintenance (uc). As to the random risk ur [8,20,21], its mathematical expression can be mod- eled by
@1-a
@1-b
where μr (X, T) is the time-dependent (τ ) unavail- ability evaluated at a given time (τ = T ), such like the surveillance test interval (STI) of an equipment; X represents a considered equipment or system, μr (X) represents the average time-dependent unavailability at a given period T, and ρ is the failure probability  per-demand, λ is the failure rate in a standby state. Equations (1-a) and (1-b) are two crude unavailability models that do not take into account the effects of age, working conditions, and preventive maintenance on the
considered equipment. To reflect these effects, two aver- age standby failure rates (λ¯ ) introduced in [22,23] are expressed, respectively, by
@2-a
@2-b
where Equation (2-a) is the proportional age setback (PAS) model, Equation (2-b) is the proportional age reduction (PAR) model, λ0 is the remaining standby failure rate, α denotes the linear aging coefficient, M represents the preventive maintenance period, W(Z) indicates the working conditions factor and Z means component work conditions, ε represents the mainte-
nance effectiveness, L denotes an overhaul period of replacing  the  equipment.  Through  replacing  λ by   λ¯ , Equations (1-a) and (1-b) can reflect more influence
factors that should be considered to the equipment fail- ure rates.
For other three risk models, [21,23] suggest three mathematical expressions that can be used in a standard PRA:
@3
@4
@5
where ft (X) represents the rate of test events, fm (X) indicates the rate of preventive maintenance events,   fc (X) denotes the rate of the corrective maintenance events, t and m represent the mean time of test and
preventive maintenance, respectively, qt (qm) repre-) with the compo-
nent downtime separately, and as to the d(X), it can be expressed as
@6
where μ represents the free mean repair time, and D represents allowed downtime defined by the technique specifications.where X is the decision variable vector, and X = (x1, x2,... ·· ·, xn), the μi(xi) represents the unavailabil- ity of the ith component involved in the considered sys- tem, f is the structure function of the fault tree. To get the exact expression of Usystem(X), f is often required to be converted into sum of disjoint products (SDP) form, such as binary decision diagram (BDD). Hence, as to a very large system, its expression is too complex to be handled in the optimization model.
For simplification purposes, an approximate rare event model is developed as [24]
@7
@8
where j represents the number of MCS, i represents the number of basic events contained in the corresponding cut sequence expression, μji (X) indicates the unavail- ability of the ith equipment belonging to the jth MCS. Although Equation (8) is an approximate model, it is extensively used as the risk models of low-demand sys- tems of the NPPs due to its simplification and conser- vative results.
2.2. Cost function
Carrying out regular test and maintenance activities inevitably produces much financial cost; this financial cost consists of mainly five parts [22,23,25]: a yearly cost due to test events ct(X), a yearly cost due to preventive maintenance events cm(X), overhaul cost incurred by replacing an equipment with a new one co(X), a yearly cost due to corrective maintenance events cc(X), outage cost due to the loss of electricity production of NPPs cs(X). These cost models can be expressed as follows:
... Risk model of a system
Risk models of low-demand systems of NPPs can be obtained by two ways: one is the PRA model based   on fault tree and event tree; the other is the rare event approximate model based on minimal cut sets (MCS). The system risk model derived from PRA model can be expressed by@9
@10
@11
@12
@13
where cht is the hourly cost for a test, chm represents the hourly cost for a preventive maintenance, cr denotes the total cost of replacing a new one, chc indicates the hourly expenditure for a corrective maintenance, chs represents the hourly cost for loss of electricity production. Ts is the average time needed to restart the reactor after a shutdown event.
Hence, as to a low-demand safety-critical system having m equipment, the system’s total cost C(X) caused by test and maintenance activities can be computed by
m
@14
where ci(X) represents the total cost of the ith equip- ment.
3.Coevolutionary multiswarm PSO techniques
When dealing with multi-objective optimization prob- lems, standard PSO shows disadvantages on fitness assignment problems. That is because the obtained solutions may dominate at one objective, but weaken at another  objective.  To  settle  this  problem,  Zhan  et al. have presented a coevolutionary multiswarm PSO (CMPSO) to handle a multi-objective PSO problem [26]. The novelty of this method is that it offers a simple and feasible way to solve multi-objective opti-mization problems through assigning a sub-swarm to a
corresponding objective. That is to say, one objective corresponds to one sub-swarm. In this way, the fit- ness assignment issue can be well solved for the multi- objective optimization. However, it should be noted that these sub-swarms do not work isolatedly, but cooperate with each other by a certain information-shared mech- anism.
3.1.CMPSO formulation
In CMPSO methods, there exist N sub-swarms work- ing together to optimize N objectives, and each sub- swarm corresponds to only one objective. To some extent, the optimization process in the internal of each sub-swarm is similar to single-objective PSO proce- dure. The only difference lying in CMPSO method is that it develops an external shared archive to save non- dominated solutions that are found in different sub- swarms. These sub-swarms can exchange information via the external shared archive, and also can use the information selected from the shared archive to coop- erate with each other to approximate the whole Pareto front. Hence, the particles in each sub-swarm can not only make use of the information from its own single swarm, but also make use of the information provided by other sub-swarms. Therefore, each particle actually sub-swarms which can drive the particle to approach the true Pareto front effectively.represented as Pn, its velocity vector is denoted as υn =
......
(CC)
υi1,..., υid ,... υim}, and its position vector is indi-
cated by xn = {xn ,..., xn ,... xn }. Then, the CMPSO
Replace
(MN+CC+CC) can be formulated as
@15
@16
where pBestn is historically the optimum of the particle Pn itself, id gBestd represents the optimum of the whole nth sub-swarm that ever found, Aid is the optimum randomly selected from the external archive A. Com- pared with the standard PSO, CMPSO is introduced the fourth term (i.e. c3 · rand3d · (An − xn (t )) ) which is called the transcending social-cognition part in  this
paper, and the c3 is called transcending social learn- ing factor. In addition, as to learning factors c1, c2 and c3, they are suggested to comply with the relationships as: c1= c2 = c3, c1+ c2 + c3 = 4 (i.e. the three learn- ing factors have the equal inertia weight 4/3). It should be noted that An  is randomly selected by the particle i , and if the external archive is empty, Ai should be
selected randomly from the gBests generated by other (N − 1) sub-warms, not the nth swarm itself (consider- ing particles can be attracted to the margin due to the guidance of their own sub-swarm information).
3.2.Archive update
The nondominated solutions saved in the external shared archive A are not only used as the shared tran- scending social information among all sub-swarms, but also used as the reported results at the end of the CMPSO algorithm. At each iteration, all nondominated solutions generated by sub-swarms have an access to enter the shared archive A. Hence, the scale of archive A would increase rapidly in case of no limit. It is better to tailor an archive with a maximum threshold capacity (TC) that can help improve the computa- tional performance of the algorithm. The problem is that which solutions should be allowed in when the size exceeds the maximum threshold, besides, what measurements should be taken to avoid local Pareto set (PS). In [26], a comprehensive decision strategy
Figure . Updating process of the external shared archive
is developed that includes three parts: elite learning strategy (ELS), nondominated-solution-determination,
and the density-based selection.As to the ELS, it promotes population’s diversity through introducing a local disturbance to particles that can help them jump out of local optimum which can be formulated as [27]
@17
where Aid  is the copy of Aid, Xmax, d and  Xmin, d  are the lower and upper boundaries of the dth dimension of Abi  separately, Gaussian (0, 1) is a random value that is produced by the Gaussian distribution with the follow ing parameters: μ(mean value) = 0; δ(standard devia- tion) = 1.For nondominated-solution-determination, it aims to choose the nondominated solutions within an obtained solution set (i.e. the mating pool (MP)). That is to say, for each solution i, it should be added to the nondominated set (NS) if it is determined to be non- dominated compared with other solutions in MP.
Density-based selection is carried out when the size of the NS (i.e. current capacity, CC) exceeds TC of the external shared archive A. First, the density of each solu- tion i is calculated according to the computing proce- dure presented in [28], and then, only the less crowed solutions are permitted in archive A. The updating pro- cess of the external shared archive is provided as shown in Figure 1.
As observed in Figure 1, first, an MP is initialized as an empty set, then the pBest of each particle in each sub- swarm is added in the MP, then all solutions in archive A (with the maximum allowable number (TC) of the solutions, and the current number (CC) of solutions) are also added in the MP. In addition, Aj (a copy of A) is performed ELS, and the disturbed Aj is also added in
Figure . An illustrative scenario for updating the position of discrete variable.
the MP. Hence, the size of the MP is M × N + CC + CC, where M is the size of a sub-swarm, N is the num- ber of the objectives. Then, non-domination sorting is performed on the MP, and all non-dominated solutions are stored in the NS. If the scale of NS is less than TC of archive A, the oldA is replaced by NS; if not, the less crowed TS solutions in NS are chosen to replace A. For the external shared archive A, it should be updated at each iteration during the CMPSO process.
4.The proposed method for minimizing the risk and cost of low-demand systems of NPPs
4.1.Problem formulation
Sometimes, technical personnel of nuclear utilities need to optimize multi-objective (suck like the risk and cost) of the low-demand systems simultaneously, and the optimization mathematical model for simultaneously minimizing risk and cost objective functions is formu- lated as
minU (X) , C (X)
s.t.
XL ≤ X ≤ XU
Such multi-objective optimization model can be solved by CMPSO as mentioned in Section 3.2. The problem is that decision variables X are often mixed integer, yet the previous CMPSO is developed to solve multi-objective problems with continuous variables. Hence, the previous CMPSO should be adapted to deal with mixed-integer problems. In Section 4.2, a sub- interval covering nearest boundary strategy is adopted to handle the mixed-integer problem.
4.2.Adapted multi-objective CMPSO with mixed integer
To deal with the mixed-integer problem, a sub-interval covering nearest boundary strategy is introduced [29] considering easy implementation and understanding. The idea is as follows: as to continuous variables, their evolutionary processes are still calculated by the previ- ous CMPSO; for discrete integers, in the velocity updat- ing stage, they are viewed as continuous variables con- sidering the consistency of the evolutionary rate, yet in position updating stage, they are treated as discrete vari-Figure . The logical ﬂow chart of the proposed algorithm of multi-objective ACMPSO.
Assume that there existsa set of discrete variable vec- tor X = (x1, x2,... , xn), and the discrete value space of a variable xp can be indicated as xp = [a0, a1, .. ., ak](1 ≤ p ≤ n), where ak is an integer value, then divide the value space into k continuous sub-intervals: M1 = [a0, a1], M2 = [a1, a2], .. ., Mk = [ak−1, ak]. In the stage of position updating, its position (x ) updating formula can be expressed by
@18
where  xi  is  the  direct  value  of  the  ith  variable  of X before applying the sub-interval covering nearest boundary strategy. Apparently, in order to implement Equation (18), first, we should know which sub-interval covers this new generated position, then we should judge which bound is closer to this new position. There- fore, in this paper, we call this method as the sub- interval covering nearest boundary strategy.
To demonstrate  the  implementation   of   Equation (18), one illustrative  scenario  is  provided as shown in Figure 2.
Then, based on the sub-interval covering nearest boundary strategy, we propose an adapted CMPSO algorithm for mixed integers as
@19
Figure . Structure scheme of a high-pressure injection system.
Table . Test-related parameters.
Table . Maintenance-related parameters.
Table . Test and maintenance-related cost.
Table . Proposed solution by the ACMPSO.
Table . Reliability parameters of equipment.
@19
@20
Hence, for a real multi-objective optimization prob- lem, we can use Equations (15) and (16) to deal with continuous variables, and apply Equations (19) and
(20) to handle discrete variables, that is the proposed adapted CMPSO (ACMPSO). The logical flow chart of the proposed algorithm of multi-objective ACMPSO is provided in Figure 3.
5.A case study: a typical high-pressure injection system
To illustrate the applicability and effectiveness of the proposed methods, a typical low-demand HPIS of an NPP is analyzed.
5.1.System descriptions
Accident safety has attracted more attention in nuclear community [29,30], and many engineered safety sys- tems are designed. HPIS is a typical low-demand safety- critical system used for mitigating severe accidents of NPPs, and its structure scheme is shown in Figure 4 which consists of seven valves and three pumps. It must be activated to work when a small LOCA acci- dent occurs in the first loop of reactor, or an occur- rence of the break of the main steam pipe and the pres- sure and temperature of the first loop decrease at a  certain low thresholds. It aims to take away reaction heat through injecting high-pressure water containing boron from the refueling water storage tank. Hence, it can lead to a very severe accident consequence if it does not work when needed. To keep the HPIS at a high level of reliability, regular test and maintenance activities are implemented according to the technical specification and maintenance program. The test and maintenance- related parameters cited from [17] are shown in Tables 1 and 2. And the test and maintenance-related cost infor- mation is listed in Table 3.
We aim to find a better test and maintenance strat- egy that can minimize the risk or cost, or both risk  and cost. Hence, we need to optimize the test and maintenance-related decision variables X = {T1, M1, M2, D1, D2, K2, K3, n1}, where T1 is the test interval, M1, M2 are maintenance intervals, D1, D2 are the allowed outage time for valves and pumps separately, and K2, K3, n1 are the constraint coefficients. For the valves, the allowed range is 4 h ≤ D1 ≤ 24 h, and for the pumps, the allowed range is: 24 h ≤ D1 ≤ 168 h. As observed in Tables 1 and 2, K2, K3, n1 are discrete
variables, and others are continuous variables. In this
paper,  an approximate  rare event model (indicated by
Equation (8)) is taken to characterize the unavailability of the HPIS for the convenience of computing.
5.2.Multi-objective optimization and
In this part, we use the adapted multi-objective CMPSO to simultaneously minimize the cost  and  risk of HPIS. We set the maximum iteration number Gen_num_maximun as 500, and the maximum thresh- old value of external shared archive as 200. We take two sub-swarms to work cooperatively, and the size of each swarm is initialized as 30. Meanwhile, we set c1 = 5/3, c2 = 5/3, c3 = 2/3, and the inertia coefficient w is also set as w = 0.9–0.5 × Gen_num/Gen_num_max. The optimized results (rounded) are obtained as shown in Figure 5, in which the origin TS means the solu-  tion decided by the origin parameters defined in techni- cal specification (TS). The archive updating strategy is adopted the same as that in Figure 1. Then, from the obtained approximate Pareto set, one Pareto solution (i.e. proposed solution) is picked up which is listed in Table 4.
And the reliability parameters of the equipment involved in the HPIS are used as shown in Table 5, and the meanings of the parameters are consistent through- out the paper which are defined in Equations (1-a)–(6). To show the merits of the proposed method, the classic NSGA-II is adopted as a comparison. As to the NSGA_II, the control parameters are chosen as follows: the size of tournament is 2, cross probability pm = 0.9, mutation probability pc = 0.1, population size is 200. For the adapted multi-objective CMPSO, we reset the size of the shared archive as 200 for consistency, and other parameters remain the same. Without loss of gen-
erality, four test cases are carried out where iteration numbers are chosen as 100, 200, 300, and 400, respec- tively. The comparative optimized results are shown in Figures 6–9.
To evaluate the uniformity and convergence perfor- mances of the adapted multi-objective CMPSO, two commonly used evaluation indices are introduced sep- arately which are spacing metric [31] and coverage  [32]. As to the spacing metric, the smaller the value of
Figure . Comparative Pareto optimal front (case ).
Figure . Comparative Pareto optimal front (case ).
Figure .  Comparative Pareto optimal front (case ).
Figure . Comparative Pareto optimal front (case ).
Figure . Uniformity performance (fspacing metric) of ACMPSO and NSGA-II with iterations.
Figure  . Coverage of nondominated solutions obtained by ACMPSO and NSGA-II with iterations.
fspacing metric, the better the uniformity performance of the algorithm. As to the coverage C(X, Y), the larger the value of the C(X, Y), the better the convergence perfor- mance of algorithm X than that of Y. The evaluation results are shown in Figures 10 and 11.
5.3. Results and discussions
As seen in Table 5, through applying the multi-objective ACMPSO algorithm, the unavailability of HPIS falls down from 1.62 × 10−4 to 1.20 × 10−5, nearly reduced by one order of magnitude. At the same time, the cost of HPIS is reduced from 3001 CNY to 2577 CNY, saved by 14.13% or so. Apparently, the proposed meth- ods have shown sufficient effectiveness in optimizing risk and cost of the low-demand HPIS. In addition, as observed in Figures 6–9, at the same iteration number, the Pareto fronts obtained by ACMPSO are much more well distributed than those derived by NSGA-II, and the Pareto fronts are much closer to the true PF than those obtained by NSGA-II. In addition, two evalua- tion indices (i.e. spacing metric and coverage) at differ- ent iteration numbers are calculated and compared, and the results are shown in Figures 10 and 11. As we can see
in the figures, on the whole, compared with the classic NSGA-II, the proposed methods exhibit notable merits on uniformity and convergence performance. Besides, the computing time of these two methods are compa- rable (as to the case 4, the average time for NSGA-II is about 15 min, and for the ACMPSO, the average time is about 20 min). From the code scale point of view, com- pared with NSGA-II, ACMPSO is much simpler and easier to be implemented.
6.Conclusion and future work
In this paper, an ACMPSO framework  is  presented to handle multi-objective optimization problems with mixed integers, in which a sub-interval covering near- est boundary strategy is adopted to deal with discrete integers, and multi-swarm co-evolutionary strategy is introduced to handle fitness assignment problem. To validate the effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed methods, a typical low-demand system HPIS of NPPs is analyzed. The results indicate that the proposed meth- ods are capable of optimizing the risk and cost of low- demand systems of NPPs.
Compared with the classic NSGA-II, the proposed methods show notable merits on uniformity perfor- mance and convergence when using ACMPSO to deal with multi-objective optimization problems. Especially, for the uniformity performance of obtained approxi- mate Pareto set, it would offer more chances for users to choose a better solution. In addition, the computing time of the proposed methods is comparable with the NSGA-II.
Updating external shared archive is a very time-  consuming process, especially for an archive with a large threshold value. In the future, we will be focused on developing an even more efficient non-dominated sorting algorithm for updating the shared archive. Besides, developing PSO-based expert system is also our future work for regulating risk versus cost of low- demand systems of NPPs.
Acknowledgments
Authors are very grateful to the National Science and Tech- nology Major Project of China [2011ZX06004-024], the Staff Independent Innovation Fund of State Nuclear Power Tech- nology Corporation [grant number SNP-KJ-CX-2015-27], and National Natural Science Foundation [grant number 71671179] for providing the financial support for this study, and also thank other members of FDS team.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.
Funding
This work was supported by the National Science and Tech- nology Major Project [grant number 2011ZX06004-024];Staff Independent Innovation Fund of State Nuclear Tech- nology Corporation [grant  number  SNP-KJ-CX-2015-  27]; National Natural Science Foundation [grant number 71671179].
