<title>Enhanced photon shielding efﬁciency of a ﬂexible and lightweight rare earth/polymer composite: A Monte Carlo simulation study</title>
<author>Ying Wang a, Guangke Wang c, Tao Hu b, Shipeng Wen b, Shui Hu b, *, Li Liu a, b, **</author>
<Affiliation>a State Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China
b Beijing Engineering Research Center of Advanced Elastomers, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China
c Global Energy Internet Research Institute Corporation Ltd, Beijing, 102211, China</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>NUCLEAR ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2019.12.028</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2019.12.028</URL>
ABSTRACT
Photons with the energy of 60 keV are regularly used for some kinds of bone density examination de- vices, like the single photon absorptiometry (SPA). This article reports a ﬂexible and lightweight rare earth/polymer composite for enhancing shielding efﬁciency against photon radiation with the energy of 60 keV. Lead oxide (PbO) and several rare earth element oxides (La2O3, Ce2O3, Nd2O3) were dispersed into natural rubber (NR) and the photon radiation shielding performance of the composites were assessed using monte carlo simulation method. For 60 keV photons, the shielding efﬁciency of rare earth- based composites were found to be much higher than that of the traditional lead-based composite, which has bad absorbing ability for photons with energies between 40 keV and 88 keV. In comparison with the lead oxide based composite, Nd2O3-NR composite with the same protection standard (the lead equivalent is 0.25 mmPb, 0.35 mmPb and 0.5 mmPb, respectively), can reduce the thickness by 35.29%, 37.5% and 38.24%, and reduce the weight by 38.91%, 40.99% and 41.69%, respectively. Thus, a ﬂexible, lightweight and lead-free rare earth/NR composite could be designed, offering efﬁcient photon radiation protection for the users of the single photon absorptiometry (SPA) with certain energy of 60 keV.
© 2019  Korean Nuclear Society, Published by Elsevier Korea LLC. This is an open access article under the
Keywords: Photon Composite
Monte Carlo simulation Rare earth
1.Introduction
Photon radioactive sources have been widely used in disease diagnostic and therapeutic applications [1e5]. Unwanted expo- sures to photon radiation are hazardous to people's health, espe- cially for long term exposure. To avoid hazard from these radiation sources, lead/rubber composites, which combine the good absorbing ability of lead for ionizing radiation [3,6e9] and the improved processing ability, good ﬂexibility of rubber, have tradi- tionally used as personnel radiation protection materials [1,3,10,11]. However, there is a weak absorption energy region between 40 and 88 keV [10,12], so called “lead feeble absorbing area”, in which the photon (gamma ray) shielding efﬁciency of lead is low. Coinci- dentally, the energy of photon emitted from most of clinical diagnostic devices is below 100 keV [13,14]. As a result, the shielding polymer based composites ﬁlled with lead or lead com- pounds must be made much thicker or heavier by adding more ﬁller to provide sufﬁcient radiation protection [15]. Such heavy lead/polymer composites would cause discomfort and even back problems to the operators and patients. Moreover, another weak- ness of lead is its toxicity [10,14].
Consequently, research efforts have been focused on developing alternative materials for lead. A variety of shielding materials (e.g., concrete, iron, tantalum, barium, tungsten, tin, rare earths, or other high Z elements) have attracted tremendous attention as lead-free alternatives for attenuation or adsorption of the undesired radia- tions [15e19]. The shielding properties of these candidates have been proved better than that of lead just at some energy region due to their different K electron shells [1], but these candidates cannot replace lead at the wide energy region below 100 keV.
In order to offer broad spectrum protection, researchers have designed multilayer structural radiation shielding materials con- tained multiple metal elements [20e22]. As-fabricated shielding material is much lighter and thinner than typical lead-based ma- terial or non-Pb materials which mixed various high Z elements as functional ﬁller. However, the shortcoming of these multilayer composites is their complicated manufacturing process, which leads to high production cost and low products’ qualiﬁed rate.
We suggest another study approach that our research can be focused toward designing efﬁcient, ﬂexible, lightweight and cost- effective shielding materials for protection only against certain energy of radiation encountered in speciﬁc medical device instead of broad-spectrum protection. For example, single photon absorp- tiometry (SPA), one of clinical examination device for bone meta- bolism disease, just release 60 keV photons emitted from its 241Am source [23,24]. The photonic shielding performance of the shielding materials can be optimized by making use of the absorption edge. In this regard, rare earths whose absorption energy of the K-shell electron between 38.9 and 63.3 keV [10], have become best can- didates that can be designed to effective attenuate radiation emitted from the 241Am source of SPA.
In this paper, based on photon shielding theory, monte-carlo simulation method is adopted to assess the photon radiation shielding performance of natural rubber (NR) composites ﬁlled with different kinds of rare earth element oxides (La2O3, Ce2O3,Nd2O3). Compared to traditional lead oxide/rubber composite, rare earths/rubber composites show much better photon radiationshielding ability. With the same protection property for 60 keV photons, the thickness and the weight of Nd2O3-NR composite was found to be reduced by 35.3% and 48.9% at least, respectively. In other words, rare earths/rubber composites will be much lighter, safer and more ﬂexible. Therefore, it provides a new approach for reducing weight or thickness of the radiation composites used as personnel radiation protection materials for clinical diagnostic devices emitted photons with mono energetic radiation.
2.Materials and methods
2.1.Theoretical calculations
Attenuation of photons in shielding materials can be expressed by the next equation:@1
where I0 and I represent the incident and transmitted photon in- tensities respectively, m is linear attenuation coefﬁcient and x is thickness of shielding material. A straight line can be obtained with thickness as the abscissa and ln I  as the ordinate. The slope of the
0
straight line is m [25]. The larger the m is, the better the shielding
performance of the material will be.
There is another parameter can be determined using the following equation:@2
where mm is mass attenuation coefﬁcient [26] and r is density of material. The larger the mm is, the better the shielding performance of the material will be. The mm of composite can be calculated by the next equation:
@3
where wi represents the mass fraction of component in the com- posite [27].
Photon shielding rate can be denoted as SR and determined as follows:@4
Obviously, the larger the SR is, the better the shielding perfor- mance of the material will be. Besides, by means of formula (2) and (3), SR can be described using another equation:@5
where M represents the mass of per unit area of the shielding material. The required mass of a certain material can be calculated by formula (5) when reached a certain shielding rate.
The required thickness of the shielding material to attenuate the beam intensity to 50% of the incident intensity is called half-value layer (HVL) [28]. It can be written as follows:@6
Similarly, the required thickness of the shielding material to attenuate the beam intensity to 10% of the incident intensity is called ten-value layer (TVL) [29]. It can be written by the next equation:
27
The smaller the HVL and TVL, the better the shielding perfor- mance of the material.
2.2.Experiment
Monte carlo simulation MCNP is a computer algorithm based on random sampling. The radiation source is deﬁned by inputting incident particle type, energy, geometric position and incident di- rection. During the simulation, the incident particles are tracked by probability statistics. After a particle passing through the trans- mission plane, it stops tracking and starts to simulate the next particle until all the particles are simulated. The distribution of particle intensity and dose can be obtained by means of the data recorded by the detectors during the tracking process.
The simulate geometric model is shown in Fig. 1. Photons with certain energy are vertically shoot into the ﬂat shielding material along the positive direction of the z-axis. It is assumed that the material is ideal with uniform distribution of components. It has stable geometry without shrinkage and expansion. The composites with different ﬁller are denoted as La2O3-NR, Ce2O3-NR, Nd2O3-NR and PbO-NR, respectively.
To assess the photon radiation shielding performance of different composites, the energy of radiation source is deﬁned changing from 35 to 95 keV. Then by means of deﬁning thickness of composites as 0.02, 0.04, 0.06, 0.08 and 0.1 cm, the shielding per- formance of rare earth element oxides and lead oxide under 60 keV energy photons which emitted from 241Am of SPA can be further
Fig. 1. Geometric structure of the simulates.
Fig. 2. Shielding rates under different energies.
Fig. 3.  Linear ﬁtting.
compared.
In order to research inﬂuence of thickness and ﬁller content on shielding performance, shielding ﬁller with best property selected out based on above study is simulated under the photon of 60 keV. Five different thicknesses of 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and 1.0 cm are deﬁned respectively and a series of different ﬁller contents are deﬁned for each thickness.
Curves of shielding rate changes along with photon energy are illustrated in Fig. 2. The K shell absorption edges of La, Ce, Nd and Pb are 38.9, 40.4, 43.5 and 88 keV. The shielding rate decreased with the energy increasing but increased sharply when the photon en- ergy reached the K shell absorption edge and then decreased again. This is because when the photon energy is low, the material absorbs photons mainly through the photoelectric effect. The greater the probability of photoelectric effect, the more rays are absorbed and the better the shielding performance. The probability of the pho- toelectric effect is inversely proportional to the third power of the photon energy. Therefore, the probability of photoelectric effect and the shielding rate decreased with the energy increasing. When the incident energy is exactly equal to the K shell absorption edge of the shielding element, the photon energy will be completely absorbed by the electron and the probability of photoelectric effect is greatly increased. So the shielding rate will increase sharply near the K shell absorption edge. In addition, the probability of photo- electric effect is also proportional to the fourth power of the atomic number of shielding element. The atomic number of lead is bigger than rare earths, so the shielding rate of PbO is better than other compounds outside lead feeble absorbing area but worse in this area because of the K shell absorption edge of rare earth elements. Therefore, the rare earth elements can replace lead to increase the protection effect when the photon energy is in the lead feeble absorbing area.
As shown in Fig. 3, A straight line can be obtained with the thickness as the abscissa and ln I   as the ordinate. The m of four
0
composites can get from the slope of the straight lines  respectively.
The HVL and TVL of each composite can be further calculated from m. The obtained values of m, HVL and TVL at deﬁned energy (60 keV) are illustrated in Fig. 4(a). The abscissa represents different composites, the left ordinate represents the values of m and the right ordinate represents the values of HVL and TVL. In terms of
Fig. 4. Comparison of shielding properties of composites with different ﬁllers.
Fig. 5. Curves of shielding rate change with the increasing ﬁller content and thickness.
numerical  values,  the  sequence  of  m  is   Nd2O3-NR  >  Ce2O3- NR > La2O3-NR > PbO-NR, while the sequence of HVL or TVL is PbO- NR > La2O3-NR > Ce2O3-NR > Nd2O3-NR. The larger the m is, or the smaller the HVL and TVL are, the better the shielding effect will be. Therefore, the shielding effect of La2O3, Ce2O3 and Nd2O3 is obvi- ously better than that of PbO when the photon energy is 60 keV. It is because the closer the K shell absorption edge of the shielding material is to the photons’ energy emitted from the source, the better the shielding effect will be. Among these four elements, the K shell absorption edge of Nd is closest to 60 keV, so it has the best shielding effect. Then Ce and La in turns and the Pb is last.
The particle distributions of the X-Z cross proﬁle in four
La2O3 and Ce2O3, which is consistent with the above conclusion.
3.2.Inﬂuence of thickness and ﬁller content on shielding performance
Basing on the above research, Nd2O3 is selected as the functional ﬁller to design shielding composite and the relationship between ﬁller content or material thickness and shielding property is further studied. Fig. 5(a) illustrates the variation of shielding rate versus ﬁller content for composites of different thickness at ﬁller content from 0 to 1. Fig. 5(b) shows the curve of shielding rate versus
thickness for composites containing different contents of Nd O
different composites are illustrated in Fig. 4(b) and the different	ﬁ	2 3
colors represent different particle intensity. The photons shoot into the shielding material at 0.1 cm and exit at 0.5 cm. The ﬁgure in- dicates that the intensity decay continually as the particles passed through the shielding material. When leaved the PbO-NR com- posite, the photon intensity is obviously greater than that of other shielding materials. It indicates that the photon shielding efﬁciency of rare earth oxides is obviously better than lead oxide. In addition, the photon shielding efﬁciency of Nd2O3 is slightly higher than
Fig. 6. Curves of shielding rate change with the increasing mass.
Table 1
The reduced weight of other points compared with the point e.
Fig. 7. Schematic diagram of composite for ray shielding.
the proportion of polymer matrix in the composite decreases gradually and the softness, mechanical properties and weight of the material will change in practical terms. Therefore, the compre- hensive performance should be considered in the formulation design instead of pursuing the increase of ﬁller content lonely.
In Fig. 5(b), as the thickness of material increased, the shielding rate increased rapidly in the begin and then the growth rate slowed down. It is because photons decay exponentially as they pass through the shielding material and that's shown in formula (1). Therefore, the shielding rate increased exponentially with thick- ness increasement. And the curves in Fig. 5(b) follow this trend.
The curves of shielding rate changes with the increasing mass of shielding material are shown in Fig. 6. As the mass of material increased (that is the thickness or ﬁller content increased), the shielding rate increased rapidly in the begin then the growth rate
guaranteeing the protective performance.
PbO  Nd2O3 D T	D M
slowed down. According to formula (5), the shielding rate increases exponentially with the mass increasing. And the curves in Fig. 6 follow this trend.
In addition, when materials of different thicknesses reached the same shielding rate, their mass can get from Fig. 6. For example, a horizontal straight line is made along the point whose shielding rate is 80%. The intersection points of the horizontal straight line and shielding rate curves denote as a, b, c, d and e respectively. From these points, mass of different materials can be obtained. The reduced weight of other points compared with the point e are shown in Table 1. When the thickness was 0.8 cm, 0.6 cm, 0.4 cm and 0.2 cm, the weight of materials decreased by 18.02%, 33.33%, 50.45% and 67.57%, respectively. That is the thinner material is lighter when reached the same shielding rate. It is because shielding effect mainly depends on material thickness and collision probability between photons and effective shielding elements. The greater the collision probability and thickness, the greater the photon attenuation and then the better the shielding effect. Fig. 7 is a schematic diagram of composite for ray shielding. Material (a1) and (b1) have the same shielding rate. Compared with (b1), (a1) is thinner and the ﬁller content is higher. Figure (a2) and (b2) represent the projection of the two materials on the incident di- rection of the photon respectively, and the shaded parts represent the ﬁllers. As shown in the ﬁgure, material with higher content of probability between effective shielding elements and photons is greater, so the shielding efﬁciency is higher. On the contrary, ma- terial with lower content of ﬁller has lower shielding efﬁciency and in order to achieve the same shielding rate, it is necessary to in- crease its thickness. The weight increase caused by thickness far exceeds the ﬁller content. So when reach the same shielding rate, the material with less ﬁller content has greater thickness and weight. Therefore, in order to reduce the weight of protective material, the content of ﬁller should be increased as much as possible on the premise of ensuring other properties meeting the requirements.
Based on the above data and conclusions, the Nd2O3 and the traditional photon shielding ﬁller PbO are set as the ﬁller respec- tively. The thickness of the two different materials can be obtained when reached different lead equivalent. Furthermore, the per- centage of thickness and weight reduced by Nd2O3 compared with traditional protective composite can be calculated. And the data are shown in Table 2. According to Table 2, when the protective com- posite reached 0.25mmPb, the thickness and weight of Nd2O3 material are reduced by 35.29% and 38.91% compared with tradi- tional materials. When reached 0.35mmPb and 0.5mmPb, the thickness of Nd2O3 material are reduced by 37.5% and 38.24% and the mass are reduced by 40.99% and 41.69%. It can be seen that when Nd2O3 is selected as the shielding ﬁller, the thickness and weight of the protective composite can be greatly reduced while
Table 2
Thickness of two materials and reduced thickness and weight by Nd2O3.
guaranteeing the protective performance.
3.3.Comparison between theory and simulation
The mm of NR and Nd2O3 can get from the NIST and that of the composites with different ﬁller contents can be calculated by formula (3). The shielding rate of composites can get from formula (5).  Fig.  8  represents  the  curves  of  theoretical  calculation  and
simulation. The ﬁgure shows that small differences exist between theory and simulation and the theoretical values slightly greater than simulation values. That may be because each element distributed uniformly according to their mass fraction on atomic scale in the simulation and it is totally different from the actual particle distribution. The theoretical volume is smaller than simu- lative volume  so the  theoretical density  is  bigger than  simulative
density. And that leads theoretical mm which closely related to density bigger than simulative mm, then resulting in shielding performance  of  theory  is  better  than  that  of  simulation.  But  in
general, the error between simulation and theoretical calculation is within the acceptable range, so the simulation model is reliable.
4.Conclusions
In the lead feeble absorbing area, the photon shielding perfor-
mance of rare earth oxide is  obviously  better  than that of PbO.  Nd O  is the best, followed by Ce O  and La O . The higher the ﬁller content is, the smaller the thickness and weight needed when  reach a certain shielding rate. When reach different lead equivalent, the protective material Nd2O3-NR reduced the thickness by 35.29%, 37.5% and 38.24%, and reduced the weight by 38.91%, 40.99% and 41.69% respectively compared with the traditional lead-containing protective material. Rare earth elements can greatly reduce the thickness and weight of the protective material so that they can be used as an alternative material for lead.
Fig. 8. Calculation and simulation curves of shielding rate change with the increasing mass.Declaration of competing interest
There is no ﬁnancial or personal interest in the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the supports from Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51573007).
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2019.12.028.
