<title>Feasibility assessment of using external neutron and gamma radiation measurements for monitoring the state of fuel assemblies in dry storage casks</title>
<author>Reuven Rachamin a,b,⇑, Uwe Hampel a,b</author>
<Affiliation>a Chair of Imaging Techniques in Energy and Process Engineering, Institute of Power Engineering, Technische Universität Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany
b Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf, POB 51 01 19, 01314 Dresden, Germany
</Affiliation>
<year>2020</year>
<Jounral>Annals of Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.anucene.2019.106975</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2019.106975</URL>
ABSTRACT
This study assesses the feasibility of using external neutron and gamma flux measurements to detect the state of spent fuel assemblies inside a sealed cask. Several Monte-Carlo simulations were performed to evaluate the neutron and gamma flux distribution outside the sidewall of a cask with all intact fuel assemblies and a cask with one damaged fuel assembly, mimicking a fuel assembly with expanded rods and fuel relocation. The evaluation was performed for different positions of the damaged fuel assembly and different storage times. The results show that in case the damaged fuel assembly is located near the inner wall of the cask, it can be detected by both of the radiation modes. The detection of the inner dam- aged fuel assemblies, however, can be feasible only by the external neutron flux.
Keywords:
Monte-Carlo  Dry storage cask Monitoring
Neutron and gamma radiation
1.Introduction
Spent fuel storage is one of the important stages in the nuclear fuel cycle and one of the most vital challenges for countries oper- ating nuclear power plants. For several decades the common solu- tion for the interim storage of spent fuel assemblies has been wet storage in water-filled pools. In the late 1970s, the need for alter- native storage began to grow when pools at many nuclear power plants began to fill up with stored spent fuel assemblies. Utilities started looking at other options such as storing the spent fuel assemblies in interim storage facilities within large, heavily shielded containers called dry storage casks. In Germany, these containers are commonly of the type CASTOR1 (Gesellschaft für Nuklear-Service mbH Essen), i.e., CASTOR V/19, and CASTOR V/52, which are designed for PWR and BWR fuel assemblies, respectively. The fuel assemblies can be stored in a cask after they have already been cooled in the spent fuel pool for at least one year. Starting with the loading date, their storage in the cask is limited for 40 years. The same time span applies to the storage facility beginning with the first stored cask. After 40 years, the fuel assemblies should be trans- ferred to a repository in deep geological formations. However, in Germany, like in many other countries, there are still no final repos-itories for high-level waste in operation or at least under construc- tion. Therefore, the storage period has to be extended, and as a consequence, the licenses for both the casks and the storage facilities have to be renewed (Spykman, 2018; Linnemann et al., 2014).
Longer-term dry cask storage, beyond the period of 40 years, raises questions about the state of  the  casks  and  especially  on  the integrity of the fuel assemblies inside. During the dry cask stor- age, the fuel assemblies undergo several physical and chemical processes (Spykman, 2018; Wiss  et  al.,  2014;  Ewing,  2015;  Kook et al., 2013; Kim et al., 2013). After the decay of the predominantly beta-decaying short-lived fission products, the fuel assemblies are subjected primarily to self-radiation damage and radiogenic  helium accumulation due to alpha-decay events from the acti- nides. These processes can lead to early material degradation and enhanced corrosion (Wiss et al., 2014). If the helium generated during the storage is not retained in the fuel, it will increase the internal fuel rod pressure. The pressure from accumulating helium may compromise the integrity of the fuel rods cladding, especially if there is significant hydrogen embrittlement of the fuel rods’ zir- caloy cladding (Ewing, 2015). Once the cask is filled and sealed, the knowledge about the state of the fuel assemblies is limited. There- fore, there is a great interest in a non-invasive long-term monitor- ing technique, which will provide direct information on the fuel assemblies inside cask (Hampel et al., 2018).
The measurement of external gamma and neutron radiation fields is probably the most conventional way to  monitor sealed  dry storage casks. This method, however, can be quite a challenge
due to the massive shielding of the cask that is used to protect the environment from the radiation emitted from the fuel assemblies, as well as the self-shielding from the fuel assemblies themselves. The primary goal of this study is to investigate, using a series of high fidelity Monte-Carlo simulations, whether the intensity and the profile of the gamma and neutron flux outside of a sealed cask are sufficient and suitable enough to provide meaningful informa- tion on the fuel assemblies’ state.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a brief description of the cask model and defines the Monte-Carlo simula- tions setup. In Section 3, the fuel assembly’s composition and gamma and neutron sources used for the Monte-Carlo simulations are described and discussed. Section 4 presents the gamma and neutron flux distributions outside a cask with different fuel assem- blies’ states. This section is aimed to examine the possibility of using external gamma and neutron flux measurements to deter- mine the state of the fuel assemblies  along  different  periods  of the storage. Finally, the summary and the main conclusions are given in Section 5.
2.Cask model and Monte-Carlo calculations
The Monte-Carlo code MCNP (version 6.1.1 beta) (Goorley et al., 2012) was used to investigate the possibility of using external neu- tron and gamma radiation measurements to detect geometrical changes in the fuel assemblies inside the cask. MCNP is well- known code for nuclear applications such as radiation protection and shielding, radiation transport, neutron physics analysis, etc. Moreover, it is well-suited code for complex geometry configura- tions, such as that of the dry cask designs. In this study, the CASTOR V/19 design (Wimmer et al., 2015) was chosen for the investigation.
The CASTOR V/19 consists of a thick-walled monolithic body made of ductile cast iron with radial cooling fins machined  into  the outer surface. The overall length is 586.2 cm, and the sidewall thickness (including the fins) is 47.8 cm. The cask cavity has a diameter of 148.0 cm and a length of 502.5 cm. It holds a fuel bas- ket made of borated stainless steel, which is designed to accommo- date 19 PWR fuel assemblies (FAs). The cask is sealed, to maintain a helium atmosphere, with a multiple-cover system consisting of a primary lid and a secondary lid. The double-lid system is made     of forged stainless steel. The cask body, together with the lids is responsible for the shielding of alpha, beta, neutron, and gamma radiation. For neutron moderation, two concentric rings of axial holes are drilled into the cask wall and filled with polyethylene moderator rods. A slab of polyethylene is inserted at the bottom end and on the underside of the secondary lid for the same pur- pose. The main geometry and technical data of the CASTOR V/19 are presented in Table 1.
In this study, it was assumed that the cask is loaded with fuel assemblies from a ‘‘Vor-Konvoi”-type German PWR with equal dis- charged burnup. Each fuel assembly consists of 236 fuel rods and 20 guide tubes arranged in a 16 16 square lattice. The fuel  rod  pitch is 1.43 cm. Each of the  fuel  rods  has  an  active  height  of  390 cm. The cask and the fuel assemblies inside of it were modeled in detail, as shown in Fig. 1.
The neutron and gamma flux distributions outside the sidewall of the cask were calculated for a case where the fuel assemblies inside the cask are all intact and for  a case  where the  cask  has one damaged fuel assembly. The potential damage of a fuel assem- bly, after a longer storage time, is expected from pressure built-up inside the rods. The pressure increase will initially lead to a slight expansion of the rods. When the hoop stress in the cladding exceeds a critical value, the cladding may rupture. With the pre- sent limitation of the storage period of 40 years, the cladding hoop
Table 1
Main geometry and technical data of the CASTOR V/19.
stress and strain values are limited for 120 N/mm2 and 1%,  respec-
tively (Spykman, 2018). This translates into a permissible  rod  radial expansion of about 1% or 100 mm. The ductile to brittle tran- sition  is  strongly  determined  by  the  amount  and  orientation  of
embedded hydrides and is currently a topic of international research activities (Spykman, 2018; Wiss  et  al.,  2014;  Ewing,  2015; Kook et al., 2013; Kim et al., 2013). In any case, both for expansion and rupture of the fuel  cladding,  it  is  expected  that the embrittled fuel may be relocated by the action of gravity towards the bottom of the fuel assembly. It should be noted as  well, that beside pressure-induced cladding extension and failure also other potential incidents, like fire in the storage building or mechanical impacts during transport can lead to fuel compaction and/or rod ballooning. In this study, a generic case of a damaged fuel assembly was considered. It was assumed that each fuel rod
expanded uniformly along its axis  by  100 mm  (in  diameter) and  as a result, a fragmented fuel accumulated at the bottom of the
rod (i.e., fuel relocation). The MCNP geometrical model of the intact and expanded fuel rods is shown in Fig. 2. The neutron and gamma flux distributions were evaluated, in this case, assuming that the damaged fuel assembly situated at different positions inside the cask, i.e., at center (Position 0, marked in orange in Fig. 1), at the inner fuel assemblies ring (Position 1, marked in green in Fig. 1), and at the outer fuel assemblies ring (Position 2, marked in red       in Fig. 1).
The simulations for the evaluation of the neutron and gamma flux distributions outside the sidewall of the cask were performed using 108 histories. The results obtained from the MCNP simula- tions contain uncertainty as a relative error. Due to the thick wall  of the cask, the radiation from the fuel assemblies can hardly reach the outer cask surface, which influences the uncertainties. This  kind of problem can be solved by using one of the MCNP sets of variance reduction techniques. In this study, the mesh-based weight windows technique was used. For generating the mesh- based weight windows, the density of the cask wall was reduced  at first to get enough events. Then the weight windows produced in the first run was used as an input in the second run with the actual density. This process was carried out repeatedly to get the appropriate distribution of particle weights (Booth,  2004).  Once the appropriate distribution of particle weights was achieved, the neutron and gamma flux distributions outside the sidewall of the cask were obtained by using the track-averaged TMESH tally of  the MCNP. The use of the weight windows results in neutron and gamma flux distributions with a relative error below 6%.
3.Fuel assemblies composition and radiation source evaluation
3.1.Fuel composition
As mentioned above, the Monte-Carlo calculations were per- formed for a cask loaded with fuel assemblies from a ‘‘Vor- Konvoi”-type German PWR. It was assumed that all the fuel assem- blies have the same discharged burnup. The axial burnup distribu- tion and the corresponding fuel composition of the assemblies  were extracted from a generic calculation of an equilibrium core with common low-leakage loading (Konheiser et al., 2017).
Fig. 1.  MCNP model of a  fully loaded  CASTOR V/19.
Fig. 2. MCNP model of intact and expanded fuel rods.
Typically, the axial power distribution in a fuel assembly with high burnup varies only slightly over most of the height. The differences are seen only in the top and bottom 25 cm of the 390 cm active height of the fuel assembly. Therefore, the axial burnup distribu- tion and the corresponding fuel composition of the assemblies were divided into only three regions (25, 340, and 25 cm). Each fuel assembly has discharged burnup of 39.83, 59.66, and 34.66 GWd/ tHM for the bottom, middle, and top regions, respectively. The averaged discharged burnup of the fuel assemblies is, therefore,
56.79 GWd/tHM.
The primary gamma source is generated from the active fuel region of the fuel assemblies. It consists of gamma rays from the disintegration of fission products and actinides. Hence, the inten- sity of the gamma source depends on the isotopic composition of the fuel, which in turn depends on the fuel burnup. The gamma source for the Monte-Carlo calculations was estimated using the FISPACT-II code (Sublet et al., 2017), which is an enhanced multi- physics, inventory, and source-term code system.
Fig. 3 presents the total gamma source as a function of storage time of the discharged fuel assembly described above (average dis- charged burnup of 56.79 GWd/tHM). After 5 years of storage, the gamma flux is about 9.94 1010 photons/sec per fuel assembly (photons/sec FA). Following 10 and 50 years of storage, the gamma flux is about 51.25% and 16.08% of this value, respectively. Fig. 4 presents the gamma spectrum of 5, 10, and 50 years stored fuel  assembly in 38 energy groups. As can be noted, the largest contri- bution to the gamma source comes from the decay of 137Cs, which produces 0.662 MeV photons. After ten years of storage, the 137Cs becomes the most dominant gamma emitter. The gamma from this isotope is about 42.61%, 74.06%, and 93.80% of the total gamma source after 5, 10, and 50 years of storage time, respectively. Other major gamma emitters are 134Cs, 154Eu, 106Ru, and 144Ce. However, the last two isotopes have a relatively short half-life.
3.3.Neutron source
Neutrons are emitted from the active fuel region of the fuel assemblies by two primary mechanisms. The first and most prob- able way is by the spontaneous fission of the transuranium ele-
ments. The second is by (a, n) reactions, particularly by the 17O     (a, n) and 18O(a, n) reactions. The neutron-production  cross- section of the 17,18O(a, n) reactions as a function of the incident
alpha particle energy (Murata et al., 2006) is given in Fig. 5. The most important alpha emitters in the fuel are 238Pu, 239Pu,  and  240Pu.  The  alpha  particle  energies  for  these  nuclides  are  5.5, 5.2,
and 5.15 MeV, respectively. Hence, they highly contribute neutrons through the  17,18O  (a, n)  reactions. Other  actinides of  importance
Fig. 3. Total gamma flux as a function of storage time.
Fig. 4. Gamma spectrum of 5, 10, and 50 years stored fuel assembly in 38 energy groups.
Fig. 5. Neutron-production cross section of 18O and 17O atoms bombarded by alpha particles (JENDL/AN-2005 Library).
are 241Am and 244Cm, which has high alpha particle energy of 5.5 and 5.8 MeV, respectively.
The neutrons source term for the Monte-Carlo calculations, i.e., the neutron production rates and spectra from spontaneous fission
and  (a,   n)  reactions,   was  determined  using  the   SOURCES-4C
(Wilson et al., 2009) code system. Fig. 6 presents the neutron spec-
trum of 5 and 50 years stored fuel assembly (average discharged burnup of 56.79 GWd/tHM) in 100 energy groups. As can be noted, the spontaneous fission spectrum is by far the dominant neutron source. It does not change much over time, just its intensity decreases. Fig. 7 presents the total  neutron source  as  a  function  of the storage time. After 5 years of storage, the total neutron flux is about 6.980 104 neutrons/sec per fuel assembly (neutrons/sec FA). Following 50 years of storage, the total neutron flux is only about 7.906 103 neutrons/sec FA. The neutrons from the sponta- neous fission are about 99.76% and 98.63% of the total neutron source  after  5  and  50 years  storage  time,  respectively.  The ratio
between  neutrons  from  spontaneous  fission  and  (a,  n) reactions
remains relatively constant over time.
4.Results and discussion
4.1.External gamma radiation flux evaluation
In the dry storage facility, the casks fulfill essential functions. As mentioned above, one of the most important roles is the shielding of the radiation emitted from the fuel assemblies. The thick cast iron wall of the cask strongly attenuates the gamma radiation. This makes the identification of the fuel assemblies’ states by external gamma radiation measurements to quite a challenge. In addition  to the attenuation by the cask wall, the gamma radiation is atten- uated by the stainless steel fuel basket and the fuel assemblies’ structural materials. This matter imposes further difficulties, espe- cially in detecting the gamma radiation which comes from the  inner fuel assemblies. Table 2 presents the half-value layer (HVL) values of UO2, Zirconium, and Iron for 137Cs, 134Cs, and 154Eu ener- gies. The HVL expresses the thickness of the absorbing material needed to reduce the gamma-ray intensity by a factor of two.
The HVL value of UO2, Zirconium, and Iron for a 0.662 MeV gamma photon  emitted   by   137Cs   is   about   0.512,   1.456,   and 1.198 cm,
respectively. In a fuel assembly with pellet diameter of 0.911 cm and zircaloy cladding thickness of 0.068 cm, the probability for a gamma photon emitted by the inner fuel assemblies with such energy to exit the cask is very low.
Fig. 8 presents the gamma flux outside the sidewall of the cask obtained  from  the  MCNP  simulations  for  a  cask  with  one  fuel
assembly having fuel rods expansion of 100 mm. The curve of the gamma  flux  obtained  for  a  cask  with  all  intact  fuel   assemblies
was added for comparison. The results were obtained for a cask with 5 years stored fuel assemblies. It should be noted that the gamma flux was evaluated  and  averaged  only  over  the  upper  30 cm of the fuel assembly’s active region. As can be expected, when the damaged fuel assembly is located in the center (Position
0)or the inner fuel assemblies ring (Position 1), the gamma flux curve (shape and intensity) shows no significant difference (only slight changes) than that obtained for a cask with all intact fuel assemblies. On the other hand, the difference between the gamma
flux  obtained for a  cask  with  a  damaged fuel assembly located in the outer fuel assemblies ring (Position 2) and a cask with all intact fuel assemblies is quite visible. In case the fuel assembly has more significant geometric change, this difference will be more prominent.
The gamma flux distribution map outside the sidewall of a cask with one fuel assembly having fuel rods expansion of 100 mm after 5, 10, and 50 years storage time is given in Fig. 9. The gamma flux
distributions presented in this Figure were obtained for a cask with a damaged fuel assembly in the outer fuel assemblies ring (Position 2). As can be noted, although the intensity of the gamma flux reduces over the years, the damage fuel assembly can still be detectable. The azimuthal location and the depth of the fuel reloca- tion inside the fuel rods are very noticeable.
Fig. 6. Neutron spectrum of 5 and 50 years stored fuel assembly in 100 energy groups.
Fig. 7. Total neutron flux as a function of storage time.
The gamma radiation emitted from the inner fuel assemblies is mostly shielded by the fuel basket and the fuel assemblies them- selves. For evaluating the fuel assemblies self-shielding effect, a     2D detailed model of the fuel basket and the fuel assemblies (active region) was simulated using the MCNP code. A gamma source of 0.662 MeV, which corresponding to the energy of most dominant gamma emitter 137Cs, was defined once only in the central fuel assembly (Position 0), and once only in a fuel assembly located     on the inner fuel assemblies ring (Position 1). The idea of this sim- ulation setup was to track the gamma radiation emitted by these fuel assemblies and to demonstrate its absorption in the fuel bas- ket and assemblies structural material.
Fig. 10 presents the range out of 137Cs gamma photons emitted by a fuel assembly in position 0 and position 1. The range out points represent the locations where the gamma photons, emitted by the specified fuel assembly, stopped (range out) within the fuel basket and assemblies materials after being lost enough energy through interactions with matter. The points were obtained by post-processing of the particle track (PTRAC) output file generated
Fig. 8. Averaged gamma flux outside the sidewall (462.415 cm ≤ Z ≤ 492.780 cm) of the cask as a function of the azimuthal angle after 5 years storage time.
by the MCNP. For demonstration purposes, only the first 25,000 histories were plotted. As can be noted, most of the gamma pho- tons are stopped within the fuel assembly in which they were born or within the adjacent fuel assemblies. Only a small fraction of gamma photons actually can reach the inner cask wall. The unnor- malized gamma current on the inner cask wall surface is only 1.7945      10—4 ± 4.3068      10—7  and  8.8492      10—4 ± 9.7341      10—7
photons/source-photons  when  the  gamma  photons  are   emitted
from the central fuel assembly and a fuel assembly on the inner  fuel assemblies ring, respectively. These results indicate that the detection of the state of the inner fuel assemblies by external gamma measurements can be quite difficult. Due to the self- shielding of the fuel assemblies, the detectability of these fuel assemblies will probably be dependent on the cask loading pat- terns and the state of the adjacent fuel assemblies.
4.2.External neutron radiation flux evaluation
Similar to the gamma radiation, neutrons are attenuated by the cask thick-walled cast iron body and affected by the fuel
Table 2
Half-Value Layer values of UO2, Zirconium, and Iron for some major gamma emitters.
Fig. 9. Gamma flux distribution outside the sidewall of a cask having a damaged FA in position 2.
assemblies self-shielding. In addition to these shielding mecha- nisms, the neutrons are thermalized and shielded by the polyethy- lene embedded in the cask structure and absorbed by the boron present in the fuel basket material. Nevertheless, due to their high penetration capabilities, a reasonable amount makes it to the outer surface of the cask.
Fig.  11  shows the  neutron flux outside the sidewall of  the cask
obtained from the MCNP simulations for a cask with one fuel assembly having fuel rods expansion of 100 mm. The results were obtained for a cask with 5 years stored fuel assemblies. It should
be noted that the neutron flux was evaluated and averaged only over the upper 30 cm of the fuel assembly’s active region. As can  be seen from Fig. 11c, the difference between the neutron flux obtained for a cask with a damaged fuel assembly located in the outer fuel assemblies ring (Position 2) and a cask with all  intact fuel assemblies is very visible. This observation is similar to that
obtained from the external gamma flux evaluation. However, in contrast to the external gamma flux,  the  external  neutron  flux can also provide information on the state of the inner fuel assem- blies. Fig. 11a and b show that the difference between the neutron flux obtained for a cask with all intact fuel assemblies and a cask having a damaged fuel assembly in the center (Position 0) or in   the inner fuel assemblies ring (Position 1) is still quite notable. This observation can be strengthened by looking at Figs. 12–14 that present the full neutron flux distribution map obtained for a cask having a damaged fuel assembly in positions 0, 1, and 2, respec- tively. The relative difference of these neutron flux distributions from the neutron flux distribution obtained for a cask with  all intact fuel assemblies implies on the location of the damaged fuel assembly. It should be noted that when the damaged fuel assembly is in position 0, the effect is a homogeneous reduction of flux in the top in the angular coordinate.
Fig. 10. Range out of 137Cs gamma photons emitted by a fuel assembly in position 0 and position 1.
Fig. 11. Averaged neutron flux outside the sidewall (462.415 cm ≤ Z ≤ 492.780 cm) of the cask as a function of the azimuthal angle after 5 years storage time.
Similar to Fig. 11, Fig. 15 presents the averaged neutron flux over the upper 30 cm of the fuel assembly’s active region outside the sidewall of the cask, but for a cask with 50 years stored fuel assemblies. As can be noted the curves trend are similar to those observed for a cask with 5 years stored fuel assemblies (Fig. 11). This is due to the fact that the neutron spectrum shape does not change much over time (see Fig. 6). The external averaged neutron flux intensity after 50 years of storage is about only 11.39% of that obtained after 5 years of storage. Therefore, long storage time may require a longer measurement time.
5.Summary and conclusions
In this study, the feasibility of using external neutron and gamma radiation measurements to detect the state of spent fuel assemblies located inside sealed dry storage casks was evaluated.
The measurement of the neutron and gamma radiation fields out- side the dry storage casks can be quite a challenge due to the mas- sive shielding of the cask that is used to protect the environment from the radiation emitted from the fuel  assemblies,  as  well  as the self-shielding  from the fuel assemblies themselves. However,  it is expected that geometrical changes of the fuel assemblies, including a significant relocation of fuel, will result in a  change    in the radiation profile outside the sidewall  of  the  cask.  Such may happen if fuel rods expand and embrittled fuel sacks down inside the rods or even runs out of the fuel rods due to cladding disrupture. However, the degree of pulverization and the mobility of the fuel powder is still an open question.
For investigating whether the intensity and the shape of the neutron and gamma fluxes outside of a sealed cask are sufficient and suitable enough to provide meaningful information on the fuel assemblies’ state, a 3D model of the CASTOR V/19 design was sim- ulated using the MCNP code. It was assumed that the cask is loaded
Fig. 12. Neutron flux and relative difference distributions outside the sidewall of a cask having a damaged FA in position 0 after 5 years storage time.
Fig. 13. Neutron flux and relative difference distributions outside the sidewall of a cask having a damaged FA in position 1 after 5 years storage time.
with fuel assemblies from a ‘‘Vor-Konvoi”-type German PWR with equal discharged burnup. The neutron and gamma flux distribu- tions outside the sidewall of the cask were evaluated for a generic case where the cask has one damaged fuel assembly as well as for a case where the fuel assemblies are all intact. The calculations were performed for different location of the damaged fuel assembly and for different storage time. The gamma and neutron sources for the Monte-Carlo calculations were estimated using the FISPACT-II code and SOURCES-4C, respectively. The damaged fuel assembly was defined as one with expanded fuel rods. It was assumed that each fuel rod expanded uniformly along its axis by 100 mm and as a
result  a  fragmented  fuel  accumulated  at  the  bottom  of  the  rod
(i.e., fuel relocation).
The results show that in case the damaged fuel assembly is located near the inner wall of the cask, it can be detected by both  of the radiation modes, i.e., by the external neutron flux and by the external gamma flux. The detection of the inner damaged fuel assemblies, however, can be feasible only by the external neutron flux. While the neutrons can pass the self-shielding of the fuel assemblies and shielding of the thick cask iron wall, the gamma photons, which come from the inner fuel assemblies, stopped within the fuel basket and assemblies materials. The gamma pho- tons, which do survive the fuel assemblies self-shielding reach the inner cask wall with not enough energy to escape the shielding of the cast iron wall. Therefore, the state of the inner fuel assemblies cannot be captured by the external gamma flux. In general, it can
Fig. 14. Neutron flux and relative difference distributions outside the sidewall of a cask having a damaged FA in position 2 after 5 years storage time.
Fig. 15. Averaged neutron flux outside the sidewall (462.415 cm ≤ Z ≤ 492.780 cm) of the cask as a function of the azimuthal angle after 50 years storage time.
be concluded that the more the damaged fuel assembly is close to the cask inner walls and that the damage is in a large scale (i.e., sig- nificant fuel relocation), the more it can be detected by both of the external radiation modes.
The results and physical observations shown in this paper will serve for future investigation of more exact and realistic fuel assembly damages, cask loading patterns, and various degrees of damage. Moreover, measurements in an interim storage  facility are planned for the next step of the study. The measurements will be aimed at determining total detection time, ensuring the identi-
fication of different field signatures in differently loaded contain- ers, and analyzing the influence of neighboring casks.
Acknowledgment
This work was funded by the German Federal Ministry of Eco- nomic Affairs and Energy (BMWi) with the grant number  1501518A on the basis of a decision by the German Bundestag. Responsibility for the content of this report lies with the authors.
