<title>Preparation of organic acid lignin submicrometer particle as  a natural	 broad-spectrum photo-protection agent</title>
<author>Shu-Xian Li, Ming-Fei Li ⁎, Jing Bian ⁎, Xiao-Fei Wu, Feng Peng, Ming-Guo Ma</author>
<Affiliation>Beijing Key Laboratory of Lignocellulosic Chemistry, Beijing Forestry University, Beijing 100083, China</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.03.177  </DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2019.03.177 </URL>
ABSTRACT
Valorization of lignin by-product is an urgent issue in the context of bioreﬁnery. Lignin is a natural anti-UV active ingredient with great potential applications. In this study, a natural broad-spectrum photo-protection agent was prepared using lignin from organic acid extraction process. The submicrometer particles were prepared by dial- ysis lignin recovered from the pretreatments with organic acid extraction processes (formic acid, formic acid/hy- drogen peroxide, and acetic acid/hydrogen peroxide/HCl) and they served as active ingredients in sunblock formulation. The structures of the lignin submicrometer particles were characterized by multiple spectroscopies. The submicrometer particles from organic acid lignin showed high capacities to enhance the sun protection fac- tor values of lotion by 2.80–3.53 at the dosage of 5%, and the lotions containing lignin submicrometer particles had good UV-blocking properties. In addition, the UVA/UVB values (i.e., the ratio of absorbance at UVA to that at UVB) were in the range of 0.69–0.72 for the organic acid lignin submicrometer particles, indicating that they exhibited superior properties. The results indicated that the lignin submicrometer-based lotions with excellent antioxidant and UV protection capacities offered a natural source for sunblock cosmetics.
Keywords:
Organic acid lignin Submicrometer particle Antioxidant
1.Introduction
The biopolymers, i.e., cellulose, hemicelluloses, and lignin in ligno- cellulose, can be updated into a variety of products as alternatives to the traditional petroleum-derived commodities, implementing the strategy of sustainable development [1,2]. The implement of bioreﬁnery that converts lignocellulose into paper/ethanol generates large amounts of lignin; therefore, valorization of the lignin produced is an urgent issue [3,4]. Lignin is an aromatic polymer in plants, which is resulted from the coupling  of  phenylpropane  units–p-hydroxyphenyl  (H), guaiacyl
(G) and syringyl alcohol (S). Its composition varies depending on the plant species, tissue and growing conditions. It was estimated that 5–36 × 108 tons of lignin is synthesized by photosynthesis in plants anually [5], whereas over 70 million tons of industrial lignin is produced mainly from the chemical pulping mills [6]. The elucidation of the struc- ture of lignin isolated is of vital importance for the utilization of lignin [7]. In addition, a huge amount of lignin is available as byproduct during the pretreatment and fermentation in the production of bioethanol from lignocellulose [8]. However, most lignin is used in low value, such as the production of steam, heat, power, dispersant or binding agents. The research and development of value-added products from lignin have attracted increased attention [9]. In recent years, much at- tention has been paid to the manufacture of nanoparticles from lignocelluloses. Nanoparticles and nanomaterials were manufactured from both cellulose and lignin. For instance, hierarchical nanocellulose aerogel foam [10] and sensor based on cellulose nanoﬁbril/silver nano- wire layer [11] have been produced from cellulose. Porous lignin nano- composites were produced and it showed excellent capacity for the adsorption of Pb2+, which was a good candidate for treatment of indus- trial waste water [12]. For instance, novel sulphobetaine zwitterionic surfactants from lignin were synthesized and the products had high sur- face activity and low surface tension, which can be used as promising surfactants for oil recovery [13].
Lignin is rich in carbon content, UV chromophoric groups and aro- matic ring with hydroxyl and methoxyl groups, which is a potential feedstock for UV protection agent and antioxidant. In addition, lignin also provides excellent properties for antioxidant due to its capacity for capturing free radicals [14–16]. A safe and stable sunscreen was manufactured through encapsulation of chemical into enzymatic hy- drolysis lignin, and the chemical sunscreen did not notably release from the capsule [17]. The lignin nanoparticle infused by Fe3O4 was re- ported to a good drug delivery for antiproliferation of cancer cells [18]. Lignin nanoparticle with drug-releasing properties and biocompatibility was synthesized by self-assembly aqueous sodium p-toluenesulfonate solution [19].
Recently, increasing attention has been paid to natural sunblock as alternative to the synthetic one. It has been reported that many active ingredients have been extracted from Zanthoxylum Rhetsa bark [20], fruit seed [21], Baccharis antioquensis [22], and brown macroalga Halidrys siliquosa [23]. Although these products served as both sunblock and antioxidant, they do not show satisfy effect since they can only shield a part of spectrum for the ultraviolet radiation and the cost for preparation is expensive [24]. In addition, these compounds are usually small organic molecules and have potentials to penetrate into skins, thus can lead to allergy effects [25,26].
Up to date, limited research and application of lignin as sunblock agent in cosmetics and pharmaceuticals are available, which is mainly due to the concern for safety and side effects [27,28]. Based on the mechanism of the precipitation and self-assembly of lignin nanoparti- cle, an entrapment system was developed using lignin as a drug delivery [29]. A series of industrial lignin was used to generate sunscreen, and it was found that hydrophobic lignin showed superior properties than hy- drophilic lignin [17]. Cellulose nanoﬁbril (CNF) ﬁlms were produced with the addition of 10% colloidal lignin particles, which showed good antioxidant and UV-shielding features. Colloidal spheres having differ- ent sizes were prepared from ethanol lignin and the properties with re- spect to sunscreen application were evaluated [30]. Alkali lignin was directly added to creams for the manufacture of sunscreens, and it was found that the addition of 10% lignin into SPF 15 lotion notably in- creased the UV absorbance [31].
Despite the progresses, the lignin-based microparticle used for sun block was mainly manufactured from industrial lignin (commercial al- kali lignin or puriﬁed kraft lignin [29]), thus the potential toxicity re- sulted from the production and puriﬁcation is hard to evaluate. In addition, the preparation of lignin from industrial alkaline processes is energy-intensive and costly since the processes are conducted at high temperatures (over 140 °C). It is crucial to develop a method to produce lignin with green chemicals and under mild conditions. The direct addi- tion of lignin into cosmetics just led to inconspicuously enhancement of the UV protection [31]. In addition, the antioxidant capacity regarding to lignin in cream has not been well investigated [27,28]. To address these problems, in the present study, lignin was obtained from organic acid extraction process and then converted into submicrometer particle. The submicrometer particle was obtained by dialysis in water, which changed the morphology of lignin, increased speciﬁc surface area of lig- nin, and enhanced the resistance of lignin to ultraviolet light. The submicrometer particle served as active ingredients in sunblock formu- lation, aiming at providing a natural protection agent against UV irradi- ation. The structure of the lignin particle was characterized and the protection properties were evaluated in terms of sun protection factor (SPF).
2.Materials and Thethods
2.1.Material
Bamboo of 2 years old was collected from a farm in Yunnan province, China. Bamboo has a short growth cycle, and is abundantly available in many Asian countries especially China, which is a good feedstock for large-scale extraction of lignin. After air dried, the stems were smashed and screened to obtain the specimen having sizes between 20 and 60 mesh. The sample was placed in a bag before use. Industrial lignin ob- tained from bioreﬁnery of corncob (Shandong Longlive Bio-technology Co., Ltd., China) was used as a reference. The lignin was obtained from alkaline extraction of corncob, precipitation in acid water and puriﬁcation.
2.2.Pretreatment of bamboo and isolation of lignin
Organic acid lignin samples were prepared by pretreatment of bam- boo under atmospheric pressure at the boiling points of the solutions. Bamboo (20 g) was cooked in 200 mL of 88% formic acid at 100 °C for 2 h. The mixture was ﬁltered and washed with 88% formic acid. The ﬁl- trate and washing liquor were combined and concentrated to 20 mL and precipitated in 200 mL acid water (adjusted with HCl). The precipitation
was washed with water and then dried to obtain lignin. The pretreat- ments of bamboo with formic acid (88%)/hydrogen peroxide (1%) and acetic acid (95%)/hydrogen peroxide (1%)/HCl (1%) were conducted under the similar conditions. For formic acid/hydrogen peroxide pre- treatment, it was heated at 100 °C and washed with formic  acid  (88%); for acetic acid/hydrogen peroxide/HCl pretreatment, it was heated at 118 °C and washed with acetic acid (95%), respectively. The lignin yields extracted from bamboo were 19.2%, 16.7%, and 21.3% for formic acid, formic acid/hydrogen peroxide, and acetic acid /hydrogen peroxide/HCl methods, respectively. The lignin samples were bleached by formic acid/hydrogen peroxide and acetic acid /hydrogen peroxide/ HCl methods, and the obtained particles showed light color.
2.3.Preparation of lignin submicrometer particle
For each run, lignin was added into tetrahydrofuran to form solution with a concentration of 10 mg/mL. Next, the solution was ﬁltered by a
0.45 μm syringe ﬁlter and then the ﬁltrate was added into a dialysis bag (MW 3 kD). The dialysis bag was immersed into excess amounts of deionized water under slow stirring. The water was replaced with fresh water every 4 h, and the dialysis was conducted for 24 h [32]. The residual tetrahydrofuran was not detected as reveal by the 1H NMR spectroscopy. The particles in the bag were recovered by centrifu- gation at 4000 rpm and then freeze dried at −50 °C to obtain lignin submicrometer particle. The particles prepared with lignin obtained from formic acid, formic acid/hydrogen peroxide, and acetic acid/hydro- gen peroxide/HCl pretreatments and industrial bioreﬁnery lignin were noted as FL, FPL, APHL, and LL, respectively.
2.4.Characterization of lignin submicrometer particle
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was applied to observe the size of the prepared lignin submicrometer particle. The sample was coated with gold‑palladium in a sputter coater (E1010, HITACHI, Japan) before the examining. The images were taken using a microscope (S-3400N, HITACHI, Japan) under an acceleration voltage of 10 kV. The contami- nated sugars were analyzed by the method reported in the literature [33]. FTIR spectroscopic analysis was performed with an FTIR spectrom- eter (Thermo Nicolet 6700). After the spectra were collected from 4000 to 650 cm−1, the curves obtained were baseline corrected. 1H NMR spectra were acquired on a Bruker AVIII 400 instrument. Before analysis, 20 mg of lignin was dissolved in 0.5 mL DMSO‑d6. 1H-13C HSQC and 31P spectra of lignin samples were recorded in the same instrument using the parameters reported previously [34,35]. UV–visible spectra of the sample were recorded on a spectrometer (UV 2300, Shanghai Tianmei Science and Technology Corporation, China). The sample was dissolved in 4 g L-1 NaOH aqueous solution at a concentration of 12.5 mg L-1, and the absorptions were recorded and the corresponding absorption coef- ﬁcients were calculated. The antioxidant of the sample was assayed using 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) radical scavenging test ac- cording to the previous report [15,36]. DPPH radical-scavenging capac- ity against lignin concentration was plotted. EC50 is deﬁned as the lignin concentration where DPPH radical-scavenging activity is 50%. Radical scavenging index (RSI) is deﬁned as the inverse of EC50. The tests were performed in triplicate and the average values were reported.
2.5.Sunblock cream preparation
A commercial moisture lotion (Yumeijing, Tianjin, China) composed of water, glycerin, and milk was used for the preparation of sunblock cream. Lignin submicrometer particle and the lotion were mixed with lignin submicrometer particle in a certain percentage (1% and 5%) by weight of cream. Homogeneous dispersion of the mixture was per- formed by stirring at 500 rpm for 24 h under darkness.
2.6.Measurement of SPF
UV transmittance measurement of the lotions containing lignin submicrometer particle was performed on a UV–visible spectrophotom- eter (UV-2600, Shimadzu) equipped with an integrating sphere. The sunblock cream was sucked into a needle and then spayed on a quartz substrate at a loading of 2 mg cm-2 for the quartz substrate. After the sunblock cream was uniformly spread over the surface of quartz sub- strate by slowly, lightly, and circularly rubbing the slide surface for about 20 s by a ﬁnger with a glove, the sample was placed in darkness for 20 min until drying [31]. It can better simulate the thickness of the ﬁnger on the skin and prove the accuracy of the experimental results. The transmittance of the sample was detected in the range from 290 to 400 nm at a scanning wavelength of 0.5 nm. SPF value and UVA/ UVB ratio were calculated by the formulas below [37].@1
@2
where Eλ is CIE (Commission Internationale de l'Eclairage) erythemal spectral effectiveness, Sλ is solar spectral irradiance, Tλ is spectral trans- mittance of the specimen, and Aλ is spectral absorption of the specimen. The experiment was conducted in triplicate the average values were re- ported. Different UVA/UVB values represent distinct ability of sun- screens to block UV light. The higher the value, the stronger the ability. The categories are divided into too low (0.0 to b0.2), moderate (0.2 to b0.4), good (0.4 to b0.6), superior (0.6 to b0.8), and maximum (⩾0.8) types.
3.Results and discussion
3.1.Structural characteristics of lignin submicrometer particle
The size of lignin is important for its volatilization. A new strategy to enhance the properties of lignin and host matrices is to apply lignin submicrometer particle. The small particle shows better blending prop- erties than the raw lignin. The sizes of the particles range from tens to hundreds of nanometers and the shape was variable. Thus, the
Fig. 1. Yield and radical scavenging index of submicrometer particle from organic acid lignin and commercial lignin (FL, FPL, APHL, and LL represent particles prepared by lignin obtained from formic acid, formic acid/hydrogen peroxide, and acetic acid/
hydrogen peroxide/HCl pretreatments, and industrial bioreﬁnery lignin, respectively).	Fig. 2. SEM images of lignin submicrometer particle.
Fig. 3. The contaminated sugar in lignin submicrometer particle.
manufacture method is of vital importance for the application. The lig- nin submicrometer particle is manufactured primarily by solution- based treatment in which particle sizes are controlled by precipitation of lignin solution. In the present study, dialysis of lignin solution in water was applied to prepare lignin submicrometer particle, to enable suitable properties for sunblock. Since sunblock used for the protection against ultraviolent irradiation is mainly due to the active ingredients in the formulation, the preparation of lignin submicrometer particle with proper size is important. After the manufacture by dialysis, the yields of the obtained submicrometer particle were 73.73%, 60.95%, 80.8%, and 74.77% for FL, FPL, APHL, and LL, respectively (Fig. 1). The lignin submicrometer particles remain stable in size when stored in darkness, as conﬁrmed by measurements conducted after 180 days. SEM observa- tion clearly revealed that the prepared particles had spherical shapes
with nanometer sizes, as evidenced by the size distributions of 100–600, 600–5000, and 400–2000 nm for FL, FPL, and APHL, respec- tively (Fig. 2). The sizes of the particles are relatively larger than the re- ported values (ranging from 0.081 to 360 nm), mainly due to the different preparation methods [38]. The formation of the submicrometer particle was because the entry of water into the solution changed the hydrophobic to hydrophilic balance. Water segregated hy- drophilic groups from hydrophobic skeleton and hydrophilic groups of lignin macromolecules stayed on the surface of the particle, thus forming the submicrometer particle. The sizes of the particle were be- yond the stratum corneum of skin, thus cannot penetrate into blood- stream, avoiding the potential toxicity for use. Thus we have previously used lignin for dialysis under a dialysis bag with a molecular weight of 3000 k. Although the diameter of the lignin submicrometer
Fig. 4. FTIR spectra of lignin submicrometer particle.
Fig. 5. 1H NMR spectra of lignin submicrometer particle.
particle is b100 nm, the ability to determine the ability to penetrate the skin is the molecular weight of the lignin particles.
In order to elucidate the chemical structure of the lignin submicrometer particle, FTIR, NMR and UV spectra were recorded and the results were analyzed below. The content of the contaminated sugars in lignin samples were analyzed (Fig. 3). FL contained a relatively high amount of sugars (10.3%) followed by FPL (7.1%) and APHL (4.1%), whereas LL contained less sugars (0.3%). Among the sugars, xylan was the major impurity, occupying 3.6–8.7% for the organic acid lignin sam- ples. This suggested that the linkages between lignin and hemicelluloses were stable during the extractions with organic acids.
In the FTIR spectra (Fig. 4), typical bands of lignin from straw can be clearly identiﬁed by referring to the literatures as follows [1,39,40]. The board band at 3439 cm−1 was due to O\\H stretch, and the absorptions at 2942 and 2849 cm−1 were attributed to the C\\H stretch from methyl and methylene groups. The signal at 1732 cm−1 for organic acid lignin was due to the C_O stretch in unconjugated ketones, whereas that at 1698 cm−1 for LL was owning to the conjugated aldehydes. Aromatic skeletal vibrations showed signals at 1596, 1505, and 1422 cm−1. The signals at 1457 cm−1 were due to the C\\H deformations as well as asymmetrical stretch in \\CH3 and \\CH2\\. The absorptions at 1367
Table 1
The content of the different hydroxyl groups (mmol/g) quantiﬁed by 31P NMR.
and 1326 cm−1 were due to the aliphatic C\\H stretch in CH3 and G ring stretch. The signal at 1123 cm−1 corresponded to C\\H in-plane de- formation in aromatic groups and C_O stretch. The peak at 1083 cm−1 was due to C\\O deformation and that at 1035 cm−1 was owning to C\\H   in-plane   deformation   in   aromatic   groups.   The   signal   at 865 cm−1 corresponded to the C\\H out-of-plane in G units. The signal at 835 cm−1 conﬁrmed again that the lignin was from straw, since it was due to all positions from H units and C\\H out-of-plane for S unit. Overall, the spectra indicated that the core structures of lignin were pre- served after the isolation and manufacturing process. These lignin
Fig. 6. UV–visible spectra of lignin submicrometer particle.
Fig. 7. Free radical scavenging activity of lignin submicrometer particle.
submicrometer particles showed slight differences, mainly due to the distinct separation methods.
The samples were investigated by 1H NMR spectroscopy (Fig. 5). The signal observed at about 7.54 ppm was due to the aromatic protons of the p-hydroxyphenol units, whereas those for guaiacyl and syringyl units were observed at 7.30–6.82 and 6.82–6.30 ppm, respectively [41]. The abundance of the signals in this range for all samples indicated that these samples were rich in the linkages of lignin units. The chemical shift of about 3.10 ppm derived from the proton of anhydroxylose units from hemicelluloses, and the signals were very weak (only small peaks were observed for FL and APHL, and no signals were observed for the other two samples). For all samples, the signals at 0.8–1.70 ppm were due to primary, secondary and tertiary alkyl groups [42].
The structures of the lignin samples were analyzed by 1H-13C two- dimensional heteronuclear single-quantum correlation (2D HSQC) and 31P NMR spectroscopies. Based on the HSQC spectra, the substructures of lignin units were identiﬁed. The major subunits includes β-O-4 alkyl–aryl ethers (A), phenylcoumarans (C), p-coumaric acid (PCA), ferulic acid (FA), p-hydroxyphenyl units (H), guaiacyl units (G), syringyl units(S), and oxidized syringyl units bearing a carbonyl at Cα (S′). It should be noted that the signals for APHL is relatively weak due to the serious degradation.
The presence of internal standard allowed for the quantiﬁcation of all-OH groups in lignin. The content of various hydroxyl groups (mmol/g) quantiﬁed are given in Table 1. The assignment of signal and the calculation were conducted according to the previous report [36]. The content of H-type phenilic-OH in LL was the  highest (0.66 mmol/g) while those for organic acid lignin samples were rela- tively lower. The differences were mainly due to the extraction method as well as the raw material. FL had the highest content of aliphatic\\OH (2.79  mmol/g).  For  all  sample,  the  contents  of  non-condensed  OH groups were higher than those of condensed OH groups. As described above for the 1H NMR, 31P NMR and 2D HSQC analysis showed that the presence of traces of THF was not detected in the lignin.
In the UV–Vis spectra of the lignin submicrometer particle in NaOH solution (Fig. 6), the  samples  showed  broad  absorption  between  235 nm and 400 nm. In the range of 235 and 600 nm, LL had relatively strong absorption with two peaks at 242 nm and 292 nm. The absorp- tion at 292 nm was due to the π → π* electronic transition in the aro- matic ring of the unconjugated phenolic units, resulting from the hydroxyl groups [43,44]. Clearly, the π → π* absorption band was red- shifted as compared to the normal absorption (at 280 nm), mainly due to the auxochromic substituents (e.g.,\\OH and\\OCH3) on phenylrings. The organic lignin submicrometer particle (FL, FPL, and APHL) also showed similar absorptions. Overall, all submicrometer particle showed effective absorption in the whole UV range (290–400 nm), conﬁrming that these samples were potential active ingredients for sunblock.
3.2.Antioxidant capacity
DPPH is a stable radical which makes the spare electrons on mole- cules form a stable group, thus forming a purple substance with a spe- ciﬁc absorption at 517 nm. However, in the presence of an antioxidant or a free radical substance, the absorption disappears. In the present study, the antioxidant free radical scavenging ability of the lignin submicrometer particle was evaluated applying the rapid and conve- nient DPPH determination. It is well known that the DPPH free radical scavenging capacity was mainly due to the hydrogen donating ability of antioxidants. The possible pathways for the reaction of lignin with DPPH are summarized as follows. Lignin ﬁrst provides a hydrogen from the hydroxyl group to scavenge a DPPH• molecule, and \\OCH3 stabilizes the hydroxyl group. Next, a DPPH molecule combines with an aryl group to form an electron pair. The dimerization between two phenoxy groups and the produced complexes provides another hydro- gen by the hydroxyl group. The antioxidant capacity of the lignin
Fig. 8. UV transmittance of pure lotion mixed with different amounts of lignin submicrometer particle in UVA and UVB areas (dosage 1% (a) and 5% (b)).
submicrometer particle was investigated by DPPH assay, and the results are shown in Fig. 7. Clearly, all the lignin submicrometer particle showed DPPH• scavenging capacities at various concentrations. During the low concentration range from 0 to 1 mg/mL, the increase of the con- centration resulted in rapid enhancement of the inhibition rate, whereas the increase of the concentration from a high concentration (higher than 1 mg/mL), the increase of the inhabitation rate became slight. Overall, all the samples exhibited good capacity for radical scav- enging, suggesting that they would serve well as sunblock lotion to di- minish the damage resulted from free-radical and environmental harm on skin under sunshine. For comparison, the RSI values were cal- culated (Fig. 1). It was found that the RSI value showed the decrease order: FPL N FL N APHL. The highest value for FPL was 1.38, notably higher than the reported value for commercial synthetic BHT (0.29) [15]. In lignin, phenolic hydroxyl groups were the major sources serving as active sites to terminate radical reactions [45]. This was evidenced by the content of phenolic –OH groups aforementioned, in which FPL had a high content of phenolic \\OH groups (2.19 mmol/g) followed by FL (2.13 mmol/g) and APHL (1.28 mmol/g). In addition, considering the small sizes of the submicrometer particle, the higher capacity for protonof the phenyl group of lignin also contributed to the high antioxidant ability, in accordance with the research of the relationship between structure and antioxidant of acid isolated lignin submicrometer particle from alkali lignin [45].
3.3. Performance of the pure lotion with the addition of lignin submicrometer particle
The lignin submicrometer particle prepared were blended with pure lotion to prepare submicrometer particle-based sunblock and their per- formances were compared to the native lotion (Fig. 8). The pure cream showed negligible absorbance in the UVA and UVB areas, and the calcu- lated SPF value was 1.03. The UV transmittances of lotions containing submicrometer particle were lower than that of pure lotion in both UVB and UVA areas. The addition of 1% lignin submicrometer particle only led to decrease of the transmittance of the samples in the range of 290 and 310 nm, and the corresponding SPF values increased to 1.35–2.13 (Table 2). Whereas after 5% lignin submicrometer particle were added, the transmittance of the samples decreased notably and the SPF values reached 3.07–4.56. The phenolics, hydroxyls, double bonds, and carbonyls in lignin showed good absorption capacities for ul- traviolent and visible irradiation. Among the samples, FL showed the highest SPF value (4.56) followed by APHL (3.96) and FPL (3.83) for the dosage of 5%. This was mainly related to the particle size detected by SEM, where the lignin with small sizes showed better property. The submicrometer particle from organic acid lignin showed a higher capacity to enhance the SPF values of cream, as indicated by the fact that their SPF values were 2.80–3.53 higher than that of the lotion. As compared to the reported case, the maximum SPF was 2.69 for sample with the addition of 5% lignin [31]. The values reported in the present study were also higher than lignin–poly(ethylene glycol) methacrylate copolymers, which only showed a maximum increase of SPF of 1.58 even the addition of agent reached 10% [37]. It has been reported that the excess use of lignin for sunblock may lead to negative effect since lignin did not disperse well [31]. The data of SPF was related to the amount of cream with the addition of lignin submicrometer particle. When light passes through various turbid media, some of the light scat- ters. The scattering of visible light has little effect on the value of SPF. In
Table 2
SPF values of the pure creams blended with different amounts of lignin.
Fig. 9. UVA/UVB values of lignin submicrometer particle added into lotion.
addition, the UVA/UVB values were in the range of 0.69–0.72 for the three organic acid lignin submicrometer particle, slightly lower than that for LL (Fig. 9). This indicated that the particles showed a broad- spectrum protection effect, better than the reported commercial SPF15-L (containing octinoxate 7.5% and avobenzone 4%) since it showed the rather weak protection effect in the UVA area (especially at 385–400 nm) [31]. In fact, the UVA/UVB ratio can be improved to a higher value by the addition of other active agents [46].
Considering the good antioxidant capacity of the lignin submicrometer particle, the lotions containing lignin can inhabit the formation of free radicals by photolysis, thus proving a good photostability [19]. Overall, the lignin submicrometer particles showed a good and broad-spectrum sunblock effect. The biopolymers can serve as an active candidate for cosmetics to give protection for the skin. It should be noted that the lignin submicrometer particle itself was not enough to ensure desired SPF values for pure lotion, whereas it would be feasible to add the lignin submicrometer particle into sun-blockers for enhancement.
4.Conclusions
Organic acid lignin was applied to manufacture submicrometer par- ticle for serving as an active ingredient in sunblock. The highest value of radical scavenging index for organic acid lignin reached 1.38. At the dos- age of 5%, the submicrometer particle from organic acid lignin had a high capacity to enhance the sun protection factor values of lotions by 2.80–3.53 and they showed UVA/UVB values in the range of 0.69–0.72, indicating a broad-spectrum skin photo-protection effect. The ﬁndings suggested that the application of lignin submicrometer particle to lotion had excellent antioxidant and UV protection capacities, providing a so- lution for the value-added utilization of byproducts in lignocellulose bioreﬁnery industry.
AcknowledgThents
The authors wish to express their gratitude for the ﬁnancial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21706014, 31870567).
