<title>Occupational radiation exposure in vascular interventional radiology: A complete evaluation of different body regions</title>
<author>Fernando Antonio Bacchim Neto, Allan Felipe Fattori Alves, Yvone Maria Mascarenhas,
Patrícia Nicolucci, Diana Rodrigues de Pina,</author>
<Affiliation>a.Instituto de Biociências de Botucatu, Departamento de Física e Biofísica, UNESP — Universidade Estadual Paulista, Distrito de Rubião Junior S/N, Botucatu, 18618-000 São Paulo, Brazil;b. Sapra Landauer, Rua Cid Silva César, 600, São Carlos, 13562-400 São Paulo, Brazil;
c.CIDRA – Centro de Instrumentação, Dosimetria e Radioproteção, Faculdade de Filosofia, Ciências e Letras de Ribeirão Preto, USP — Universidade de São Paulo, Av. Bandeirantes, 3900 Bairro Monte Alegre, Ribeirão Preto, 14040-901 São Paulo, Brazil;d.Departamento de Doenças Tropicais e Diagnóstico por Imagem, Faculdade de Medicina de Botucatu, UNESP — Universidade Estadual Paulista, Distrito de Rubião Junior S/N,Botucatu, 18618-000 São Paulo, Brazil</Affiliation>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>Physica Medica</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.ejmp.2016.06.0141120-1797</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmp.2016.06.0141120-1797</URL>
abstract
Purpose: To perform a complete evaluation on radiation doses, received by primary and assistant medical staff, while performing different vascular interventional radiology procedures.
Materials and methods: We evaluated dose received in different body regions during three categories of vascular procedures: lower limb angiography (Angiography), lower limb percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (Angioplasty) and stent graft placement for abdominal aortic aneurysm treatment (A. A. A. Treatment). We positioned the dosimeters near the eye lens, thyroid, chest, abdomen, hands, and feet  of the interventional physicians. Equivalent dose was compared with annual dose limits for workers in order to determine the maximum number of procedures per year that each physician could perform. We assessed 90 procedures.
Results: We found the highest equivalent doses in the A. A. A. Treatment, in which 90% of the evaluations indicated at least one region receiving more than 1 mSv per procedure. Angioplasty was the only proce- dural modality that provided statistically different doses for different professionals, which is an impor- tant aspect on regards to radiological protection strategies. In comparison with the  dose  limits,  the most critical region in all procedures was the eye lens.
Conclusions: Since each body region of the interventionist is exposed to different radiation levels, dose distribution measurements are essential for radiological protection strategies. These results indicate that dosimeters placed in abdomen instead of chest may represent more accurately the whole body doses received by the medical staff. Additional dosimeters and a stationary shield for the eye lens are strongly recommended.
Keywords:
Radiation protection    Interventional radiology    Occupational exposure
1.Introduction
Interventional radiology (IR) is an area of radiology that exposes medical staff to the highest doses of radiation [1–3]. The scattered radiation to which medical staff are usually exposed to comes mainly from the patient, therefore professionals who remain close to the patient receive highest levels of radiation [4]. Many other factors can influence the levels of exposure for medical staff,including the professional height, positioning in the room, the X-ray tube position relatively to table and patient, the use of radi- ological protection equipment, the total exposure time during the procedure and the condition of fluoroscopy and image acquisition [1–3].
Several studies have evaluated radiation exposure in IR to both describe medical staff exposure and improve radiological protec- tion strategies [1,4,5]. However, these studies concentrated on a specific procedure or specific body region. Dosimetry is usually acquired under artificial conditions or neglects important body regions such as the abdomen [1,5,6].
The aim of our study was to investigate radiation exposure pro- files in medical staff during different vascular IR procedures. We performed a complete assessment and comparison of radiation doses in different regions of the body for both primary and assis- tant professionals on three modalities of procedures, representing the highest potential exposure to medical staff. We also estimated the maximum number of procedures that each professional could perform without exceeding annual dose limits and with different radiological protection efficiency.
2.Materials  and methods
2.1.Selection of procedures
We evaluated three different vascular procedures based on three criteria: total exposure time (fluoroscopy time), procedure frequency and noise level, which is selected on each protocol and is influenced by tube current (mA). According to these features, we selected the most frequent procedures among those with the longest fluoroscopy time and higher tube current, which represent the procedures with highest potential doses to the medical staff. Procedures chosen were lower limb angiography (Angiography), lower limb percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (Angioplasty) and abdominal aortic aneurysm treatment (A. A. A. Treatment – angioplasty with stent grafts placement for abdominal aortic aneurysms). The number of procedures per group were 30 for Angiography, 30 for Angioplasty, and 30 for A. A. A. Treatment. Seven staff members participated in the study. One primary inter- ventionist and one assistant composed the interventional staff for each procedure, and they were both monitored. For Angioplasty and Angiography protocols, both remained on the same side of the patient’s table, the primary interventionist and assistant remained at 0.5 m and 1.0 m from the X-ray tube, respectively. During A. A. A. Treatment, they stood on opposite sides of the table, positioned symmetrically distant from the tube, both at 0.5 m from the X-ray tube.
2.2.Equipment description
All procedures were performed with the equipment LCV Plus (Advantax; General Electric Medical Systems, Milwaukee, Wis. USA), which was in accordance with all standard quality control tests. Lead blades underneath the patient table were part of the stationary shielding. However, the equipment did not present ceiling-suspended transparent shield.
Angiographies and Angioplasties were performed with the same protocol: 70 kVp, 1.9 frames/s, ‘‘medium” noise level, 32 cm field of view, and automatic control of mA.
All A. A. A. Treatment were performed with the same protocol: 85 kVp, 3.8 frames/s, ‘‘medium” noise level, 32 cm field of view, and automatic control of mA.
In all procedures the imaging system (X ray tube and image detector) was positioned by the interventionist  in  the  range  of  15° right  and  15° left  with  respect  to  posteroanterior  projection,
according with the particularities of each procedure. The LCV Plus
equipment does not provide the air kerma – area product (KAP) measurement and, therefore, patients’ doses were not monitored.
2.3.Dosimetry of professionals
TLD-100 dosimeters (LIF: Mg, Ti Harshaw®) were used in all procedures. For each monitored region, a set of three dosimetric
tablets were fixed to obtain higher accuracy and allow us to discard possible experimental reading errors.
Dosimeters were calibrated in Photon Dose Equivalent Hx (measured in Sv), according to current legislation in our country. Calibration of our TLDs was performed using a Co-60 source on a 4p geometry free air exposure using a 3 mm Lucite® build up plate. Exposure conditions were verified by comparison with a secondary laboratory ionization chamber.
In each evaluation procedure, dosimeters were placed on the primary interventionist (i.e., the physician who conducted the intervention) and one assistant, who remained in the room throughout the entire procedure. Dosimeters were fixed at the fol- lowing locations: a few inches below the eye lens (on top of the surgical mask), thyroid, chest, abdomen, hands (bottom of the wrist), and feet. Dosimeters were positioned above the radiological protection aprons, such as lead aprons and thyroid shields to ensure that measured doses were within a good sensibility range to use TLD. We monitored the extremities in both hands and feet, using the highest dose values per procedure for analysis (i.e., the highest dose received by the hands and the highest dose received by the feet in each professional per procedure).
Each group of dosimeters (eight sets with three TLD tablets each) contained a control group (one set with three TLD tablets). Readings from the control group were subtracted from readings   of all regions to discard the background influence. We performed approximately 4500 TLD measurements throughout the dosimetry process.
We divided all dosimeters into three groups, according to each procedure category, and stored each group separately. All dosime- ters were properly stored and read exactly 48 h from its respective radiation exposure procedure. The fluoroscopy time of each proce- dure was recorded for subsequent calculations.
2.4.Equivalent dose rate profile construction
Equivalent dose rates (EDRs) were obtained by calculating the rate between equivalent doses and fluoroscopy time. The EDRs were evaluated for different body regions (eye lens, thyroid, chest, abdomen, feet, and hands) for both professionals.
We performed statistical comparisons between our dose mea- surements and suggested radiological  protection  strategies  for  our medical staff.
2.5.Estimation of the maximum number of procedures per year
We determined the hypothetical maximum number of proce- dures per year (MNPY) that each professional can perform without exceeding annual dose limits, which is similar to Hausler et al. [1]. We divided the international dose limits by the median and max- imum measured dose values for each body region.
The annual dose limits employed in the present study were based on Publication 103 of the International Commission on Radiological Protection and the Brazilian standard, which defines occupational dose limits for different regions of the body [2,7].
For the eye lens and whole body (measured at the chest), the dose limits are 20 mSv per year, averaged over defined periods of   5 years, with no single year exceeding 50 mSv.  For  extremities  and skin, the dose limit is 500 mSv of the equivalent dose per year [2,7]. On regards to MNPY extremity measurements, we divided the annual dose limit (500 mSv) by the median and the higher dose received at all professionals’ extremities for each procedure category.
We corrected our dose levels according to the attenuation val- ues from the protective lead aprons, defined by international guidelines and the literature [8,9]. Based on these data and the mean energy used in these procedures, we considered 85% attenu- ation for 0.25 mm and 95% for 0.5 mm Pb lead apron, respectively. All lead aprons were in accordance with quality control tests, and their attenuation values were verified through testing with ioniza- tion chambers. For leaded protective glasses, a 60% attenuation
Table 1
Median (interquartile range) equivalent dose values (lSv) for eye lens, thyroid, chest, abdomen, feet, and hands in all of the procedures for both primary interventionists and assistants. These values were for an unshielded person and were obtained above the protective clothing.
value was assumed, defined by Thornton et al. and an international guideline [9,10].
2.6.Statistical analysis
The statistical analysis was performed using MINITAB 14 soft- ware (Minitab, USA). Significant differences in the median dose levels between the primary physician and assistant were deter- mined using the Mann-Whitney test. The null hypotheses (i.e., ‘‘dose levels do not differ between different body regions in the same procedure modality” and ‘‘dose levels do not differ between the same body regions in different modalities”) were tested using the Kruskal-Wallis test for the equality of medians.
3.Results
The largest equivalent doses were found for A. A. A. Treatment, in which 90% of the evaluations indicated that at least one region received more than 1 mSv per procedure. The highest dose values in the hands for both professionals were approximately 9 mSv.
Table 1 summarizes the median (interquartile range) equivalent dose  values  (lSv)  for  each  monitored  region  for  both  primary interventionists and assistants. These values were obtained above the protective clothing.
The mean fluoroscopy time was 6.7 ± 4.6 min for Angiography,
15.6 ± 10.7 min for Angioplasty, and 29.3 ± 17.2 min for A. A. A. Treatment.
3.1.Dose  rate profiles
The EDRs for Angiography, Angioplasty, and A. A. A. Treatment, respectively, for both professionals were plotted as a box plot in Figs. 1–3. These profiles were determined for an unshielded per- son. Figs. 1–3 show the EDRs of the primary interventionists (black boxes) and assistants (gray boxes) for eye lens, thyroid, chest, abdomen, feet, and hands.
3.2.Equivalent dose rate for primary interventionist vs. assistant
To determine radiological protection strategies, the EDRs for different body regions were statistically compared for all proce- dures. Angioplasty was the only procedural modality that pre- sented statistically different EDRs (medians) for different professionals for the following regions: eye  lens  (p = 0.03),  chest  (p = 0.03), abdomen (p = 0.01), and hands (p = 0.03). For Angiogra- phy and A. A. A. Treatment, the EDRs in the same regions showed no significant difference between both professionals.
3.3.Equivalent dose rate for different body regions for primary interventionists and assistants
The EDRs for different regions of the primary interventionists and assistants were analyzed for specific types of procedures.
Fig. 1. Equivalent dose rates of the primary interventionist (black boxes) and assistant (gray boxes) for the eye lens, thyroid, chest, abdomen, feet, and hands for Angiography procedures. Each box represents the following statistical values: the lower and upper boundaries of the box indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles; the solid horizontal line in the box marks the median; and the square represents the mean value. The whiskers above and below the box are representing the standard deviation.
Fig. 2. Equivalent dose rates of the primary interventionist (black boxes) and assistant (gray boxes) for the eye lens, thyroid, chest, abdomen, feet, and hands for Angioplasty procedures. Each box represents the following statistical values: the lower and upper boundaries of the box indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles; the solid horizontal line in the box marks the median; and the square represents the mean value. The whiskers above and below the box are representing the standard deviation.
Fig. 3. Equivalent dose rates of the primary interventionist (black boxes) and assistant (gray boxes) for the eye lens, thyroid, chest, abdomen, feet, and hands for
A. A. A. Treatment procedures. Each box represents the following statistical values: the lower and upper boundaries of the box indicate the 25th and 75th percentiles; the solid horizontal line in the box marks the median; and the square represents the mean value. The whiskers above and below the box are representing the standard deviation.
Table 2
Number of annual procedures that each professional may perform without exceeding the annual effective dose limits (measured at the chest). The results were based on the median and maximum dose values estimated in the present study, with 0.25 and
0.5 mm lead shielding.
The null hypothesis that the median dose would not differ for dif- ferent body regions in the same procedure was discarded for aneurism treatment for the primary interventionists and assistants (p = 0.05).
3.4.Equivalent dose rate for each region in different procedures
The EDRs for each body region were obtained for all of the pro- cedures, which allowed us to compare the EDRs for specific regions in different procedures for both primary interventionists and assis- tants. The null hypothesis that the median dose would not differ between same body regions in different procedures was discarded for feet (p = 0.04) and hands (p = 0.02) for the primary interven- tionists. For the assistants, the null hypothesis was discarded for eye lens (p = 0.01), feet (p = 0.03), and hands (p = 0.01).
3.5. Estimation of the maximum number of procedures per year
We estimated the MNPY without reaching the annual limits of effective dose (chest dose) and equivalent dose (extremities and eye lens) for both primary interventionists and assistants. We con- sidered two situations for the effective dose: a person wearing a
0.25 mm shielding lead apron and a person wearing a 0.50 mm shielding lead apron. Table 2 summarizes the MNPY for effective doses for both professionals. A similar calculation was performed for the eye lens, with the exception that, in this case, the shielding factor was 60%. For the extremities, we considered only unshielded people, since wearing protection in these regions is not common. Table 2 summarizes the MNPY for effective doses, and Table 3 shows the equivalent doses. MNPYs greater than 2500 were con- sidered ‘‘unlimited” because more  than 10  interventions per  day is above the routine workload for a typical physician.
4.Discussion
We assessed the EDR profiles of medical staff for different IR procedures. We also evaluated the maximum number of proce- dures each professional could perform, without exceeding annual dose limits under different shielding configurations. These maximum values were based on measurements performed in a specific department and this methodology can be applied else- where to indicate the occupational exposure in others circumstances.
We found median dose rate for eye lens of the primary inter- ventionist for A. A. A. Treatment (0.01 mSv/min) consistent with those found by Vano et al. [11], employing phantom measure- ments for the same equipment of fluoroscopy. Doses in interven- tionist legs found by Efstathopoulos  et  al.  [12]  during  lower limbs angiographies were considerably near of our measurements
for  feet  (around  of  20 lSv  for  assistants  and  50 lSv  for  primary
interventionists). However, even the smallest eye lens median doses  found  in  our  study  (9.8 lSv)  were  higher  than  the  data showed  by  Hausler  et  al.  [1]  (2.4 lSv),  which  was  an  expected result, since they employed lead acrylic glass shielding, suspended from the ceiling. The MNPY values for maximum chest dose, for a shielded professional (0.25 mm Pb) in Angiographies and Angioplasties (around of 1560 and 600, respectively) were higher
Table 3
Number of annual procedures that each professional may perform without exceeding the annual equivalent dose limits (measured at respective regions). The results were based on the median and maximum dose values estimated in the present study, and a shielding factor of 60% for lead acrylic glass. For the extremities, we do not consider attenuation factors because shielding in these regions is not used.
than the values found by Hausler et al. [1] (around of 500 and 270, respectively).
In our study, A. A. A. Treatment resulted in median doses per procedure in agreement with Vano et al. [13] (around 300– 400 lSv)  for  eye  lens.  Thus,  our  results  were  similar  in  some instance to others in the literature.
Longer procedures can result in higher dose exposures to med- ical staff when compared to shorter protocols, even under the same circumstances. Therefore, we employed EDRs to better describe exposure conditions for different procedures and to disregard the influence of exposure time.
The EDR profiles demonstrated that lower body regions (abdo- men and feet) and hands presented higher EDRs. This occurred because of the X-ray tube positioning (i.e., below the table). High dose values for both abdomen and feet indicates that lead blades below the table were not correctly positioned to fully protect these regions. Extensive instrument manipulation during image acquisi- tion causes high levels of hands exposure. However, in Angiogra- phy, because of the lower instrument manipulation during image acquisition, the hands presented lower EDRs compared with other body regions.
We found significant dose differences between the primary interventionists and assistants for Angioplasty. The eye lens, chest, abdomen, and hands of the assistants resulted in significantly lower EDRs compared with primary interventionists in these pro- cedures. This difference occurs mainly due to the positioning of professionals during image acquisition, as described in the meth- ods section ‘‘A. Selection of procedures”.
Since there are no instruments manipulation during image acquisition in angiographies, we assumed that this was the reason this difference was not found.
During longer A. A. A. Treatments, dose levels received for both professionals were not significantly different, probably because professionals are positioned on opposite sides of the table during the entire procedure, at equidistant positions of the X-ray tube, causing them to receive same dose levels.
For primary interventionists and assistants, the null hypothesis that dose levels would not differ between different body regions in the same type of procedure was discarded for A. A. A. Treatment. These results suggest the need for more than one dosimeter to accurately measure the doses received by these professionals.
The null hypothesis, i.e. that dose levels would not differ between the same regions of the body in different types of proce- dures, was discarded for feet and hands for the primary interven- tionists. For the assistants, this hypothesis was discarded for eye lens, feet, and hands.
A. A. A. Treatments are a modality that results in higher doses for eye lens and extremities. The MNPY for these regions were con- siderably close to the number of procedures performed in our insti- tution annually. Considering that some professionals are always part of the intervention team for these procedures, they may be dangerously near exposure dose limits for the eye lens, which would not be indicated by a chest dosimeter solely.
Our dosimeters were calibrated using Photon Dose Equivalent (Hx) as described in ‘‘C. Dosimetry of professionals” section. According to H. Stadtmann and C. Hranitzky, doses measured using Hx are a good estimative for doses measured using Hp(0.07), for diagnostic radiology energies. For comparison with Hp(10) mea- surements, possible differences may arise from uncertainties of Hp(10) estimations at low energies [14,15].
There were some limitations in our study. The equipment used in this study does not have a KAP meter. Therefore, correlating patients and operators’ doses was not possible. Although we pre- sent a description on the occupational radiation doses in a single institution, we differentiate the exposure by the interventionist function in each procedure, which is an important aspect to be considered. On regards to experimental design, a difference that can be noticed in this study in comparison to others is the position of the eye lens dosimeters. We placed the eye lens dosimeters on top of the surgical mask, between the eyes of the professional. Several studies have shown differences between  left  and  right  eye doses. However, our results agree  with  values  presented in the literature [11,13].
5.Conclusion
The dose levels measured in our study indicate that profession- als, who are properly shielded, in a normal routine schedule, do not exceed the annual dose limits. However, in some specific regions and for some specific procedures, the maximum number of annual procedures is fairly close to the number of procedures that are actually performed. Our analysis showed that individual dosime- ters, positioned on the chest, may underestimate the doses for  other body regions, especially abdomen, extremities, and eye lens. Therefore, a strategy involving professional rotation, additional dosimeters (especially for the extremities) and additional station- ary shielding for the eye lens are strongly recommended, especially for Angiography.
These results also indicate that dosimeters placed in abdomen, instead of chest, may represent more accurately the whole body doses received by the medical staff. For a more accurate profes- sional dosimetry, we can suggest the use  of  two  dosimeters  in the abdomen, one inside the lead protections and other outside.
This protocol can be applied to any interventional radiology department and provides extremely important information to determine radiation protection strategies.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank all of the physicians at  Botucatu Medical Hospital for their support and dedication throughout the study. The authors would also like to thank the Centro de Instrumentação, Dosimetria e Radioproteção (especially PhD. Cassiana Viccari de Moraes) of São Paulo State University and Sapra Landauer (especially PhD. Maria de Fátima Magon) for their support throughout the study.
