<title>A new security strategy for small medium sized reactor (SMR) plants</title>
<author>Manseok Leea, Seung Min Woob,∗</author>
<Affiliation>a.Graduate School of Science and Technology Policy, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, 291 Daehak-ro, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea
b.Department of Nuclear Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-3133, United States
</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2018.05.012</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2018.05.012</URL>
ABSTRACT
New methodologies to evaluate the reliability of physical protection in SMRs have been proposed in this study because small-scale facilities would quickly approach undesirable conditions under a small number of threats compared to large-scale systems in which multiple protection systems including security personnel are present. Threats and attacks can be categorized into two types: i) stealth threats and ii) violent and vehicle assaults – the given conditions for each threat are diﬀerent. In the case of a stealth threat, on-site forces can defeat the threat without outside support. However, on-site forces may not be able to defeat a violent or vehicle assault alone because such threats might be stronger than the on-site forces in terms of the number of people and ﬁre power. Detecting an adversary of stealth threat type could be crucial. However, in the case of a violent or vehicle assault, the time to protect the system should be more signiﬁcant than the detection of such threats because on-site forces must delay the assault of an adversary until oﬀ-site forces arrive. In order to take into account those diﬀerences, the probabilities of system failure, which is evaluated by the probability of non-detection times the probability of pathway selection by an adversary, and the consequences of that are selected as critical parameters. For the  second threat type, it is reckoned that the expected time for the protection system should be longer than the response time of oﬀ-site forces. The expectation of delay time in the system can be computed by the summation   of a delay time of a protection system in a certain pathway weighted by the probability of that pathway selection by an adversary. Using these methodologies, the physical protection system could be more eﬀectively established in a small-scale facility.
Keywords:
Physical protection Nuclear security SMR
Risk analysis1.Introduction
Even though vigilance and security measures have been heightened since September 11, 2001, there have still been several major terrorist- led attacks around the world, for example terrorist attacks in France, Iraq and the UK. Not only can hundreds or thousands of innocent people be killed or injured, but many buildings, including private and government sector buildings, can be destroyed or damaged by ter- rorism. In the case of nuclear facilities, there are many kinds of high radioactive and toxicity materials in which the leakage of those needs to be strongly avoided. Therefore, physical protection for nuclear fa- cilities should be one of the most signiﬁcant concerns of building da- mage in the case of a terrorist attack.
Several methodologies to evaluate nuclear security have been de- veloped including a methodology to assess a security risk, proliferation resistance, and physical protection for nuclear systems (Shin et al., 2015, 2017; Yim  and  Li, 2013; Skutnik  and  Yim, 2011; Li  et  al.,  2008;
Yim, 2006; Nishimura et al., 2004; Yoo, 2009; Sung et al., 2009; Ezell,
2007;  Martz  and  Johnson,  1987;  Biringer  et  al.,  2007;  Bernero, 1984;
Ezell et al., 2010). Although the concept of the method could apply to other types of nuclear facilities, it has been speciﬁcally developed for Generation-IV systems (Nishimura et al., 2004). In addition, a new physical protection measure in which the main parameters are prob- ability of interruption, probability of neutralization, consequences, ﬁssile material type, and eﬀectiveness of physical protection resources has been developed (Yoo, 2009). As mentioned in this paper, the methodology has an advantageous feature in terms of the ﬂexibility in the applicable facility types such as currently operating nuclear facil- ities and new Generation-IV systems. However, even though it is well explained that the delay time should be greater than the arrival time of the oﬀ-site forces, the time constraint would not be well presented through this method. Moreover, several studies have introduced vul- nerability assessment (Sung et al., 2009; Ezell, 2007) and risk assess- ment for evaluating nuclear security (Shin et al., 2015, 2017; Martz and Johnson, 1987; Biringer et al., 2007; Bernero, 1984; Ezell  et al., 2010)  and proliferation (Yim and Li, 2013; Skutnik and Yim, 2011; Li et al., 2008; Yim, 2006).
Physical protection strategies and methodologies are expected to provide a reliable security environment for current nuclear systems, but would not be favorable for Small Medium sized Reactors (SMRs) which have been developed by several countries such as China, Japan, Russia, South Korea, and the USA (IAEA, 2012). In the existing strategy, plant security guards or forces actively counter adversaries or malicious acts to ensure that the protected area is secure (IAEA, 2010). For a large reactor, this strategy can be eﬀective since it suﬀers from security ob- jectives dispersed across the protected area and multiple entry points to the vital area. However, according to the IAEA report summarizing several types of small- and medium-sized nuclear reactors (IAEA, 2012), most conceptual designs for them show a much more compact sizing for an SMR, a decrease of the vital area is expected, although one malicious act could lead a severe accident resulting in core damage. Therefore, the concept of physical protection for SMRs should be in- vestigated. In that regard, the purpose of this study can be summarized as the proposal for a new method and concepts to evaluate the physical protection for SMRs. In addition, a new strategy of physical protection is suggested.
2.Methodology
2.1.Risk assessment in previous works
The evaluation model development is based on a technical report, 'Probabilistic Consequence Analysis of Security Threats,' provided by the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), USA (Gaertner, 2004). The EPRI report develops a probabilistic risk assessment methodology that can be used to evaluate risk reduction options and assist the security
@1
where PTh_S is the probability of threat success (given the threat occurs), FTh_is the frequency of threat occurrence (/yr), and P is the prob ability of consequence. In addition, the vulnerability assessment team proposes the risk-acceptance criteria for individual scenarios in terms of Core Damage Frequency (CDF) and Large Early Release Frequency (LERF). The probability of threat success is deﬁned as:
@1-1
where PDet is the probability of detecting, interrupting, and neutralizing the threat, and PDMG is the probability of asset damage occurring. The parameter, FTh_O, can be evaluated by:
@1-2
where FAtt is the frequency of large US terrorist attacks, PNPP_Tg is the probability of a nuclear power plant (NPP) as a target, PT_P is the probability of this plant, and PTh_Type is the probability of threat type. FTh_O is not considered since this study deals with the event of adversary attack. Thus, FTh_O is assumed as 1 in this study.
However, Eqs. (1)–(1) does not best reﬂect threat characteristics, because threat types are not taken into account. In order to evaluate the risk more accurately, PNon-Det and PDMG should be applied according to the threat type. This is because each threat is governed by diﬀerent factors. For instance, stealth threats avoid engagement with a security force, and, in the case of being detected, they tend to ﬂee rather than ﬁght against the force. Therefore, stealth attackers are governed by PNon-Det and have an independent correlation with PDMG. Alternatively, violent and vehicle assault threats are independent of PNon-Det because hey do not avoid detection and would use frontal attack tactics from the very ﬁrst assault. However, in this case, the adversary is also not governed by PDMG because terrorists would be willing to die. Rather, frontal attackers are governed by the delay time factor because they must succeed in the attack before being defeated by oﬀ-site reinforcement forces given that they outweigh the adversary.
2.2.  Attack by stealth threat scenarios
In the event of a stealth attack, the non-detection probability is a critical factor in evaluating system reliability. Therefore, in this study, the system reliability is newly deﬁned by the product of detection failure probability factor and consequence factor:
@2
where PF is the probability of system failure (given the threat occurs),which is deﬁned as:
@
where PNon_Det_i is the non-detection probability of the ith pathway, and PPW_i is the probability of selection for the ith pathway, and PC is the probability of consequence. It is assumed that an adversary's will to attack and a protection system are independent.
The Bayes' theorem tree diagram is used to calculate the probability of non-detection. For that, the three areas, the owner controlled area, the protected area, and the vital area, are considered. The non-detec- tion probability of the corresponding pathway (PNon_Det) is also deﬁned in Fig. 1. In addition, the probability of the i-pathway selection (PPW_i) is also deﬁned. In this evaluation, it is assumed that the adversary would take a pathway where its utility (U) dominates others. The utility function consists of the non-detection probability, the eﬀectiveness  (Eﬀ) of barriers set in the path, and the resist factor (Re) of that path by
security forces, as follows:
@3
where Eﬀj is the eﬀective factor of the jth path element against a stealth attacker (0 < Eﬀ < 1), and Rej is the resist factor of the jth path ele- ment by security forces (0 < Re < 1).
2.3.  Attack by a violent assault or a vehicle assault
The frame or plan for physical protection in the event of a violent or vehicle assault could diﬀer from that of a stealth attacker. For example, the stealth attacker could be more concerned with non-detection by security forces or physical barrier systems, while time could be a more essential factor for attackers in a violent or vehicle assault. When an adversary attempts a frontal attack using vehicles, security forces must buy time until on-site or oﬀ-site reinforcements arrive. Therefore, in order to evaluate risk reduction measures and, thus, the reliability of a protection system, the key criterion must be the time factor. The equations for that are deﬁned as:
@4
where Exp[TD] is the expected delay time of a protection system, and TR is the response time of oﬀ-site forces.
The expected delay time of a protection system is given as follows:
@4-1where tD_i is the delay time of the ith pathway, and PPW_i is the prob- ability of a pathway selection. A Bayes' theorem tree diagram is used to calculate each pathway's delay time, as shown in Fig. 2. In this case, a summation value of each node is a delay time of a certain pathway.
Fig. 1. Evaluation for PNon-Det, PPW, and PF using Bayes' theorem tree diagram.
The probability of an adversary selecting pathway-i is based on the assumption that the adversary would take a pathway where its utilitydominates others, as mentioned in Eq. (3). However, the utility factor for these scenarios diﬀers from that for the stealth attacker scenario because of the importance of the time factor. Therefore, the utility function has been modiﬁed into Eqs. (4)–(2) which takes into account the eﬀect of the delay time along the i-pathway.
@4-2
The Response Time of Oﬀ-site Forces (TR) is judged by the following factors:
@4-3
where Do is the oﬀ-site force distance from a plant, V is the average traﬃc speed of a path to the plant, and θ is the threat type factor. The threat type factor in that equation takes into account the diﬀerence of urgency depending on the assault type.
3.A new physical protection strategy
3.1.Safety and security characteristics of SMRs
SMRs can be designed to have enhanced safety and security char- acteristics to provide better plant protection environments than those of
Fig. 2. Evaluation for tD, PPW, and the expected delay time in the system using Bayes' theorem tree diagram.
current large reactor plants (IAEA, 2012). The characteristics for SMR design could include: 1) downgraded or partially embedded nuclear islands, 2) a spent fuel storage in the nuclear islands, 3) a passive heat removal system, and 4) a malicious action resistant control system. These characteristics enable SMR plants to limit the essential security objectives to a small vital area inside the reactor building and con- tainment. This is desirable because attacks outside the vital area could not credibly cause damage to fuel or cause release of radioactive ma- terial. Even adversary seizure of the control room would not aﬀect the reactor safety given the control system's resistance to malicious actions. With these measures in mind, the adversarial threat can be nar- rowed to radiological sabotage, which is sabotage with the intent to release radiological material on site. Fissile weapon materials  from spent fuel either stolen or diverted would not be credible given the material's high radiation level and low ﬁssile material concentration. Lastly, impact from an airborne source, such as from a commercial airliner, is designed for during structural design. It is greatly simpliﬁed by the smaller size and downgraded or partially embedded reactor
building.
Therefore, limited security concerns and reduced credible threats present favorable conditions for SMR security. It is possible to change the SMR plant physical protection strategy under this reduced security requirement. The current paradigm of repelling an adversary in a pro- tected area is to detect, delay, and deny an adversary access to a vital area.
3.2.Deﬁnition of threat
According to Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) regulations 10 CFR Part 73 Physical Protection of Plants and Materials, there are ﬁve types of threats from radiological sabotage: a violent external assault, an attack by stealth, a land or waterborne vehicle bomb assault, an internal threat, and a cyber-attack (U. S. NRC website, 2017). In this study, an internal threat and a cyber-attack are not considered.
Attack by stealth refers to a terrorist attack that inﬁltrates the vital area with the intent to cause radiological sabotage by damaging a re- actor core or a spent fuel storage pool without being detected by plant security forces. Violent external assault refers to a terrorist attack that penetrates into the vital area with the intent to damage multiple re- actors and spent fuel storages as fast as possible while actively engaging with security forces. Vehicle bomb assault refers to a terrorist attack that penetrates the vital area to damage one or more reactors and spent fuel storage facilities with land or waterborne vehicles laden with ex- plosives. Such adversaries also actively engage with security forces and access the vital area as eﬃciently as possible. These three threat types would consist of well-trained individuals (including military training and skills) who are dedicated to the point of willing to kill or be killed. It is also assumed they possess suﬃcient knowledge of weapons and explosives necessary for a successful attack (U. S. NRC website, 2017).
3.3.Details of physical protection strategy
Details of the physical protection strategy vary according to the type of threat. The main diﬀerences are in attack tactics and the number of attackers. The following deﬁnes the physical protection strategy cor- responding to each threat type.
3.3.1.Attack by stealth threat scenario
In the event of an adversary attack by stealth, a security force ac- tively contacts and engages with adversaries to repel and defeat them. This is because the adversary is assumed to be a small number of at- tackers armed with light weapons. The adversaries' penetration time would be shorter than the oﬀ-site forces' response time because they avoid being detected early in their assault. This means a highly reliable detection system with multiple layers and rapid response of on-site forces are critical. A plant security force's standard operations
procedures could be as follows:
1)detect and alarm (request oﬀ-site force),
2)lock all security doors, then
3)contact and engage with adversary.
3.3.2.Violent external assault or vehicle bomb assault threat scenario
In the event of a violent or vehicle assault, the security strategy pre- positions reserve personnel and secure defensive positions to control all entry points of the vital area. Oﬀ-site response forces then repel an adversary. This is because the adversary is armed with heavy weapons and outnumbers security personnel. However, their delaying capacity would be longer than the oﬀ-site forces' response time if the adversary's attack is deterred and delayed by defensive actions and barriers. Therefore, hardened defensive positions, reinforced barriers, and fast response time of oﬀ-site forces must be ensured. A plant security force's standard operations procedures could be as follows:
1)detect and alarm (request oﬀ-site force),
2)lock all security doors,
3)pre-position and secure defensive positions,
4)delay an adversary, then
5)repel an adversary with oﬀ-site force.
4.Conclusion and future works
Nuclear utilities have an ethical and regulatory responsibility to protect the safety and security of the surrounding public. This manda- tory responsibility outweighs any other considerations so that the se- curity of the plant should be the top priority in any implementation strategy. SMR plant security systems should be designed to satisfy se- curity integrity. This report addresses this problem by suggesting new protection strategies and provides models to evaluate risk for an SMR plant with respect to stealth attacks as well as attacks by violent and vehicle assaults. By suggesting new dominant parameters for each threat type, the physical protection system in the SMRs or small-scale facilities could be eﬀectively designed.
Future work to improve and supplement this report should contain:
1) security system design and evaluation model development for pro- tection against non-physical threats (i.e., cyber-attack and internal threats) and beyond design basis threats (i.e., air assault and under- ground inﬁltration); 2) enhancement of suggested models by improving the consequence factor and response time equations; 3) development of a data acquisition model for security measures' non-detection prob- ability and delay time with a probabilistic approach; 4) implementation of suggested models to SMR designs. In addition, cost analysis de- pending on the security system would be conducted in the future.
