<title>NCRP Report No.180 - Management of exposure to ionizing radiation: NCRP radiation protection guidance for the United States</title>
<author>D A Cool， K R Kase， J D Boice Jr</author>
<Affiliation>a.Electric Power Research Institute, 1300 West WT Harris, Blvd, Charlotte, NC, United States ;b.137 Skyline Dr, Medford, OR, United States 97504;c. National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America;d.Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Radiological Protection</Journal>
<Publishing_house>IOP Publishing</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1088/1361-6498/ab1826</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6498/ab1826</URL>
Article Highlights:
Updated National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements recommendations apply
the radiation protection principles of justification, optimization of protection, and numerical
protection criteria to each exposure situation.
New exposure categories address emergency workers and nonhuman biota (i.e., animals and
plants)The recommendations include the roles of ethical principles, stakeholder engagement, and
safety culture, and stress their importance in implementation of the system of protection.
Abstract:
NCRP Report No. 180, “Management of Exposure to Ionizing Radiation: Radiation Protection Guidance for the United States (2018)” was developed by Council Committee 1. The report builds and expands
upon previous recommendations of NCRP and ICRP, covering exposure to radiation and radioactive
materials for five exposure categories: occupational, public, medical, emergency workers, and
nonhuman biota. Actions to add, increase, reduce or remove a source of exposure to humans require
justification. Optimization of protection universally applies, taking into account societal, economic, and
environmental factors; addressing all hazards, and striving for continuous improvement when it is
reasonable to do so. Numeric protection criteria for management of dose to an individual for a given
exposure situation are provided, and differ in some respects from ICRP. A specific criterion is suitable to be designated as a regulatory dose limit only when the source of exposure is stable, characterized, and the responsible organization has established an appropriate radiation control program in advance of
source introduction.  Medical exposure includes patients, comforters and caregivers of a patient, and
voluntary participants in biomedical research. Emergency workers are a new exposure category; their
exposure is treated separately from occupational, public or medical exposure, and numeric criteria are
provided for deterministic and stochastic effects. For nonhuman biota, the focus is on population
maintenance of the affected species, and a guideline is provided for when additional assessment may be necessary. In addition, the recommendations emphasize that: ethical principles support decision-
making; stakeholder engagement is necessary in deciding suitable management of their radiation
exposure; and a strong safety culture is intrinsic to effective radiation protection programs.
Keywords:
recommendations; radiation protection; justification; optimization of protection; numeric protection
criteria; occupational, public; medical; emergency workers; nonhuman biota
Introduction
The National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements (NCRP) is the US national non-
governmental, not-for-profit advisory organization, chartered by the U.S. Congress, that seeks to
formulate and widely disseminate information, guidance and recommendations on radiation protection and measurements which represent the consensus of leading scientific thinking. In the United States,
federal governmental organizations and state governments utilize NCRP’s recommendations, as well as recommendations of the International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) as a scientific basis for the process of developing of their radiation protection activities. NCRP has now completed a multi-
year effort to update its recommendations for managing exposure to ionizing radiation.
The previous NCRP recommendations were contained in NCRP Report No. 116, published in 1993 [1].
The new recommendations, published as NCRP Report No. 180 [2], resulted from work by NCRP Council
Committee 1, which included inputs from the scientifically diverse membership of NCRP, review and
approval by the Council, and opportunity for public comment. The members of Council Committee 1
are: Kenneth R. Kase (Co-chair), Donald A. Cool (Co-chair), Armin Ansari, John D. Boice, Jr., Jerrold T.
Bushberg, Lawrence T. Dauer, Darrell R. Fisher, Patricia A. Fleming, Kathryn A. Higley, Randall N. Hyer,
William E. Irwin, Fred A. Mettler, Jr., Donald L. Miller, R. Julian Preston, and Gayle E. Woloschak.
Consultants and Liaisons to the committee included: S. James Adelstein, Ralph L, Andersen, Michael A.
Boyd, John E. Till, Kathryn H. Pryor, Tammy P. Taylor, James A. Brink, S.Y. Shen, Steven L. Simon. Marvin
Rosenstein served as the NCRP staff consultant.
Recommendations for protection from possible harmful effects of ionizing radiation have been
produced and updated many times, principally by ICRP and by NCRP. This latest report builds and
expands upon previous recommendations of both ICRP in Publication 103 [3] and NCRP. Written within the context of the United States of America, the new NCRP recommendations differ somewhat from
ICRP recommendations, with different terminology intended to avoid implementation issues observed in applying ICRP recommendations, selection of numeric criteria for control of dose to individuals, addition of exposure categories for emergency workers and non-human biota, and inclusion of ethical principles,
stakeholder engagement, and safety culture within the system of protection.The recommendations present a system of protection that aims to prevent occurrence of acute and
chronic radiation-induced tissue reactions (deterministic effects) in humans, and to reduce the
probability of stochastic effects (primarily cancer) in radiation-exposed persons while maintaining the
benefits to the individual and to society from the activities that generate such exposures. For exposure
to nonhuman biota (i.e., animal and plant life), a protective guideline is provided that focuses on
population maintenance of the species, without unnecessarily limiting the benefits to humans that may
result from such exposure.
The report is primarily for U.S. federal and state agencies responsible for the health and well-being of
individuals exposed to ionizing radiation, and those agencies with responsibility for protecting
nonhuman biota from such sources. It also provides practical information for health physicists, medical
physicists, physicians and other medical professionals, radiation safety officers, managers, workers,
emergency responders, members of the public and the scientific community, and the media.
Basis for Recommendations The system of protection aims to prevent the occurrence of tissue reactions (deterministic effects) and
reduce the probability of stochastic effects (primarily cancer). Although primarily controlled by
restrictions on effective dose, NCRP continues to recommend an approach somewhat different from
ICRP to assess skin dose, based on ensuring that irradiation would not result in breakdown of the skin
barrier function. For the lens of the eye, evidence is now available indicating that lens opacities and
cataracts are observed at lower levels than previously estimated. NCRP Commentary No. 26 [4]
provided a detailed review for the lens of the eye, and recommended that the annual value should not exceed 50 mGy absorbed dose. NCRP Report No. 180 has adopted this recommendation. Criteria
designed for protection against tissue reactions are given in absorbed dose, rather than dose equivalent,to avoid potential concerns regarding the appropriate weighting factors for such effects.
Ionizing radiation is a relatively weak carcinogen; and at this time no approach can distinguish a cancer that may have been caused by radiation exposure from a cancer resulting from any other etiology.
Epidemiologic studies, by themselves, cannot provide definitive information about the relationship
between radiation exposure and cancer incidence for exposure to ionizing radiation in the range of
doses from the ubiquitous background radiation, i.e., several mGy. Radiation biology has shown
competing processes at the molecular, cellular and tissue levels, with an exposure stimulating certain
metabolic activities and reducing others.While the presence of thresholds or even positive effects (the latter referred to as hormesis or adaptive response) can be detected in some cellular systems, these observations cannot be generalized into a
relationship that is universally applicable. In recognition of the great variability of biological processes,
and the considerable uncertainty in estimates of stochastic effects at low absorbed doses and low
absorbed-dose rates [4] [5], the recommendations continue to apply a simplifying and prudent
assumption of linearity of the dose and effect relationship for stochastic effects (particularly cancer) for
purposes of implementing the system of radiation protection.  NRCP Commentary 27 [5] provides an in depth review of epidemiological data, and the extent to which various studies lend support to a linear
response relationship.
Supported by the scientific knowledge of human biological effects of ionizing radiation, the system of radiation protection and its principles are informed by established ethical principles, experience gained
in the use and management of radioactive material and radiation-producing devices, and experience
with approaches to the protection of individuals from adverse health effects resulting from radiation
exposures.
3. Ethical Foundation
Ethical theories about right and wrong generally can be categorized as referring to ends or purposes,
emphasizing determination of one’s duties, or as emphasizing a virtuous way of living. All of these
theories contribute to aspects of the system of protection. Ethical principles are prescriptive statements
about values that ought to be considered. Four established ethical principles have been adopted by
NCRP for protection of humans to support making decisions on radiation protection, particularly in
circumstances and situations that may present inherent conflicts in interests of different individuals and groups. The four principles are:provide good (beneficence);prevent harm (non-maleficence);respect an individual’s autonomy (autonomy); and act fairly (justice).
These ethical principles underlie the radiation protection principles of justification, optimization of
protection, and management of dose to an individual, and the implementation of those principles in
various situations. The report notes that while it is not necessary to consider the underlying interests
and the value that ethics may contribute in many routine decisions, it is useful to consider those
differences in the importance placed by relevant stakeholders on the ethical principles when there may
be conflicts among them in making a particular decision. Involvement of the relevant stakeholders is
essential to understand clearly the importance and meaning of each principle that should be considered,and to develop a radiation protection approach that best meets those views and positions. It is also
important to reflect practical experience in making and implementing sustainable decisions.
NCRP places priority on radiation protection of humans, with attention also given to radiation protection of nonhuman biota. While this approach does not necessarily accord moral significance to nonhuman
entities, meaningful protection can be achieved by recognizing the interest humans have in such
protection. For non-human biota, the objective of protection is associated with population endpoints
39(i.e., population maintenance) rather than protection of individual members of the species.
4. The System of Radiation Protection
The following sub-sections describe the key components of the system of radiation protection in Report No. 180.
Exposure Situations
An exposure situation is a way of classifying the circumstances by which a source of ionizing radiation,
through various pathways, causes exposure to humans or to nonhuman biota.  Sources may be either
machines that emit ionizing radiation or radioactive material, and may be of natural origin or be man-
made. For purposes of NCRP recommendations, an exposure situation is defined by its specific
characteristics, namely the:nature of the source;individuals exposed;circumstances of exposure; and ability of those with responsibility or authority to control the:source of ionizing radiation; and/or actions of the persons at risk.NCRP considers the three exposure situations (planned, emergency, and existing) recommended by ICRP in 2007 [3] to be useful for thinking about the different ways in which exposure occurs. NCRP, however,recommends that the system of protection should allow more flexibility for informed judgment and not be rigidly organized into these three situations. The need for flexibility has been evident in handling
transitions between emergencies and existing situations, and in the most appropriate treatment for
naturally occurring radioactive materials.
Categories of Exposure
The recommendations are based in five categories of exposure: occupational, public, medical,
emergency worker, and nonhuman biota. The last two are new categories that have not appeared in
previous NCRP recommendations, and are introduced to cover important issues in emergency
situations, and in radiation protection for nonhuman biota.
Occupational exposure involves exposure of individuals to ionizing radiation in the course of their work,and as a result of situations that can reasonably be regarded as being under the control of the
organization responsible for the exposure. Occupational exposure does not include exposure received:
as a part of employment fitness screening; as a patient, biomedical research subject, or comforter or
caregiver of a patient; nor outside of the work environment. Designation of individuals as
occupationally exposed does not depend on their locations, or on their anticipated level of exposure.
The organization responsible for the exposure determines when an individual is to be regarded either as occupationally exposed or as a member of the public, and such a designation would need to consider
the extent to which the individual’s specific activities do, or do not, routinely entail work with
radioactive material or machines that emit ionizing radiation. Likewise, the responsible organization
specifies the necessary training, monitoring, and protective equipment that may be required based on
the likelihood and extent of exposure. As with all exposure situations, optimization of protection is
always to be applied, and exposure of individuals at levels approaching the numeric protection criteria
should be examined to determine if it is reasonable to reduce the exposures.
Public exposure comprises any exposure of humans outside of the described occupational, medical or
emergency worker categories. Public exposure does not include exposure from ubiquitous background radiation except above defined levels of radon in dwellings. Public exposure can occur in planned,
existing, and emergency exposure situations.
Medical exposure of patients is dealt with separately in the system of protection because the exposures are for purposes of medical diagnosis or therapy and provide a direct benefit to the individual exposed.The category of medical exposure also includes individuals who may be participating voluntarily in
biomedical research that results in their exposure to ionizing radiation, and certain individuals who are
engaged in the comfort and care of a patient who is receiving external radiation or has been
administered a radionuclide for the purpose of medical diagnosis or therapy.
The category of emergency worker is a unique, transitory exposure category that will start soon after a
radiological or nuclear emergency begins. Emergency workers may include responders like firefighters,
law enforcement officers, and emergency medical service providers. Utility workers and others essential
in restoring critical infrastructure may also become emergency workers. There will also be support
personnel recruited by the designated authority in large numbers to serve in such jobs as vehicleoperators or administrative service providers. Some may serve for only the first few hours or days
following the initial response; others may transition from emergency workers to occupationally exposed individuals when they take on more permanent tasks days or weeks later in the recovery phase. The
inclusion of the category reflects discussions particularly following the events in Fukushima, and is
intended to answer questions that were raised by emergency response and regulatory organizations in the United States.
The category of nonhuman biota applies to animals and plants. Exposure of nonhuman biota may or may not concurrently result in exposure of humans. The objective of radiation protection for nonhuman biota is associated with population endpoints (i.e., population maintenance of the exposed species)
rather than protection of individual members of the species, and is considered within the framework of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) [7]. NEPA requires that assessments be made of
environmental impact, to aid in decisions as to whether an action should be taken, and if so, the
preferred option. As such, the NEPA requirements can be seen as parallels with the radiation protection principles of justification and optimization of protection. NCRP has stated that the assessed absorbed
dose rate to non-human biota from various options can help to inform the selection of the best option
for protection, all other factors being taken into account.
Radiation Protection Principles
The radiation protection principles utilized in addressing exposure of humans are: justification,
optimization of protection, and numeric protection criteria (for management of dose to an individual).
These principles function as a set, to determine whether some action should be taken, and if so, how
protection can be implemented and improved. Justification is related to the source, while optimization
is related to both the source and the individual, because the endpoint is to protect the individual. The
third principle specifies numeric criteria for the individual, to ensure adequate protection.
Justification is necessary for actions to add, increase, reduce, or remove a source of exposure (i.e., the
action does more good than harm). All factors, both radiological and non-radiological, and particularly
the economic, societal, psychological, and environmental implications (including to nonhuman biota),
should be considered. The application of justification for the use of ionizing radiation in medicine is
distinct from other exposure situations because patients receive direct benefit from a deliberate
exposure for the purpose of medical diagnosis or therapy. The process of justification in the context of
medical exposure thus requires additional considerations.  Under NEPA the appropriate assessment of
environmental impacts is made to inform decisions regarding taking an action, which is considered by
NCRP as application of the principle of justification for the exposure category of nonhuman biota.
Optimization of protection means that the likelihood of incurring exposures, the number of individuals
exposed, and the magnitude of the dose to an individual should be kept as low as reasonably achievable,taking into account societal, economic and environmental factors. The level of protection should be the best under the prevailing circumstances, maximizing the margin of benefit over harm. Optimization of protection is achieved when the organization responsible for protection, those being protected, and any 3other relevant stakeholders broadly accept that the most appropriate protection under the circumstances has been identified and implemented. If there are exposures that are greater than the
recommended numeric protection criteria (see below), it is critical that protection be improved in an
effort to satisfy the recommended criteria. The numeric protection criteria serve to avoid protection
outcomes that are inequitable, and thus serve as a boundary for judging the acceptability of the
protection options available. The entire process of improving protection is referred to as optimization of
protection.Once the numeric protection criteria have been satisfied, there continues to be the obligation to determine if protection can be improved further. Optimization of protection is always to be applied, and can only be accomplished in the context of the options available for improving protection. However,
optimization of protection is not minimization of exposure. There is always the consideration of what is reasonable in the context of all the hazards presented in an exposure situation. The outcome of the
optimization of protection will be unique to the exposure situation, and the particular circumstances
therein. The outcome of optimization of protection is not to be considered as a regulatory dose limit.Optimization of protection applied to medical exposure of the patient is best described as management of the radiation dose to the patient to be commensurate with the medical purpose. For medical
exposure, unnecessary levels of exposure are to be avoided; i.e., levels that are too low to achieve the
intended outcome are to be avoided as well as levels that are greater than necessary for that outcome.In an emergency, radiological conditions may not be well characterized, and urgent actions are needed to respond to the incident. Optimization of protection in this context considers all the hazards that may be present, including radiological hazards, and decisions on whether to proceed with lifesaving
activities. While there is always the desire to reduce exposures, the issue may be more of permitting
exposures based on the recommended numeric protection criteria in order to accomplish the necessary actions, particularly in the initial hours and days of an incident. The individual’s dose is still controlled
consistent with optimization of protection, but the worker is allowed to fully and effectively engage in
activities governed by the exposure situation.
In the context of exposure of nonhuman biota and protection of the environment, optimization of
protection is a consideration of the options available for the management and control of the source
within the overall NEPA assessment process. NCRP is not recommending an independent optimization of protection analysis for ionizing radiation alone outside of the overall NEPA process. Different options for managing a source may have different impacts on the exposures in the environment, and thus the
exposures of nonhuman biota may help to inform the overall optimization of protection for a source.
Radiation Protection Culture
NCRP recommendations explicitly recognize the importance of radiation protection culture in the
implementation of the system of protection. Positive radiation protection culture fosters traits to
effectively establish and implement a radiation protection program that applies to an organization’s
setting. These traits are seen to contribute to radiation protection through the open process of
identifying concerns and responding, which from a practical standpoint, is often the basis for day to day optimization of protection. As such, it is a force that multiplies supporting and sustaining effective
implementation of other recommendations.
Numeric Protection Criteria
The radiation protection principle of numeric protection criteria (for management of dose to an
individual) is fundamental and is intended to ensure adequate protection. It also is intended to ensure
that application of the principle of optimization of protection does not result in individuals or groups of
individuals receiving a dose that is inappropriate for the specific exposure situation. Historically, this
principle (referred to as dose limitation) focused upon dose limits. The principle, as presented in NCRP
Report No. 180, is broader than dose limits, and encompasses all uses of numeric protection criteria to
prevent harm. NCRP has chosen not to use terms such as constraint, reference level, administrative
control level, or other terms that are often used. In doing so, NCRP recognized that the terms have been the subject of much debate, and emphasized that it is not the particular term that is used that is
important, but rather the consistent application of numeric criteria to guide protection.  The use of a
single phrase to express the concept also reinforces that the approach to protection is the same in all
situations.
If the initial circumstances for a particular exposure situation and category of exposure are such that the numeric protection criterion is exceeded, the first objective would be to consider actions that would
result in returning doses to values that meet the numeric protection criterion. In some cases of
emergency and existing exposure, this may not be immediately possible. Optimization of protection
should be applied to reduce exposures, and to continue to reduce exposures below the numeric
protection criteria, taking into account societal, economic, and environmental factors.NCRP recognizes the term dose limit only as a legal boundary established in a specific circumstance by a regulatory authority. Although NCRP emphasized that a regulatory dose limit is not a boundary
between a safe and an unsafe exposure, from the standpoint of accountability and responsibility,
exceeding the numeric value of a dose limit is automatically regarded as a violation by regulatory
authorities. Regulatory dose limits should be considered only in specific, well-defined circumstances
when:
the source of exposure is well known and characterized;the source is stable, in the sense that significant variations of exposure are not expected to
occur in routine activities; and protection strategies for controlling exposure can be planned before the introduction of the
source (an advance control program), and operate on the source itself.
For the specific circumstances described above, NCRP recognizes that its numeric protection criteria are suitable for use as a regulatory dose limit. The numeric protection criteria for management of dose to
an individual are shown in Table 1 and fuller discussion of each is found in Report No. 180. A
comparison of NCRP recommendations with those of ICRP in Publication 103 does show several
differences, some of which are not new. For example, occupational exposure effective dose is set at 50
mSv in any year, with an additional specification of 10 mSv times the individuals age in years, rather
than the 100 mSv of 5 year averaging period. The lens of the eye is expressed in mGy, rather than as
equivalent dose, and is set at 50 mGy in a year. For extremity dose, although the numeric values are
the same, NCRP has expressed the value in absorbed dose (mGy) rather than equivalent dose, and
continues with the averaging area of 10 cm2. NCRP’s decision to use absorbed dose is in recognition
that the radiation weighting factors, and tissue weighting factors, are specified for stochastic endpoints
such as cancer, and the lens of the eye, and extremity dose criteria are aimed to prevent deterministic
effects.In the medical arena, numeric protection criteria do not apply to the exposure of patients and voluntary participants in biomedical research, but do apply to exposures of comforters and caregivers who may be exposed as a result of interactions with a patient. NCRP Report No. 180 includes a table reflecting a
suggested classification scheme for use of effective dose as a qualitative indicator of radiation detriment for balancing against expected individual or societal benefit for biomedical research studies.
With respect to nonhuman biota, the guidance is in the form of an absorbed dose rate to the tissue of
nonhuman biota that would not likely need further assessment.  Dose rates above the recommended
level do not automatically mean that there would be an impact, but that further evaluations might be
needed to support decision making.  The ultimate determination of what constitutes an appropriate or
allowable environmental impact requires much more than a comparison with a single numeric value of
absorbed-dose rate.
6. Conclusions
NCRP Report No. 180 provides an updated set of NCRP recommendations for radiation protection in the United States, building upon the previous recommendations of both ICRP and NCRP, and taking into
account new information and experience gained in the implementation of radiation protection
programs. The Report covers five categories of exposure (occupational, public, medical, emergency,
workers and nonhuman biota), and discusses the contributions that stakeholders and radiation
protection culture make to radiation protection. The system of radiation protection includes the
principles of justification, optimization of protection, and numeric protection criteria for management of dose to an individual, takes into account social, economic, and environmental factors, and is informed
by stakeholder interaction. This approach provides a current framework for radiation protection in the
United States, and provides useful insights into implementation and possible future development of the system of protection outside of the United States.
Acknowledgments
Financial support for preparation of NCRP Report 180 was provided by the US Nuclear Regulatory
Commission under Grant No. NRC-HQ-60-14-G-0012 and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) under Grant No. 5UE1EH000989. The work was conducted independently of the sponsoring
agency and does not necessarily reflect its views.
