<title>Assessment of control room habitability and unfiltered air inleakage test of the OPR 1000 NPP</title>
<author>Dong Soo Songa, Jong Beom Leea, Sang Jun Haa & Seong Cheol Huha</author>
<Affiliation>a Central Research Institute, Korea Hydro & Nuclear Power Co. Ltd., 1312-70 Yuseong- daero, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-343, Korea</Affiliation>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2014.995145</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2014.995145</URL>
The assessment of control room habitability for Hanbit unit 5 was performed based on GL 2003-01 and Regulatory Guide 1.197. The integrated control room envelope (CRE) test was performed utilizing ASTM E741. Four tests were performed using each of the control room HVAC subtrains. The control room heat- ing, ventilating, and air conditioning (HVAC) system lineup of pressurization mode test was based upon a lineup that encompassed the design basis radiological analyses. The other control room HVAC system lineup of isolation mode test was based on an operation mode that considers toxic gas. The measured in- leakage for the isolation test mode remains within the toxicity limit. Radiation effect analysis showed that the measured inleakage satisfied the regulatory criteria, and the inleakage would not result in control room operator dose exceeding 50 mSv whole body and 500 mSv thyroid except train A pressurization test mode. The thyroid dose due to maximum measured unfiltered inleakage of 8976 lpm for train A is correspond- ing to 700 mSv. Modifications to the CRE boundary and control room HVAC system should be done to demonstrate that the measured unfiltered inleakage for train A pressurization test mode is bounded by the regulatory criteria assumed in the design basis radiological analyses.
Keywords: ASTM E741; CRE; CRH; inleakage test; toxic gas; iodine; radiation dose; accident
1.Introduction
Hanbit unit 5 nuclear power plant is a 1000-MW two-loop pressurized light water reactor, with an ex- pected plant life of 40 years. The construction began in June 1997 and the commercial operation commenced on 21 May 2002.
In response to Generic Letter 2003-01 [1], the inleak- age tracer gas testing was performed in spring 2014.
A control room habitability (CRH) program for the Hanbit unit 5 has been established and implemented to ensure that CRH is maintained such that, with an op- erable control room heating, ventilating, and air condi- tioning (HVAC) system, control room envelope (CRE) occupants can control the reactor safely under normal conditions and maintain it in a safe condition follow- ing a radiological event, hazardous chemical release, or a smoke challenge. The CRH program shall ensure that adequate radiation protection is provided to permit ac- cess and occupancy of the CRE under design basis acci- dent (DBA) conditions without personnel receiving ra- diation exposures in excess of 50 mSv (5 rem) whole body or its equivalent to any part of the body for the duration of the accident.
A slight positive pressure is maintained in CRE to prevent inleakage through doors, pipes, and penetra- tions.
Hanbit unit 5 CRE test was performed utilizing the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) standard E741 [2] to confirm the unfiltered inleakage into the control room. A constant flow of tracer gas is injected into the CRE until the resulting concentration in the envelope reaches a steady state. This occurs when the amount of tracer gas entering the CRE is the same as the amount leaving the CRE. By injecting the tracer gas in the airflow used for pressurization of the envelope, an estimate of the filtered and unfiltered airflows which pro- vides this pressurization can be made by measuring the concentration of tracer gas in the airflow from the out- side, while at the same time measuring the steady-state concentration in the CRE.
During performance of the inleakage tests, the  CRE was administratively controlled to minimize casual ingress or egress. Measuring and testing equipment were calibrated in accordance with the test procedure.
This paper provides the CRE inleakage test and the CRE inleakage effect analysis for Hanbit unit 5.
Figure 1. CRE and sample locations at elevation 50.3 m (165 ft) in auxiliary building.
2.Control room habitability
The CRH systems are provided to allow control room operators to remain in the control room and take actions to operate the plant safely under normal con- ditions, and maintain it in a safe condition under ab- normal conditions, including a loss of coolant accident (LOCA). The CRH systems protect control room op- erators from gas releases and smoke from a fire outside the control room. Materials and facilities are provided to permit operators to remain in the CRE for an extended period.
2.1.CRE boundary
The CRE is located at elevations 43.9 m (144 ft) and
50.3 m (165ft) in auxiliary building.
The CRE consists of the control rooms, electrical equipment room, computer rooms, offices, toilet facili- ties, corridors, kitchen, and control room HVAC equip- ment room, in other words, the entire zone serviced by control room HVAC system.
The CRE in an emergency can be isolated from other plant areas and the environment external to the CRE.
Figures 1 and 2 show the CRE boundary and sample locations at elevations 43.9 m (144 ft) and 50.3 m (165 ft) in auxiliary building.
2.2.Control room HVAC system
The CRE is serviced by the control room HVAC sys- tem, which maintains CRE habitability for normal and abnormal conditions.
Figure 2. CRE and sample locations at elevation 43.9 m  (144 ft) in auxiliary building.
The control room HVAC system consists of two redundant divisions. Each division has an outside air intake, dampers, an air cooling unit (ACU), two air han- dling units (AHUs), ductwork, and instrumentation and controls. Each outside air intake is provided with radia- tion monitors and a smoke detector. Figure 3 shows the schematic diagram of control room HVAC system of the emergency pressurization mode for Hanbit unit 5.
The control room HVAC system is normally in op- eration providing cooled and filtered air to the control room. Under operating conditions, an air intake pro- vides a 33% fresh air makeup (6796 m3/hr) to the control room.
Following an LOCA, the normal air intake is auto- matically closed, and the control room HVAC system will begin an emergency recirculation mode of opera- tion. A filtration unit consisting of fans, a pre-filter, an absolute filter, and a charcoal adsorber purifies the out- side air from an air intake. The outside air intakes are monitored for the presence of radioactivity and smoke. Isolation of the outside air intake occurs automatically upon indication of radioactivity or smoke in the out- side air intake. Redundant radiation monitors control the control room HVAC system operation. If a high ra- diation condition exists, the monitor initiates the clo- sure of the normal outside air intake and the starting   of the control room post-accident recirculation system fans. In this way, the control room HVAC system keeps the control room habitable. The control room HVAC system is safety related and the active components are designed with redundancy to meet single active failure criteria.
3.CRE inleakage test
3.1.Test configurations
There are two operating modes of pressurization and isolation for CRE ventilation test. The system lineup of pressurization mode as shown in Figure 3 is based upon a lineup that encompasses the design basis radiological analyses following a loss of coolant accident. The oper- ators can place the control room HVAC system in the isolation mode in the event of toxic gas intrusion, and the control room HVAC system is placed in the full re- circulation mode for the purpose of toxic gas protection.
The pressurization test was performed to confirm that the CRE could be treated as a single zone.
The inleakage test is comprehensive if it quantifies all of the inleakage associated with the CRE for all system modes of operation.
3.2.Test methods
In most cases,  sulfur hexafluoride (SF6) is used.    It is an inert, non-toxic gas that can be measured in minute quantities. A high-pressure gas cylinder contain- ing a diluted mixture of SF6 in nitrogen is used as the
Figure 3. Schematic diagram of control room HVAC system.
injection gas source. Samples were taken using either manual aspiration methods (e.g. disposal syringes) or mechanically assisted methods (e.g. diaphragm pumps to draw remote samples into syringes for subsequent analysis).
Six test procedures of Hanbit 5-101 through 106 [3] were developed to perform the CRE inleakage tests for Hanbit unit 5.
The inleakage testing was performed in accor- dance with LAT/KFTL Procedure Hanbit 5-101: to-   tal air inflow measurement procedure for pressuriza- tion CREEVS which is based on the ASTM E741-00 methodology. This procedure covers tracer gas testing used to determine total air inflow of train A and train B into Hanbit unit 5 CRE. By combining this value with the pressurization airflow (makeup airflow), the air in- leakage into a CRE was determined. This procedure uti- lizes LAT/KFTL Procedure Hanbit 5-102 to measure makeup flow rates simultaneously with concentration measurements designed to measure total air inflow into the CRE.
A constant tracer injection test, also known as the concentration buildup/steady-state technique, is per- formed by injecting tracer into a CRE at a constant rate and measuring the tracer concentration within the CRE as a function of time. When the tracer concentration reaches equilibrium, the resulting value can be used to calculate the total airflow from (or into) the CRE.
The tracer concentration initially increases with time but eventually reaches a plateau. According to ASTM Standard E-741, the time to equilibrium is given approx-imately by the quantity 3/A, where A is the air exchange rate in ACU. In this test, an equilibrium time of 4/A is used to obtain the enhanced accuracy. This value implies that approximately 98% of the ultimate equilibrium con- centration is achieved.
At equilibrium, the total air inleakage into the CRE is calculated as follows:
@1
where Qtotal is the total airflow into the CRE (lpm), F is the tracer gas injection rate (lpm), C is the tracer con- centration, and Cequil is the equilibrium tracer gas con- centration in CRE.
The time to equilibrium of Teq   4/A is determined as follows:22
Since Qtotal is initially an unknown quantity, the first approximation to calculate an approximate equilibrium time uses the makeup flow rate. For maximum accu- racy and precision, the makeup flow rate is measured simultaneously with the total air inleakage rate using LAT/KFTL Procedure Hanbit 5-102: flow rate determi- nation using tracer gas. The knowledge of the makeup air supplied to the CRE allows calculation of the unfil- tered air inleakage into the CRE by differencing the total airflow rate Qtotal and the makeup flow rate Qmakeup asfollows:
@3
The tracer gas testing to determine the actual makeup airflow rate through sections of installed duct work that are part of train A and train B into con- trol room HVAC system was performed in accordance with LAT/KFTL Procedure Hanbit 5-102: procedure for tracer gas flow rate measurement, which is based on the ASTM E2029 [4] methodology. This test allows mea- surement of the flow rate of ductwork or other flow com- ponents installed in control room HVAC system using a tracer gas technique. In practice, a known concentration of tracer is introduced upstream of a measurement point in a continuous fashion by means of a flow controlling and measuring device. The concentration of tracer gas downstream of the injection location is measured. For continuous injection, the mean downstream concentra- tion is inversely proportional to the duct flow rate.
The flow rate measured with this procedure is used in conjunction with the total air inflow measured using LAT/KFTL Procedure Hanbit 5-101 to calculate a value of air inleakage.
The inleakage testing was performed in accor- dance with LAT/KFTL Procedure Hanbit  5-103:  to- tal air inflow measurement procedure for  recircula- tion CREEVS, which is based on the ASTM E741-00 methodology. This procedure covers tracer gas testing that is used to determine air inleakage of train A and train B into Hanbit unit 5 CRE that does not possess a source of makeup air. This procedure is used for CRE that isolate and recirculate during an emergency event. A tracer concentration decay test is performed by mix- ing a quantity of tracer gas into a CRE and measuring tracer concentration decay as a function of time. Tracer concentration decay is proportional to air inleakage.
LAT/KFTL Procedure Hanbit 5-104: information for main control room (MCR) inleakage test at Hanbit 5 nuclear power station is used to describe information on sampling time, mixing fan location, and concentra- tion for performing LAT/KFTL Procedure Hanbit 5- 101, Hanbit 5-101, and Hanbit 5-103. Mixing fans were used in the CRE during the test to assist in providing adequate mixing.
The actual differential pressures between the MCR and surrounding areas during an inleakage test were measured in accordance with LAT/KFTL Procedure Hanbit 5-105: differential pressure measurement for
tions at elevation 55.47 m (182 ft), 6 locations at eleva- tion 50.29 m (165 ft), 7 locations at elevation 43.89 m
(144 ft), and 11 locations at elevation 38.1 m (125 ft) are determined based on requirements for the test and document.
Initially, both barometers were placed next to each other in the control room and the units were ‘zeroed.’ One unit (the mobile unit) was then moved to various locations and the pressure values were noted at timed in- tervals. The indicated pressure values of the unit which remained in the control room (the stationary unit) were also recorded at the same timed intervals. Both the mo- bile and stationary units were placed on the floor of the CRE prior to taking a measurement reading. The mo- bile unit was then returned to the main control room and both readings were again recorded. This allowed a cor- rection to be made for differences between the responses of the two units. Differential pressure calculations in- cluded corrections for differences in instruments and elevations.
AUTOTRAC has the ability to self-calibrate and give the maximum confidence in the concentration val- ues outputted by the monitor. Model 101 AUTOTRAC tracer gas analyzer calibration was performed in ac- cordance with LAT/KFTL Procedure Hanbit 5-106: AUTOTRAC self-calibration procedure.
3.3.Test results
The inleakage tracer gas test provides the total in- leakage, which includes filtered inleakage and unfiltered inleakage. The unfiltered inleakage for train A and train B based on the test results are 3171 5805 and 0 lpm, re- spectively. The unfiltered inleakage rate of 0 lpm means the test data to be statistically indistinguishable from a zero value. As per Regulatory Guide 1.197 [5], Section 1.4, inleakage rates below 2832 lpm do not require an uncertainty value to be added. Table 1 shows the results of the inleakage test.
3.4.Uncertainty analysis
If concentration equilibrium occurs, Q is propor- tional to 1/C, where C is the concentration of the tracer
Table 1. Inleakage test results.
gas as follows:@4
By measuring the concentrations of the tracer gas, it is possible to calculate the total air inleakage into the CRE. However, the test results usually have some un- certainties such as bias and test itself. The total uncer- tainty of each CRE air inleakage measurement is calcu- lated using methods provided in ANSI/ASME Standard PTC19.1-1985 [6].
If it is assumed that the measured data are normally distributed about their mean values, then it is possible
to use a statistical test to determine whether the means
The RADTRAD [7] code was used to estimate the containment release using TID-14844. In addition, a reduction in the quantity of radioactive material due   to containment sprays, natural deposition, and other natural and engineered safety features were considered. RADTRAD computer code was developed for the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) to estimate transport and removal of radionuclide and dose at se- lected receptors, and used for numerous design basis dose analyses. Figure 4 shows the RADTRAD nodal- ization for radiation dose analysis of the CRE of Hanbit unit 5.
Radiation effect analysis for the control room of Hanbit unit 5 using RADTRAD computer program showed that the calculated maximum permissible unfil-
of Ctotal
and C
makeup
are indistinguishable. This test is
tered inleakage corresponding to the dose criterion of
500 mSv (50 rem) thyroid was evaluated to be 6145 lpm.
called the t-test for comparing mean values. It is a well- known statistical test. To determine whether the mean values are indistinguishable, a statistic value of tcalc is cal- culated and compared to the student t-value of tstatistical. By assuming a magnitude for the significance level of 95% and calculating the degree of freedom, tstatistical is calculated by using a lookup table or by using TINV function in the Microsoft Excel program. If tcalc is less than tstatistical, the null hypothesis is acceptable. Mea- surement uncertainty is calculated using square root of square sum of bias uncertainty and random uncertainty multiplied by student t. Uncertainty analysis results for train A pressurization test mode are shown in Table 2.
4.CRE Inleakage effect analysis
4.1.Radiation dose analysis
Final safety analysis report (FSAR) of Hanbit units 5 and 6 shows that unfiltered inleakage rate of 1274 lpm was used for the design basis dose analysis, and the radi- ation dose for the whole body and thyroid, correspond- ing to 20.7 and 165 mSV, respectively, satisfied the ac- ceptance criteria of 50 mSv whole body and 500 mSv thyroid.
The control room dose analysis for the design basis case is based on the assumption that 91% of the iodine is elementary gas and 5% of the iodine is particulate, and 4% of the iodine is organic.
In the pressurization test mode, the measured un- filtered inleakage for train A and train B were 3171 5805 and 0 lpm, respectively. The most limiting unfil- tered inleakage into the CRE for train B pressurization test mode is bounded by the value assumed in the DBA radiological analyses for CRH.
However, in the train B pressurization test mode, the measured unfiltered inleakage was 3171 5805 lpm, and the measured unfiltered inleakage for train A exceeded the acceptance criteria of 6145 lpm. In addition, a higher thyroid dose due to the measured unfiltered inleakage of 8976 lpm is expected to be 700 mSv (70 rem) and ex- ceeded the dose limit of 500 mSv (50 rem) thyroid.  It  is noted that the whole-body doses for the train A and train B satisfied the dose limit of 50 mSV.
4.2.Toxic gas analysis
Releases of hazardous chemicals can result in the control room becoming uninhabitable. Toxic gas anal- ysis was performed to assess the habitability of the con- trol room during and after a postulated release of rep- resentative hazardous chemical of ammonia. Under the circumstances that control room operators could be ex- posed to high levels of ammonia gases, exposure of con- trol room operators should be less than IDLH level of 300 ppm that would prevent them from safely operat- ing the plant. The odor threshold of ammonia is about
Table 2. Uncertainty analysis results for train A pressurization test mode.
Figure 4. RADTRAD nodalization for radiation dose analysis of the CRE.
17 ppm, and minor irritation of the nose and throat will occur at 30–50 ppm.Rupture is conservatively assumed in an ammonium hydroxide storage tank of 20 m3. Ammonium hydrox-de is released from a tank that flashes to form a vapor cloud. The rupture of the tank would cause the ammo-nium hydroxide to spill into the containment area and the release of ammonia will result from the evaporation of ammonium hydroxide. Molecular weight and satu- rated vapor pressure of ammonium hydroxide are 35.04gm/mole and 1550.8 mbar, respectively.
The evaporation rate of ammonium hydroxide is cal- culated by using appropriate mass transfer relationships as follows:@5
where hd is the mass transfer coefficient (cm/sec), where 0.664 D Re 1 Sc 1 is for a laminar flow and 0.037 D Re0.8Sc 1 is for a turbulent flow; M is the molecular weight of the liquid (g/mole); A(t) is the surface area for  spilled  liquid;
Ps is the saturation vapor pressure of the liquid at am- bient temperature (◦C) (mm Hg); Pa is the actual vapor pressure of the liquid in air (mm Hg); Rg is the univer- sal gas constant; D is the diffusion coefficient (cm2/sec);
Re is the Reynolds number . ρ Lu Σ; Sc is the Schmidt num-@L is the characteristic length (cm); u is the wind speed (cm/sec); ρ is the density of air (g/cm3); and μ is the viscosity of air (g/cm sec).trol room is calculated using atmospheric dispersionmodel as follows:
χ (x, y, z)
Qj
@6
where Q is the continuous source strength (g/sec), u is
the wind speed (m/sec), σy, σz is the standard deviations of the plume concentration in the Y- and Z-directions, respectively, and h is the height of the source above ground level (m):
@7
where Cr .tj Σ is th.e CΣ RE concentration at the j th × time
tep (ppm) !is the air intake concentration at the j th × time step (ppm) , W is the ventilation/infiltration
rate (lpm/ (60 sec/min)) , Ot is the time step (s) , and V is the CRE volume (liter) .
The TGA computer code [9], which was developed by incorporating the above methodology, was used to perform the toxic gas analysis. Numerous conservative assumptions such as worst case release of a storage tank rupture and worst case stability class were used in the above toxic gas analysis. The constant continuous evaporation rate is conservatively estimated to be about
1.1 kg/sec. The maximum concentration of ammonia ar- riving at the control room HVAC intake is considered to be 2.317 g/m3 (3309 ppm), and the time to arrive at the odor threshold of 17 ppm and the toxicity limit of 300 ppm is 30 sec and nine minutes, respectively. Pro- tective emergency will be given to allow control room operators to function during a two-minute period while fresh-air mask and protective clothing are put on.
5.Conclusion
The Assessment of Control Room Habitability and Establishment of Control Room Habitability Program for Hanbit unit 5 was performed based on GL 2003-1 and Regulatory Guide 1.197. The integrated CRE test was performed utilizing ASTM E741: Standard Test Method for Determining Air Change in a Single Zone by Means of a Tracer  Gas Dilution. Extensive seal- ing efforts before CRE test were implemented to drop the unfiltered inleakage into CRE. Four tests were per- formed using each of the control room HVAC subtrains to perform pressurization and isolation mode. The sys- tem lineup of pressurization mode test was based upon a lineup that encompassed the design basis radiological analyses. The other system lineup of isolation mode test was based on an operation mode that considers toxic gas.
Toxic gas analysis showed that maximum concentra- tion of ammonia at the control room HVAC intake is considered to be 2.317 g/m3 (3309 ppm), and the time to arrive at the toxicity limit of 300 ppm is nine minutes. Protective emergency will be given to allow operators to function during a two-minute period while fresh-air mask and protective clothing are put on.
Radiation effect analysis showed that the calculated maximum allowable unfiltered inleakage corresponding to the dose criterion of 500 mSv (50 rem) for the thyroid was evaluated to be 6145 lpm. However, in the pressur- ization test mode, the measured unfiltered inleakage for train A and train B were 3171 5805 and 0 lpm, respec- tively, and 95% uncertainty value for train A exceeded the acceptance criteria.
The exceeded unfiltered inleakage for train A CRE boundary is considered to be due to train A HVAC sys- tem with the evidence that CRE inleakage test result for
train B showed the perfect leak tightness. Further inves- tigation to the train A HVAC system will be made to identify the unfiltered inleakage and next CRE test will be successful through minor sealing efforts to the train A HVAC system.
Funding
This research has been accomplished by funding from the Ko- rea Hydro & Nuclear Power Company.
