<title>Testing the Key Performance of Mobile Flood Protection System</title>
<author>Shoukai Chen,1 Huimin Li   ,1 Lei Guo,2,3 Lunyan Wang,4 and Yongchao Cao1</author>
<Affiliation>1School of  Water Conservancy, North China  University of  Water Resources and Electric Power, Zhengzhou 450045, China    2Academician Workstation of Water Environment Governance and Ecological Restoration, Zhengzhou, Henan 450002, China 3Henan Key Laboratory of  Water Environment Simulation and Treatment, Zhengzhou 450045, China
4 Collaborative Innovation Center of  Water Resources Eﬃcient Utilization and Protection Engineering, Zhengzhou,
Henan 450045, China</Affiliation>
<year>2018</year>
<Jounral> Science and Technology of Nuclear Installation</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Hindawi</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1155/2018/5641385</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/5641385</URL>
Mobile ﬂood protection systems provide a standardized ﬂood protection method with high reliability. A comprehensive test site for mobile ﬂood wall was established with the support of real applications, which provided opportunities to perform various tests. *e anchor plate installation, seepage characteristics, and stress behavior of mobile ﬂood protection systems were investigated through a process test, a water impounding test, and a post loading/unloading test. Test results indicated that installing anchor plates either by direct ﬁxing or by preopened slots and eyes satisfy the construction and normal work requirements. However, the former is preferable over the latter. *e mobile ﬂood protection wall leaks when ﬁlled with water, and the leakage changes exponentially with the level. *e leakage accelerates when the water level exceeds 1.5 m, thus registering 300 L/h at the 1.7 m level. In the post loading test (0–100 kN), concrete plastic deformation was ﬁrst observed. *en, residual displacement was developed in the posts. *e stressing process indicated that the failure process in the post, anchor plate, and base concrete system propagates from the concrete on both sides of the anchor plates toward the water side.
1. Introduction
Today, there are more than 400 cities worldwide with one million or more population [1]. More than half of the world’s population lives in  cities which provide job opportunities and quality life. Historically, major cities are located along rivers  and  coastal  areas.  *is  makes them  and their pop-
ulations vulnerable to natural disasters  such  as ﬂood.  Fur-
thermore,  natural  disasters  and  weather-related  disasters have been occurring at an increased frequency during the last decade  [2].
*is upward trend in losses has been mainly attributed to socioeconomic  developments,  such  as  economic  and  pop- ulation growth in disaster-prone areas, which have increased the exposure of properties that can be damaged by natural hazards over time  [3, 4]. Moreover, future natural disaster losses are expected to increase in many regions around the world [5, 6]. *e high-level urban ﬂood control system is the basic guarantee  for  the   sustainable  development   of  modern
cities,   and  the  beautiful  water  environment   and  river landscape are the important symbols of modern cities. *e need  of  protection  is  increasing  with  rising  population density and concentration of valuables in low-lying coastal and river areas in the last decades [7]. Nevertheless, a fact frequently overlooked is that small local events cause ap- proximately 50% of total ﬂood damage  [8]. For example, the ﬂooding caused by the hurricane can be assumed as the ﬂooding with the highest economical losses for more than $81 billions at the US coast  [9]. Tropical Storm Irene and spring  ﬂooding  in  2011  exposed  the  vulnerabilities  of mobile home parks in Vermont when 154 mobile homes in parks were destroyed  [10].
Beneath dykes and ﬂoodwalls, mobile constructions are a solution for ﬂood protection especially in densely popu- lated  areas  where  no  space  for  permanent  structures  is available.  In  addition, permanent  structures  may obstruct heavily the view onto the water body. In these cases, mobile ﬂood  protection  measures  may  be  a  solution  to  ﬁt  both requirements: protection in case of ﬂooding and open access to  the  ﬂoodplain  over  the  remaining  time.  Furthermore, mobile protective systems can be used as an emergency tool against  ﬂooding  in  unprotected  low-lying  areas  and  for heightening  of permanent  ﬂood  protection  structures  in extreme events  [11].
Greening ﬂood protection (GFP) is increasingly recog- nized as an adaptive and ﬂexible approach to water man- agement that is well suited to addressing uncertain futures associated  with  climate  change.  In  the  last  decade,  GFP knowledge   and   policies   have   developed   rapidly,   but implementation has been less successful and has run into numerous barriers  [12].
*erefore, the demand for technical protection measures is growing. It means that the construction of ﬂood control projects  should  not  only meet the  requirements  of urban construction, but also meet the requirements of water and shore two-way landscape viewing and residents’ and tourists’ visiting  [13].  Recently,  more  and  more  mobile  protection schemes   are   on  the  market  promising  to  ﬁt  both  re- quirements: protection in case of ﬂooding and open access to the ﬂoodplain in the remaining time. With the severe sit- uation of urban ﬂood protection in China [14], mobile ﬂood protection systems can satisfy the diﬀerent quality of life and safety  requirements  for  the  urban  residents.  *e  mobile ﬂood  protection  method  has  been  successfully  applied  in many American and European countries [15]. For example, in   1984,  Cologne  City,  ﬁrst  installed  the  mobile  ﬂood protection  baﬄe  to  protect  against  river  ﬂood.  In  2005, Czech  built  a  17.2 km  long  and  6.0 m  high  mobile  ﬂood protection system, which is one of the largest urban ﬂood protection systems in the world. After the ﬂood protection exercise,  310  ﬁre  protection volunteers  completed  the  in- stallation  of the  entire  system  in  11 hours.  Grein  City in Austria also introduced ﬂood protection equipment which successfully resisted the maximum rainfall record in the area in  June,  2013.  In  recent  years,  mobile  ﬂood  protection systems  have  been  implemented  by  important  ﬂood  pro- tection cities in Heilongjiang province and Zhejiang prov- ince in China. However, these ﬂood protection systems have not met the ﬂood.
Mobile ﬂoodwalls can be installed at river dams, large- size port piers, railway tunnel portals, culvert openings of expressways,  openings  of civil  air  defense  structures,  and urban  large-scale  communities  to  prevent  ﬂood  disasters. Compared  with  the  traditional  ﬂood  protection  method, mobile ﬂoodwalls have the advantages of low-labor intensity, high-work  eﬃciency,  and  small  seepage  over  traditional ﬂood protection methods  [15]. Mobile ﬂoodwalls improve the standard of urban ﬂood protection and can eﬀectively prevent ﬂood disasters under the requirement of preserving the urban landscape  [16]. Mobile ﬂoodwalls usually com- prise  posts  (including  center  post  and  end  posts),  dam beams, ground seal, bolts, pressing tool, and anchor plate [17–19]. For mobile ﬂoodwalls, reinforced concrete plinths embedded with anchor plates are constructed in advance at the site of ﬂoodwalls. *e posts should be installed on the anchor plates before ﬂooding occurs, and the dam beams and ground seal should be installed among the posts to form
Advances in Civil Engineering
a  closed  wall  to  prevent  ﬂooding.  When  ﬂooding  occurs, water enters the vacuum dam beams through the  contact parts of the dam beams and the vertical posts. *en, the self- weight  and stability of ﬂoodwalls are improved. After the ﬂood  recedes,  all  components  are  reversely  removed  and orderly stored in a warehouse.
During a ﬂood, several causes of failure may occur re- lated to the ﬂood protection  system.  Failure types  can be distinguished into ﬁve general situations: (1) sliding/rolling, (2) seepage, (3) leakage, (4) tilting, and (5) collapse. Every ﬂood   protection   system   has   the   possibility   of  failure. *erefore, it is important to design the system in a way that minimizes the possibility to meet one or several failure types. Wind, ﬂoating elements, bad design, vandalism, and human failure  are  all  factors  that  may  cause  failure  of the  ﬂood protection  system  [16].  Obviously,  it  is  important  to  try avoiding  the  mentioned  failure  types.  During  the  design phase  of a  ﬂood  protection  system,  the  engineers  should consider the risk of failure and put it up against properties that the system should hold. For instance, large and heavy systems provide  stability and robustness, but  on the  con- trary, they will be more diﬃcult and expensive to produce, store, and transport. *erefore, it is important to consider which strengths the ﬂood protection system should get and which to neglect  [20].
Two problems should be considered for such a combined ﬂood  protection  system.  *e  ﬁrst  one  is  the  installation precision of anchor plates as the key control components for the assembly and force transmission of ﬂoodwalls in which the  anchor  plates  are  embedded  in  reinforced  concrete plinths  for  connecting  ﬁxed  columns.  Ensuring  the  in- stallation   precision   of  anchor   plates   without   deviation during  concrete  pouring  is  crucial  because  the  control precision of concrete pouring is in millimeter accuracy, and the  installation precision  of anchor plates  should be  con- trolled in centimeter accuracy. *e second problem is the seepage  and  safety  of ﬂood  protection  systems,  which  is the primary concern of practical and research [7]. However, the seepage and safety of ﬂood protection systems have not been studied in the literature. Considering the two problems, this  study used the  mobile  ﬂood wall  from  IBS  company through  the  construction  of  experimental  bases  and  in- vestigated the installation technology of anchor plates, the leakage characteristics of mobile ﬂood protection systems, and the stress conditions of posts and anchor plate bases to provide  a  reference for the  application  and promotion  of
mobile ﬂoodwalls in China.
2. Test Scheme of Mobile Floodwalls
2.1. Product Characteristics.  *e mobile ﬂood wall used in this study is obtained from IBS Company, Germany, and has been  applied  in  Germany,  Austria,  UK,  and  China.  *e installation eﬀect is shown in Figure 1. *e posts (including center posts and end posts) and dam beams of the system are made   of   aluminum   alloy   (with   a   tensile   strength   of 200 N/mm2 and yield strength of 165 N/mm2). *e pressure tools  and  anchor  plates  are  made  of stainless  steel  (with a  tensile  strength  of  500 N/mm2    and  yield  strength  of
Figure 1: Mobile ﬂood wall.
Table 1: Main structure parts and materials of mobile ﬂoodwalls.
190 N/mm2). *e type and materials of their components are shown in Table 1, and the main structure parts are shown in Figure 2. In this research, the single span and the height of maximum water level for the system are 3.0 m and  1.8 m, respectively.
2.2.  Test  Design.  Figure  3   shows  the  layout   of  mobile ﬂoodwalls at the test site. *e test site is divided into three areas: water storage, post damage destructive, and standby areas. *e test  site is  10.4 m long and  10.0 m wide. *ree spans, two end posts, two center posts with an anchor plate, and three-span dam beams (27 dam beams) were designed for the ﬂoodwalls in the prototype test area. *e destructive test area comprises a center post and its anchor plates.
*e  base  plate  in  the  test  site  was  30 cm  thick,  and a layer of V18 reinforcing mesh with a spacing of 20 cm was installed  inside.  *e  reservoir  wall  was  a  standard  rein- forced concrete U-shaped shear wall, which was 250 mm thick and 2.4 m high. *e base of the anchor plates for the center  posts  was  10.4 m  (length) × 1.2 m  (width) × 1.0 m (height), and the reinforced concrete posts of the anchor plates   for   the   end   posts   were   0.8 m   (length) × 0.8 m (width) × 1.8 m (height). When water is impounded to the designed height of 1.8 m, the volume of the impounding reservoir is 55.341 m3 .
3
Dam beam
Center post
Anchor plate
Figure 2: Structure of main parts.
*e test site was built using C25 reinforced concrete and completed in two layers. *e ﬁrst layer comprised the base plate and the base of the anchor plates, and the second layer comprised the reservoir walls.
2.3. Test Procedures and Method.  After the test site is con-
ducted according to the design, the following are performed:
(1) *e installation methods for the test of anchor plates: two  methods  are  adopted  for  the  installation  of anchor plates. *e ﬁrst one is the direct installation method; that is, the anchor plates are installed and ﬁxed. *en, concrete is poured after the steel bars are assembled.  *e  second  one  is  the  reserved  slot method; that is, the anchor plates are installed, and slots  are  reserved  on  the  base  after  the  poured concrete reaches a certain age.
(2) After  the  anchor  plates  are  installed,  the  steel bar meters and the strain meters are arranged as shown in Figure 4. R1–R5 are steel bar meter number, and S1–S3  are  strain  gauge  number.  *e  steel bar  and strain meters are obtained from Geokon Instruments
Co., Ltd. Full-automatic wireless collection devices are used for real-time collection, and they recorded data once every 3 mins.
(3) Concrete is poured and cured for 28 d. Subsequently, reaction frames, the waterproof impounding reser- voir, water inlet and outlet pipelines, and the ceiling are installed and erected. *en, the construction of
Figure 4: Layout of reinforcing steel bars, steel bar meters, and strain meters. R1–R5 are steel bar meter number, and S1–S3 are strain gauge number. *e same as in Figure 4(b). 3Φ12 @ 150 refers to three steel bars with diameter 12 mm and spacing 150 mm, the same as in Figure 4(a).
the test site is completed such that the ceiling can prevent the inﬂuence of sunlight or rainfall during the leakage test.
(4) Water storage and post loading tests are performed.
3. Installation Technology of Anchor Plates
3.1. Installation Precision of Anchor Plates.  *e precision of anchor plates’  installation  depends  on the  designed water level.  Considering  the  water  retaining  height  of  1.8 m  as an  example,  the  tolerances  of all  directions  are  shown  in Figure 5. *e control tolerances in the axis direction of the anchor  plates  are  ±5 mm  and  ±10 mm  in  the vertical  di- rection,  ≤3°  of the  horizontal  angle,  0.15%  of the vertical angle, ±3 mm of the interval errors for the contiguous an- chor  plates,  and  ±5 mm  interval  errors  for  the  interval anchor plates, perspective.
3.2.   Installation   Technology   of   Anchor  Plates.  Two   in- stallation methods, namely, the direct installation method and  reserved  slot method,  are  used for  anchor plate’s  in- stallation  for this  test.  For the  direct  installation  method,
U-shaped steel bars are arranged ﬁrstly at the installation position (Figure 6), and the anchor plates and U-shaped steel bars are welded. *e foundation steel bars are assembled, and  concrete  is  poured  all  at  once.  *e  advantage  of the direct  installation  method  is  the  integrity  of the  anchor plates,  steel  bars,  and  base  concrete.  However,  the  in- stallation precision of anchor plates cannot be easily con- trolled   because   the   anchor   plates   easily   deviate   when concrete is poured. And their surrounding concrete cannot be easily vibrated and compacted.
For the reserved slot method, concrete should be poured one time at the lifting elevation of the foundation and slots should be reserved in the concrete foundation according to Figure 6: Direct installation method. (a) Anchor plate ﬁxation. (b) Reinforced bar assembly.
the requirement  and water level  of the ﬂood period  during construction. *e steel bars around the anchor plates cannot be arranged in advance. However, U-shaped steel bars are welded with the  anchor plates completely in  advance  (Figure 7(a)). *en, the  second-stage  concrete  is  poured  after  the  anchor plates are ﬁxed by an adjusting device  (Figure 7(b)). In the reserved  slot  method, the base  concrete  can be  constructed ﬁrstly, and thus, the installation is convenient and precision can be easily controlled. However, the periphery of slots is pro- cessed as construction joints, and leakage channels can be easily formed at the joints.
*e  two  methods  have  been  applied  on-site  for  this research.
4. Analysis of Test Results
4.1. Water Storage Test.  After civil engineering is completed, the mobile ﬂoodwalls are installed for the water storage test, as shown in Figure 8. *e measured values of steel bar meters
of the two installation methods are shown in Table 2. *e strain gauge measured values of two installing methods are shown  in  Table  3.  *e  layout  of the  steel  bar  and  strain meters of the base is shown in Figure 4.
*e stresses on all parts are changed after water storage with water pressure, water weight, and deadweight of the ﬂood protection system. *e stress condition of the direct installation method is as follows: maximum tensile stress appears  at  R1  and  R4 positions where  a tensile  stress  of 0.9 MPa was recorded; moreover, R3 and R5 positions are compressed,  reaching  a  compression  stress  of  5.8 MPa. Compared with the direct installation method, the stress characteristics of R1, R3, and R4 positions are consistent. At the same time, the stress features of concrete under the two  installation  methods  are  consistent,  but  the  strain generated by the latter is higher; for instance, S2 generates tension  strains  5.45 με  (direct  installation  method)  and 1.39 με (reserved slot method). *e analysis indicates that the integrity of anchor plates installed via the reserved slot
Figure 7: Reserved slot installation method. (a) Reinforced bar arrangement. (b) Adjusting device and anchor plate ﬁxation.
Figure 8: Water storage testing of mobile ﬂood wall storage. (a) Overall view. (b) Pool (not storage). (c) Pool (stored water at  1.8 m).
Table 2: Measured values of steel bar meters of the two installation methods (unit: MPa).
method is low, which just like anchor plates and slot concrete form a member that is embedded into the base. *en, the stress state of the reserved slot method is clearly diﬀerent from the direct installation method. So, the direct installation method is apparently  safer  than  the  reserved  slot  method.  *e  actual stress values of impounding of the two installation methods
are  lower  than  the  allowable  values  of reinforced  concrete
plinths.
4.2. Leakage Test.  *e seepage test was performed when the level of stored water reached 1.78 m. After 3 h, the water level
Table 3: Strain gauge measured values of two installing methods (unit: με).
decreased to 1.75 m. Given 1.75 m as time 0, the observation frequency   was   measured   every   6–2 h,   until   150 h   was reached.  *en,  the  water  level  was  1.37 m  at  300 h.  *e observation times and corresponding observation levels are shown in Tables 2 and 3. *e variation in the actual mea- sured level with time did not exhibit a linear correlation. *e
following  regression  formula  was  obtained  by  origin  re- gression analysis:@1
where H is the water level (m) and t is the time (h), when t  0 and H  1.75 m.
Fitting  testing  was  conducted  via  (1).  *e  correlation coeﬃcient was 0.995, and the ﬁtting eﬀect was good. For- ward and backward predictions were performed to verify the accuracy  of the  relation  formula.  *e  calculation  results indicated that the H value was 1.784 m (the actual measured value was  1.78 m) when the time was moved back by 3 h (t  −3 h in the calculation), and the calculation value was
1.369 m  (the actual measured value was  1.37 m) when the time was moved forward to 300 h. *us, the consistency of the result was good. *e decrease of water level is caused by the leakage in the mobile ﬂoodwalls, and the critical water level is  1.327 m.
*e seepage rule for mobile ﬂoodwalls has not been from the  literature.  Generally,  seepage  only  occurs  at  contact positions, which are the positions between dam beams and posts, the positions between the bottom dam beams and the foundation, and the positions among dam beams. Consid- ering the current test condition, the leakage amount of all parts  cannot be  obtained through the  test.  Under the  re- quirement of ignoring the inﬂuence of water evaporation at the reservoir surface, the leakage amount of mobile ﬂood- walls is calculated according to the following formula:@2
where q is the leakage amount (L/h) and A is the reservoir area (m2). For the test conducted, A  30.745 m2 and v is the seepage velocity (m/h), v  dH/dt.
After  the  derivation  of  (1),  the  seepage  velocity  is obtained.   *e   variation   rule   for   the   average   leakage amount  at  diﬀerent  water  levels  is  obtained  after  sub- stitution  in  (2).  *en,  the  average  leakage  amounts  are compared  with  the   average  leakage  amount   after  the conversion of the actual measured water level (Figure 10). Figures 9 and 10 show that the range of water level var- iation becomes  fast  and the  seepage  rate becomes large,
Figure 9: Variation rule of water level with time.
Figure 10: Leakage variation rule with the change of water level.which is more than 50 L/h, when the water level exceeds 1.7 m, and the seepage rate can exceed 300 L/h when the water level exceeds 1.5 m. Seepage quantity is an important aspect  to  consider  when  ﬂoodwalls  increase  the  ﬂood protection height.
4.3. Post Loading Test.  Section 4.2 indicates that under the normal hydrostatic pressure, the base of the mobile ﬂood wall  is  slightly  stressed  and  generally  cannot  damage  the concrete. However, the hydrodynamic action or the impact of foreign objects should be considered during the process of ﬂood resistance. At this time, the post, anchor plate, and base system ensure the safety of ﬂood protection.
Figure 11: Post loading test.
*e   post   loading   test   site,   layout   of   its   loading devices, displacement meters, and strain plates are shown in Figures 11 and 12. And the layout of the base steel bar and strain meters is shown in Figure 4. In Figure 12, strain meters C1  and  C2  are  arranged  at the  side  of the posts, which is 1.02 m  away  from  the  base  surface,  to  observe  the  self- deformation  of  the  posts.  Displacement  meters  A1,  A2, and A3 are arranged at the downstream surface of the posts, which are 0.25, 1.02, and 1.57 m away from the base surface, respectively, to measure the overall displacement of the posts. *e steel bar and strain meters are arranged in the same way as that  in  Section 4.1.  *e test  adopted  the hydraulic jack continuous loading mode, the set load limit was 100 kN, and all measurement equipment was measured once at 0, 25, 50, 75, and 97 kN. *e loading and unloading process lines of all monitoring devices are shown in Figures 13–16.
*e oblique strains (C1 and C2) of the post show a linear variation  with  the  load  during  the  loading  process.  *e loading and unloading curves are basically consistent, and the  directions  and values  of C1  and  C2  are  opposite  and similar,  respectively.  Under  loading  of 50  and  97 kN,  the strain   values   are   approximately   500   and   1000 με,   re- spectively, which indicate that the posts are consistently in the  elastic  phase  during  the  loading  process.  *e  overall radial displacement of the posts shows that one of the upper parts is higher than that of the lower part, and the maximum value appears at the upper parts of the posts. For instance, the displacement meter A3 is 9.8 mm when the load is 50 kN, and displacement meter A3 is 17.1 mm when it is 97 kN. *e radial displacement of the posts shows a nonlinear variation with the load variation,  and the  actual measured  residual displacements of A1, A2, and A3 are 0.17, 0.36, and 0.50 mm, respectively,  after  unloading.  *e  values  are  in  linear  re- lationship with the heights where the displacement meters are located (as showing in Figure 17); that is, the posts are also at the elastic stage. *us, residual displacement shall be
Advances in Civil Engineering
generated by the reinforced concrete plinth of the anchor plates.
Considering  the  concrete  load-strain  curve,  concrete enters the plastic stage from the elastic stage when the load is approximately 25 kN. For example, S1 and S2 reach 97.34 and −389.47 με when loaded to 7 kN. At this time, S1 is close to the ultimate tensile deformation value of concrete, and the residual  strains  are  6.50  and  −26.39 με,  respectively,  after unloading.  *is  condition  can  also be  observed  from  the
load-stress  curve  of steel bar  meters.  Stress  shows  a linear
variation with the load when the load does not exceed 25 kN, which indicates that the steel bars and concrete are in the elastic stage of coordinative deformation at this time. Stress shows a nonlinear variation with the load when it is loaded continuously,  and  residual  stresses  are  found,  which  are 0.39 MPa (R1), 0.20 MPa (R2), 0.16 MPa (R3), and 0.10 MPa (R4), after unloading. Unfortunately, R5 was broken, so the record cannot be gotten. *e stress of the loaded steel bar is lower than the yield condition because the test uses HRB335 steel bars. *us, the residual stresses displayed by steel bar meters are caused by the plastic deformation of concrete. In addition,    the    strain    rule    of    steel    bar    meters    is R2 > R1 > R4 > R3. For example, when the loading is up to 97 kN, the actual maximum measured stress values of R1 to
R4 are 8.50,  12.50, 2.70, and 3.63 MPa, respectively, which indicates  that  the  side  surface  of the  anchor  plates  is  in maximum stress. *us, crack starts from the two sides of the anchor plates and then develops to the positive side of the water gradually if damage occurs.
5. Conclusions
Mobile ﬂoodwalls can be installed at river dams, large-size port piers,  railway tunnel portals,  culvert  openings  of ex- pressways, openings of civil air defense structures, and urban large-scale communities to prevent ﬂood disasters. Mobile ﬂoodwalls improve the standard of urban ﬂood protection and  can  eﬀectively  prevent  ﬂood  disasters  under  the  re- quirement of preserving the urban landscape. In order to investigate the safety of mobile ﬂood wall, the anchor plate installation, seepage characteristics, and stress behavior of mobile ﬂood protection systems were investigated through a   process   test,   a   water   impounding   test,   and   a   post loading/unloading test. Test results indicated the following:
(1) *e installation precision  of anchor plates  ensures the rapid assembly and normal operation of mobile ﬂood   protection   systems.   Combined   with   engi- neering characteristics, the technologies of the direct installation  and reserved  slot methods  are  studied. *e two methods are assumed capable of satisfying the construction requirements after technical testing. However, the integrity of the former is better than the latter. *e impounding test also proved that the two methods can satisfy the requirements of normal operation. However, the stress condition of the direct installation method is better than that of the reserved slot  method.  So,  direct  installation  method  is  rec- ommended for the actual project.
Figure 12: Layout of displacement meter, strain meter, and loading.
Figure 13: Relationship between post oblique strain and load.
Figure 14: Relationship between displacement and load.
Figure 15: Relationship between concrete strain and load.
Figure 16: Relationship between steel bar stress and load.
Figure 17: Relationship between residual displacement and height of the post.
(2) *e leakage characteristic of the mobile ﬂood pro- tection  system  should  be  considered  during  ﬂood prevention. *e impounding test for the reservoir of three-span mobile ﬂood protection system indicated the actual measured water level and time, and the leakage  amount  and  water  level  are  in  the  index variation relationship. *e leakage amount, which is higher than  50 L/h, will  rapidly increase when the water level  is  higher than  1.5 m.  For  example,  the leakage amount can be 300 L/h when water level is
1.7 m,  which  indicates  that  the  leakage  should  be solved when the water retaining height of the mobile ﬂood protection system increases.
(3) In  the  entire  mobile  ﬂood  protection  system,  the post-anchor plate-reinforced concrete plinth system ensures  the  safety  of  ﬂood  protection.  *e  post loading  and  unloading  tests  (the  limited  load  is
100 kN  at  this  time)  indicate  that  the  plastic  de- formation  of  concrete  around  the  anchor  plates occurs when the load is up to 25 kN. When the load is reaching 97 kN, the concrete would be close to ul- timate tensile deformation. However, the posts and steel bars are all in the elastic stage during the en- tire loading  process.  *e  actual  measured  residual displacements  of posts  and  residual  stress  of steel
bars are caused by the plastic deformation of con- crete after unloading. In addition, the stress analysis of the loading and unloading processes shows that the  damage  of  the  post-anchor  plate-foundation system will start from the concrete around the an- chor plate and gradually develop toward the surface of the  water  surface  until  the  whole  is  destroyed. *erefore,  the  mobile  ﬂood  control  system  engi- neering should pay full attention to the construction quality of concrete around the anchor plate.
Data Availability
data  used  to  support  the  ﬁndings  of this  study  are available from the corresponding author upon request.
Conflicts of Interest
authors declare that they have no conﬂicts of interest.
Acknowledgments
is  research  was  ﬁnancially  supported  by  the  National Natural  Science  Foundation  of China  (nos.  51309101  and 51679092).
