<title>Investigation on radiation shielding parameters of cerrobend alloys</title>
<author>Borhan Tellili a, b, Youssef Elmahroug a, *, Chedly Souga c</author>
<Affiliation>a  Universit´e de Tunis El Manar, Facult´e des Sciences de Tunis, D´epartement de physique, Unit´e de Recherche de Physique Nucl´eaire et des Hautes Energies,
Campus Universitaire El-Manar, 2092 El Manar Tunis, Tunisia
b  Universit´e de Tunis El Manar, Institut Sup´erieur des Technologies M´edicales de Tunis, D´epartement de physique, 9 Rue Zouhair Essaﬁ, 1006 Tunis, Tunisia
c  Universit´e de Carthage, E´cole Polytechnique de Tunisie, B.P. 743, 2078, La Marsa, Tunisia</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>NUCLEAR ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2017.08.020</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2017.08.020</URL>
ABSTRACT
In this study, to determine the most effective alloy for shielding against gamma-rays, the gamma-ray shielding parameters of six types of cerrobend alloys have been investigated. Gamma-ray interaction with the cerrobend alloys has been discussed mainly in terms of total mass attenuation coefﬁcient (mt), half value layer (HVL), tenth value layer (TVL), effective atomic number (Zeff), and effective electron density (Neff). These parameters have been calculated by theoretical approach using the ParShield pro- gram in a photon energy range between 0.1 MeV and 100 GeV. The dependence of these parameters on the incident photon energy and chemical composition of the cerrobend alloys has been studied.
Keywords:
Cerrobend Alloys
Effective Atomic Number and Electron Density
Half Value Layer Tenth Value Layer
Total Mass Attenuation Coefﬁcients
1.Introduction
With the increasing use of gamma-rays and x-rays in medicine, particularly in radiotherapy and medical imaging, various human organs and tissues will be exposed to x-rays and gamma-rays, in particular during radiotherapy treatment; this can cause many dangerous diseases, such as breast and skin cancer. Hence, to minimize the risk of damage to healthy tissue and potentially serious side-effects, it is necessary to restrict and control exposure of human beings to these types of radiation by using shields of proper dimensions and of an appropriate material. The choice of suitable shielding materials requires a thorough understanding of the absorption and interaction of x-rays and gamma-rays with matter. Knowledge of photon interaction parameters is therefore very useful for radiation protection engineers in the design and manufacture of gamma radiation shielding. The total mass atten- uation  coefﬁcient  (mt),  the  half  value  layer  (HVL),  the  tenth  value layer (TVL), the effective atomic number (Zeff), and the effective electron density (Neff) are the basic quantities used in calculations and the study of the penetration of x-rays and gamma-rays in to shielding materials and other materials.
The  total  mass  attenuation  coefﬁcient  (mt)  is  a  measure of  the probability of interactions that occur between incident photons and the thickness of the target material; it is measured in cm2/g [10,11]. It is a fundamental parameter used in the calculation of many other photon interaction parameters such as absorbed dose, energy ab- sorption, build-up factor, Kinetic Energy Released in Materials (KERMA), mean free path, HVL, equivalent and effective atomic numbers, electron density, molecular cross-section, atomic cross- section, and electronic cross-section, e.g., in designs of radiation shielding. The values of this coefﬁcient are used in several ﬁelds such as radiotherapy, nuclear diagnostics, radiation protection, ra- diation dosimetry, radiation biophysics, etc. The mass attenuation coefﬁcients of different materials have been determined in several works [1,2,5,7,8,12,13,15]. The magnitude of this coefﬁcient depends on the incident photon energy, the material density, and the atomic number of elements. In the case of a composite material (com- pound and mixture), consisting of several elements in varying proportions, the total mass attenuation coefﬁcient depends on another number called the “effective atomic number (Zeff),” which varies with the incident photon energy. Indeed, the partial inter- action cross-section depends on the chemical composition of the material; a single, unique atomic number across the entire energy region, cannot describe the chemical properties of composite ma- terials in an entire energy range, as is possible for pure elements.
The idea of this number is to assume that a compound or a mixture can be considered as a simple element characterized by the atomic number (Zeff); however, this value is not constant, it varies with the incident photon energy. The notion and the theoretical expression of this parameter were suggested by Hine [9]. The effective atomic number is related to another important physical parameter called the effective electron density (Neff), which is deﬁned as the number of electrons per unit mass of the target material [1,2,5,7,8,12,15].
In the present work, some radiation shielding parameters such as the total mass attenuation coefﬁcient (mt), the HVL, the TVL, the effective atomic number (Zeff), and the effective electron density (Neff) of six types of cerrobend alloys were investigated. The total mass attenuation coefﬁcient, the effective atomic number, and the effective electron density were calculated using the ParShield program for a photon energy range of 0.1 MeVe100 GeV. The HVL and TVL were calculated using the values of mt. The ParShield program was written in C ; it runs on the Windows operating system [6]. It was developed to calculate the gamma and neutron shielding parameters for compounds or mixtures. ParShield can calculate the total mass attenuation coefﬁcient, the effective atomic number, and the effective electron density for any compound or mixture, at energies from 1 keV to 100 GeV. It can also calculate the macroscopic effective removal cross-sections of fast neutrons for compounds or mixtures. The predictions of this program were tested and validated by comparing them with the experimental results and the results obtained using the programs WinXcom and MERCSF-N, for which good agreement was found [6]. A description of this program (the equations and the database used) is available in the Elmahroug's study [6].The aim of this study is to make a comparison between these materials to determine what the materials are effective for gamma rays shielding. The present work will be of prime importance for radiation shield design in radiotherapy and medical imaging. The results of the present investigation may help in selecting appro- priate shielding material and determining the optimum  thickness of blocks; it will also help in calculating the absorbed dose. Indeed, cerrobend alloys are used in several areas, especially in radiation therapy applications [3,4,14,16e18]. They are often used as custom blocks to form a special open size that can ﬁt the shape of a tumor
to minimize the dose outside of the patient's treatment ﬁeld [3,4,14,16e18]. The following are the major advantages of cerro- bend alloys: (1) high density; (2) low melting temperature, but  solid at room temperature; (3) easy molding and reuse; (4) ease of shaping; (5) low cost; and (6) consist of elements of high atomic number (Cd, In, Sn, Sb, Bi, and Pb). The chemical compositions of the six types of cerrobend alloys studied in this work were obtained from CS Alloys Company (2888 Colony Woods Drive Gastonia, NC 28054, USA) and have been listed in Table 1.
2.Theoretical method
2.1.Total mass attenuation coefﬁcient
During its passage through a material medium, a photon un- dergoes several interactions such as photoelectric absorption,
Table 1
Chemical composition (%) of cerrobend alloys used in this work.
coherent scattering, incoherent scattering, and pair production. If a photon beam having an initial intensity (I0) penetrates matter, it will be attenuated and its intensity decreases exponentially ac- cording to the following exponential law:@1
This is called the Beer-Lambert law, where I is the transmitted intensity, m is the linear attenuation coefﬁcient in cm—1, r is the material density in g/cm3, x is the thickness of the absorbing me- dium, d is the mass per unit area (cm2/g), and mt     m/r is the total mass attenuation coefﬁcient (cm2/g). For a chemical mixture composed of various elements and compounds, as in our case, the
total mass attenuation coefﬁcient of the mixture (mt) is given by the following “mixture rule”:@2
where   mt   i  and wi are, respectively, the total mass attenuation coef-
ﬁcient and the fractional weight of the ith constituent in the mixture.
2.2. HVL and TVL
To correctly choose the optimum thickness of a material used for shielding purposes, it is necessary to have knowledge of the values of the HVL and the TVL. These two parameters are commonly used in shielding calculation, especially in radiotherapy and medical imaging. The HVL is the thickness of the shielding material required to reduce the incident beam intensity by one-half. The TVL could be deﬁned in the same way: it is the thickness of the shielding material required to reduce the radiation intensity to one-tenth of its initial intensity. The HVL and TVL are expressed in units of distance (cm or mm). Like the attenuation coefﬁcient, the values of HVL and TVL are dependent on the energy of the photon radiation and the type of material. HVL and TVL are inversely proportional to the linear attenuation coefﬁcient (m) and are related as follows:
@3
The unit of (m) is cm—1 and that of HVL is cm.@4
Effective atomic number and effective electron density
The effective atomic number (Zeff) is deﬁned as the ratio of the total atomic effective cross-section to the total electronic effective cross-section:
25
Table 1
Chemical composition (%) of cerrobend alloys used in this work.
Table 2
Total mass attenuation coefﬁcient (mt) for cerrobend alloys used in this work. The total atomic cross-section (sa) can be derived from the values of the total mass attenuation coefﬁcients by the following relation:@6
where NA is Avogadro number and Ai is the molar mass of the ith constituent in the mixture. Similarly, the total electronic cross- section (se) is given by the following formula:
@7
Fig. 1. The variation of total mass attenuation coefﬁcients of cerrobend alloys with incident photon energies.
Fig. 2. The variation of total and partial mass attenuation coefﬁcients with incident photon energies.
where mt j, fj, and Zj are, respectively, the total mass attenuation coefﬁcient, the fractional abundance, and the atomic number of the jth element in the ith constituent.
Finally, the effective electron number or the density (Neff; the electrons number per unit mass, electron/g) is closely related to Zeff and can be found from the following equation:@8
3.Results and discussion
3.1.Total mass attenuation coefﬁcient
Table 2 lists the obtained values of the total mass attenuation coefﬁcient for all cerrobend alloys used in this study for the energyrange of 0.1 MeVe100 GeV. In addition, the variations of the total mass attenuation coefﬁcients (mt), with the incident photon energy for all alloys have been shown graphically in Fig. 1. It can be clearly seen in this ﬁgure that the total mass attenuation coefﬁcients depend on the incident photon energy and the concentration of elements within alloys. It can also be clearly seen in this ﬁgure that the behaviors of mt with the incident photon energy for all the alloys considered in this work are almost identical. Maximum values of mt
have been observed at low energies. However, low values of mt have been observed at intermediate energies. The dependence of the mass absorption coefﬁcient on the chemical composition is large at the lower energy region and negligible at intermediate energies; furthermore, there is a signiﬁcant variation in mt in the high energy region. The dependence of mt on the incident photon energy and the chemical composition can be attributed to domination of the different photon interaction processes with materials in different energy regions. The contributions of different photon interaction processes (photoelectric absorption, Compton scattering, and pair
Fig. 3. The variation of total mass attenuation coefﬁcients of cerrobend alloys with incident photon energies for the energy range of 0.1 MeVe0.6 MeV.
Fig. 4. The variation of total mass attenuation coefﬁcients of cerrobend alloys with incident photon energies for the energy range of 0.6 MeVe5 MeV.
Fig. 5. The variation of total mass attenuation coefﬁcients of cerrobend alloys with incident photon energies for the energy range of 5 MeVe100 GeV.
Table 3
HVL for cerrobend alloys used in this work.
production in the nuclear and electronic ﬁelds) are shown graph- ically in Fig. 2. This ﬁgure shows that the variation of the total mass attenuation coefﬁcients with the incident photon energy and the dependence of these coefﬁcients on the chemical content can be explained by the dominance of the partial photon interaction processes with matter (photoelectric absorption, Compton scat- tering, and pair production in the nuclear and electronic ﬁelds) in
the following three energy regions: low (E < 0.6 MeV), intermediate (0.6 MeV < E < 5 MeV), and high photon energy (E > 5 MeV).
In the low incident photon energy region (E < 0.6 MeV), the total mass  attenuation  coefﬁcient  (mt)  decreases  rapidly  with  the  in- crease of the incident photon energy for all the selected alloys. Fig.
3 shows that the difference between the values of the mass attenuation coefﬁcients of the materials in this region is very large
Table 4
TVL for cerrobend alloys used in this work.
compared with that of other regions. The strong dependence of mt on the incident photon energy and the chemical composition in this energy region can be explained based on the dominance of the photoelectric absorption at low energy, as shown in Fig. 2. It can be seen from this ﬁgure that in the low photon energy region, the photoelectric absorption is the dominant process; the contribution of other processes is negligible. Also, we can see that the partial
mass attenuation coefﬁcients of the photoelectric absorption decrease rapidly with increases in the incident photon energy. The rapid decrease in the attenuation coefﬁcients for all the selected alloys in this region is due to the fact that the cross-section of the photoelectric absorption is inversely proportional to the incident photon energy, as E3.5 [10,11]. On the other hand, the signiﬁcant difference in the values of mt in the low energy region can also be Fig. 6. The variation of half value layer of cerrobend alloys with incident photon energies.Fig. 7.  The variation of half value layer of cerrobend alloys with incident photon energies for the energy range of 0.1 MeVe0.6 MeV.
Fig. 8. The variation of half value layer of cerrobend alloys with incident photon energies for the energy range of 0.6 MeVe5 MeV.
Fig. 9. The variation of half value layer of cerrobend alloys with incident photon energies for the energy range of 5 MeVe100 GeV.Fig. 10. The variation of tenth value layer of cerrobend alloys with incident photon energies.
attributed to the dominance of the photoelectric absorption because the photoelectric cross-section is strongly dependent on the atomic numbers of the constituent elements; it is proportional to the atomic number as Z4 [10,11].
At intermediate incident photon energies, the mass attenuation coefﬁcient decreases slowly with the increase of the incident photon energy and becomes almost constant as the incident photon energy approaches 3 MeV (Fig. 4). Furthermore, the difference be- tween the values of mt becomes almost negligible compared with that observed in the low energy region; almost identical values have been observed for different alloys. This signiﬁes that the chemical composition of the selected alloys plays a less signiﬁcant role in the intermediate energy region. Fig. 2 shows that in this energy region, Compton scattering (especially incoherent scattering) becomes the main type of photon interaction; the partial mass attenuation co- efﬁcient decreases slowly with the increase of incident photon en- ergy. The variation of this coefﬁcient is due to the fact that the cross- section of the Compton scattering process is inversely proportional to the incident photon energy (E—1) [10,11]. Therefore, the slow decrease in the values of mt at intermediate energy is mostly due to
the contribution of the partial mass attenuation coefﬁcient of the Compton scattering process; this also explains why lower values of the mass attenuation coefﬁcients of all the alloys were obtained in this energy region (the minimum values of mt for all selected alloys have been observed at 5 MeV). On the other hand, the small dif- ference observed between the values of mt of the six alloys in this energy region is due to the linear Z-dependence of the cross-section of the Compton scattering [10,11].
In  the  high  energy  region  (5  MeV  < E),  the  mt values  increase
gradually with the increase of the incident photon energy and become almost constant when the incident photon energy ap- proaches 1 GeV (Fig. 5). Moreover, the variation in mt with chemical composition again becomes important, but it is less than the vari- ation observed in low incident photon energy region (Fig. 5). These behaviors may result dominance of the pair-production process in the high energy region. Fig. 2 shows that the pair-production pro- cesses in the nuclear and electron ﬁelds become the dominant photon absorption processes after certain thresholds are exceeded (1.022 MeV and 2.044 MeV for pair-production in the nuclear and electron ﬁelds, respectively). It is also observed from this ﬁgure that
Fig. 11.  The variation of tenth value layer of cerrobend alloys with incident photon energies for the energy range of 0.1 MeVe0.6 MeV.
Fig. 12. The variation of tenth value layer of cerrobend alloys with incident photon energies for the energy range of 0.6 MeVe5 MeV.
the partial mass attenuation coefﬁcients of pair-production in the nuclear and electron ﬁelds start, respectively, from 1.022 MeV and
2.044 MeV, and thereafter increase with the increase of the inci- dent photon energy and become almost constant when the inci- dent photon energy approaches 100 MeV. This also shows that the variation of the total mass attenuation coefﬁcients in the high en- ergy region is mostly due to the contribution of the partial mass attenuation coefﬁcients of the pair-production processes. On the other hand, the variation of mt with the chemical composition can be explained based on Z-dependence of cross-section of pair pro- duction, which is proportional to Z2 [10,11].
Finally, it can be seen from Figs. 3e5 and Table 2 that the alloy
called the “Safe alloy” has the highest value of mass attenuation coefﬁcient, whereas the alloy called the “Cast alloy” has the lowest value of mass attenuation coefﬁcient. Although the alloys are composed of Cd, In, Sn, Sb, Pb, and Bi, the main inﬂuence on the total mass attenuation coefﬁcient in this work is the amount of Pb and Bi in the alloys; alloys with Pb and Bi have higher values of total
mass attenuation coefﬁcients in comparison with those of the other alloys. The large amounts of Pb (37.7%) and Bi (42.5%) in the chemical composition of the Safe alloy in comparison with the case of the other alloys explain the greater value of mt for these alloys. On the other hand, the Cast alloy contains only Sn (60%) and Bi (40%), and hence has a lower total mass attenuation coefﬁcient. Also, it can be seen from Table 2 that the values of the total mass attenu- ation coefﬁcients of the Bend alloy and the Low 147 alloy are very close to that of the Safe alloy. This may be due to the concentration of Pb and Bi in these alloys, which is very close to that of the Safe alloy.
3.2.HVL and TVL
The HVL and TVL for all the selected cerrobend alloys were determined from Eqs. 3 and 4, respectively, and are given  in  Tables 3 and 4. The variations of the HVL and TVL with the incident photon energy are graphically shown in Figs. 6e13. From these
Fig. 13. The variation of tenth value layer of cerrobend alloys with incident photon energies for the energy range of 5 MeVe100 GeV.Fig. 14. The variation of the effective atomic number of cerrobend alloys with incident photon energies.
ﬁgures, it can be observed that initially, HVL and TVL have mini- mum values, which increase rapidly with the increase of the inci- dent photon energy up to 4 MeV. Then, with further increase of the incident photon energy, the HVL and TVL values decrease slowly and become almost constant beyond 1 GeV. Like the variation of the value of mt, the variations of HVL and TVL can be explained by the dominance of different processes of photon interaction on different energy regions. On the other hand, it can be seen that the Cast alloy, the Tru alloy, and the Low 136 alloy have lowest values of HVL and TVL. This might be the result of the higher values of attenuation coefﬁcient and the densities of these alloys.
3.3.Effective atomic number and effective electron density
Using the ParShield program, the values of Zeff and Neff of the six cerrobend alloys considered in this work have been determined at photon energies in the range of 1 keVe10 MeV. The ParShield program uses Eqs. 5 and 8 to calculate Zeff and Neff. The variations of the Zeff values versus the incident photon energy for all the selected cerrobend  alloys  are  presented  in  Fig.  14,   and  are  tabulated in
Table 5. It can be clearly seen in Fig. 14 and Table 5 that the effective electron number Zeff is not a constant, but varies with the photon energy, as mentioned by Hine [9]. Moreover, the variations of Zeff with the photon energy for all the alloys considered in this work are approximately identical. Initially, Zeff decreased rapidly with the increase of the incident  photon energy and reached a minimum at 2 MeV. After that, the value increased slowly and became constant. Also, it is seen from the Fig. 14 that Zeff depends on the chemical composition of the alloys. As in the case with mt, the highest values of Zeff have been observed for alloys that have higher amounts of Pb and Bi. The Safe alloy has the highest value of Zeff, whereas the lowest value of Zeff has been observed for the Cast alloy. As in the case of the variation of mt, the behaviors of Zeff can be explained by the predominance of different processes of photon interaction in different energy regions.
The variations of the Neff values with incident photon energy for all the selected cerrobend alloys are given in Table 6 and shown graphically in Fig. 15. It can be seen in this ﬁgure that Neff varies with the photon energy. It is also clear that the variations of Neff with the photon energy for all the selected alloys are similar to that
Table 5
Effective atomic number (Zeff) for cerrobend alloys used in this work.
of Zeff; this is normal because these two parameters are related through Eq. 8.
4.Conclusions
In this study, using the ParShield program, the values of total mass attenuation coefﬁcient (mt), HVL, TVL, effective atomic num- ber (Zeff), and effective electron density (Neff) for six cerrobend
alloys were calculated in the energy region of 0.1 MeVe100 GeV. It can be concluded from the results obtained in this work that these parameters depend on the incident photon energy and the chem- ical composition of the alloys.
Because of the dominance of the photoelectric absorption pro- cess, the dependence of these parameters on both the incident photon energy and the chemical composition is remarkable in the low incident photon energy region. The compositional effects and
Table 6
Effective electron density (Neff) for cerrobend alloys used in this work.
photon energy dependencies are reduced at intermediate incident photon energies because the Compton scattering process becomes the main type of photon interaction. In the high energy range, the variation of these parameters with the chemical composition again becomes important, and these parameters become almost inde- pendent of the photon energy because of the dominance of the pair-production process.
We can also conclude that the radiation shielding effectiveness of the cerrobend alloys investigated in this work will increase in the following order: Safe alloy > Bend alloy > Low 147 alloy > Low 136 alloy > Tru alloy > Cast alloy. The Safe alloy, Bend alloy, and Low 147 alloy have good radiation attenuation properties and hence absorb maximum amounts of gamma rays; therefore, they would be preferred as shielding materials against gamma radiation.
Fig. 15. The variation of the effective electron density of cerrobend alloys with incident photon energies.
However, the Low 136 alloy, Tru alloy, and Cast alloy demonstrate poor radiation attenuation properties.
Although the cerrobend alloys have seen large usage scale in radiotherapy and medical imaging, no further information is available on their mt, Zeff, Neff, HVL, and TVL values. To the best of our knowledge, the data presented are the ﬁrst of their kind and have not been reported previously. This motivated us to undertake the present investigation. Moreover, the results of this present inves- tigation are extremely important for radiation shield design in radiotherapy and medical imaging.
Conﬂicts of interest
We have no conﬂict of interest.
