<title>CXCR4-Overexpressing Umbilical Cord Mesenchymal Stem Cells Enhance Protection against Radiation-Induced Lung Injury</title>
<author>Chunyang Zhang   ,1 Yan Zhu,2 Ji Wang,3 Lisheng Hou,4 Wei Li,4 and Huaijie An  5</author>
<Affiliation>1Respiratory Department of Navy General Hospital, Beijing 100048, China
2Respiratory Department of International Hospital of Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310009, China
3Health Care Cadre Department of Navy General Hospital, Beijing 100048, China
4 Orthopedics Department of Navy General Hospital, Beijing 100048, China
5 Center of Basic Medical Sciences of Navy General Hospital, Beijing 100048, China</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral> Science and Technology of Nuclear Installation</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Hindawi</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1155/2019/2457082</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/2457082</URL>
Less quantity of transplanted mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) inﬂuences the therapeutic eﬀects on radiation-induced lung injury (RILI). Previous studies have demonstrated that MSCs overexpressing Chemokine (C-X-C motif) receptor 4 (CXCR4) could increase the quantity of transplanted cells to local tissues. In the present study, we conducted overexpressing CXCR4 human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cell (HUMSC) therapy for RILI. C57BL mice received single dose of thoracic irradiation with 13Gy  of X-rays  and  then  were  administered  saline,  control  HUMSCs,  or  CXCR4-overexpressing  HUMSCs  via  tail  vein. Transfection  with  CXCR4  enhanced  the  quantity  of transplanted  HUMSCs  in  the  radiation-induced  injured  lung  tissues. CXCR4-overexpressing  HUMSCs  not  only  improved  histopathological  changes  but  also  decreased  the  radiation-induced expression of SDF-1, TGF-β1, α-SMA, and collagen I and inhibited the radiation-induced decreased expression of E-cadherin. Transplanted CXCR4-overexpressing HUMSCs also could express pro-SP-C, indicated adopting the feature of ATII. These ﬁnding suggests that CXCR4-overexpressing HUMSCs enhance the protection against RILI and may be a promising strategy for
RILI treatment.
1. Introduction
Radiotherapy,  the  commonly used treatment  for thoracic malignant tumor, can lead to severe complications in some patients,  like  radiation-induced  lung  injury  (RILI).  RILI may   include   early   radiation-induced   pneumonitis   and advanced  stage  radiation-induced  lung  ﬁbrosis  [1].  They can aﬀect the patient’s quality of life with severe adverse com- plications  [2].  Radiation-induced  pneumonitis  and  lung ﬁbrosis are mostly observed in 4 to 30 weeks and 6 to 12 months after thoracic radiotherapy [3]. The incidence rate of severe irradiation-induced lung injuries reported is 15% among patients treated by thoracic radiotherapy [4]. These patients  are  presented  with  symptoms  such  as  cough, panting,  dyspnea,  and  even  respiratory  failure  [5, 6].  As there were few eﬃcient therapeutic methods available for
RILI  in  clinical  practice  [7],  it  is  critical  to  understand the  complications  in  great  depth  and  investigate  better methods of protection to improve patients’life quality.
MSCs are able to ameliorate various kinds of lung injury and  are  intensively  investigated  to  develop  a  therapeutic approach for treating lung diseases such as RILI, idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis (IPF), and emphysema which are lacking a speciﬁc and eﬀective therapy [8, 9]. It has been observed that  mesenchymal  stem  cells  (MSCs)  could  home  and engraft within the injured tissues and diﬀerentiate into vas- cular cells and alveolar cells to regenerate the damage in the irradiated mouse lung [10]. In in vivo and in vitro stud- ies, MSCs were found to alleviate irradiation-induced lung injuries  not  only  by  the  secretion  of  cytokines,  growth factors, and paracrine molecules but also by immunomodu- latory  eﬀect.  Moreover,  they  could  modulate  immuneresponse, attenuate inﬂammation, and regulate the release of proinﬂammatory  and  proﬁbrotic  molecules  involved  in ﬁbroblast proliferation and extracellular matrix excess depo- sition [2, 11–13]. Some previous studies also demonstrated that MSCs act as gene therapy delivery vehicles and attenu- ate lung injury through enhancing the target gene expression in speciﬁc damaged tissue sites in the lungs [14, 15]. MSCs are currently used as a promising therapeutic candidate for alleviation of RILI.
Contrarily,  some  studies  suggested  that  the  quantity of exogenous  MSCs transplanted  in the  injured lung tis- sues is so less to inﬂuence the biological eﬀects of MSCs [2, 16, 17]. Accordingly, some studies were carried out to increase the quantity of MSCs in the injured tissues and improve their therapeutic eﬀect [18–20]. Recent studies have demonstrated that the homing capability is improved, and the therapeutic eﬀect is increased by enhancing the expres- sion  of CXCR4  gene  in  MSCs  [19–21].  CXCR4  is  a  G protein-linked seven transmembrane spanning receptor that has  been  identiﬁed  as  a  receptor  of stromal  cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1) for stem cells [22–24]. Previous studies have identiﬁed that CXCR4/SDF-1 axis critically inﬂuences the migration and homing capabilities of MSCs [25, 26]. Acti- vated CXCR4/SDF-1 axis could recruit MSCs to injured sites in the lungs and increase the number of cells in the local tissues [25, 26]. Liebler et al. [17] found that preincubation of human bone marrow-derived cells with diprotin A, an inhibitor  of  CD26  peptidase  activity  that  increases  the SDF-1/CXCR4  axis,  could  enhance  the  number  of trans- planted cells retained in the bleomycin-induced injured lung injury  in  mice  model.  Other  studies  also  showed  that CXCR4-overexpressing human MSCs could correlate with higher engraftment in an injured site [27, 28].
In order to speciﬁcally enhance the quantity of trans- planted  MSCs  in  injured  lung  tissues,  we  transplanted CXCR4-overexpressing  HUMSCs  transduced  by lentiviral vector to irradiate mouse models and identiﬁed the eﬃcacy of CXCR4-overexpressing HUMSCs on treating RILI in the present study.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Isolation, Culture, and Passage of Human Umbilical Cord Wharton’s Jelly-Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells (HUMSCs). All experiments in this study were approved by the Navy General Hospital Ethical Review Board. Human umbilical cords were obtained from healthy and full-term births by cesarean section in accordance with the ethical standards of the  local  ethics  committee.  Under  sterile  conditions,  the Wharton’s jelly was isolated from the umbilical cords and was cut into small pieces of about  1mm. The cord pieces were  then  placed  in  T75  culture  ﬂasks  with  2.5–3ml  of low-glucose  Dulbecco’s  modiﬁed  Eagle  medium  (DMEM; Gibco,  USA)  supplemented with  10%  fetal bovine  serum (FBS)  (Gibco,  USA),  2mM  L-glutamine  (Hyclone,  USA), 100IU/ml penicillin (Hyclone, USA), and 100μg/ml strepto- mycin (Hyclone, USA) at 37°C in a humidiﬁed atmosphere containing 5% CO2, and the culture medium was changed after  every  3-4  days.  The  remaining  fragments  of  the
Stem Cells International
Wharton’s jelly were wiped oﬀ from the ﬂask after 2 weeks of culture. The cultured HUMSCs had attached to the ﬂask surface and reached conﬂuence. When the primary HUMSCs reached about 80% conﬂuence, they were subcultured and cultivated for up to 3–6 passages. The passage 3 cells were used in the present study.
2.2.   Immunophenotypes   of   HUMSCs.   The   passage   3 HUMSCs grown as monolayers were treated with trypsin (Invitrogen, USA) and washed with PBS and staining buﬀer containing 4% FBS and 0.1% azide in PBS. Every tube con- tained 1 × 106  HUMSCs for the studies. The HUMSCs were stained with phycoerythrin- (PE-) labeled monoclonal anti- bodies against human CD29, CD90, and HLA-DR; ﬂuores- cein- (FITC-) labeled monoclonal antibodies against human CD34,  CD44,  and  CD45;  and  APC-labeled  monoclonal antibodies against human CD31, respectively (Biosynthesis Biotechnology, Beijing, China). The cells were kept in dark for 30min at room temperature. The cell’s immunopheno- types  were  detected  by  ﬂow  cytometry  (FACS  Calibur,
Becton-Dickinson, USA). Flow cytometric analyses showed positive reactions for CD29, CD 44, and CD90 but negative for CD31, CD34, CD45, and HLA-DR.
2.3. Construction and Transfection of Lentivirus. The overex- pression of CXCR4 and EGFP was constructed by lentivirus (GeneChem Co. Ltd., Shanghai, China). The human CXCR4 (gene ID: 7852, NM: 001008540) was cloned into the multi- cloning  site  of  a  lentivirus  vector  plasmid  pGC-FU-3- FLAG-SV40-EGFP (GeneChem Co. Ltd., Shanghai, China). The  lentivirus-CXCR4-EGFP  vector   (LV-CXCR4-EGFP) was mixed with pHelper 1.0 and pHelper 2.0, and then was cotransfected   into   HEK-293T   cells   with   lipofectamine TM2000  (Invitrogen,  Shanghai,  China)  according  to  the manufacturer’s  instruction.  After  48h  transfection,  viral supernatants   were   collected,   ﬁltered   through   0.45μm polyvinylidene ﬂuoride membranes, and then centrifuged. The recombinant lentiviral vector  expressing EGFP alone (LV-EGFP) was constructed as control.
We explored the diﬀerent multiplicities of infection of lentiviral vectors referring some previous studies [15]. In pre- liminary  experiments,  the  transfected  HUMSCs  exhibited decreased EGFP expression at low multiplicity of infection (MOI); the morphological characteristics of HUMSCs were changed and the mortality rate was increased at high MOI. We selected the best MOI through evaluating the expression of EGFP,  the  eﬃciency  of transfection,  and  the  state  of HUMSC growth. The passage 3 HUMSCs were transfected with  LV-CXCR4-EGFP  vectors  at  MOI  of 20  and  with
LV-EGFP vectors at MOI of 10 and were cultured for fol- lowing examinations and cell transplantation. The diﬀerent target genes carried by either LV-CXCR4-EGFP vector or LV-EGFP vector perhaps made the diﬀerence of two MOIs. After     96     hours,     HUMSCs     transfected     with LV-CXCR4-EGFP  or  LV-EGFP  were  examined  through a   ﬂuorescence   microscope.   The   overexpression   of  the
CXCR4   gene   was   detected   by   western   blotting   and immunoﬂuorescence.
MTT   Assay.   To   observe   the   eﬀect   of   CXCR4 overexpression    on    HUMSCs,    normal,    control,    and CXCR4-overexpressing HUMSCs were, respectively, seeded in 96-well plates  (2 × 104  cells per well) and incubated at 37°C  for  4h  in  an  incubator  containing  5%  CO2,  with 20 μl  of  3-(4,5-dimethylthia-zol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazo- lium  bromide  (MTT).  Subsequently,  the  CM  and  MTT were removed, and  150μl of dimethyl  sulfoxide  (DMSO) added  to  each well.  The  samples were  then  shaken,  and the optical density (OD) values at 570nm measured using an ELISA meter  (3001-122J, Thermo, USA). Assays were performed  on  days  0,  2,  4,  6,  and  8  after  transfection. Experiments were performed 6 times.
2.5. Migration Assay. HUMSCs (1 ×104/well) were cultured in the polycarbonate membrane of the upper transwell cham- bers (8μm pores/24 wells; collagen-coated; Corning Costar, Corning, USA) in DMEM/F12 for 12 hours at 37°C in an incubator containing 5% CO2, where the under transwell chambers contained SDF-1 (100ng/ml, SAB, USA, 801121) in DMEM/F12 or kept blank. Then the residual HUMSCs on  the  upper  side  of the  polycarbonate  membrane  were removed. The membranes were rinsed in paraformaldehyde for 15min and then the cells were stained with hematoxylin. To quantify the migration of transfected HUMSCs, the num- ber of cell on the underside of the membrane was determined from  5  randomly  selected  areas  per  ﬁeld  (magniﬁcation, ×200) with microscope.
2.6.     Animal     Model     Construction     and     HUMSC Transplantation.  Seventy-two  female  C57BL  mice  of  2 months old (from Military Medical Science School, Beijing)
wereprocuredandacclimatedforoneweekbeforeconducting the study. All experiments and procedures were approved by the Committee on the Ethics of Animal Care and Use of Navy General Hospital. The mice were randomized into 4 groups: normal,   radiation,   control,   and   CXCR4-overexpressing. Before  irradiation,  5  mice  were  subjected  to  CT  scan  to determine  the  size  of  the  lungs,  and  linear  accelerator (oncor   impression,   Siemens)   was   adjusted   to   restrict X-rays  to  just  the  thorax.  The  mice,  except  the  normal group, received single dose of thoracic irradiation  (13Gy, 6 MV, 3.68Gy/min, window width 20 × 2.5cm) using the linear    accelerator.    Saline    (200μl),    control    HUMSCs (5 ×105/200μl),     or     CXCR4-overexpressing     HUMSCs (5 ×105/200μl) was injected intravenously via the tail vein, one day after radiation, respectively. Mice were killed on day 7, 30, or 60 after treatment. The right lungs were used for RNA and protein extraction; the left lungs were ﬁxed in  10% paraformaldehyde for histopathological analysis.
2.7.  Lung  Morphology  and  Immunohistochemistry.  The samples from left lungs were embedded by paraﬃn and were sectioned at a thickness of 5μm. And then they were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE) and Masson, respectively. Lung  pathology  was  detected  by  light  microscopy.  After deparaﬃnization,   the   paraﬃn-embedded   lung   sections were  incubated  with  rabbit  polyclonal  anti-collagen  anti- body  (1:200,  Abcam,  USA,  ab34710),  rabbit  polyclonal
3
anti-α-SMA  antibody  (1:250,  Abcam,  USA,  ab5694),  or rabbit polyclonal anti-E-cadherin antibody (1:50, Abcam, USA,  ab15148)  antibody,  respectively,  for  2h  at  37°C, followed by an incubation with goat–anti-rabbit IgG-HRP antibody    (1:1000,    Sigma-Aldrich,    USA,   A6154)   for 40min at 37°C. 3,3-diaminobenzidine  (DAB) was used as chromogenic substrate.
2.8.    Immunoﬂuorescence.    The    CXCR4-overexpressing HUMSCs or control HUMSCs, grown on glass coverslips, and frozen mouse lung tissues, sectioned at 4μm and placed onto  glass  slides,  were  incubated  overnight  with  rabbit polyclonal  anti-CXCR4  antibody  (1:200,  Boster,  China, BA0761),   or   rabbit   polyclonal   anti-pro-SP-C   antibody (1:250, Abcam, USA, ab40879), respectively, in darkness at 4°C,  followed  by  incubations  with  Dylight  549  (1:100, Abbkine, USA, A23320) for 1h at 37°C. Then the total cell nuclei of the HUMSCs and the lung tissues were stained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole    (DAPI)    (Sigma-Aldrich). The ﬂuorescence images of EGFP, CXCR4, and pro-SP-C were detected using a confocal laser scanning microscope (Leica, Germany, TCS SP8).
2.9. Western Blot. HUMSCs, lysed in RIPA buﬀer, and frozen lung tissues, ground in a mortar with liquid nitrogen, were all stored aliquots at −80°C until assayed, respectively. Lysates were  mixed  with   an   equal  volume   of  sample  buﬀer, denatured  by  boiling,  and  then  separated  on  a  10 – 15% polyacrylamide  minigel.  The proteins were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes, blocked with 5% milk, and incu- bated overnight with rabbit polyclonal anti-CXCR4 antibody (for HUMSC sample, 1:100, Boster, China, BA0761), mouse monoclonal anti-CXCR4 antibody (for lung tissue samples, 1:500,  Abcam,  USA,  ab58176),  or  mouse  monoclonal anti-TGF-β1  antibody  (1:1000,  Abcam,  USA,  ab64715)
at   4°C.   And   then   the   blots   were   incubated   with goat-anti-rabbit  IgG  HRP  antibody   (1:1000,  Applygen Technologies   Inc.,   China,   C1309)   or   goat-anti-mouse IgG-HRP antibody (1:5000, Abcam, USA, A4416) for  1h at  room  temperature.  The  membranes  were  rinsed  with washing  buﬀer  and  incubated  with  chemiluminescence (ECL) working solution for 5min. The signals were detected by Gel software, and the relative intensities of the detected bands compared between groups.
2.10. RT-PCR Examination to Detect Engrafted HUMSCs in Mouse Lung.  Lung  samples  underwent  mRNA  extraction using RNAprep pure tissue kit (TIANGEN Biotech, Beijing, China,  DP431).  For  β-actin  gene,  the  forward  primer sequence  was  5′-CTGGAACGGTGAAGGTGACA-3′  and the reverse primer sequence was 5′-AAGGGACTTCCTGT AACAATGCA-3′   (GenBank   accession   number:   NM_ 001101), present in humans and not in mouse to detect the human  cellular  cDNA  in  samples.  Reverse  transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis for the human marker, β-actin gene, was performed using primers that span the gene (94°C 5min, 94°C 30 seconds, 58°C 30 seconds, 72°C 30 seconds, 72°C 7min, 4°C ∞). PCR products were detected by the ethidium bromide-stained 2.5% agarose gel.
4
2.11. Cytokine Examination by ELISA. The SDF-1 protein in the lung homogenate was quantiﬁed by ELISA according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Abcam, USA).
2.12. Statistical Analysis. Values are presented as the mean ± standard deviation (SD). Multiple groups were compared with a Tukey-Kramer post hoc test after an analysis of vari- ance (ANOVA). Two continuous variables were compared using  Student’s  t-test.  Diﬀerences  between  groups  were considered to be signiﬁcant at P <0  05.
3. Results
3.1. Characterization of HUMSCs. Adherent HUMSCs were present around the Wharton’s jelly fragments after 10 days of culture. Most of the HUMSCs appeared spindle-shaped under light microscopy, and after 3 weeks of culture, the quan- tity of HUMSCs increased and they aggregated like a vortex (Supplementary  Figure  1(a)).  A  ﬂow  cytometric  analysis presented that HUMSCs were positive for CD29, CD44, and CD90  and  were  negative  for  CD31,  CD34,  CD45,  and HLA-DR, which is consistent with previous reports [29–31] (Supplementary   Figure   1(b)).   As   described   previously, HUMSCs in this study had the capacity to diﬀerentiate into osteoblasts, chondrocytes, and adipocytes  [29]. The results indicated  that  the  cultured  cells  had  the  characteristic  of mesenchymal stem cells and diﬀer from hematopoietic cell lineage and endothelial progenitor cell lineage.
3.2.    Eﬀect    of    CXCR4    Overexpression    on    HUMSCs’ Proliferation, Migration, and Distribution. The MTT assay  was used to observe the eﬀects of CXCR4 overexpression  on the proliferation of HUMSCs. The HUMSCs were trans-  fected with LV-CXCR4-EGFP vectors or LV-EGFP vectors,  and observations made 0, 2, 4, and 6d after transfection.  Measurement of OD values showed that the proliferation of  HUMSCs in control and CXCR4-overexpressing group was  all increased from day 0 to day 6. There was no signiﬁcant  diﬀerences  between  the  CXCR4-overexpressing  group  or  control group and normal group in the OD values, respec-  tively (P >0  05, n =6). This reﬂects the normal proliferative  capacity of these cells in the CXCR4-overexpressing group  and control group (Supplementary Figure 3).
To   determine   whether   the   migration   capacity   of CXCR4-overexpressing HUMSCs increased after transfection, we quantiﬁed the number of migrated normal, control, and CXCR4-overexpressing HUMSCs in transwell assay in vitro. It showed that the number of migrated CXCR4-overexpressing HUMSCs was signiﬁcantly increased compared to control and  normal  HUMSCs  when  the  under  transwell  cham- bers  contained  SDF-1  (P <0 001,  CXCR4-overexpressing HUMSCs:   80±7  vs.  control  HUMSCs:   50±8,  normal HUMSCs:  48±5).  There  was  no  signiﬁcant  diﬀerences between the three groups in the migration numbers when the   under   transwell   chambers   were   without   SDF-1 (P >0  05,   CXCR4-overexpressing   HUMSCs:   43 ±4   vs. control    HUMSCs:    41±6,    normal    HUMSCs:    38 ± 5) (Figures 1(a)  and 1(b)). These results conﬁrmed that the transduced   HUMSCs  expressing  CXCR4  enhanced  the
Stem Cells International
migration   capacity,   which   is   consistent   with   previous reports  [32, 33].
In order to investigate whether HUMSCs could home to the injured lung and transduction of CXCR4 could enhance homing and migration capacities of HUMSCs in vivo, we performed RT-PCR examination and immunoﬂuorescence assays. As previous study described, we ampliﬁed sequences of β-actin gene (GenBank accession number: NM_001101) only present in human but not in mouse by reverse tran- scriptase PCR to determine the successful transplantation of HUMSCs into mouse lung  [20, 34]. The expression of β-actin   in   mouse   lung   tissues   was   observed   in   the CXCR4-overexpressing  group  and  control  group  but  not in normal group and radiation groups (Figure 1(c)), which indicated that  CXCR4-overexpressing HUMSCs  and  con- trol HUMSCs had been successfully transplanted into the mouse and migrated to the irradiated lung tissue.
TheﬂuorescenceexaminationshowedthatEGFP-positive cells were observed in frozen lung sections of the mice in the CXCR4-overexpressing and control groups on day 7 postirra- diation. Moreover, the quantity of EGFP-positive cells was signiﬁcantly  higher  in  the  CXCR4-overexpressing  group compared to control group (Figure 1(d)).
The   above   results   indicated   that   the   transplanted HUMSCs smoothly immigrated to the injured lung tissues after irradiation, and the HUMSCs transduced by lentiviral vector overexpressing CXCR4 gene distributed more in lung tissues than in control HUMSCs.
3.3.  CXCR4  Gene  Overexpression  in  HUMSCs  and  Lung Tissue and Eﬀect on SDF-1 Expression. To identify lentivirus transfection,  which   can   overexpress   CXCR4  gene,  the expressions of EGFP and CXCR4 were examined by ﬂuo- rescence  microscopy,  immunoﬂuorescence,  and  western blots.  After  96h  transfected  with  LV-CXCR4-EGFP  or LV-EGFP,  the  green  ﬂuorescence  of EGFP  was  detected in  CXCR4-overexpressing  and  control  HUMSCs by ﬂuo- rescence microscope. The transfection eﬃciency was above 80% (Supplementary Figure 2), and the green ﬂuorescence of EGFP was still detected after normal subculturing of the transduced HUMSCs.
The immunoﬂuorescence and western blotting demon- strated that the CXCR4 protein expression was higher in CXCR4-overexpressing HUMSCs compared to control and normal  HUMSCs  in  vitro  (Figures 2(a)  and 2(b)). These results  conﬁrmed  that  HUMSCs  had  transducted  with LV-CXCR4-EGFP or LV-EGFP and signiﬁcantly expressed the target gene.
Western blot was used to detect the expression of CXCR4 in lung tissue on days 7, 30, and 60 after radiation. We could not ﬁnd obvious CXCR4 expression in the normal and radi- ation  groups,  whereas  in  the  CXCR4-overexpressing  and control groups, the expression of CXCR4 was observed. A negligible expression of CXCR4 in the control group was observed, which could be due to the transplanted HUMSCs naturally  expressing  CXCR4  (Figure  2(c)).  Western  blot analysis showed that CXCR4-overexpressing group exhibited much higher  CXCR4  expression,  as  compared to  control group (Figure 2(d)). The immunoﬂuorescence also identiﬁed
Figure 1: Eﬀect of CXCR4 overexpression on HUMSCs’migration and distribution. (a) The migrated HUMSCs in the down side of the polycarbonate membrane in transwell by hematoxylin staining under white light microscopy at 200x magniﬁcation. (b) Transwell assay conﬁrmed that the number of migrated  CXCR4-overexpressing HUMSCs was increased compared to control and normal HUMSCs when the under chambers contained SDF-1  ( ∗∗ P <0  01, n =5). There was no diﬀerence between every group not containing SDF-1. (c) Examination of human β-actin expression in mouse lung tissues by detecting cDNA with hACTB-speciﬁc primers. The expression of β-actin only present in human but not in mouse was detected in control and CXCR4-overexpressing groups and was absent in normal and radiation groups. (d) The EGFP-positive cells were detected by the ﬂuorescence examination in frozen lung sections. The quantity of EGFP-positive cells was much more in the CXCR4-overexpressing group compared to control group (DAPI: blue; EGFP: green).
theexpressionofCXCR4intheEGFP-positivecellsofCXCR4 group lung tissue on day 7 postirradiation (Figure 2(e)).
To determine the eﬀects of HUMSCs on SDF-1 levels, ELISA was performed to  detect the  SDF-1  expression  in the  lung  tissue.  The  expression  of  SDF-1  increased  on 7d,  30d,  and  60d  after  irradiation,  whereas  the  level  of SDF-1    decreased    after    administration    of   HUMSCs. CXCR4-overexpressing  HUMSCs  attenuated  the  increase of   SDF-1   level   signiﬁcantly   in   contrast   to   control HUMSCs   (Figure   2(f)).   These   results   suggested   that CXCR4-overexpressing HUMSCs could signiﬁcantly inhibit the  enhancement  of SDF-1  induced by radiation  in lung tissues, in contrast to control HUMSCs.
3.4.       CXCR4-Overexpressing      HUMSCs       Attenuated Radiation-Induced Lung Injury.  The  HE  staining  of lung sections showed that radiation induced obvious inﬂamma- tory inﬁltrates and alveolar septa thickness on day 30 post- irradiation.  Aggravated  interstitial  hyperplasia,  interstitial pachy congestion, interalveolar septal thickening, and par- tial  consolidation were  observed  on  day 60. The Masson staining of lung sections showed marked collagen deposi- tion  on   30d  and   60d  postirradiation,  indicating  that transplantation of HUMSCs could attenuate lung injuries. Administration of CXCR4-overexpressing HUMSCs mark- edly  reduced  the  morphological  lung  damage  compared with control HUMSCs (Figure 3(a)).
Figure 2: CXCR4 overexpression in HUMSCs and lung tissue and eﬀect on SDF-1 expression in lung tissue. (a) Expressions of EGFP and
CXCR4 were examined by immunoﬂuorescence in vitro (DAPI: blue; EGFP: green; CXCR4: red). (b) CXCR4 protein was assessed by western blot analysis in HUMSCs. Transfection increased the expression of CXCR4 in CXCR4-overexpressing HUMSCs.  (c) CXCR4 protein was assessed by western blot analysis in mouse lung tissue. (d) Densitometric quantiﬁcation of CXCR4 protein levels in lung tissues of the control and CXCR4-overexpressing groups. Expression of CXCR4 markedly increased in the CXCR4-overexpressing group ( ∗∗ P <0  01, n =6). (e) Immunoﬂuorescence identiﬁed EGFP and CXCR4 expressions in transplanted CXCR-overexpressing HUMSCs in
mouse lung tissue (DAPI: blue; EGFP: green; CXCR4: red). (f) Expression of SDF-1 in the lung tissue was measured by ELISA. Compared to  control group, the radiation-induced increased  expression  of SDF-1 was  obviously inhibited in the  CXCR4-overexpressing group ( ∗∗ P <0  01, n =6).
TGF-β1 is a critical factor in radiation-induced ﬁbrosis [35]. Western blot analysis showed that radiation resulted in  a  remarkable  increase  in  the  level  of TGF-β1  in  the lung tissue of radiation group on 7d, 30d, and 60d post- irradiation.  Administration  of  HUMSCs  attenuated  the radiation-induced  elevation  of TGF-β1  levels.  Moreover, the  expression  level  of  TGF-β1  markedly  decreased  in the  CXCR4-overexpressing  group  in  contrast  to  control group (Figures 3(b) and 3(c)).
3.5. Eﬀect of CXCR4-HUMSCs on α-SMA, Collagen I, and  E-Cadherin and HUMSCs Adopted ATII Cell Phenotype. As  a unique marker of myoﬁbroblasts, α-SMA plays a critical  role in lung ﬁbrosis and“epithelial-mesenchymal transition” (EMT). A previous study had reported that radiation could  induce increased α-SMA expression in human lung ﬁbro-  blasts  [5].  In  our  study,  immunohistochemistry  analysis  demonstrated  that  α-SMA  expression  was  increased  in  mice lung of the radiation group at 30 days after radiation
Figure 3: Protective eﬀect of HUMSCs on RILI. (a) Compared to control HUMSCs, CXCR4-overexpressing HUMSCs could attenuate histopathological changes of RILI by hematoxylin  and eosin  (H&E) and Masson staining of lung sections.  (b) TGF-β1 protein was assessed by western blot analysis in the mouse lung tissue. (c) Densitometric quantiﬁcation of TGF-β1 protein levels in the lung tissue. The radiation-induced enhancement of TGF-β1 was inhibited markedly in the CXCR4-overexpressing group compared to control group ( ∗∗ P <0  01, n =6).
(Figure 4(a)), whereas the expression of α-SMA markedly reduced after the administration of HUMSCs (Figure 4(a)). The   α-SMA   expression  was   slightly   decreased   in  the CXCR4-overexpressing group  compared to  control  group (Figure 4(a)).
In  addition,  E-cadherin  expression  in  immunohisto- chemistry  assays  showed  an  obvious  decrease  at  30  days after  irradiation,  which  exhibited  an  important  role  in maintaining  the  tight  junctions  of  epithelial  cells  and normal functions of the paracellular barrier in the airway epithelia  [5]  (Figure 4(b)).  However,  after  administration of   HUMSCs,   the   expression   of   E-cadherin   did   not decrease   critically   in   contrast   to   the   radiation   group (Figure  4(b)),  and  the  expression  of  E-cadherin  in  the CXCR4-overexpressing group was higher than that in the control group (Figure 4(b)).
After irradiation, a signiﬁcant increase in collagen depo- sition was reported in pulmonary ﬁbrosis [36]. In this study, the expression of type I collagen was increased at 30 days after irradiation (Figure 4(c)), which was inhibited by admin- istrated HUMSCs (Figure 4(c)). There was no obvious diﬀer- ence    in    type    I    collagen    expression    between    the CXCR4-overexpressing HUMSC group and control group.
To conﬁrm whether the transplanted HUMSCs diﬀer- entiated to alveolar type II  (ATII) cells in the mice lung
tissue after irradiation, immunoﬂuorescence was performed to  detect  the  expression  of pro-SP-C,  which  is  a  typical marker of ATII cell diﬀerentiation in the mammalian lung [37]. In the control and CXCR4-overexpressing group, the EGFP-positive  cells  exhibited the  expression  of pro-SP-C on day 7 after irradiation. This revealed that transplanted HUMSCs could adopt the features of ATII cells in the lung tissue after transplantation (Figure 4(d)).
4. Discussion
Recent studies have demonstrated that transplanted MSCs could alleviate the lung injury [2, 11, 15], but the quantity of delivered MSCs in local injured lung tissue was not enough as we anticipated [9, 17, 38–40]. So, we carried out the studies to probe the resolutions for enhancement of homing and retention of stem cells in the injured organs. In this study, CXCR4-overexpressing   HUMSCs   showed   not   only   an increased capacity of migration in vitro but also the enhance- ment of homing eﬃciency in vivo. Moreover, it showed that CXCR4-overexpressing  HUMSCs  could  alleviate  RILI  in our mice model.
Previous   study   showed   that   0.1%  lung   cells  were derived from transplanted MSCs  [2], and a relatively low frequency of engraftment cells inﬂuenced their therapeutic
Figure 4: Eﬀect  of  HUMSCs  on  α-SMA,  E-cadherin,  and  collagen  I  and  HUMSCs  adopted  alveolar  type  II  cell  phenotype. (a) Immunohistochemistry images for α-SMA at 30 days postradiation. (b) Immunohistochemistry images for E-cadherin at 30 days postradiation. (c) Immunohistochemistry images for collagen I at 30 days postradiation. (d) Immunoﬂuorescence (IF) of frozen lung sections from control, CXCR4-overexpressing, and radiation groups at 7 days postradiation by using deconvolution microscopy (DAPI: blue; EGFP: green; pro-SPC: red).
eﬀect  [16].  Chang  et  al.  have  suggested  that  homing  of culture-expanded MSCs was not as eﬃcient as hematopoietic stem  cells  and leukocytes for lack of relevant  chemokine receptors and cell adhesion [41].
In  our  study,  CXCR4-overexpressing  HUMSCs  have been shown to be more eﬃciently retained in postirradiated lung tissues,  suggesting that the  enhancement  of CXCR4 expression in HUMSCs could further improve their homing
capacity. Moreover, histopathology and TGF-β1 examina- tion showed that CXCR4 overexpression in HUMSCs could alleviate the RILI better in contrast to control HUMSCs.
TGF-β1 is one of the important growth factors in the process of RILI [7] and is considered as a master switch for ﬁbrotic  program  [35].  In  clinical  practice,  the  increased TGF-β1 level in plasma is the marker of subsequent RILI in patients administrated with radiation therapy [42]. In a pre- vious study, it was shown that the MSCs could decrease the level of TGF-β1 [2]. We found that transplanted HUMSCs could inhibit irradiation-induced enhancement of TGF-β1, which was  consistent with the previous  study. Moreover, CXCR4-overexpressing HUMSCs showed better downregu- lation eﬀect on TGF-β1 in contrast to control HUMSCs.
Previous  studies have  reported that the  expression  of SDF-1 increased within the injured lung [17, 43]. In the pres- ent study, we found that radiation could induce the enhance- ment of SDF-1 in lung tissues, which was consistent with the previous  study  [2]. After  administration  of HUMSCs, we found  that  HUMSCs  could  inhibit  the  enhanced  SDF-1 expression  in  the  irradiated  lung  tissues.  Consequently, CXCR4-overexpressing HUMSC delivery had a better eﬀect on the increase of SDF-1 level in this study.
Some studies conﬁrmed that ﬁbrocytes derived from the bone marrow are recruited in the damaged lung tissues and participated  in the  development  of lung ﬁbrosis  [44–46]. These  circulating  ﬁbrocytes  could  express  CXCR4   [47] and  are  considered  to  be  the  resource  of  lung  ﬁbro- blasts  in  response  to  lung  injury  in  the  body  through the  CXCR4/SDF-1  axis.  Moreover,  the  elevated  SDF-1 associates  with  a  large  quantity  of circulating  ﬁbrocytes during the process of pulmonary ﬁbrosis  [48]. Song et al. treated  bleomycin-induced  pulmonary  ﬁbrosis  mice  with AMD3100,  a  CXCR4  antagonist,  to  decrease  the  expres- sion of SDF-1 and circulating ﬁbrocytes in the lung tissue [49]. They used CXCR4 antagonist to inhibit the expres- sion  of CXCR4  in  circulating  ﬁbrocytes  and  to  decrease chemotaxis  and  recruitment  of the  circulating  ﬁbrocytes to the damaged lung tissues, which resulted in alleviating the  lung  injury  [49].  In  our  study,  we  used  exogenous CXCR4-overexpressing HUMSCs to attenuate RILI through the enhancement of MSC homing ability. There was no con- tradiction between our study and the previous study. CXCR4 antagonist  treatment  could  decrease  the  SDF-1  mRNA expression in the previous study [49], whereas in the present study the SDF-1 level decreased signiﬁcantly after the admin- istration of HUMSCs. This result indicated that HUMSCs perhaps  could  decrease  the  circulating  ﬁbrocytes,  which contributed to the lung injury and ﬁbrosis, through inhibi- tion  of  radiation-induced  increase  of  SDF-1.  However,
CXCR4-overexpressing HUMSCs had a better eﬀect on it in contrast to control HUMSCs in the present study. Additional work is required to elucidate the underlying mechanisms.
The pathologic process of RILI develops through a com- plex mechanism and involves several cell types in the lung. Fibroblasts and alveolar epithelial cells in the lung are consid- ered to play a key role in the process of RILI [5, 36]. Not only in  the  diﬀerentiation  of  ﬁbroblasts  into  myoﬁbroblasts but  also  in  the  transition  of  alveolar  epithelial  cells  to
9
myoﬁbroblasts, the expression of α-SMA is increased in both in vitro and in vivo studies, which is a hallmark of these two transitions  [5, 13]. In the process of RILI, myoﬁbroblasts showed increased α-SMA expression and synthesized more collagens, which lead to the remodeling of the extracellular matrix. In a previous study, we have identiﬁed that irradia- tion could induce the expression of α-SMA enhancement in human lung ﬁbroblasts and result in the diﬀerentiation of human lung ﬁbroblasts into myoﬁbroblasts, which is inhib- ited by coculture with HUMSCs [13]. In the present study, we  demonstrated  that  CXCR4-overexpressing  HUMSCs could inhibit the increased expression of α-SMA and col- lagen I in irradiated lung tissues. These results suggested that the transfected HUMSCs could relieve the remodeling of the extracellular matrix.
Alveolar epithelial cell is one of the cell types involved in the process of RILI. The alveolar epithelium injury has been considered to be a key factor in the development of RILI [50]. Alveolar epithelial injury could induce an abnormal epi- thelial repair, which is a critical pathological feature of lung ﬁbrosis  [5]. In the process of RILI, resident epithelial cells undergo transdiﬀerentiation into myoﬁbroblasts, a process termed EMT, which is characterized by increased expression of α-SMA and decreased expression of the epithelial marker, E-cadherin   [5].  In  the  present  study,  irradiation  could increase the expression of α-SMA and decrease the expres- sion  of  E-cadherin  in  lung  tissues  postirradiation.  The decreased expression of E-cadherin also indicated that the tight junctions between alveolar epithelial cells are damaged by  irradiation.  The  abnormal  expression  of α-SMA  and E-cadherin in lung tissues postirradiation was alleviated by administrating  HUMSCs,  which  was  obviously  by  trans- planted  CXCR4-overexpressing  HUMSCs.  These  results showed  that  CXCR4-overexpressing  HUMSCs  could  per- haps  inhibit  the  process  of ﬁbroblast  diﬀerentiation  into myoﬁbroblasts and EMT in lung tissues postirradiation.
Type II alveolar epithelial (ATII) cells have been identi- ﬁed to be the stem cells for producing AEI cells, which are sensitive to injury and incapable of self-renewal. Therefore, treatments that aim to repair or limit epithelial damage might become a key therapeutic strategy to accelerate recovery in lung injury [2, 51]. MSCs have been shown to replace and repair the injured alveolar epithelial cells by diﬀerentiation to ATII cells in in vitro studies [2, 39, 52–54]. In this study, HUMSCs were found to express pro-SP-C, which was the characteristic of ATII. The mechanism of engrafted MSCs adopting the phenotype of ATII cells remains unclear, which may be related with the diﬀerentiation of MSCs to ATII, the cellular fusion or combination between MSCs and resident
ATII  cells  [40, 55].  But  some  studies  showed that trans- planted MSCs could not diﬀerentiate into lung epithelium and mainly diﬀerentiate into myoﬁbroblasts, especially in MSCs  administrated late  after  irradiation  [2, 11, 38, 56]. The diﬀerent microenvironment in early and late lung injury phases may perhaps inﬂuence the engrafted MSCs’diﬀeren- tiation  [2, 11]. In this study, we have early administrated HUMSCs 1 day after irradiation by the tail vein injection. The  involvement  of  transplanted  MSCs’diﬀerentiation discrepancy needs further study in the future.
10
5. Conclusions
In conclusion, the present study reveals that HUMSCs, either plain  or  transfected  with  CXCR4  gene,  could  have  the therapeutic eﬀects onRILI.CXCR4-overexpressing HUMSCs do have advantages on homing and reparative eﬀects. Thus, therapeutic application of gene-modiﬁed HUMSC overex- pression ofCXCR4may be helpful forthe attenuation of RILI.
Data Availability
The  data  used  to  support  the  ﬁndings  of this  study  are included within the article.
Conflicts of Interest
The  authors  declare  that  there  is  no  conﬂict  of interest regarding the publication of this paper.
Authors’ Contributions
Chunyang Zhang, Yan Zhu, Ji Wang, Lisheng Hou, Wei Li and Huaijie An have contributed equally to this work.
Supplementary Materials
Supplementary Figure  1: characterization of HUMSCs. (a) Morphology  of  HUMSCs.   HUMSCs  were   around  the Wharton’s  jelly  fragments  at  21  days  of culture  at  40x (a) magniﬁcation (bar=100μm). The passage 3 HUMSCs appeared spindle-shaped and reached conﬂuence circinately after 3 days of culture at 40x (b) (bar=200μm), and 100x (c)  magniﬁcation  (bar=100μm).  (b)  Immunophenotype of HUMSCs  by  ﬂow  cytometric  analysis.  The  HUMSCs were positive for CD29, CD44, and CD90 and were nega- tive for CD31, CD34, CD45, and HLA-DR. Supplementary
Figure  2:  transduction  of CXCR4  into  HUMSCs  using  a lentiviral  vector.  The  passage  3  cultured  HUMSCs  after transfection  with  lentivirus-CXCR4-EGFP  vectors  (a)  or lentivirus-EGFP vectors  (c) under white light microscopy at  200x  magniﬁcation  (bar=50μm).  The  expression  of EGFP (green) in HUMSCs detected at 96h after transduc- tion under ﬂuorescence microscopy at 200x magniﬁcation; ((b) lentivirus-CXCR4-EGFP vectors; (d) lentivirus- EGFP vectors; bar=50μm). Supplementary Figure 3: MTT assay for HUMSCs of CXCR4-overexpressing, control, and normal (P >0  05, n =6). (Supplementary Materials)