<title>Development of methodology of probabilistic safety assessment for radioactive waste disposal in consideration of epistemic uncertainty and aleatory uncertainty</title>
<author>Ryo Nakabayashi & Daisuke Sugiyama</author>
<Affiliation>Radiation Safety Research Center, Nuclear Technology Research Laboratory, Central Research Institute of Electric Power Industry, Komae-shi, Tokyo, Japan</Affiliation>
<year>2016</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2016.1179138</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2016.1179138</URL>
ABSTRACT
Probabilistic safety assessment has not been performed for radioactive waste disposal owing to the difficulty of dealing with the probability distributions of the parameters included in the long- term safety assessment of radioactive waste disposal. In this study, we develop a methodology of probabilistic safety assessment in consideration of both epistemic uncertainty and aleatory uncertainty, in which the probability density function (PDF) and cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the maximum annual dose can be calculated. We also propose an approach to demon- strating dose assessment results in compliance with the stepwise target annual doses of likely and less-likely scenarios according to the occurrence probability of the scenario without classify- ing the probabilities of parameters involved prior to the safety assessment. For the likely scenario, we can employ the larger of the modal value of the PDF and the 50th percentile of the CDF to meet the target annual dose (10 µSv y-1). For the less-likely scenario, we can adopt the 95th percentile of the CDF as the assessment result for comparison with the target annual dose (300 µSv y-1).
KEYWORDS
Radioactive waste management; epistemic uncertainty; aleatory uncertainty; PSA; Monte Carlo calculation; sub-surface disposal
1.Introduction
The nuclear regulation authority (NRA) of Japan, which replaced the Nuclear Safety Commission in 2012, requires applicants for a license for radioactive waste disposal to demonstrate that their dose assessment results are less than a target annual dose assigned for each scenario in consideration of uncertainties. The target annual doses of likely, less-likely, very unlikely, and human intrusion scenarios, which are classified in terms of their likelihood of occurrence, are 10, 300, 1000, and 10001 µSv y-1, respectively. This basic concept is provided in the ‘Basic Policy for Safety Regulations Concerning Land Disposal of Low-Level Radioactive Waste (Interim Report)’ [1] and the ‘Policy of the Safety Assessment of Sub-surface Disposal after the Period for Active Control’ (the Sub-surface Disposal Report) [2].
There are two types of uncertainty associated with long-term safety assessment for the disposal of radioac- tive waste [3]. One type of uncertainty, for example, concerning the fracture permeability of the host rock or the distribution coefficient of each material, origi- nates from the inherent heterogeneity or diversity of data and cannot be reduced. This type of uncertainty in radioactive waste disposal is referred to as aleatory uncertainty [3] and can be expressed as a mean, vari- ance, and standard deviation by a statistical process. The other type of uncertainty is due to lack of knowl- edge and can generally be reduced or eliminated by obtaining more or better data. However, quantifying
this uncertainty in radioactive waste disposal is not easy since it is difficult to accurately predict future events such as, for example, alterations to engineered and nat- ural barriers and the transitions due to tectonic uplift and denudation. This type of uncertainty in radioac- tive waste disposal is referred to as epistemic uncer- tainty [3]. Central Research Institute of Electric Power Industry of Japan has developed a methodology to quantify the epistemic uncertainty as probability distri- butions by eliciting expert judgments, and the result- ing distributions were skewed and multimodal [4,5]. However, a methodology of safety assessment in con- sideration of both uncertainties that meets the regula- tory body requirements has not been proposed, which is mainly due to the presence of epistemic uncertainty.
The objective of this study is, therefore, to develop a methodology of probabilistic safety assessment in consideration of both the epistemic uncertainty and aleatory uncertainty associated with long-term safety assessment and to propose an approach to adopting the assessment results for comparison with the target annual doses of likely and less-likely scenarios.
2.Development of methodology of probabilistic safety assessment
The procedure of the methodology of probabilistic safety assessment proposed in this paper is summarized as follows:
(1)Aleatory uncertainty is quantified as a probabil- ity distribution by applying a statistical process to measured data.
(2)Epistemic uncertainty is quantified as a proba- bility distribution by eliciting expert judgments.
(3)Probabilistic dose assessment is carried out in consideration of both the epistemic uncertainty and aleatory uncertainty by using the radionu- clide migration program with a Monte Carlo simulation.
(4)The cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the maximum annual dose of a certain radionu- clide is calculated in the dose assessment. The probability density function (PDF) is also cal- culated by using the kernel density estimation (KDE).
(5)The larger of the modal value of the PDF and the 50th percentile of the CDF is adopted as the assessment result for comparison with the tar- get annual dose (10µSv y-1) of the likely scenario. The 95th percentile of the CDF is adopted as the assessment result for comparison with the target annual dose (300 µSv y-1) of the less-likely sce- nario.
This methodology allows us to employ dose assess- ment results in compliance with the stepwise target annual dose of likely and less-likely scenarios accord- ing to the occurrence probability of the scenarios with- out classifying the probabilities of parameters involved prior to the safety assessment. This methodology con- sists ofa probabilistic dose assessment (i.e. the first four stages of the methodology) and determination of the compliance with likely and less-likely scenarios (i.e. the fifth stage of the methodology). The first and second stages of this methodology are to quantify the epis- temic uncertainty and aleatory uncertainty associated with the radioactive waste disposal system as probabil- ity distributions, respectively. The third stage is to con- duct a probabilistic dose assessment using the prob- ability distributions related to both epistemic uncer- tainty and aleatory uncertainty to estimate concentra- tions of radionuclides in environmental media, and then to combine the concentrations of radionuclides in the environmental media with habit data such as the breathing rate, food and water ingestion rates, and time spent doing various activities. Finally, annual doses to the public are calculated by combining the radionu- clide concentrations with dose coefficients. The fourth stage is to obtain the PDF and CDF of the maximum annual doses from the dose assessment for determin- ing compliance with the likely and less-likely scenar- ios. The fifth stage is to determine compliance with the likely and less-likely scenarios by comparing the assess- ment results (i.e. the larger of the modal value of the PDF and the 50th percentile of the CDF in the likely scenario, and the 95th percentile of the CDF in the
Figure . Concept of the approach to adopting the assessment results in likely and less-likely scenarios. When dose B (mode of PDF) is greater than dose A (th percentile of CDF), dose B is adopted as the assessment result in the likely scenario and dose C is adopted as the assessment result in the less-likely scenario (a). When dose B (mode of PDF) is less than dose A (th per- centile of CDF), dose A is adopted as the assessment result in the likely scenario and dose C is adopted as the assessment result in the less-likely scenario (b).
less-likely scenario) with the target annual doses. Note that this probabilistic dose assessment adopts the dis- aggregated dose/probability approach [6], which sep- arately evaluates the calculated doses and their prob- ability of occurrence to avoid the risk dilution issue2. Risk dilution means that increasing uncertainty in the parameter values leads to decreasing risk [10], which is defined as an expected value (e.g. calculated doses multiplied by their probabilities of occurrence). In other words, averaging over doses that have very different probabilities of occurrence leads to dilution of the effect of a high dose with a low probability of occurrence.
The proposed method for determining compliance with the likely and less-likely scenario in this paper is summarized in Figure 1. In Figure 1(a), doses B and C are adopted as the assessment results in the likely and less-likely scenarios, respectively. In Figure 1(b), doses A and C are adopted as the assessment results in the likely and less-likely scenarios, respectively. The basis of
the methodology, which employs the dose assessment results in compliance with the stepwise target annual dose of the likely and less-likely scenarios, is described below.
2.1.Likely scenario
The purpose of conducting the safety assessment of the likely scenario is to evaluate whether the basic design of the disposal system has been considered to minimize the effects of radiation on the public under normally expected scenarios. Such scenarios cover the character- istics of the disposal system, exposure pathways, and their future evolution predicted on the basis of past and present conditions [2]. To comply with this pur- pose, according to the Sub-surface Disposal report [2], the safety assessment of the likely scenario needs to demonstrate that the dose to the public is less than the target annual dose (10 µSv y-1) using the most likely parameters. Here, the most likely parameters are the medians of probability distributions if abundant data for statistical processing of the parameters is available [2]. This implies that the mode of the PDF, which is the most likely parameter, exactly coincides with the 50th percentile of the CDF when probability distri- butions such as the normal and log-normal distribu- tions are obtained, meaning that most likely parame- ters are both the mode of the PDF and the 50th per- centile of the CDF. If the amount of statistical data   for the parameter is limited, the most likely param- eter should be selected appropriately with reasonable conservativeness [2]. This approach is applicable to the aleatory uncertainty since it can generally be expressed as normal and log-normal distributions, suggesting that we can select the most likely parameters prior to the safety assessment. However, there has been no appro- priate approach to adopting the most likely parameters in the epistemic uncertainty since the probability distri- bution of the epistemic uncertainty may be skewed and multimodal. To overcome this problem, we propose a methodology that allows us to discuss the occurrence probabilities of the assessment results without classify- ing the probabilities of parameters involved prior to the safety assessment.
To determine compliance with the likely scenario, we can employ the larger of the modal value of the PDF and the 50th percentile of the CDF of the maximum annual dose calculated in the dose assessment to meet the tar- get annual dose in Figure 1. The reason why we focus on the modal value of the PDF and the 50th percentile of the CDF of the calculated maximum annual dose is given.
As stated in the Sub-surface Disposal Report [2], the safety assessment needs to be conducted on the basis of likely and normally conceivable scenarios under likely conditions using the most likely parameters, implying that the safety assessment in the likely scenario needs
to involve calculation of the maximum annual dose, which is the most likely dose to be exposed to the pub- lic. In other words, it can be considered that the require- ment of the Sub-surface Disposal Report [2] for safety assessment in the likely scenarios is satisfied by con- sequently obtaining the most likely maximum annual dose even though the most likely parameter has not been determined prior to the safety assessment. Since the methodology proposed in this study uses a prob- abilistic approach and we can obtain the maximum annual dose distribution, it is easy to focus on the cal- culated most likely maximum annual dose, which is the modal value of the PDF, in the safety assessment.
However, since the amount of statistical data for epis- temic uncertainty considered in the methodology is extremely limited, the conservativeness of safety assess- ment in the likely scenario needs to be appropriately ensured in compliance with the Sub-surface Disposal Report [2]. Unlike in the case that abundant data for statistical processing of the parameter is available, when the amount of statistical data for the parameter is lim- ited, probability distributions of the calculated dose can be skewed and the mode of the PDF does not coin- cide with the 50th percentile of the CDF. Therefore, we focus on not only the modal value of the PDF but also the 50th percentile of the CDF to consider the con- servativeness of the safety assessment in the likely sce- nario. This methodology does not consider the mean value of the PDF since mean values, including the arith- metic and geometric means, can be affected by out- liers. When the mean value is adopted as the assessment result in the presence of outliers, the assessment result in the likely scenario may be too conservative in some cases. To comply with the Sub-surface Disposal Report [2], the effect of uncertainties associated with long-term radioactive waste disposal will be evaluated in detail in the less-likely scenario, and the likely scenario, there- fore, does not need to be defined too conservatively. On the basis of the above, we focus on the modal value of the PDF and the 50th percentile of the CDF.
2.2.Less-likely scenario
The purpose of conducting the safety assessment of the less-likely scenario is to check whether the design of the disposal system is robust with regard to inherent uncer- tainties, i.e. whether the doses on the basis of the sce- nario are below the target annual doses, which are inter- nationally accepted doses for the long-term disposal of radioactive waste, even when taking into account uncertainties that are less likely but that may have a sig- nificant effect in the safety assessment [2]. Here, the tar- get annual dose in the less-likely scenario is 300 µSv y-1, which is determined on the basis of the dose constraint for the public from radioactive waste disposal activi- ties [6]. To comply with this purpose, according to the Sub-surface Disposal Report [2], the safety assessment
needs to demonstrate that the public is protected from the radiation derived from radioactive waste disposal activities, i.e. the dose to the public is less than the target annual dose (300 µSv y-1), even when comprehensively considering the uncertainties associated with long-term radioactive waste disposal.
To determine compliance with the less-likely sce- nario, we propose that the 95th percentile of the CDF is adopted as the assessment result for comparison with the target annual dose (300 µSv y-1) as shown in Figure 1. This methodology is based on the concept provided in ‘Assessing Dose of the Representative Per- son for the Purpose of the Radiation Protection of the Public’ [11] published by the International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP). The reason why we focus on the 95th percentile of the CDF of the calculated maximum annual dose is given.
For the purpose of public protection, the ICRP pro- posed the concept of the ‘representative person’ [11]. The ICRP stated that it is necessary to characterize an individual receiving a dose that is representative of the more highly exposed individuals in the population. This individual is defined as the representative person. The ICRP’s goal of protection of the public is achieved when the dose to the representative person is less than the dose constraint and radiological protection has been optimized. The ICRP recommends that the representa- tive person should be defined such that the probability is less than about 5% that a person drawn at random from the population will receive a greater dose in a proba- bilistic assessment. This indicates that the vast majority of the population is protected from the radiation when the 95th percentile of the dose distribution incorporat- ing the uncertainties involved, which is considered to be a conservative assumption, is less than the dose con- straint for the public. Since another purpose of conduct- ing the safety assessment in the less-likely scenario is to demonstrate whether the public is protected from a radiation source, particularly when it is derived from radioactive waste disposal activities, in consideration of the uncertainties involved, consideration of conserva- tiveness in the concept of the representative person can be analogically adopted to the safety assessment of the less-likely scenario. By demonstrating that the 95th per- centile of the dose distribution, obtained by probabilis- tic dose assessment in consideration of the uncertainties associated with long-term radioactive waste disposal, is less than the target annual dose (300 µSv y-1), the effect of radiation derived from radioactive waste disposal can be concluded to be sufficiently limited if a scientifically reasonable range of uncertainties is considered com- prehensively in assessments for the less-likely scenario. This should mean that the public is protected and also demonstrate the robustness of the disposal system with regard to the uncertainties, which is in compliance with the purpose of conducting the safety assessment in the less-likely scenario.
2.3.
Very unlikely and human intrusion scenarios
Very unlikely and human intrusion scenarios are not considered in the methodology because the occurrence of each scenario would be difficult to express as a proba- bility. These scenarios assume damage to disposal facil- ities caused by incidental human activities and natural events such as earthquakes and volcanic activity that are considered to have an extremely low likelihood, and these scenarios are used to determine whether the design of a disposal system can adequately mitigate the impacts of assumed events in view of radiation protec- tion [1]. On the basis of the definitions of these sce- narios, it is considered that the deterministic approach, which gives a more conservative estimate than the prob- abilistic approach, is appropriate for safety assessment in very unlikely and human intrusion scenarios.
3.Applicability of probabilistic safety assessment
We discuss the applicability of the methodology pro- posed in chapter 2 by considering a model for a sub- surface disposal system as an example. We consider the dose assessment model for exposure pathways in groundwater migration in a sub-surface disposal sys- tem and deal with the epistemic uncertainty concerning the degradation times of the low-diffusivity and low- permeability layers and the aleatory uncertainty con- cerning the permeability coefficient of the host rock.
3.1.Concept of sub-surface disposal system
The engineered and natural barrier system of sub- surface disposal assumed in this paper is shown in Figure 2, referring to the concept of sub-surface dis- posal in ‘Method for Safety Assessment of Sub-surface Disposal: 2008’ [12]. These engineered barriers, espe- cially the low-diffusivity and low-permeability layers, which are composed of cementitious and bentonite materials, respectively, are expected to prevent or delay
Figure . Schematic diagram of the radionuclide migration model for a sub-surface disposal facility [].
the migration of radionuclides via the groundwater pathway from the disposal facility to the biosphere. However, the cementitious material can be altered by reactions such as dissolution into the groundwater and the formation of secondary minerals caused by chemi- cal components in the groundwater. Furthermore, the bentonite can also be altered by reacting with hyper- alkaline pore fluids generated from the interaction between the groundwater and the cementitious mate- rial. With respect to the performance of engineered barriers, these reactions may affect their capacity to act as physical and chemical barriers to the migration of radionuclides, which is also important in the safety assessment for the disposal of radioactive waste. How- ever, it is difficult to quantitatively predict how and when each layer will lose its barrier capacity as a result of long-term alteration. This paper considers the epis- temic uncertainty in the safety assessment concerning the degradation times when the performances of the low-diffusivity and low-permeability layers are lost.
The natural barrier, which is the host rock shown in Figure 2, is also expected to prevent or delay the migra- tion of radionuclides and its permeability coefficient is a critical parameter for safety assessment. According to the U.S. Department of Energy (1998) [13], uncer- tainties such as the permeability coefficient of the host rock should be treated as aleatory uncertainties when it is possible to obtain more or better data and statisti- cal parameters such as the mean, variance and standard deviation3. As an example, the permeability coefficient of the host rock is considered as an aleatory uncertainty in this paper.
3.2.Quantification of epistemic uncertainty and aleatory uncertainty
... Epistemic uncertainty concerning the degradation times of engineered barriers
This section briefly describes the methodology used  to quantify the epistemic uncertainty concerning the degradation times of the low-diffusivity and low- permeability layers. This methodology is described indetail in [4]. The epistemic uncertainty concerning the degradation time of each layer can be divided into the following:
Epistemic uncertainty concerning the alteration processes of each layer.
Epistemic uncertainty concerning the degradation time of each layer for a certain alteration process.
The former epistemic uncertainty originates from the fact that how each layer will change in the future  is unclear. This type of epistemic uncertainty can be quantified by using techniques based on logic trees [14], by which the options of models and/or scenarios are identified, and evidential support logic [15], by which probability of each option is quantified. Figure 3 shows the  identification  and  quantification  of  the  former epistemic uncertainty by eliciting the judgments of four experts (experts A, B, C, and D). Their research interests include the chemistry of cement and the performance assessment of engineered barriers for radioactive dis- posal systems. Eight and 20 alteration processes were identified for the low-diffusivity and low-permeability layers, respectively. The subjective probability of the occurrence of each branch was also quantified. The sub- jective probability of each alteration process was deter- mined by multiplying the probabilities along all the component branches.
On the other hand, the latter epistemic uncer- tainty was derived from the fact that the duration for which each layer will prevent or delay the migration of radionuclides is unclear. This type of epistemic uncer- tainty is quantified as below. First, it is necessary to sim- ulate the alteration process of each layer by using geo- chemical and transport codes and to obtain informa- tion concerning the alteration of each layer as a func- tion of time. In our example, experts quantified the probability that the performance of each layer cannot be maintained during each period by referring to the simulation results and their knowledge on the alter- ation of each layer. Here, the probabilities are expressed as relative values, with the probability of the degra- dation time of the low-permeability layer being from
3     106   to  1     107   years  being  100%.  For  exam- ple, the conditional CDF for the degradation time of the low-permeability layer for the top scenario (Clog- ging/TST/Promotion/Occurrence) in Figure 3(b) can be quantified as shown in Figure 4.
As described above, the epistemic uncertainty con- cerning the alteration processes of each layer and the epistemic uncertainty concerning the degradation time of each layer for a certain alteration process were quan- tified as a subjective probability and a conditional CDF, respectively. Next, the epistemic uncertainty concern- ing the degradation times of the low-diffusivity and low-permeability layers was quantified as CDFs Pi(t) given by@1
where subscripts i and j indicate the serial numbers of each layer and each alteration process, respectively. Pˆi (t )  is  the  subjective  probability  for  the  epistemic
uncertainty concerning alteration process j of layer i. Pi(t ) is the conditional CDF for the epistemic uncer- tainty concerning the degradation time of layer i in alteration process j. Figure 5 shows the CDFs indicating the degradation times of the low-diffusivity and low- permeability layers. In the safety assessment, the max- imum cumulative probability during each period for each layer was selected conservatively. Probability mass functions were obtained from the CDFs and used in the safety assessment (Table 1).
Figure . Logic trees concerning the alteration processes of the low-diﬀusivity layer (a) and low-permeability layer (b) []. The logic trees were derived by eliciting the judgments of four experts (experts A, B, C, and D).
... Aleatory uncertainty concerning the permeability coeﬃcient of the host rock
The aleatory uncertainty concerning the permeability coefficient of the host rock was quantified in a previ- ous paper [5], in which the aleatory uncertainty was expressed as a log-normal distribution by applying a statistical process to measured values. The log-normal distribution used in the present paper is shown in Table 1.
3.3.
Dose assessment model
... Concept of the dose assessment model GoldSim, which is Monte Carlo simulation software including a radionuclide migration module, was used in the dose assessment. This software allows us to prob- abilistically simulate the release, transport, and other processes within complex engineered and/or natural environmental systems [16].
Table . Probability distributions for the epistemic uncertainty and aleatory uncertainty used in the safety assessment.Our radionuclide migration model was established with reference to the concept of the sub-surface dis- posal in [12] (Figure 2). While in the model in [12], the low-diffusivity layer was composed of the degraded and intact parts and the low-permeability layer was only composed of an intact part, in the present model, the low-diffusivity and low-permeability layers are composed of an intact part up to the degradation times of the low-diffusivity and low-permeability layers in the simulation. An intact part is replaced by a degraded part after the degradation times of the low-diffusivity and low-permeability layers in the simulation. Regard- ing the concrete pit assumed to maintain the structural strength of the facility, it was originally expected that it would not delay or prevent the migration of radionu- clides. Therefore, in the present model, the concrete pit is assumed to be composed of only a degraded part, while the model in [12] considered the concrete pit   to be composed of degraded and intact parts. Details of the numerical model concerning radionuclide migration and radiation exposure are given in [12].
To determine the number of realizations in the dose assessment, the Monte Carlo simulation was carried out for 50,000 cases. Here, the 5th, 50th and 95th per- centiles of the maximum annual dose distribution were calculated to confirm the convergence of the solutions. It was found that the percentage errors among  the 5th, 50th and 95th percentiles at and exceeding 20,000 realizations were less than 5%, indicating that  the  5th, 50th and 95th percentiles converged after 20,000 realizations. Thus, the number of realizations was set to 20,000 in this study.
... Variable parameter sets
The variable parameter sets for the engineered barri- ers are shown in Table 2. In the present model, it is assumed that 14C and 129I are instantaneously released from radioactive waste. The provided initial invento- ries of 14C and 129I were 4.38   1015  and 1.04    1012    Bq, respectively [12]. The effective diffusion coefficient and porosity of each intact part were used up to the degradation time of each layer in the simulation. After
Table . Variable parameters for engineered barriers. The parameters were determined from [].Figure  . CDFs  indicating  the   degradation   time   of   the low-permeability layer for the top scenario (Clog- ging/TST/Promotion/Occurrence) in Figure (b) []. The CDFs were derived by eliciting the judgments of four experts (experts A, B, C, and D).
the degradation time of each layer, the effective diffu- sion coefficient and porosity of each degraded part were used in the simulation. Regarding the groundwater flow rate in the engineered barriers, a value of 1.8 10-4 m3 s-1, which was calculated by groundwater flow analysis for the permeability coefficient of the low-permeability layer of 3 10-13 m s-1 in [12], was used up to the degra- dation time of the low-permeability layer in the sim- ulation. After the degradation time, the flow rate in the engineered barriers was obtained by multiplying the Darcy flux (m s-1) of the host rock by the cross- sectional area (m2) of the low-permeability layer, imply- ing that the performance of the low-permeability layer has been lost. Details of the other parameters are given in [12].
Figure . CDFs indicating the degradation times of the low- diﬀusivity layer (a) and low-permeability layer (b) []. The CDFs were derived by eliciting the judgments of four experts (experts A, B, C, and D).
Figure . CDFs indicating the maximum annual doses of C (a) and I (b) for exposure pathways.
3.4.Results
... Cumulative distribution functions
Figure 6 shows the CDFs of the maximum annual doses of 14C and 129I for each exposure pathway. The expo- sures due to the ingestion of fishery products and the ingestion of drinking water were the most critical for the dose assessment of 14C and 129I, respectively.
... Probability density function
We also focused on the mode of the PDF of the max- imum annual dose calculated in the dose assessment. The PDF can be obtained by KDE, which is a nonpara- metric way of estimating the true PDF f (x) of a ran- dom variable X (i.e. the maximum annual dose in this
paper). The kernel density estimator fˆ(x), which is the
best approximation of f (x), is given as@2
where K( ) is the kernel function and h is the band- width. There are various types of kernel function and bandwidth selection method. In general, it is impor- tant to choose the most appropriate kernel function and bandwidth to approximate the true PDF. Hence, we first considered which kernel function and bandwidth selec- tion method are most appropriate in the dose assess- ment. The density function in the R program was used in this study, where the Gaussian, Epanechnikov, rect- angular, triangular, biweight, cosine and optcosine ker- nel functions, and the Silverman’s rule of thumb (SROT) [17], simple normal reference (SNR) [18], least-squares cross-validation (LSCV) [19], biased cross-validation
(BCV) [20], and Sheather and Jones plug-in (SJPI) [21] bandwidth selection methods were considered.
First, the effect of changing the kernel function on the mode of the PDF was confirmed using the SJPI  bandwidth selection method (Figure 7). There was lit- tle difference in the modes and shapes of the PDFs of 14C and 129I derived from each kernel function. Next, the effect of changing the bandwidth selection method on the mode of the PDF was confirmed using the Gaus- sian kernel function (Figure 8). There was a large dif- ference in the shape of the PDFs of 14C and 129I derived from each bandwidth selection method. On the other hand, there was no significant difference in the mode of each PDF, as shown in Table 3, suggesting that chang- ing the bandwidth selection method has little effect  on the mode of PDFs. Jones et al. [22] stated that the SJPI method is a useful compromise between the LSCV
and SROT methods. Furthermore, Sheather [23] rec-ommended the use of the SJPI or LSCV bandwidth selection method. Therefore, the Gaussian kernel functhe SJPI bandwidth selection method are used in this paper.
On the basis of the above consideration, KDE was carried out to obtain the PDFs of the maximum annual doses of 14C and 129I in their most critical exposure pathway. Figure 9 shows the PDFs and CDFs indicat- ing the maximum annual doses of 14C and 129I in their most critical exposure pathway. The shapes of all the PDFs were bimodal as shown in Figure 9. This is due to the radionuclide transport model used in this paper, in which it was assumed that the intact and degraded parts in each engineered barrier did not coexist.
Figure . Eﬀect of changing kernel function on kernel density estimation. (a) and (b) PDFs indicating the maximum annual doses of C for the exposure pathway of ingestion of ﬁshery products and I for the exposure pathway of ingestion of drink- ing water, respectively.
However, intact and degraded parts coexist in an actual environment. It would be useful to elicit expert judg- ments on the ratio of intact and degraded parts in each engineered barrier and to improve the radionu- clide migration model in GoldSim.
... Comparison of assessment result with target annual dose
In this subsection, we illustrate how to demonstrate the assessment results in compliance with the stepwise target annual doses (10 and 300 µSv y-1) of likely and less-likely scenarios based on the methodology pro- posed in this paper.
Figure 9(a,b) shows the PDFs and CDFs of the maxi- mum annual doses of 14C and 129I obtained using PDFs derived from the expert judgments, respectively. The modes of the maximum annual doses of 14C and 129I were 2.5 and 7.7 10-3 µSv y-1, whereas the 50th per- centiles of the maximum annual doses were 2.9 and
8.9× 10-2 µSv y-1, respectively, i.e. the 50th percentiles
Figure . Eﬀect of changing bandwidth selection method on kernel density estimation. (a) and (b) PDFs indicating the maxi- mum annual dose of C for the exposure pathway of ingestion of ﬁshery products and I for the exposure pathway of inges- tion of drinking water, respectively.
were larger than the modes. In this case, the 50th per- centiles are adopted as the assessment results for com- parison with the target annual dose (10 µSv y-1) in the likely scenario. The 95th percentiles of the CDF are adopted as the assessment results for comparison with the target annual dose (300 µSv y-1) in the less-likely scenario.
As described above, it was demonstrated that the methodology proposed in this paper was applicable to the safety assessment of likely and less-likely scenarios for the sub-surface disposal system in consideration of
Table . Modes of PDFs in Figure  using diﬀerent bandwidth selection methods.Figure . PDFs and CDFs indicating the maximum annual doses of C for the exposure pathway of ingestion of ﬁshery products
(a) and I for the exposure pathway of ingestion of drinking water (b).
both the epistemic uncertainty and the aleatory uncer- tainty.
4.Conclusion
We developed the methodology of a probabilistic safety assessment in consideration of both the epistemic uncertainty and aleatory uncertainty associated with long-term safety assessment. We also proposed an approach to adopting the assessment results for com- parison with the target annual doses of likely and less- likely scenarios. This approach allows us to adopt the assessment results without classifying the probabili- ties of parameters involved prior to the safety assess- ment. The applicability of the proposed methodol- ogy was  demonstrated with  a  safety  assessment  for a sub-surface disposal system, in which the epis- temic uncertainty concerning the degradation times of the low-diffusivity and low-permeability layers and the aleatory uncertainty concerning the permeability coefficient of the host rock were considered as an example. We are continuing to validate the applicability of the methodology for different disposal systems (e.g. near-surface concrete pit disposal) in consideration of different types of epistemic uncertainty (e.g. transition rates due to tectonic uplift and denudation) and aleatory uncertainty (e.g. the distribution coefficient (Kd)) to rationalize and optimize radioactive waste disposal.
