<title>Radiation protection knowledge and practices in interventional cardiologists practicing in Africa: a cross sectional surveyl</title>
<author>Endale Tefera, Shakeel A. Qureshi, Alemayehu M. Gezmu, Loeto Mazhani</author>
<Affiliation>1.Department of Paediatrics & Adolescent Health, division of Cardiology, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Botswana, Gaborone, Botswana.2.Evelina London Children’s Hospital, Guys and St Thomas’ Foundation Trust,London, United Kingdom</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Radiological Protection</Journal>
<Publishing_house> IOP Publishing</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1088/1361-6498/ab5840</DOI>
<URL> https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6498/ab5840</URL>
Abstract
We conducted a survey of doctors working in the cardiac catheterization laboratories in Africa on their knowledge, attitude and practice with respect to radiation   protection.   Of   seventy-two   respondents   contacted,   61   (84.7%) completed the questionnaire. Twenty-eight, (45.9%) were younger than 45 years. Thirty-seven, (60.6%) had less than 10 years of experience in the laboratory.  Only  28  (45.9%)  had  undertaken  radiation  protection  training.Fifty-eight, (95.1%) consistently used lead aprons. Forty-seven, (77%) reported consistently using thyroid shields. Ten (16.4%) consistently used radiation protection eyeglasses, whilst 36 (59%) never used them. Thermoluminescent Dosimeter  badges  were  consistently  used  in  23  (37.7%).  Forty-two, (68.9%)reported   having   ceiling   mounted   lead/acrylic   shields.   Level   of   radiation exposure in the most recent one year was ≤2mSv in 14, between 2 and 20 mSv in 8 and between 20 and 30mSv in 2, whilst 33 did not know their dose readings.The use of basic radiation protection tools as well as the knowledge andmeasurement of radiation	 exposure among	interventional cardiologists working  in  Africa  is  low.  Unavailability  of  some  of  the  protective  tools  and knowledge gap in terms of radiation protection and monitoring of self-exposure were some of the reasons for suboptimal self-protection against ionizing radiation among our respondents.  We suggest that initiatives be taken by all stakeholders  to  train  this  group  of  medical  professionals  in  basic  radiation protection to avoid unnecessary exposure to themselves, coworkers and patients.Keywords: radiation protection, cardiac catheterization, occupational doses,survey, training, Africa
1. Introduction
Ionizing radiation exposure during cardiac catheterization procedures carries
potential health hazards for the patient and staff (1-4). Health problems are more frequently observed in workers performing fluoroscopically-guided cardiovascular procedures than in unexposed controls, raising the need to spread the culture of safety in the catheterization laboratory (5). As radiation doses delivered to patients and medical staff during interventional cardiology procedures are among the highest in medicine (6), interventional cardiologists and radiologists are exposed to more ionizing radiation than physicians in any other specialized medical fields (7-9). However, despite the extensive and routine use of ionizing radiation in their clinical practice, cardiologists worldwide typically have little or no training in radiological protection (10).
In the last couple of decades, efforts have been underway in many African countries to establish cardiac surgery and interventional cardiology services as public, charity or private settings (11-13). Young and enthusiastic professionals have joined and will continue to join interventional cardiology practice in these and future centers. Therefore, it is mandatory that the safety of such practitioners, co-workers and their patients be ensured to avoid adverse outcomes and also tackle an irrational fear of radiation (4,14) that would ultimately hamper practice, should adverse outcomes occur in this population. We sought to determine the current existing knowledge and practice of radiation protection among interventional cardiologists working in some of these centers in Africa.
2. Materials and methods
The study was a cross sectional survey of cardiologists working in the cardiac catheterization laboratories across Africa  on basic radiation protection practices.  A standardized and pre-tested questionnaire was prepared. The questionnaire was a self-administered and this was accomplished in two ways. We distributed the questionnaire to interventional cardiologists who participated on the 4th  edition of Congenital,  Structural  and  Valvular Heart  Disease  Intervention-Africa (CSI-Africa) congress in Nairobi Kenya. This congress is open to all interventional cardiologists in Africa. For the rest who were not present in the congress, the questionnaire was sent via email and also hand-delivered to their institutions in few cases. The email messages were sent via office 365 (15) survey forms in order to ensure anonymity of responses. Data were entered into Statistical Software for Social Sciences (SPSS) for Mac (IBM Corporation, New York, USA) and were analyzed. Data were displayed in frequencies and percentages. The Institutional Review Boards (IRBs) of the University of Botswana and Ministry of Health & Wellness of Botswana approvedthe study.
3. Results
Of the total of 72 questionnaires distributed directly and via email using office 365survey forms (15), 61 participants responded.   Responses were anonymous in such a way that the respondents, institutions or countries were not identifiable. Forty-four, (72.1%) were males. Twenty-eight, (45.9%) of the respondents were younger than 45 years of age. With respect to experience in the catheterization laboratory,37 (60.6%) of the respondents had professional experience of less than 10 years.Twenty-eight,  (45.9%)  were  pediatric  and  congenital  interventionists.  Details  of characteristics of the respondents are shown in table 1. Only 28 (45.9%) reported to have undertaken dedicated radiation protection training. Out of the 28 respondents who had undertaken the training, in 18, their own institutions organized the training, whilst in the others non-governmental organizations or charities organized it.  Of  the  33  (54.1%)  who  reported  not  to  have  undertaken  any  training,  indicated that they would like to undertake the training, if given an opportunity.With respect to the year-of-make of the catheterization laboratory (angiography) equipment, 29 (47.5%) reported ≤10 years whilst 2 reported >30 years.
Table 1. Description of characteristics of respondents
Fifty-eight, (95.1%) responded that they always used lead aprons whenever they worked in the catheterization laboratory, whilst the rest appeared to have worked without these sometimes. Forty-seven, (77%) consistently used thyroid protection lead shields, whilst 6 (9.8%) reported that they used these occasionally or not at all. Only 10 (16.4%) consistently used radiation protection eyeglasses, whilst 36 (59%) never used them. Forty-two, (68.9%) reported that their lab is equipped with ceiling suspended lead/acrylic shields whilst 19 (31.1%) said they don’t have it. None of the participants reported using radiation protection gloves consistently. Use of the radiation	protection	tools	by	their	co-workers (assistants,	scrub nurses,radiographic technicians etc.) was reported to be similar to the respondents themselves (table 2). For those who reported not to have used one or more of the radiation protection tools, majority 45/61 (73.8%), reported that the major reason was unavailability of the tools in their institutions.
Table 2. Responses of participants on basic radiation protection practices Thermoluminescent  Dosimeter  (TLD)  badges  were  consistently  used  only  in  2(37.7%) of the respondents. When asked about their level of radiation exposure in the most recent one year: 14 said it was ≤2mSv; 8 reported between 2 and 20 mSv;2 reported between 20 and 30mSv, whilst 33 did not know their exposures/doses.When asked if they ever had high readings on TLD badge to the best of their memory, 17 answered yes; 28, no and 14 did not know and 2 did not respond.However,  when  asked  whether  they  know  the  annual  dose  limit  of  radiation exposure   for   workers   (International   Commission   on   Radiological   Protection-ICRP)(16), only 5 responded correctly, whilst the rest responded incorrectly or did not know. We also asked if local radiation protection authorities regularly inspected their radiological facilities. Ten reported intervals between 1 - 3 months; 10 every 3-6 months; 17 every 1-year, whilst the rest reported that facilities were not inspected at all or they had no information.
Discussion
Our study found out that prior training on basic radiation protection measures,basic knowledge regarding exposure to ionizing radiation and the use of the most basic radiation protection tools are lower than that expected to ensure safety of the operators themselves and their co-workers. This is alarming because ionizing radiation exposure in cardiac catheterization laboratories is primarily reduced or prevented  by  the  application   of   basic  x-ray   optimization   tools  and technique (2,8,14) and all involved personnel should receive adequate training and knowledge of them (10). Though it has been reported in another study that interventional cardiologists  generally  tend  to  underutilize  radiation  protection  tools  (14),  the major reason in our study was unavailability of the protective tools or the lack of knowledge/training, rather than preference or carelessness. Whilst lead aprons appear to be available in almost all institutions and thyroid shields in most institutions, facilities like leaded eyeglasses and radiation gloves were not available in most institutions. Ceiling  suspended lead/acrylic shields were also  not  available in a significant number of institutions. A majority of our respondents were young and early career professionals with respect to their exposure to cardiac catheterization laboratories. Needless excessive radiation exposure at such young age is likely to result in adverse consequences in their lifetime, due to the additive effects over a long time and also due to the longer age they are expected to live (17). Our study looked at utilization of only some of the basic tools for self- and co-workers protection. We did not look at some of the knowledge, attitude and practice elements   that   may   be   important   for   staff   and   patient   protection,   such   as: maintaining   distance   from   the   x-ray   source,   avoiding   direct   x-ray  exposure,positioning the table, adjusting the image intensifier close to the patient, varying projections, avoiding left anterior oblique cranial projections, limiting the use of steep   angulated   views,   minimizing   fluoroscopy   time,   reducing  the   number of acquired frames and series, storing fluoroscopy instead of cine, reducing the frame rate, limiting image magnification, and the use of collimation (14,18). It is highly likely that these protective maneuvers may also be less utilized, given the high proportion of respondents who did not take radiation protection trainings.All the staff involved in interventional cardiology procedures should have a general knowledge of safe operating practices in a radiation environment and be familiar with the operation of the particular imaging equipment they are using (16,19,20).More than half of our respondents reported that they had never undertaken any training  on  radiation  exposure.  This  is  alarming  because  training  in  the  use  of radiation protection tools and minimizing exposure during procedures is essential to ensure the safety of the operator and the patient and decrease deterministic and stochastic effects of ionizing radiation (16,21,22). Studies in developed countries have shown that high-dose exposure to ionizing radiation mostly results from a lack of awareness on the effects of ionizing radiation, and a lack of knowledge on the distribution and behavior of scattered radiation (23-25). Following the joint position statement  by  the  IAEA  and  WHO  known  as  the  Bonn  Call-for-action,  which  was inaugurated in December 2012 (26), the AfroSafeRAD campaign was launched in 2015 in Nairobi,	Kenya	with	the	objective	of	encouraging	self-regulation medical professionals in radiology through promoting a radiation safety culture and creating radiation safety awareness in patients and the public (27). Included in this initiative are mainly radiologists, radiographers, radiotherapists and their professional societies. It is important that the interventional cardiology community in Africa joins such initiatives directed towards promoting radiation safety. Some readily available online resources may also help (28,29).The  international  commission  on  radiation  protection  (ICRP)  has  made detailed recommendations for training of interventional cardiologists in radiation protection that  would  require  20  –  30  hours  (4).  The  recommendation  includes:  detailed knowledge	and	understanding	of	principles	and	process	of	justification, deterministic   effects   of   radiation,   general   principles   of   radiation   protection including optimization, operational radiation protection, particular patient radiation protection	aspects,	and	particular	staff	radiation	protection	aspects.	The commission recommends that they have basic understanding of radiological quantities  and  units,  physical  characteristics  of  X-ray  machines,  fundamentals of radiobiology  and  biological  effects  of  radiation,  risks  of  cancer  and  hereditary diseases, typical doses from diagnostic procedures, quality control and quality assurance and national regulations and international standards. It also prescribes general   awareness   in   atomic   structure,   X-ray   production   and   interaction   of
radiation; nuclear structure and reactivity, fundamentals of radiation detection,  and risks from fetal exposure.A significant number of our respondents reported that their facilities did not have ceiling suspended lead/acrylic shields. This protective shield would have been very important in protecting the head and the eyes from scattered radiation (16), as the use of radiation eyeglasses (30-32) is very low among our respondents. It is very important that interventional cardiologists and other professionals directly involved with ionizing radiation wear dosimeters and know their level of exposure. Only 36% of  our  respondents  reported  wearing  dosimeters  consistently,  much  lower  than other published studies (9,33-35). ICRP has published the annual dose limits for workers (16). Whole body: an effective dose of 20 mSv per year, averaged over define periods of 5 years, provided that the effective dose does not exceed 50 mSv in any single
year. Extremities: hands and feet, an equivalent dose of 500 mSv per year. Skin: an equivalent dose of 500mSv per year, averaged over 1cm2 area of skin regardless of the area exposed. Lens of the eye: an equivalent dose limit for the lens of the eye of 20 mSv per year, averaged over defined periods of 5 years, provided that the equivalent dose to the lens of the eye does not exceed 50 mSv in any single year (16). WHO recommended
that an investigation should be carried out when monthly exposure reaches 0.5 mSv for effective  dose,  5  mSv  for  dose  to  the  lens  of  the  eye,  or  15  mSv  to  the  hands or extremities (36). These exposures can be measured only if dosimeters are worn and worn properly. Our survey inquired only whether the practitioners were wearing dosimeters. We did not investigate whether they wore the personal dosimeters properly or whether they wore two personal dosimeters (one under the apron and one over the apron) as per ICRP recommendation (16).
4. Conclusion
The use of basic radiation protection tools as well as the knowledge and measurement of radiation exposure among interventional cardiologists working in Africa is low. Whilst the major reason for underutilization of the protective tools was reported to be unavailability of the tools, there also exists a knowledge gap in terms of radiation protection, monitoring of self-exposure and probably with other additional methods of protecting themselves, their co-workers and patients. It is important	that	stakeholders	including	Universities,	training institutions,scientific/professional societies, regulatory and health authorities, international organizations including IAEA and WHO, industries and others strengthen their efforts to address this important problem.
5. Limitations of the study
Our study has important limitations. We did not address important factors including the typical annual number of procedures performed, specific issues related to the use of personal dosimeters, management of protective tools including the way lead aprons and thyroid shields were stored after use and many other important issues.We did not also inquire details of contents of the radiation protection trainings
taken for those who claimed to have taken the training. However, we believe that our study may lay foundation for subsequent detailed studies.
Acknowledgements
This study did not receive any funding. We thank Stanislava Kolkova for assisting in distributing the questionnaires to respondents.
