<title>Radiation-induced transformation of  Hafnium composition</title>
<author>Alexander Ulybkin a, *, Alexander Rybka a, Konstantin Kovtun b, Vladimir Kutny a,
Victor Voyevodin a, c, Alexey Pudov a, Roman Azhazha a</author>
<Affiliation>a National Science Center “Kharkov Institute of Physics and Technology”, “Institute of Solid State Physics, Materials Science and Technologies”, Kharkiv,
Ukraine
b Scientiﬁc-Technological Center “Beryllium” of NAS of Ukraine, Kharkiv, Ukraine
c V. N. Karazin Kharkiv National University, Kharkiv, Ukraine</Affiliation>
<year>2019</year>
<Jounral>NUCLEAR ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2019.06.007</DOI>
<URL>https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2019.06.007</URL>
ABSTRACT
The safety and efﬁciency of nuclear reactors largely depend on the monitoring and control of nuclear radiation. Due to the unique nuclear-physical characteristics, Hf is one of the most promising materials for the manufacturing of the control rods and the emitters of neutron detectors. It is proposed to use the Compton neutron detector with the emitter made of Hf in the In-core Instrumentation System (ICIS) for monitoring the neutron ﬁeld. The main advantages of such a detector in comparison the conventional b- emission sensors are the possibility of reaching of a higher cumulative radiation dose and the absence of signal delays. The response time of the detection is extremely important when a nuclear reactor is operating near its critical operational parameters. Taking Hf as an example, the general principles for calculating the chains of materials transformation under neutron irradiation are reported. The inﬂuence of 179m1Hf on the Hf composition changing dynamics and the process of transmutants’ (Ta, W) generation were determined. The effect of these processes on the absorbing properties of Hf, which inevitably predetermine the lifetime of the detector and its ability to generate a signal, is estimated.
Keywords: Transmutation Composition calculation Hafnium detector Prompt response Nuclear energy
Burn-up life
1.Introduction
The most important measurements which ensure the required level of the nuclear power plants’ safety and efﬁciency are the monitoring and the control of the neutron ﬂux spatial density and the level of energy release in the reactor core. These measurements are directly related to the operating parameters of the reactor and its power [1].
Hafnium is one of the most promising materials for the ele- ments of the ICIS. This metal has unique nuclear-physical proper- ties: effective absorption of thermal and epithermal neutrons; high corrosion resistance and thermal conductivity; dimensional sta- bility in radiation conditions; partial recovery of absorbing prop- erties during prolonged irradiation in neutron ﬂuxes [2,3]. It is due to these advantages that Hf is one of the promising materials for the manufacture of various reactor core elements.
At present, there is a task of selecting a candidate neutron- sensitive element for an in-core neutron detector. Such detectorshould be operated reliably for more than 4 years (it is the maximum lifetime of the neutron detectors in the WWER), and also be able to instantly respond to any ﬂuctuations in the neutron ﬁeld. In light of this, the search for materials, which are capable of retaining their properties under unconventional irradiation con- ditions (higher irradiation dose and higher temperature), is highly relevant.
The widely used b-emission Self Powered Neutron Detectors
(SPND) are not able to satisfy the requirements presented above [4e7]. Therefore, instead of inertial SPND, it is proposed to use Compton (prompt response) SPND, and to take the metallic Hf as the emitter material of such detector. In connection with this choice, it is important to understand how the neutron irradiation and the subsequent composition changes affect the ability of Hf to form the SPND’s signal.
From the standpoint of the nuclear reactor’s sustainable and safe operation, the primary problem that needs to be solved for any used materials is the calculation (or prediction) of the isotopic and elemental compositions. In the literature sources, one can ﬁnd many papers, which are dedicated to the transmutation and burn- out calculation methods. Unfortunately, these methods are often presented in such a way that it is difﬁcult to apply in practice. The
reason for this is the authors’ desire to summarize the information as much as possible, without going into details. The most frequentlyencountered demonstration of the nuclear transformations’ calcu- lation method is reduced to the consideration of a three-nuclides chain (both for serial transformations and for the case of branch- ing) and usually has the format as in work [8]. Sometimes the au-obtained [9].
At present, there are a sufﬁcient number of certiﬁed software products that allow to calculate any burn-out and transmutation processes with high accuracy. Such codes are very expensive, and not all researchers have access to them. Therefore, the method of “manual” calculation is a convenient, acceptable and even neces- sary tool that allows you to study ﬁne details of the occurring processes.
In this paper, the basic principles of the materials’ (which exposed to neutrons) composition calculation are demonstrated step by step. This is done on the example of natural Hf.
This article is a continuation of the works [4,10e14] dedicated to the development of the SPND with an emitter of Hf, as well as the study of the possibility of using such sensor in the ICIS.
The Hf SPND is a neutron detector of Compton type, which has an instantaneous (prompt) response. Typically, prompt response detectors are used in an emergency protection system. The signals of the ICIS detectors should have a wide enough range of propor- tionality to the neutron ﬂow (i.e. the detector needs to have a sufﬁcient level of the neutron ﬂux sensitivity). The sensitivity of the Compton SPNDs with Hf emitters is at an acceptable level [15e17]. This allows using of such detector for the monitoring and control of the energy release in the reactor core.
As mentioned above, the change in Hafnium’s ability to absorb neutrons is important from the standpoint of the SPND’s signal formation. The efﬁciency of the (n, g)-reaction that causes the subsequent (g, e)-process is implied. The evaluation of the composition changes and absorption ability will be implemented  by using the “manual” calculation.
2.The Hafnium transformation chain
The burning-out of the initial nuclide and the formation of a new one in the nuclear reaction involving a neutron can be rep- resented by the following schematic (all chain members are irra- diated with neutrons):@1
For members from (1), the change in concentration over time can be described by a system of n ordinary differential equations.
@2
where r [s—1] is a nuclear transformation rate (a decay (l) or a  nuclear reaction (rx, x e a reaction type).
The solution of such a system was obtained by Bateman more than 100 years ago [18] and has the next form:@3
where m ¼ 1…n; k ¼ 1…n; n e is the number of chain members; r
can be represented as l, rx or (l rx), it depends on the process which is demanded to describe.
If there is a branching in the chain (for example, the chain has a division into two branches A and B, Fig. 1), then, applying the Bateman solution to it, the rk in the product with k  [1,  n-1] after  the branching point, must be changed to partial values, according to the branching ratio  (qi  ri/(rA  rB), i   A;  B).  In this case,  each branch must be calculated independently. If the branches are further connected again, then the number of atoms at such a point (as well as “below” this point) can be obtained by summing up the transformations along both chains [8].
The use of the Bateman’s solution requires compliance to the following rules: 1) when setting up the linear chains, for the original nuclides, one should select only those nuclides that exis- ted at the initial moment; 2) the splitting of a complex chain into linear independent components (branches) is applicable to any nuclear transformation, in which a change in the substance con- centration occurs over time; 3) the concentration of the nuclides located in the chain after (“below”) the branching point is calcu- lated by taking into account the branching coefﬁcients for each branch (in the equation for the concentration, you need to add a multiplier corresponding to the branching coefﬁcient); 4) the concentration of the nuclides below the point, where the branches are reconnected again, is calculated by adding the concentration portions formed for each of the branches taking into account their branching ratios.
The nuclides that are part of the natural Hf undergo nuclear transformations under the inﬂuence of a neutron ﬂux (Fig. 1). The schematic in the ﬁgure is considerably simpliﬁed, as it does not show the metastable states of the formed isotopes (you can see all isomers in Ref. [4]). For example, due to the small fraction of 174Hf (0.16%) in the natural mixture, the corresponding transformation chains (with participation of 176m,177mLu) (Fig. 1) are not considered. This is done with the aim to demonstrate the above principles for the concentrations calculation as clearly as possible.
As known, the natural Hf composition includes 6 stable isotopes. Therefore, it is necessary to consider 6 initial sources (parent) nu-
clides, which simultaneously burn-out in (n, g)-reactions of radia- tive neutron captures. Each of the chain members has its own reaction cross-section (Table 1) and makes its own contribution to the concentration change of all following nuclides. For example, if you want to calculate the N(t) for 178Hf, you have to account 4 portions of atoms Fig. 2: contributions from 174,176,177Hf and а depletion of initial 178Hf concentration. As a result, it is necessary to
@4
The Bateman’s solution allows you to separate and study any contributions. For example, counting the change in concentration  of 183W, it is necessary to separately calculate which portion
Fig. 1. A simpliﬁed schematic for the Hf isotope transformation under the inﬂuence of the neutrons ﬂux.
Table 1
The thermal and the resonant neutron capture cross-sections and the half-lives of nuclides from the chain on Fig. 1 taking into account: the resonance integral I; the k·T (600 K); the spectrum hardness kres/th ¼ 0.436 and the Westkott g-factor.
Fig. 2. The linear chains for the calculation of 178Hf concentration.
(fraction) of W atoms is formed by the branches “A” and “B” from each of the 6 original Hf nuclides. In particular, if you look at the contribution from 180Hf (see. Fig. 1), then we get following chains:@5
By calculating the 183W concentrations from each of  the branches and then adding them, we get the fraction of the full concentration that is formed due to the transformation of 180Hf. To ﬁnd out the true behavior of N(t), we need to make up chains for allHf  isotopes.  These  chains  will  be  similar to (5).  Then we need to
describe each of the chains with an equation like (3), and in the end
we need to sum up all contributions.
3.The Hafnium composition change
The nuclear reaction rate r [s—1] depends of the neutron ﬂux, the neutron energy and the interaction cross-sections of the material atoms subjected to the irradiation. The dependence of the cross- sections of the (n, g)-reactions for the nuclei of heavy elements has a complicated character because they have a large number of resonances, related to the excitation of the energy levels of the compound nuclei [19].
The equation for the r includes 2 components and has the following look [20,21]:
@6
integral; Fn is the neutron ﬂux density; the cross-section s equals
to Refs. [20,21].@7
Еn 0.0253 eV; ET k·T; T is the temperature of the medium where the neutrons are moderated; k is the Boltzmann constant; s(En) is the microscopic interaction cross-section; g(T) is the Westcott g-factor [22].
In the case when a nuclide, besides its participation in the (n, g)- reaction, also undergoes the radioactive decay (for example, 182Ta, see. Fig. 1) one should also take into account the concentration
decrease in the decay process of the nuclide
@8
Thus, for the total rate of disappearance of a nuclide we obtain the following equation
@9
The calculation results show that, under the inﬂuence of neutron irradiation, the composition of natural Hf is constantly changing. (Figs. 3 and 4). The concentrations of 174,176,177,178Hf iso- topes decrease relatively quickly. It is quite clear that the 180Hf concentration is constantly growing. The reason for this is the low value (by more than 10 times) of its cross-section in the (n, g)-re- action (see. Table 1).
The algorithm described in Section 1, as well as the equations for the obtaining r given earlier, were used to obtain the results in  Figs. 3 and 4. The calculation used some average magnitudes of the neutron ﬂux (5$1013 n/(cm2$s)) and the neutron spectrum hardness (kres/th 0.436). The nuclear data  for  the  calculations  are  taken from the sources [23e25].
It should be noted that we did not take into account the self-
shielding effect. That is, the situation was considered when all particles of the irradiated material are in the same conditions. Software codes allow to take into account the mentioned phe- nomenon, which, of course, allows you to make a more accurate calculation (the ability to obtain a spectrum of values, and not one averaged characteristic). However, a “manual” calculation is sufﬁ- cient for the qualitative evaluation and the use of averages.
4.The inﬂuence of nuclear isomer on the composition changing
Metastable states (isomers) are an important object of research  of radioactivity and play a signiﬁcant role in understanding of the nuclear structure details. Isomers differ from ordinary excited nuclei states in that they have certain lifetimes [26]. It is important
to know how this phenomenon affects the Hf properties. Let’s add the 179m1Hf metastable state to the chain (Fig. 1) (the 179m1Hf state has the  largest  s, Table  2  [27]).  In this case, for example, the chain
@10turns into the chain.
@11
Next, the chain (11) should be separated into 2 linear indepen- dent components, one of which has the form (10), and the second one
@12
Now, using the algorithm described above, it is possible to calculate the concentration of any chain member. When calcu- lating, for example, the concentration of 179Hf or 180Hf, it is necessary to take into account the branching ratio for each component (10) and (12).
The calculation shows that the appearance of the 179m1Hf state, complicates the chain, but its inﬂuence on the composition change
nature is small. However, the presence of the isomer has some ef- fect on the 178Hf и 179Hf isotopes (Fig. 5): the 178th starts burn-out faster (because it is necessary to account for the formation of
Table 2
The thermal and the resonant neutron capture cross-sections for some Hafnium isomers [27].Fig. 5. 178Hf and 179Hf concentration dependence N(t) on the time taking into account the inﬂuence of 179m1Hf (dotted curves) and without it (solid curves).
179m1Hf, and it leads to the additional concentration decrease of the parent nuclide); the concentration of the 179th begins to accu- mulate quicker. It can be seen that, during the entire time, for which the calculation was done,  the  “difference” between  the  curves is < 1 at. %. For the concentrations of the transmutants 181Hf, Ta, W, this difference is 2 orders of magnitude smaller. In the case of Hf, the effect of the metastable state on the concentration changes of the initial isotopes and the produced transmutants is insigniﬁcant. But in general, one should always check all nuclides, which are present (or will appear) in the irradiated material on the subject of isomers’ generation.
5.The evaluation of Hafnium burn-up life
As known, the neutron irradiation changes physical and me- chanical properties of materials. These changes determine the service life depending on the exposure dose, its accumulation rate and the environment temperature. These factors are decisive for the materials burn-up life.
The burn-up life can be characterized by the change of the ab- sorption ability (for neutrons) on time. The ability has the following outlook@13
where S t is the macroscopic cross-section of the nuclides “mixture” at the irradiation time t; S 0 is the macroscopic cross- section of the nuclides “mixture” before the irradiation start.
The macroscopic cross-section S[cm—1] has the meaning of the number of interactions per unit length of the neutron path, i.e. it is the linear attenuation coefﬁcient into the irradiated material. If the material consists of a mixture of nuclei, then the macroscopic section with respect to the process “i” is determined by the equation214
where sk is the microscopic cross-section of ith type of the neutron
interaction with the kth kind of nuclei; Nk is the number of kth kind of nuclei per unit volume. The macroscopic cross-section is a ma- terial’s characteristic and depends on its composition [28,29].
Knowing the behavior of the concentrations of Hf isotopes’ and the transmutants accumulated in it (see. Figs. 3 and 4), let’s
Fig. 6. The absorption capacity change of Hf: kres/th ¼ 0.436 corresponds to the calculation result obtained here; kres/th ¼ 0.05; 0.1; 0.2; 0.5 corresponds to the results from Ref. [21].estimate how Hf absorption ability changes with time. It is clear (curves corresponding to kres/th  0.436, Fig. 6) that after the ﬁrst   year of irradiation and later, the absorption ability decreases more slowly, because it begins to largely recover due to the transmutants’ accumulation (as calculated for the number of particles corre- sponding to 1 cm3 of substance).
6.Discussion
The results obtained in this work demonstrate the promise of using Hf in the ICIS. With the help of “manual” calculation, the advantages of Hf as a structural material for control rods and emitters of Compton detectors are estimated. This is especially important in the context of a constant increase in the level of Power Plants safety and efﬁciency, as well as the search for new materials for energy management systems. Hafnium is very well suited for this use. This is demonstrated even by the qualitative prediction of its nuclide composition (see Figs. 3 and 4).
The unique nuclear-physical properties of Hf create a good prospect of its use in pressurized water reactors (PWR). Sufﬁciently high absorption cross-sections in the thermal range, signiﬁcant absorption in the epithermal region, high thermal conductivity and mechanical properties are the most important advantages of this material.
The quite complex chain of nuclear transformations (see Fig. 1), having many isomers, does not interfere with the use of Hf. Moreover, successive isotopes 176e180 ensure the preservation  (and partial regeneration) of the absorbing properties. The trans- mutants arising in the process of neutron irradiation (see Fig. 4) also contribute to the partial regeneration of the ability to absorb neutrons (see Fig. 6). The appearance of radioactive nuclides (181Hf, T1/2 z 42 d; 182Ta, T1/2 z 115 d; 183Ta, T1/2 z 5 d) doesn’t affect SPND’s prompt response ability. This is because the concentration of beta-radioactive transmutants, which are responsible for the slow response, doesn’t exceed 0.5% after 5 years operation. Besides this “0.5%” inﬂuences only the (n,g)-portion of the signal, doesn’t
inﬂuence the (g,e)-portion of the signal. What is important is that
the new nuclides (181,182,183Ta, 182,183,184W) have a large Z and can
absorb g-quanta effectively.
From the view point of using Hf as the Compton SPND’s mate- rial, the partial regeneration of the absorption capacity is an extremely important phenomenon. It slows down the signal level decrease over time, and also allows to increase the detector service life. The compensation occurs due to the Hf isotopes transforming one into another and the accumulation of transmutants, which are capable of working as sources of instantaneous g-radiation in the (n, g)-reactions as effectively as the Hf nuclides.
Thus, the Hf’s nuclear-physical properties ensure the prospects of this metal as a material for the manufacture of SPND’s emitters and control rods of ICIS. This is possible primarily due to the efﬁ- ciency of Hf in (n-g-e-)-processes and its high radiation burn-up life.
7.Conclusions
The use of Compton SPND instead of b-emission detectors in the ICIS of the PWR has a good prospect. This proposal arises in light of the trend of increasing the dose and temperature of the irradiated materials (increase in power density). This inevitably brings the technological parameters corresponding to the normal operation of fuel rods and other elements of the core to the critical (limit, threshold) values adopted to prevent the damage (especially fuel rods) in various operating conditions. That is why there is a need for accurate and prompt measurements, as well as the regulation of the energy distribution in the reactor core volume.
It is proposed to use the metallic Hf as an emitter of the Compton SPND. In this regard, the calculation of the change in the metal composition in time was carried out. The obtained results allow us to conclude that Hf is a good candidate for the role of the material for the manufacture of both control rods and emitters of neutron detectors. The inﬂuence of the most probable isomeric state on the dynamics of the Hf composition changes was consid- ered separately. The calculation shows that the isomer’s inﬂuence is insigniﬁcant.
The methods for calculating the transmutation and burn-out, presented in the literature, seem quite difﬁcult to put into prac- tice. Therefore, in the framework of this study, the literature sour- ces were analyzed, and the algorithm that allows to estimate the nuclides’ concentration changes in nuclear transformations that occur under the inﬂuence of neutron irradiation was summarized. In the future, our research will focus on the Compton SPND’s signal level prediction depending on the received radiation dose. In addition, it is planned to carry out the simulation tests by using an
accelerator of charged particles.
Declarations of interest
None.
