<title>Effects of -radiation on a direct disposal system for spent nuclear fuel – (2) review of research into safety assessments of direct disposal of spent nuclear fuel in Europe and North America</title>
<author>Akira Kitamura, Hiroyasu Takase, Richard Metcalfe & James Penfold</author>
<Affiliation>a.Sector of Decommissioning and Radioactive Waste Management, Japan Atomic Energy Agency, 4-33 Muramatsu, Tokai, Naka, Ibaraki 319-1194, Japan; b.Quintessa Japan, Queen’s Tower A 7-707, 2-3-1 Minatomirai, Nishi-ku, Yokohama 220-6007, Japan; c.Quintessa Ltd., The Hub 14 Station Road, Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire RG9 1AY, United Kingdom</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>Journal of Nuclear Science and Technology</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Taylor & Francis</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1080/00223131.2015.1014874</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00223131.2015.1014874</URL>
The Japanese geological disposal programme has started researching disposal of spent nuclear fuel (SF) in deep geological strata (hereafter “direct disposal of SF”) as an alternative management option other than reprocessing followed by vitrification and deep geological disposal of high-level radioactive waste (HLW). In the case of direct disposal of SF, the radioactivity of the waste is higher and the potential effects of the radiation are greater. Specific examples of the possible effects of radiation include: increased amounts of canister corrosion; generation of oxidizing chemical species in conjunction with radiation degradation of groundwater and accompanying oxidation of reducing groundwater; and increase in the dissolution rate and the solubility of SF. Therefore, the influences of radiation, which are not expected to be significant in the case of geological disposal of vitrified waste, must be considered in safety assessments for direct disposal of SF. Focusing especially on the effects of α-radiation in safety assessment, this study has reviewed safety assessments in countries other than Japan that are planning direct disposal of SF. The review has identified issues relevant to safety assessment for the direct disposal of SF in Japan.
Keywords: safety assessment; direct disposal of spent nuclear fuel; alpha-radiation; radiolysis of water; oxidative dissolution of spent nuclear fuel; features, events and processes (FEPs); review of research
1.Introduction
1.1.General introduction
Prior to the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant accident in March 2011, it was planned that all of the spent fuel (SF) generated by Japanese nuclear power plants should be reprocessed. Consequently, only high- level radioactive waste (HLW) in the form of glass was considered for disposal; Japanese deep geological dis- posal research, therefore, concentrated on HLW (e.g. [1]) and TRU waste (e.g. [2]). Following the accident, the government of Japan is promoting research into alterna- tive disposal options for SF, including direct disposal [3], based on the “Strategic Energy Plan”, which was pub- lished by the Japanese government in April 2014. Only a preliminary safety assessment of SF disposal has been performed as a basis for a cost estimation and compari- son with HLW disposal in Japan [4]. In this preliminary safety assessment for SF disposal, radiation effects were treated as uncertainties and further investigations were recommended to reduce these uncertainties based on a
reference to the SITE-94 assessment by the Swedish Nu- clear Power Inspectorate [5]. The SITE-94 assessment mentioned the possibility that, within the range of un- certainties at the time of writing (early 1990s), not only was it conceivable that radiolytically oxidized compo- nents such as H2O2 may contribute to an oxidative disso- lution of SF, but it was also plausible that under certain very pessimistic conditions these oxidants might pene- trate the waste canister, surrounding buffer and even the geosphere. There was, therefore, a need to evaluate radi- ation effects to establish better how they should be in- cluded in a safety assessment for SF disposal.
Since previously no attention had been paid to SF disposal in Japan, no studies have been performed for SF disposal explicitly in Japan; only a few studies on the effects of α-radiation (e.g. [6]) have been performed for HLW in Japan.
What research would be needed to support the op- tion of direct disposal of SF is being considered. One is- sue to be considered is how α-radiation effects have been treated by safety assessments for direct disposal of SF that have been performed in other countries. The moti- vation is that compared to other kinds of waste that have been considered for possible deep disposal in Japan hith- erto, SF generates relatively high α-radiation activities.
The purpose of the present review is therefore to understand α-radiation effects and its treatment within safety assessments undertaken between the early 1990s and the present, and to establish the possible signifi- cance of this research for SF disposal-related research in Japan.
1.2.Purpose of review of Swedish and Swiss research
As mentioned above, radiation effects were treated as uncertainties in the Japanese preliminary safety assess- ment for SF disposal [4] and further investigations were recommended to reduce these uncertainties, with refer- ence to the SITE-94 assessment [5]. It is noteworthy for the safety assessment of Japanese SF disposal that for- eign (especially Swedish) safety assessment reports pre- pared after the SITE-94 assessment [5] took into account investigations of the effects of α-radiation.
Between the early 1990s and the present time, re- search into the effects of α-radiation from SF under- taken in many countries has been used to justify not rep- resenting α-radiation in safety assessments. In Sweden, four safety assessments were carried out within this time period, including the preliminary SITE-94 assessment [5]. These assessments were supported by a research pro- gramme that aimed to address the uncertainties high- lighted in the SITE-94 report [5], including uncertainties about α-radiation effects. Therefore, these four Swedish safety assessments can be used as case studies to illus- trate how thinking concerning α-radiation from SF has evolved in the light of ongoing research. The assessments are:
•SITE-94, a safety assessment undertaken between 1992 and 1995 by the then Swedish regulator, the Swedish Nuclear Power Inspectorate (SKI, now replaced by the Swedish Radiation Safety Author- ity, SSM) [5];
•SR 97, a safety assessment undertaken by the Swedish Nuclear Fuel and Waste Management Company (SKB) between 1997 and 1999 [7];
•SR-Can, a safety assessment undertaken by SKB between 2002 and 2006 [8,9]; and
•SR-Site, a safety assessment undertaken by SKB between 2007 and 2011 [10].
Furthermore, Swiss research into radiolysis products and canister corrosion products [11] was undertaken by the Swiss National Cooperative for the Disposal of Ra- dioactive Waste (Nagra) as an input to a safety assess- ment during Project Opalinus Clay between 1994 and 2002 [12]. During the Swiss assessment, Johnson and
Smith [11] established a radiolysis model in which ra- diolytically oxidized components can propagate to the geosphere, in a similar fashion to that mentioned in the SITE-94 report [5]. Consequently, the Swiss assessment
[11] can be compared with the SITE-94 assessment [5]. This paper reviews treatments of α-radiation from
SF in each of these five safety assessments and, in Sec- tion 2, assesses how these treatments were supported by the research programme that was undertaken during that period of time.
1.3.Purpose of review of features, events and processes (FEPs) of some safety assessment reports
There is international consensus that safety cases, and the underpinning safety assessments, need to care- fully consider all of the aspects of a disposal system and their implications for its performance. A tool that is of- ten used for the structured analysis of the disposal sys- tem is a list of features, events and processes (FEPs). An FEP list is a compilation of all of the potential aspects of the disposal system that might have a role in its re- tention of radionuclides, and its evolution over time. An FEP analysis uses this list to examine each aspect in turn. The aim is to determine each FEP’s importance and whether it needs to be included in the safety assessment and hence safety case. An FEP analysis, therefore, con- siders the relevant arguments and evidence for the signif- icance of an FEP in the context of the overall safety case. International guidance on FEP lists was developed over a decade ago, and the guidance by the Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA) in Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development [13] forms the basis of FEP lists used in most country-specific geological dis- posal programmes. The NEA FEPs, and thus most other FEP lists, focus on an element-by-element “phenomeno- logical” description of the disposal system. For this rea- son “α-radiation effects” is not itself an FEP (just as “chemistry” is not). Instead, it is addressed as a con- tributing factor to relevant phenomena (e.g. “SF disso-
lution”).
This paper, in Section 3, describes how FEPs relevant to α-radiation have been treated in a number of safety assessment/safety case studies for prominent geological disposal programmes.
2.Swedish and Swiss research from SITE-94 to SR-Site
2.1.SITE-94
SITE-94 was a comprehensive performance assess- ment (PA) for a hypothetical SF repository at  a real  site in Sweden. The purpose of the assessment was to help SKI develop its capabilities and experience in PA, thereby making SKI more able to evaluate SKB’s regula- tory safety submissions on repository siting and design.
At the time when the SITE-94 assessment was carried out, SKB was planning to start the surface-based char- acterization of two potential sites for an SF repository, but had not started this work.
The SITE-94 assessment used geological data from A¨ spo¨ ,  in  south-central  Sweden,  and  considered  hy- pothetically that a small repository and engineered
barrier system (EBS) had been constructed there. The evaluated disposal concept was essentially the KBS-3 concept in the form that had been specified more than 10 years ago in 1983. Accordingly, SITE-94 assessed the performance of copper canisters produced using the so- called advanced cold-process. In this design, an outer copper container is used to resist corrosion and an in- ner steel container for mechanical support. In the hypo- thetical repository, these canisters were considered to be in vertical deposition holes drilled into a fractured crys- talline rock, and surrounded by a buffer composed of bentonite.
Calculations were undertaken to estimate the effects of radiolytic oxidants produced inside the container. An important conclusion from the calculations was that the reducing potential of the container and its corrosion  products will dominate and maintain overall reducing conditions within any failed canister. However, signifi- cant uncertainties were stated to exist in modelling the radiolytic oxidative dissolution of SF. At the time of the assessment, no fully coupled model of all the mecha- nisms involved was available. This lack of capability was likely to reflect, at least in part, the limited computing capability in the early 1990s. Consequently, the follow- ing conservative assumptions were made in alternative calculation cases (the reference case is under a reducing condition):
•The reducing capacity of the canister and the fuel were specified conservatively to be zero (keq/m3).
•The release of radionuclides was assumed conser- vatively to be at the same rate as radiolytic oxida- tive dissolution of the UO2 fuel matrix to higher oxides, except for certain radionuclides which ac- cumulate in the cladding gap (Cs, I) or at grain boundaries (Cs, I, Sb, Mo, Tc, Sr).
•When calculating radionuclide release rates, it was conservatively assumed that all of the oxidant re- acts with the fuel.
•When calculating the rate of redox front migration from the surface of the SF after canister failure, it was also conservatively assumed that all the oxi- dants produced are able to migrate.
•A simple model was used in which UO2 trans- forms to U3O8 and H2O2 is the sole oxidant.
The conservative assumptions that the oxidants pro- duced by α-radiolysis are all available for reacting with the SF and are able to migrate without any consump- tion by reaction with the SF (i.e. oxidative dissolution of SF) from the canister, through the buffer, into the
host rock are clearly exclusive. Thus, the overall treat- ment was clearly overly conservative.
With the above conservative assumptions, key results of the calculations were that:
•An oxidation  front  would  begin  to  form  in the bentonite buffer immediately following canister failure.
•Given canister failure after 1000 years, the front was calculated to move through the full thick- ness of the buffer within a timeframe of about 400 years. Thereafter, the rate of front migration was thought to slow down considerably and to mi- grate only about one metre into the rock over a period of about one million years. The effective G value (Geff), which is the fraction of radiolytic ox- idants that result in the dissolution of SF and ra- diolysis of water, corresponding to previous anal- ysis in Project 90 [14] prior to SITE-94 [5], was estimated to be 1 molecule of H2O2 per 100 eV and is also consistent with previous calculations by Japan Atomic Energy Agency [15].
•Oxidative dissolution rates were estimated to be highest at early times, owing to the higher α-
radiation flux from young SF compared to the flux from more aged SF. Canister failure at 1000 years was calculated to be followed by total fuel disso- lution in 15 ka, but failure at 100 ka caused total dissolution only after 360 ka.
Nevertheless, the SITE-94 assessment recognized that in reality, fuel dissolution depends on several rate- dependent processes: oxidant production, transport of oxidant away from the surface, fuel oxidation, other oxidant-consuming reactions, transport of oxidized ura- nium from the surface and transport of other reactants. It was recommended in the SITE-94 report that where the conservative assumptions resulted in un- acceptable calculated mobilization of radionuclides, it would be appropriate in future calculations to consider more realistic models using more tightly constrained
data.
Simulations of the chemical evolution of the buffer were performed using the CALIBRE software [16]. In the base-case, it was assumed that redox conditions would be controlled by rock–water interactions. How- ever, additional analyses looked at fixed oxygen partial pressures to simulate the effect of oxidizing groundwa- ters or α-radiolysis. The susceptibility of the near-field to oxygenated waters was stated to need better understand- ing, as some radionuclides (notably 99Tc) are mobilized readily by the penetration of oxidizing conditions deep into the EBS.
The conservative parameter values used in SITE- 94 were taken from an earlier assessment, Project-90 [14]. In this project, it was concluded that the rate of oxidant production (Gox in mol/t/y) would be directly proportional to the α-activity (A in GBq/t) according
@1
where Gox(t) is the value of Gox at time t, A(t) is the value of A at time t and kox is a constant of proportionality.
The value of kox was recognized to depend on several factors, including:
•the presence or absence of Fe species, which could catalyse the combination of oxidized and reduced species produced by radiolysis;
•the physical state of the SF, notably its specific sur- face area.
SITE-94 used the same time-dependence of α- activity and value of kox that were calculated in Project- 90 [14], yielding the curve shown in Figure 1.
The rate of SF oxidation was assumed to be a func- tion of the oxidant production and hence proportional to the α-decay rate. However, the SITE-94 report [5] ac- knowledged that alternative models exist that give ra- diolysis rates 2 orders of magnitude smaller than the rate calculated according to the above equation and as- sumptions. It was surmised that the discrepancy is due to this simple model not accounting for the recombi- nation of the oxidized and reduced species produced by radiolysis. Nevertheless, owing to the uncertain- ties concerning this recombination, conservatively the SITE-94 assessment used the data and approach from Project-90 [14].
It is noteworthy that the reports of the SR-Site as- sessment [10] do not conclude that the effects of α- radiation are actually significant for EBS performance. Instead, the report states that uncertainties about these effects were sufficiently large (in 1994/1995 when the work was undertaken) that a very conservative approach to assessment was needed. An important conclusion was
Figure 1. Production rate of oxidants by α-radiolysis in the presence of SF as a function of time (re-drafted from [5]).
2.2.Swiss study (prior to EN2002)
Another case considering propagation of a redox front into buffer materials has been described by John- son and Smith [11]. Johnson and Smith [11] sum- marized the interaction of radiolysis products and canister corrosion products and the implications for SF dissolution and radionuclide transport in a repository for SF. These researchers developed PA models for ra- diolysis effects such as failure of zircaloy, radiolysis of water, SF dissolution, corrosion of carbon steel and migration of the redox front. In a previously reported preliminary assessment of Nagra’s repository concept for a crystalline rock system [17], four cases shown in Figure 2 were specified to evaluate the sensitivity of ra- dionuclide migration to different redox front positions. In each case, different transport parameters were spec- ified, consistent with an assumed time-invariant redox state. In contrast, in Johnson and Smith [11], a value for the effective yield of oxidants due to radiolysis, ex- pressed as an effective G-value (Geff), was introduced for predicting the long-term oxidative dissolution of fuel in PA models as shown in Figure 3. The report reviewed evidence from laboratory experiments and natural ana- logues shown in Table 1, and concluded that a conserva- tive value for performance-assessment calculations was
0.01molecules of H2O2 per 100 eV, which is two orders of magnitude smaller than the estimated value for the SITE-94 system [5] as described above.
If the radiolytic oxidants were not scavenged by re- ductants inside the canister, such as H2 and Fe2 + , radi- olytic oxidants, and U(VI) from the dissolved fuel might
migrate from a breached canister into the surrounding bentonite buffer. The reducing minerals present in the bentonite, such as pyrite and siderite, would be depleted by these oxidants, forming an oxidizing region, bounded by a redox front.
Case 1	Case 2	Case 3	Case 4 a/b
Fuel matrix dissolution rate	Values for reducing conditions	Values for oxidizing conditions
Sorption	Values for reducing conditions	Values for oxidizing conditions
Solubility limits	Values for reducing conditions	Values for oxidizing conditions
Geosphere colloids	Colloids generated at the redox front are ﬁltered by the bentonite	Geosphere ﬁltration	No  geosphere ﬁltration
Redox front migration	Host Rock
Bentonite Fuel	Redox Front
Figure 2. Calculational cases to evaluate sensitivity to posi- tion of a redox front [17].
Figure 3. Dissolution rate of the UO2 electrode and esti- mated values assuming different Geff values as a function of H2O2 concentration in the cell [11].
In order to assess scavenging by Fe2 + , the corro- sion of carbon steel was reviewed and a model was presented for Fe2 + release from a corroding steel can- ister. Iron might be passivated by the formation of a low-porosity layer of maghemite on the magnetite. The production of radiolytic oxidants would then decrease as a function of time, whereas the production of Fe2 + would initially decrease but increase at longer times be- cause corrosion deposits with high surface areas form. It was considered that, eventually, all oxidants  that  had been produced would probably be scavenged. The time at which production of Fe2 + would first exceed that of radiolytic oxidants  would  also  be  that  time  at which the oxidizing region reaches its maximum extent.
The production rate Pc (mol/y/tHM) of radiolytic H2O2 is given by:
@2
where Q (W/tHM) is a heat output of the fuel, Ff  is     a fraction of the fuel that can give rise to α-particles penetrating the wetted surfaces and causing radiolysis (equals to 0.004). In this expression, it is assumed that the dissolution rate of the fuel is equal to the production rate of radiolytic H2O2. Since one mole of radiolytically generated H2O2 oxidizes one mole of U(IV) to U(VI), the fractional dissolution rate of the fuel (D) is defined as:
@3
The calculated fractional dissolution rate as a func- tion of time for a G-value of 0.01 molecules of H2O2 per 100 eV is shown in Figure 4.
The report presented calculations of redox-front penetrations for different fuel types (UO2 and mixed- oxide (MOX) fuels with a range of burnups) and for different assumptions regarding the nature of reduc- tants in the bentonite and different canister lifetimes.    It was concluded that the scavenging of radiolytic oxi-
dants by Fe2 +  from canister corrosion was an impor-
tant mechanism in limiting the extent of the oxidizing re- gion, but that it was also important to establish whether credit may be taken for the full potential of pyrite in the
Table 1. The effective G-values (Geff) summarized in [11] along with their sources and some key observations.
Figure 4. Fractional dissolution rate as a function of time for a G-value of 0.01 molecules of H2O2 per 100 eV. Constructed using the model in [11].
Figure 5. Integrated production of radiolytic oxidants, com- pared to the inventory of UO2 per canister, the generation of Fe2 + by canister corrosion and the inventories of reductants in the bentonite (reducing equivalents from pyrite and siderite) [11].
bentonite to provide a further scavenging of radiolytic oxidants as shown in Figure 5.
2.3. SR-97
The SR-97 assessment was undertaken by SKB at the request of the Swedish government and regulators in or- der “.. .to demonstrate that the KBS-3 method has good prospects of being able to meet the safety and radiation protection requirements which SKI and SSI have speci- fied in recent years.” [7].
The assessment analysed three hypothetical reposi- tory sites, all of which were specified to lie in crystalline rock. The data used were taken from A¨ spo¨ in Sma˚land,
Finnsjo¨ n  in  Uppland  and  Gidea˚   in  A˚ ngermanland, which were termed “Aberg”, “Beberg” and “Ceberg”, re- spectively, to emphasize the fact that none of the sites were actually being investigated to host a repository.
Five scenarios were specified to analyse the future evolution of the repository:
•a base scenario in which the repository is built en- tirely according to specifications and present-day environmental conditions persist.
•Four alternative evolution scenarios that consider how the repository might evolve if the repository:
–contains a few initially defective canisters;
–climate changes (glaciation and deglaciation occur);
–earthquakes affect the repository; and
–there is inadvertent human intrusion.
The assessment did consider radiation-related pro- cesses, including those related to α-radiation, in the dif- ferent parts of the engineered and natural barrier system [23]:
•fuel and cavity;
•cast iron insert and copper canister;
•buffer and backfill; and
•geosphere.
In the fuel and cavity, the effect of α-radiation on fuel dissolution following canister breaching was the only effect treated explicitly. The model for fuel dissolution used in SR-97 assumed that the fuel matrix dissolves ow- ing to its “own” solubility and the action of oxidants produced by water radiolysis [7]. The radiolytic oxida- tion model was essentially the same as one first used in the SKB 91 safety assessment [24] 6 years previously. This model assumes that the oxidation and, hence, ra- dionuclide release are proportional to the α dose rate in the fuel. The proportionality constant was derived from the Sr-90 release rate during fuel leaching experiments under oxidizing conditions [25]. A similar model was also used in the SITE-94 assessment [5].
The model was refined for use in SR-97 and quanti- fied:
•α- and β-radiolysis in the water between fuel and cladding;
•a series of reactions between different radiolysis products in the water;
•radiolysis products and dissolved H2 produced by corrosion of the iron insert; and
•reactions between oxidants and the UO2.
The β-radiolysis tends to produce radicals, while the α-radiolysis produces molecular species. When making the calculations, a constant dose rate of 685 Gy/h was used, corresponding to the conditions at the time of de- position. That is, the calculations were conservative be- cause they take no account of cooling of the SF over time.
It was assumed that radiolysis takes place in a 100-μm-wide water layer that surrounds the fuel pellets. It was further assumed that the fuel cladding has de- fects that allow ingress of water, but the cladding cor- rodes only slowly and therefore persists for very long times. There are no concentration gradients of species
produced by radiolysis because diffusion across the 100-
μm-thick water film is rapid.
In the SR-97 assessment, the other potential effects of α-radiation were subsumed into the treatment of heat generation and assessment of criticality. It was noted that most α-radiation remains within the fuel and con- sequently has little effect on the cast iron insert and interior of the copper canister. Within the buffer and backfill, only radiation effect, apart from heat flow due to radioactive decay within the canister, was considered to be γ -induced radiolysis, but this was not assessed to be significant with respect to performance. No radia- tion effects were considered important within the geo- sphere barrier. Notably, the assessment documentation states explicitly that the understanding of all radiation- induced processes was considered to be adequate for the needs of the assessment.
During the assessment, the possibility that gas may pressurize the inside of a canister was considered. It was noted that gas accumulating within a canister will in- clude a proportion of He produced by α-decay. How- ever, it was concluded that there would be a negligible effect of He on gas pressurization and that in the base scenario gas pressurization would in any case have only a small effect on the chemical evolution of a canister. In the other scenarios, the detrimental effects of gas gen- eration would be much less than the other detrimental effects explored by the scenarios. Therefore, gas pressur- ization, including the contribution by He of α-origin, was not considered explicitly.
2.4.SR-Can
The SR-Can project was undertaken as a prepara- tion for the later SR-Site assessment, which supported SKB’s application for a license to construct a final repos- itory [8,9]. The specific aims of SR-Can were to:
•make an initial assessment of the safety of poten- tial KBS-3 repositories at the candidate sites of Forsmark and Laxemar (which were both being considered as possible repository sites at the time of the SR-Can assessment);
•provide inputs to:
–repository design development;
–SKB’s R&D programme;
–further site investigations; and
–future safety assessment (which was subsequently carried out and reported as SR-Site).
•foster dialogue between SKB and the regulatory agencies (i.e. SKI, and the Swedish Radiation Protection Authority (SSI), now subsumed into SSM), concerning the interpretation of regula- tions, as a preparation for the SR-Site project.
The assessment assumed that wastes would be em- placed at c. 500 m depth in water-saturated, granitic rock. Data from the preliminary site investigations at Forsmark and Laxemar sites were used in the assess- ment.
The effects of α-radiation from the SF were assessed
as follows:
•Fuel dissolution – Fuel dissolution was considered not relevant for an intact canister. After a canis- ter had failed and water had entered, fuel disso- lution was modelled using a constant, pessimistic dissolution rate [26] with the COMP23 radionu- clide transport code [27]. It was considered that α- radiation would not lead to enhanced dissolution under the in situ conditions within the repository [26]. Thus, α-radiation was not represented explic- itly, although COMP23 is able to do so [27].
•He production – He production due to α-radiation in an intact canister was considered incapable of raising the internal canister pressure sufficiently to affect the canister’s mechanical stability. Follow- ing canister failure, He production was not con- sidered to be relevant with respect to safety.
•Water radiolysis within a canister– Water radioly- sis, whether by α-radiation or other kinds of radia- tion, was neglected in the cases of intact canisters, owing to there being only very small quantities of water present. In the case of a breached canis- ter, water radiolysis was neglected, except in so far as its effect on fuel dissolution was taken into ac- count by the pessimistic fuel dissolution rate that was specified.
•Radiation-induced transformations in the buffer
– During the resaturation/thermal period, these transformations were neglected because the radi- ation dose outside a canister was considered to be too low. For the longer term, following satura- tion of the buffer and canister failure, the effects of α-radiation were estimated. However, it was con- cluded that the effects would be too small to be significant.
While α-radiation was not considered to be signifi- cant with respect to safety, the absolute importance of α- radiation will depend upon when a container is breached allowing water to ingress. The earlier the breaching, the greater will be the α-radiation effects, but conversely the smaller will be these effects relative to those of β- and γ -radiation. The assessment considered four means by which a canister might fail.
Following failure of the canister and the develop- ment of a continuous water pathway, the instant release fraction of the inventory was assumed to dissolve in the water in the canister void. If this process caused a ra- dionuclide to reach its solubility limit, then the concen- tration of the radionuclide was not allowed to increase further. The radionuclides dissolved in the water were
then assumed to leave the canister by diffusion. Thus, the processes that controlled the release of the radionu- clides were:
•dissolution rate, which takes into account
α-radiation effects implicitly;
•solubility limitation, which does not take into account α-radiation effects; and
•diffusion, which does not take into account
α-radiation effects.
In the case of a growing pinhole failure mode, α- radiation effects were relatively large from the start (al- though considered insignificant apart from their im- pact upon dissolution rates). Where failure occurs after 100,000 years (the design life span of a copper canister), it was considered that the α-activity of the fuel at the time of water intrusion would have decreased to such low levels that there would be no measurable effect of α-radiolysis on fuel dissolution.
2.5.SR-Site
The most recent safety assessment carried out in Sweden is SKB’s assessment of the repository that it pro- poses to construct at Forsmark in the municipality of O¨ sthammar, Sweden [10]. The purpose of the assessment was to support the license application for this repository. The basic approach and the treatment of α-radiation were very similar to that in SR-Can [8,9]. The treatment of key processes that could in principle be affected by
α-radiation was as follows:
•Residual gas radiolysis/acid formation – This pro- cess was neglected for intact canisters since negli- gible amounts of corrodants were calculated to be produced. For a failed canister,  this  process  was not considered to be relevant.
•Water radiolysis in the canister – This process was neglected for an intact canister owing to there be- ing insignificant quantities of water in contact with the SF, in this case. For a failed canister, this pro- cess was only considered in so far as a pessimistic fuel dissolution rate was chosen; any effects of wa- ter radiolysis were assumed to be encompassed by the high dissolution rate specified.
•Radiation effects on the canister – It was consid- ered that there were no radiation effects on the copper shell of the canister, including corrosion (i.e. depths of corrosion due to radiation were con- sidered insignificant), irrespective of whether the canister is intact or has failed. This assumption was based on the specified limit on Cu content for the insert (Cu impurities promote radiation dam- age).
•Radiation-induced transformations in the buffer – These effects were also considered to be insignif- icant around both an intact canister and a failed
canister, owing to the dose rate outside the canis- ter being too low.
•Radiolysis of pore water in the buffer – These effects were also considered to be insignificant around an intact canister or a failed canister, ow- ing to the dose rate outside the canister being   too low.
At the time when water enters a failed canister, fuel dissolution is expected to begin. SR-Site, like the ear- lier SR-Can, specified dissolution rates based on the re- view of experimental data in Werme et al. [26]. That  is, a constant fractional dissolution rate was specified with a triangular probability density function in log10- space, the lower limit, best estimate and upper limit be- ing 10−8, 10−7 and 10−6 per year, respectively. However, additional review work undertaken for the SR-Site as- sessment showed support for even lower values and pro- vided greater confidence in the conservatism of these dis- solution rates [29,38].
The distribution of SF dissolution rates was based on the results of laboratory studies that covered peri- ods of up to 4 years. These experiments used relatively fresh SF, and α-doped UO2 (i.e. UO2(s) doped with U- 233 or Pu-238). The former has the real properties of the fuel matrix, but its radiation field is unrealistically high with large β- and γ -radiation contributions. In contrast, α-doped UO2 has a radiation field that is more similar to the SF that might contact groundwater, but its other properties are dissimilar to the matrix of real SF.
The SF dissolution studies were carried out in the presence of H2 (>1 mM) or actively corroding Fe in order to maintain a reducing redox state. Molecular oxidants in the solution or gas phase and oxidized ra- dionuclide species were all confirmed to be below their detection limits. These results show that any oxidants produced by radiolysis were consumed by recombina- tion with H2 to produce water. Spectroscopic analysis of SF surfaces after leaching showed no evidence for sur- face oxidation.
The experiments with UO2 that had been doped with α-emitters were carried out in the presence of low con- centrations of dissolved H2, sulphide ions or Fe un- dergoing active corrosion. These results showed clearly that small quantities of sulphide and anoxic conditions would compensate for any oxidation due to α-radiolysis from SF in a breached canister.
Concentrations of U liberated from a highly doped UO2 pellet (385 MBq/g corresponding to 50 years old fuel) were found to be higher when an Ar atmosphere was imposed than when an atmosphere of 1 bar H2 was maintained [30]. This result was interpreted to support the production of oxidants by α-radiolysis in the pres- ence of Ar, but the suppression of oxidants by the pres- ence of H2.
Even without the suppressing effect of reductants such as sulphide or H2, the concentrations of oxidants within a canister should decrease over time owing to
radioactive decay decreasing the rate at which radioly- sis occurs. However, the SR-Site model pessimistically neglected this decrease and assumed instead a constant dissolution rate, which varies within broad ranges to cover conceptual and other uncertainties.
In SR-Site, canister failure by corrosion was consid- ered to occur most likely after a hundred thousand years or more. After an elapse of such a long time interval, the α-radiation field of the SF is expected to have decreased sufficiently that α-radiolysis would have an insignificant effect on fuel dissolution [28]. Even if a canister were to fail unexpectedly at a relatively early time, corrosion of the Fe insert would then continue for tens of thousands of years, thereby generating H2 and compensating for the effects of α-radiation on radiolysis. It was believed that during this time, fuel activity will decrease to levels below the α-activity threshold at which radiolytic SF dis- solution stops being an effective dissolution mechanism [30].
Some consideration was given to the possibility that Br might influence radiolytic fuel dissolution. These ions are strong reductants and compared to the H2 molecule react  250 times faster with the OH-radical produced  by radiolysis. The Br thereby scavenges the OH-radical, thereby diminishing the beneficial effect of H2 on water radiolysis. However, the absence of very saline Br-rich waters during repository evolution and the very low α- activity were considered to make any influence of Br on fuel dissolution very improbable.
Structural evolution of the fuel matrix due to ra- dioactive decay, mainly α-decay, could possibly affect the distribution of radionuclides in the fuel matrix. The main impact of this process would be on the segrega- tion of fission products to the grain boundaries of the fuel matrix. However, experimental results were quoted to justify assuming that radiation-enhanced diffusion in the SF matrix is too limited to have any significant ef- fects over safety assessment timescales for the fuel types and burnup relevant for SR-Site [28].
The α-decay of actinides produces He in the SF. In SR-Site, some consideration was given to the possibility that this gas could lead to increased pressure within the fuel rods, thereby potentially leading to their mechani- cal failure. Based on estimated amounts of He that could be evolved and the assumption that all of it is released to the canister interior, the maximum pressure increase in- side the canister was calculated. This pressure was found to be significantly less than the pressure outside the can- ister. Based on these results, reported in SKB [28], the consequence of He production for the mechanical sta- bility of the canister was neglected.
If a canister fails, radionuclides that are released from the canister and sorbed in the buffer may expose the montmorillonite in the buffer to α-radiation. Results from radionuclide transport calculations for the SR-97 safety assessment SKB [7,25] of the concentration of α-emitters in the buffer and the total dose they would give during one million years in case of an early canister
failure, indicated that the consequences can be neglected [31].
Water-saturated MX-80 bentonite with a density of 2050 kg/m3 was irradiated for one year with a total ra- diation dose of 3 107 Gy, which is several orders of magnitude greater than could occur within a repository. Mineralogical characterization of the sample and of a control sample that was not irradiated showed irradi- ation to have an insignificant effect on the montmoril- lonite content.
2.6.Summary of Swedish and Swiss research
In the SITE-94 assessment, the possible effects of α- radiation from SF were recognized as an uncertainty to be addressed, although not necessarily as being prob- lematical. Johnson and Smith [11] developed another model to describe the propagation of a  redox  front and concluded that the redox front would not pen- etrate through the buffer materials. Furthermore, the later safety assessments undertaken by SKB all con- cluded that α-radiation effects were insignificant com- pared to other factors. Each of these assessments made very conservative assumptions about SF dissolution, which clearly over-estimated even the most pessimistic assumptions about α-radiation. Even so, these conser- vative assumptions did not call into question the safety of the evaluated KBS-3 disposal concept at the consid- ered sites (whether hypothetical or actual). Thus, it was clearly demonstrated that the uncertainties in the effects of α-radiation were not significant.
Nevertheless, the four assessments quoted extensive published research and also SKB’s and Nagra’s own researches to justify the conservative assumptions that were made and justify neglecting α-radiation effects. Progressively more detailed justifications were provided by SKB from SR-97 through SR-Can to SR-Site.
3.Implications of research into α-radiation for safety and the treatment of α-radiation in safety cases
3.1.Introduction and approach to assessing implications
This section considers the implications of α-radiation from SF for safety, and the treatment of α-radiation in safety cases. To do this, the study has focused on examining the way in which α-radiation has been evaluated in the systematic studies that support geological repository safety cases. The NEA  FEPs  [13], used in most country-specific geological disposal programmes as mentioned previously and thus most other FEP lists, focus on an element-by-element “phe- nomenological” description of the disposal system. For this reason, “α-radiation effects” is not itself an FEP (just as “chemistry” is  not).  Instead,  it  is  addressed as a contributing factor to relevant phenomena (e.g. “SF dissolution”).
This section describes how FEPs relevant to α- radiation have been treated in a number of safety assessment/safety case studies for prominent geological disposal programmes. These studies include:
•The Swedish SR-Site programme [32]
SKB’s FEP list is broken down into a very large number of FEPs and the report [32] concentrates on cataloguing the treatment of each in a clear and systematic manner. In many cases, therefore, an FEP may be categorized as being “covered”, even though it is not explicitly represented. Rather, the FEP may be “covered” by a conservative as- sumption. This is underpinned by an electronic database which gives more details concerning the specific treatment of each FEP. As a reflection of this approach, the following subsections present a relatively brief summary of the treatment of each FEP that is related to α-radiation based on the in- formation presented by SKB [32].
•Posiva’s assessment of FEPs for the safety case for the disposal of SF at Olkiluoto in Finland (TURVA-2012) [33]
The list of FEPs considered by Posiva is based on the NEA international FEP database [13], and previous work by Posiva [34] which was in turn based on SKB’s SR-97 study, adapted for the Olk- iluoto context. The main α-radiation effects that have been considered include movement of recoil nuclei, He generation and H2 generation.
•Work by the Department of Energy (DOE) in the United States of America for the proposed repos- itory at Yucca Mountain [35]
The FEPs identified by DOE in which α-radiation effects are potentially of relevance, and have been considered, are summarized below. DOE’s list of 328 FEPs was developed in a systematic way using the following methods:
–The NEA list was used as a basis for the ini- tial FEP list, augmented by site-specific infor- mation.
–Brainstorming by experts was used to develop some of the initial project-specific FEPs.
–Top-down elicitation was used to develop gen- eral event-tree logic diagrams that provide the basis for identification of some of the project- specific FEPs.
–Hybrid procedures were used in the refinement and reclassification of the NEA FEPs to make them relevant to the project.
As in other programmes, the main α-radiation effects that are considered include movement of recoil nuclei, helium generation and radiolysis effects.
•Safety studies by the Nuclear Waste Management Organization (NWMO) in Canada on the disposal
of SF in a hypothetical geological repository in the Canadian Shield (Fourth Case Study) [36]
The Fourth Case study is the latest in a series of as- sessments of geological disposal of SF in Canada. The FEPs are based on Version 1.2 of the interna- tional FEPs database developed by the NEA [13]. NWMO’s FEPs are identical with some minor modifications and interpretation specific to the Canadian context. In a number of cases, NWMO has divided a given NEA FEP into more specific sub-FEPs where it was useful to provide a more detailed breakdown. These are indicated with an alphabetical letter after the NEA FEP number. The FEP assessment summarized here is presented by Garisto [36].
•Finally, safety assessments by the National Coop- erative for the Disposal of Radioactive Waste in Switzerland (Nagra) (EN2002) [12]
The aims of and the approach used in the FEP management process were:
–to consider and reflect the approach used by sci- ence to describe a disposal system and the ap- proach used when modelling the system as de- scribed by science;
–to ensure that a sufficiently broad set of assess- ment cases is analysed by suitable tools (assess- ment codes); and
–to take all reasonable measures to ensure com- pleteness.
In each case, the treatment of α-radiation issues has been evaluated by examining the relevant FEP lists and screening arguments.
3.2.FEP analyses and treatment of α-radiation in each programme
The FEPs related to the effects of α-radiation that have been specified by five organizations are summarized in Table 2. The FEP descriptions are quoted from SKB
[32] and numbers that index corresponding FEPs spec- ified by other organizations have been inserted by us. Major FEPs specified by all organizations and listed in Table 2 that are related to radiation effects are fuel dis- solution and water radiolysis. Cladding failure and He production are also considered in many FEP analyses as shown in Table 2. The treatment of radiolysis by each programme is described briefly below.
3.2.1.SR-Site by SKB
As mentioned in Section 2, the fundamental α- radiation effects that have been evaluated by SKB are the movement of recoil nuclei, He generation and H2 gener- ation.
In relation to the effects of recoil, SKB consider the recoil effects on nuclei not to require explicit represen- tation, although the aggregated effects of α-radiation
Table 2. Features, events and processes (FEPs) related to the α-radiation effects specified by five radioactive waste management organizations.damage to the fuel itself are relevant. SKB adopts simpli- fied and pessimistic assumptions for cladding and can- ister failure.
In relation to gas generation, the implication from SKB’s FEP analysis is that the effects of He generation and radiolytic gas generation are dominated by the gen- eration of H2 through iron corrosion. It is also noted that SKB have considered He pressurization in intact can- isters and concluded that the design is such that it will not be deformed. Similarly, radiation damage to cop- per is deemed to be negligible due to design considera- tions. These α-radiation processes are therefore not rep- resented in the safety assessment.
In summary, SKB have considered α-radiation ef- fects in a thorough way, and concluded that they are typ- ically negligible when compared with other mechanisms linked to the same phenomena (e.g. gas generation or mechanical damage). Typically, these phenomena are in any case modelled using simplifying and conservative as- sumptions, which will adequately cover the implications of any α-radiation-related effects.
3.2.2.TURVA-2012 by Posiva
Posiva’s analysis of the disposal system has consid- ered the effects of α-decay in terms of the effects of re- coil on diffusion, radiation-induced chemical effects as- sociated with radiolysis and damage associated with the evolution of helium gas. These processes have been eval- uated in terms of their significance to near-field barriers including the fuel cladding and canister as well as pro- cesses concerned with the release of radionuclides (diffu- sion, structural alteration of fuel and effects of radiolysis on chemical conditions).
Posiva concludes that the greatest potential for ef- fects is in the fuel and cladding, as the radiation inten- sity is greatest there. Although recognizing that some α- radiation effects are potentially important in this region, Posiva has taken the approach of adopting conservative assumptions for the release of radionuclides within the canister in its assessment of safety. Specifically, it is as- sumed that once the canister is breached, the radionu- clides therein are instantly available for dissolution and transport. The cladding is not assumed to have a role. Alpha radiation effects (e.g. radiolysis and/or recoil ef- fects on radionuclide availability for dissolution, and He effects on cladding integrity) do not therefore need to be represented explicitly.
Beyond the cladding, Posvia concludes that the ra- diation levels are sufficiently low not to result in any ef- fects sufficiently significant to require representation in the safety assessment and safety case.
3.2.3.Yucca Mountain project by US-DOE
DOE’s FEP analysis of the Yucca Mountain dis- posal system has considered the same α-radiation ef- fects as other studies, including nuclear recoil, He gen-
eration and radiolysis. In all cases, DOE concludes that α-radiation effects are of low significance to the overall system behaviour, and in no case is there any explicit rep- resentation of the process. This is typically because other factors are more influential to the relevant processes, and the α-related effects are of low consequence.
3.2.4.Fourth case study by NWMO
As with other programmes, the focus is on the po- tential for α-decay to affect dissolution (due to radiol- ysis that causes oxidizing conditions, and recoil effects), and damage associated with He pressurization and reac- tive products of radiolysis. NWMO adopt conservative assumptions for fuel dissolution meaning that it is not necessary to directly represent the α-radiation effects. The dissolution rate used in the assessment has, how- ever, taken account of radiation effects, including the ef- fect of water radiolysis on the rate of dissolution of the UO2 matrix.
NWMO consider that He pressurization is not rel- evant as the pressure increase will be trivial compared with the design tolerance of the container. Alpha radi- ation fields are assessed as being insufficient to affect groundwater chemistry in such a way as to lead to en- hanced corrosion of the containers. Similar considera- tions lead to the conclusion that α-radiation effects on clay-based sealing materials will not be significant, and are therefore not considered in the safety assessment modelling.
3.2.5.EN2002 by Nagra
Nagra developed the Opalinus Clay FEP Database (OPA FEP Database) that contains all safety-relevant issues. In Nagra’s database, the FEP corresponding to radiolysis of water around the HLW/SF canisters re- lates to the period following canister breaching, because prior to this time, the shielding effects of the canisters are considered to prevent significant radiolysis (see FEP No. 2.2/2.07 in Table 2) [12]. In contrast, the report [12] states that β/γ -radiolysis products may influence the dis- solution rate of SF by producing radiolytic oxidants, al- though such effects were considered to be small owing to the rapid decay of beta/gamma fields (see FEP No. 2.2/2.08 in Table 2). It was also considered that radiation damage from fission and alpha decay may affect zircaloy and fuel materials, influencing their chemical stability (see FEP No. 2.2/2.09 in Table 2). Radiolysis may also in- fluence redox conditions, thus affecting solubilities and sorption in the buffer (see FEP No. 4.1/2.08 in Table 2).
3.3.Summary and conclusions concerning treatment of α-radiation from SF in safety assessments
The treatment of α-radiation effects in safety as- sessments and safety cases has been examined in five
prominent geological disposal programmes, in Sweden, Finland, the US, Canada and Switzerland. In each case, the approach has been to examine the analysis of the rel- evant FEPs by the relevant radioactive waste manage- ment organization.
FEP analysis is a widely used method for systemati- cally examining what issues are important for safety as- sessment and safety case development. Whilst countries adopt site-specific lists of FEPs, they usually have a com- mon heritage in the International FEP list developed by the NEA [13]. However, each country’s analysis of FEPs is independent, taking account of site-specific consider- ation, so differences are expected and occur. By consid- ering five separate programmes, this review provides a broad view of the treatment of the issue.
All programmes considered the same set of α-
radiation effects. These include:
•the potential for movement of radioactive nuclei as a result of α-recoil, which can result in migration and also damage to material;
•formation of He in the fuel matrix, which can lead to an increase in gas pressure and micro-cracking in the fuel, and has implications for cladding and container integrity;
•radiolysis can have a variety of effects associated with the products formed, which can enhance cor- rosion of containers or cladding, and/or affect the rate of dissolution of UO2 by generating oxidizing conditions in the immediate vicinity of the fuel.
Most of these processes have not been modelled ex- plicitly in safety assessment studies.
Some aspects, such as the effects of radiolysis on pro- moting oxidizing conditions that enhance dissolution, are recognized as being potentially relevant, but are not addressed directly because simplifying and conservative assumptions are made for the process as a whole. An- other example of such an approach is in relation to He cracking in fuel and effects on cladding, where simplify- ing assumptions are often made that mean that the effect of these aspects on fuel dissolution rates are conserva- tively ignored.
In other cases, the process is clearly found to be in- significant. For example, He pressurization can easily be estimated for a given fuel inventory and container design, and shown to be trivial in terms of the design strength of the container or canister. Similarly, the radi- olytic generation of H2 can be shown to be insignificant compared with its generation as a result of corrosion.  In any case, it is typically dominated by γ -radiation due to the short range of α-radiation and thus its effective shielding within the SF container.
Finally, it is noted that in all cases, α-radiation ef-
fects were considered to be confined to the waste, the container/canister and its immediate environs.
It is therefore concluded that, based on five promi- nent geological disposal programmes, α-radiation ef-
fects are not considered to be sufficiently significant to merit explicit representation in safety assessments for geological disposal except for dissolution rate in the EN2002 project. This is mainly because:
•where its consequences are notable, such as He production or recoil effects, they are not signifi- cant in terms of the repository environment; or
•the conditions in the repository environment are influenced dominantly by other factors, such as the generation of H2 through corrosion reactions.
3.4.Relevance of research in North America and Europe for Japan
The research into α-radiation from SF in North America and Europe has covered a wide range of dif- ferent light water reactor (LWR) fuel types and disposal concepts. The vast majority of the reactors in Japan are also of LWR designs; at the time of the Fukushima acci- dent in 2011, there were 30 boiling water reactors (BWR) and 24 pressurized water reactors (PWR) operating in Japan. Thus, the research into α-radiation from SF that has been undertaken in Europe and North America is mostly applicable to Japan.
An area where research in Europe and North America is relatively immature concerns MOX fuel and, indeed, plutonium. Japan has approximately 33 tons of Pu, of which 23 tons are in safekeeping in France and the UK [37] and it remains policy to burn this Pu in MOX. Consequently, potential SF disposal in Japan, if under- taken, could include a significant proportion of MOX. It is notable that the specific activity, and especially the α- specific activity, of MOX fuel is considerably greater at longer cooling times than uranium fuel with an equiva- lent burnup (Figure 6) [38]. While the review has iden- tified no clear reasons to suppose that α-radiation from MOX fuel would call safety into question, research to confirm this could be beneficial.
Most likely in Japan, Fe-based canisters like those favoured in most other countries besides Sweden and Finland will be employed, together with a bentonite buffer. Such canisters will probably have much shorter life spans under in situ repository conditions than the Cu canisters proposed for use in Sweden and Finland. At the time that an Fe-based canister is breached, the α-radiation will probably be relatively intense. However, from the research in Europe and North America, there is no reason to suppose that there will be detrimental α- radiation effects from Japanese SF even though there are the following concerns:
•dependence of α-radioactivity on the different dis- charge burnup of Japanese SF compared to SF that has been studied elsewhere;
Figure 6. Dependence of α-radioactivity on discharge burnup and cooling year of (a) UOX-SF and (b) MOX-SF, measured as  per ton heavy metal [38].
•use of relatively short-lived Fe-canisters in Japan compared with the Cu-canisters to be used for SF disposal in Sweden, Finland, etc.;
•different fuel structures and properties from Canada deuterium and uranium (CANDU) fuel that is mainly used in Canada; and
•special types of fuel (e.g. research reactors and fuel debris generated at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant accident) for which there is little infor- mation about treatment.
Corrosion of the large quantities of Fe that are likely to be employed in the canisters in Japan  will proba- bly maintain reducing conditions and produce sufficient H2 to compensate the effects of α-radiation until α- radiation decays to insignificant levels. Quantitative as- sessment of the effects of α-radiation on safety assess- ment of Japanese SF disposal system will be important.
5.Conclusions
The present paper reviewed how relevant research has underpinned the treatment of radiation effects (mainly by α-radiation) in four Swedish safety as- sessments and a Swiss safety assessment aimed at SF disposal. Until the mid-1990s, there had been large un- certainties about the significance of α-radiation effects for the safety of SF disposal, but subsequently extensive studies on α-radiation effects have shown that that these radiation effects would be negligible compared to other safety-relevant processes. Thus, by specifying suitably conservative treatments of these latter processes, α- radiation effects can be neglected. The present paper has also reviewed the treatment of radiation effects in analyses of FEPs carried out by five safety assessment programmes in Sweden, Finland, Switzerland, Canada and the United States. It was found that these analyses had identified an influence of α-radiation on the dis- solution rate of SF, but had concluded that the effects of α-radiation on redox-front propagation and overall
safety would be negligible. These conclusions will be useful to a Japanese programme for safety assessment of SF disposal.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge Mr Masahiro Shibata of Japan Atomic Energy Agency for many useful comments and discussion.
