<title>In-line (a,n) source sampling methodology for monte carlo radiation transport simulations</title>
<author>David P. Griesheimer*, Andrew T. Pavlou, Jason T. Thompson, Jesse C. Holmes, Michael L. Zerkle, Edmund Caro, Hansem Joo</author>
<Affiliation>Naval Nuclear Laboratory, P.O. Box 79, West Mifﬂin, PA 15122, USA</Affiliation>
<year>2017</year>
<Jounral>NUCLEAR ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY</Journal>
<Publishing_house>Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.net.2017.08.004</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2017.08.004</URL>
ABSTRACT
A new in-line method for sampling neutrons emitted in (a,n) reactions based on alpha particle source information has been developed for continuous-energy Monte Carlo simulations. The new method uses a continuous-slowing-down model coupled with (a,n) cross section data to precompute the expected neutron yield over the alpha particle lifetime. This eliminates the complexity and computational cost associated with explicit charged particle transport. When combined with an integrated alpha particle decay source sampling capability, the proposed method provides an efﬁcient and accurate method for sampling (a,n) neutrons based solely on nuclide inventories in the problem, with no additional user input required. Results from several example calculations show that the proposed method reproduces the (a,n) neutron yields and energy spectra from reference experiments and calculations.
Keywords:
Monte Carlo alpha particle neutron source
continuous-slowing-down charged particle
1.Introduction
The ability to accurately represent the emission rate and spec- trum of neutrons produced by (a,n) reactions with light nuclides in materials containing alpha particle emitters (such as actinides) is important for critical experiment analysis, reactor design, reactor protection, and shielding applications. Examples of these applica- tions include the modeling of artiﬁcial (AmeBe, PueBe, etc.) neutron sources used in critical assemblies, reactor startup, and response checks of nuclear instrumentation; neutron production in fresh and irradiated fuel in both reactors and fuel cycle facilities; and neutron shielding analyses involving spent fuel.
Support for (a,n) sources in Monte Carlo (MC) transport codes in the past [1e5] has suffered from a variety of disadvantages. First, explicit alpha transport in codes such as MCNP, FLUKA, and GEANT is computationally expensive [1e3]. The charged particle transport code package SRIM/TRIM is generally fast but can only be used with planar geometries [4]. Additionally, there is a lack of support for elastic scattering cross sections required for explicit alpha particle transport in some Evaluated Nuclear Data File (ENDF)-format incident-alpha nuclear data libraries. In other codes, such as MCNP, users must manually specify the source distribution of alphas and/ or emitted neutrons from a secondary code such as SOURCES-4C [6] owing to a lack of (a,n) information. The MC radiation transport code COG [5] treats explicit alpha transport with a multistep approach using the continuous-slowing-down approximation, but only the ability of the method to calculate total neutron emission rates has been studied [7].
In this paper, we describe a new methodology for in-line sam- pling of neutrons emitted from (a,xn) reactions, where (a,xn) de- notes any alpha-particle reaction that emits neutrons. The  proposed methodology is based on a thick-target, continuous- slowing-down model, resulting in a simpler and faster sampling algorithm relative to methods that utilize explicit charged particle transport. In addition, this paper demonstrates that many of the slowing-down parameters required for the (a,n) source calculation can be precalculated and stored by nuclide along with other microscopic cross section data. The resulting method is straight- forward to backﬁt into existing continuous-energy MC codes.
When coupled with an in-line decay source capability and suitable (a,xn) cross sections, the new methodology produces effective neutron source distributions based only on nuclide in- ventories in the model. This enables calculations such as subcritical multiplication of highly depleted fuel, improves quality assurance for complex models, and simpliﬁes user input.
2.In-line (a,n) source generation
The production rate of neutrons due to (a,xn) reactions is given by the basic relationship,
@1
particles, respectively, as a function of energy for the corresponding particle type, y(Ea) is the total yield of neutrons from (a,xn) reactions resulting from an alpha particle with initial energy Ea, and p(EnjEa) is the probability that the (a,xn) reaction induced by an alpha particle with energy Ea will produce a neutron with energy En.
In order to determine the neutron production rate during an MC transport simulation, it is necessary to develop on-the-ﬂy methods for determining the neutron yield and sampling from the energy distribution of emitted neutrons from (a,xn) reactions.
2.1.Determination of neutron yield
The expected number of neutrons created by an alpha particle with initial energy Ea traveling through material m is given by@2
where Im is the number of unique nuclides in material m, Ji is the number of (a,xn) reaction types for nuclide i, Ni is the atomic number density of nuclide i (in atoms/(barn$cm)), si,j is the microscopic neutron production cross section for (a,xn) reaction j of nuclide i, yi,j is the number of neutrons emitted in reaction j of nuclide i, E0,i,j is the threshold energy for reaction j of nuclide i, and e(dE0/dx)m is the stopping power (in eV/cm) for alpha particles in material m.
For alpha particles with energy less than 20 MeV traveling in materials with atomic number greater than 20, the stopping power in eV/cm can be well approximated by the AlsmillereEstabrook correlation [8],
@3
@4
for E0 in eV. Substituting Eqs. (3) and (4) into Eq. (2) and factoring out constant terms yields@5
where um is the slowing-down parameter for material m,
@6Note that the integral in Eq. (5) is an intrinsic (microscopic) quantity that is proportional to the number of neutrons produced by (a,xn) reaction j of nuclide i as an alpha particle with initial energy Ea slows down to the energy threshold for the corre- sponding reaction. In the remainder of this paper, this quantity will be referred to as the microscopic integral neutron production for reaction j in nuclide i, and is denoted by
@7
Because Eq. (7) does not depend on the density of other nuclides in the material, ti,j can be precomputed and stored along with other microscopic cross section data for each nuclide.
S@8
Note that  the  right-hand  side  of  Eq.  (8)  is  similar  to the  deﬁ- nition   for   a   macroscopic   cross   section,   with   ti,j   acting   as   a microscopic cross section and umNi acting as an effective number density.  The  latter  term  accounts  for  both  the  actual  number density   of   nuclide   i,   as   well   as   the   effects   of   the   material
composition on the alpha-slowing-down process. Because the factor  um  is  based  only  on  the  density  of  nuclides  in  the local
material, it can be calculated on the ﬂy when time-in-life- dependent number densities are retrieved for calculating macro-scopic cross sections at each alpha particle source site. As a result, calculation of the (a,xn) neutron yield using Eq. (8) is especially
easy to back ﬁt into a continuous-energy MC particle transport code using the existing framework for calculating macroscopic cross sections.
Given the similarity of ym(Ea) to a macroscopic cross section, it is straightforward to deﬁne the partial neutron yields by reaction, ym,i,j(Ea), and by nuclide, ym,i(Ea), as@9
@10respectively. These partial yield values will be used in the sampling algorithm described in the following sections.
Before continuing, it is useful to consider some details  regarding the alpha-slowing-down approximation used in the preceding derivation. Note that the proposed formulation of neutron yield as a pseudo-macroscopic cross section [Eq. (10)] is based on the AlsmillereEstabrook correlation, which relates alpha stopping power to the sum of slowing-down contributions from each constituent nuclide in the material [Eq. (3)]. As a result, the
factorization  of  the  (a,n)  yield  expression  into  the  macroscopiccross section form shown in Eq. (5) is especially straightforward.Although other approximations for alpha stopping power are available, few (if any) of these approximations allow such a convenient factorization of the (a,n) neutron yield. For example,
the BetheeBloch expression for stopping power is a function of ln(E)/E plus additional terms (e.g., excitation potential, shell cor-
rections) that depend on 1/E  [9]. As a consequence, the resultingfactorization,    where    possible,    would    require    multiple  pre-computed energy integral factors rather than just one when using the AlsmillereEstabrook correlation.
In addition to the convenient factorization, internal testing suggests that the AlsmillereEstabrook correlation provides an ac- curate estimate of alpha stopping power to lower energies than the BetheeBloch expression. In a 1973 study, Nitzki and Matzke [10] measured stopping power for alpha particles in UO2, PuO2, and ThO2, and showed that the BetheeBloch approximation compares well with experimental measurements down to about 4 MeV.
However, informal studies involving UO2 indicate that the stoppingpowers calculated with the AlsmillereEstabrook correlation compare well with the 1973 experimental results from Nitzki and Matzke down to 2 MeV. The 2e4 MeV energy range is especiallyimportant  for  in-line  (a,n)  calculations  because  many  important
decay alphas are emitted with energies between 4 and 6 MeV. This further supports the use of the AlsmillereEstabrook correlation forthese types of calculations. However, a thorough comparison be-ween available alpha slowing-down approximations is beyond the scope of this paper.2.2.Correction for a escape
The preceding derivations are based on the thick-target approximation and  implicitly  assume  that  the  alpha  particle will not leave the material that it was born in. In cases where the thick-target approximation is not reasonable, the source  sam-  pling methodology can be modiﬁed to account for the probability the alpha particle will escape from the material that it was originally born in. Furthermore, in volumes that contain a het- erogeneous mixture of materials, it is possible for an alpha par- ticle to travel through multiple materials before losing all of its energy [11]. For example, this situation occurs in AmeBe neutron source capsules that are manufactured by mixing AmO2 and Be powders.
Consider an alpha particle with energy Ea,m that enters (or is born in) material m. Furthermore, let  Dxm  denote  the  distance that the alpha particle will travel before  reaching the boundary     of material m. Note that Dxm may be computed based on the
current position and direction of the alpha particle (if the  ma- terial heterogeneity is explicitly represented) or  randomly  sampled from a nearest-neighbor distribution (NND) (if the material heterogeneity is modeled stochastically). Applying the basic relationship between range and stopping power for  a charged particle gives
@11
where Ea,mþ1 denotes the energy of the alpha particle when it exits material m and enters material m	1.
Applying the AlsmillereEstabrook correlation for stopping po- wer [Eq. (3)] to Eq. (11) yields@12
which gives a relationship between Dxm, Ea,m, and Ea,mþ1. Note that Eq. (12) is only satisﬁed when@13
indicating that the alpha particle will reach the material boundary before losing all of its energy. If the condition in Eq. (13) is satisﬁed, the energy of the alpha particle when it leaves material m can bedetermined by solving Eq. (12) for Ea,mþ@14
The neutron yield within material m can then be determined by using Ea,mþ1 as the lower limit of integration in Eqs. (2) and (5)
the Bernoulli random variable B, with probability  of  success  @15
Furthermore, Eq. (15) can be written in terms of the microscopic integral neutron production ti,j as
@16
Note that Eq. (16) reverts to the original form [Eq. (10)] when the exiting alpha energy Ea,mþ1 is less than or equal to the minimum (a,n) reaction threshold energy for the material.
In cases where the alpha particle can travel through multiple materials during slowing down, the neutron yield in each segment can be determined using the process outlined above. The alpha transport calculation iterates over each material sequentially, using the exiting alpha energy from one material as the entering alpha energy for the next material. In these situations, it is important to note that the alpha particle cannot be safely terminated until it falls below the lowest (a,n) threshold energy for any nuclide/reaction present in the collection of materials that the alpha particle may pass through. An example that illustrates the effects of alpha transport in a heterogeneous material on (a,n) production is pro- vided in Section 3.
2.3.(a,n) Source sampling algorithm
The process for sampling secondary neutrons produced via (a,xn) reaction(s) for a given incident alpha particle consists  of three basic steps. First, the expected yield of neutrons from each nuclide and reaction type is determined and the number of sec- ondary neutrons is sampled in proportion to the corresponding yield(s). Next, for each secondary neutron produced, the energy of the alpha particle immediately prior to the corresponding (a,xn) reaction is sampled. Finally, the initial energy and direction of each secondary neutron produced in the reaction is sampled based onthe target nuclide, reaction type, and energy of the incident alpha particle at the time of the (a,xn) reaction. Note that the initial po- sition of the neutron is assumed to be the same as the birth locationof the parent alpha particle.For the ﬁrst step, there are several unbiased algorithms for sampling the neutron production by nuclide and reaction. The most straightforward approach is to independently sample the number of neutrons produced for each (a,xn) reaction of each nuclide. This
sampling strategy produces a separate realization for the number of
neutrons from each nuclide and reaction combination. However,
the disadvantage of this approach is that it requires a sampling step for all pos@sible (a,xn) reactions within the material. For cases where
alpha-induced neutron production is dominated by a few nuclides and/or reaction types, this methodology can be inefﬁcient because it is performing sampling on many reactions that have a low probability of producing secondary neutrons.
An alternative sampling strategy is to ﬁrst sample the total number of secondary neutrons and then determine which nuclide and reaction produced each neutron based on the corresponding marginal probability distributions. In this case, the total number of secondary neutrons produced from (a,xn) reactions is given by
@17
where ym(Ea) is the total neutron yield for an alpha particle with energy Ea  slowing down in material m  and b~ is a realization from the Bernoulli random variable B, with probability  of  success  given by!@18
The probability that a secondary neutron was produced because of an (a,xn) reaction with nuclide i is given by the discrete proba- bility density function (PDF)@19
Similarly, the probability that a secondary neutron from an (a,xn) reaction with nuclide i was created by reaction j is given by the conditional discrete PDF@20
Based on Eqs. (19) and (20), selection of the target nuclide i and (a,xn) reaction type j is possible using any unbiased discrete sam- pling algorithm.
Once the target nuclide and reaction type have been sampled, the energy of the alpha particle at the time of the (a,xn) reaction must be determined, which requires information on the relative probability that a partially slowed alpha particle with any energy E0a < Ea will produce a neutron via the (a,xn) reaction. Information on this slowing-down reaction probability distribution can be inferred from the ratio of the expected neutron production for an alpha particle at energy E0a  to the expected total neutron produc- tion from the original energy of the alpha particle, Ea,@21
which  gives  the  cumulative  distribution  function  (CDF)  of  the desired distribution as a function of the slowing-down energy E0a, expressed in  terms of  the microscopic integral production for re- action j in nuclide i, ti,j.
The energy of  the alpha particle immediately  prior to (a,xn)  re-
action j with target nuclide i can be sampled from the slowing-down reaction probability distribution using the CDF given in Eq. (21). The most basic sampling algorithm is to simply draw a uniformly distributed random number x between 0 and 1 and then ﬁnd the corresponding alpha particle energy E0  such that PðE0 Þ ¼ x. However,this sampling  methodology implicitly  assumes  that the underlying
probability distribution is a histogram. If necessary, accuracy of the energy sampling method can be further improved by sampling within the selected CDF bin according to the slope of the corresponding microscopic (a,xn) cross section values within the bin. The assump- tion of a linear CDF within each energy bin is reasonable, provided that the spacing between tabulated cross section values is sufﬁciently small. Additional accuracy can be obtained by calculating and storing the underlying PDF pm;i;jðEa0 Þ based on the raw cross section data, at the cost of additional data processing and cross section data storage.
2.4.Secondary neutron distributions
Once the target nuclide, reaction type, and alpha particle reac- tion energy have been sampled, the energy and direction of the emitted neutron can be sampled from the corresponding secondary energy distribution provided in the evaluated nuclear data. The JENDL/AN-2005 library includes (a,xn) reaction data for 17 isotopes
with signiﬁcance in nuclear fuel cycle applications [12]. Within these evaluations, cross section data are provided for a total of 139 distinct reactions, along with secondary neutron distributions for  36 of these reactions. The difference between the number of re- actions and secondary distributions is due to the fact that only the evaluations for 9Be and 12C provide secondary energy distributions for (a,n) reactions by discrete excitation level. The remaining nu- clides combine the secondary neutron energy distributions from all (a,xn) reactions (ground state plus excited states) into a single distribution.
Secondary energy distribution data in JENDL/AN-2005 is given as a coupled energy-angle distribution (ENDF File 6) using either KalbacheMann systematics [13,14] or a two-body kinematics rep- resentation (used for level excitation reactions for 9Be and 12C only). Methodologies for interpreting and sampling from distributions in either of these formats are published in the documentation for the ENDF format [15].
KalbacheMann systematics were originally developed to model reactions for various incident charged particles with energies signiﬁcantly higher (several hundred MeV) than those of interest for this work. For nuclides examined in this work, the (a,n) neutron energy and angle distributions predicted by the JENDL/AN-2005 library evaluations using KalbacheMann systematics compared poorly to measured neutron spectra for experiments involving lower-energy alphas characteristic of transuranic nuclide decay, as demonstrated in Section 3. In particular, the predicted neutron energy spectra based on KalbacheMann systematics were consis- tently biased too low in energy.
For many engineering applications, accurately representing the neutron energy distribution is much more important than the angular distribution. Neutron energies can impact detector sensi- tivity, subcritical multiplication, shielding penetration, and other physical effects. By considering the incident alpha energy, reaction Q value, compound nucleus excitation levels, and partial cross given an assumed center-of-mass angular distribution. The energy- angle distributions predicted by JENDL/AN-2005 evaluations that use KalbacheMann systematics are inconsistent with two-body kinematics based on the provided data for level excitation en- ergies and partial cross sections.
For nuclides examined in this work, neutron energy distribu- tions predicted using two-body kinematics assuming isotropic center-of-mass neutron emission compare reasonably well with experimentally measured data, as demonstrated in Section 3. Physically, angular distributions are known to be somewhat for- ward peaked. The use of a forward-peaked angular distribution wiltend to redistribute the energy spectrum toward higher energies, which may be important for certain applications such as shielding analyses, which can be sensitive to neutron energy.3.Numerical results
A version of the proposed in-line (a,n) source sampling capability was implemented in a developmental version of MC21 [16], an in- house continuous-energy MC radiation transport code. Processing of the raw ENDF-format (a,n) cross section data and calculation of the microscopic integral neutron production values [Eq. (7)] was performed by NDEX [16], an in-house code for creating continuous- energy cross sections for MC21. In all cases, JENDL/AN-2005 cross- section evaluations were used for (a,n) reactions, with modiﬁcations to the neutron energy-angle distributions as speciﬁed.
In order to demonstrate the effectiveness of the new  (a,n) source sampling method, a series of three example problems were considered and MC21 results compared with experimental mea- surements, where available, or independent calculations using the SOURCES-4C computer code. SOURCES-4C [6] is the current de facto standard for calculating the neutron yield and energy spectrum from the (a,n) and spontaneous ﬁssion (SF) reactions in neutron source materials. SOURCES-4C can calculate neutron production
rates and spectra for four geometric conﬁgurations (homogenous, beam, two-region interface, and three-region interface). The (a,n) spectra in SOURCES-4C are determined assuming an isotropic neutron angular distribution in the center-of-mass frame with a library of 89 nuclide decay alpha spectra and 24 sets of product- nuclide discrete-level branching fractions. The (a,n) reaction cross sections are drawn from a variety of sources, including an evalua- tion by Geiger and van der Zwan [17] for 9Be and Perry and Wilson
[18] for 17,18O.
3.1.(a,n) Source in UO2
In the ﬁrst example, the in-line source methodology in MC21 was used to calculate the total neutron production due to (a,n) reactions with 17O and 18O in a thick target of UO2. This example models the UO2 thick-target measurements by Bair and Gomez del Campo [19] and West and Sherwood [20], which are two of the primary measurements used to develop the 17O and 18O evaluations in JENDL/AN-2005 [12]. In addition, the JENDL/AN-2005 evaluation report for (a,xn) reaction data provides calculated and experi- mental neutron yield results for 18O(a,n) reactions in UO2 [12], which serves as a useful benchmark for validating the in-line (a,n) source sampling method as implemented in MC21.
For the initial test of the in-line (a,n) source capability, 17O and
18O (a,n) neutron production in UO2 was calculated as a function of
incident alpha particle energy. In this test, a total of 14 simulations were run, with incident monoenergetic alpha particle energies ranging from 2 MeV to 15 MeV in 1-MeV increments, which covers the range of yield results provided by Boles et al. [11]. The target material for the MC21 simulation was modeled as an inﬁnite me- dium of UO2 with 2.4% enriched uranium and natural isotopic abundances of oxygen, as shown in Table 1.
Each simulation included a ﬁxed source calculation with 10,000 total alpha source particles divided among 100 batches. The target birth weight  of  secondary  neutrons  was  set  to a value  between 1 × 10—7 and 1 × 10—10 in order to boost the yield of neutrons produced in (a,xn) reactions [21] so that the total number of sampled neutrons was between 1 and 100 per source alpha particle (1 × 104 to 1 × 106 secondary neutrons produced per simulation). After each simulation, the (a,xn) neutron yield was estimated from the total birth weight of secondary neutrons produced during the simulation divided by the total number of initial alpha source particles. JENDL/AN-2005 alpha cross section data was used for all simulations.
The resulting neutron yield curve as a function of incident alpha particle energy from the 14 independent MC21 simulations is shown in Fig. 1. The results from this curve show excellent agree- ment with experimental works by Bair and Gomez del Campo [19] and West and Sherwood [20]. These results suggest that the pro- posed in-line (a,n) sampling method is working as intended and is capable of faithfully reproducing (a,xn) reaction rates as speciﬁed by the provided nuclear data evaluation.
In order to test the coupling between the in-line alpha decay and (a,n) source capabilities, MC21 was used to calculate the naturally
Table 1
UO2 composition deﬁnition.
occurring neutron source intensity and spectrum due to (a,n) re- actions caused by alpha particles emitted during the radioactive decay of uranium isotopes in the thick-target UO2 sample. The MC21 simulation for this case used 1 106 source alpha particles sampled from the alpha decay spectra of 234U, 235U, and 238U, using the in-line decay source sampling capability in MC21 [22]. The birth weight of neutrons was set to 1 × 10—6, which increases  the  number of sampled secondary (a,n) neutrons by a factor of one million, as described by Griesheimer and Nease [21]. The calcula- tion used the JENDL/AN-2005 library for alpha cross section data and the JEFF 3.1.1 library for decay data.
Results from the simulation indicate a naturally occurring (a,n) neutron source rate density of 6.248 × 10—4 neutrons/(s$g UO2), based on an alpha source rate density of 5.131 × 104 alphas/(s$g UO2). As expected, the calculated (a,n) neutron source is small compared with the SF source rate density of 1.168 × 10—2 neutrons/ (s$g UO2) for UO2. SF neutrons were included in the MC21 simu- lation to enable comparisons with SOURCES-4C (which reports SF neutron sources). The MC21 neutron source rates agree to within 2% of the corresponding values produced by an independent simulation with the SOURCES-4C code (6.248 10—4 (a,n) neu- trons/(s$g UO2) and 1.172 10—2 SF neutrons/(s$g UO2)). Fig. 2 shows the sampled alpha emission spectrum and corresponding alpha reaction rate density for the simulation, conﬁrming that MC21 is modeling the slowing down behavior of the alpha parti- cles. Note that the resulting alpha absorption spectrum follows the characteristic shape of the 18O (a,xn), which is overlaid in Fig. 2 for comparison. Note that the cross sections for 17O are negligibly small compared to 18O and are not included in Fig. 2.
Fig. 3 shows the naturally occurring (a,n) neutron emission
spectrum in UO2 computed with both MC21 and SOURCES-4C. Note that the MC21 calculation using the original JENDL/AN-2005 eval- uations for 17O and 18O (utilizing KalbacheMann systematics) produces a neutron emission spectrum that is strikingly different from the corresponding spectrum calculated with SOURCES-4C. In particular, this MC21 emission spectrum is signiﬁcantly shifted toward lower energies, with the most probable neutron energy occurring at 750 keV vice 2.25 MeV in the SOURCES-4C spectrum. This difference is likely due to the use of the KalbacheMann rep- resentation of the secondary neutron energy and angular distri- bution for 17O and 18O in JENDL/AN-2005.
In order to test the hypothesis that the KalbacheMann repre- sentation was responsible for the shift in the neutron energy spectrum, the JENDL/AN-2005 evaluations for 17O and 18O were manually modiﬁed to use two-body kinematics with isotropic neutron emission in the center-of-mass frame. In the modiﬁed evaluations, each excited level of the recoil nucleus was repre- sented explicitly, based on the partial reaction cross sections and corresponding Q values provided in the ENDF File 3 for each (a,n) reaction.
The MC21 (a,n) neutron emission spectrum using the modiﬁed reaction data for 17O and 18O (with explicit two-body kinematics) is also shown in Fig. 3. Note that the resulting spectrum shows signiﬁcantly better agreement with respect to the spectrum calculated by SOURCES-4C. The absolute neutron source density also matches SOURCES-4C to within a few percent. Experimental data by Jacobs and Liskien [23] is also overlaid for comparison. This experiment   used   natural   UO2   and   an   artiﬁcial high-intensity
4.5 MeV alpha source. The alpha source intensity was sufﬁcient toallow SF neutrons to be neglected. The MC21 spectrum using the
modiﬁed JENDL/AN-2005 evaluations appear to be very consistent with the experimental spectra.
The emission spectrum from the MC21 calculation using sec- ondary neutron energy and angle distributions based on two-body kinematics clearly shows the contributions of reactions that leave
Fig. 1. Yield of neutrons from (a,n) reactions with 17O and 18O as a function of incident alpha particle energy computed with in-line (a,n) source sampling methodology imple- mented in MC21 (black) and compared to experimental results (blue [19] and red [20]).Fig. 2. Spectrum of alpha decay energies and (a,n) absorption rate for 2.4% enriched UO2. Also shown is the microscopic total (a,xn) cross section for 18O, illustrating the relationship between the (a,n) reaction rate and cross section. Cross sections for 17O are not shown because they are negligibly small compared to 18O.
the recoil 21Ne nucleus in the ground state (peak centered at
~2.25 MeV) vice reactions that leave 21Ne in an excited state (peak centered at ~500 keV), consistent with results from experimental measurements by Jacobs and Liskien [23]. The pri- mary differences between the emission spectra calculated using SOURCES-4C and the two-body kinematics representation in MC21 are likely attributable to underlying differences in the nuclear data used by the different codes; in particular, the branching fractions for each of the excited levels for the recoil nucleus. Note that these differences, as well as the larger differences between the Kal- bacheMann and two-body kinematics representations, only affect the energy and angular distribution of secondary neutrons emitted
during (a,n) reactions. These differences do not have any impact on the total emission rate of (a,n) neutrons, which agrees to within 2% for all methods considered.
3.2.Naturally occurring neutron source in PuO2
In the second example, MC21 was used to determine the total naturally occurring neutron source for PuO2, including contribu- tions from both (a,n) reactions as well as SF. The cross section li- braries, problem setup, and running strategy are identical to the previous UO2 example, with 1 × 106 decay alphas produced within an inﬁnite medium of PuO2. The composition, shown in Table 2, is
Fig. 3. Comparison of naturally occurring neutron emission spectrum due to (a,n) reactions in 2.4% enriched UO2, as calculated by SOURCES-4C, MC21 using the original JENDL/AN- 2005 evaluations for 17O and 18O (with KalbacheMann systematics), and MC21 using modiﬁed evaluations for 17O and 18O using two-body kinematics for the secondary neutron energy and angular distributions. The Jacobs and Liskien [23] experimental data are for natural UO2 using a high-intensity artiﬁcial 4.5 MeV alpha source.
Table 2
PuO2 composition deﬁnition.
based on a 238PuO2 sample used for (a,n) measurements in 1968 by Herold [24] to determine shielding requirements for the 238PuO2 heat sources used in isotopic power generators. Again, the in-line decay source capability of MC21 was used to sample alpha parti- cles as well as SF neutrons produced from the radioactive decay of
238Pu e 242Pu. In this case, the neutron birth weight was set to
1 × 10—8 (for (a,n) reactions only), which increases the number of sampled secondary (a,n) neutrons by a factor of 100 million.
For this conﬁguration and composition, MC21 estimates a total neutron production rate density of 1.203 × 104 neutrons/(s$g PuO2), with 84.27% from (a,n) reactions and the remainder from SF. In this case, these values agree to within 0.2% when compared to results from an independent SOURCES-4C calculation (1.205 × 104 neu- trons/(s$g PuO2) with 84.32% from (a,n) reactions). Fig. 4 shows the sampled alpha emission spectrum and corresponding (a,n) reaction rate density for the simulation. Again, the (a,n) reaction rate shows a strong correlation with the 18O (a,n) cross section, as expected.
Fig. 5 shows the total naturally occurring neutron emission spectrum in PuO2 computed with both MC21 (using unmodiﬁed JENDL/AN-2005 evaluations for 17O and 18O) and SOURCES-4C, compared with experimental results from 1967 measurements by Herold [24] and two separate experimental measurements by Anderson [25,26]. Data from all sources have been converted to speciﬁc neutron emission density [neutrons/(s$eV$g PuO2)] in or- der to allow for a fair comparison between the different spectra.
Experimental results from the measurements performed by Anderson were reported as relative neutron intensity rather than absolute neutron emission rate. For consistency, this data was renormalized to match the peak absolute neutron emission density value reported by Herold.
As noted previously, the PuO2 composition used in the MC21 and SOURCES-4C simulations matches the speciﬁcation reported by Herold [24]. The experiments by Anderson, however, both used PuO2 samples that were isotopically enriched in 18O. The 1967 experiment used enriched oxygen with 45.61% 18O atom fraction, whereas the 1980 experiment used a sample with 18O  enrichment  of 31% atom fraction. Although differences in 18O enrichments affect the total (a,n) neutron production rates, the impact on the shapes of the neutron energy emission spectra after common normalization is negligible. Thus, a reasonable comparison of the neutron emission spectra from the three experiments can be made to the MC21 and SOURCES-4C results.
Inspection of Fig. 5 once again shows that the MC21 calculation using the KalbacheMann systematics for secondary neutron dis- tributions for 17O and 18O (a,n) produces a neutron emission spectrum that deviates signiﬁcantly from the experimental mea- surements as well as from the spectrum calculated with SOURCES- 4C. This observation is consistent with the results for UO2, as described in the previous example. Interestingly, Fig. 5 also shows that the MC21 calculation using modiﬁed (a,n) data with two-body kinematics for neutron emission from 17O and 18O produces an emission spectrum with a pronounced peak below 1 MeV, which is not present in the spectrum calculated with SOURCES-4C (or in the experimental spectra). The difference between the spectra from the two codes below 1 MeV appears to be tied to the treatment of the
Fig. 4. Spectrum of alpha decay energies and (a,n) absorption rate for PuO2. Also shown is the microscopic total (a,xn) cross section for 18O, the dominant nuclide for (a,n) reactions, illustrating the relationship between the (a,n) reaction rate and cross section.
Fig. 5. Comparison of naturally occurring neutron emission spectrum, including (a,n) and spontaneous ﬁssion (s.f.), in PuO2 between SOURCES-4C, MC21, and experimental results from Herold [24], Anderson [25], and Anderson [26].
energy state of the 21Ne recoil following an 18O(a,n) reaction.
The JENDL/AN-2005 evaluation includes explicit cross section data for 18O(a,n) reactions that leave 21Ne in the ground state or excited levels 1e4. A sixth “continuum” cross section is provided to account for 18O(a,n) reactions that leave the exiting 21Ne nucleus above the fourth excited level (2.867 MeV). A plot of the JENDL/AN- 2005 microscopic cross sections for the different 18O(a,n) reactions  is shown in Fig. 6. Note that the JENDL evaluation suggests that the continuum reaction (e.g., reactions that leave 21Ne above the fourth
excited level) becomes the most probable reaction for incident alpha energies above ~4.8 MeV, with a reaction branching fraction of >30% for alpha  energies >5  MeV, and >45%  for alpha  energies  above   6 MeV.
SOURCES-4C    includes    reaction    branching    fractions    for
18O(a,n) reactions that leave 21Ne in  the  ground  state  or excited  levels  1e4,  but  does  not  include  an  additional  con-
tinuum reaction  that  accounts  for  21Ne  nuclei  emitted  above  the   fourth   excited   level.   In   addition,   the   reaction branching
Fig. 6. JENDL/AN-2005 total and partial cross sections for 18O (a,n) reactions.
fraction data in SOURCES-4C indicates that reactions  involving the ground or  ﬁrst-excited  state  of  21Ne  remain  dominant  for  all incident alpha energies. This data does not suggest  the  presence of a  sharp  change  in  the  probability  of  leaving  21Ne  in a higher excited state for (a,n) reactions induced by alpha particles above 5 MeV.
The difference in the reaction branching fractions for incident alpha particles with energies above 5 MeV appears to lead to the different neutron emission spectra behavior predicted by MC21 and SOURCES-4C for neutron energies below 1 MeV. This conjecture would also explain why a corresponding spectral difference for low- energy neutrons is not observed in the UO2 calculations, because the maximum decay alpha energy for uranium occurs just below 4.8 MeV. Because KalbacheMann systematics were developed for high- energy incident charged particles, it may be expected that the neutron energy distribution deﬁned for the continuum reaction (which has the highest threshold energy of the given partial level excitation reactions) may be more physical than the distributions given for the ground state and lower excitation level reactions. Furthermore, as the angular distribution of neutrons in the center- of-mass frame becomes more forward-peaked and anisotropic with increasing alpha energy, the isotropic two-body kinematics model may not perform adequately for continuum reactions with a high alpha-energy threshold. In order to test this hypothesis,  special (a,n) libraries were produced for 17O and 18O where isotropic two- body kinematics are used to compute neutron energy distributions for the ground state and discrete level excitation reactions, but the
original KalbacheMann systematics are used to compute the sec-ondary neutron energy distributions for continuum reactions. The resulting spectrum, shown in Fig. 5, appears to be reasonablyconsistent with SOURCES-4C as well as with the experimentally observed spectra of Herold and Anderson. In any case, results from both the UO2 and PuO2 cases indicate that KalbacheMann sys- tematics may not be physically appropriate to describe neutron energy distributions for (a,n) reactions induced by low-energy incident alphas typical of transuranic nuclide decay.3.3.Manufactured AmeBe neutron source
For the ﬁnal example, MC21 was used to calculate the neutron emission rate and spectrum from an AmeBe neutron source (the dominant commercially available type of artiﬁcial neutron source). The neutron source was modeled as a hollow stainless steel cylin- der ﬁlled with a loose mixture of AmO2 and Be powders. The cavity containing the active source material has a height of 4.826 cm and an inner diameter of 2.2225 cm. The composition of the homoge- nized source powder mixture is given in Table 3. All dimensions and composition information were taken from speciﬁcations for ~2.5 curie AmeBe neutron test sources manufactured by the Monsanto Research Corporation. The reference neutron source intensity for these sources was given as 4.5e6.0 106 neutrons/s.
The MC21 simulation for this case used 10,000 source alpha particles sampled from the alpha decay spectra of 241Am, 242Am, and 243Am, again using the in-line decay source sampling capability in MC21. The birth weight of neutrons was set to 1 × 10—6, which increases the number of sampled secondary (a,n) neutrons by a factor of 106. The calculation used the JENDL/AN-2005 evaluation for alpha cross section data and the JEFF-3.1.1 evaluation for decay data. The JENDL/AN-2005 (a,n) reaction data for 17O and 18O were modiﬁed to use two-body kinematics with isotropic neutron emission in the center-of-mass frame, as described previously. Note
Table 3
Homogenized AmeBe composition deﬁnition.
that the JENDL (a,n) reaction for 9Be was not modiﬁed, as the original evaluation used two-body kinematics with anisotropic angular data provided.
Results from the MC21 simulation estimate a decay source in- tensity of 9.623 106 alpha particles/s, with a corresponding (a,n) neutron source intensity of 5.138  106 neutrons/s, which is within the reference range given on the source speciﬁcation. During the simulation, a total of 533,950 secondary neutrons were produced, with a cumulative weight of 0.5339. Fig. 7 shows the total (a,n) neutron emission spectrum in the AmeBe source, computed with both MC21 and SOURCES-4C. A comparison between the two emission spectra shows good agreement in the shape and locations of major peaks in the spectra, consistent with the level of agree- ment observed in the UO2 and PuO2 examples. The high energy tail of the neutron emission spectrum is attributable to the fact that the
9Be(a,n) reaction is exothermic with Q ¼ þ5.701 MeV when therecoil 12C nucleus is left in the ground state.	3	V
Although AmeBe is traditionally modeled as a homogenized mixture of americium, oxygen, and beryllium atoms, some AmeBe source capsules are manufactured as a loose mixture of AmO2 and Be powders. The size of the constituent particles that make up each powder affects alpha radiation transport within the material, impacting both the yield and energy distribution of neutrons emitted via (a,n) reactions. In Section 2.2, the concept of escape probability was introduced to account for alpha particles traveling through multiple materials before losing all of their energy (or dropping below the energy threshold for an (a,n) reaction). Here, the effect of material heterogeneity on alpha slowing-down and (a,n) reaction rate is assessed by modeling the AmeBe source as spherical AmO2 particles embedded in a uniform background ma- terial of beryllium. Because no data regarding AmO2 particle sizes were available, a sensitivity study was conducted using a range of AmO2 particle diameters from 0.1 mm to 1,000 mm. In each case, the mass density of AmO2 particles and beryllium was held constant at 11.680 g/cm3 and 0.845 g/cm3, respectively. In addition, the volume fraction of AmO2 was ﬁxed at 0.388%, in order to maintain the original nuclide densities given in Table 3.During each MC21 simulation, source alpha particles from the decay of americium were produced uniformly within an AmO2 par- ticle. The distance to the AmO2 particle surface was then explicitly calculated based on the diameter of the AmO2 particle along with the location and direction of the sampled alpha radiation. Alpha radiation that reached the surface of the AmO2 particle prior to losing all of their energy was transferred to the beryllium background material, and the slowing-down process continued. Once in the beryllium, the distance to the next AmO2 particle was randomly sampled from a nearest neighbor distribution (NND) for uniform mixtures of rigid, nonoverlapping spheres in a homogeneous background material. In this situation, the NND follows an exponential distribution@22
where l is a rate parameter given by
@23
and R and V represent the AmO2 particle radius and AmO2 volume fraction, respectively [27]. The process of sampling distances trav- eled through the AmO2 and beryllium materials was then repeated until the alpha energy was reduced below the energy threshold for all (a,n) reactions in 9Be, 17O, and 18O.
Results for the (a,n) neutron production rate are shown in Table 4 for a homogeneous AmeBe material and ﬁve heterogeneous AmO2/Be powder mixtures with AmO2 particle diameters between
0.1mm and 1,000 mm. These results demonstrate that the neutron
source strength decreases as AmO2 particle size is increased, effectively preventing some alpha particles from escaping the AmO2 particle and reaching the beryllium material, which has a higher (a,n) cross section. The results also suggest that AmO2 par- ticle diameters 1 mm produce neutron source rates that are consistent with the reference range of 4.5e6.0  10  neutrons/s for this conﬁguration. Although detailed manufacturing data regarding AmO2 powder is not available, particle sizes of less than 1 mm are not unreasonable.
Fig. 7. Energy spectrum for neutrons produced via (a,n) reactions in a AmeBe source as calculated by the in-line (a,n) source sampling methodology implemented in MC21 (blue) and the SOURCES-4C computer code (red).
Table 4
Neutron emission rate for mixtures of AmO2 and Be powders for various AmO2 particle diameters.Fig. 8 shows the (a,n) neutron emission spectrum for the ho- mogeneous AmeBe mixture, as well as the ﬁve heterogeneous mixtures each with different AmO2 particle diameters. The results show that as the AmO2 particle diameter increases, the neutron spectrum below 4 MeV shifts slightly toward lower energies, sug- gesting increased (a,n) reactions with 18O as a result of fewer alpha particles reaching the beryllium material. Note that, even for very large AmO2 particle sizes, alpha particles born near the particle surface are able to reach the beryllium, producing the characteristic high energy tail in the neutron emission spectrum due to 9Be(a,n) reactions.
The results from this test provide a qualitative indication that the alpha escape model in the proposed method is working as intended and can capture the detailed effects of material hetero- geneity on alpha transport. It is also worth noting that AmeBe sources also emit gamma rays due to the decay of 12C atoms that are left in an excited state following 9Be(a,n) reactions. Although gamma emission was not included as a part of this study, it should be possible to adapt the proposed in-line (a,n) sampling method- ology to incorporate the subsequent decay of these excited recoil nuclei. Furthermore, (a,n) reactions that use two-body kinematics have enough data to model the characteristic gamma emission spectra associated with each excited level of the recoil nucleus as well as the effect of recoil nucleus motion on the gamma emission spectrum. Such an extension to the proposed model could allow accurate characterization of all radiations emitted frommanufactured sources, enabling improved modeling of experi- ments involving these types of sources.
4.Conclusions
A new in-line method for sampling neutrons emitted in (a,n) reactions based on alpha particle source information has been developed for continuous-energy MC simulations. The new method uses a continuous-slowing-down model coupled with cross section data to precompute expected neutron yields over the alpha particle lifetime. This eliminates the complexity and cost associated with explicit charged particle transport. When com- bined with an integrated alpha particle decay source sampling capability, the proposed algorithm provides an efﬁcient and ac- curate method for sampling neutrons produced via (a,xn) re- actions based solely on nuclide inventories in the problem, with no additional user input required. Results from three example prob- lems show that the proposed method adequately reproduces the (a,n) neutron yields and spectra from reference experiments and calculations.
All MC21 simulations in this work used the JENDL/AN-2005 nuclear data library, which provides evaluated cross section and energy-angle distribution data for (a,n) reactions for 17 isotopes. The majority of nuclide evaluations in JENDL/AN-2005 utilize Kal- bacheMann systematics to describe energy-angle spectra for neutron emission by (a,xn) reactions. For nuclides examined in this work, the neutron energy distributions predicted by Kal- bacheMann were biased much too low in energy when compared to experimental measurements. Consequently, a decision was made to use two-body kinematics, based on isotropic center-of-mass neutron emission, to determine energy spectra for neutrons pro- duced via (a,xn) reactions. With this method, in certain cases, the partial cross section branching ratios in the evaluated nuclear data also resulted in overrepresentation of low-energy neutron emission (but to a lesser extent). In all cases, the energy spectra resulting from MC21 simulations based on two-body kinematics were su- perior to those based on KalbacheMann systematics in reproducing experimental measurements.
Fig. 8. Energy spectrum for neutrons produced via (a,n) reactions in a heterogeneous mixture of AmO2 and Be powders, assuming various AmO2 particle diameters. The neutron spectrum for a homogeneous AmeBe source is also shown for reference. These spectra are normalized by the alpha source intensity.
Although the proposed in-line method can allow efﬁcient and accurate characterization of (a,n) neutron emission in MC transport codes, the success of the approach is governed by the accuracy of supplied (a,n) nuclear reaction data (as well as the supplied nuclear decay data used to compute a-particle emission). Revisiting the (a,n) nuclear data evaluation process may improve the ability to predict neutron energy spectra from (a,n) reactions induced by lower-energy alphas associated with transuranic nuclides, which is of interest in nuclear reactor and fuel cycle applications.
Conﬂicts of interest
The authors afﬁrm that they do not have any potential conﬂicts of interest related to this research.
Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge Mr. Dave Heinrichs and Dr. Ed Lent from Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Nuclear Criticality Safety Division for their feedback, suggestions, and conﬁrmatory calculations using the COG Monte Carlo code. The authors are especially indebted to Dave and Ed for their suggestion on using the KalbacheMann data, rather than two-body kinematics, for con- tinuum reactions where level-speciﬁc data was not available.
