<title>Simulation of particle impact on protective coating of high-level waste storage packages</title>
<author>Samah Radwan a, Leigh Winfrey b, Mohamed Bourham c, *</author>
<Affiliation>a Accelerators & Ion Sources Department, Basic Nuclear Science Division, Nuclear Research Center, Atomic Energy Authority, P.N.13759 Cairo, Egypt
b Department of Mechanical Engineering, Nuclear Engineering Program, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA 24061, USA
c North Carolina State University, Department of Nuclear Engineering, Raleigh, NC 27695, USA</Affiliation>
<year>2015</year>
<Jounral>Progress in Nuclear Energy</Journal>
<Publishing_house> Elsevier</Publishing_house>
<Text_Collector>田苗，BFSU</Text_Collector>
<DOI>10.1016/j.pnucene.2015.01.013</DOI>
<URL>http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pnucene.2015.01.013 </URL>
ABSTRACT
Integrity and survivability of high-level waste packages are critical for their storage and during their transport. Multi-layer, multi-component coatings composed of TiCN/ZrO2eTiO2eAl2O3/MoS2 on the outer shield material can provide engineered barriers resistant to corrosion; radiation, diffusion, and thermal cycling effect that are also wear tolerant and mechanically robust. While waste packages are designed to survive some structural damage, potential coatings applied to future packages may be affected by the development of micro-cracks. In such a case neutrons and gamma rays might interact with the external coatings. In this research, particle impact with multi-layered, multi-component  coatings is studied to assess the damage expected in the coatings if micro cracking would happen and heavy particles (neutrons) leak into the coatings. As a ﬁrst step to investigate this scenario, the open source code SRIM has been used to perform the study using protons as a simulation of the heavy particle interaction. The simulation provides a tool to determine the optimal coating thickness to be manufac- tured in order to limit the coating surface damage to within minimum values.
Keywords:
Multilayer coating
High-level waste storage
Heavy particle interaction with surfaces
1.Introduction
Dry casks for nuclear spent fuel have shown reliability over the years since they were ﬁrst built and used for spent fuel storage (Bare and Torgerson, 2001; Kunerth et al., 2012). A dry cask is generally composed of an inner steel alloy canister with basket for spent fuel assemblies and an outer concrete overpack. A recent coating concept was developed and suggested coating the outer wall of the canister by multi-layer or multi-component coatings to make a barrier composed of TiCN/ZrO2eTiO2eAl2O3/MoS2 to pro- vide enhancing features to the canister (Winfrey and Bourham, 2013). In the multi-layer coating, as shown in Fig. 1,  the ﬁrst layer  is titanium carbon nitride (TiCN) to serve as a hydrogen diffusion barrier additional to its enhancement to material corrosion resis- tance and hardness (Checchetto et al., 1996; Schefﬁng et al., 2006). The second layer is a synthesized zirconiaetitaniaealumina (ZrO2eTiO2eAl2O3, Zirconolite) layer to provide a water barrier, additional hardening, and corrosion resistance. Zirconolite is
insoluble in water, resistant to radiation and provides wear and scratch resistant protection to the material layers (Smith et al., 1998, 2000). The third layer is molybdenum disulﬁde (MoS2), which is an effective barrier to oxidation effects and air or soil contaminants, and is an additional barrier to provide corrosion resistance in ambient environmental conditions. This MoS2 layer is similar to diamond-like carbon (DLC), which has various uses as a hard, wear resistant, and lubricating coating (Voevodin et al., 1995; Chromik et al., 2008). Thin carbon steel envelops the coated canister as a ﬁnal layer before the air gap and the concrete over- pack. The ﬁrst layer will have most of the damage if the thickness is thin and the damage can propagate into the subsequent layers, however, a thicker ﬁrst layer can eliminate the damage to within few micrometers from its surface. The simulation results will show damage within the ﬁrst 10 mm suggesting increasing the thickness by a factor of 2 or 3. An additional coating scheme of a single layer nanocomposite synthesized from the same constituents and also backed with a carbon steel envelope is also investigated here, as shown in Fig. 2. This single nanocomposite layer as a homogenous bulk material has the advantage of spreading the multi-features of the constituents over the entire coating thickness, which maintains a continued performance of the coating though its thickness when
Fig. 1. Schematic of the multi-layer multi-component coatings.
the damage occurs on the coating within few micrometers from its surface.
While canisters are expected to perform without cracking, this study will assume a micro-crack of 1 mm radius developing under extreme, abnormal conditions and where the coatings will be
subjected to leaking heavy particles (neutrons) and gamma rays. The open source code SRIM (Stopping and Range of Ions in Matter) has been used to simulate the interaction of heavy particle beam with the coatings to assess their damage to optimize the best coating thickness for experimental manufacturing of the coatings
Fig. 2. Schematic of the synthesized nanocrystalline single-layer coating.
(Ziegler et al., 2008, 2010). The SRIM code is based on a Monte Carlo simulation method where the binary collision approximation with a random selection of the impact parameter of the next colliding ion is used. SRIM and TRIM (Transport of Ions in Matter) are both useful in evaluation of material response to heavy particles. TRIM is a Monte Carlo computer program that calculates the interactions of energetic ions with amorphous targets, and is used to understand the changes to the target under bombardment by heavy particles (Ziegler and J. P. Biersack, 2009). The passing of the heavy particles though the micro crack is assumed to be monoenergetic, as described in the literature, which was also based on an average energy of 1e2 MeV (up to 2.2 MeV) as the neutrons average energy range from spent nuclear fuel (Shimanskaya, 1980; Hermann and Alexander, 1986; Lee et al., 2005; Baranko, 2012). As illustrated in the work of Baranko, and considering 100 years storage, it has been shown that the total neutron ﬂuence is 3.1 1014 neutrons/cm2 for the Westinghouse MC-10 cask (aluminum basket) and 6.5 1014 neutrons/cm2 for the Transnuclear TN-REG cask (SS-304 basket). For the case presented in this work only 5000 heavy particles (monoenergetic ﬁssion neutrons) to pass through a micro crack of 1 mm radius (1.592 1011 n/cm2), the energy ﬂuence through the micro crack would be 255e509 J/m2 for the  energy  range  of 1e2 MeV, respectively.
2.Conﬁguration of coatings for SRIM simulation
The conﬁguration of the multi-layer, multi-component coatings and the single synthesized nanocrystalline composited layer are shown in Figs. 1 and 2. As shown in Fig. 1, the layers are of equal thickness with a speciﬁc functionality for each layer. This multi- layered conﬁguration provides a hydrogen diffusion barrier (ﬁrst layer), a corrosion resistance water barrier and additional hard- ening layer (second layer), and a wear resistant barrier (third layer). The composited single layer, Fig. 2, which is intended to spread the multi-features of the constituents over the entire coating thickness, was simulated as a synthesized nanocomposite from the constitu- ents of the multi-layered material with their respective atomic weight. These conﬁgurations will be manufactured and experi- mentally tested in the near future. The work focuses on assessing the potential damage of the coating as a result of leakage but not the canister damage and its degradation due to the long storage time as this is a stage more concerned with the canister itself, however, coating damage due to long term exposure and contin- uous impact of particles through a micro crack will be considered when experimental samples of coated substrates will be manu- factured and tested.
The simulation herein will help optimizing the thickness of each layer or the overall thickness of the single synthesized nano- crystalline coating. An assumed 1 mm radius micro crack in the canister wall, and allowing 5000 heavy particles (monoenergetic ﬁssion neutrons) with an average of 1e2 MeV energy to pass through, the energy ﬂuence passing through the micro crack (1 mm radius) into the ﬁrst coating would be 255e509 J/m2 for the energy range of 1e2 MeV, respectively. The average neutron energy of spent fuel is up to 2.2 MeV (Shimanskaya, 1980; Hermann and Alexander, 1986; Lee et al., 2005; Baranko, 2012). Fig. 1 illustrates the structure of the multi-layer coatings on the outer wall of the waste package (substrate) with 10 mm thickness assumed for each layer, a carbon steel backing (2.5 mm thick), the air gap and the concrete overpack. The simulation starts at the ﬁrst layer and through the backing carbon steel envelop (liner). As will be seen from the tracking into the thickness of the coating, their distribu- tion into the material is basically hemispherical. For each case, the particles are monoenergetic with ﬁxed energy of 0.5, 1, 1.5 or 2 MeV,
so there is no distribution as the simulation is not for particles with different energies.
Fig. 2 illustrates the structure of the single layer synthesized from the constituents of the multi-layers. The structure of the composited coating is a single 30 mm layer of synthesized nano- crystalline coating on the outer wall of the waste package (sub- strate), a carbon steel backing (2.5 mm thick), the air gap and the concrete overpack. The simulation starts at the surface of the ﬁrst layer and through the backing carbon steel envelop (liner).
3.Simulation results
3.1.Target damage
When a heavy particle (neutron or proton) is incident on the target, it will transfer a signiﬁcant portion of its energy to the target. Assuming protons, simulating neutrons in terms of mass, are leaking from the canister liner and impacting on the multi-layer multi-component coatings, or the synthesized single layer coating, the particles will cause a vacancy. Simulation was done with 5000 and 10,000 incident protons on the coating structures. The results presented herein are for 5000 particles as the damage is the same for both numbers of particles and only the backscattering is a factor of 2 higher for 10,000 particles. The heavy particle tracks in the layered and composited structures at proton energies of 1.0 and 2.0 MeV are shown in Figs. 3 and 4, respectively. The Energy range of 1.0 and 2.0 MeV was selected for simulation as the neu- trons average energy range (Shimanskaya, 1980; Hermann and Alexander, 1986; Lee et al., 2005; Baranko, 2012). Vacancies are shown by the white tracks while recoiling due to the collision of the heavy particles with the target atoms is shown by the red dots (in the web version). As shown from the tracks in Fig. 3(a), the target is deep enough to capture all the incident 1.0 MeV particles in the ﬁrst layer (TiCN) at almost 5 mm, which is half of its thickness. Similarly, the damage occurs within the ﬁrst 5 mm of the composited coating as shown in Fig. 3(b). At increased particle energy of to 2.0 MeV, the damage occurs deeper into the ﬁrst layer (TiCN) at almost its full thickness of 10 mm as shown in Fig. 4(a), and similarly in the composited coating as illustrated in Fig. 4(b) with a few tracks extended through the full length. As one may expect, the simula- tion results indicate that an increase in the thickness of the ﬁrst layer (TiCN) is preferable to limit the damage within this layer. While one can see that the distribution of the damage, as seen from particle tracks into the coating as a cluster around the point of attack, however, scattered particles are reﬂected back from the surface as a fraction of the incident monoenergetic particles.
3.2.Backscattering, vacancies, ranges, straggle and displacements
The open source codes SRIM (Stopping and Range of Ions in Matter) and TRIM (Transport of Ions in Matter) provide detailed assessment of the interaction of ions, and heavy particles, with matter including the range, backscattering, ionization, transport, vacancies, damage, projected straggle and sputtering (Ziegler et al., 2008, 2010; Ziegler and Biersack, 2009). The backscattering of the particles versus incident proton energy is shown in Fig. 5 for the layered and composite samples. Backscattering in the layered structure is less than that of the composited structure, especially at higher particle energy, indicating strong collision near the surface of the target and hence showing higher backscattering. It is important to note that the composite structure was simulated as a homogenous bulk material synthesized from the constituents of  the layered structure averaged with their respective mass fraction but not with grain boundaries, however, determination of the exact structure and the grain boundaries will be considered after
Fig. 3. Heavy particle track in the layered (a) and composited (b) structures at 1.0 MeV proton energy.
Fig. 4. Heavy particle track in the layered (a) and composited (b) structures at 2.0 MeV proton energy.
experimentally synthesizing the composite and testing its structure and homogeneity.
In this simulation, the coating using composite structure was simulated considering it as a bulk material and that's why effects of grain boundaries were not considered in this work as we explicitly
Fig. 5. Number of backscattered particles from a total of 5000 monoenergetic particles incident on the surface of the coating at speciﬁc energy of 0.5, 1.0, 1.5 or 2.0 MeV.
stated in the manuscript, however, determination of the exact structure and the grain boundaries will be considered after experimentally synthesizing the composite and testing its structure and homogeneity.
The backscattering at each particle energy in Fig. 5 represents the number of backscattered particles from a total of 5000 mono- energetic particles passing through an assumed 1 mm radius micro- crack (1.592      1011 n/cm2) at the speciﬁc energy of 0.5 or 1 or 1.5 or 2 MeV and are allowed to impact on the coating, so there is no mixing of particles at different energies. As seen from the tracking into the thickness of the coating, their distribution into the material is basically hemispherical. For each case, the particles are mono- energetic with ﬁxed energy of 0.5, 1, 1.5 or 2 MeV for each simu- lation run, so there is no distribution as the simulation is not for particles with different energies. Particles at lower energy such as
0.5 MeV has more back scattering, almost half of the incident particles  backscatter,  while  particles  at  higher  energy  such  a
2.0 MeV has less backscattering. While one can see that the dis- tribution of the damage, as seen from particle tracks into the coating as a cluster around the point of attack, however, scattered particles are scattered from the surface ﬁrst few monolayers and their number is a fraction of the incident monoenergetic particles (Ziegler, J.F., 2009).
Fig. 6 shows the relation between the vacancies/particle versus the incident particle's energy. The number of vacancies is nearly equal for both layered and composited structures; however, the composite structure has slightly higher vacancies per incident
Fig. 6. Vacancies per particle versus incident heavy particle (proton) energy.
particle. The number of vacancies increases with increased incident particle energy. Having a single composited coating may be bene- ﬁcial from the adhesion of the coating on the substrate, while multi-layered may have different adhesion to each other.
The longitudinal range, deﬁned as the range of the heavy par- ticles perpendicular to the target surface, is a measure of the transport of the incident particles on the target's surface and into the depth of its thickness. Fig. 7 shows the longitudinal range (mm) versus the incident particle's energy (MeV), in both the layered and composited coating structures. The longitudinal range increases with the increase in the energy of the incident particles. The layered structure shows slightly less longitudinal range than the compos- ited structure due to the fact that the ﬁrst layer suffers from most of the collisional processes before the particles continue into the second and third layers.
The displacement per atom is shown in Fig. 8, which shows the displacement for each incident particles' energy, indicating highest values for lower energy particles and lowest values for higher en- ergy particles. Displacement in layered structure is less than that of the  composited  structure  at  lower  particle  energies  of  0.5  and
1.0 MeV, but typically the same at higher particle energies of 1.5
Fig. 7. Longitudinal range versus incident heavy particle (proton) energy.
Fig. 8. Displacement per atom versus incident heavy particle (proton) energy.
and 2.0 MeV. It indicates that the composited structure can perform well as compared to the layered one but with the advantage that the features of the barriers are distributed among the entire thickness of the coating.
A summary of the simulation results for the layered and composited coatings is shown in Table 1 for all parameters at incident particle energy of 1.0 and 2.0 MeV. The table shows values of backscattering, vacancies, longitudinal and radial ranges and their corresponding straggling, the lateral projected range and its straggle, and the displacement per atom (dpa). It is clear that there is no much difference between the values for the layered and the composited, which is an indication of possible success in using the synthesized single layer to spread the features over the entire thickness of the coating.
It is clear that most of the damage takes place within 10 mm from
the surface of the coating and hence the ﬁrst layer in 3-layer structure takes most of the damage, however, the subsequent layers remain unaffected. This means that the ﬁrst layer's damage, which is responsible for serving as a hydrogen diffusion barrier and enhancement corrosion resistance layer, can lose its functionality.  In contrast, the composited layer can suffer a10 mm damage but the rest of its bulk maintains the blended functionality of the constituents.
To overcome the problem of ﬁrst layer damage, it is possible to increase the thickness of this TiCN layer to 30 mm while maintaining the second and third layers at 10 mm each. This will increase the total coating thickness to 50 mm. While it is also possible to increase the overall thickness of the composited single layer to 50 mm, however, it has been shown that if only 30 mm would be synthe- sized then the damage will only be within the ﬁrst 10 mm from the surface.
Simulation was performed for a 3-layer structure in which the ﬁrst layer is 30 mm and the subsequent layers are 10 mm each, and for a single 50 mm composited layer. Fig. 8 shows the heavy particle tracks in the layered (a) and composited (b) coatings. As shown in Fig. 9(a), the tracking is within less than one third of the thickness of the ﬁrst layer with few particles migrating into the depth. The tracking in the composited layer, as shown in Fig. 9(b) is similar and is also concentrated within the ﬁrst 10 mm. Clearly increasing the thickness of the ﬁrst layer can limit the damage provide and the ﬁrst layer will continue to provide its functionality. A summary of the simulation results for the 50 mm layered and composited coatings is shown in Table 2 for all parameters at incident particle energy of 1.0 and 2.0 MeV. It is obvious that there is no much
Table 1
Simulation results of TiCN (10  mm), ZrO2 þ TiO2 þ Al2O3 (10  mm), MoS2 (10  mm) and the composited single nanocrystalline synthesized layer (30 mm); L ¼ layered,        C ¼ Composited.Table 2
Simulation results of TiCN (30 mm), ZrO2 þ TiO2 þ Al2O3 (10  mm), MoS2 (10  mm) and the composited single nanocrystalline synthesized layer (50 mm); L ¼ layered,         C ¼ Composited.
difference between the values for the layered and the composited, which is an indication of possible success in using the synthesized single layer to spread the features over the entire thickness of the coating.
As can be seen from Table 2, the results are almost typical to the ones in Table 1 thus indicating that the effectiveness of the composition is not affected by the thickness, and that the increase in the thickness only provides limitation on the damage within the ﬁrst 10 mm in both coating structures. The slight differences be- tween Tables 1 and 2 are in longitudinal and radial straggles in the layered structure at 2 MeV for both the thin (10 mm) and the thick (30 mm) TiCN layers.
4.
Conclusions
Simulation of two coating structures has been performed to investigate the damage expected from heaving particle impact. The layered structure is composed of three layers to form three barriers with ﬁrst layer of TiCN followed by a layer of TiCN/ ZrO2eTiO2eAl2O3 and a third layer of MoS2. The second structure is a single layer synthesized from the constituents of the three layers via nanocrystalline preparation to provide a spread feature over the entire thickness. The three layers each of 10 mm thick backed by stainless steel liner have shown that particles of up to 2 MeV can cause damage of the ﬁrst layer. Synthesized single layer as a nano-
composite of the layers constituents has also shown similar results, however, the blended constituents provides a spread of the features over the entire length. Backscattering is lower in layered structure indicating strong collision near the surface of the target. The number of vacancies in the layered and composited structures is nearly equal and the vacancies increase with increased energy of the incident particle. The layered structure shows slightly less longitudinal range than the composited structure due to the fact that the ﬁrst layer suffers from most of the collisional processes before the particles continue into the second and third layers. The coating in the layered and composited structures can perform almost similarly in terms of surface damage, penetrability, and vacancies per incident particle, but slightly different for the back- scattering. Increasing the thickness of the ﬁrst layer to 30 mm provides limitation on the damage within the ﬁrst10 mm and hence it is beneﬁcial to have the ﬁrst layer thicker than the second and third layers. Similarly, increasing the overall thickness of the composited structure to 50 mm is also an advantage in limiting the damage to within 10 mm form the surface while maintaining the blended features of the constituents over the entire coating thickness.
Experimental results of coated samples will be compared to
simulation results. While simulation results show near equal per- formance for both layered and composited structures, however, they may differ in their mechanical properties, which will be examined experimentally. It may be of beneﬁt to have the composited structure as a single coating deposited on the substrate as compared to the multilayered structure with multiple interfaces to provide better surface adhesion as opposed to the multilayers where adhesion can be a concern between successive layering.
